2024 INSC 1
 
           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9098 OF 2013 
 
 
    
 
    
         Page 1 of 8 
 
NON REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9098 OF 2013 
 
 
KANWAR RAJ SINGH (D) TH. LRS.                  …APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
GEJO. (D) TH.LRS & ORS.                              …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
 
1. 
Unsuccessful defendants have preferred this Civil Appeal 
for taking exception to the judgment and order dated 16th 
March 2010 passed by the Punjab and Haryana High Court. 
The respondents are the legal representatives of Smt. Gejo. She 
was the plaintiff in a suit for declaration. She claimed a 
declaration of ownership over the land measuring 71 kanals 8 
marlas (“suit property”) based on the sale deed executed on 6th 
June 1975 and registered on 23rd July 1975. The first 
defendant, Kanwar Raj Singh (predecessor of the present 
appellants), executed the sale deed. Subsequently, the first 
defendant executed a gift deed regarding a 2/3rd share in 
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.01.02
16:49:51 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9098 OF 2013 
 
 
    
 
    
         Page 2 of 8 
 
respect of the same property in favour of the eighth defendant 
– Smt. Ravinder Kaur. The eighth defendant is the first 
defendant’s wife. According to the case of the original plaintiff 
– Smt. Gejo, before registration of the sale deed, an 
interpolation was made in the sale deed by the first defendant 
by adding that only 1/3rd share measuring 23 kanals and 8 
marlas was being sold. The suit was contested by the first 
defendant, contending that what was sold was the area of 23 
kanals and 8 marlas, which was his 1/3rd share in the suit 
property.  
2. 
 The Trial Court decreed the suit and held that what was 
sold to the original plaintiff was the entire land measuring 71 
kanals 8 marlas. The first and eighth defendants preferred an 
appeal before the District Court. On 23rd August 1984, the 
Additional District Judge allowed the said appeal and held that 
the correction made in the sale deed was bona fide and was not 
fraudulently made.  The plaintiff preferred a second appeal 
before the High Court. The plaintiff died during the pendency 
of the second appeal. Respondent nos. 1(i) & 1(v) are the legal 
representatives of the original plaintiff. By the impugned 
judgment, the appeal was allowed, and the decree of the Trial 
Court was restored.  
SUBMISSIONS 
3. 
Learned counsel appearing for the appellants submitted 
that as the price of the property subject matter of the sale deed 
was only Rs. 30,000/-, it is impossible that a vast area of 71 
kanals 8 marlas was sold under the sale deed. The learned 

 
           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9098 OF 2013 
 
 
    
 
    
         Page 3 of 8 
 
counsel submitted that the sale took effect from the date on 
which the sale deed was registered and not from the date on 
which it was executed. He submitted that what is conveyed by 
the sale deed is what is mentioned in the registered sale deed. 
He submitted that even the agreement for sale executed before 
the execution of the sale deed refers to the sale of 1/3rd share 
of the first defendant and not the entire property. He submitted 
that the entry of the name of the original plaintiff in the revenue 
records as the owner of the whole area would not confer any 
title as what is relevant is the description of the property in the 
registered sale deed. The learned counsel relied upon a decision 
of the Constitution Bench in the case of Ram Saran Lall v. 
Domini Kuer1 and submitted that in view of the said decision, 
the sale would be completed when the sale deed was registered 
and, therefore, the description of the property recorded in the 
registered sale deed will prevail. The respondents are not 
represented. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
4. 
We have perused the judgments of the Trial Court, 
District Court and the impugned judgment of the High Court. 
The first Appellate Court recorded that it is the case of the 
defendants that before registration of the sale deed, the first 
defendant incorporated a change in the sale deed stating that 
it was in respect of 1/3rd share in the area of 71 kanals and 8 
marlas. The first Appellate Court noted that the original first 
defendant's evidence was that the correction was made by him 
 
1 AIR 1961 SC 1747 

 
           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9098 OF 2013 
 
 
    
 
    
         Page 4 of 8 
 
with his own pen in the sale deed before its registration. The 
appellants are the legal representatives of the first defendant. 
In this case, it is an admitted position that while executing the 
sale deed, the area of the land sold was shown as 71 kanals 
and 8 marlas and subsequently, the area was altered to 1/3rd 
of the said area by the first defendant before the sale deed was 
registered.  
5. 
The High Court, in the impugned judgment, has relied 
upon Section 47 of The Registration Act, 1908 (the Registration 
Act), which reads thus: 
“47. 
Time 
from 
which 
registered 
document 
operates.—A 
registered 
document shall operate from the time from 
which it would have commenced to operate if 
no registration thereof had been required or 
made, and not from the time of its 
registration.” 
 
6. 
On plain reading of Section 47, it provides that a 
registered document shall operate from the time from which it 
would have commenced to operate if no registration thereof was 
required. Thus, when a compulsorily registerable document is 
registered according to the Registration Act, it can operate from 
a date before the date of its registration. The date of the 
operation will depend on the nature of the transaction. If, in a 
given case, a sale deed is executed and the entire agreed 
consideration is paid on or before execution of the sale deed, 
after it is registered, it will operate from the date of its 
execution. The reason is that if its registration was not 
required, it would have operated from the date of its execution. 

 
           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9098 OF 2013 
 
 
    
 
    
         Page 5 of 8 
 
7. 
Now, we come to the decision of the Constitution Bench 
in the case of Ram Saran Lall (Supra). In paragraph 8 of the 
judgment, the Constitution Bench held thus: 
“8. We do not think that the learned Attorney-
General's contention is well founded. We will 
assume that the learned Attorney-General's 
construction of the instrument of sale that the 
property was intended to pass under it on the 
date of the instrument is correct. Section 47 
of the Registration Act does not, however, say 
when a sale would be deemed to be complete. 
It only permits a document when registered, 
to operate from a certain date which may be 
earlier than the date when it was registered. 
The object of this section is to decide which of 
two or more registered instruments in respect 
of the same property is to have effect. The 
section applies to a document only after it has 
been registered. It has nothing to do with the 
completion of the registration and therefore 
nothing to do with the completion of a sale 
when the instrument is one of sale. A sale 
which is admittedly not completed until the 
registration of the instrument of sale is 
completed, cannot be said to have been 
completed earlier because by virtue of Section 
47 the instrument by which it is effected, after 
it has been registered, commences to operate 
from an earlier date. Therefore we do not 
think that the sale in this case can be said, in 
view of Section 47, to have been completed on 
January 31, 1946. The view that we have 
taken of Section 47 of the Registration Act 
seems to have been taken in Tilakdhari 
Singh v. Gour Narain [AIR (1921) Pat 150] . We 
believe that the same view was expressed 
in Nareshchandra 
Datta v. Gireeshchandra 
Das [(1935) ILR 62 Cal 979] and Gobardhan 
Bar v. Guna Dhar Bar [ILR (1940) II Cal 270].” 
(underline supplied) 

 
           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9098 OF 2013 
 
 
    
 
    
         Page 6 of 8 
 
8. 
The Constitution Bench held that Section 47 of the 
Registration Act does not deal with the issue when the sale is 
complete. The Constitution Bench held that Section 47 applies 
to a document only after it has been registered, and it has 
nothing to do with the completion of the sale when the 
instrument is one of sale. It was also held that once a document 
is registered, it will operate from an earlier date, as provided in 
Section 47 of the Registration Act.  
9. 
Section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1984 (the 
Transfer of Property Act) reads thus: 
“54. “Sale” defined.—“Sale” is a transfer of 
ownership in exchange for a price paid or 
promised or part-paid and part-promised.  
Sale how made.—Such transfer, in the case 
of tangible immoveable property of the value 
of one hundred rupees and upwards, or in the 
case of a reversion or other intangible thing, 
can be made only by a registered instrument.  
In the case of tangible immoveable property 
of a value less than one hundred rupees, 
such transfer may be made either by a 
registered instrument or by delivery of the 
property.  
Delivery of tangible immoveable property 
takes place when the seller places the buyer, 
or such person as he directs, in possession of 
the property.  
Contract for sale.—A contract for the sale of 
immoveable property is a contract that a sale 
of such property shall take place on terms 
settled between the parties. 
It does not, of itself, create any interest in or 
charge on such property.” 
 

 
           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9098 OF 2013 
 
 
    
 
    
         Page 7 of 8 
 
10. 
Every sale deed in respect of property worth more than 
Rs. 100/- is compulsorily registerable under Section 54 of the 
Transfer of Property Act. Thus, a sale deed executed by the 
vendor becomes an instrument of sale only after it is registered. 
The decision of the Constitution Bench only deals with the 
question of when the sale is complete; it does not deal with the 
issue of the date from which the sale deed would operate. 
Section 47 of the Registration Act does not deal with the 
completion of the sale; it only lays down the time from which a 
registered document would operate.  
11. 
Now, coming to the facts of this case, the consideration 
was entirely paid on the date of the execution of the sale deed. 
The sale deed was registered with the interpolation made about 
the description/area of the property sold. The first defendant 
admittedly made the said interpolation after it was executed 
but before it was registered.  In terms of Section 47 of the 
Registration Act, a registered sale deed where entire 
consideration is paid would operate from the date of its 
execution. Thus, the sale deed as originally executed will 
operate. The corrections unilaterally made by the first 
defendant after the execution of the sale deed without the 
knowledge and consent of the purchaser will have to be 
ignored. Only if such changes would have been made with the 
consent of the original plaintiff, the same could relate back to 
the date of the execution. It is not even the first defendant's 
case that the subsequent correction or interpolation was made 
before its registration with the consent of the original plaintiff. 

 
           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9098 OF 2013 
 
 
    
 
    
         Page 8 of 8 
 
Therefore, in this case, what will operate is the sale deed as it 
existed when it was executed. 
12. 
Therefore, we find no error in the view taken by the High 
Court.  
13. 
As held in the case of Satyender and Ors. v. Saroj and 
Ors.2 , the second appeal in the present case will be governed 
by Section 41 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918. Under clause (a) 
of sub-Section (1) of Section 41, a decision being contrary to 
law is a ground for interference. The decision of the first 
Appellate Court was contrary to Section 47 of the Registration 
Act. The High Court was justified in interfering with the 
decision of the first Appellate Court in a second appeal under 
Section 41 of the Punjab Courts Act.  
14. 
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed with no order as to 
costs. 
 
……………………..J. 
(Abhay S. Oka) 
 
……………………..J. 
(Pankaj Mithal) 
New Delhi; 
January 02, 2024 
 
2 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1026