2024 INSC 95
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 644-645 OF 2017 
  
 
No.2809759H EX-RECRUIT BABANNA  
MACHCHED  
         
 
 
 
  …APPELLANT(S) 
  
 
VERSUS 
 
 
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.  
 
         …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
   
 
 
 
 
WITH 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 652-653 OF 2017, 
CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 642-643 OF 2017 & 
CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 654-655 OF 2017 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
Learned counsel for the parties were heard. 
2. 
Instructions were issued from time to time with regard to 
enrollment into Army under the Unit Headquarters Quota 
(UHQ). The instructions as revised upto the year 1978,  
provided that Regiments/Corps have sanction to enroll 15 
per cent of the total yearly demand released by the 
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2024.02.09
16:52:05 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Additional Directorate of Recruiting to Zonal Recruiting 
Offices. This percentage was increased to 25 during the year 
1981-82 and in March, 1983 this quota was further 
increased to 50 per cent. Since the Regiments/Corps could 
not fill up such large number of vacancies, to facilitate the 
enrollment, priority was provided to certain categories of 
personnel 
which 
included 
sons 
and 
grandsons 
of 
servicemen and ex-servicemen; brothers and other near 
relatives of those killed in battle or died in service; wards 
who were fully dependent upon servicemen or ex-
servicemen; sportsmen of merit, and those for whom there 
was a special recruitment, e.g., Ladakh Scouts, Cavalry, 
Gorkha, Para, President Body Guard Regiments etc. It was 
further provided that Unit Headquarters Quota Enrollment 
shall give priority to the above categories and in case 
vacancies for recruitment remain available with Regimental 
Centre, personnel from open category based on merit may 
be taken. 
3. 
In the light of the above instructions for recruitment under 
the Unit Headquarters, a news item was published for the 
purposes of recruitment inviting applications under the 

3 
 
Unit Headquarters Quota. It appears that a large number of 
candidates including the appellants applied. The appellants 
were selected and were enrolled in the Army by the Maratha 
Light Infantry Regimental Centre (‘MLIRC’). After they had 
put in nearly three years of service, a show cause notice 
was issued to several of them alleging that they had 
obtained enrollment in the Army either on the basis of the 
fake sports person certificate or on the basis of false 
relationship certificate. On consideration of the reply of 
those persons, the services of about 52 of them were 
terminated.  However, after some litigation, candidates 
belonging to the category of sportsmen of merit, were all 
reinstated. In regard to the fake relationship certificate, 
services of about 20 persons including the appellants were 
terminated out of which 4 persons are before this Court. 
4. 
The case of all the four appellants is identical and is based 
upon similar facts and as such the appeals of all four of 
them were taken up together for consideration and are 
being disposed of by this common judgment.  

4 
 
5. 
In these appeals the challenge is to the common judgment 
and order of the Armed Forces Tribunal1, Kochi, dated 
6.03.2014, whereby the Tribunal has refused to interfere 
with the discharge certificate, dismissing the appellants 
from service for adopting fraudulent means. Consequently, 
refusing the prayer of the appellants to reinstate them.  
6. 
Notice in these appeals were issued only because the 
appellants before this Court wished to press that the 
appellants had never applied for enrollment in any reserved 
category. This was done on the statement of the counsel for 
the appellants which stands recorded in the order dated 
08.03.2016. 
7. 
In view of the above factual position, the only question for 
our consideration in these appeals is whether the 
appellants had applied and were selected as general 
category candidates or were placed in any of the reserved 
category.  
8. 
Briefly stated, after the appellants were enrolled/recruited 
in the Army, they were served with identical show cause 
notices contending that they have been enrolled in the Army 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Tribunal’ 

5 
 
by producing false relationship certificates and the 
documents produced by them on verification have been 
found to be fake/forged. Thus, calling upon them as to why 
they should not be dismissed from service. In response to 
the show cause notice, all the appellants submitted their 
response on identical lines that they were recruited in the 
Army after they have passed all exams and standards; they 
were not recruited on the basis of the claim that they were 
relatives of any serving or ex-servicemen personnel rather 
they had applied under the general category and as such 
there was no occasion for them to have produced any 
relationship certificate. In other words, they clearly denied 
having produced any certificate of relationship for the 
purposes of recruitment and as such contended that they 
cannot be charged of producing fake certificates. 
9. 
The Maratha Light Infantry Regimental Centre by similar 
orders dismissed all the appellants from service with effect 
from 9.05.2013. The discharge certificate issued to each of 
the appellant in unequivocal terms stated that they are 
being dismissed from service for the reason that they got 
themselves enrolled by adopting fraudulent means, referring 

6 
 
to the fake relationship certificates as mentioned in the 
show cause notices. 
10. In other words, the appellants were dismissed/discharged 
from service on the ground that at the time of their 
enrollment in the Army through Maratha Light Infantry 
Regimental Centre under the Unit Headquarters Quota in 
December, 2009 they had produced false relationship 
certificates which upon verification were found to be 
manipulated and false. 
11. The 
departmental 
appeal(s) 
against 
the 
aforesaid 
discharge/dismissal also failed whereupon the appellants 
preferred Original Applications before the Armed Forces 
Tribunal. The Original Applications were dismissed by the 
Tribunal and so were the review petitions.  
12. The appellants have thus preferred these appeals under 
Section 31 of the Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007 before 
this Court inter alia contending that the appellants were 
recruited under the general category and not on priority 
basis as relatives of any servicemen or ex-servicemen; and 
they have not produced any relationship certificate and, 
therefore, 
they 
cannot 
be 
charged 
for 
obtaining 

7 
 
enrollment/recruitment on the basis of fake relationship 
certificates. The authorities as well as the Tribunal have not 
considered the above explanation of the appellants and only 
on the basis that the certificates alleged to have been 
produced by the appellants on verification have been found 
to be fake/forged, without recording any finding that the 
appellants had in effect produced any such certificate, 
upheld the order of discharge/dismissal. 
13. The 
defence 
of 
the 
respondents 
is 
that 
the 
enrollment/recruitment under the Army Headquarters 
Quota is only for the relatives of the servicemen/ ex-
servicemen and that there is no general category in which 
the appellants could have been recruited. It is also 
contended that the appellants are taking the above grounds 
of enrollment/recruitment under general category and of 
non-production of relationship certificate as an afterthought 
as on identical plea the sports persons were directed to be 
reinstated. 
14. After hearing Shri Vinay Navare, learned senior counsel, 
appearing as a lead lawyer for the appellants and Ms. 
Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor General, 

8 
 
appearing 
for 
the 
respondents, 
in 
the 
facts 
and 
circumstances of the case, as narrated above, the following 
points arise for our consideration: 
(i) 
Whether the appellants were enrolled/recruited by 
giving benefit of relationship with the servicemen/ex-
servicemen; 
(ii) 
Whether 
the 
appellants 
have 
produced 
any 
relationship certificate(s);  
(iii) Whether their discharge/dismissal from service is bad 
in law for non-consideration of their explanation. 
15. The respondents have relied upon a newspaper clipping 
which was neither part of the record before the Tribunal or 
of these appeals but was passed over to this Court for the 
purposes of its perusal. The newspaper clipping dated 
27.9.2009 as appearing in Deccan Herald as shown to this 
Court during the course of hearing is not part of the record. 
The respondents made no efforts to bring it on record at any 
stage, not even before this Court except for placing it across 
the Bar for our perusal. In such a scenario, it is not at all 
appropriate for this Court to consider and rely upon it. 
Nonetheless, a plain reading of it would reveal that it is not 

9 
 
an 
advertisement 
inviting 
applications 
for 
enrollment/recruitment 
under 
the 
Unit 
Headquarters 
Quota. It is simply a news item published in the newspaper 
informing that such an exercise for enrollment/recruitment 
under the Unit Headquarters Quota is going to take place 
without specifically stating that general category candidates 
who do not have any relationship with servicemen/ex-
servicemen are prohibited or barred from applying. On the 
contrary, the guidelines/instructions for recruitments 
under the enrollment/recruitment in Paragraph 7 clearly 
mentions about open category recruitment. It reads thus: 
“7.  Open Category: In case of Additional 
vacancies 
for 
recruitment 
available 
with 
Regimental Centre open category of personnel 
based on merit may be taken provided they meet 
the ___________.” 
 
16. A simple reading of the above Paragraph 7 clearly belies the 
stand 
taken 
by 
the 
defence 
that 
the 
above 
enrollment/recruitment was only meant for the relatives of 
the servicemen/ex-servicemen and was not open for the 
general category. 
17. The appellants have brought on record zerox copies of their 
applications 
submitted 
for 
the 
purposes 
of 

10 
 
enrollment/recruitment. In Part-II of the application(s) 
under the heading ‘Documentation’ they have not claimed 
status of a relative of servicemen/ex-servicemen, NCC, 
Sports persons rather they have clearly stated to be of 
general category. The application(s) nowhere mentions that 
they have produced any relationship certificate(s). The 
application(s) thus clearly establishes that the appellants 
appear to have applied as a general category candidate(s) 
against the surplus seats/vacancies remaining unfilled after 
considering the priority/reserved quota for relatives of 
servicemen/ex-servicemen, etc. In such a situation, when 
they have not claimed any enrollment/recruitment on the 
basis 
of 
relationship 
with 
servicemen/ex-servicemen, 
obviously there was no occasion for them to submit any 
relationship certificate. 
18. In response to the show cause notice which stated that the 
appellants have obtained enrollment/recruitment on false 
relationship certificates which on verification have been 
confirmed to be fake, the appellants have denied producing 
any such certificates as they never applied under any 
priority category as a relative of servicemen/ex-servicemen 

11 
 
but in the general category. The discharge certificate simply 
states that the appellants are dismissed from service under 
the orders of Commandant for the reason of obtaining 
enrollment/recruitment by fraudulent means referring to 
submission of fake relationship certificates. The order of the 
Commandant 
states 
that 
at 
the 
time 
of 
enrollment/recruitment in December, 2009 under the Unit 
Headquarters 
Quota 
at 
the 
Maratha 
Light 
Infantry 
Regimental Centre, the relationship certificates of the 
appellants upon verification from records have been found 
to be manipulated and false. Therefore, the appellants had 
obtained enrollment/recruitment by fraudulent means and 
their services are liable to be terminated. Accordingly, the 
appellants were dismissed. 
19. In the above discharge certificate or the order of the 
Commandant, there is no whisper that any inquiry was 
conducted to ascertain or find out as to whether the 
appellants had actually produced relationship certificates 
for the purposes of enrollment/recruitment in the Army. No 
finding has been recorded by the respondents that the 
appellants had as of fact, produced such certificates or that 

12 
 
their explanation claiming that no such certificates were 
furnished by them is completely false. In effect, the 
authorities 
have 
not 
dealt 
with 
the 
above 
explanations/claims of the appellants.  
20. A reading of the order of the Tribunal also shows that the 
above aspect or the contention of the appellants was not 
dealt with by the Tribunal. The Tribunal in a casual and 
routine manner affirmed the discharge/dismissal order 
simply holding that the relationship certificates produced by 
the appellants have been found to be fake even upon 
verification. The Tribunal also seems to have lost sight of 
the crucial point of the appellants that they have applied 
under the general category and not as relatives of 
servicemen/ex-servicemen. They have not produced the 
alleged certificate(s) which could be held to be fake. 
Accordingly, the core issue arising in the matter was missed 
not only by the authorities concerned but by the Tribunal 
as well. Thus, the order(s) of discharge/dismissal of the 
appellants and that of Tribunal stand vitiated for non-
consideration of the material aspect. 

13 
 
21. In S.N. Mukherjee vs. Union of India2, it has been 
categorically laid down by this Court that an order passed 
without consideration of the material evidence or the plea 
would be violative of Principles of Natural Justice and would 
stand vitiated for non-consideration of the relevant material, 
plea or the evidence. 
22. At the same time in Mohinder Singh Gill vs. Chief 
Election Commissioner, New Delhi3, it has been provided 
that the validity of the order impugned has to be tested on 
the basis of the reasoning contained therein and that the 
authorities are not supposed to supplement the same by 
means of extraneous material or affidavit before the courts. 
23. In the case at hand, it was not the case of the respondents 
ever that the vacancies on which the appellants have been 
enrolled/recruited were only supposed to be filled up by the 
relatives of the servicemen/ex-servicemen and not by a 
general category person or that the posts advertised were 
only for the alleged reserved category. They never even took 
any defence based upon the newspaper clipping as referred 
to earlier. This is a subsequent improvement in their 
 
2 (1990) 4 SCC 594 
3 (1978) 1 SCC 405 

14 
 
defence 
which 
as 
discussed 
earlier 
do 
not 
stand 
established. It is nothing but supplementing the reasoning 
of discharge/dismissal which is not contained in the order 
impugned. It is thus not permissible in law in view of 
Mohinder Singh Gill (supra). 
24.  In the end, we sum up our conclusions as under: - 
(i) 
The recruitment under the Headquarter Quota was not 
confined to the priority/reserved class rather it was 
open for general category also to a limited extent; 
(ii) 
There is no material on record to establish that the 
appellants had produced any relationship certificate to 
obtain enrollment; and  
(iii) The discharge/dismissal of the appellants from service 
is vitiated for non-consideration of their specific case 
that they have actually not produced any relationship 
certificate for selection/recruitment as they never 
applied in the reserved category.  
25. The decision in Ex Sig. Man Kanhaiya Kumar vs. Union 
of India and Ors.4 as cited from the side of the 
respondents has no application in the present case 
 
4 (2018) 14 SCC 279 

15 
 
inasmuch as in the said case the fraudulent enrollment in 
the Army was admitted to the appellants to be on the basis 
of fake relationship certificate. There is no dispute to the 
ratio laid down in the above case that the authorities had 
the 
power 
of 
punishment/dismissal/removal 
of 
the 
candidate in the event the enrollment/recruitment had been 
obtained by fraudulent means or on the basis of fake 
relationship certificate. 
26. Similarly, the case of S. Muthu Kumaran vs. Union of 
India and Ors.5 is of no help to the respondents as the 
dismissal therein under the Army Act was on the ground of 
fraudulent recruitment which was found to be proved and 
no perversity was found in the order of the Tribunal 
affirming 
the 
dismissal 
order 
which 
was 
modified/substituted to that of discharge. 
27. In view of what have been said above and the legal position, 
as referred, the discharge/dismissal order of the appellants 
is certainly invalid for want of non-consideration of the plea 
taken by the appellants. Accordingly, we have no option but 
to set aside the impugned orders of discharge/dismissal 
 
5 (2017) 4 SCC 609 

16 
 
dated 9.5.2013 and the judgment(s) and order(s) dated 
06.03.2014 and 18.11.2015 passed by the Armed Forces 
Tribunal. The appellants shall be reinstated with all 
consequential benefits.  
28. 
The appeals are allowed as aforesaid with no order as to 
costs. 
 
 
……………………….. J. 
(BELA M. TRIVEDI) 
 
 
 
……………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL) 
NEW DELHI; 
FEBRUARY 9, 2024.