2024 INSC 102
           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 1 of 38 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS.7590-7591 OF 2023 
(Arising out of Diary No.3628 of 2023) 
 
 
GREATER NOIDA INDUSTRIAL 
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
…APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
 
PRABHJIT SINGH SONI & ANR.  
 
…RESPONDENTS 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
MANOJ MISRA, J. 
 
1. 
These appeals under Section 62 of the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code, 20161 are directed against the 
judgment and order2 of the National Company Law 
Appellate Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi3 passed in 
Company Appeal (AT) (Ins.) No. 867 of 2021 and I.A. No. 
2315 of 2021, whereby the appellant’s appeal against the 
order of the National Company Law Tribunal, New Delhi4 
dated 05.04.2021 has been dismissed.  
 
1 IBC 
2 Order dated 24.11.2022 
3 NCLAT 
4 NCLT 
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2024.02.12
12:47:30 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 2 of 38 
 
2. 
By the order dated 05.04.2021, NCLT had 
dismissed two applications filed by the appellant under 
Section 60(5) of the IBC, namely: 
(a)  I.A. No.1380/ 2021, inter alia, to recall the order 
dated 04.08.2020 passed by NCLT in I.A. No. 2201 
(PB)/2020 in Company Petition No. (IB)-272 (ND)/ 
2019; and  
(b)  I.A. No.344/ 2021, inter alia, questioning the 
decision 
of 
the 
Resolution 
Professional 
(hereinafter referred to as the RP) in treating the 
appellant as an operational creditor and not 
informing the appellant about the meetings of the 
Committee of Creditors5.  
 
Factual Background 
3. 
The 
appellant being a 
statutory authority 
constituted under Section 3 of the U.P. Industrial Area 
Development Act, 19766 acquired land for setting up an 
urban and industrial township. On 28.10.2010, one of the 
plots of land acquired by it, namely, Plot No. 01-C, Sector 
16C, Greater Noida, District Gautam Budh Nagar, U.P., 
was allotted, by way of lease for 90 years, to M/s. JNC 
Construction (P) Ltd (the Corporate Debtor7) for a 
residential project, by charging premium, payable in 
instalments starting from 29.10.2012 up to 29.04.2020, 
after initial moratorium of 24 months, albeit subject to 
 
5  COC 
6 1976 Act 
7 CD 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 3 of 38 
 
payment of interest as well as penal interest, while 
reserving right to cancel the lease and resume the demised 
land, subject to certain conditions. The CD committed 
default in payment of instalments and was served with 
demand cum pre-cancellation notice.   
4. 
A Company Petition No. (IB) 272 (PB)/ 2019 was 
filed against the CD for initiating Corporate Insolvency 
Resolution Process8, which was admitted on 30.05.2019. 
Consequent thereto, claims were invited through a public 
announcement.   
5. 
Pursuant to the public notice, in the month of 
January 2020, appellant submitted a claim of Rs. 
43,40,31,951, being unpaid instalments payable towards 
premium for the lease. The claim was set up by the 
appellant as a financial creditor of the CD.  
6. 
However, the RP treated the appellant as an 
operational creditor and, vide e-mail dated 04.02.2020, 
requested the appellant to submit its claim in Form B, as 
an operational creditor of the CD.  
7. 
The appellant did not submit its claim afresh as 
an operational creditor. In the meantime, the COC 
approved a plan which was presented to the Adjudicating 
Authority (NCLT) for approval. The NCLT vide order dated 
04.08.2020 approved the same. 
8. 
On getting information through letter dated 
24.09.2020 that the plan has been finalised and approved, 
on 06.10.2020 the appellant filed I.A. No.344 of 2021 
 
8 CIRP 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 4 of 38 
 
questioning, inter alia, the resolution plan, the decision of 
the RP to treat the appellant as an operational creditor, 
and all actions in pursuance thereof. Another I.A. 
No.1380/2021 was filed on 15.03.2021 seeking, inter alia, 
recall of the order dated 04.08.2020.  
9. 
In the two applications referred to above, the 
appellant pleaded, inter alia, that, --  
(a) there was gross error on part of the RP in treating 
the 
appellant 
as 
an 
operational 
creditor, 
particularly, when it had no adjudicatory power 
under Regulation 13 of The Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency Resolution 
Process for Corporate Persons) Regulations, 
20169; 
(b) the resolution plan erroneously states that 
appellant did not submit a claim when, in fact, it 
was submitted; 
(c) appellant being owner of the land with statutory 
charge over assets of the CD ought to have been 
given top priority for its dues as a secured 
creditor;  
(d) no opportunity of hearing was given to the 
appellant by the COC, and the entire process right 
up to the approval of the plan by the Adjudicating 
Authority was ex parte.  
 
 
 
9 CIRP Regulations 2016 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 5 of 38 
 
 
NCLT’s Order  
10. 
The NCLT, vide order dated 5.4.2021, rejected the 
aforesaid applications, inter alia, on the ground that, 
despite lapse of seven months between the date of filing its 
claim in January, 2020 and the date of approval of the 
plan in August 2020, the appellant took no steps against 
the RP for not taking a decision on its claim, even though 
it was aware about initiation of the CIRP, and now it is not 
permissible to take a decision on the claim application of 
the appellant as the CIRP is complete consequent to 
approval of the plan.  
 
Appeal before NCLAT 
11. 
Aggrieved with the order of the NCLT, the 
appellant filed an appeal before the NCLAT, inter alia, on 
the following grounds:   
 
(i) 
The appellant was a financial creditor and, 
therefore, ought to have been a member of the 
COC. On account of absence of the appellant in 
the COC, the approval of the resolution plan by 
the COC and, thereafter, by the NCLT is rendered 
invalid;  

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 6 of 38 
 
(ii) By virtue of Sections 1310, 13A11 and 1412 of the 
1976 Act, the appellant had a charge over the 
assets of the CD and was therefore a secured 
creditor within the meaning of Section 3(30)13 read 
with Section 3(31)14 of the IBC, yet the resolution 
plan does not treat the appellant as a secured 
creditor;  
(iii) The appellant had submitted its claim with proof, 
yet the appellant was shown as one who 
submitted no claim. Additionally, the appellant 
was neither informed of the meetings of the COC 
nor adequate amount, commensurate to its status 
as a secured creditor and owner of the land with 
 
10 Section 13.- Imposition of penalty and mode of recovery of arrears.- Where any transferee makes any 
default in the payment of any consideration money or instalment thereof or any other amount due on account 
of the transfer of any site or building by the Authority or any rent due to the Authority in respect of any lease, or 
where any transfer or occupier makes any default in payment of any amount of fee or tax levied under this Act 
the Chief Executive Officer may direct that in addition to the amount of arrears, a further sum not exceeding that 
amount shall be recovered from the transferee or occupier, as the case may be, by way of penalty. 
11 Section 13.A- Any amount payable to the Authority under Section 13 shall constitute a charge over 
the property and may be recovered as arrears of land revenue or by attachment and sale of property in the 
manner provided under Sections 503, 504, 505, 506, 507, 508, 509, 510, 512, 513, and 514 of the Uttar Pradesh 
Municipal Corporations Act,  1959 [Act 2 of 1959] and such provisions of the said Act shall mutatis mutandis 
apply to the recovery of dues of an authority as they apply to the recovery of a tax due to a Municipal Corporation, 
so however, that references in the aforesaid Sections of the said Act to “Municipal Commissioner”,  “Corporation 
Officer” and “Corporation” shall be construed as references to “Chief Executive Officer” and “Authority” 
respectively:  
provided that more than one modes of recovery shall not be commenced or continued simultaneously 
12 Section 14.- Forfeiture for breach of conditions of transfer.- (1) in the case of non-payment of 
consideration money or any installment thereof on account of the transfer by the Authority of any site or building 
or in case of breach of any condition of such transfer or breach of any rules or regulations made under this Act, 
the Chief Executive Officer may resume the site or building so transferred and may further forfeit the whole or 
any part of the money, if any, paid in respect thereof. 
(2) Where the Chief Executive Officer orders resumption of any site or building under sub-section (1) the Collector 
may, on his own requisition, cause possession thereof to be delivered to him and may for that purpose use or 
causes to be used such force as may be necessary 
13 Section 3 (30).- “secured creditor” means a creditor in favour of whom a security interest is created.  
14 Section 3(31).- “security interest” means right, title or interest or a claim to a property, created in 
favour of, or provided for a secured creditor by a transaction which secures payment or performance of an 
obligation and includes mortgage, charge, hypothecation, assignment and encumbrance or any other agreement 
or arrangement securing payment or performance of any obligation of any person:  
 Provided that security interest shall not include a performance guarantee. 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 7 of 38 
 
statutory rights, was allocated to it in the 
resolution plan, which is violative of the 
provisions of Section 30(2)15 of the IBC; and 
(iv) The NCLT failed to address and appreciate the 
grounds taken in the correct perspective. 
 
Findings of NCLAT 
12. 
The appeal preferred by the appellant was 
dismissed by observing, inter alia,  
 
15 Section 30. Submission of Resolution Plan. – (1)………………… 
 
(2) The resolution professional shall examine each resolution plan received by him to confirm that 
each resolution plan— 
(a) provides for the payment of insolvency resolution process costs in a manner specified by 
the Board in priority to the payment of other debts of the corporate debtor; 
(b) provides for the payment of debts of operational creditors in such manner as may be 
specified by the Board which shall not be less than— 
(i) the amount to be paid to search creditors in the event of a liquidation of the 
corporate debtor under section 53; 
(ii) the amount that would have been paid to such creditors, if the amount to be 
distributed under the resolution plan had been distributed in accordance with the 
order of priority in sub-section (1)  of section 53; 
whichever is higher, and provides for the payment of debts of financial creditors, who do not 
vote in favour of the resolution plan, in such manner as may be specified by the Board, which 
shall not be less than the amount to be paid to such creditors in accordance with sub-section 
(1) of section 53 in the event of a liquidation of the corporate debtor. 
Explanation 1.-- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a distribution in 
accordance with the provisions of this clause shall be fair and equitable to such creditors. 
Explanation 2.-- For the purposes of this clause it is hereby declared that on and from the date 
of commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code [Amendment] Act, 2019, the 
provisions of this clause shall also apply to the corporate insolvency resolution process of a 
corporate debtor---- 
(i) 
where the resolution plan has not been approved or rejected by the 
adjudicating authority; 
(ii) 
where an appeal has been preferred under section 61 or section 62 or such 
an appeal is not time barred under any provision of law for the time being in 
force; or 
(iii) 
 where a legal proceeding has been initiated in any court against the decision 
of the adjudicating authority in respect of a resolution plan; 
(c) provides for the management of the affairs of the corporate debtor after approval of the 
resolution plan; 
(d) the implementation and supervision of the resolution plan; 
(e) does not contravene any of the provisions of the law for the time being in force; 
(f) conforms to such other requirements as may be specified by the Board. 
 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 8 of 38 
 
(i)  the materials on record reflect that the RP had 
informed 
the 
appellant 
vide 
e-mail 
dated 
04.02.2020 about its status as an Operational 
Creditor and to submit its claim in Form ‘B’, yet 
the appellant chose not to file its claim;  
(ii)  in New Okhla Development Authority vs. 
Anand 
Sonbhadra16, 
it 
was 
held 
that 
disbursement is an indispensable requirement to 
constitute a financial debt within the meaning of 
Section 5(8)17 of the IBC and, that too, the 
disbursement must be from a creditor to a debtor, 
and as the lease executed by the appellant was 
not a financial lease or capital lease, the appellant 
does not qualify as a financial creditor;  
 
16 (2023) 1 SCC 724 
17 Section 5(8).—“financial debt” means a debt along with interest, if any, which is disbursed against the 
consideration for the time value of money and includes – 
(a) money borrowed against the payment of interest; 
(b)  any amount raised by acceptance under any acceptance credit facility or its dematerialised equivalent;  
(c)  any amount raised pursuant to any note, purchase facility or the issue of bonds, notes, debentures, 
loan stock or any similar instrument;  
(d)  the amount of any liability in respect of any lease or higher purchase contract which is deemed as a 
financial or capital lease under the Indian Accounting Standards or such other accounting standards as 
may be prescribed;  
(e) receivables sold or discounted other than any receivables sold on non-recourse basis; 
(f)  any amount raised under any other transaction, including any forward sale or purchase agreement, 
having the commercial effect of a borrowing;  
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this sub clause,-- 
(i) 
any amount raised from an allottee under a real estate project shall be deemed to be an amount 
having the commercial effect of a borrowing; and  
(ii) 
the expressions, “allottee” and “real estate project” shall have the meanings respectively assigned 
to them in clauses (d) and (zn) of Section 2 of the Real Estate (Regulation and Development Act, 
2016 (16 of 2016);  
(g) any derivative transaction entered into in connection with protection against or benefit from fluctuation 
in any rate or price and for calculating the value of any derivative transaction, only the market value of 
such transaction shall be taken into account;  
(h) any counter indemnity obligation in respect of a guarantee, indemnity bond, documentary letter of 
credit or any other instrument issued by a bank or financial institution;  
(i)  the amount of any liability in respect of any of the guarantee or indemnity for any of the items referred 
to in sub-clauses (a) to (h) of this clause; 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 9 of 38 
 
(iii) the resolution plan was approved by the 
Adjudicating Authority on 04.08.2020, and the 
successful resolution applicant (SRA) seeking 
implementation of the plan informed the appellant 
vide letter dated 24.09.2020 about the plan, yet  
I.A. No.344/ 2021 was not filed before 06.10.2020 
and I.A. No. 1380/2021, seeking recall, was filed 
only on 15.03.2021, which shows that the 
appellant had not been diligent in pursuing its 
right, if any, therefore the challenge, post approval 
of the resolution plan, is liable to be rejected; and  
(iv) there appears no material irregularity in the 
approval of the Resolution Plan, particularly, 
when the commercial wisdom of the COC is not 
justiciable.  
13. 
We have heard Sri Ravindra Kumar, learned 
senior counsel, for the appellant; Dr. Abhishek Manu 
Singhvi, learned senior counsel, for respondent no.2 
(Resolution Applicant); 
and 
Sri 
V.M. 
Kannan 
for 
respondent no.1 (Resolution Professional). 
 
Submissions on behalf of the appellant 
14. 
The learned counsel for the appellant, inter alia,  
submitted: 
(a) There is no dispute that appellant had submitted 
its claim with proof on 30.01.2020 as a financial 
creditor having security interest over the assets of 
the CD. Even if the appellant was not a financial 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 10 of 38 
 
creditor, the resolution plan ought to have noticed 
its claim as a secured creditor whereas the order 
of 
approval 
dated 
4.8.2020 
describes 
the 
appellant as one who did not submit its claim.  
(b) The meetings of the COC were not notified to the 
appellant to enable its participation. In absence 
thereof, the resolution plan stood vitiated.  
(c) At the time of approving the resolution plan, the 
adjudicating authority failed to consider whether 
the plan had made provisions commensurate to 
appellant’s claim, and the statutory charge which 
the appellant enjoyed over the assets of the CD. 
Not only that, it overlooked the ownership and 
statutory rights of the appellant over the land and 
thereby failed to consider whether the plan was 
feasible 
and 
viable. 
In 
absence 
of 
such 
consideration, the order of approval stood vitiated. 
(d) The finding that there had been a delay on part of 
the appellant in pursuing its remedies is 
misconceived, 
particularly 
when 
it 
was 
established on record that I.A. No.344/ 2021 was 
filed 
promptly 
on 
6.10.2020 
upon 
getting 
information on 24.09.2020 from the monitoring 
agency regarding approval of the plan. Likewise, 
I.A. No.1380/ 2021 was filed immediately on 
15.03.2021 when suspension of the period of 
limitation for any suit, appeal, application or 
proceeding, imposed between 15.03.2020 and 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 11 of 38 
 
14.03.2021, was lifted in terms of this Court’s 
order dated 8.03.2021 in RE: Cognizance For 
Extension of Limitation18.  
 
Submissions on behalf of the respondents 
15. 
Dr. 
Abhishek 
Manu 
Singhvi, 
leading 
the 
arguments on behalf of the respondents, submitted that 
the issue as to whether dues payable to an Industrial Area 
Development Authority, like the appellant, towards lease/ 
allotment premium / rental, would be a financial debt or 
not is no longer res integra, as it stands settled by a 
decision of this Court in Anand Sonbhadra (supra), 
wherein it has been held that it is not a financial debt. 
Therefore, the appellant had no voting right in the COC. 
And since the appellant pressed its case only on the 
ground that it is a financial creditor, its challenge to the 
order of approval had no basis. More so, when the 
commercial wisdom of the COC is not justiciable. Further, 
once the resolution plan, which makes a provision for the 
appellant, is approved by the Adjudicating Authority, it 
cannot be questioned through a recall application.  
 
Analysis 
16. 
Before we proceed to test the correctness of the 
impugned order against the weight of rival submissions, it 
would be useful to have a look at the statutory provisions 
 
18 (2021) 5 SCC 452 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 12 of 38 
 
of the IBC and the Regulations framed thereunder with 
reference to the corporate insolvency resolution process.   
17. 
As per the provisions of the IBC, on admission of 
a petition, and declaration of a moratorium under Section 
13, a public announcement is made inviting claims 
against the CD by a specified date. The manner in which 
a public announcement is to be made and claims are to be 
submitted, is described in the CIRP Regulations 2016.  
18. 
Regulation 719 of CIRP Regulations, 2016 deals 
with submission of a claim by a person who claims himself 
to be an operational creditor. Such claim is to be 
submitted in Form B specified in the Schedule. Whereas 
Regulation 820 deals with submission of a claim by a 
 
19  
7. Claims by operational creditors.—(1) A person claiming to be an operational 
creditor, other than workman or employee of the corporate debtor, shall submit claim with 
proof to the interim resolution professional in person, by post or by electronic means in Form 
B of the Schedule: 
Provided that such person may submit supplementary documents or clarifications in 
support of the claim before the constitution of the committee. 
(2) The existence of debt due to the operational creditor under this regulation may be 
proved on the basis of— 
(a) the records available with an information utility, if any; or 
(b) other relevant documents, including— 
(i) a contract for the supply of goods and services with corporate debtor; 
(ii) an invoice demanding payment for the goods and services supplied to the corporate 
debtor; 
(iii) an order of a court or tribunal that has adjudicated upon the non-payment of a debt, 
if any; or 
(iv) financial accounts. 
 
20 8. Claims by financial creditors.—(1) A person claiming to be a financial creditor, other 
than a financial creditor belonging to a class of creditors, shall submit claim with proof to the 
interim resolution professional in electronic form in Form C of the Schedule: 
Provided that such person may submit supplementary documents or clarifications in 
support of the claim before the constitution of the committee. 
(2) The existence of debt due to the financial creditor may be proved on the basis of— 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 13 of 38 
 
person who claims himself to be a financial creditor. Such 
a claim is to be submitted in Form C.  Regulations 8-A, 9 
and 9-A deal with other classes of creditors with which we 
are not concerned here.  
19. 
Regulation 1221 mandates submission of proof of 
the claim by the date specified. Whereas, Regulation 1322 
 
(a) the records available with an information utility, if any; or 
(b) other relevant documents, including— 
(i) a financial contract supported by financial statements as evidence of the 
debt; 
(ii) a record evidencing that the amounts committed by the financial creditor to 
the corporate debtor under a facility has been drawn by the corporate debtor; 
(iii) financial statements showing that the debt has not been paid; or 
(iv) an order of a court or tribunal that has adjudicated upon the non-payment 
of a debt, if any. 
 
21 12. Submission of proof of claims.—(1) Subject to sub-regulation (2), a creditor shall 
submit claim with proof on or before the last date mentioned in the public announcement. 
(2) A creditor, who fails to submit claim with proof within the time stipulated in the 
public announcement, may submit the claim with proof to the interim resolution 
professional or the resolution professional, as the case may be, on or before the ninetieth 
day of the insolvency commencement date. 
(3) Where the creditor in sub-regulation (2) is a financial creditor under Regulation 8, 
it shall be included in the committee from the date of admission of such claim: 
Provided that such inclusion shall not affect the validity of any decision taken by the 
committee prior to such inclusion. 
 
22 13. Verification of claims.—(1) The interim resolution professional or the resolution 
professional, as the case may be, shall verify every claim, as on the insolvency 
commencement date, within seven days from the last date of the receipt of the claims, 
and thereupon maintain a list of creditors containing names of creditors along with the 
amount claimed by them, the amount of their claims admitted and the security interest, if 
any, in respect of such claims, and update it. 
(2) The list of creditors shall be— 
(a) available for inspection by the persons who submitted proofs of claim; 
(b) available for inspection by members, partners, directors and guarantors of the 
corporate debtor or their authorised representatives; 
(c) displayed on the website, if any, of the corporate debtor; 
(ca) filed on the electronic platform of the Board for dissemination on its website: 
Provided that this clause shall apply to every corporate insolvency resolution 
process ongoing and commencing on or after the date of commencement of the 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 14 of 38 
 
speaks of verification of claims by the interim resolution 
professional (IRP) or the RP, as the case may be. 
Regulation 1423 provides for determination of amount of 
claim where the amount claimed is not precise.  
20. 
The use of the words “a person claiming to be an 
operational creditor” in the opening part of Regulation 7, 
and the words “a person claiming to be a financial creditor” 
in Regulation 8, indicate that the category in which the 
claim is submitted is based on the own understanding of 
the claimant. Thus, there could be a situation where the 
claimant, in good faith, may place itself in a category to 
which it does not belong. However, what is important is, 
the claim so submitted must be with proof.  As to what 
could form proof of the debt/ claim is delineated in sub-
regulation (2) of Regulations 7 and 8 of the CIRP 
Regulations, 2016.  
21. 
Once a claim is submitted with proof under any of 
the Regulations (i.e., Regulations 7, 8, 8-A, 9 and 9-A), the 
 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency Resolution Process for 
Corporate Persons) (Fifth Amendment) Regulations, 2020; 
(d) filed with the adjudicating authority; and 
(e) presented at the first meeting of the committee. 
 
23 14. Determination of amount of claim.—(1) Where the amount claimed by a creditor 
is not precise due to any contingency or other reason, the interim resolution professional 
or the resolution professional, as the case may be, shall make the best estimate of the 
amount of the claim based on the information available with him. 
(2) The interim resolution professional or the resolution professional, as the case may 
be, shall revise the amounts of claims admitted, including the estimates of claims made 
under sub-regulation (1), as soon as may be practicable, when he comes across additional 
information warranting such revision.” 
 
 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 15 of 38 
 
IRP or the RP, as the case may be, as per Regulation 13, 
has 
to 
verify 
the 
claim, 
as 
on 
the 
insolvency 
commencement date, and thereupon maintain a list of 
creditors containing names of creditors along with the 
amount claimed by them, the amount of their claims 
admitted and the security interest, if any, in respect of 
such claims, and update it in terms of Regulation 12 A24.   
22. 
As it could be noticed from the CIRP Regulations, 
2016, on submission of a claim with proof, the IRP or the 
RP, as the case may be, has to verify the claim and prepare 
a list of creditors containing names of creditors along with 
the amount claimed by them and security interest, if any, 
the logical conclusion derivable from the provisions 
analysed above would be that the Form in which a claim 
is to be submitted under the CIRP Regulations 2016 is 
directory and not mandatory. What is important is, the 
claim must be supported by proof. 
23. 
On collation of claims received against the CD, the 
IRP has to constitute a COC. As per Section 21 (2) of the 
IBC, subject to other provisions of Section 21, the COC 
must comprise all financial creditors of a CD. Under 
Section 22 of the IBC, the COC appoints an RP in its first 
meeting.  It may, however, resolve to appoint the IRP as 
the RP, subject to confirmation by the Board.  
24. 
The RP has many important duties. Some of the 
duties which an RP has to perform, under Section 25 of 
 
24 !2 A. Updation of claim. — A creditor shall update its claim as and when the claim is 
satisfied, partly or fully, from any source in any manner, after the insolvency commencement 
date.  

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 16 of 38 
 
the IBC, are to: (a) take immediate custody and control of 
all the assets of the CD, including the business records of 
the CD; (b) maintain an updated list of claims; (c) convene 
and attend all meetings of the COC; (d) prepare 
information memorandum in accordance with Section 29 
read with Regulation 36 of the CIRP Regulations 201625; 
(e) invite prospective resolution applicants to submit a 
resolution plan or plans; and (f) present all resolution 
plans at the meetings of the COC.    
 
25 Regulation 36. Information memorandum. – (1) Subject to sub regulation [4], the resolution professional shall 
submit the information memorandum in electronic form to each member of the committee within 2 weeks of 
his appointment, but not later than 54th day from the insolvency commencement date, whichever is earlier.  
(2) the information memorandum shall contain the following details of the corporate debtor--  
[a] assets and liabilities with such description, as on the insolvency commencement date, as 
are generally necessary for ascertaining their values. 
Explanation.- Description includes the details such as date of acquisition cost of acquisition, 
remaining useful life identification number, depreciation charged, book value, and any other 
relevant details. 
(b) the latest annual financial statements; 
 
(c) financial statements of the corporate debtor for the last 2 financial years and provisional 
financial statements for the current financial year made up to a date not earlier than 14 days 
from the date of the application; 
(d) a list of creditors containing the names of creditors, the amounts claimed by them, the 
amount of their claims admitted and the security interest, if any, in respect of such claims; 
(e) particulars of a debt due from or to the corporate debtor with respect to related parties; 
(f) details of guarantees that have been given in relation to the debts of the corporate debtor 
by other persons, specifying which of the guarantors is a related party; 
(g) the names and addresses of the members or partners holding at least 1% stake in the 
corporate debtor along with the size of stake; 
(h) details of all material litigation and an ongoing investigation or proceeding initiated by 
Government and statutory authorities; 
(i)  the number of workers and employees and liabilities of the corporate debtor towards them; 
(j) *******omitted 
(k)*******omitted 
(l) other information, which the resolution professional deems relevant to the committee. 
(3)  A member of the committee may request the resolution professional for further information of the 
nature described in this regulation and the resolution professional shall provide such information to all 
members within reasonable time if such information has a bearing on the resolution plan.  
(4) The resolution professional shall share the information memorandum after receiving an undertaking 
from a member of the committee to the effect that such member or resolution applicant shall maintain 
confidentiality of the information and shall not use such information to cause an undue gain or undue 
loss to itself or any other person and comply with the requirements under subsection [2] of section 29.  

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 17 of 38 
 
25. 
The meetings of the COC are to be conducted by 
the RP. Sub section (3) of Section 2426, inter alia, provides 
that the RP shall give notice of each meeting of the COC to 
the operational creditors or their representative(s) if the 
amount of their aggregate dues is not less than ten percent 
of the debt. Regulation 19 of the CIRP Regulations, 2016 
further mandates the RP to ensure that notice of the 
meeting is given to every participant. “Participant” is 
defined in Regulation 2 (l) of the CIRP Regulations 2016 as 
a person who is entitled to attend a meeting of the COC 
under Section 24 of the IBC or any other person 
authorised by the COC to attend the meeting.  
26. 
Based on the information memorandum, when a 
resolution plan is submitted by a resolution applicant, 
eligible under Section 29-A of the IBC, the RP is under an 
obligation to examine whether the resolution plan(s) 
received by him conform(s) to the conditions referred to in 
 
26 “Section 24. Meeting of committee of creditors.---  (1)……… 
            (2)………….. 
            (3) The resolution professional shall give notice of each meeting of the committee of creditors to— 
(a) members of committee of creditors, including the authorized representatives referred to in 
sub-sections (6) and (6A) of section 2 and sub-section (5); 
(b) members of the suspended Board of Directors or the partners of the corporate persons, as 
the case may be; 
(c). operational creditors or their representatives if the amount of their aggregate dues is not 
less than ten percent of the debt   
 
 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 18 of 38 
 
sub-section (2) of Section 30 of the IBC as elaborated in 
Regulations 3727 and 3827A of the CIRP Regulations 2016.  
27. 
 The resolution plan that conforms to the 
conditions referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 30 is to 
be presented by the RP to the COC for its approval. 
Thereafter, under sub-section (4) of Section 3028, the COC 
 
27 Regulation 37. Resolution Plan.-- A resolution plan shall provide for the measures as may be necessary, for 
insolvency resolution of the corporate debtor for maximization of value of its assets including but not limited to 
the following:- 
[a] transfer of all or part of the assets of the corporate debtor to one or more persons; 
(b) sale of all or part of the assets whether subject to any security interest or not;  
[ba] restructuring of the corporate debtor, by way of merger, amalgamation and demerger; 
[c] the substantial acquisition of shares of the corporate debtor or the merger or consolidation of 
the corporate debtor with one or more persons;  
[ca] cancellation or delisting of any shares of the corporate debtor if applicable;  
[d] satisfaction or modification of any security interest; 
[e] curing or waving of any breach of the terms of any debt due from the corporate debtor; 
  
[f] reduction in the amount payable to the creditors; 
[g] extension of a maturity date or change in interest rate or other terms of a debt due from the 
corporate debtor;  
[h] amendment of the constitutional documents of the corporate debtor; 
[i] issuance of securities of the corporate debtor for cash, property, securities, or in exchange for 
claims or interest, or other appropriate purpose; 
  
[j] change in portfolio of goods or services produced or rendered by the corporate debtors; 
[k] change in technology used by the corporate debtor; and  
[l] obtaining necessary approvals from the central and state governments and other authorities. 
27A Regulation 38. Mandatory contents of the resolution plan.---(1) The amount payable under a resolution plan-
----  
(a)  to the operational creditors shall be paid in priority over financial creditors; and  
(b)  to the financial creditors, who have a right to vote under sub- section (2) of Section 21 and did not 
vote in favour of the resolution plan, shall be paid in priority over financial creditors who voted in favour of the 
plan. 
(1A) A resolution plan shall include a statement as to how it has dealt with the interests of all 
stakeholders including financial creditors and operational creditors, of the corporate debtor. 
(1B) A resolution plan shall include a statement giving details if the resolution applicant or any of its 
related parties has failed to implement or contributed to the failure of implementation of any other resolution 
plan approved by the adjudicating authority at any time in the past.  
(2) A resolution plan shall provide: 
[a] the term of the plan and its implementation schedule; 
[b] the management and control of the business of the corporate debtor during its term; and 
[c) adequate means for supervising its implementation. 
(3) A resolution plan shall demonstrate that----  
[a] it addresses the cause of the fault;  
[b] it is feasible and viable;  
[c] it has provisions for its effective implementation; 
(d) it has provisions for approvals required and the timeline for the same; and 
 [e] the resolution applicant has the capability to implement the resolution plan. 
28 Section 30 (4). The committee of creditors may approve a resolution plan by a vote of not less than sixty six 
percent of voting share of financial creditors, after considering its feasibility and viability, the manner of 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 19 of 38 
 
may approve the plan after considering its feasibility and 
viability, the manner of distribution proposed, which may 
take into account the order of priority amongst creditors 
as laid down in sub-section (1) of Section 53, including the 
priority and value of security interest of a secured creditor 
and such other requirements as may be specified by the 
Board.   
28. 
Once the plan is approved by the COC, the RP has 
to submit it for approval of the Adjudicating Authority.  As 
per sub-section (1) of Section 3129 of the IBC, if the 
Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution plan 
as approved by the COC under sub-section (4) of Section 
30 meets the requirements of sub-section (2) of Section 30, 
it has to approve the resolution plan. On its approval, the 
plan becomes binding on the CD and its employees, 
members, creditors, including the Central Government, 
any State Government or any local authority to whom a 
debt in respect of the payment of dues arising under any 
law for the time being in force, such as authorities to 
whom statutory dues are owed, guarantors and other 
stakeholders involved in the resolution plan.  But where 
 
distribution proposed, which may take into account the order of priority amongst creditors as laid down in sub-
section (1) of section 53, including the priority  and value of the security interest of secured creditor and such 
other requirements as may be specified by the Board: 
………………” 
 
29 “Section 31. Approval of resolution plan.- (1) If the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution plan 
as approved by the committee of creditors under sub-section (4) of section 30 meets the requirements as 
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 30, it shall by order approve the resolution plan which shall be binding 
on the corporate debtor and its employees, members, creditors, including the Central Government, any State 
Government or any local authority to whom a debt in respect of the payment of dues under any law for the time 
being in force, such as authorities to whom statutory dues are owed, guarantors and other stakeholders involved 
in the resolution plan: 
………….”. 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 20 of 38 
 
the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution 
plan does not conform to the requirements referred to in 
sub-section (1), it may, in exercise of power under sub-
section (2) of Section 31, by an order, reject the resolution 
plan.   
29. 
 Explaining the scheme of the CIRP under the IBC, 
in Ghanashyam Mishra & Sons (P) Ltd. vs. Edelweiss 
Asset Reconstruction Co. Ltd.30, a three-Judge Bench of 
this Court observed that one of the principal objects of the 
IBC is to provide for revival of the CD and to make it a 
going concern. The RP on commencement of CIRP is 
required to issue a publication inviting claims from all the 
stakeholders; thereafter, on basis of claims received, the 
RP is required to collate the information and submit 
necessary details in the information memorandum; the 
resolution applicant(s) submit their plan(s) on the basis of 
the details provided in the information memorandum; the 
resolution plan(s) undergo deep scrutiny by RP as well as 
COC; in the negotiations that may be held between COC 
and the resolution applicant, various modifications may 
be made so as to ensure that while paying part of the dues 
of financial creditors as well as operational creditors and 
other stakeholders, the CD is revived and is made an on-
going concern; after COC approves the plan, the 
adjudicating authority is required to arrive at a subjective 
satisfaction that the plan conforms to the requirements as 
are provided in sub-section (2) of Section 30 of IBC; and 
 
30  (2021) 9 SCC 657 (paragraph 93)  

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 21 of 38 
 
only thereafter, the adjudicating authority can grant its 
approval to the plan.  
30. 
What is clear from the provisions of the IBC and 
the Regulations noticed above is, that the RP is under a 
statutory obligation to collate the data obtained from (a) 
the claim(s) made before it and (b) information gathered 
from the records including those maintained by the CD. 
The data so collated forms part of the information 
memorandum. Based on that information, the resolution 
applicant(s) submit(s) plan. In consequence, even if a 
claim submitted by a creditor against the CD is in a Form 
not as specified in the CIRP Regulations, 2016, the same 
has to be given due consideration by the IRP or the RP, as 
the case may be, if it is otherwise verifiable, either from the 
proof submitted by the creditor or from the records 
maintained by the CD. A fortiori, if a claim is submitted by 
an operational creditor claiming itself as a financial 
creditor, the claim would have to be accorded due 
consideration in the category to which it belongs provided 
it is verifiable. 
31. 
On submission of the plan by a resolution 
applicant, the RP examines it to confirm whether it meets 
the requirements of sub-section (2) of Section 30 and, if it 
conforms to the conditions referred to therein, present the 
plan to the COC for its approval. After the plan is 
presented to the COC for its approval, the COC, under 
sub-section (4) of Section 30, has to consider its feasibility 
and viability, the manner of distribution proposed, 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 22 of 38 
 
including the priority and value of the security interest of 
a secured creditor and such other requirements as may be 
specified by the Board. Once that exercise is over, the plan 
is submitted for approval of the Adjudicating Authority, 
which must, under sub-section (1) of Section 31, satisfy 
itself as to whether the plan approved by COC under sub-
section (4) of Section 30 meets the requirements as 
referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 30 of IBC.  
32. 
In Jaypee Kensington Boulevard Apartments 
Welfare Association vs. NBCC (India) Ltd.,31 a three-
Judge Bench of this Court had occasion to examine the 
scope of judicial review exercisable by: (a) the Adjudicating 
Authority, under Section 31 (1), over a resolution plan 
approved by the COC; and (b) the Appellate Authority 
exercising its power under Section 32 read with Section 61 
(3) of the IBC.  After examining the relevant provisions of 
the IBC and the Regulations framed thereunder, and upon 
a survey of various judicial pronouncements on the 
subject, the scope of judicial review was summarised as 
follows: 
“108. To put in a nutshell, the adjudicating 
authority has limited jurisdiction in the matter 
of approval of a resolution plan, which is well-
defined and circumscribed by Sections 30(2) and 
31 of the Code read with the parameters 
delineated by this Court in the decisions above-
referred. The jurisdiction of the appellate 
authority is also circumscribed by the limited 
grounds of appeal provided in Section 61 of the 
Code. In the adjudicatory process concerning a 
 
31 (2022) 1 SCC 401 
 
 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 23 of 38 
 
resolution plan under IBC, there is no scope for 
interference with the commercial aspects of the 
decision of the CoC; and there is no scope for 
substituting any commercial term of the 
resolution plan approved by the CoC. Within its 
limited jurisdiction, if the adjudicating authority 
or the appellate authority, as the case may be, 
would find any shortcoming in the resolution 
plan vis-à-vis the specified parameters, it would 
only send the resolution plan back to the 
Committee of Creditors, for re-submission after 
satisfying the parameters delineated by the Code 
and exposited by this Court. 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
33. 
In light of the analysis of the provisions of the IBC 
and the Regulations framed thereunder, in our view, 
though commercial wisdom of the COC in approving a 
resolution plan may not be justiciable in exercise of the 
power of judicial review, the Adjudicating Authority can 
always take notice of any shortcoming in the resolution 
plan in terms of the parameters specified in sub-section 
(2) of Section 30 of the IBC coupled with Regulations 37 
and 38 of the CIRP Regulations 2016. If any such 
shortcoming appears in the resolution plan, it may send 
the resolution plan back to the COC for re-submission 
after satisfying the parameters so laid down. Likewise, the 
appellate authority can also interfere upon noticing any 
shortcoming in the resolution plan while exercising its 
powers under Section 3232 read with Section 61 (3)33 of the 
IBC.     
 
32 Section 32. Appeal. -  Any appeal from an order approving the resolution plan shall be in the manner and on 
the grounds laid down in sub-section (3) of Section 61. 
33 Section 61. Appeals and Appellate Authority. – (1)………… 
(2)…………. 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 24 of 38 
 
34. 
In the instant case, a perusal of the approval order 
dated 04.08.2020 would reveal that the resolution plan 
put forth by the resolution applicant refers to the appellant 
as a creditor who had not submitted its claim.  Further, 
the dues shown payable to the appellant are Rs. 
13,47,40,819/- when, according to the appellant, its claim 
was for Rs. 43,40,31,951/- Not only that, the amount 
proposed to be paid is just Rs.1,34,74,082/-, that too, 
payable by conversion of dues into square feet of area to 
be completed and payment to be made, on square feet 
basis, at the time of registration of each of the units.  
35. 
 However, what is important is that neither NCLT 
nor NCLAT rejected the assertion of the appellant that on 
30.01.2020, in response to the public announcement, the 
appellant 
had 
submitted 
with 
proof 
a 
claim 
of 
Rs.43,40,31,951/- before the RP, being the amount 
payable to it by the CD towards unpaid premium including 
interest payable thereon for the lease/allotment of land 
owned by the appellant. 
36. 
According to the appellant, the resolution plan 
fails to take into account the following: (a) the appellant 
 
(3) An appeal against an order approving resolution plan under Section 31 may be filed on the 
following grounds, namely:-  
[i] the approved resolution plan is in contravention of the provisions of any law for 
the time being in force; 
(ii) there has been material irregularity in exercise of the powers by the resolution 
professional during the corporate insolvency resolution period; 
(iii) the debts owed to operational creditors of the corporate debtor have not been 
provided for in the resolution plan in the manner specified by the Board; 
(iv) the insolvency resolution process costs have not been provided for repayment in 
priority to all other debts; or  
(v) the resolution plan does not comply with any other criteria specified by the 
Board. 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 25 of 38 
 
had submitted its claim with proof for Rs. 43,40,31,951/-
; (b) the appellant had a statutory charge over the assets 
of the CD; (c) the entire land over which the project has 
been conceived is owned by the appellant; (d) a notice to 
cancel the lease for non-payment of dues had already been 
served on the CD; and (e) without approval of the 
appellant, the plan was not feasible. Further, according to 
the appellant, the plan did not conform to the conditions 
referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 30 of the IBC read 
with Regulations 37 and 38 of the CIRP Regulations 2016; 
and that the entire process of preparing the resolution 
plan and approving the same had been ex parte, thereby 
seriously prejudicing the interest of the appellant. It is the 
case of the appellant that neither NCLT nor NCLAT 
accorded due consideration to the above aspects while 
rejecting the application/ appeal of the appellant.  
37. 
Per contra, on behalf of the respondents, it was 
urged that,- (a) the appellant had pressed its case only on 
the ground that it was a financial creditor, once this plea 
is found unsustainable, no relief can be granted to the 
appellant, as commercial wisdom of the COC is not 
justiciable; (b) NCLT has no power to recall its order of 
approval, the remedy for the appellant was to file an appeal 
within the time provided by the statute; and (c) there has 
been inordinate delay on the part of the appellant in 
questioning the order of approval. 
38. 
At this stage, we may put on record that the 
appellant had set up its claim as a financial creditor. 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 26 of 38 
 
However, the appellant was found to be an operational 
creditor. Though a challenge to this finding has been laid 
but, during the course of arguments, the learned counsel 
for the appellant failed to demonstrate as to how could the 
appellant be considered a financial creditor. In view 
thereof, taking notice of the decision in Anand 
Sonbhadra (supra), we do not propose to deal with the 
submission that the appellant was a financial creditor.  
39. 
Upon consideration of the rival submissions, 
following issues arise for our consideration in this appeal: 
(i) 
Whether in exercise of powers under sub-section 
(5) of Section 60, the Adjudicating Authority (i.e., 
NCLT) can recall an order of approval passed 
under sub-section (1) of Section 31 of the IBC?.   
(ii) Whether the application for recall of the order was 
barred by time? 
(iii) Whether the resolution plan put forth by the 
resolution 
applicant 
did 
not 
meet 
the 
requirements of sub-section (2) of Section 30 of 
the IBC read with Regulations 37 and 38 of the 
CIRP Regulations, 2016? 
(iv) As to what relief, if any, the appellant is entitled 
to? 
 
Recall Application is maintainable. 
40. 
Section 60 of the IBC specifies that the 
Adjudicating Authority in relation to insolvency resolution 
and liquidation for corporate persons including corporate 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 27 of 38 
 
debtors and personal guarantors thereof shall be the NCLT 
having territorial jurisdiction over the place where the 
registered office of the corporate person is located. Sub-
section (5) of Section 60 provides that notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, the NCLT shall have jurisdiction to 
entertain or dispose of: (a) any application or proceeding 
by or against the corporate debtor or corporate person; (b) 
any claim made by or against the corporate debtor or 
corporate person, including claims by or against any of its 
subsidiaries situated in India; and (c) any question of 
priorities or any question of law or facts, arising out of or 
in relation to the insolvency resolution or liquidation 
proceedings of the corporate debtor or corporate person 
under the IBC. 
41. 
The NCLT has been constituted by the Central 
Government in exercise of power under Section 408 of the 
Companies Act, 2013. Section 408 of the Companies Act 
is in following terms: 
“The Central Government shall, by notification, 
constitute with effect from such date as may be 
specified therein, a tribunal to be known as the 
National Company Law Tribunal consisting of a 
President and such number of judicial and 
technical members as the Central Government 
may deem necessary, to be appointed by it by 
notification to exercise and discharge such 
powers and functions as are, or may be, 
conferred on it by or under this Act or any other 
law for the time being in force.” 
 
42. 
Rule 11 of the National Company Law Tribunal 
Rules, 2016, framed under Section 469 of the Companies 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 28 of 38 
 
Act 2013, which is in pari materia with Section 15134 of 
Code of Civil Procedure, 190835, preserve the inherent 
powers of the Tribunal in the following terms:  
“Nothing in these rules shall be deemed to limit 
or otherwise affect the inherent powers of the 
Tribunal to make such orders as may be 
necessary for meeting the ends of justice or to 
prevent abuse of the process of the Tribunal.” 
 
43. 
In Manohar Lal Chopra vs. Rai Bahadur Rao 
Raja Seth Hiralal35   a four-Judge Bench of this Court in 
the context of powers vested in the Court, while 
interpreting Section 151 CPC, observed: 
“23… The Section itself says that nothing in the 
Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect 
the inherent power of the Court to make orders 
necessary for the ends of justice. In the face of 
such a clear statement, it is not possible to hold 
that the provisions of the Code control the 
inherent power by limiting it or otherwise 
affecting it. The inherent power has not been 
conferred upon the court; it is a power inherent 
in the Court by virtue of its duty to do justice 
between the parties before it.” 
(Emphasis supplied)   
 
44. 
In Grindlays Bank Ltd. vs. Central Govt. 
Industrial Tribunal36 a question arose whether Central 
Government Industrial Tribunal has power to recall/ set 
aside an ex parte award when the party aggrieved had been 
prevented from appearing by a sufficient cause. Holding 
 
34 Section 151.- Saving of inherent powers of Court. - Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or 
otherwise affect the inherent power of the Court to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of 
justice or to prevent abuse of the process of the Court  
35 CPC 
35 AIR 1962 SC 527  
36 1980 Supp SCC 420  

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 29 of 38 
 
that such power inheres in a Tribunal, this Court 
observed:  
“6. We are of the opinion that the Tribunal had 
the power to pass the impugned order if it 
thought fit in the interest of justice. It is true that 
there is no express provision in the Act or the 
rules framed thereunder giving the Tribunal 
jurisdiction to do so. But it is a well-known rule 
of statutory construction that a Tribunal or body 
should be considered to be endowed with such 
ancillary or incidental powers as are necessary 
to discharge its functions effectively for the 
purpose of doing justice between the parties. In 
a case of this nature, we are of the view that the 
Tribunal should be considered as invested with 
such incidental or ancillary powers unless there 
is any indication in the statute to the contrary. 
We do not find any such statutory prohibition. 
On the other hand, there are indications to the 
contrary.” 
(Emphasis Supplied) 
 
In addition to above, recognising the difference 
between a procedural review and a review on merits, it was 
observed:   
13…………The expression “review” is used in the 
two distinct senses, namely (1) a procedural 
review which is either inherent or implied in a 
court or Tribunal to set aside a palpably 
erroneous 
order 
passed 
under 
a 
misapprehension by it, and (2) a review on merits 
when the error sought to be corrected is one of 
law and is apparent on the face of the record. 
…………. Obviously when a review is sought due 
to a procedural defect, the inadvertent error 
committed by the Tribunal must be corrected ex 
debito justitiae to prevent the abuse of its 
process, and such power inheres in every court 
or Tribunal.” 
 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 30 of 38 
 
45. 
In State of Punjab vs. Davinder Pal Singh   
Bhullar37, while considering the bar imposed on a Court 
by Section 362 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 on 
review of a judgment or final order disposing of a case, it 
was observed: 
“46. If a judgment has been pronounced without 
jurisdiction or in violation of principles of natural 
justice or where the order has been pronounced 
without giving an opportunity of being heard to 
a party affected by it or where an order was 
obtained by abuse of the process of court which 
would really amount to its being without 
jurisdiction, inherent powers can be exercised to 
recall such order for the reason that in such an 
eventuality the order becomes a nullity and the 
provisions of Section 362 CrPC would not 
operate. In such an eventuality, the judgment is 
manifestly contrary to the audi alteram partem 
rule of natural justice. The power of recall is 
different from the power of altering/reviewing the 
judgment. 
However, 
the 
party 
seeking 
recall/alteration has to establish that it was not 
at fault.” 
 
46. 
The above passage was cited and approved by a 
three-Judge Bench of this Court in New India Assurance 
Co. Ltd. vs. Krishna Kumar Pandey38. 
47. 
 In Budhia Swain vs. Gopinath Deb39, after 
considering a number of decisions, a two-Judge Bench of 
this Court observed: 
“8. In our opinion a tribunal or a court may recall 
an order earlier made by it if 
(i) the proceedings culminating into an order 
suffer from the inherent lack of jurisdiction and 
such lack of jurisdiction is patent, 
(ii) there exists fraud or collusion in obtaining the 
judgment, 
 
37 (2011) 14 SCC 770 
38 (2021) 14 SCC 683 
39 (1999) 4 SCC 396 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 31 of 38 
 
(iii) there has been a mistake of the court 
prejudicing a party, or 
(iv) a judgment was rendered in ignorance of the 
fact that a necessary party had not been served 
at all or had died and the estate was not 
represented. 
The power to recall a judgment will not be 
exercised when the ground for reopening the 
proceedings or vacating the judgment was 
available to be pleaded in the original action but 
was not done or where a proper remedy in some 
other proceeding such as by way of appeal or 
revision was available but was not availed. The 
right to seek vacation of a judgment may be lost 
by waiver, estoppel or acquiescence.” 
 
48. 
 The law which emerges from the decisions above 
is that a Tribunal or a Court is invested with such ancillary 
or incidental powers as may be necessary to discharge its 
functions effectively for the purpose of doing justice 
between the parties and, in absence of a statutory 
prohibition, in an appropriate case, it can recall its order 
in exercise of such ancillary or incidental powers.  
49. 
 In a recent decision (i.e., Union Bank of India 
vs. Dinakar T. Vekatasubramanian & Ors.), a five-
member Full Bench of NCLAT held that though the power 
to review is not conferred upon the Tribunal but power to 
recall its judgment is inherent in the Tribunal and is 
preserved by Rule 11 of the NCLT Rules, 2016. It was held 
that power of recall of a judgment can be exercised when 
any procedural error is committed in delivering the earlier 
judgment; for example, necessary party has not been 
served or necessary party was not before the Tribunal 
when judgment was delivered adverse to a party. It was 
observed that there may be other grounds for recall of a 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 32 of 38 
 
judgment one of them being where fraud is played on the 
Court in obtaining a judgment. This decision of NCLAT 
was upheld by a two-Judge Bench of this Court vide order 
dated 31.07.2023 in Civil Appeal No.4620 of 2023 
(Union Bank of India vs. Financial Creditors of M/s 
Amtek Auto Ltd. & Ors.). 
50. 
 In light of the discussion above, what emerges is, 
a Court or a Tribunal, in absence of any provision to the 
contrary, has inherent power to recall an order to secure 
the ends of justice and/or to prevent abuse of the process 
of the Court.  Neither the IBC nor the Regulations framed 
thereunder, in any way, prohibit, exercise of such inherent 
power. Rather, Section 60(5)(c) of the IBC, which opens 
with a non-obstante clause, empowers the NCLT (the 
Adjudicating Authority) to entertain or dispose of any 
question of priorities or any question of law or facts, 
arising out of or in relation to the insolvency resolution or 
liquidation proceedings of the corporate debtor or 
corporate person under the IBC. Further, Rule 11 of the 
NCLT Rules, 2016 preserves the inherent power of the 
Tribunal. Therefore, even in absence of a specific provision 
empowering the Tribunal to recall its order, the Tribunal 
has power to recall its order. However, such power is to be 
exercised sparingly, and not as a tool to re-hear the 
matter. Ordinarily, an application for recall of an order is 
maintainable on limited grounds, inter alia, where (a) the 
order is without jurisdiction; (b) the party aggrieved with 
the order is not served with notice of the proceedings in 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 33 of 38 
 
which the order under recall has been passed; and (c) the 
order has been obtained by misrepresentation of facts or 
by playing fraud upon the Court /Tribunal resulting in 
gross failure of justice. 
51. 
 In the case on hand, the recall application was 
filed by claiming that,- (a) the appellant was not informed 
of the meetings of the COC; (b) the proceedings up to the 
stage of approval of the resolution plan by the Adjudicating 
Authority were ex parte; (c) the RP misrepresented that the 
appellant had submitted no claim when, otherwise, a 
claim was submitted of an amount higher than what was 
shown outstanding towards the appellant; and (d) there 
was gross mistake on part of the Adjudicating Authority in 
approving the plan which did not fulfil the conditions laid 
down in sub-section (2) of Section 30 of the IBC.  
52. 
 In our view, the grounds taken qualify as valid 
grounds on which a recall of the order of approval dated 
04.08.2020 could be sought. We thus hold that the recall 
application was maintainable notwithstanding that an 
appeal lay before the NCLAT against the order of approval 
passed by the Adjudicating Authority. 
 
The Recall Application was not barred by time. 
53. 
As regards the plea that the recall application was 
barred by time, suffice it to say that I.A. No.344/ 2021 was 
filed 
on 
6.10.2020 
upon 
getting 
information 
on 
24.09.2020 from the monitoring agency regarding 
approval of the plan. Likewise, I.A. No.1380/ 2021 was 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 34 of 38 
 
filed on 15.03.2021 immediately when suspension of the 
period of limitation for any suit, appeal, application or 
proceeding, between 15.03.2020 and 14.03.2021, was 
lifted in terms of this Court’s order dated 8.03.2021 in RE: 
Cognizance For Extension of Limitation (supra). We, 
therefore, find no substance in the plea that the 
applications were barred by limitation.  
 
The Resolution Plan did not meet the requirements of 
Section 30 (2) of the IBC read with Regulations 37 and 
38 of the CIRP Regulations, 2016  
        
54. 
In our view the resolution plan did not meet the 
requirements of Section 30(2) of the IBC read with 
Regulations 37 and 38 of the CIRP Regulations, 2016 for 
the following reasons: 
a. 
The resolution plan disclosed that the appellant 
did not submit its claim, when the unrebutted 
case of the appellant had been that it had 
submitted its claim with proof on 30.01.2020 for 
a sum of Rs.43,40,31,951/- No doubt, the record 
indicates that the appellant was advised to submit 
its claim in Form B (meant for operational 
creditor) in place of Form C (meant of financial 
creditor). But, assuming the appellant did not 
heed the advice, once the claim was submitted 
with proof, it could not have been overlooked 
merely because it was in a different Form. As 
already discussed above, in our view the Form in 
which a claim is to be submitted is directory. What 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 35 of 38 
 
is necessary is that the claim must have support 
from proof. Here, the resolution plan fails not only 
in acknowledging the claim made but also in 
mentioning the correct figure of the amount due 
and payable. According to the resolution plan, the 
amount outstanding was Rs. 13,47,40,819/- 
whereas, according to the appellant, the amount 
due and for which claim was made was Rs. 
43,40,31,951/- This omission or error, as the case 
may be, in our view, materially affected the 
resolution plan as it was a vital information on 
which there ought to have been application of 
mind. Withholding the information adversely 
affected the interest of the appellant because, 
firstly, it affected its right of being served notice of 
the meeting of the COC, available under Section 
24 (3) (c) of the IBC to an operational creditor with 
aggregate dues of not less than ten percent of the 
debt and, secondly, in the proposed plan, outlay 
for the appellant got reduced, being a percentage 
of the dues payable. In our view, for the reasons 
above, the resolution plan stood vitiated. However, 
neither NCLT nor NCLAT addressed itself on the 
aforesaid aspects which render their orders 
vulnerable and amenable to judicial review. 
b. The resolution plan did not specifically place the 
appellant in the category of a secured creditor 
even though, by virtue of Section 13-A of the 1976 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 36 of 38 
 
Act, in respect of the amount payable to it, a 
charge was created on the assets of the CD. As per 
Regulation 37 of the CIRP Regulations 2016, a 
resolution plan must provide for the measures, as 
may be necessary, for insolvency resolution of the 
CD for maximization of value of its assets, 
including, but not limited to, satisfaction or 
modification of any security interest. Further, as 
per Explanation 1, distribution under clause (b) of 
sub-section (2) of Section 30 must be fair and 
equitable to each class of creditors. Non-
placement of the appellant in the class of secured 
creditors did affect its interest. However, neither 
NCLT nor NCLAT noticed this anomaly in the 
plan, which vitiates their order. 
c. 
Under Regulation 38 (3) of the CIRP Regulations, 
2016, a resolution plan must, inter alia, 
demonstrate that (a) it is feasible and viable; and 
(b) it has provisions for approvals required and the 
time-line for the same. In the instant case, the 
plan conceived utilisation of land owned by the 
appellant. Ordinarily, feasibility and viability of a 
plan are economic decisions best left to the 
commercial wisdom of the COC. However, where 
the plan envisages use of land not owned by the 
CD but by a third party, such as the appellant, 
which is a statutory body, bound by its own rules 
and regulations having statutory flavour, there 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 37 of 38 
 
has to be a closer examination of the plan’s 
feasibility. Here, on the part of the CD there were 
defaults in payment of instalments which, 
allegedly, resulted in raising of demand and 
issuance of pre-cancellation notice. In these 
circumstances, whether the resolution plan 
envisages necessary approvals of the statutory 
authority is an important aspect on which 
feasibility of the plan depends. Unfortunately, the 
order of approval does not envisage such 
approvals. But neither NCLT nor NCLAT dealt 
with those aspects.  
 
Relief 
55. 
As we have found that neither NCLT nor NCLAT 
while deciding the application /appeal of the appellant 
took note of the fact that,- (a) the appellant had not been 
served notice of the meeting of the COC; (b) the entire 
proceedings up to the stage of approval of the resolution 
plan were ex parte to the appellant;  (c) the appellant had 
submitted its claim, and was a secured creditor by 
operation of law, yet the resolution plan projected the 
appellant as one who did not submit its claim; and (d) the 
resolution plan did not meet all the parameters laid down 
in sub-section (2) of Section 30 of the IBC read with 
Regulations 37 and 38 of the CIRP Regulations, 2016, we 
are of the considered view that the appeals of the appellant 
are entitled to be allowed and are accordingly allowed. The 

           Civil Appeal Nos.7590-7591 of 2023                                                         Page 38 of 38 
 
impugned order dated 24.11.2022 is set aside. The order 
dated 04.08.2020 passed by the NCLT approving the 
resolution plan is set aside. The resolution plan shall be 
sent back to the COC for re-submission after satisfying the 
parameters set out by the Code as exposited above. There 
shall be no order as to costs. 
 
 
   ….........................................CJI. 
     
     
            (Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud) 
 
   …............................................J. 
     
 
 
    
   (J. B. Pardiwala) 
 
 ……..........................................J. 
   
        
 
 
         
    (Manoj Misra) 
 
New Delhi; 
February 12, 2024