2024 INSC 104
Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 1 of 36 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1162 OF 2011 
Mallappa & Ors. 
 
 
 
…..Appellants 
Versus 
State of Karnataka  
 
 
…..Respondent 
 
J U D G M E N T 
SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J. 
1. 
The wheels of justice may grind slow, but they 
grind 
fine. 
Mallappa 
S/o 
Ningappa 
Kanner, 
Hanamanth S/o Ningappa Kanner and Dharamanna 
S/o Ningappa Kanner are the appellants before us 
who were put on a trial, as accused no. 3, 4 and 5, 
for the commission of murder of deceased namely 
Marthandappa and were acquitted by the Trial 
Court/Fast 
Track 
Court-I 
at 
Gulbarga 
on 
24.03.2005. The judgment was not meant to finally 
Digitally signed by
Neetu Khajuria
Date: 2024.02.12
17:57:11 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 2 of 36 
 
seal the fate of the appellants as the State of 
Karnataka preferred an appeal against the order of 
the Trial Court before the High Court of Karnataka 
which was registered as Criminal Appeal No. 
1363/2005.  On 31.05.2010, the High Court reversed 
the order of acquittal and held the appellants guilty 
of 
the 
commission 
of 
murder 
of 
deceased 
Marthandappa. Accordingly, the appellants stood 
convicted and were sentenced to undergo life 
imprisonment. The appellants stand before us 
assailing the order of conviction of the High Court 
and praying for a declaration of innocence.  
2. 
Pertinently, eight accused persons were tried 
and acquitted by the Trial Court. The High Court 
agreed with the acquittal of all the accused persons, 
except the three appellants before us.  
PROSECUTION CASE 
3. 
The case of the prosecution begins from one 
Nagamma, who is the wife of Accused No. 5 and 
deceased Marthandappa was allegedly having an 
illicit relationship with her. On account of the alleged 
illicit relationship, the relations between A1-A8 and 
Marthandappa were strained. On 28.06.1997, the 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 3 of 36 
 
fateful day, Marthandappa (the deceased), PW3 and 
PW4 were travelling in a bullock-cart from village 
Aidbhavi to the village Nagaral for cultivating their 
lands. They left the house of PW-2 (father of the 
deceased) at around 9 A.M. in a bullock cart to go to 
village Nagaral. PW-2 had agricultural lands at 
Aidbhavi as well as Nagaral. While they were 
travelling to village Nagaral, they crossed village 
Shantpur as they were proceeding on the bullock-
cart towards Nagaral village. At around 4 P.M., when 
their 
bullock-cart 
arrived 
near 
the 
land 
of 
Balwantappa Channur, A1 to A8 came out of their 
hiding place and stopped the bullock-cart.  
4. 
As per the prosecution case, A3, A4 and A6 were 
armed with axes (MO1s. 5, 6 &7), A5 was armed with 
knife (MO8) and Al, A2, A7 and A10 were armed with 
clubs (MOs 9, 10 and 1). The accused persons started 
by threatening Marthandappa stating that on 
account of his illegal acts, village women folk are not 
able to lead their life peacefully and then they 
proceeded towards Marthandappa, with the intention 
to kill him. A3 assaulted him with an axe on his right 
 
1 MO = Material Object 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 4 of 36 
 
leg and caused injuries. A4 also assaulted him with 
an axe five/six times on the right side of the stomach. 
A5 assaulted with a knife on the lip and back of 
Marthandappa, A6 assaulted with an axe on the right 
and left temple region and chin of Marthandappa. He 
also assaulted with an axe on the lap of 
Marthandappa. As the offensive act continued, A7 
assaulted with a bullock-cart peg on the head of 
Marthandappa. A1, A2 and A8 assaulted with clubs 
on the back of Marthandappa.  
5. 
Fearing for his life, PW-4 tried to run away and 
at that point of time, A3 assaulted him with an axe 
on the head, back and on the scrotum. PW-4 
sustained injuries, became unconscious and fell on 
the ground.  
6. 
PW-3, an eye witness of the incident, rushed to 
save himself and went inside the jali-trees. He saw 
the incident hiding from that particular place. 
Eventually, Marthandappa fell on the ground and Al 
to A8, believing that Marthandappa was no more, left 
the place. Finding it safe for him, PW3 then went to 
Marthandappa and found that Marthandappa was no 
more. He noticed that PW-4 was also lying 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 5 of 36 
 
unconscious with blood flowing out of his injuries. 
Thereafter, PW-3, fearing for his life, kept on hiding 
amidst the jali-trees and sometime during the night, 
he left the jali-trees and left for Devpura. On the next 
day, PW-3 reached the house of PW-2 at Aidbhavi and 
informed him regarding the incident. PW-2 then 
visited the scene of offence and saw the dead body of 
Marthandappa. He also saw PW-4 lying on the 
ground in an unconscious condition. Thereafter, on 
29.06.1997 at around 3 P.M., he went to P.S. 
Shorapur and lodged a written complaint to the PW-
10 as per Ex.P1 and PW-10 registered a case as Crime 
No. 78/97 and sent FIR (Ex.P13) through PW-1 to the 
Judicial Magistrate First Class2, Shorapur. The copy 
of FIR was handed over to JMFC at around 4:30 P.M. 
7. 
The facts further reveal that on 29.06.1997 at 
about 12:30 P.M., PW-4 went to the Government 
Hospital, Shorapur, and met the doctor (PW-8). He 
showed his injuries to PW-8 and PW-8 found three 
injuries (simple) on PW-4 and gave treatment to him, 
and later sent him for further treatment to the 
Government Hospital, Gulbarga. The doctor at 
 
2 Hereinafter referred as “JMFC” 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 6 of 36 
 
Gulbarga treated PW-4 and issued a simple injury 
certificate to PW-8 (Ex.P12). After registering the 
case, PW-10 went to the scene of offence at Shorapur 
village along with PW-9 and saw the dead body of 
Marthandappa and collected panchas (PW-7 and 
Malleshi). In the presence of Panchas, he conducted 
inquest mahazar on the dead body of Marthandappa, 
as per Ex.P9. On 29.06.1997, between 4.30 P.M. to 
6.00 P.M. and thereafter, he handed over the dead 
body of Marthandappa to PW-9 with the requisition 
letter (Ex.P2) directing PW-9 to take the dead body to 
Government Hospital, Kakkera for getting the post-
mortem examination done. PW-9 took the dead body 
of Marthandappa to the Government Hospital, 
Kakkera, and handed over the dead body to PW-5 
(doctor) for post-mortem examination on 30.06.1997 
at about 6.30 A.M. On 29.06.1997, PW-10, in the 
presence of Panchas (PW7 and Malleshi) conducted 
mahazar of scene of offence as per Ex.P10. From the 
scene of offence, he seized MO-1 (bullock-cart peg), 
MO-12 (pair of chappal), MO-13 (towel), MO-14 (blood 
stained mud), MO-15 (sample mud), MO-16(taita) 
and MO-17 (waist thread) and slips were affixed 
bearing signatures of the Panchas on them.  

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 7 of 36 
 
8. 
On 30.06.1997, PW-5 (doctor) conducted post-
mortem 
examination 
on 
the 
dead 
body 
of 
Marthandappa from 6.30 am to 9.30 am. The doctor 
found 9 ante mortem injuries on him and issued a 
post-mortem report as per Ex.P3 stating the cause of 
death to be haemorrhage shock as a result of 
laceration of liver tissue. Notably, the report stated 
the time of death to be 36 to 48 hours prior to the 
post mortem examination. The doctor further handed 
over clothes and articles (MOs) found on the dead 
body as well as the dead body to PC (PW9). 
Thereafter, PW9 handed over the dead body to the 
relatives of Marthandappa for burial. The clothes and 
articles found on the dead body were brought to 
Kakkera by PW9, who produced them before PW-10. 
PW-10 seized them in the presence of panchas (PW7 
and Malleshi) and also conducted mahazar of seizure 
as per Ex.P11 (MOs 1 to 4). Thereafter, he went to 
Aidbhavi village and recorded the statement of 
witnesses. Thereafter, he went to Mudagal and 
recorded the statement of Nagamma (wife of A5).  
9. 
On 01.07.1997, PW-10 recorded statement of 
Balvantappa. On 04.07.1997, at about 5.30 A.M. at 
Tintini Bridge, PW-10 arrested A5 and interrogated 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 8 of 36 
 
him. A5 gave him information that he could produce 
knife from his house, thereby leading to discovery as 
per Ex.P14. A5, thereafter, took PW10 and panchas 
PW6 and Yamanappa) to his house situated in 
Aidbhavi vilage and from his house, he produced one 
knife (MO-8) and one axe (MO-5). PW-10 seized them 
as per Ex.P14. PW-10, thereafter obtained judicial 
custody remand of A5 from JMFC, Shorapur and 
obtained permission 
to 
retain 
properties. 
On 
14.07.1997 at about 4.00 A.M., PW-10 arrested A1 to 
A4 from Shorapur Bus Stand and brought them to 
the police station for interrogation. A1 gave 
information leading to discovery as per Ex.P15. A2 
gave information leading to discovery as per Ex.P16 
and A3 gave information leading to discovery as per 
Ex.P17. Thereafter, on 15.07.1997, A1 led police and 
panchas (PW6 and Yamanappa) to his house and 
from his house, he produced one stick (MO9) before 
the police and panchas and PW-10 conducted 
mahazar of seizure as per Ex.P5. PW-10 took the 
signatures of the panchas on it. Thereafter, A2 led 
police and panchas to his house and from his house, 
he produced one stick (MO-10). PW-10 conducted 
mahazar of seizure of these articles, as per Ex.P7. A3 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 9 of 36 
 
led police and panchas to his house at Aidbhavi and 
from his house, he produced one axe (MO7) and PW-
10 seized the same as per mahazar (Ex.P6) and took 
signatures of the panchas on it. PW-10 thereafter 
obtained judicial custody remand of A1 to A4 from 
JMFC, Shorapur. On 25.07.1997, PW10 arrested A7 
from his house and remanded him to judicial custody 
and on 17.07.1997 at 6.30 a.m., arrested A6 from 
Gurgunta bus stand and interrogated him. A6 gave 
him information leading to discovery as per Ex.P18 
and from his house, one knife (MO8) was recovered 
and PW-10 seized it under mahazar Ex.P8. 
Thereafter, A6 was also remanded to judicial custody. 
On 07.10.1997, PW-10 sent all the seized articles to 
FSL, Bangalore through PW9.  
10. On 07.08.1997, PW-10 recorded the statement 
of PW4. On 22.08.1997, PW10 collected post-mortem 
report 
(Ex.P3) 
from 
the 
doctor 
(PW-5). 
On 
30.08.1997, PW9 returned from Bangalore FSL Office 
and PW-9 produced all the articles in re-sealed 
condition before PW10 and seized them. On the same 
day, he collected injury certificate of Laxman (PW4) 
as per Ex.P12. On 14.09.1997, PW-10 received FSL 
report as per Ex.P19 and Ex.P20.  

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 10 of 36 
 
11. After completing investigation, he filed the 
charge-sheet before JMFC, Shorapur on 29.09.1997. 
The JMFC Court, Shorapur, passed the order of 
committal on 19.01.1998 and the accused persons 
appeared before the Principal Sessions Judge, 
Gulbarga on 22.03.2002. The Principal Sessions 
Judge framed charges against the accused persons 
for the commission of offences under Sections 147, 
148, 149, 302, 307 and 504 of the Indian Penal Code 
and all the accused persons pleaded not guilty and 
claimed trial. The prosecution examined PW1 to 
PW10 as witnesses for the prosecution, got marked 
Ex.P1 to Ex.P21 as well as MOs. 1 to17 as exhibits 
and materials in support of the prosecution case and 
closed the prosecution evidence. The defence marked 
Ex.D1 in support of their case. The trial court, after 
appreciating the evidence on record, acquitted all the 
persons under Section 235 Cr.P.C. The order of 
acquittal was assailed before the High Court and vide 
order dated 31.05.2010, the High Court convicted A3 
to A5 (present appellants) and upheld the acquittal 
order with respect to accused Nos. 1,2, 6, 7 and 8.  
12. In the course of this proceeding, we have been 
informed that appellant no. 3 is no more, and the 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 11 of 36 
 
present appeal is confined only to appellant Nos. 1 
and 2.  
13. Before we proceed to lay down the case set up 
by the parties before us, we may briefly highlight the 
reasons that prevailed upon the trial court while 
ordering acquittal. The trial court, after appreciating 
the evidence on record, acquitted the accused 
persons by assigning the following reasons: 
i. The evidence of eyewitness PW3 is not 
worthy of credit and his conduct after the 
alleged murder was artificial. 
ii. PW3 witnessed the assault on the 
deceased as well as on PW4, as per the 
prosecution version, however, he chose to 
hid behind the bushes till the sunset as 
he got frightened.  
iii. PW-3 
admitted 
that 
there 
were 
number of buses plying on the route 
between Lingasgur to Shorapur and 
Gulbarga. However, his version, that he 
could catch the bus only on the next day 
at 6.00 A.M., is artificial. He could have 
availed 
the 
transport 
facility 
on 
28.06.1997 itself after the assailants had 
left. 
iv. PW-3 states that his relatives are 
residing in Nagaral village, which is 4 km 
from the scene, but he did not go and 
inform them. 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 12 of 36 
 
v. PW-3 did not inform the people at 
Devpura or the passengers plying in the 
bus in which he travelled to go to 
Gurugunte. From there, he catched 
another bus to Aidbhavi village. The 
incident took place around 4 P.M. and it 
took more than 18 hours for PW-3 to 
inform the father of the deceased PW-2. In 
the 
meanwhile, 
although 
he 
had 
opportunity, he did not inform the        
out-post police, which must have come in 
the course of his journey from Devpura to 
Aidbhavi.  
vi. PW-3 admitted that he was conscious 
that he should get PW-4 treated after the 
incident, yet he did not make any sincere 
effort to get him treated. The deceased 
and PW-4 were assaulted by the accused. 
There was no reason for the accused 
persons to not assault PW-3. His version 
that he escaped and hid behind the 
bushes is artificial. Further, the evidence 
of PW-4 that he was unconscious till he 
was taken to hospital is artificial. There is 
no evidence to show the nature of 
treatment given to PW4 and to show his 
physical condition at Gulbarga Hospital. 
vii. The father's name of PW-4 is shown as 
Siddaramegowda, whereas in the MLC 
register the name of the father of PW-4 is 
shown as Narasappa. 
viii. 
In the wound certificate, it is 
mentioned that PW-4 "self admitted" at 
the hospital. The doctor PW-8 states that 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 13 of 36 
 
PW-4 was unconscious. In the wound 
certificate of PW-4, it is stated that the 
assault took place in the night. Whereas, 
the FIR shows that the incident took place 
around 4 P.M. in the day hours. The Trial 
Court finds that the evidence of PW-3 and 
PW-4 is incredible and thus, acquitted the 
accused. 
 
14. The High Court, in appeal, after re-appreciating 
the evidence on record, held that the post-mortem 
report supported the case of the prosecution that the 
death of Marthandappa was homicidal. It further held 
that the prosecution has successfully proved the 
motive and occurrences of incidents on the basis of 
evidence of PW-3 and PW-4. The High Court further 
held that Wound Certificate of PW-4 corroborated the 
evidence of PW-4 regarding the injuries caused to him 
in the assault. 
15. On the question of credibility, the High Court 
held that PW-4 is an injured witness and he has 
categorically stated that A1, A2, A7 and A8 assaulted 
the deceased with clubs on the head and on back, 
and A3, A4 and A6 assaulted the deceased with axe. 
His evidence established that A7 assaulted the 
deceased with knife and he was assaulted by A3 with 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 14 of 36 
 
an axe. The High Court has arrived at the conclusion 
that evidence of PW-4 is quite natural and there is 
nothing to disbelieve his veracity. It has also been 
observed that PW-4, after the assault, was found 
lying unconscious. He was admitted to the hospital 
on the next date at 12.30 P.M. The contents of the 
wound certificate at Ex.P8 show that PW-4 was semi-
conscious and it corroborates the version of PW-4 
about his condition that he fell unconscious and was 
semi-conscious at the time when he was admitted to 
the hospital. 
16. In those circumstances, the High Court has 
arrived at a conclusion that there is no reason to 
disbelieve the evidence of PW-4, and also that he was 
a witness to the assault on the deceased and was also 
a victim of assault. 
17. The High Court also considered the evidence of 
PW-3 who was the eye witness of the incident. The 
High Court has observed that PW-3 certainly had 
several options, like informing by-standers at the 
bus-stop, going to Nagaral village or going to the 
police, but he went to the village of the deceased 
father at his Aidbhavi village as he was keen on 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 15 of 36 
 
informing PW-2, as he was the most appropriate 
person to be informed about the incident. In such 
circumstances, the High Court has arrived at the 
conclusion that the conduct of PW-3 in not informing 
others and going to Aidbhavi village to inform PW-2, 
could not be a reason to disbelieve his statement. The 
High Court has arrived a conclusion that the evidence 
of PW-3 and PW-4, if read together, proves the alleged 
incident and the evidence of PW-3 and PW-4 
establishes that Al, A2, A7 and A8 assaulted the 
deceased with clubs, however, there are no injuries 
reflected on the dead body of the deceased. 
18. It has been further held that in respect of A3 to 
A6, the evidence of PW-3 and PW-4 is consistent and 
establishes their involvement in the assault and 
proves their guilt. The manner of assault in the overt 
acts of A3 to A6 corresponds with the injuries noted 
in the wound certificate and the post-mortem report. 
In those circumstances, the High Court has set aside 
the acquittal of A3, A4 and A5, and convicted them 
for offences punishable under Sections 302 read with 
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code and confirmed 
the order of acquittal in respect of A1, A2, A7 and A8. 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 16 of 36 
 
19. Assailing the order of the High Court, the 
appellants submit that the High Court has erred in 
re-appreciating the entire evidence without finding 
any fault with the appreciation of evidence by the 
Trial Court. They submit that re-appreciation of the 
entire evidence at the appellate stage is not 
permissible until and unless a grave error has been 
identified in the view taken by the Trial Court. It is 
further submitted that if appreciation of evidence 
leads to two possible views, then the decision of the 
Trial Court could not be reversed merely because 
another view was possible.  
20. Per contra, it is submitted by the respondent 
State that the Trial Court did not appreciate the 
evidence in a proper manner which led to the 
acquittal of the accused persons. It is further 
submitted that the testimonies of PW-3 and PW-4 
were incorrectly rejected by the Trial Court despite 
the fact that one of them was an eye witness of the 
entire incident and the other one was a victim of the 
assault. It is further submitted that once a grave 
error is found in the decision of the Trial Court, the 
High Court is fully empowered to re-appreciate the 
entire evidence and reach a different conclusion.  

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 17 of 36 
 
21. We have heard the rival submissions of the 
parties and have also carefully gone through the 
record.  
22. We may now proceed to answer the principal 
question i.e. whether the High Court was correct in 
reversing the order of acquittal of the Trial Court and 
thereby convicting the accused persons under 
Section 302 IPC.  
23. At the outset, it is relevant to note that accused 
Nos. 1 to 5 are brothers inter se and accused no. 6 to 
8 are relatives of accused Nos. 1 to 5, residing at 
Aidbhavi, Taluk Lingasgur. The complainant PW-2 
(Narsappa) 
is 
the 
father 
of 
the 
deceased 
Marthandappa and PW-4 and PW-3 are the nephews 
of PW2, and they are residing at village Aidbhavi. The 
accused persons are not unknown to the victims and 
complainant.  
24. We may firstly discuss the position of law 
regarding the scope of intervention in a criminal 
appeal. For, that is the foundation of this challenge. 
It is the cardinal principle of criminal jurisprudence 
that there is a presumption of innocence in favour of 
the accused, unless proven guilty. The presumption 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 18 of 36 
 
continues at all stages of the trial and finally 
culminates into a fact when the case ends in 
acquittal. The presumption of innocence gets 
concretized when the case ends in acquittal. It is so 
because once the Trial Court, on appreciation of the 
evidence on record, finds that the accused was not 
guilty, the presumption gets strengthened and a 
higher threshold is expected to rebut the same in 
appeal.  
25. No doubt, an order of acquittal is open to appeal 
and there is no quarrel about that. It is also beyond 
doubt that in the exercise of appellate powers, there 
is no inhibition on the High Court to re-appreciate or 
re-visit the evidence on record. However, the power of 
the High Court to re-appreciate the evidence is a 
qualified power, especially when the order under 
challenge is of acquittal. The first and foremost 
question to be asked is whether the Trial Court 
thoroughly appreciated the evidence on record and 
gave due consideration to all material pieces of 
evidence. The second point for consideration is 
whether the finding of the Trial Court is illegal or 
affected by an error of law or fact. If not, the third 
consideration is whether the view taken by the Trial 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 19 of 36 
 
Court is a fairly possible view. A decision of acquittal 
is not meant to be reversed on a mere difference of 
opinion. What is required is an illegality or perversity.  
26. It may be noted that the possibility of two views 
in a criminal case is not an extraordinary 
phenomenon. The ‘two-views theory’ has been 
judicially recognized by the Courts and it comes into 
play when the appreciation of evidence results into 
two equally plausible views. However, the controversy 
is to be resolved in favour of the accused. For, the 
very existence of an equally plausible view in favour 
of innocence of the accused is in itself a reasonable 
doubt in the case of the prosecution. Moreover, it 
reinforces the presumption of innocence. And 
therefore, when two views are possible, following the 
one in favour of innocence of the accused is the safest 
course of action. Furthermore, it is also settled that 
if the view of the Trial Court, in a case of acquittal, is 
a plausible view, it is not open for the High Court to 
convict the accused by reappreciating the evidence. If 
such a course is permissible, it would make it 
practically impossible to settle the rights and 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 20 of 36 
 
liabilities in the eyes of law. In Selvaraj v. State of 
Karnataka3,  
“13. Considering the reasons given by the trial 
court and on appraisal of the evidence, in our 
considered view, the view taken by the trial 
court was a possible one. Thus, the High Court 
should not have interfered with the judgment 
of acquittal. This Court in Jagan M. Seshadri 
v. State of T.N. [(2002) 9 SCC 639] has laid 
down that as the appreciation of evidence 
made by the trial court while recording the 
acquittal is a reasonable view, it is not 
permissible to interfere in appeal. The duty of 
the High Court while reversing the acquittal 
has been dealt with by this Court, thus:  
 
“9. …We are constrained to observe that the 
High Court was dealing with an appeal against 
acquittal. It was required to deal with various 
grounds on which acquittal had been based 
and to dispel those grounds. It has not done 
so. Salutary principles while dealing with 
appeal against acquittal have been overlooked 
by the High Court. If the appreciation of 
evidence by the trial court did not suffer from 
any flaw, as indeed none has been pointed out 
in the impugned judgment, the order of 
acquittal could not have been set aside. The 
view taken by the learned trial court was a 
reasonable view and even if by any stretch of 
imagination, it could be said that another view 
was possible, that was not a ground sound 
enough to set aside an order of acquittal.”” 
                                             (emphasis supplied) 
 
 
3 (2015) 10 SCC 230 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 21 of 36 
 
In Sanjeev v. State of H.P.4, the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court 
analyzed 
the 
relevant 
decisions 
and 
summarized the approach of the appellate Court 
while deciding an appeal from the order of acquittal. 
It observed thus: 
“7. It is well settled that: 
7.1. While dealing with an appeal against 
acquittal, the reasons which had weighed with 
the trial court in acquitting the accused must be 
dealt with, in case the appellate court is of the 
view that the acquittal rendered by the trial court 
deserves to be upturned (see Vijay Mohan Singh 
v. State of Karnataka5, Anwar Ali v. State of 
H.P.6) 
7.2. With an order of acquittal by the trial court, 
the normal presumption of innocence in a 
criminal matter gets reinforced (see Atley v. 
State of U.P.7) 
7.3. If two views are possible from the evidence 
on record, the appellate court must be extremely 
slow in interfering with the appeal against 
acquittal (see Sambasivan v. State of Kerala8)” 
 
27. In this case, the case of the prosecution 
substantially rests on the testimonies of PW-3 and 
PW-4 read with various documents, especially the 
reports of medical examination and post mortem. 
 
4 (2022) 6 SCC 294 
5 (2019) 5 SCC 436 
6 (2020) 10 SCC 166) 
7 AIR 1955 SC 807 
8 (1998) 5 SCC 412 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 22 of 36 
 
PW3 is the eye witness of the incident. His testimony 
has been rejected by the Trial Court by terming it as 
artificial. PW-3 deposed that he was present at the 
place of incident when the accused persons started 
assaulting the deceased and PW-4 on 28.06.1997 at 
around 4 P.M. PW-3 deposed that A3 had assaulted 
PW-4 as he was running for his life along with PW-3. 
PW-4 was attacked from the back and PW-3 
successfully managed to hide behind the bushes. 
Notably, PW-3 hid behind the bushes and observed 
the assault till Marthandappa was dead and PW-4 
was unconscious. He then came out to check them 
and fearing for his life, he again rushed behind the 
bushes. He admitted that he was hiding behind the 
bushes till sunset. Thereafter, he came out and 
started walking towards Devpura, although he 
admitted that there were a number of buses plying on 
the route. But PW-3 takes no bus and keeps walking 
towards Devpura. On reaching there, he sat at the 
bus stand and kept on sitting there. Fast forward to 
the next morning, PW-3 catches the bus only at 6 
A.M. on the next morning. The explanation as to how 
PW-3 spent the entire intervening night of 28-
29.06.1997 
is 
missing 
from 
the 
chain 
of 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 23 of 36 
 
circumstances. The statement that he was simply 
sitting at the bus stand for the entire night, while 
Marthandappa was dead and PW-4 was severely 
injured and unconscious, fails to inspire confidence. 
More so, when the entire reason for hiding behind the 
bushes was the fear of life. Despite such fear, PW-3 
did not choose to inform the police out-post, on the 
way from Devpura to Aidbhavi, and rather, he kept 
on sitting at the Devpura bus stop. He also admitted 
that his relatives were residing around 4 km from the 
place of incident at Nagaral. However, he chose not to 
inform them either. He also admitted that he took no 
steps to provide medical treatment to PW-4 who was 
lying unconscious at the place of incident as a result 
of the assault. The said fact could have been 
entertained if the place of incident was completely 
secluded. Such is not the case, as it is admitted that 
the place of incident fell on a bus route and buses 
were indeed plying.  
28. It was almost 18 hours after the assault that 
PW-3 managed to reach Aidbhavi to inform PW-2 
about the incident. The High Court found the 
conduct of PW-3 to be perfectly natural, as it was 
understandable that PW-3 wanted to inform PW-2 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 24 of 36 
 
before anyone else. Such conduct would have been 
justified if PW-2 was residing in close proximity of the 
place of incident. The very fact that PW-3 did not even 
contemplate about providing medical help to PW-4 or 
to seek protection from the local police despite such 
a drastic assault and instead, chose to wait for 18 
hours, raises a reasonable doubt on the credibility of 
his version. This circumstance assumes a greater 
importance in light of the fact that PW4 was the 
cousin brother of PW3 and not some stranger. The 
conduct of PW-3 was not that of a reasonable man 
placed in such circumstances and the Trial Court 
was right in terming it as artificial.  
29. The conduct of PW-3 renders his very presence 
at the place of incident as doubtful. Despite a heavy 
assault by multiple accused persons, he did not 
suffer any injury at all. That too when he was indeed 
chased by A3 while attacking PW-4. It is extremely 
doubtful that the assailants simply chose to give up 
on PW-3 and did not pursue him behind the bushes, 
despite knowing that PW-3 could turn out to be an 
eye witness of the incident. The story that follows the 
story of hiding behind the bushes is equally doubtful 
and leaves one speculating. The timelines, the route 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 25 of 36 
 
taken by PW-3, complete disregard for severely 
injured PW-4, failure to inform the police post despite 
access to it etc. are some of the factors that raise a 
reasonable doubt on the entire story. The chain of 
circumstances created by the testimony of PW-3 is 
not consistent with the outcome of guilt.  
30. The version of PW-4 is that he was attacked 
from the back by A3 and thereafter, he fell 
unconscious. As per his testimony and the testimony 
of PW-3, PW-4 was attacked by an axe on his head, 
back and scrotum. The first point of corroboration is 
to be seen from the circumstances following the 
assault. The assault on PW-4 took place at around 4 
P.M. and he was admittedly unconscious thereafter. 
He remained as such until he was “self-admitted” in 
the hospital at around 12:30 P.M. the following day. 
The second point for corroboration of this version 
could be taken from the wound certificate issued by 
PW-8 during the treatment of PW-4 at Government 
Hospital, Shorapur. The Trial Court relied upon the 
wound certificate and noted a contradiction between 
the condition of PW-4 at the time of admission. In the 
certificate, PW-4 is stated to be “self-admitted” but at 
the same time, he is stated to be unconscious. The 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 26 of 36 
 
High Court rejected this contradiction as material by 
observing that PW-4 was semi-conscious at the time 
of admission and therefore, he could have admitted 
himself in the hospital. However, the inherent 
contradictions in the statement of PW-4 are not 
limited to this point.  
31. The injuries found on PW-4, as per the wound 
certificate, were simple in nature. PW-8 gave some 
treatment to PW-4, however the nature of treatment 
is not indicated. Thereafter, PW-8 forwarded him to a 
hospital at Gulbarga where injury certificate Ex.P12 
was prepared. Ex.P12 also recorded the nature of 
injury to be simple in nature. The nature of injury is 
to be corroborated with the nature of assault, as 
deposed by PW-4 and PW-3. They deposed that A3 
had attacked PW-4 with an axe at three sensitive 
places i.e. head, back and scrotum. The attack was 
so severe that PW-4 immediately fell unconscious. In 
the ordinary course of natural events, an injury 
inflicted by an axe, that too in a manner that the 
injured immediately fell unconscious and remained 
unconscious for almost 20 days, could not have been 
a simple injury. More so, a simple injury of a 
standard that required no admission in the hospital.  

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 27 of 36 
 
32. Furthermore, PW-4 travelled to the hospital at 
Shorapur by a bus, but he failed to inform any 
passenger about the assault. Despite such injuries, 
including on the head, no one noticed his condition. 
He was unconscious for over 20 days and after he 
regained consciousness, his statement was recorded 
by PW-10. It is difficult to comprehend as to how a 
severely injured person, who could not gain 
consciousness before 20 days, managed to go to the 
hospital on his own by using a public bus and later, 
to another hospital at a different place. It is difficult 
to comprehend that PW-4 was conscious enough to 
undertake two journeys to two different hospitals, by 
public transport, but did not have the senses to give 
a statement to the IO PW-10 before the passage of 
almost 30 days. During cross examination, PW-4 had 
deposed that he had sustained injuries on head and 
testicles only, and there was no other injury. The said 
statement was a material improvement from the 
versions initially put forth by PW-3 and PW-4 
whereby, PW-4 had sustained injuries on the back as 
well. However, no such injury was recorded in the 
wound 
certificate 
and 
in 
all 
likelihood, 
the 
improvement was made for that reason. The 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 28 of 36 
 
testimony of PW-4 is impeachable for another reason 
– the time of the offence. As per his version, the time 
of assault was around 4 P.M., whereas, as per the 
wound certificate Ex.P12, the time of injury was at 
night. Similar issue with respect to timing was 
noticeable in the post mortem report as well.  
33. Notably, all these aspects have been carefully 
analysed and appreciated by the Trial Court, but the 
High Court rejected all the doubts by observing that 
PW-4 was an injured witness and there was no 
reason to disbelieve his testimony. The High Court 
omitted to take note of two material aspects – the fact 
that the statement of PW-4 was recorded after a 
period of one month from the date of incident and the 
factum of family relationship between the deceased 
and PW-4. The former aspect raises a grave suspicion 
of credibility, whereas the latter raises the suspicion 
of 
being 
an 
interested 
witness. 
In 
normal 
circumstances, where a testimony is duly explained 
and inspires confidence, the Court is not expected to 
reject the testimony of an interested witness, 
however, when the testimony is full of contradictions 
and fails to match evenly with the supporting 
evidence (the wound certificate, for instance), a Court 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 29 of 36 
 
is bound to sift and weigh the evidence to test its true 
weight and credibility.  
34. Pertinently, the Trial Court had reached its 
decision after a thorough appreciation of evidence 
and we have no doubt in observing that the view 
taken by the Trial Court was indeed a legally 
permissible view. The High Court went on to reverse 
the decision by taking its own view on a fresh 
appreciation of evidence. Moreover, the High Court 
did so without recording any illegality, error of law or 
of fact in the decision of the Trial Court. In our 
considered view, the same was not permissible for the 
High Court, in light of the law discussed above. 
Setting aside an order of acquittal, which signifies a 
stronger presumption of innocence, on a mere change 
of opinion is not permissible. A low standard for 
turning an acquittal into conviction would be fraught 
with the danger of failure of justice.  
35. So 
far 
as 
the 
question 
of 
independent 
appreciation of evidence by the High Court is 
concerned, be it noted that the High Court was fully 
empowered to do so, but in doing so, it ought to have 
appreciated the evidence in a thorough manner. In 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 30 of 36 
 
the present case, the High Court has not done so. 
Even the aspects discussed by the Trial Court have 
not been fully addressed and the High Court merely 
relied on a limited set of facts to arrive at a finding. 
The factors which raised reasonable doubts in the 
case of the prosecution were ignored by the High 
Court. For instance, the contradictions pertaining to 
time, which were carefully analyzed by the Trial 
Court, were not examined by the High Court at all. 
Similarly, the contradictions qua the nature of 
injuries were also not discussed. In an appeal, as 
much as in a trial, appreciation of evidence 
essentially requires a holistic view and not a myopic 
view. Appreciation of evidence requires sifting and 
weighing of material facts against each other and a 
conclusion of guilt could be arrived at only when the 
entire set of facts, lined together, points towards the 
only conclusion of guilt. Appreciation of partial 
evidence is no appreciation at all, and is bound to 
lead to absurd results. A word of caution in this 
regard was sounded by this Court in Sanwat Singh 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 31 of 36 
 
v. State of Rajasthan9, wherein it was observed 
thus: 
“9. The foregoing discussion yields the following 
results : (1) an appellate court has full power to 
review the evidence upon which the order of 
acquittal is founded; (2) the principles laid down 
in Sheo Swarup case [LR 61 IA 398] afford a 
correct guide for the appellate court's approach 
to a case in disposing of such an appeal; and (3) 
the different phraseology used in the judgments 
of this Court, such as, (i) “substantial and 
compelling reasons”, (ii) “good and sufficiently 
cogent reasons”, and (iii) “strong reasons”, are 
not intended to curtail the undoubted power of 
an appellate court in an appeal against acquittal 
to review the entire evidence and to come to its 
own conclusion; but in doing so it should not 
only consider every matter on record having 
a bearing on the questions of fact and the 
reasons given by the court below in support 
of its order of acquittal in its arriving at a 
conclusion on those facts, but should also 
express those reasons in its judgment, which 
lead it to hold that the acquittal was not 
justified.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
36. Our criminal jurisprudence is essentially based 
on the promise that no innocent shall be condemned 
as guilty. All the safeguards and the jurisprudential 
values of criminal law, are intended to prevent any 
failure of justice. The principles which come into play 
 
9 AIR 1961 SC 715  

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 32 of 36 
 
while deciding an appeal from acquittal could be 
summarized as:  
(i) 
Appreciation of evidence is the core element 
of a criminal trial and such appreciation 
must be comprehensive – inclusive of all 
evidence, oral or documentary; 
(ii) 
Partial or selective appreciation of evidence 
may result in a miscarriage of justice and is 
in itself a ground of challenge; 
(iii) If the Court, after appreciation of evidence, 
finds that two views are possible, the one in 
favour of the accused shall ordinarily be 
followed; 
(iv) 
If the view of the Trial Court is a legally 
plausible view, mere possibility of a contrary 
view shall not justify the reversal of acquittal; 
(v) 
If the appellate Court is inclined to reverse 
the acquittal in appeal on a re-appreciation 
of evidence, it must specifically address all 
the reasons given by the Trial Court for 
acquittal and must cover all the facts; 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 33 of 36 
 
(vi) 
In a case of reversal from acquittal to 
conviction, 
the 
appellate 
Court 
must 
demonstrate an illegality, perversity or error 
of law or fact in the decision of the Trial 
Court.  
37. In this case, the appellants, as a separate 
argument, have also submitted that the case is not 
based on circumstantial evidence and is based on 
direct evidence of PW-3 and PW-4, and therefore, the 
principles of circumstantial evidence shall not apply. 
The submission is erroneous for various reasons. 
First, the direct evidence of PW-3 and PW-4 is to be 
tested on its own strength, especially in light of their 
subsequent conduct after the incident. As per their 
version, they were accessories to the fact, however, 
their subsequent conduct left much to be desired and 
therefore, their direct testimony was found to be 
incredible, as already discussed above. Secondly, in 
the absence of credible direct evidence, the case 
essentially falls back on the circumstantial evidence, 
and thirdly, the prosecution has failed to complete 
the chain of circumstances. The contradictions 
between oral testimonies and medical examination 
reports, failure to seize essential materials from the 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 34 of 36 
 
scene of crime, failure to explain the mode of 
conveyance while going from one place to another, 
failure to prove the presence of PW-3 at the place of 
incident, failure to corroborate the injuries etc. are 
some 
of 
the 
deficiencies 
in 
the 
chain 
of 
circumstances. It would be apposite to refer to the 
decision of this Court in Sharad Birdhichand 
Sarda v. State of Maharashtra10, wherein the 
“Panchsheel” or five principles of circumstantial 
evidence were laid down as follows: 
“153. A close analysis of this decision would 
show that the following conditions must be 
fulfilled before a case against an accused can be 
said to be fully established: 
(1)  
the 
circumstances 
from 
which 
the 
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be fully 
established. 
It may be noted here that this Court indicated 
that the circumstances concerned “must or 
should” and not “may be” established. There is 
not only a grammatical but a legal distinction 
between “may be proved” and “must be or should 
be proved” as was held by this Court in Shivaji 
Sahabrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 
2 SCC 793] where the observations were made:  
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that the 
accused must be and not merely may be guilty 
before a court can convict and the mental 
distance between ‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long 
 
10 (1984) 4 SCC 116 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 35 of 36 
 
and divides vague conjectures from sure 
conclusions.” 
(2) the facts so established should be consistent 
only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the 
accused, that is to say, they should not be 
explainable on any other hypothesis except that 
the accused is guilty, 
(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive 
nature and tendency, 
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis 
except the one to be proved, and 
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete 
as not to leave any reasonable ground for the 
conclusion consistent with the innocence of the 
accused and must show that in all human 
probability the act must have been done by the 
accused.” 
38. The circumstances in this case are far from 
conclusive and a conclusion of guilt could not be 
drawn from them. To sustain a conviction, the Court 
must form the view that the accused “must have” 
committed the offence, and not “may have”. As noted 
in Sharad Birdichand Sarda11, the distinction 
between “may have” and “must have” is a legal 
distinction and not merely a grammatical one. 
39. In light of the foregoing discussion, we hereby 
conclude that the High Court had erred in reversing 
the decision of acquittal, without arriving at any 
 
11 Supra 

Crl.Appeal No. 1162/2011 
 
Page 36 of 36 
 
finding of illegality or perversity or error in the 
reasoning of the Trial Court. Even on a fresh 
appreciation of evidence, we find ourselves unable to 
agree with the findings of the High Court. 
Accordingly, the impugned order and judgment are 
set aside. We find no infirmity in the order of the Trial 
Court and the same stands restored. Consequently, 
the appellants are acquitted from all the charges 
levelled upon them. The appellants are directed to be 
released forthwith, if lying in custody.  
40. The captioned appeal stands disposed of in the 
aforesaid terms. Interim applications, if any, shall 
also stand disposed of.  
41. 
Parties to bear their own costs.  
 
 
…………………………J.  
[ Bela M. Trivedi ] 
 
 
 
…………………………..J.  
[ Satish Chandra Sharma ]  
New Delhi 
February 12, 2024