2024 INSC 122
SLP(C) No.29462 OF 2019
NON-REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO.    OF 2024
[@ SLP(C) No.29462 OF 2019]
BABASAHEB DHONDIBA KUTE                                Appellant(s)
                                VERSUS
RADHU VITHOBA BARDE                                   Respondent(s)
J U D G M E N T
Leave granted.
Being aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the High Court
of  Judicature  at  Bombay,  Aurangabad  Bench  dated  17.12.2018  in
Second Appeal No.118/2018, the plaintiff in the original suit has
preferred this appeal.
For the sake of convenience, the parties shall be referred to
in terms of their status before the trial Court.
The  appellant-plaintiff and  the respondent-defendant  entered
into  an  agreement  to  sell  dated  31.07.2001  under  which,  the
defendant agreed to sell his land of 80R situated at Block No.41/1,
Mandve  (Bk),  Tq.  Sangamner  to  the  plaintiff  for  a  total
consideration of Rs.2,25,000/-. An advance amount of Rs.1,55,000/-
was  paid  by  the  plaintiff  to  the  defendant  on  the  said  date.
Thereafter possession was stated to have been given in the year
1
Digitally signed by
Nisha Khulbey
Date: 2024.02.20
16:51:03 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

SLP(C) No.29462 OF 2019
2003  by  the  defendant  to  the  plaintiff.  On  10.01.2003,  the
plaintiff paid an additional consideration of Rs.65,000/- and thus
out  of  a  total  consideration  of  Rs.2,25,000/-,  an  amount  of
Rs.2,20,000/- was paid. Since the defendant did not perform his
part of the contract to execute the sale deed, the plaintiff filed
Special Civil Suit no.11 of 2005 before the concerned trial Court
seeking the decree for specific performance of the agreement to
sell  and  in  the  alternative,  for  refund  of  the  advance  sale
consideration / earnest money of Rs.2,20,000/- along with interest
@ 6% p.a.
In response to the suit summons and notice issued by the trial
Court the defendant appeared and denied the case of the plaintiff
by filing his written statement. 
The trial court framed the issues for its consideration and
ultimately refused the decree of specific performance and granted
the alternative relief of refund of Rs.2,20,000/- with interest 6%
p.a.
Being  aggrieved  by  the  denial  of  the  decree  for  specific
performance of the agreement to sell, the plaintiff preferred his
appeal before the First Appellate Court. The First Appellate Court
(Ad-hoc District Judge) affirmed the judgment of the trial Court
but increased the rate of interest from 6% to 14% from the date of
the decree. He also directed the plaintiff to hand over possession
to the defendant. 
Being  aggrieved,  the  plaintiff  preferred  the  second  appeal,
namely,  S.A.  No.118/2018  before  the  High  Court.  The  High  Court
2

SLP(C) No.29462 OF 2019
raised the following substantial questions of law:
“Whether a decree for specific performance of land to
be  transferred  from  tribal  to  non-tribal  can  be
granted  subject  to  obtaining  permission  u/s  36A  of
Maharashtra Land Revenue Code?”
The High Court considered Section 36A of the Maharashtra Land
Revenue Code, 1966 (‘Land Revenue Code’, for short) and observed
that such a decree for specific performance could not be granted
and thereby, dismissed the second appeal. Hence, this appeal.
We have heard learned counsel for the respective parties.
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  contended  that  the  High
Court was not right in interpreting Section 36A of the Land Revenue
Code to the effect that there was a total bar for transfer of any
land to be made by a tribal to a non-tribal. Such a transfer by way
of sale could be made on the basis of the conditions stipulated
therein,  that  is,  with  the  previous  sanction  of  the  State
Government. That the stage for obtaining a sanction had not arisen
in the instant case, inasmuch as the defendant had not come forward
to execute the sale deed. In the circumstances, the plaintiff filed
a suit seeking specific performance of the agreement to sell. Even
after a decree for specific performance is granted by the Court,
the plaintiff was required to seek permission under Section 36A of
the Land Revenue Code and thereafter execute such a decree. Merely
because Section 36A stipulates a pre-condition for sale of land by
3

SLP(C) No.29462 OF 2019
tribal to a non-tribal, it would not imply that there is a bar to
seeking a relief from specific performance of an agreement to sell
entered into by a tribal in favour of a non-tribunal. He contended
that in a suit for specific performance for agreement to sell what
was  required  to  be  considered  was  conditions  and  stipulations
considered under Sections 10, 16 etc. of the Specific Relief Act,
1963 and the plaintiff had complied with those conditions inasmuch
as out of a total consideration of Rs.2,25,000/-, the plaintiff had
already tendered Rs.2,20,000/- and he had performed his part of the
contract whereas the defendant had not done so. Therefore the trial
Court  as  well  as  the  first  appellate  Court  were  not  right  in
granting only the alternative relief. 
He further contended that Section 36A of the Land Revenue Code
was improperly invoked by the High Court. The said Section clearly
stipulates that if a tribal is to alienate land to a non-tribal by
way of sale, gift, exchange, or mortgage, lease or deal otherwise
then such a non-tribal has to make an application and with the
previous sanction, a tribal can alienate or convey the land to a
non-tribal.  He  submitted  that  in  the  absence  of  the  defendant
coming forward to execute the sale deed, there was no occasion for
the plaintiff to seek such a sanction of the State Government that
only if the decree for specific performance is passed in favour of
the  plaintiff  herein  he  would  be  in  a  position  to  seek  such  a
sanction and ultimately the decree would be executed only if the
sanction is given by the State Government in terms of Section 36A
of the Land Revenue Code. Therefore, the High Court was not right
4

SLP(C) No.29462 OF 2019
in holding that in view of the Section 36A of the Land Revenue
Code, the defendant had no right to even enter into an agreement to
sell and that the plaintiff had no right to seek the relief of
specific performance of the agreement to sell. It was contended
that the judgments of the High Court and courts below may be set
aside and decree of specific performance of agreement to sell may
be granted by allowing this appeal.
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent supported the
impugned judgment and contended that Section 36A not only refers to
sale, gift, exchange, mortgage, lease but also uses ‘or otherwise’.
That in the instant case, pursuant to the agreement to sell entered
into by the defendant in favour of the plaintiff, possession also
was  handed  over.  That  the  sale  agreement  was  in  violation  of
Section 36A of the Land Revenue Code. Therefore, the High Court was
right in holding that the transaction itself was void since there
was no prior sanction obtained and hence, the decree for specific
performance  could  not  have  been  granted.  He  therefore  contended
that there is no merit in this appeal and therefore, the same may
be dismissed.
Having heard learned counsel for the respective parties and on
perusal of the impugned judgment of the High Court as well as the
courts below, we find that the High Court has focused itself only
on the aspect regarding Section 36A of the Land Revenue Code to
deny relief to the appellant-plaintiff. The trial Court, the First
Appellate Court as well as the High Court have concurrently held
that there was indeed an agreement to sell between the parties and
5

SLP(C) No.29462 OF 2019
the  plaintiff  had  paid  a  sum  of  Rs.2,20,000/-  out  of  a  total
consideration of Rs.2,25,000/- to the defendant-respondent herein,
who had also handed over possession of the subject land to the
plaintiff. 
At this stage itself, it may be observed that the defendant
had not taken any contention to the effect that the entering of
agreement in favour of the plaintiff or the handing over of the
possession was contrary to any provision of law. On the other hand,
it  is  contention  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  defendant-
respondent herein that there was restriction on transfer of land by
a  tribal  (defendant-respondent  herein)  in  favour  of  non-tribals
(appellant-petitioner  herein).  In  that  regard,  Section  36  A  has
been adverted to. The same is extracted hereunder:
“36A: Restrictions  on  transfers  of  occupancies  by
Tribals:-
(1)
Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub-
section (1) of section 36, no occupancy of a
Tribal  shall,  after  the  commencement  of  the
Maharashtra Land Revenue Code and Tenancy Laws
(Amendment)  Act,,  1974,  be  transferred  in
favour  of  any  non-Tribal  by  way  of  sale
(including sales in execution of a decree of a
Civil  Court  or  an  award  or  order  of  any
Tribunal  or  authority),  gift,  exchange,
mortgage,  lease  or  otherwise,  except  on  the
application of such non-Tribal and except with
the  previous  sanction-  (a)in  the  case  of  a
lease or mortgage for a period not exceeding 5
6

SLP(C) No.29462 OF 2019
years, of the Collector; and (b) in all other
cases,  of  the  Collector  with  the  previous
approval  of  the  State  Government.  Provided
that, no such sanction shall be accorded by the
Collector unless he is satisfied that no Tribal
residing in the village in which the occupancy
is situate or within five kilometers thereof is
prepared to take the occupancy from the owner
on lease, mortgage or by sale or otherwise.
(2)
The previous sanction of the Collector may be
given in such circumstances and subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed.
(3)
On the expiry of the period of the lease or, as
the case may be, of the mortgage, the Collector
may, notwithstanding anything contained in any
law for the time being in force, or any decree
or order of any court or award or order of any
Tribunal, or authority, either suo motu or on
application made by the Tribal in that behalf,
restore  possession  of  the  occupancy  to  the
Tribal.
(4)
Where,  on  or  after  the  commencement  of  the
Maharashtra Land Revenue Code and Tenancy Laws
(Amendment)Act,  1974,  it  is  noticed  that  any
occupancy has been transferred in contravention
or sub-section (1) 1(the Collector shall, not
withstanding anything contained in any law for
the time being in force, either suo motu or on
an application made by any person interested in
such  occupant,  within  thirty  years)  from  the
date  of  the  transfer  of  occupancy  hold  an
inquiry in the prescribed manner and decide the
matter.
(5)
Where the Collector decides that any transfer
7

SLP(C) No.29462 OF 2019
of occupancy has been made in contravention of
sub-section (1), he shall declare the transfer
to  be  invalid,  and  thereupon,  the  occupancy
together  with  the  standing  crops  thereon,  if
any, shall vest in the State Government free of
all encumbrances  and shall  be disposed  of in
such manner as the State Government may, from
time to time direct.
(6)
Where  an  occupancy  is  vested  in  the  State
Government  under  sub-section  (5)  is  to  be
disposed of, the Collector shall give notice in
writing to the Tribal-transferor requiring him
to be  state within  90 days  from the  date of
receipt  of  such  notice  whether  or  not  he  is
willing to purchase the land. If such Tribal -
transferor  agrees  to  purchase  the  occupancy,
then the occupancy may be granted to him if he
pays  the  prescribed  purchase  price  and
undertakes to cultivate the land personally; so
however  that  the  total  land  held  by  such
Tribal-transferor, whether as owner or tenant,
does not as for as possible exceed an economic
holding.”
On a reading of the Section 36A, what is evident is that there
is only a restriction on the transfer to be made by a tribal in
favour of the non-tribal by way of sale, gift, exchange, mortgage,
lease  or  otherwise.  Such  a  restriction  is  in  the  context  of
requiring  the  non-tribal  to  make  an  application  for  a  previous
sanction  before  such  a  conveyance  could  be  made  by  a  tribal
(defendant/  respondent  herein)  in  favour  of  non-tribal
8

SLP(C) No.29462 OF 2019
(plaintiff/appellant herein) before the State Government so as to
seek  previous  approval  of  the  State  Government  only  after  a
previous approval of the State Government could such a sale take
place. The conveyance by way of sale would take place only at the
time of registration of a sale deed in accordance with Section 17
of the Registration Act, 2008. Till then, there is no conveyance.
Therefore, there is no bar for a tribal to enter into an agreement
to  sell  and  seeking  advance  sale  consideration.  However,  before
conveying the land by the tribal in favour of a non-tribal, the
requisites of Section 36A must be complied with by the non-tribal
before the State Government in terms of Section 36A of the Land
Revenue Code. That stage has not yet arisen in the instant case,
for the reason that the defendant failed to perform his part of the
agreement inasmuch as he did not come forward to execute the sale
deed. Possibly, if the defendant had come forward to execute the
sale deed in favour of the plaintiff, then it would have been the
duty of the appellant to have proceeded under Section 36A of the
Land Revenue Code and seek the requisite permission or previous
sanction from the Collector. 
In  view  of  the  defendant  not  performing  his  part  of  the
agreement to sell, the plaintiff was constrained to file suit for
specific  performance.  When  all  the  courts  have  held  that  the
plaintiff has performed his part of the agreement inasmuch as he
had tendered a sum of Rs.2,20,000/- out of a total consideration of
Rs.2,25,000/- and he was ready and willing to perform the rest of
the obligation under the contract, it was only in the context of
9

SLP(C) No.29462 OF 2019
non-performance by the defendant that the plaintiff was constrained
to file the suit for specific performance. Therefore, on the basis
of Section 36A, the trial Court, the first appellate court as well
as the High Court could not have declined to grant the decree for
specific  performance  to  the  plaintiff  inasmuch  as  the
considerations  under  the  provisions  of  the  Specific  Relief  Act,
1963 only had to be made for the purpose of adjudicating the suit
between the parties. Since there was no reason to decline the grant
of a decree under the provisions of the said Act, the trial Court,
the First Appellate Court as well as the High Court ought to have
granted the said decree rather than granting an alternative relief.
It may be noted that the plaintiff had relied upon Nathulal v.
Fulchand 1969(3) SCC 120 wherein it was held that when an agreement
to sale is executed but it cannot be specifically performed without
permission or sanction of any authority, the suit can be decreed
and  decree  for  specific  performance  can  be  granted  subject  to
obtaining  such  permission/sanction  from  the  competent  authority.
The sanction in the said case pertained to Section 70(4) of the
Madhya Bharat Land Revenue and Tenancy Act, 1950 as it postulated
that a purchaser of agricultural land, not being an agriculturist,
would require permission from the State government for the sale to
take  place.  This  court  had  allowed  for  the  operation  of  the
doctrine  of  part  performance  while  reasoning  that  it  was  well
settled  that  if  a  property  is  not  transferable  without  the
permission of the authority, an agreement to transfer the property
must be deemed subject to the implied condition that the transferor
10

SLP(C) No.29462 OF 2019
will obtain the sanction of the authority concerned. We find that
the plaintiff had rightly placed reliance on this case before the
High Court and that there was no occasion to distinguish the prior
sanction required under Section 70(4) of the Madhya Bharat Land
Revenue and Tenancy Act, 1950 from Section 36A of the Land Revenue
Code, 1959.
On the other hand, in our view, the High Court fell in error
while relying upon  Murlidhar Dayandeo Kesekar v. Vishwanath Pandu
Barde, 1995 (Supp.) 2 SCC 549  for the reason that the appellant in
that case, being a non-tribal purchaser, had been denied permission
for alienation by the Collector and the Commissioner, and had filed
a  writ  petition  before  the  High  Court  that  had  come  to  be
dismissed.  Therefore,  this  Court  dismissed  his  Special  Leave
Petition on the ground that the denial of permission by the State
authorities could not be faulted for it was in consonance with the
constitutional scheme and the assigned land cannot be permitted to
be sold or converted to non-agricultural use. The question before
the High Court, as noticed by us, was different because the stage
of taking steps to secure the previous sanction under Section 36A
of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1959 had not arisen in the
present case.
In  the  circumstances,  we  modify  the  judgment  of  the  High
Court, First Appellate Court as well as the trial Court and decree
the suit filed by the plaintiff by holding that the plaintiff is
entitled to the relief specific performance of the agreement to
sell dated 31.07.2001. The suit is decreed in the aforesaid terms. 
11

SLP(C) No.29462 OF 2019
It is needless to observe that now that we have granted the
decree  of  specific  performance,  the  appellant-plaintiff  shall
proceed  under  Section  36A  of  the  said  Section  before  seeking
conveyance of the subject land in his favour in case the defendant
is a tribal.
Registry to draw up a decree in the aforesaid term.
The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
No costs.
. . . . . . . . . . . ,J
[B.V. NAGARATHNA]  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .,J
[AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH] 
NEW DELHI,
FEBRUARY 15, 2024
12