2024 INSC 117
SLP(Crl.) No. 9800 of 2023. 
 
Page 1 of 12 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.         OF 2024 
@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (Crl.) No. 9800 OF 2023 
 
DEEPAK KUMAR SHRIVAS & ANR. APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
STATE OF CHHATTISGARH  
& ORS.   
 
 
 
   RESPONDENT(S) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
VIKRAM NATH, J. 
 
1. Leave granted. 
2. As a law enforcement agency, the police force 
shoulders the vital responsibility of preserving 
public order, guarding social harmony, and 
upholding the foundations of justice. However, 
the current case, full of counter-accusations of 
financial impropriety and broken promises, 
highlights the complex matters that occasionally 
make their way into the hands of the police force. 
Beyond the immediate contours of the case, a 
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2024.02.19
16:36:38 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

SLP(Crl.) No. 9800 of 2023. 
 
Page 2 of 12 
 
broader 
question 
emerges 
regarding 
the 
balancing of interests that ought to be done 
between 
addressing 
unscrupulous 
private 
grievances and safeguarding public interests. 
From the counter-allegations levelled against 
each other between the parties in the present 
case, it becomes evident that the police finds 
itself entangled in the irrelevant and trivial 
details of such unethical private issues, diverting 
the resources away from the pursuit of more 
consequential matters. The valuable time of the 
police is consumed in investigating disputes that 
seem more suited for civil resolution. This 
underscores the need for a judicious allocation of 
law enforcement resources, emphasizing the 
importance of channelling their efforts towards 
matters of greater societal consequence. 
3. By means of this appeal, challenge is to the 
correctness of the judgment and order dated 
11.07.2023 passed by the Division Bench of the 
High Court of Chhattisgarh in WPCR No.703 of 
2022 dismissing the writ petition of the appellant 
for quashing the criminal proceedings arising out 
of FIR bearing Crime No.248 of 2022. 

SLP(Crl.) No. 9800 of 2023. 
 
Page 3 of 12 
 
4. Relevant facts for deciding the present appeal are 
as follows: 
a) The appellant made a complaint dated 
06.04.2021 to the Collector, District Janjgir-
Champa (Chhattisgarh) alleging that the 
respondent no.6 (Rajkumari Maravi) had 
allured the appellant that she would secure a 
job for his brother -Raj Kumar Shivas as she 
had good contacts with higher officers and 
demanded substantial amount for doing this 
favour. The appellant got allured and paid 
Rs.80,000/- cash at the first instance.  Later 
on an additional demand was made and, 
according to the complaint made by the 
appellant, he has thereafter deposited about 
Rs.20,000/- and odd in different bank 
accounts, details of which were provided by 
respondent no.6.  When nothing happened 
and no job was provided to his brother, he 
approached the respondent no.6 for returning 
the money paid by him upon which she 
threatened him of false implication and later 
on she stopped responding to his calls and 
started avoiding him.  

SLP(Crl.) No. 9800 of 2023. 
 
Page 4 of 12 
 
b)  The Collector apparently referred the said 
complaint 
dated 
06.04.2021 
to 
the 
Superintendent of Police of the District 
Janjgir-Champa for enquiry.  The enquiry is 
alleged to be entrusted by the Superintendent 
of Police to the Station House Officer, Police 
Station Shakti, District Janjgir-Champa.  The 
Station House Officer made detailed enquiries 
and also recorded the statements of the 
appellant, respondent no.6 and other persons 
who were sought to be referred to as witnesses 
and ultimately submitted the report to the 
Superintendent of Police on 25.07.2021.   
c) The report mentioned interesting facts, 
according to which, both the parties i.e. 
appellant and respondent no.6 were accusing 
each other of having extracted money for 
securing job for their relatives. As already 
stated, the appellant was trying to secure a 
job for his brother whereas, according to 
respondent no.6, the appellant had taken 
about Rs.4 lacs from her for securing a job for 
her daughter.  In the enquiry it was also found 
that when no job was provided by the 

SLP(Crl.) No. 9800 of 2023. 
 
Page 5 of 12 
 
appellant to her daughter, the appellant 
returned some amount by depositing it in her 
bank account.  Both the parties had alleged 
that false complaints were being made against 
each other. Interestingly when in the enquiry 
the Station House Officer required the 
appellant and respondent no.6 to produce the 
relevant documents and also the details of the 
call records and recorded conversations, they 
failed 
to 
provide 
any 
such 
material.  
Accordingly, it was recommended that the 
complaint deserves to be closed. 
5. It appears that thereafter the respondent no.6 
was successful in lodging an FIR against the 
appellant on 27.07.2022, a copy of which is filed 
as Annexure P-3.  According to the contents of 
the FIR, an amount of Rs.4 lacs has been taken 
by the appellant and his brother, the other co-
accused, for providing a job to the daughter of 
respondent no.6. The said amount was paid in 
April, 2019.  The transaction is said to be purely 
in cash and there are no bank transactions.  
Before registering the FIR in this case also an 
enquiry was made and a report was submitted to 

SLP(Crl.) No. 9800 of 2023. 
 
Page 6 of 12 
 
the Sub-Divisional Officer, who directed for 
registration of an FIR.  In this enquiry it was 
found that both parties have made allegations 
against each other of taking money for providing 
a job.  
6. The appellant filed a petition under Article 226 of 
the Constitution before the High Court of 
Chhattisgarh for quashing the FIR and the 
proceedings arising therefrom. The said petition 
has since been dismissed by the impugned order 
giving rise to filing of the present appeal. 
7. We have heard learned counsel for the parties. 
8. Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that 
on the earlier occasion upon a complaint 
submitted by the appellant to the Collector of the 
district, an enquiry was conducted in which 
similar allegations against each other were made 
by both the sides which were not found to be 
substantiated and, therefore, lodging of the 
impugned FIR after about one year of the said 
enquiry, is mala fide and an abuse of the process 
of law. It was further submitted that the 
impugned FIR is a counterblast and has been 
maliciously lodged only to resist the appellant 

SLP(Crl.) No. 9800 of 2023. 
 
Page 7 of 12 
 
from recovering the amount paid by him to the 
respondent no.6.  It is also submitted that the 
alleged transaction according to the FIR is of 
April, 2019 whereas the FIR has been lodged in 
July, 2022 after more than three years and, 
therefore, on the ground of delay, the alleged FIR 
deserves to be quashed. 
9. On the other hand, learned counsel for the State 
of Chhattisgarh as also learned counsel for the 
respondents have submitted that a cognizable 
offence was disclosed in the FIR and as such the 
High Court has rightly dismissed the petition; the 
investigation must be allowed to continue and if 
ultimately the police report is submitted under 
section 173(2) Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 
finding the appellant prima facie guilty of the 
charge on the basis of the evidence collected 
during the investigation, the appellant would 
have adequate remedy of assailing the charge 
sheet and also claiming discharge at the stage of 
framing of charges.  There is no justification for 
scuttling the investigation which may ultimately 
not only deprive the respondent no.6 of her hard-
earned money but also the offence committed by 

SLP(Crl.) No. 9800 of 2023. 
 
Page 8 of 12 
 
the appellant would go unpunished. It was also 
submitted that it was a clear case of cheating as 
the appellant had deceitfully induced the 
respondent no.6 to provide a job to her daughter 
by taking huge amount of money and thereafter 
neither providing the job nor returning the 
money. 
10. Having heard learned counsel for the parties, we 
proceed to analyse the material on record and 
submissions advanced by the parties. 
11. In the complaint made by the appellant in 2021 
to the Collector an enquiry has been made by the 
Station House Officer of the Police Station 
concerned in which the fact that the respondent 
no.6 had stated that she had paid Rs.4 lacs to 
the appellant for providing a job to her daughter 
was 
recorded. 
This 
clearly 
means 
that 
respondent no.6 was well aware of the complaint 
made by the appellant and in the enquiry her 
statement had been actually recorded. The 
respondent no.6 therefore cannot raise a plea 
that she had no knowledge of the complaint made 
by the appellant. Despite the same she did not 
lodge any complaint against the appellant and 

SLP(Crl.) No. 9800 of 2023. 
 
Page 9 of 12 
 
his brother and waited for more than a year to 
lodge the FIR in July, 2022. 
12. According to the allegations made in the FIR, the 
job was to be provided by the appellant within 
three months of April, 2019 i.e. by July, 2019. 
However, the respondent no.6 did not take any 
action for a period of three years till July, 2022 
when the FIR in question was lodged. Thus, the 
FIR suffers from a serious delay of three years 
which is totally unexplained. 
13. A reading of the entire material on record clearly 
reflects that it was totally an unlawful contract 
between the parties where money was being paid 
for 
securing 
a 
job 
in 
the 
government 
department(s) or private sector.  Apparently, a 
suit for recovery could not have been filed for the 
said purpose and even if it could be filed, it could 
be difficult to establish the same where the 
payment was entirely in cash.  Therefore, the 
respondent no.6 found out a better medium to 
recover the said amount by building pressure on 
the appellant and his brother by lodging the FIR.  
Under the threat of criminal prosecution, maybe 

SLP(Crl.) No. 9800 of 2023. 
 
Page 10 of 12 
 
the appellant would have tried to sort out and 
settle the dispute by shelving out some money. 
14. In conclusion, certain key observations from the 
factual matrix warrant a closer reflection. Prima 
facie, the conduct exhibited by the parties 
involved appears tainted with suspicion, casting 
a shadow over the veracity of their claims. The 
report from the previous inquiry reflects a 
convoluted landscape and unveils a trail of 
unethical, maybe even criminal, behaviour from 
both parties. The unexplained inordinate delay in 
bringing 
these 
allegations 
to 
the 
police’s 
attention despite knowledge of previous inquiry, 
raises even more doubts and adds a layer of 
scepticism to the authenticity of the claims. The 
facts stated, as well as the prior inquiry, reveal a 
shared culpability between the parties, indicative 
of a complex web of deceit, and unethical 
transactions where even civil remedies may not 
be sustainable. Thus, the object of this dispute, 
manifestly rife with mala fide intentions of only 
recovering the tainted money by coercion and 
threat of criminal proceedings, cannot be allowed 

SLP(Crl.) No. 9800 of 2023. 
 
Page 11 of 12 
 
to proceed further and exploit the time and 
resources of the law enforcement agency. 
15. As parting suggestions, it becomes imperative to 
state that the police should exercise heightened 
caution when drawn into dispute pertaining to 
such unethical transactions between private 
parties 
which 
appear 
to 
be 
prima 
facie 
contentious in light of previous inquiries or 
investigations. The need for vigilance on the part 
of the police is paramount, and a discerning eye 
should be cast upon cases where unscrupulous 
conduct appears to eclipse the pursuit of justice. 
This case exemplifies the need for a circumspect 
approach in discerning the genuine from the 
spurious and thus ensuring that the resources of 
the state are utilised for matters of true societal 
import. 
16. For all the reasons recorded above, we are of the 
view that such criminal prosecution should not 
be allowed to continue where the object to lodge 
the FIR is not for criminal prosecution and for 
punishing the offender for the offence committed 
but for recovery of money under coercion and 

SLP(Crl.) No. 9800 of 2023. 
 
Page 12 of 12 
 
pressure and also for all the other reasons 
stipulated above.  
17. We, accordingly allow this appeal, and after 
setting aside the impugned order passed by the 
High Court, quash the entire proceedings arising 
out of FIR 248 of 2022. 
  
 
……………………………………J. 
(VIKRAM NATH) 
 
 
 
……………………………………J.  
 (SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA) 
 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY  19, 2024