2024 INSC 177
Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     1 
Reportable 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal No.            of 2024 
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.4684 of 2019) 
 
 
M. Vijayakumar                            
 
 
               Appellant(s) 
 
Versus 
 
State of Tamil Nadu                                                                  Respondent(s) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
C.T. Ravikumar, J. 
 
 
 
Leave granted. 
1. 
This appeal is directed against the Judgment dated 25.01.2019 
passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras (for short the “High 
Court”) in Criminal Appeal No. 667 of 2011 whereunder the appellant’s 
conviction under Sections 342 and 365 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC 
for short) was reversed and he was acquitted therefrom, but his conviction 
for the offence under Section 306, IPC was confirmed.  The sentence 
imposed for the said conviction was reduced to three years rigorous 
imprisonment from rigorous imprisonment for seven years.  
2. 
As a matter of fact, the appellant stood trial along with the four 
others, including his father Muthu (A-3).  The appellant and one 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Guglani
Date: 2024.03.06
13:45:06 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     2 
Ravichandran  (A-2) stood trial for the offences under Sections 306, 342 and 
365, IPC whereas the others were charged only for offences under Sections 
342 and 306 IPC.  After the trial, the appellant was convicted for all the 
offences for which he stood the trial and at the same time all his co-accused 
were acquitted from all the charges. As noticed hereinbefore, in the 
appellant’s appeal the High Court confirmed the conviction under Section 
306, IPC and acquitted him only of the other two offences.  Hence, this 
appeal.  
3. 
Heard learned counsel for the appellant and also the learned 
Standing Counsel for the State of Tamil Nadu. 
4. 
Before dealing with the contentions and the evidence on record 
which ultimately resulted in the confirmation of the conviction of the 
appellant under Section 306, IPC, certain relevant aspects of Section 306, 
IPC with reference to certain relevant decisions are to be looked into.  
There can be no doubt with respect to the position that to bring home a 
charge under Section 306, IPC it is incumbent upon the prosecution to 
establish :  
a) That the victim of the offence committed suicide; 
b) That the accused abetted the commission of suicide; 
c) That the abetment attracts the ingredients under Section 
107,IPC. 
  

Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     3 
5. 
Section 107, IPC defines the offence of abetment and it is constituted 
by any of the following:- 
 (a) instigation to commit the offence; or 
 (b) engaging in conspiracy to commit it; or 
 
(c) intentionally aiding a person to commit it. 
 
6. 
Now, bearing in mind the scope and ambit of Section 107, IPC and its 
co-relation with Section 306, IPC and the decision of this Court in M. 
Mohan v. State represented by the Deputy Superintendent of Police1 and 
in Madan Mohan Singh v. State of Gujarat2 we will proceed to consider 
the case.  After referring to an earlier decision in Chitresh Kumar Chopra 
v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi)3, this Court in M. Mohan’s case (supra) 
analysed the meaning of the word ‘abetment’ and held in paragraphs 44 
and 45 thus:-   
 
“44. Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a 
person or intentionally aiding a person in doing of a thing. 
Without a positive act on the part of the accused to 
instigate or aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot 
be sustained.  
45. The intention of the legislature and the ratio of the 
cases decided by this Court are clear that in order to 
 
1 (2011) 3 SCC 626 
2 (2010) 8 SCC 628 
3 (2009) 16 SCC 605 

Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     4 
convict a person under Section 306 IPC there has to be a 
clear mens rea to commit the offence. It also requires an 
active act or direct act which led the deceased to commit 
suicide seeing no option and this act must have been 
intended to push the deceased into such a position that 
he/she committed suicide.” 
 
7. 
In the decision in Madan Mohan Singh’s case (supra) this Court was 
considering an appeal against dismissal of a petition filed under Section 
482 Cr. PC to quash the FIR registered against the appellant therein under 
different Sections of IPC including Section 306, IPC.  For the purpose of this 
case, it is only referred to paragraph 12 therein, insofar as it is relevant 
which reads thus:- 
 
 
“In order to bring out an offence under Section 306 IPC 
specific abetment as contemplated by Section 107 IPC 
on the part of the accused with an intention to bring 
about the suicide of the person concerned as a result of 
that abetment is required.  The intention of the accused 
to aid or to instigate or to abet the deceased to commit 
suicide is a must for this particular offence under 
Section 306 IPC………” 
  
8. 
Thus, an analysis of the provisions under Section 306, IPC  with 
reference to abetment as contemplated under Section 107, IPC and the  
decisions in M. Mohan’s case (supra) and Madan Mohan Singh’s case 
(supra) would reveal that while considering the question as to whether a 

Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     5 
person can be convicted under Section 306, IPC or whether a conviction 
thereunder could be sustained, one has to consider the mens rea of the 
accused/convict to bring about suicide of the victim.  Needless to say, that 
it requires an active act or direct act which led the victim to commit suicide 
seeing no option; and in other words, the act must have been of such a 
degree intending to push the deceased into such a position that he/she 
committed suicide. Bearing in mind the aforesaid position, we will analyse 
the case of the prosecution and the evidence on record to find out whether 
the prosecution had succeeded in bringing conviction to the appellant 
under Section 306, IPC. 
9. 
A brief reference to the prosecution case is required in the above 
regard.  As per the prosecution, the victim Senthil Kumar, while working as 
a supplier in Salem Hotel belonging to one Muthu (A-3), borrowed an 
amount of Rs. 2000/- from the appellant who is the son of A-3.  It is the case 
that the latter arranged it as a loan on the request of the deceased, from 
one Kishore, Venkatachalpati Finance.  The deceased failed to repay the 
borrowed amount and then the finance company pestered the appellant for 
repayment. Enraged by this, the appellant along with one Ravichandran (A-
2) kidnapped the deceased and brought him to the shop of A-2 and from 
there took him and wrongfully confined him in the tailor shop of one 
Sampath Kumar (PW-3), on 06.12.2002 demanding repayment of the 

Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     6 
borrowed amount. For wrongfully confining him and thereby instigating 
him to commit suicide, accused Nos. 3 to 5 had played their role along with 
the appellant and A2.  It is unable to withstand the torment that Senthil 
Kumar committed suicide by hanging in the tailoring shop of PW-3. 
Indisputably, this was the prosecution case.  But the indisputable and the 
undisputed position is that the prosecution which is supposed to establish 
its case, as is put forth by it, failed to prove the same.  No volume of 
argument is required to come to such a conclusion as the very acquittal of 
all the co-accused of the appellant by the trial Court and the acquittal of the 
appellant of the conviction under Sections 342 and 365, IPC, by the High 
Court as per the impugned judgment, would speak for itself.  It is also an 
undisputable position that despite the acquittal of the co-accused of the 
appellant and thereafter, the appellant, as above, no appeal was preferred 
against their acquittal.  In the contextual situation it is also relevant to note 
that though the aforementioned Kishore was cited as a witness for the 
prosecution but was not examined.  According to the prosecution one 
Alexander had witnessed the appellant taking the deceased and 
wrongfully confining him in the tailoring shop of PW-3, Smapath Kumar.  
However, he was also not examined.  In view of the aforesaid facts and the 
judgments of the trial Court as also the High Court it can be indubitably 
said that the case of the prosecution put forth that the deceased Senthil 

Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     7 
Kumar was kidnapped and wrongfully confined in the tailoring shop of PW-
3 Sampath Kumar was not attempted to be established by the prosecution 
by examining the aforesaid Kishore and Alexander and at any rate, case of 
kidnapping and wrongful confinement against the appellant was 
disbelieved by the High Court. 
10. 
Bearing in mind the aforesaid circumstance that the contentions 
against the  conviction under Section 306, IPC have to be appreciated. 
11. 
Through PW-2, who claimed to be the wife of the deceased Senthil 
Kumar, the prosecution attempted to establish that one week prior to the 
occurrence the appellant along with three others went to the house of the 
deceased and created a ruckus and at that time PW-2 alone was there.  
According to her, when the deceased came back home, she divulged the 
entire episode to him.  Further, she would depose that her husband had 
received Rs. 2000/- for interest and it was to be repaid in instalments.  She 
would also depose that earlier, the deceased himself had deposited two 
installments of Rs. 400/- each, towards the loan amount directly to the 
aforementioned financial institution.  She has also deposed that subsequent 
to the appellant’s iniquitous visit as above, she asked him to come on 
Wednesday and then paid him an amount of Rs.800/-. 
12. 
PW-2 further deposed that while leaving the house, after that first 
iniquitous visit, the appellant threatened that the deceased would be lifted 

Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     8 
unless the balance amount is not returned.  Going by the evidence of PW2 
out of borrowed amount of Rs. 2,000/- an amount of Rs. 1,600/- was paid 
back.  Hence, going by the prosecution case the kidnapping and 
consequential wrongful confinement was due to the failure on the part of 
the deceased to repay the balance amount.  But then, as noticed above, the 
case of kidnapping and wrongful confinement was disbelieved by the High 
Court and consequently, the appellant’s conviction under Sections 342 and 
365, IPC was set aside and the conviction under Section 306, IPC alone was 
sustained.  It is in the aforesaid context that we have referred to and 
analysed the provisions under Section 306, IPC and also referred to the 
decisions in M. Mohan’s case (supra) and Madan Mohan Singh’s case 
(supra).  In the light of the provisions thus analysed with reference to the 
said decisions the question to be considered is whether the prosecution 
had succeeded in establishing that there was mens rea on the part of the 
appellant to commit the offence rather to push the victim to commit suicide 
and to attract the offence under Section 306, IPC. 
13. 
While considering the said question it is relevant to take into account 
the fact that though the prosecution had attempted to establish the case that 
the appellant and the second accused herein had committed the offences 
under Sections 306, 342 and 365, IPC.  With the acquittal of the appellant 
and the second accused under those offences there can be no case of 

Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     9 
kidnapping or wrongful confinement of the deceased Senthil Kumar, by the 
appellant.  In paragraph 2.1 of the impugned judgment itself the High Court 
took note of the prosecution case. It is only apropos to extract paragraph 
2.1 which reads thus:- 
“2.1  It is the case of the prosecution that the deceased Senthil 
Kumar had borrowed Rs.2,000/- from Vijayakumar (A1), which 
Vijayakumar (A1) had borrowed from a Finance Company; 
when Senthil Kumar did not return the money, the Finance 
Company started mounting pressure on Vijayakumar (A1); 
therefore, it is alleged that Vijayakumar (A1) and Ravichandran 
(A2) abducted Senthil Kumar on 06.12.2002 and locked him up 
in the tailoring shop of Sampath Kumar (PW3) and thereby 
wrongfully restrained him demanding repayment of the 
amount; unable to withstand the torment Senthil Kumar 
committed suicide by hanging in the tailoring shop of Sampath 
Kumar (PW3) on 06.12.2002.”   
 
14. 
Thus, it is to be considered when the case put forth by the 
prosecution is abduction and wrongful confinement of the appellant for 
repayment of the balance amount and the inability to withstand the torment 
as the instances for accusing the appellant for commission of the offence of 
‘abetment of suicide’, how conviction under Section 306, IPC can be 
sustained in the light of his acquittal under Sections 342 and 365, IPC. 
15. 
In the contextual situation, in view of the analysis of the provisions 

Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     10 
under Section 306, IPC and the decisions referred to supra, we will also 
have to consider what is mens rea?  ‘Mens rea’ means a guilty mind.  As a 
general rule, every crime requires a mental element, the nature of which, 
will depend upon definition of the particular crime in question.  Although it 
is impossible to ascribe any particular meaning to the term ‘mens rea’ as 
the circumstance to determine the existence of mens rea depends upon the 
ingredients constituting the particular offence and the expression used in 
the definition of the particular offence to constitute such offence.  It is only 
appropriate to refer to Halsbury’s Laws of England (4th Edn., Vol-11, Para-
10), going by the same: 
 
“…it is impossible to ascribe any particular meaning to the 
term ‘mens rea’, concepts such as those of intention, 
recklessness and knowledge which commonly used as the 
basis for criminal liability and in some respects, it may be 
said to be fundamental to it.  Generally, subject to both 
qualification and exception, a person is not to be made 
criminally liable for serious crimes unless he intends to 
cause or foresees that he will probably cause or at the 
lowest he may cause the elements which constitute a crime 
in question.” 
 
 
 

Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     11 
16. 
In the decision in Director of Enforcement v. MCTM Corp. Pvt. Ltd. 
& Ors.4, it was observed that mens rea is a state of mind and held that under 
the criminal law mens rea is considered as the “guilty intention” and unless 
it is found that the ‘accused’ had the guilty intention to commit the crime, he 
could not be held guilty of committing the crime. 
17. 
In the case on hand the question to be considered is whether the 
appellant had instigated as envisaged under Section 107, IPC, to commit 
the offence under Section 306, IPC. It is in the said circumstances that we 
have earlier referred to the ingredients to attract offence under Section 
306, IPC.  Essentially the gravamen of the offence punishable under Section 
306, IPC, is abetting suicide. Abetment imposes a mental process of 
instigating a person or initially aiding a person in doing the offence.  In the 
case on hand, the question is whether the appellant abetted the deceased 
Senthil Kumar to commit suicide.  The evidence of the prosecution witness 
viz., PW-1 and PW-3 did not reveal existence of the element of mens rea on 
the part of the appellant.  There is nothing in their oral testimonies which 
would suggest that the appellant had instigated the deceased Senthil 
Kumar to commit suicide.  In this context, it is to be noted that the victim 
committed suicide inside the tailoring shop of PW-3 Sampath Kumar. He 
would submit that on 06.12.2002 at about 06.30 pm he locked his shop and 
 
4 AIR 1996 SC 1100 

Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     12 
left the key of the shop with A-3, father of the appellant.  Sampath Kumar 
would further depose that he came to know about the commission of 
suicide by Senthil Kumar inside his tailoring shop only in the next morning 
by about 9 O’clock. We have already noted that though the prosecution got 
a case that one Alexander had witnessed the appellant taking the victim 
and wrongfully confining him in the said shop, the said Alexander was not 
examined by the prosecution.  At any rate, the fact is that the appellant was 
already acquitted for the offence under Sections 342 and 365, IPC.  It is also 
to be noted that though A-3, Muthu, (the father of the appellant) was the 
person to whom PW-3 said to have handed over the key of his shop, he was 
acquitted by the trial Court and no appeal was filed against his acquittal.  
The impugned judgment would reveal that even after acquitting the 
appellant for the offences under Sections 342 & 365, IPC, the High Court 
confirmed his conviction under Section 306, IPC, holding that the appellant 
had failed to offer explanation as to how the deceased Senthil Kumar 
entered into the tailoring Shop of PW-3 to commit suicide in terms of 
Section 106 of the Evidence Act.  
18. 
We are at a loss to understand as to how Section 106 of the Evidence 
Act could be applied in the case on hand against the appellant in view with 
facts narrated  above. This Section is an exception to the general rule laid 
down in Section 101 which casts burden of proving a fact on the party who 

Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     13 
substantially asserts the affirmative of the issue.  Section 106 is not intended 
to relieve any person of that duty or burden.  On the contrary, it says that 
when a fact to be proved, either affirmatively or negatively, is especially 
within the knowledge of a person, it is for him to prove it.  This Section, in 
its application to criminal cases, applies where the defence of the accused 
depends on his proving a fact especially within his knowledge and of 
nobody else.  In short, Section 106 cannot be used to shift the burden of 
proving the offence from the prosecution to the accused.  It can only when 
the prosecution led evidence, which, if believed, will sustain a conviction 
or which makes out a prima facie case, that the question of shifting the onus 
to prove such fact(s) on the accused would arise.  (See the decision in 
Sawal Das v. State of Bihar5). 
19. 
In view of the exposition of law as above and in the absence of 
anything to make Section 106 applicable to shift the onus on the appellant, 
the High Court had committed an error in applying Section 106 of the 
Evidence Act, in the instant case.  
  
20. 
We have no hesitation, therefore, to hold that there is absolute 
absence of any basis for its application against the appellant in view of the 
evidence on record. 
21. 
The upshot of the discussion is that the prosecution has miserably 
 
5 AIR 1974 SC 778   

Crl. A. @ SLP(Crl.) No. 4684/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     14 
failed to establish that the appellant herein had abetted the victim to 
commit suicide. The conviction of the appellant under Section 306, IPC 
cannot be sustained.  
22. 
Resultantly this appeal stands allowed.  The appellants conviction 
under Section 306, IPC which was confirmed vide judgment dated 
25.01.2019 passed by the High Court in Criminal Appeal No.667/2011 is 
quashed and set aside. Consequently, he stands acquitted of the offence 
under Section 306, IPC.  The appellant is already on bail.  His bail bonds 
are discharged. 
23. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.  
 
 
.........................J. 
(C.T. RAVIKUMAR) 
 
 
.......................J. 
(RAJESH BINDAL) 
New Delhi; 
February 21, 2024.