2024 INSC 128
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  206  OF 2024 
 
 
RAM SINGH 
 
 
  
 
 
 
APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF U.P.  
 
 
                 RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
UJJAL BHUYAN, J. 
  
 
This appeal is directed against the judgment and order 
dated 05.02.2018 passed by the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad in Criminal Appeal No. 1611 of 1983, confirming the 
conviction and sentence imposed on the appellant by the 
Additional Sessions Judge, Non-metropolitan Area, Kanpur in 
Sessions Trial No. 297 of 1982.  
2.  
 
In the sessions trial, appellant Ram Singh was convicted 
under Section 301 read with Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 
1860 (IPC). He was also convicted under Section 307 IPC. For the 
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.02.21
16:36:28 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
offence under Section 301/302 IPC, appellant was sentenced to 
undergo imprisonment for life and for the offence under Section 
307 
IPC, 
appellant 
was 
sentenced 
to 
undergo 
rigorous 
imprisonment for five years, both the sentences to run 
concurrently.  
2.1.  
As noticed above, the appeal filed by the appellant 
before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad (‘High Court’ for 
short) was dismissed. Consequently, the conviction and sentence 
of the appellant imposed by the Sessions Court was confirmed by 
the High Court. 
Prosecution case 
3. 
 
PW-1 Shri Radhey Lal lodged a first information before 
the Bhognipur Police Station in the District of Kanpur (U.P.) on 
19.08.1982 at midnight stating that he and his brother Desh Raj 
were sitting in the open space in front of the entrance door of his 
house during the evening hours. His mother Dulli was sitting close 
by on a cot. On another cot, neighbours Lala Ram i.e. PW-3 and 
Man Singh i.e. PW-2 were sitting. They were chatting under a 
glowing lantern hanging on the roof-side of his residence.  
According to the informant, at about 08:00 PM, appellant Ram 
Singh accompanied by one Lala Ram came to his residence. He 

3 
 
stated that both of them were residents of his village. Ram Singh 
was holding a country made pistol in his right hand. As per version 
in the first information, Lala Ram had instigated Ram Singh by 
loudly saying that these people were creating disturbances; so kill 
them. Ram Singh fired on the informant but he slipped below the 
cot. The bullet hit the left breast of his mother Dulli who cried aloud 
saying that she was dead. According to the informant, they also 
cried. Ram Singh and Lala Ram ran away towards the north. 
Mother died immediately due to the gunshot wound. Informant 
stated that the incident was seen by his brother Desh Raj and by 
his neighbours Lala Ram and Man Singh in the light of the lantern. 
On hearing the firing, many people living nearby came. They had 
seen the accused running. The mother was lying dead on bed. The 
informant further stated that about one and a half months back, 
there was a scuffle betfween his son Baan Singh and the appellant 
Ram Singh which matter was duly reported to the local police 
station. Lala Ram and Ram Singh belongs to the same party. 
Because of this, they came to the door of his residence when on the 
instigation of Lala Ram, Ram Singh fired a shot due to which his 
mother Dulli died.  

4 
 
3.1.  
The first information as dictated by the informant, was 
reduced to writing by the scribe Sunder Lal, another brother of PW-
1. The said first information was registered as FIR bearing No. 
252/1982. 
4. 
 
Police investigated the crime and on completion of the 
investigation submitted chargesheet charging appellant Ram Singh 
of having committed offence under Sections 301 and 302 of the IPC 
as well as under Section 307/34 IPC. On the other hand, the co-
accused Lala Ram was charged of having committed offence under 
Section 307/34 IPC.  
4.1.  
To prove its case, prosecution examined six witnesses. 
After considering the evidence and materials on record, the 
Sessions Court convicted the appellant under Section 301 read 
with Section 302 IPC and also under Section 307 IPC. However, the 
other accused Lala Ram was given the benefit of doubt and 
accordingly was acquitted. 
4.2.  
At this stage, we may mention that there are two Lala 
Ram in this case. One is Lala Ram, son of Prahalad Singh who is 
PW-3 and the other is Lala Ram, son of Dhanna Ram Yadav who 
was named as accused number 2 and acquitted by the trial court. 

5 
 
5. 
 
As noticed above, the trial court convicted the appellant 
under the aforesaid provisions of IPC and sentenced him 
accordingly. The co-accused Lala Ram, son of Dhanna Ram Yadav, 
was acquitted. The appeal filed by the appellant before the High 
Court was dismissed. Consequently, his conviction and sentence 
were confirmed. 
Submissions 
6. 
 
Learned counsel for the appellant submits that there are 
gross contradictions in the testimony of the prosecution witnesses. 
The so called eyewitnesses were no eyewitnesses at all. Rather, they 
were interested witnesses having previous political enmity with the 
appellant. It is because of such political rivalry that appellant was 
falsely implicated in the case. 
6.1.  
He further submits that not only there are glaring 
inconsistencies in the version of the prosecution witnesses; crucial 
and material witnesses have not been examined. Even the country 
made pistol allegedly used by the appellant was not recovered. The 
pellets found at the site and also extricated from the body of the 
deceased were not sent for ballistic examination. In the absence of 
any ballistic report linking the pellets to the pistol allegedly used 
by the appellant, he could not have been convicted. Both the trial 

6 
 
court and the High Court therefore fell in error in convicting the 
appellant. 
6.2.  
Learned counsel submits that it is true that on 
16.07.2018, this Court had issued notice only on the question of 
converting the conviction from under Section 302 IPC to Section 
304 IPC and also on the prayer for grant of bail, nonetheless, he 
had submitted before this Court on 31.10.2023 that he would 
argue for acquittal as well. 
6.3.  
He further submits that the trial court had committed a 
fundamental error in convicting the appellant on the one hand and 
acquitting the co-accused Lala Ram on the other hand. Evidence 
against both were the same. When on the same set of evidence the 
co-accused was acquitted, the trial court ought to have acquitted 
the appellant as well. This aspect was overlooked by the High 
Court. In support of his submission, learned counsel has placed 
reliance on a decision of this Court in Javed Shaukat Ali Qureshi 
Vs. State of Gujarat, (2023) 9 SCC 164.  
6.4.  
Contention of learned counsel for the appellant is that 
there are no materials on record to conclusively prove the guilt of 
the appellant. Rather, it is a case of no evidence. Therefore, 

7 
 
appellant is entitled to be acquitted. Orders of the trial court as 
well as of the High Court should be set aside.  
7. 
 
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent-State 
argues that in view of the incriminating evidence against the 
appellant, both the Sessions Court as well as the High Court had 
rightly convicted the appellant. The ocular evidence clearly points 
to the positive act of the appellant firing the gunshot which killed 
the mother of PW-1, Dulli. Considering the gruesome nature of the 
murder and the testimony of the prosecution witnesses, conviction 
of the appellant is fully justified. High Court had rightly dismissed 
the criminal appeal of the appellant. No case for interference is 
made out.  
8. 
 
Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties 
have received the due consideration of the Court. 
Evidence: appreciation and analysis 
9. 
 
PW-1, who is the first informant and son of the 
deceased, stated in his evidence that they are the three brothers: 
Desh Raj, Sunder Lal and himself, he being the youngest. He lived 
with his mother at his village where his mother had property. In 
the same village, his maternal uncle used to reside. Both the 
accused were residents of his village and belonged to the same 

8 
 
community. He deposed that he had a rivalry with accused Ram 
Singh in connection with the election of village Pradhan. In that 
election, wife of the accused Ram Singh was one of the candidate. 
Ram Singh was also related to accused Lala Ram. PW-1 stated that 
he had voted for the candidate who stood against the wife of Ram 
Singh. In that election, Ram Singh’s wife lost and in this 
connection, a fight had broken out between the son of PW-1 i.e. 
Baan Singh and accused Ram Singh in respect of which FIR and 
cross FIR were lodged. The cases were going on. Accused Lala Ram 
was deposing as a witness in Ram Singh’s case. This incident had 
happened about a month and a half prior to the present incident. 
According to him, it was around 08:00PM in the evening when he 
was sitting at his door. His mother Dulli was sitting on the cot. The 
place was lit up by the hanging lantern which was hung on the 
roof. The two accused came from the north. Accused Lala Ram 
challenged PW-1 by saying that the latter was creating a lot of 
mischief and, therefore, he should be killed. Ram Singh fired from 
his country made pistol which he was carrying. Instead of hitting 
PW-1, the bullet hit his mother leading to her death. Thereafter, 
the two accused fled away. After this incident, PW-1 alongwith PW-
2 Man Singh went to Bhognipur Police Station and on the way 

9 
 
informed his brother Sunder Lal, the scribe, who wrote the first 
information which PW-1 carried to the police station.  
9.1.  
In his cross-examination, he stated that accused Lala 
Ram was a witness in the case against his son. He explained that 
there was a pile of bricks about 3-4 steps north of the courtyard 
where the deceased was sitting. The deceased was sitting on the 
northern side of the cot whereas PW-1 and his brother Desh Raj 
were sitting at the other end of the cot. He added that when Ram 
Singh fired at him, he bent below the cot, so also his brother. He 
could not see as to whether PW-2 and PW-3 had bent or not. As 
per the version of PW-1, the first gunshot did not hit him. Second 
shot was not fired at him or his brother because his mother had 
died in the first gunshot itself. Accused Ram Singh was at a 
distance of three steps from his mother’s cot. On hearing their 
screaming, several villagers came to the place of occurrence. At 
this, the two accused ran away. However, he stated that he could 
not say as to whether any villager had seen the accused running 
away or not as no villager had told him. 
9.2.  
In the cross-examination, it further revealed that 
deceased Dulli used to live with the brother of PW-1 i.e. Desh Raj 
whose house was behind the house of PW-1. The other brother’s 

10 
 
house was also nearby. On that fateful evening, though dinner had 
been taken, the deceased had not eaten food. As they were 
conversing in the courtyard, his mother was sitting quiet on the cot 
and did not participate. This time, he stated that he and his brother 
were sitting on the floor at the time of gunshot. Though he had bent 
down when the shot was fired, nobody got under the cot. On 
receiving the gunshot, the mother had collapsed on the cot. He had 
cried while sitting but had not hugged his mother. He had gone to 
his brother Sunder Lal’s hotel where the first information was 
written but his brother Sunder Lal did not accompany him to the 
police station. 
9.3.  
He denied the suggestion that it was a false case because 
of personal enmity; that Desh Raj and others who were sitting on 
the cot with the deceased in Desh Raj’s house and that while 
examining a country made pistol, a bullet was fired accidentally. 
10.  
PW-2 Man Singh stated that the deceased was sitting on 
a cot in the courtyard. Desh Raj and PW-1 were sitting on the floor 
near the cot. Accused Lala Ram had instigated accused Ram Singh 
by saying that PW-1 was being mischievous and that he should be 
killed. At this, accused Ram Singh walked 2-3 steps and fired from 

11 
 
his country made pistol but instead of hitting PW-1, his mother 
was hit and she died.  
10.1.  
In his cross-examination, PW-2 stated that the deceased 
was sitting on a cot while PW-1 and his brother Desh Raj were 
sitting on the floor on the west side of the cot. He saw the accused 
in the lantern light. Though Lala Ram had instigated Ram Singh, 
he did not get up from the cot and kept sitting. When shot was 
fired, Desh Raj and Radhey Lal (PW-1) stood up. He did not run to 
see the deceased after being shot. She was shot from a distance of 
2-3 steps. 
11.  
PW-3 Lala Ram, son of Prahalad Singh, stated that at 
the relevant time on the date of incident, he and Man Singh PW-2 
were sitting on the same cot. Dulli was sitting on bed. Desh Raj 
and Radhey Lal were sitting on the floor at a distance of one and a 
half hems away. The two accused came from the northern side. 
Accused Lala Ram instigated accused Ram Singh to kill PW-1 
saying that he was doing a lot of mischief. Ram Singh instantly 
fired from his country made pistol. The bullet did not hit Radhey 
Lal PW-1 but hit the left breast of his mother who was killed.  
11.1.  
In his cross-examination, he stated that he had seen 
accused Ram Singh before accused Lala Ram started challenging 

12 
 
PW-1. He did not see what Ram Singh was carrying and did not see 
any country made pistol in his hand. It would be wrong to say that 
he had seen country made pistol in the hands of Ram Singh. Sub-
Inspector of Police had not questioned him. While he was examined 
in court, he admitted that there were party politics between the 
Pradhan of the village who got elected and the accused. He also 
denied the suggestion that he had not seen any such incident and 
that no such incident had happened.  
12.  
PW-4 is the Sub-Inspector of Police, B.D. Verma. He 
stated that while preparing the inquest report, one tikli and 12 
pellets were seized from the wound of the deceased. He also seized 
cans of normal and blood-stained soil and also blood-stained 
clothes of the deceased. The blood-stained clothes and the cans of 
soil were sent to the chemical examiner for chemical examination 
but the report was not received back. He further stated that during 
preparation of inquest report, one tikli and 12 pellets were seized 
from the wound of Dulli on the cot. However, in re-examination, he 
stated that the pellets taken out by the doctor in the hospital were 
produced in the court. The tikli which was taken out from the body 
of the deceased in the hospital was with the pellets. 

13 
 
13.  
PW-5 is Raghu Raj Singh who was the Pradhan of the 
village. The inquest report was prepared in his presence and had 
his signature. He stated that blood-stained cot strips, empty 
cartridge, tikli and pellets were collected from the spot.  
13.1.  
In his cross-examination, he stated that he used to 
reside at a distance of 150 steps from the house of Dulli. He came 
to know about Dulli’s death on hearing the sound of firing but he 
did not come out of his house due to fear. However, he contradicted 
himself when he stated that he could not tell by the sound of firing 
that Dulli was killed; rather he came to know about this 10-15 
minutes later when one of the villagers Raja Ram, son of Prahalad 
Yadav told him while running by. He further compounded the 
inconsistency by saying that he did not tell the Sub-Inspector 
about hearing the sound of firing because this did not happen. 
14.  
The 
doctor 
who 
had 
conducted 
post-mortem 
examination, Dr. P.S. Mishra, was examined as PW-6. He stated 
that the entry wound of the bullet pellet 4cm × 3cm was on the left 
side of the left breast. The edges were inside with blackening. The 
wound was bone-deep. Third and fourth ribs on the left side chest 
were broken. There was laceration on the left lung. Both the lungs 
had blood. The heart was also lacerated. Semi-digested rice and 

14 
 
pulse were found in the stomach of the deceased. He opined that 
cause of death of the deceased was due to shock and haemorrhage 
because of the above injuries. 55 small pellets were taken out of 
the body of the deceased during post-mortem. 
15.  
During his examination under Section 313 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.P.C.), accused Ram Singh denied 
the accusation that he had killed the deceased by shooting her from 
a country made pistol. He stated that there was indeed a scuffle 
between the son of PW-1 and himself relating to the Pradhan 
election for which criminal cases were pending. The witnesses were 
testifying against him due to enmity. 
16.  
Before we proceed further, we may mention that in the 
seizure memo dated 20.08.1982, which has been placed on record, 
it was stated that during preparation of inquest report of the 
deceased, the police had seized the tikli of the cartridge stuck on 
the wound of the deceased and 12 bore cartridge lying on the cot 
of strips.  
17.  
From a careful scrutiny of the prosecution evidence, 
what is seen is that PW-1 alongwith his brother Desh Raj were 
chatting with PW-2 and PW-3 in the courtyard in front of the house 
of PW-1. PW-2 and PW-3 were sitting on one cot. The deceased was 

15 
 
sitting on another cot. Thereafter the discrepancies in the version 
of the witnesses arise. At one point of time, PW-1 said that he was 
at his door; at another point he stated that he and his brother Desh 
Raj were sitting on the same cot in which his mother was sitting 
but on the other end of the cot. Then again he said that the two 
brothers were sitting on the floor. It has also come on record that 
according to the version of some of the prosecution witnesses, PW-
1 and his brother Desh Raj were sitting on the floor.  Pausing here 
for a moment, we can visually analyse that the mother was sitting 
on the cot at a distance from her two sons. She was sitting laterally 
and not behind her two sons. According to the witnesses, the two 
accused came from the northern side and when they reached the 
pile of bricks, accused Lala Ram instigated accused Ram Singh 
that PW-1 was creating lot of mischief and, therefore, he should be 
killed. Ram Singh then moved 2-3 steps ahead and fired at PW-1. 
Now PW-1 says that he had hid himself below the cot; while the 
other version is that he had simply bent as he was sitting on the 
floor. On the other hand, PW-2 had stated in his cross-examination 
that when the shot was fired, PW-1 and his brother Desh Raj stood 
up. It is the prosecution case that Ram Singh had shot PW-1 but 
because of the evasive reaction of PW-1, the bullet fired by Ram 

16 
 
Singh from his country made pistol hit the left breast of the 
deceased who thereafter died. 
18.  
If this version is to be believed, then Ram Singh had fired 
at PW-1 from a close range and from a standing position. Therefore, 
trajectory of the shot would be from a height downwards. PW-1 was 
either sitting on the cot or on the floor and had taken evasive action 
(though PW-2 says that PW-1 stood up when the shot was fired); 
the mother was sitting diagonally on the other end of the cot. It is 
highly improbable that the shot fired at from such a close range 
and from a height downwards could have hit the left breast of the 
deceased who was sitting at a lateral distance and not behind PW-
1. 
19.  
Interestingly, neither Desh Raj, brother of PW-1 and son 
of the deceased, who was very much present at the place and time 
of occurrence was examined by the police nor the other brother 
Sunder Lal, the scribe, who had written the first information, was 
examined by the police. Omission to examine Desh Raj by the 
prosecution is most crucial as according to the prosecution version 
he was very much present when the incident occurred. We may 
also mention that the behaviour of Sunder Lal is also very unusual. 
He did not accompany PW-1 to the police station. There is also no 

17 
 
evidence that he had rushed to the place of occurrence where his 
mother was killed. An adverse inference will have to be drawn 
against the prosecution for not examining material witnesses. Be 
that as it may, it was only PW-1 and PW-2 who had stated that 
Ram Singh had fired from a country made pistol at PW-1 but the 
bullet had hit mother of PW-1, who died of the bullet wound. On 
the other hand, PW-3 categorically stated that he did not see 
accused Ram Singh carrying any country made pistol. Further, it 
has come on record that there was previous enmity between PW-1 
and the accused relating to election of village Pradhan because of 
which there were cross cases between them.  
 
 
20.  
The village Pradhan who testified as PW-5 stated that he 
was inside his house when he heard gunshot. He came to know 
that Dulli was killed about 10 to 15 minutes later when one Raja 
Ram, son of Prahalad Yadav, told him so while he was running by. 
Incidentally, the said Raja Ram was not examined by the police. 
 
 
21.  
At this stage, what is noticeable is that the weapon of 
offence i.e. the country made pistol used by the accused in the 
offence, could not be recovered by the police and therefore not 
exhibited. Thus, the main material evidence i.e., the weapon of 

18 
 
offence was not exhibited. In the seizure memo, it was mentioned 
that a 12 bore cartridge was lying on the cot and alongwith the tikli 
of the cartridge which was stuck on the wound of the deceased, 
were seized by the police. On the other hand, in the evidence of the 
doctor, PW-6 as well as from the post-mortem report, it has come 
on record that 55 small pellets were taken out from the body of the 
deceased during post-mortem. The bullet wound was bone-deep 
which clearly reveals that the deceased was shot at from close 
range. In his evidence, PW-4 Sub-Inspector B.D. Verma deposed 
that during preparation of the inquest report, one tikli and 12 
pellets were seized from the wound of the deceased. The pellets as 
well as the tikli of the cartridge were not sent to any ballistic expert, 
as a result of which there is no ballistic report on the basis of which 
it could be said for sure that the pellets found outside the body and 
from within the body could be traceable to the tikli of the 12 bore 
cartridge which in turn could be traced to the country made pistol 
from which the shot was allegedly fired by the appellant. There is 
no explanation of the prosecution regarding the 55 pellets retrieved 
from the body of the deceased during post-mortem; whether those 
could be linked to the 12 bore cartridge and the tikli. Importantly, 
the country made pistol was never recovered. Prosecution has not 
said anything in this regard. That apart, as per the version of PW-

19 
 
4, the blood stained clothes of the deceased which were seized were 
sent to the chemical examiner but the report from the chemical 
examiner was not received till the date and time of his deposition. 
 
 
22.  
From the above, it is evident that there are glaring 
inconsistencies in the prosecution version which have been 
magnified by the absence of the testimony of the material witnesses 
and the ballistic report coupled with the non-recovery of the 
weapon of crime. 
 
Case law 
23.  
In Munna Lal Vs. State of U.P., (2023) SCC Online SC 80, 
this Court opined that since no weapon of offence was seized in 
that case, no ballistic report was called for and obtained. This 
Court took the view that failure to seize the weapon of offence on 
the facts and in the circumstances of the case, had the effect of 
denting the prosecution story so much so that the same together 
with non-examination of material witnesses constituted a vital 
circumstance amongst others for granting the appellants the 
benefit of doubt. 
 
 

20 
 
24.  
On the aspect of non-examination of ballistic expert and 
its impact on the prosecution case, one of the earliest decisions of 
this Court was rendered in Gurucharan Singh Vs. State of Punjab, 
AIR 1963 SC 340. This Court observed that there is no inflexible 
rule that in every case where an accused person is charged with 
murder caused by a lethal weapon, the prosecution case can 
succeed in proving the charge only if an expert is examined. It is 
possible to imagine cases where the direct evidence is of such an 
unimpeachable character and the nature of the injuries disclosed 
by post-mortem notes is so clearly consistent with the direct 
evidence that the examination of a ballistic expert may not be 
regarded as essential. Where the direct evidence is not satisfactory 
or disinterested or where the injuries are alleged to have been 
caused by a gun and those prima facie appeared to have been 
inflicted by a rifle, undoubtedly the apparent inconsistency can be 
cured or the oral evidence can be corroborated by leading the 
evidence of a ballistic expert. However, in what cases the 
examination of a ballistic expert is essential for the proof of the 
prosecution case must naturally depend upon the circumstances 
of each case. This Court held as under: 
41.... These observations do not purport to lay 
down an inflexible Rule that in every case where 
an accused person is charged with murder 

21 
 
caused by a lethal weapon, the prosecution case 
can succeed in proving the charge only if an 
expert is examined. It is possible to imagine cases 
where the direct evidence is of such an 
unimpeachable character and the nature of the 
injuries disclosed by post-mortem notes is so 
clearly consistent with the direct evidence that 
the examination of a ballistic expert may not be 
regarded as essential. Where the direct evidence 
is not satisfactory or disinterested or where the 
injuries are alleged to have been caused with a 
gun and they prima facie appear to have been 
inflicted by a rifle, undoubtedly the apparent 
inconsistency can be cured or the oral evidence 
can be corroborated by leading the evidence of a 
ballistic expert. In what cases the examination of 
a ballistic expert is essential for the proof of the 
prosecution case, must naturally depend upon 
the circumstances of each case….  
 
 
25.  
This issue was again examined by this Court in 
Sukhwant Singh Vs. State of Punjab, (1995) 3 SCC 367. In that 
case, this Court observed that though the police had recovered an 
empty cartridge from the spot and a pistol along with some 
cartridges were seized from the possession of the appellant at the 
time of his arrest, yet the prosecution did not send the recovered 
empty cartridges and the seized pistol to the ballistic expert for 
examination and expert opinion. This Court was of the view that if 
such opinion would have been called for, comparison could have 
been made which in turn could have provided link evidence 
between the crime and the accused. It was noted that this again 

22 
 
was an omission on the part of the prosecution for which no 
explanation was furnished. It was thereafter that this Court 
declared as follows: 
21.... It hardly needs to be emphasised that in 
cases where injuries are caused by firearms, the 
opinion of the ballistic expert is of a considerable 
importance where both the firearm and the crime 
cartridge are recovered during the investigation 
to connect an accused with the crime. Failure to 
produce the expert opinion before the trial court 
in such cases affects the creditworthiness of the 
prosecution case to a great extent.  
 
 
25.1.  
Thus, in the aforesaid case, this Court emphasized that 
in cases where injuries are caused by firearms, the opinion of the 
ballistic expert becomes very important to connect the crime 
cartridge recovered during the investigation to the firearm used by 
the accused with the crime. Failure to produce expert opinion in 
such cases affects the creditworthiness of the prosecution case to 
a great extent. 
 
26.  
However, in State of Punjab Vs. Jugraj Singh, (2002) 3 
SCC 234, this Court opined that when there are convincing 
evidence of eyewitnesses, non-examination of the expert would not 
affect the creditworthiness of the version put forth by the 
eyewitnesses. 
 

23 
 
27.  
This Court considered the issue as to failure of the 
prosecution to recover the crime weapon and also non-
examination of ballistic expert in Gulab Vs. State of U.P., (2022) 12 
SCC 677. In that case, the deceased had sustained a gunshot 
injury with a point of entry and exit. In that case, prosecution had 
relied on the eyewitnesses’ accounts of three eyewitnesses which 
were found to be credible. Therefore, non-recovery of the weapon 
of the offence would not dis-credit the case of the prosecution. 
After referring to the previous decisions, this Court opined that in 
the facts and evidence of the case, the failure to produce the report 
by a ballistic expert who could testify to the fatal injuries being 
caused by a particular weapon would not be sufficient to impeach 
the credible evidence of the direct witnesses.  
 
28.  
In Pritinder Singh Vs. State of Punjab, (2023) 7 SCC 727, 
this Court in the facts and evidence of that case held that 
conviction could not be sustained. That apart, from not collecting 
any evidence as to whether the gun used in the crime belonged to 
the appellant or not, even the ballistic expert had not been 
examined to show that the wad and pellets were fired from the 
empty cartridges of the appellant. In that case which was based 
on circumstantial evidence, it was held that when there was 

24 
 
serious doubt as to credibility of the witnesses, the failure to 
examine ballistic expert would be a glaring defect in the 
prosecution case. 
29.  
Thus, what can be deduced from the above is that by 
itself non-recovery of the weapon of crime would not be fatal to the 
prosecution case. When there is such non-recovery, there would 
be no question of linking the empty cartridges and pellets seized 
during investigation with the weapon allegedly used in the crime. 
Obtaining of ballistic report and examination of the ballistic expert 
is again not an inflexible rule. It is not that in each and every case 
where the death of the victim is due to gunshot injury that opinion 
of the ballistic expert should be obtained and the expert be 
examined. When there is direct eye witness account which is found 
to be credible, omission to obtain ballistic report and non-
examination of ballistic expert may not be fatal to the prosecution 
case but if the evidence tendered including that of eyewitnesses do 
not inspire confidence or suffer from glaring inconsistencies 
coupled with omission to examine material witnesses, the 
omission to seek ballistic opinion and examination of the ballistic 
expert may be fatal to the prosecution case. 
 

25 
 
30.  
Applying the above proposition to the facts of the present 
case, we find that the evidence tendered by the eyewitnesses suffer 
from serious lacunae. Thus, their evidence cannot be said to be 
credible. That apart, material witnesses have not been examined. 
On the whole, the evidence tendered on behalf of the prosecution 
cannot be said to be full proof so much so that non-recovery of the 
weapon of offence, non-obtaining of ballistic opinion and non-
examination of ballistic expert would be immaterial. 
 
31.  
In such circumstances, it cannot be said that the 
prosecution could prove the accusation against the appellant 
beyond all reasonable doubt. As a matter of fact, on the same set 
of evidence, the trial court gave the benefit of doubt to the other 
accused Lala Ram primarily on the ground that there was a grudge 
between the accused and PW-1. 
 
32.  
This Court in the case of Javed Shaukat Ali Qureshi, has 
held that when there is similar or identical evidence of eyewitnesses 
against two accused by ascribing them the same or similar role, 
the court cannot convict one accused and acquit the other. This 
Court clarified as under: 
 
 
15. When there is similar or identical evidence 
of eyewitnesses against two accused by 

26 
 
ascribing them the same or similar role, the 
court cannot convict one accused and acquit 
the other. In such a case, the cases of both the 
accused will be governed by the principle of 
parity. This principle means that the criminal 
court should decide like cases alike, and in 
such cases, the court cannot make a 
distinction between the two accused, which 
will amount to discrimination. 
 
 
Conclusion 
33.  
Thus, on a careful analysis of the evidence on record, we 
are of the view that the appellant should be given the benefit of 
doubt as according to us, the prosecution could not prove his guilt 
beyond all reasonable doubt. Any lingering doubt about the 
involvement of an accused in the crime he is accused of 
committing, must weigh on the mind of the court and in such a 
situation, the benefit of doubt must be given to the accused. This 
is more so when the co-accused is acquitted by the trial court on 
the same set of evidence. 
 
34.  
That being the position, we set aside the conviction and 
sentence of the accused. The judgment and order of the Additional 
Sessions Court dated 28.05.1983 as well as the judgment and 
order of the High Court dated 05.02.2018 are hereby set aside and 

27 
 
quashed. Consequently, the appellant is directed to be released 
from jail forthwith, if not required in any other case. 
 
35.  
Appeal is allowed in the above terms. 
 
          .………………………………J 
    [ABHAY S. OKA] 
 
 
 
…………………………………J. 
   [UJJAL BHUYAN] 
NEW DELHI;  
21.02.2024