2024 INSC 149
1
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL (NO.) 1722 of 2010
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 8873/2008)
NARESH KUMAR                                          APPELLANT(S)
                                VERSUS
STATE OF HARYANA                                      RESPONDENT(S)
O R D E R
1.
This appeal is at the instance of a convict accused and is
directed against the judgment and order dated 03.09.2008 passed by
the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh, in Criminal
Appeal No. 762-SB of 1998, by which the High Court dismissed the
appeal  filed  by  the  appellant  herein  and  thereby  affirmed  the
judgment and order of conviction passed by the Additional Sessions
Judge, Karnal dated 08.09.1998/10.09.1998 in Sessions Trial No. 06
of  1996  holding  the  appellant  guilty  of  the  offence  punishable
under Section 306 of the Indian Penal Code (for short ‘IPC’).
2.
The short facts necessary to be narrated for disposal of this
appeal, are as under:-
The deceased, Rani, was married to the appellant herein. The
marriage was solemnized on 10.05.1992. The marriage of Rani with
the  convict  was  her  second  marriage.  In  the  wedlock  with  the
convict, Rani gave birth to a girl child. 
Digitally signed by
VARSHA MENDIRATTA
Date: 2024.02.29
14:03:23 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
The case of the prosecution is that soon after marriage, the
appellant-convict and her parents started demanding money as the
appellant convict wanted to start a ration shop. It may not be out
of place to state at this stage that the parents of the appellant-
convict  herein  were  also  put  to  trial  for  the  alleged  offence.
However, they came to be acquitted by the Trial Court.
The record reveals that on 19th November, 1993, Rani committed
suicide  by  consuming  poison.  According  to  the  case  of  the
prosecution,  Rani  committed  suicide  on  account  of  incessant
harassment at the end of her husband i.e., the appellant herein and
in such circumstances, the appellant-convict was charged with the
offence  of  abetting  the  commission  of  suicide  by  his  wife
punishable under Section 306 of the IPC.
In  the  course  of  the  trial  many  witnesses  were  examined,
however, we have looked into the oral evidence of PW-4, namely,
Madan Lal, who happens to be the brother of the deceased and PW-5,
Narata Ram, who happens to be the father of the deceased.
ORAL EVIDENCE ON RECORD:
3. 
PW-4 Madan Lal (brother of the deceased) son of Narata Ram in
his examination in chief has deposed as under:-
“We are four brothers and 9 sisters. My younger
sister  Rani  was  married  to  Naresh  accused  on
10-5-92  at  Kurukshetra  as  per  Hindu  rites  and
custom. At the time of her marriage she was aged
about 18/19 years. A female child was born to my
sister Rani after marriage. The daughter of Rani at
the time of death of Rani was aged about 4 or 5
months. After about 2/2½ months of marriage, Fakir
Chand,  Anguri  and  Naresh  demanded  a  sum  of  Rs.
50,000/- for starting business of Kiryana shop for
accused  Naresh.  We  being  poor  person  could  not
arrange for the said money. We had performed the
marriage of our sister by selling family property

3
(later  portion  is  volunteered).  About  one  or
quarter before death of Rani we got opened a shop
at  our  village  Raison  for  accused  Naresh  Kumar
which he had run for about 8 or 9 months. Accused
Naresh had run the shop for about 11 months. Since
accused Naresh suffered loss, he wound up the shop
and left for Delhi. About 1½ month before death of
Rani, accused Naresh had taken her to Delhi. On
17-11-93 my sister Rani along with accused Naresh
came  to  our  house.  My  sister  Rani  stated  that
accused  Naresh,  Fakir  Chand  and  Anguri  Devi  are
raising demand of Rs. 20,000/- for opening a shop
for Naresh. I, my father and my mother told accused
Naresh that we would arrange the amount and pay the
same after about 8 or 10 days. On 19-11-93 accused
Naresh and my sister left for Delhi at about 7 a.m.
saying  that  they  are  going  and  amount  be  sent
later. My sister Rani used to remain tense because
of repeated demands by the accused. Getting fed up
my  sister  consumed  some  poisonous  thing  on
19-11-93. On learning that my sister had consumed
some poisonous thing, we came to Karnal. Police met
me at G.H. Karnal where my statement Ex. PJ was
recorded by the police which was read over to me
and  after  admitting  the  contents,  I  signed  the
same. After post mortem, the dead body of my sister
was handed over to us on 20-11-93.”
4. 
PW-5 Narata Ram (father of the deceased) in his examination in
chief has deposed as under:-
“I have four sons and 9 daughters. My daughter Rani
was  married  to  Naresh  accused  on  10-5-92  at
Kurukshetra. After about 2½  months of marriage all
the  accused  started  harassing  my  daughter.  They
raised demand of Rs. 50,000/- for opening a shop
for Naresh. Being poor people we could not arrange
the amount. By arranging some amount we opened a
shop for accused Naresh at Raison. Accused Naresh
continued the shop for about 7 or 8 months. The
accused Naresh Dulian Kha Pee Kay left the shop and
went to Delhi. After about 5 or 7 months accused
Naresh came to take my daughter Rani to Delhi. On
17-11-93 accused Naresh alongwith my daughter Rani
came to our house. My daughter Rani told that all
the accused are demanding a sum of Rs. 20,000/- for
starting  business  at  Delhi.  I  expressed  my
inability to pay same day. At this Naresh told that
either pay the amount or he shall finish himself by
consuming  some  poison.  Accused  Naresh  then  left
with my daughter. My daughter used to remain tense

4
due to repeated demands of the accused. On learning
that Rani had consumed some poisonous thing we came
to G.H. Karnal.”
5.
The  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  appellant  convict
submitted that the Courts below committed an error in holding the
appellant guilty of having abetted the commission of suicide by the
deceased. He would submit that there is not an iota of evidence to
even  remotely  suggest  that  there  was  any  kind  of  harassment,
physical or mental, to the deceased by her husband.
6.
In such circumstances, he would submit that the conviction be
set aside and the appellant convict be acquitted.
7.
On  the  other  hand,  Ms.  Sabarni  Som,  the  learned  counsel
appearing for the State of Haryana, submitted that no error not to
speak of any error of law could be said to have been committed by
the Courts below in holding the appellant guilty of the alleged
offence.  Much  emphasis  was  laid  on  the  fact  that  the  deceased
committed suicide within seven years from the date of her marriage.
8.
The learned counsel appearing for the State tried to fortify
her above referred submission by relying on Section 113A of the
Indian  Evidence  Act,  1872  (for  short  ‘the  Evidence  Act’)  which
enables  raising  of  presumption  as  to  abetment  of  suicide  by  a
married woman. She would submit that the oral evidence of PW-4 and
PW-5 has been well appreciated and the Courts below have rightly
held the appellant guilty of the alleged offence.

5
ANALYSIS:
9.
Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and
having gone through the materials on record, the only question that
falls for our consideration is whether the High Court committed any
error in passing the impugned judgment?
10.
We have looked into the evidence of PW-4 i.e., the brother of
the deceased and also the evidence of PW-5 i.e., the father of the
deceased.  Both  these  witnesses  have  only  stated  that  after  the
marriage, there was a demand of some money by the convict, as he
wanted to start a ration shop. It appears from the evidence of both
these witnesses that on account of such demand, the deceased used
to remain tense.
11.
What ultimately led the deceased to take such a drastic step
of committing suicide is not clear. To put it in other words, the
plain reading of the oral evidence of both these witnesses does not
disclose any form of incessant cruelty or harassment on the part of
the husband which would in ordinary circumstances drag the wife to
commit suicide as if she was left with no other alternative. Mere
demand of money from the wife or her parents for running a business
without anything more would not constitute cruelty or harassment.
12.
Section 306 of the IPC reads as under :-
"306.  Abetment  of  suicide.─If  any  person  commits
suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide,
shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of  either
description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine."

6
13.
Thus,  the  basic  ingredients  to  constitute  an  offence  under
Section 306 of the IPC are suicidal death and abetment thereof.
Abetment of a thing is defined under Section 107 IPC as under:- 
“107. Abetment of a thing.─A person abets the doing of
a thing, who─ 
First.─Instigates any person to do that thing; or
Secondly.─Engages  with  one  or  more  other  person  or
persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing,
if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance
of that conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that
thing; or 
Thirdly.─Intentionally  aids,  by  any  act  or  illegal
omission, the doing of that thing.
 
Explanation  1.─ A  person  who  by  wilful
misrepresentation,  or  by  wilful  concealment  of  a
material  fact  which  he  is  bound  to  disclose,
voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause or
procure, a thing to be done, is said to instigate the
doing of that thing. 
 Explanation  2.─ Whoever,  either  prior  to  or  at  the
time  of  the  commission  of  an  act,  does  anything  in
order  to  facilitate  the  commission  of  that  act,  and
thereby facilitate the commission thereof, is said to
aid the doing of that act.” 
14. This Court in Geo Varghese v. State of Rajasthan and another,
(2021) 19 SCC 144, has considered the provisions of Section 306 IPC
along  with  the  definition  of  abetment  under  Section  107  IPC
observed as under:- 
“14.  Section  306  of  IPC  makes  abetment  of  suicide  a
criminal  offence  and  prescribes  punishment  for  the
same.
. . .
15.  The  ordinary  dictionary  meaning  of  the  word
‘instigate’  is  to  bring  about  or  initiate,  incite
someone to do something. This Court in Ramesh Kumar Vs.
State of Chhattisgarh, (2001) 9 SCC 618, has defined
the word ‘instigate’ as under:- 
“20.  Instigation  is  to  goad,  urge  forward,
provoke, incite or encourage to do “an act”.”

7
16.  The  scope  and  ambit  of  Section  107  IPC  and  its
co-relation  with  Section  306  IPC  has  been  discussed
repeatedly by this Court. In the case of S.S. Cheena
Vs. Vijay Kumar Mahajan and Anr (2010) 12 SCC 190, it
was observed as under:- 
“25.  Abetment  involves  a  mental  process  of
instigating a person or intentionally aiding a
person in doing of a thing. Without a positive
act on the part of the accused to instigate or
aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot be
sustained. The intention of the legislature and
the ratio of the cases decided by the Supreme
Court is clear that in order to convict a person
under Section 306 IPC there has to be a clear
mens rea to commit the offence. It also requires
an  active  act  or  direct  act  which  led  the
deceased to commit suicide seeing no option and
that act must have been intended to push the
deceased into such a position that he committed
suicide.”
15.
This  Court  in  M.  Arjunan  v.  State,  represented  by  its
Inspector  of  Police,  (2019)  3  SCC  315,  while  explaining  the
necessary ingredients of Section 306 IPC in detail, observed as
under:- 
“7.  The  essential  ingredients  of  the  offence  under
Section  306  I.P.C.  are:  (i)  the  abetment;  (ii)  the
intention of the accused to aid or instigate or abet
the deceased to commit suicide. The act of the accused,
however,  insulting  the  deceased  by  using  abusive
language will not, by itself, constitute the abetment
of  suicide.  There  should  be  evidence  capable  of
suggesting  that  the  accused  intended  by  such  act  to
instigate  the  deceased  to  commit  suicide.  Unless  the
ingredients  of  instigation/abetment  to  commit  suicide
are  satisfied,  accused  cannot  be  convicted  under
Section 306 IPC.”
16.
This  Court  in  Ude  Singh  &  Others  v.  State  of  Haryana,
(2019) 17 SCC 301, held that in order to convict an accused under
Section 306 IPC, the state of mind to commit a particular crime
must be visible with regard to determining the culpability. It was
observed as under:- 

8
“16.  In  cases  of  alleged  abetment  of  suicide,  there
must  be  a  proof  of  direct  or  indirect  act(s)  of
incitement  to  the  commission  of  suicide.  It  could
hardly  be  disputed  that  the  question  of  cause  of  a
suicide, particularly in the context of an offence of
abetment  of  suicide,  remains  a  vexed  one,  involving
multifaceted and complex attributes of human behavior
and responses/reactions. In the case of accusation for
abetment  of  suicide,  the  Court  would  be  looking  for
cogent and convincing proof of the act(s) of incitement
to the commission of suicide. In the case of suicide,
mere  allegation  of  harassment  of  the  deceased  by
another person would not suffice unless there be such
action  on  the  part  of  the  accused  which  compels  the
person to commit suicide; and such an offending action
ought  to  be  proximate  to  the  time  of  occurrence.
Whether  a  person  has  abetted  in  the  commission  of
suicide by another or not, could only be gathered from
the facts and circumstances of each case.
16.1 For the purpose of finding out if a person has
abetted  commission  of  suicide  by  another;  the
consideration would be if the accused is guilty of the
act of instigation of the act of suicide. As explained
and  reiterated  by  this  Court  in  the  decisions  above
referred,  instigation  means  to  goad,  urge  forward,
provoke,  incite  or  encourage  to  do  an  act.  If  the
persons who committed suicide had been hypersensitive
and the action of accused is otherwise not ordinarily
expected to induce a similarly circumstanced person to
commit suicide, it may not be safe to hold the accused
guilty of abetment of suicide. But, on the other hand,
if the accused by his acts and by his continuous course
of conduct creates a situation which leads the deceased
perceiving  no  other  option  except  to  commit  suicide,
the case may fall within the four-corners of Section
306  IPC.  If  the  accused  plays  an  active  role  in
tarnishing  the  self-esteem  and  self-respect  of  the
victim,  which  eventually  draws  the  victim  to  commit
suicide, the accused may be held guilty of abetment of
suicide. The question of mens rea on the part of the
accused in such cases would be examined with reference
to the actual acts and deeds of the accused and if the
acts  and  deeds  are  only  of  such  nature  where  the
accused intended nothing more than harassment or snap
show of anger, a particular case may fall short of the
offence of abetment of suicide. However, if the accused
kept on irritating or annoying the deceased by words or
deeds  until  the  deceased  reacted  or  was  provoked,  a
particular  case  may  be  that  of  abetment  of  suicide.
Such  being  the  matter  of  delicate  analysis  of  human
behaviour, each case is required to be examined on its

9
own  facts,  while  taking  note  of  all  the  surrounding
factors having bearing on the actions and psyche of the
accused and the deceased.”
17.
This Court in Mariano Anto Bruno & another v. The Inspector of
Police, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1387, Criminal Appeal No. 1628 of 2022
decided  on  12th  October,  2022,  after  referring  to  the  above
referred decisions rendered in context of culpability under Section
306 IPC observed as under:-
“44. . . . It is also to be borne in mind that in cases
of alleged abetment of suicide, there must be proof of
direct or indirect acts of incitement to the commission
of  suicide.  Merely  on  the  allegation  of  harassment
without  their  being  any  positive  action  proximate  to
the time of occurrence on the part of the accused which
led  or  compelled  the  person  to  commit  suicide,
conviction  in  terms  of  Section  306  IPC  is  not
sustainable.”
18.
This Court in  Gurcharan Singh v. State of Punjab, (2020) 10
SCC  200,  observed  that  whenever  a  person  instigates  or
intentionally aids by any act or illegal omission, the doing of a
thing, a person can be said to have abetted in doing that thing. To
prove the offence of abetment, as specified under Section 107 IPC,
the state of mind to commit a particular crime must be visible, to
determine the culpability.
19.
This Court in  Kashibai & Others v. The State of Karnataka,
2023 SCC Online SC 575, Criminal Appeal No. 627 of 2023 (arising
out of SLP (Crl.) No. 8584/2022) decided on 28th February, 2023,
observed that to bring the case within the purview of ‘Abetment’
under Section 107 IPC, there has to be an evidence with regard to
the instigation, conspiracy or intentional aid on the part of the
accused and for the purpose proving the charge under Section 306

10
IPC, also there has to be an evidence with regard to the positive
act on the part of the accused to instigate or aid to drive a
person to commit suicide.
20.
Had there been any clinching evidence of incessant harassment
on account of which the wife was left with no other option but to
put an end to her life, it could have been said that the accused
intended the consequences of his act, namely, suicide. A person
intends  a consequence when he (1)foresees  that it will happen if
the given series of acts or omissions continue, and (2)desires it
to happen. The most serious level of  culpability, justifying the
most  serious  levels  of punishment, is  achieved  when  both  these
components  are  actually  present  in  the  accused's  mind  (a
"subjective" test). 
21. For  intention  in  English  law,  Section  8  of  the  Criminal
Justice  Act,  1967  provides  the  frame  in  which  the mens  rea is
assessed. It states:
“A court or jury, in determining whether a person has
committed an offence,
(a)
shall not be bound in law to infer that he intended
or foresaw a result of his actions by reasons only
of its being a natural and probable consequence of
those actions; but
(b)
shall decide whether he did intend or foresee that
result  by  reference  to  all  the  evidence,  drawing
such inferences from the evidence as appear proper
in the circumstances.”
Under Section 8(b), therefore, the jury is allowed a wide latitude
in applying a hybrid test to impute intent or foresight on the ba-
sis of all the evidence.

11
22.
It is now well settled that in order to convict a person under
Section 306 of the IPC there has to be a clear mens rea to commit
the offence. Mere harassment is not sufficient to hold an accused
guilty of abetting the commission of suicide. It also requires an
active act or direct act which led the deceased to commit suicide.
The  ingredient  of  mens  rea cannot  be  assumed  to  be  ostensibly
present but has to be visible and conspicuous.
23.
We take notice of the fact that the High Court has laid much
emphasis on Section 113A of the Evidence Act.
24.
Section 113A of the Evidence Act reads thus:-
“113A.  Presumption  as  to  abetment  of  suicide  by  a
married  woman.─When  the  question  is  whether  the
commission of suicide by a woman had been abetted by her
husband or any relative of her husband and it is shown
that she had committed suicide within a period of seven
years from the date of her marriage and that her husband
or  such relative  of her  husband had  subjected her  to
cruelty, the court may presume, having regard to all the
other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had
been abetted by her husband or by such relative of her
husband.
     Explanation.─For  the  purposes  of  this  section,
“cruelty” shall have the same meaning as in section 498A
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)."
25. This  Section  was  introduced  by  the  Criminal  Law  (Second
Amendment)  Act  46  of  1983.  The  Indian  Penal  Code,  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Evidence Act were amended keeping
in view the dowry death problems in India.
26.
The Section requires proof (1) that her husband or relatives
subjected her to cruelty and (2) that the married woman committed
suicide  within  a  period  of  seven  years  from  the  date  of  her

12
marriage.
27.
Although, it is not necessary for us to refer to Section 113B
of the Evidence Act which raises presumption as to dowry death yet
with  a  view  to  indicate  the  fine  distinction  between  the  two
presumptions we are referring to Section 113B. In Section 113A the
legislature has used the word ‘may’, whereas in Section 113B the
word used is ‘shall’.
28.
In  this  appeal,  we  are  concerned  with  Section  113A  of  the
Evidence Act. The mere fact that the deceased committed suicide
within a period of seven years of her marriage, the presumption
under  Section  113A  of  the  Evidence  Act  would  not  automatically
apply.  The  legislative  mandate  is  that  where  a  woman  commits
suicide within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that her
husband  or  any  relative  of  her  husband  had  subjected  her  to
cruelty, the presumption under Section 113A of the Evidence Act may
be raised, having regard to all other circumstances of the case,
that  such  suicide  had  been  abetted  by  her  husband  or  by  such
relative of her husband.
29.
What is important to note is that the term ‘the Court may
presume having regard to all other circumstances of the case that
such suicide had been abetted by her husband’ would indicate that
the  presumption  is  discretionary,  unlike  the  presumption  under
Section 113B of the Evidence Act, which is mandatory. Therefore,
before  the  presumption  under  Section  113A  is  raised,  the
prosecution must show evidence of cruelty or incessant harassment
in that regard.

13
30. The court should be extremely careful in assessing evidence
under section 113A for finding out if cruelty was meted out. If it
transpires that a victim committing suicide was hyper sensitive to
ordinary petulance, discord and differences in domestic life quite
common  to  the  society  to  which  the  victim  belonged  and  such
petulance, discord and differences were not expected to induce a
similarly  circumstanced  individual  in  a  given  society  to  commit
suicide, the conscience of the Court would not be satisfied for
holding that the accused charged of abetting the offence of suicide
was guilty.
31. Section 113A has been interpreted by this Court in  Lakhjit
Singh v. State of Punjab, 1994 Suppl (1) SCC 173,  Pawan Kumar v.
State of Haryana, 1998(3) SCC 309, and Smt.  Shanti v. State of
Haryana, 1991(1) SCC 371.
32. This Court has held that from the mere fact of suicide within
seven years of marriage, one should not jump to the conclusion of
abetment unless cruelty was proved. The court has the discretion to
raise or not to raise the presumption, because of the words 'may
presume'. It must take into account all the circumstances of the
case which is an additional safeguard.
33.
In  the  absence  of  any  cogent  evidence  of  harassment  or
cruelty, an accused cannot be held guilty for the offence under
Section 306 of IPC by raising presumption under Section 113A.
34.
Before we part with this matter, we may only observe that the
criminal justice system of ours can itself be a punishment. It is
exactly what has happened in this case. It did not take more than
10 minutes for this Court to reach to an inevitable conclusion that

14
the conviction of the appellant convict for the offence punishable
under Section 306 of the IPC is not sustainable in law. The ordeal
for the appellant started some time in 1993 and is coming to the
end in 2024, i.e. almost after a period of 30 years of suffering.
At the same time, we are also mindful of the fact that a young
woman died leaving behind her 6 months old infant. No crime should
go unpunished. But at the same time, the guilt of the accused has
to be determined in accordance with law. To put it in other words,
the guilt of the accused has to be determined on the basis of legal
evidence on record. The question is : On what and where did the two
courts  falter?  In  our  opinion,  the  two  courts  faltered  as  they
failed to apply the correct principles of law to the evidence on
record on the subject of abetment of suicide. The two courts got
enamoured by just three things, (i) the deceased committed suicide
within  seven  years  of  marriage,  (ii)  the  accused  was  demanding
money from the parents of the deceased for starting some business,
and (iii) the deceased used to remain tense. We do not say that
these  are  irrelevant  consideration.  All  the  three  aspects  are
relevant.  But  there  are  settled  principles  of  law  to  be  made
applicable  to  the  matters  of  the  present  type.  In  the  case  of
accusation  for  abetment  of  suicide,  the  court  should  look  for
cogent  and  convincing  proof  of  the  act  of  incitement  to  the
commission  of  suicide  and  such  an  offending  action  should  be
proximate to the time of occurrence. Appreciation of evidence in
criminal matters is a tough task and when it comes to appreciating
the  evidence  in  cases  of  abetment  of  suicide  punishable  under
Section 306 of the IPC, it is more arduous. The court must remain

15
very careful and vigilant in applying the correct principles of law
governing the subject of abetment of suicide while appreciating the
evidence on record. Otherwise it may give an impression that the
conviction is not legal but rather moral.
35.
For  all  the  foregoing  reasons,  we  have  reached  to  the
conclusion that the prosecution has not been able to establish the
guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt.
36.
In the result, the appeal succeeds and is, hereby, allowed.
The judgment and order of conviction passed by the Trial Court as
affirmed by the High Court is, hereby, set aside.
37.
The appellant stands acquitted of the charge framed against
him.
38.
Pending  the  present  appeal,  vide  order  dated  13.05.2009  a
coordinate Bench had ordered release of the convict on bail. Since
the appeal is being allowed and the convict is being acquitted, the
bail bond(s) furnished then shall also stand discharged.
………………………………………………………………,J.
[J.B.PARDIWALA]
………………………………………………………………,J.
[MANOJ MISRA]
NEW DELHI;
22ND FEBRUARY, 2024

16
ITEM NO.102               COURT NO.10               SECTION II-B
               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Criminal Appeal  No(s).  1722/2010
NARESH KUMAR                                       APPELLANT(S)
                                VERSUS
STATE OF HARYANA                                   RESPONDENT(S)
Date : 22-02-2024 This appeal was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :  HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.B. PARDIWALA
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJ MISRA
For Appellant(s)
Mr. S.D.Singh, Adv.
Mrs. Shweta Sinha, Adv.
Mr. Ram Kripal Singh, Adv.
Mr. Siddharth Singh, Adv.
Mrs. Aparna Jha, AOR
                   
For Respondent(s)  Mr. Raj Singh Rana, A.A.G. (N/P)
                   Mr. Samar Vijay Singh, AOR
                   Mr. Keshav Mittal, Adv.
                   Ms. Sabarni Som, Adv.
                   Mr. Fateh Singh, Adv.
          UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.
The relevant portion of the order, reads as under:-
“  In  the  result,  the  appeal  succeeds  and  is,  hereby,
allowed. The judgment and order of conviction passed by the
Trial Court as affirmed by the High Court is, hereby, set
aside.
  The  appellant  stands  acquitted  of  the  charge  framed
against him.
   Pending the present appeal, vide order dated 13.05.2009
a coordinate Bench had ordered release of the convict on
bail. Since the appeal is being allowed and the convict is
being acquitted, the bail bond(s) furnished then shall also
stand discharged.”
(VARSHA MENDIRATTA)                           (POOJA SHARMA)
COURT MASTER (SH)                            COURT MASTER (NSH)
(Signed reportable order is placed on the file)