2024 INSC 137
1 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL Nos. 2899-2907 OF 2024 
Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 19633-19641/2013 
 
SMT. VIDYA K. & ORS. 
 
 
 
         
...APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
STATE OF KARNATAKA & ORS.              
    …RESPONDENT(S) 
WITH 
CIVIL APPEAL Nos. 2936-2954 OF 2024 
Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 34297-34315/2013 
WITH 
CIVIL APPEAL Nos. 2908-2916 OF 2024 
Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 19942-19950/2013 
WITH 
CIVIL APPEAL Nos. 2917-2935 OF 2024 
Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 31253-31271/2013 
WITH 
CIVIL APPEAL Nos. 2955-2963 OF 2024 
Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 34730-34738/2013 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
Leave Granted.  
2. 
The short question arising for our consideration is whether a 
notification for filling up 18 posts of lecturers of Home Science in First 
Grade College run by State of Karnataka is liable to be quashed for not 
providing the breakup of the ‘subjects’ within Home Science. The 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.02.22
17:47:02 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Karnataka Administrative Tribunal quashed the notification on the 
ground that specifying the subject categories is necessary for 
advertising the vacant posts1. Writ Petitions2 filed by the Karnataka 
Public Service Commission as well as the successful candidates were 
dismissed by the High Court confirming the order of the Tribunal. 
Thus, the present appeal. 
3. 
Having examined the rules and regulations which govern the 
process of recruitment, we found no difficulty in arriving at the 
conclusion that the requirement, as assumed by the Tribunal and the 
High Court, is not a mandate of the recruitment Rules. Even otherwise, 
the Tribunal and the High Court have erroneously based their 
conclusions on policy considerations relating to how such a breakup 
would be beneficial to the candidates. For the reasons to follow, we 
have allowed the appeals, set-aside the judgments and upheld the 
recruitment process. Consequently, appointments made on the basis 
of the advertisement are affirmed.  
4. 
The short facts leading to the present appeal are as follows. The 
Karnataka Public Service Commission (hereinafter ‘KPSC’) issued a 
notification on 24.12.2007 for filling up approximately 2500 posts of 
 
1 Order dated 12.06.2009 passed in ApplicaƟon No. 1002/2008 and ApplicaƟon No. 2794/2008 by the Karnataka 
AdministraƟve Tribunal, Bangalore. 
2 Judgment dated 28.03.2013 passed in W.P. Nos. 19495-503/2009 and W.P. Nos. 20289-20297/2009 connected with 
W.P. No. 21474/2009 (S-KAT). 

3 
 
lecturers in the Government First Grade Colleges. Of the said posts, we 
are concerned with the recruitment to 18 posts in the department of 
Home Science. Following the advertisement, the appellants in the lead 
matter and two other connected matters, having the required 
qualification, were selected to the post of Home Science lecturer on 
23.09.2008. In the meanwhile, respondent no. 8 approached the 
Tribunal seeking quashing of the notification by filing an Application 
on the ground that the breakup of the specialised subjects within Home 
Science are not specified in the notification. There was no interim order 
passed by the Tribunal, but the recruitment was made subject to the 
outcome of the Application. 
5. 
The Application was finally taken up for hearing and the Tribunal 
by its order dated 12.06.2009 allowed the same and quashed the 
advertisement dated 24.12.2007. The Tribunal held that – (i) Home 
Science is not a subject, but a course which comprises of different 
subjects; (ii) in the past, KPSC had released notifications specifying 
vacancies against each specialisation, and appointments were also 
made after notifying vacancies against each specialisation; and (iii) if 
posts are not filled up subject-wise, and a lecturer possessing degree 
in Home Science in a particular subject is made to teach students in 
another subject, the education of the students would suffer. 

4 
 
6. 
Questioning the legality and validity of the Tribunal’s decision, the 
appellants, who were successfully appointed candidates and KPSC filed 
Writ Petitions before the High Court. By the order impugned herein, the 
High Court dismissed the said Petitions.  The reasoning of the High 
Court is that – (i) though the notification dated 24.12.2007 specifies 
subjects within the field of Arts and Science, for Home Science, no 
subjects or specialisations were mentioned; (ii) the Karnataka 
Education Department Service (Department of Collegiate Education) 
(Special Recruitment) Rules, 1993, require that the vacancy must be 
specified subject wise which was not done for Home Science; and (iii) if 
any student wants to take up specialised subjects in his masters’ 
degree, he is required to have studied that subject, and therefore 
providing the breakup of subjects within Home Science is necessary.  
7. 
The appeals before us are by the appointed candidates, the State 
of Karnataka and the KPSC. We have heard all the counsels for the 
appellants and the respondents. 
8. 
The issue as to whether the notification calling for applications for 
recruitment to the 18 posts of lecturers in the department of Home 
Science is illegal for not providing the subject wise specified categories, 
would depend upon the Rules governing the recruitment process, 
which are the Karnataka Education Department Service (Department 

5 
 
of Collegiate Education) (Recruitment) Rules, 1964, and the Karnataka 
Education Department Service (Department of Collegiate Education) 
(Special Recruitment) Rules, 1993.  Rules 3 and 4 of the 1993 Rules 
provide as follows: -  
“3. Qualification and Age - No person shall be 
eligible for recruitment under these rules unless 
he, has –  
 
(a)   (i) Obtained a Master's Degree in the 
relevant subject with at least 55 per cent 
marks or its equivalent grade; 
(ii) been, declared successful in the 
National 
Education 
Test”, 
provided 
further 
that 
candidates 
possessing 
Ph.D/M. 
Phil. 
are 
exempted 
from 
appearing for NET. 
(b)… 
 
4. Notification of vacancies - Appointing Authority 
shall notify the vacancies under each subject to the 
Karnataka Public Service Commission which shall 
make the selection in accordance with these 
rules.” 
  
9. 
The advertisement dated 24.12.2007 refers to the relevant Rules, 
and in fact, specifies all the requirements such as eligibility criteria, 
selection methods, educational qualifications, age limit etc. Under the 
educational qualification, the notification, which is in consonance with 
Rule 3 stated above, specifies as under: - 
“1. Must be a holder of a Master’s Degree in the 
concerned subject with minimum of fifty five percent 
of marks. Provided that in the respect of Scheduled 

6 
 
Caste and Scheduled Tribes candidates the 
minimum marks shall be fifty percent. 
2. Must have passed National Eligibility test 
conducted by the U.G.C. or C.S.I.R of SLET 
conducted by the State Government or any 
authority accredited by the U.G.C.” 
 
10. There is no dispute about the fact that the recruitment inter alia 
is to the post of a lecturer in an undergraduate program in Government 
First Grade Colleges. That, it is a lecturer post, is also evident from the 
pay scale of Rs. 8000-13500 that it carries. In fact, Rule 3 of the 1993 
Rules provides qualifications which concerns appointment to the post 
of lecturers in undergraduate programs. The reason for emphasising 
the Rule position is to indicate that these lecturers, upon appointment, 
would be teaching undergraduate students in the Home Science 
department. The qualification is therefore, confined to, a post-
graduation degree in Home Science. As long as a candidate holds a 
master’s degree in Home Science, he/she will be qualified for applying 
to the post. It does not matter in which speciality within Home Science 
the master’s degree is obtained.   
11. We may conclude this issue by referring to a statement made by 
the University Grants Commission (hereinafter ‘UGC’) in the affidavit 
which is to the following effect: - 
“12. That the present Special Leave Petition 
pertains to the issue as to “whether the post of 

7 
 
lecturer in Home Science is required to be classified 
subject-wise or not”. 
13.  In this regard, it is already submitted on behalf 
of UGC that there is no separate subject wise 
provision for the post of lecturers Home Science.” 
12. Service jurisprudence must begin and end with rules that govern 
the process of qualification, recruitment, selection, appointment and 
conditions of service. Appointments to these posts are in the nature of 
‘status’, which means that the service and its conditions can be 
unilaterally changed by the amendment of the Rules. The first duty of 
the Tribunal is to verify and examine the claims made by a party in the 
context of the Rule that governs the field. If the Rule does not prescribe 
a subject-wise speciality, there is no justification for the Tribunal or the 
High Court to examine the propriety, or for that matter, the beneficial 
effect of the rule. 
13. The reasoning adopted by the High Court is as follows: 
“14. The material on record discloses that all persons 
who have basic degree in Science is not eligible for 
being admitted to M.Sc. in Home Science. If any 
student wants to take up specialized subject, he also 
should have studied that subject as a subject in the 
basic degree. Under these circumstances, though the 
Government had asked the KPSC to recruit 18 
Lecturers 
in 
Home 
Science, 
the 
KPSC 
being 
specialized Agency should have known that while 
inviting applications, mentioning of mere Home 
Science would not be sufficient. In fact, the Rules on 
which reliance is placed categorically states that the 
candidate should have obtained a Master Degree in 
the 'relevant subject' with at least 55% marks or its 
equivalent grade and the Amended Rule (4) makes it 

8 
 
very clear that the Appointing Authority shall notify 
the vacancies under ‘each subject' to the KPSC which 
shall make selection in accordance with these Rules. 
Home Science is not a subject. Home Science is a 
stream or genesis. In that view of the matter, the 
notification calling for applications in Home Science is 
vague. Only the specialized subject has to be 
mentioned as they have mentioned in the case of Arts, 
Science and Commerce. The candidate possessing 
M.Sc. in Home Science with specialized subject is in 
disadvantageous position to apply as against the 
said vacancies. In their anxiety, if the applicant had 
applied for the post of Lecturer in Home Science, that 
cannot be held against her. The State and the KPSC 
should act in accordance with law.” 
 
14. It does not require detailed reasoning to find the error in the 
judgment of the High Court. The fact that an undergraduate student 
would be required to choose a specialisation when he takes up a PG 
program has no bearing on the qualification of the lecturer teaching the 
undergraduate students. Further, the assumption of the High Court 
that Home Science is not a subject, instead it is a stream, or a genesis 
has no application to the recruitment of lecturers for an undergraduate 
program. For under-graduation, Home Science in itself is the subject. 
In fact, UGC also considers Home Science as a subject, with subject 
code no. 12, as per the latest information bulletin issued by it towards 
National Eligibility Test conducted in December, 2023. To teach 
undergraduates, the qualification prescribed is simply a post-
graduation degree in the subject of Home Science. We repeat, it does 

9 
 
not matter in which subject of Home Science that the post-graduation 
is obtained.  
15. The other reasoning given by the High Court is that on an earlier 
occasion, the KPSC, while recruiting for the post of probationary 
officers in the Dept. of Woman & Child Welfare, had mentioned the 
qualification as Master’s Degree in Social Works or Home Science with 
a specialization in Child Development or Nutrition. Even this reasoning 
is misplaced because this advertisement was for recruitment to an 
executive post. While recruiting a person as a probationary officer in 
the Dept. of Woman & Child Welfare, the employer is certainly entitled 
to indicate the specialisation that is expected. This has nothing to do 
with advertisement for recruitment for the post of a lecturer. 
16. Till date, the lecturers of Home Science in undergraduate program 
run by the Government First Grade Colleges have been treated as one 
cadre and recruitment to the posts were advertised as such. If one has 
to follow the logic adopted by the High Court, then the entire 
notification will collapse as the subjects of History, Economics, Political 
Science, Sociology etc. are also mentioned without the so-called 
specialisations and they must be set aside by the same logic. For 
example, History has its specialised subjects in post-graduation such 
as Ancient History, Archaeology, Epigraphy, Modern Indian History, 

10 
 
World History, European History, South-east Asian History, West Asian 
History etc. The simple answer is that for under graduation, History is 
a subject in itself.  
17. We conclude by holding that the High Court committed an error 
in not focussing on what the Rule provides for and whether the 
advertisement is in consonance with the Rule. If the High Court had 
confined itself to the basic features of judicial review, it would have 
avoided committing the error that it did.  
18.  For the reasons stated above, we allow the appeals and set aside 
the judgement of the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore in W.P. 
Nos. 19495-19503/2009, W.P. Nos. 20289-20297/2009 connected 
with W.P. No. 21474/2009 (S-KAT) dated 28.03.2013 and the order 
dated 12.06.2009 passed in Application No. 1002/2008 and 
Application No. 2794/2008 by the Karnataka Administrative Tribunal, 
Bangalore. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.  
19.  No order as to costs.  
……..……………………………….J. 
                                         [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha] 
 
 
.………….………………………….J. 
[Aravind Kumar]   
New Delhi; 
February 22, 2024.