2024 INSC 142
Non­Reportable 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.776 OF 2024
 
Shiv Jatia
    
      … Appellant
versus
Gian Chand Malick & Ors.
… Respondents
with
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.777 OF 2024
J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.
The appellant in Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 is the
accused no.2 in the complaint filed by the 1st  respondent­
complainant   under   Section   200   of   the   Code   of   Criminal
Procedure,   1973   (for   short,   ‘the   Cr.PC’)   alleging   the
commission of offences under Sections 420, 406, 467, 468
and 472 read with Section 120­B of the Indian Penal Code,
1860 (for short, ‘the IPC’) and Section 13 of the Essential
Commodities Act, 1955.   The appellants in Criminal Appeal
no.777 of 2024 are the accused nos.1, 4 and 5 in the same
Complaint.   The   appellants   in   these   two   appeals   filed   a
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 1 of 16
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.02.23
18:02:12 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

petition under Section 482 of the Cr.PC before the High Court
of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh for quashing the said
complaint and for quashing the summoning order dated 16th
July 2013 passed on the said complaint.  The High Court, by
the impugned judgment dated 25th  August 2014, dismissed
the said petition.
2.
On 23rd September 2002, under the Liquified Petroleum
Gas   (LPG)   Distributorship   Agreement   (for   short,   ‘the
Distributorship Agreement’), the accused no.1 – M/s.Energy
Infrastructure   (India)   Limited   (for   short,   ‘the   accused
company’) appointed the 2nd  respondent­accused no.7 (Arun
Sharma,   Proprietor   of   M/s.Arshya   Max   Agencies)   as   a
distributor for distribution of LPG cylinders in the areas of
Panchkula and Chandigarh.  The 2nd respondent, on behalf of
the accused company, purported to execute a Point of Sale
agreement on 7th March 2003 (for short, ‘the POS agreement’)
by   which   he   purported   to   appoint   the   1st  Respondent­
complainant as a sales outlet (Point of Sale) in the town of
Dhanas   to   sell   MaxGas   to   the   consumers.     By   the   POS
agreement,   the   2nd  respondent   agreed   to   pay   a   flat   rate
commission   per   cylinder   sold   by   the   1st  respondent­
complainant.  A demand draft in the sum of Rs.74,900/­ was
issued   in   favour   of   the   accused   company   by   the   1st
respondent­complainant.
3.
The   accused   company   addressed   a   letter   dated   3rd
March 2004 to the 2nd respondent alleging serious lapses in
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 2 of 16

customer   services   rendered   by   the   2nd  respondent,   which
allegedly caused a big dent in the reputation of the accused
company.  Various instances of lapses in service were set out
in the said letter.  The accused company also stated that the
2nd  respondent had illegally supplied the cylinders to the 1st
respondent­complainant   beyond   the   assigned   territory   in
Punjab.  It was specifically stated in the said letter that the
name of the 1st respondent­complainant was not reflected in
the records of the accused company as a Point of Sale.  The
accused company alleged that, thus, the 2nd respondent had
committed   a   breach   of   the   Distributorship   Agreement.
Another allegation in the said letter was that a cheque issued
by the 2nd respondent had been dishonoured.  
4.
A   private   complaint   was   filed   by   the   1st  respondent­
complainant on 17th  July 2004 before the Illaqa Magistrate,
Chandigarh.  The allegation in the said complaint is that the
2nd respondent, along with accused nos.5 and 6, approached
the 1st respondent­complainant and disclosed that they were
involved in the business of manufacturing and selling LPG.
The 1st  respondent­complainant has relied upon the alleged
information   furnished   by   the   three   accused   and   their
representations.     There   is   an   allegation   that   the   accused
allured   the   1st  respondent­complainant   to   join   hands   with
them and relinquish his old venture of supplying LPG in the
market.     The   1st  respondent­complainant   alleged   in   the
complaint that while the POS agreement was executed on 7th
March 2004, he paid a sum of Rs.74,900/­ to the accused
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 3 of 16

company by way of a demand draft.   It is alleged that the
accused company encashed the said demand draft.  Further
allegation   in   the   complaint   is   that   the   1st  respondent­
complainant paid the security deposit for 360 empty cylinders
at   the   rate   of   Rs.700/­   per   cylinder   to   the   accused   and
received the cylinders/refills.   Based on the assurance that
the accused company will supply at least 600 refills against
300   empty   cylinders   in   a   month,   the   1st  respondent­
complainant made investments to purchase trucks, engage
staff, take telephone connections, etc.  The allegation is that
apart   from   the   sum   of   Rs.74,900/­,   the   1st  respondent­
complainant   paid   a   sum   of   Rs.2,10,000/­   to   the   accused
company.   It is alleged that the accused company supplied
only   250   to   300   refills   to   the   1st  respondent­complainant
against the assurance of 600 refills.  It is further alleged that
from 5th March 2004, the accused company stopped supplying
LPG refills to the 1st  respondent­complainant.   It is alleged
that the accused company did not take delivery of the empty
cylinders   and   failed   to   refund   the   security   deposit.
Notwithstanding the letter dated 17th May 2004 sent by the 1st
respondent­complainant, no action was taken by the accused
company.     Therefore,   the   allegation   is   that   the   accused
company committed a breach of trust by not refunding the
security deposit and not accepting the empty cylinders from
the 1st respondent­complainant.  It is alleged that there was a
common intention on the part of the accused company and
other   accused   to   play   fraud   upon   the   1st  respondent­
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 4 of 16

complainant.  It is alleged that due to the non­supply of refills
by the accused company, the reputation of the 1st respondent­
complainant has been adversely affected.   The appellant in
the   Criminal   Appeal   no.776   of   2024   was   arraigned   as   an
accused   in   the   capacity   of   the   Managing   Director   of   the
accused company. The 1st  appellant in the Criminal Appeal
no.777   of   2024   is   the   accused   company.   The   2nd  and   3rd
appellants have been described in the complaint as “liable
officers” of the accused company as per the averments made
in the complaint.  They are the accused nos.4 and 5.
5.
The   learned   Judicial   Magistrate,   First   Class,
Chandigarh, from 17th November 2004 onwards, recorded the
statements   of   the   1st  respondent­complainant   and   other
witnesses. After examining the witnesses, on 15th  December
2011, the learned Magistrate held that for proper adjudication
of the case, it was necessary to send the complaint to the
jurisdictional   police   station   for   investigation   in   accordance
with Section 202 of the Cr.PC.  According to the case made
out by the appellant, a report under Section 202 of the Cr.PC
was never submitted by the Police, and without waiting for
the said report, the learned Magistrate passed the summoning
order on 16th  July 2013 for the offences punishable under
Sections 420, 406, 467, 468 and 472 read with Section 120­B
of the IPC and Section 13 of the Essential Commodities Act,
1955.     By   the   impugned   judgment   and   order   dated   25th
August 2014, the High Court dismissed the quashing petition
by holding that disputed questions of fact were involved in the
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 5 of 16

petition,   which   can   be   dealt   with   only   after   recording
evidence.
SUBMISSIONS
6.
The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant
pointed   out   that   sub­section   (1)   of   Section   202   of   Cr.PC
provides that if an accused resides at a place beyond the area
where the learned Magistrate exercises his jurisdiction, the
issue of process shall be postponed by directing that a police
officer or any other person should make an investigation.  An
option is available to the learned Magistrate to inquire into
the case himself.   He submitted that from the record of the
Trial Court called for by this Court and from the affidavit filed
by  the   3rd  respondent­Union  Territory   of  Chandigarh,  it  is
established that the report under Section 202 of the Cr.PC
was not received by the Court before passing the order of
summoning.  The Police forwarded no such report.  He urged
that in view of sub­section (1) of Section 202 of the Cr.PC, as
the individual accused were admittedly residing outside the
territorial   jurisdiction   of   the   learned   Magistrate,   without
compliance   with   Section   202   of   the   Cr.PC,   the   order   of
summoning could not have been passed.  He submitted that
the three accused were the residents of New Delhi.  He, thus,
submitted that the summoning order was completely illegal.
He submitted that the accused company is a limited company
which   never   authorised   the   2nd  respondent­7th  accused   to
execute the said agreement on its behalf.  He submitted that
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 6 of 16

in any case, on the plain reading of the complaint, there is no
allegation   against  the   appellants   about  the   commission   or
omission   of   any   acts   which   constitute   any   offence.     He
submitted   that,   reading   the   complaint   as   a   whole,   it   is
apparent   that   no   case   was   made   out   to   issue   a   process
against the appellants.  He pointed out that the High Court
has not considered the case on merits.  
7.
The   learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the   1st
respondent­complainant   submitted   that   though   the   Police
report under Section 202 of the Cr.PC may not have been on
record, but it cannot be said that the Police had not prepared
any such report.   He submitted that by the Distributorship
Agreement,   the   accused   company   had   appointed   the   2nd
respondent as its distributor of LPG cylinders.  Therefore, the
2nd  respondent   was   competent   enough   to   execute   an
agreement on behalf of the accused company in favour of the
1st respondent­complainant.   He submitted that the security
deposit   amount   had   gone   to   the   account   of   the   accused
company.  He submitted that the ingredients of the offences
alleged were made out on a plain reading of the complaint.
Whether the 2nd  respondent was empowered to execute the
said agreement on behalf of the accused company can be
decided only after evidence is adduced.   He also submitted
that on a plain reading of sub­section (1) of Section 202 of the
Cr.PC,   it   was   not   necessary   for   the   learned   Magistrate   to
appoint a Police Officer to carry out the investigation.   The
learned Magistrate had the jurisdiction to conduct an inquiry
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 7 of 16

himself   as   specifically   provided   under   sub­section   (1)   of
Section 202 of the Cr.PC.   He submitted that the learned
Magistrate   recorded   the   statements   of   the   1st  respondent­
complainant and two other witnesses.   The 1st  respondent­
complainant,   also   produced   documents   in   support   of   the
complaint.  He submitted that the recording of the evidence of
three witnesses and consideration of the documents by the
learned Magistrate constitutes an inquiry under sub­section
(1) of Section 202 of the Cr.PC.  He would, therefore, submit
that the High Court has rightly held that this is a case where
the  1st  respondent­complainant,  should   be   allowed  to   lead
evidence. The issues raised by the appellant can be decided
only after the evidence is adduced.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
8.
In   this   case,   there   is   no   dispute   that   some   of   the
accused,   including   three   of   the   appellants,   were   residing
outside the territorial jurisdiction of the Court of the learned
Magistrate before whom the complaint was filed by the 1st
respondent–complainant.   Sub­section (1) of Section 202 of
the Cr.PC was amended with effect from 23rd  June 2006 by
the Act No.25 of 2005.  Sub­section (1) of Section 202 of the
Cr.PC, as amended, reads thus: 
“202.   Postponement   of   issue   of
process.—
(1)   Any   Magistrate,   on   receipt   of   a
complaint of an offence of which he is
authorised to take cognizance or which
has   been   made   over   to   him   under
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 8 of 16

section 192, may, if he thinks fit,  and
shall, in a case where the accused is
residing at a place beyond the area in
which   he   exercises   his   jurisdiction,
postpone  the   issue  of  process  against
the accused, and either inquire into the
case himself or direct an investigation to
be made by a police officer or by such
other person as he thinks fit, for the
purpose   of   deciding   whether   or   not
there   is   sufficient   ground   for
proceeding: 
Provided   that   no   such   direction   for
investigation shall be made,— 
(a) where it appears to the Magistrate
that the offence complained of is triable
exclusively by the Court of Session; or 
(b) where the complaint has not been
made   by   a   Court,   unless   the
complainant and the witnesses present
(if   any)   have   been   examined   on   oath
under section 200.”
(emphasis added)
The   portion   starting   from   “and”   and   ending   with   “his
jurisdiction” was added with effect from 23rd June 2006.  The
requirement   of   postponing   the   issue   of   the   process   was
introduced on 23rd June 2006 which is applicable only when
one of the accused stays outside the jurisdiction of the court.
The   said   requirement   is   held   to   be   mandatory.     The
mandatory requirement of postponing the issue of the process
because the accused was residing at a place beyond the area
where the learned Magistrate exercises his jurisdiction was
not applicable when the complaint was filed in 2004.   The
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 9 of 16

mandate introduced with effect from 23rd June 2006 was not
applicable on the date of filing of the complaint.  We are not
examining   whether   the   amended   provision   will   apply   to   a
complaint filed before 23rd  June 2006 in which the order of
issue of process has been passed after 23rd June 2006.  
9.
  We   may   note   here   that   when   the   order   dated   15th
December  2011, calling  for  the report  from  the concerned
Police Station under Section 202 of the Cr.PC was passed, the
learned Magistrate had already recorded the evidence of the
1st  respondent­complainant   and   two   witnesses–S.C.Mahto
(CW­1) and Rajiv Kumar (CW­3).   Therefore, after recording
the evidence of the three witnesses, the learned Magistrate
was   not   satisfied   that   the   material   on   the   record   of   the
complaint,   including   the  testimony   of   the  three  witnesses,
was sufficient to pass the summoning order.  That is why the
learned Magistrate had called for the report under Section
202 of the Cr.PC.
10.
Initially, some controversy was raised as the order dated
17th  December   2012,   passed   by   the   learned   Magistrate,
records that a report was received.  Therefore, we called for a
soft copy of the record of the complaint.  The record reveals
that the report referred to in the order dated 17th December
2012 was submitted by the Police, seeking two more months
to file the report.  It is an admitted position that on record of
the complaint, the report made by the Police under Section
202   of   the   Cr.PC   was   not   received.     In   any   case,   Shri
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 10 of 16

Kanwardeep   Kaur,   IPS,   Senior   Superintendent   of   Police,
Union Territory of Chandigarh, in the affidavit filed on 24th
October 2023, categorically stated that the Police did not file
the report under Section 202 of the Cr.PC till 16th July 2013,
when   the   summoning   order   was   issued   by   the   learned
Magistrate.
11.
After recording the evidence of the three witnesses and
perusing the documents on record, the learned Magistrate
passed the order calling for the report under Section 202 of
the Cr.PC. He postponed the issue of the process. The learned
Magistrate ought to have waited until the report was received.
He had an option of conducting an inquiry contemplated by
sub­section (1) of Section 202 of the Cr.PC himself due to the
delay on the part of the Police in submitting the report.  But,
he did not exercise the said option. For issuing the order of
summoning,   the   learned   Magistrate   could   not   have   relied
upon   the   same   material   which   was   before   him   on   15th
December   2011   when   he   passed   the   order   calling   for   the
report under Section 202 of the Cr.PC.   The reason is that,
obviously, he was not satisfied that the material was sufficient
to pass the summoning order. It is not the case of the 1st
respondent­complainant   that   when   the   learned   Magistrate
passed   the   order   dated   16th  July   2013,   there   was   some
additional   material   on   record.     At   least,   the   order   of   the
learned Magistrate does not say so.  The order does not even
consider the earlier order dated 15th  December 2011 calling
for the report under sub­section (1) of Section 202 of the
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 11 of 16

Cr.PC.  The order issuing process has drastic consequences.
Such orders require the application of mind.   Such orders
cannot   be   passed   casually.     Therefore,   in   our   view,   the
learned Magistrate was not justified in passing the order to
issue a summons. 
12.
Therefore, an order of remand is warranted. But, we
cannot overlook that the complaint subject matter of these
appeals   was   filed   on   17th  July   2004,   and   the   order   of
summoning   was   passed   nine   years   thereafter,   i.e.   on   13th
August 2013.  The complaint is nearly twenty years old; even
the   summoning   order   was   passed   eleven   years   ago.
Therefore, we allowed the learned senior counsel appearing
for the parties to address us on merits.  We may note that the
High   Court   has   not   recorded   cogent   reasons   for   not
entertaining the prayer for quashing the complaint.  The only
reason given by the High Court is that there were disputed
questions   of   fact,   and   therefore,   the   controversy   can   be
decided only after evidence is recorded. 
13.
We have perused the averments made in the complaint
and   examined   the   documents   relied   upon   by   the   1st
respondent­complainant.  
  The   first   document   is   the
Distributorship   Agreement   dated   23rd  September   2002
executed   by   the   accused   company   in   favour   of   the   2nd
respondent­Arun Sharma, in his capacity as the Proprietor of
M/s.Arshya Max Gas.  Under the said agreement, the accused
company   appointed   the   2nd  respondent   as   its   exclusive
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 12 of 16

distributor confined to the territory specified in Annexure–A to
the agreement.   The territory was limited to Panchkula and
Chandigarh.   Clause 1 of the said agreement clearly states
that   the   2nd  respondent   accepted   the   appointment   as   an
exclusive distributor of the accused company in the territory
as   defined   in   Annexure­A.     Taking   the   said   agreement   as
correct, there is no clause in the agreement which allows the
2nd  respondent to appoint anyone as a sales outlet (Point of
Sale) on behalf of the accused company.
14.
Now, we come to the POS agreement relied upon in the
complaint. A photocopy of the agreement is placed on record.
The   agreement   is   purportedly   executed   on   behalf   of   the
accused   company   by   the   2nd  respondent,   showing   his
designation   below   his   signature   as   the   Proprietor   of
M/s.Arshya Max Gas.   Admittedly, neither any Director nor
any officer of the accused company has signed the same.  The
said agreement does not contain anything to show that the
accused   company   had   authorised   the   2nd  respondent   to
execute the said agreement. There is no such recital.  In the
complaint as well as in the deposition of the 1st respondent–
complainant, it is stated that in February and March, 2003,
accused   no.7   (2nd  respondent)   and   accused   nos.4   and   5
approached   him   for   involving   him   in   their   business   and
appoint him as their Point of Sale for the area of Chandigarh
and its surroundings.  It is stated that the accused company
and   other   accused   (except   accused   no.7)   had   appointed
respondent no.7 as the sole distributor in Chandigarh.  In his
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 13 of 16

deposition, the 1st respondent­complainant stated that the 2nd
respondent provided empty cylinders to the 1st  respondent­
complainant on payment of a security deposit of Rs.700/­ per
cylinder. Thus, the empty cylinders were not provided by the
accused company. The 1st  respondent–complainant deposed
that the POS agreement was executed by the 2nd respondent–
accused   no.7,   and   he   identified   the   signature   of   the   2nd
respondent.   Only one thing is relevant in his evidence: he
claims that a demand draft of Rs.74,900/­ was issued in the
name   of   the   accused   company   and   was   encashed   by   the
accused   company.     There   is   a   specific   averment   in   the
complaint that the appellant­accused no.2 was the Managing
Director of the accused company.  Very general allegations are
made in the complaint by referring to the “accused” without
explicitly referring to any particular accused. But, the claim is
that the money was taken by the accused company and the
agreement   was   executed   in   favour   of   the   1st  respondent–
complainant by the accused company, which was signed by
the 2nd respondent, who was neither an Officer nor a Director
of the accused–company.  It is not the case in the complaint
that   the   2nd  respondent   was   authorised   by   the   Board
Resolution   of   the   accused   company   to   sign   the   POS
agreement   with   the   1st 
respondent–complainant.   The
Distributorship Agreement executed by the accused company
did   not   authorise   the   2nd  respondent   to   execute   the   POS
agreement on behalf of the company.  Moreover, it is not the
case that the 1st  respondent complainant handed over the
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 14 of 16

demand draft to any of the directors of the accused company.
It was apparently handed over to the 2nd  respondent. The
deposit of the demand draft in the account of the accused
company will, at the most, give rise to civil liability. Even the
empty   cylinders   were   provided   to   the   1st  respondent­
complainant by the 2nd  respondent against the deposit. The
accused company had no role in this. There is no contractual
relationship   between   the   accused   company   and   the   1st
respondent­complainant.
15.
In fact, the entire dispute is of a civil nature arising out
of   a   commercial   transaction.   Therefore,   in   our   considered
view, taking the complaint and documents relied upon by the
1st respondent–complainant as correct, no case was made in
the   complaint   or   in   the   evidence   of   the   1st  respondent   to
proceed against the appellants.  The evidence of CW­3 (Rajiv
Kumar) shows that he has stated that the 2nd, 5th  and 6th
respondents   in   the   Criminal   Appeal   of   accused   no.2   had
approached   the   1st 
respondent–complainant   and   had
represented that the accused company is a limited company
and   accused   nos.2   to   4   are   its   Directors.     There   is   no
allegation  that the accused company was  involved, in any
manner, with the transaction between the 2nd  accused and
the   1st  respondent–complainant.     Hence,   continuing   the
complaint against the appellants will amount to an abuse of
the process of law. Therefore, a case is made out for quashing
the complaint as against the appellants.
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 15 of 16

16.
Hence,   the   Appeals   must   succeed.     The   impugned
judgment dated 25th August 2014 is set aside insofar as the
appellants are concerned.   The complaint bearing Criminal
Complaint no.128 dated 17th July 2004 pending in the Court
of   Judicial   Magistrate,   1st  Class,   Chandigarh   is,   hereby,
quashed only insofar as the appellants are concerned.   The
complaint will proceed against the rest of the accused.  The
other accused can raise appropriate defences at the time of
framing charge or Trial.   The Appeals are partly allowed on
the above terms with no order as to costs.
                 ….…………………….J.
                  (Abhay S. Oka)
…..…………………...J.
          (Ujjal Bhuyan)
New Delhi;
February 23, 2024.
Criminal Appeal no.776 of 2024 etc.
   Page 16 of 16