2024 INSC 148
 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 1 of 44 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7257 OF 2011 
 
BHARTI CELLULAR LIMITED 
(NOW BHARTI AIRTEL LIMITED) 
 
.....  
 
APPELLANT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
  
 
ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF INCOME 
TAX, CIRCLE 57, KOLKATA AND ANOTHER 
 
.....  
 
RESPONDENTS 
 
W I T H 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2652-2653, 4949-4950 AND 4947-4948 OF 2015; 
7455 OF 2018; 111 AND 2860 OF 2021; 8902 OF 2022; 7729, 7735, 
7736, 7737, 7738, 7739, 7740, 7741, 7742, 7743, 7679, 7680, 7681, 
7682, 7744, 7745, 7746, 7747, 7748, 7848, 7849, 7852, 7853, 7854, 
7855, 7856, 7857 AND 7859 OF 2023; AND 3514, 3515, 3516 AND 3517 
OF 2024 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
SANJIV KHANNA, J. 
 
This common judgment decides the aforestated appeals 
preferred by the Revenue and the assessees, who are cellular 
mobile telephone service providers. The issue relates to the liability 
to deduct tax at source under Section 194-H of the Income Tax Act, 
19611 on the amount which, as per the Revenue, is a commission 
 
1 “The Act”, for short. 
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
Date: 2024.02.28
17:51:32 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 2 of 44 
 
payable to an agent by the assessees under the franchise/ 
distributorship agreement between the assessees and the 
franchisees/distributors. As per the assessees, neither are they 
paying a commission or brokerage to the franchisees/distributors, 
nor are the franchisees/distributors their agents. The High Courts 
of Delhi and Calcutta have held that the assessees were liable to 
deduct tax at source under Section 194-H of the Act, whereas the 
High Courts of Rajasthan, Karnataka and Bombay have held that 
Section 194-H of the Act is not attracted to the circumstances under 
consideration.  
 
2. 
To avoid prolixity and repetition, we are not referring to the facts 
and arguments in the beginning, and will preface our judgment by 
reproducing Section 194-H of the Act and explaining its contours. 
The relevant portion of Section 194-H reads as under: 
“194-H. Commission or brokerage.— Any person, not being 
an individual or a Hindu undivided family, who is responsible 
for paying, on or after the 1st day of June, 2001, to a resident, 
any income by way of commission (not being insurance 
commission referred to in Section 194-D) or brokerage, shall, 
at the time of credit of such income to the account of the payee 
or at the time of payment of such income in cash or by the 
issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is 
earlier, deduct income tax thereon at the rate of five per cent: 
 
Provided that no deduction shall be made under this section in 
a case where the amount of such income or, as the case may 
be, the aggregate of the amounts of such income credited or 
paid or likely to be credited or paid during the financial year to 
the account of, or to, the payee, does not exceed fifteen 
thousand rupees: 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 3 of 44 
 
 
Provided further that an individual or a Hindu undivided family, 
whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business 
or profession carried on by him exceed one crore rupees in 
case of business or fifty lakh rupees in case of profession 
during the financial year immediately preceding the financial 
year in which such commission or brokerage is credited or 
paid, shall be liable to deduct income tax under this section. 
 
Provided also that no deduction shall be made under this 
section on any commission or brokerage payable by Bharat 
Sanchar Nigam Limited or Mahanagar Telephone Nigam 
Limited to their public call office franchisees. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx" 
  
3. 
Section 194-H of the Act imposes the obligation to deduct tax at 
source, states that any person responsible for paying at the time of 
credit or at the time of payment, whichever is earlier, to a resident 
any income by way of commission or brokerage, shall deduct 
income tax at the prescribed rate The expression “any person (...) 
responsible for paying” is a term of art, defined vide Section 2042 of 
 
2 204. Meaning of “person responsible for paying”.—For the purposes of the foregoing provisions 
of this chapter and Section 285, the expression “person responsible for paying” means— 
(i) in the case of payments of income chargeable under the head “Salaries” other than payments by 
the Central Government or the Government of a State, the employer himself or, if the employer is a 
company, the company itself, including the principal officer thereof; 
(ii) in the case of payments of income chargeable under the head “Interest on securities” other than 
payments made by or on behalf of the Central Government or the Government of a State, the local 
authority, corporation or company, including the principal officer thereof; 
(ii-a) in the case of any sum payable to a non-resident Indian, being any sum representing 
consideration for the transfer by him of any foreign exchange asset, which is not a short-term capital 
asset, the authorised person responsible for remitting such sum to the non-resident Indian or for 
crediting such sum of his Non-resident (External) Account maintained in accordance with the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999)], and any rules made thereunder; 
(ii-b) in the case of furnishing of information relating to payment to a non-resident, not being a company, 
or to a foreign company, of any sum, whether or not chargeable under the provisions of this Act, the 
payer himself, or, if the payer is a company, the company itself including the principal officer thereof; 
(iii) in the case of credit or, as the case may be, payment of any other sum chargeable under the 
provisions of this Act, the payer himself, or, if the payer is a company, the company itself including the 
principal officer thereof. 
(iv) in the case of credit, or as the case may be, payment of any sum chargeable under the provisions 
of this Act made by or on behalf of the Central Government or the Government of a State, the drawing 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 4 of 44 
 
the Act. As per the clause (iii) of Section 204, in the case of credit 
or in the case of payment in cases not covered by clauses (i), (ii), 
(ii)(a), (ii)(b), “the person responsible for paying” is the payer 
himself, or if the payer is a company, the company itself and the 
principal officer thereof. 
 
4. 
Explanation (i) to Section 194-H3 of the Act defines the expressions 
‘commission’ or ‘brokerage’, as:  
“Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, — 
 
(i) “commission or brokerage” includes any payment received 
or receivable, directly or indirectly, by a person acting on 
behalf of another person for services rendered (not being 
professional services) or for any services in the course of 
buying or selling of goods or in relation to any transaction 
relating to any asset, valuable article or thing, not being 
securities;” 
 
 
and disbursing officer or any other person, by whatever name called, responsible for crediting, or as 
the case may be, paying such sum. 
(v) in the case of a person not resident in India, the person himself or any person authorised by such 
person or the agent of such person in India including any person treated as an agent under Section 
163.] 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “non-resident Indian” and “foreign exchange asset” shall have the meanings assigned to them in 
Chapter XII-A; 
(b) “authorised person” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (c) of Section 2 of the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999). 
3 Sub-section 1 to Section 194-H of the Act can be interpreted as requiring deduction of tax at source 
on commission and brokerage, even when the principal and agent relationship does not exist between 
the parties. Explanation (i) to Section 194-H of the Act can be read as expanding and widening the 
scope of the provision of sub-section (1) to include in the ambit of brokerage and commission, 
payments made by the principal to the agent, when covered under the four corners of the said 
explanation. We would not like to pronounce on this aspect as it has not been argued by the Revenue, 
and it appears that the requirement of relationship of principal and agent has been read into the main 
section. Further, applying common or commercial parlance meaning to the terms ‘brokerage’ or 
‘commission’, given the wide divergence in which it is understood, would lead to confusion and has 
pitfalls. Deduction of Tax provisions should be pragmatically and realistically construed, and not as 
enmeshes or by adopting catch-as-catch-can approach. When doubts exist, the Central Board of Direct 
Taxes may examine this question and may issue appropriate instructions/circular after ascertaining the 
views of assessees and other stakeholders. The decision should be clear, and we trust and hope that 
an obligation, if imposed, will be prospective. (See paragraph 34 of the judgment.) 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 5 of 44 
 
Payment is received when it is actually received or paid. The 
payment is receivable when the amount is actually credited in the 
books of the payer to the account of the payee, though the actual 
payment may take place in future. The payment received or 
receivable should be to a person acting on behalf of another 
person. The words “another person” refers to “the person 
responsible for paying”. The words “direct” or “indirect” in 
Explanation (i) to Section 194-H of the Act are with reference to the 
act of payment. Without doubt, the legislative intent to include 
“indirect” payment ensures that the net cast by the section is 
plugged and not avoided or escaped, albeit it does not dilute the 
requirement that the payment must be on behalf “the person 
responsible for paying”. This means that the payment/credit in the 
account should arise from the obligation of “the person responsible 
for paying”. The payee should be the person who has the right to 
receive the payment from “the person responsible for paying”. 
When this condition is satisfied, it does not matter if the payment is 
made “indirectly”.4 
 
 
4 We are unable to visualize ‘indirect’ credit in the books of the payer to the account of the payee. 
Credit entry is required even in cases of set-off. Nevertheless, this judgment should not be read as 
laying down that ‘indirect’ credit in the books shall not require deduction of tax under Section 194-H of 
the Act. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 6 of 44 
 
5. 
The services rendered by the agent to the principal, according to 
the latter portion of Explanation (i) to Section 194-H of the Act, 
should not be in the nature of professional services. Further, 
Explanation (i) to Section 194-H of the Act restricts application of 
Section 194-H of the Act to the services rendered by the agent to 
the principal in the course of buying and selling of goods, or in 
relation to any transaction relating to any asset, valuable article, or 
thing, not being securities. The latter portion of the Explanation (i) 
to Section 194-H of the Act is a requirement and a pre-condition. It 
should not be read as diminishing or derogating the requirement of 
the principal and agent relationship between the payer and the 
recipient/payee. 
 
6. 
 It is settled by a series of judgments of this Court that the 
expression ‘acting on behalf of another person’ postulates the 
existence of a legal relationship of principal and agent, between the 
payer and the recipient/payee.5 The law of agency is technical. 
Whether in law the relationship between the parties is that of 
principal-agent is answered by applying Section 182 of the Contract 
Act, 18726. Therefore, the obligation to deduct tax at source in terms 
of Section 194-H of the Act arises when the legal relationship of 
 
5 Singapore Airlines Ltd. and Another v. Commissioner of Income Tax, (2023) 1 SCC 497, ¶¶ 23-29. 
6 “Contract Act”, for short. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 7 of 44 
 
principal-agent is established. It is necessary to clarify this position, 
as in day to day life, the expression ‘agency’ is used to include a 
vast number of relationships, which are strictly, not relationships 
between a principal and agent.  
 
7. 
Section 182 of the Contract Act, defines the words ‘agent’ and 
‘principal’ and reads as under: 
“182. “Agent” and “principal” defined.— An “agent” is a person 
employed to do any act for another, or to represent another in 
dealings with third persons. The person for whom such act is 
done, or who is so represented, is called the “principal”.” 
 
Agency in terms of Section 182 exists when the principal 
employs another person, who is not his employee, to act or 
represent him in dealings with a third person. An agent renders 
services to the principal. The agent does what has been entrusted 
to him by the principal to do. It is the principal he represents before 
third parties, and not himself. As the transaction by the agent is on 
behalf of the principal whom the agent represents, the contract is 
between the principal and the third party. Accordingly the agent, 
except in some circumstances, is not liable to the third party. 
 
8. 
Agency is therefore a triangular relationship between the principal, 
agent and the third party. In order to understand this relationship, 
one has to examine the inter se relationship between the principal 
and the third party and the agent and the third party. When we 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 8 of 44 
 
examine whether a legal relationship of a principal and agent exists, 
the following factors/aspects should be taken into consideration: 
(a) 
The essential characteristic of an agent is the legal power 
vested with the agent to alter his principal’s legal relationship 
with a third party and the principal’s co-relative liability to have 
his relations altered.7 
(b) 
As the agent acts on behalf of the principal, one of the prime 
elements of the relationship is the exercise of a degree of 
control by the principal over the conduct of the activities of the 
agent. This degree of control is less than the control exercised 
by the master on the servant, and is different from the rights 
and obligations in case of principal to principal and 
independent contractor relationship. 
(c) 
The task entrusted by the principal to the agent should result  
in a fiduciary relationship. The fiduciary relationship is the 
manifestation of consent by one person to another to act on 
his or her behalf and subject to his or her control, and the 
reciprocal consent by the other to do so.8 
(d) 
As the business done by the agent is on the principal’s 
account, the agent is liable to render accounts thereof to the 
 
7 F.E. Dowrick, The Relationship of Principal and Agent, 17 MLR 24, 37 (1954). 
 
8 RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF AGENCY (AMERICAN LAW INSTITUTE PUBLISHERS 2007). 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 9 of 44 
 
principal. An agent is entitled to remuneration from the 
principal for the work he performs for the principal.  
 
9. 
At this stage, three other relevant aspects/considerations should be 
noted. First is the difference between ‘power’ and ‘authority’. The 
two terms though connected, are not synonymous. Authority refers 
to a factual position, that is, the terms of contract between the two 
parties. The power of the agent however, is not, strictly speaking, 
conferred by the contract or by the principal but by the law of 
agency. When a person gives authority to another person to do the 
acts which bring the law of agency into play, then, the law vests 
power with the agent to affect the principal’s legal relationship with 
the third parties. The extent and existence of the power with the 
agent is determined by public policy. The authority, as observed 
above, refers to the factual situation. The second consideration is 
that the primary task of an agent is to enter into contracts on behalf 
of his principal, or to dispose of his principal’s property. The factors 
mentioned in clauses (b) to (d) in paragraph 8 above flow, and are 
indicia of this primary task. Clauses (b) to (d) of paragraph 8 are 
useful as tests or standards to examine the true nature or character 
of the relationship. Lastly, the substance of the relationship 
between the parties, notwithstanding the nomenclature given by the 
parties to the relationship, is of primary importance. The true nature 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 10 of 44 
 
of the relationship is examined by reference to the functions, 
responsibility and obligations of the so-called agent to the principal 
and to the third parties.    
 
10. 
An agent is distinct from a servant, in that an agent is subject to less 
control than a servant, and has complete, or almost complete 
discretion as to how to perform an undertaking. As Seavey said, ‘‘a 
servant (...) is an agent under more complete control than is a non-
servant’’.9 The difference is “in the degree of control rather than in 
the acts performed. The servant sells primarily his services 
measured by time; the agent his ability to produce results.”10 This 
distinction can be criticised, for servants may have very wide 
discretion, and may not really be subject to control at all in practice, 
while agents may have their power to act circumscribed by detailed 
instructions.11 
 
11. 
This Court in Bhopal Sugar Industries Limited v. Sales Tax 
Officer, Bhopal12, has expounded the difference between 
principal-agent and principal-principal relationship, in the following 
words:- 
“5. … the essence of the matter is that in a contract of sale, 
title to the property passes on to the buyer on delivery of the 
 
9 Warren A. Seavey, The Rationale of Agency, 29 YALE L.J. 859, 866 (1920). 
10 Ibid. 
11 G.H.L. FRIDMAN, THE LAW OF AGENCY 33 (Butterworths, 7 ed. 1996). 
12 (1977) 3 SCC 147. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 11 of 44 
 
goods for a price paid or promised. Once this happens the 
buyer becomes the owner of the property and the seller has 
no vestige of title left in the property. The concept of a sale 
has, however, undergone a revolutionary change, having 
regard to the complexities of the modern times and the 
expanding needs of the society, which has made a departure 
from the doctrine of laissez faire by including a transaction 
within the fold of a sale even though the seller may by virtue of 
an agreement impose a number of restrictions on the buyer, 
e.g. fixation of price, submission of accounts, selling in a 
particular area or territory and so on. These restrictions per se 
would not convert a contract of sale into one of agency, 
because in spite of these restrictions the transaction would still 
be a sale and subject to all the incidents of a sale. A contract 
of agency, however, differs essentially from a contract of sale 
inasmuch as an agent after taking delivery of the property does 
not sell it as his own property but sells the same as the 
property of the principal and under his instructions and 
directions. Furthermore, since the agent is not the owner of the 
goods, if any loss is suffered by the agent he is to be 
indemnified by the principal. This is yet another dominant 
factor which distinguishes an agent from a buyer—pure and 
simple. In Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. 1, 4th Edn., in para 
807 at p. 485, the following observations are made: 
 
“807. Rights of agent. —The relation of principal and 
agent raises by implication a contract on the part of the 
principal to reimburse the agent in respect of all 
expenses, and to indemnify him against all liabilities, 
incurred in the reasonable performance of the agency, 
provided that such implication is not excluded by the 
express terms of the contract between them, and 
provided that such expenses and liabilities are in fact 
occasioned by his employment.” 
  
12. 
The aforesaid judgment in the context of distinction between a 
contract of sale and contract of agency observes that the agent is 
authorised to sell or buy on behalf of the principal, whereas the 
essence of contract of sale is the transfer of title of goods for the 
price paid or promised to be paid. In case of an agency to sell, the 
agent who sells them to the third parties, sells them not as his own 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 12 of 44 
 
property, but as a property of the principal, who continues to be the 
owner of the goods till the sale. The transferee is the debtor and 
liable to account for the price to be paid to the principal, and not to 
the agent for the proceeds of the sale. An agent is entitled to his fee 
or commission from the principal. 
 
13. 
This distinction and test was referred to by this Court in 
Commissioner of Income Tax, Ahmedabad and Others v. 
Ahmedabad Stamp Vendors Association13, which is a case 
relating to Section 194-H of the Act. This Court had approved the 
decision of the High Court in Ahmedabad Stamp Vendors 
Association v. Union of India14. We may also refer to two more 
decisions of this Court. In the case of Director, Prasar Bharati v. 
Commissioner of Income Tax, Thiruvananthapuram15, this 
Court has observed that the explanation appended to Section 194-
H of the Act defining the expression ‘commission or brokerage’ is 
an inclusive definition giving wide meaning to the expression 
‘commission’. The second decision is in the case of Singapore 
Airlines Limited v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi16, which 
we shall refer to subsequently in some detail as to its exact purport 
 
13 (2014) 16 SCC 114. 
14 (2002) 257 ITR 202 (Guj.). 
15 (2018) 7 SCC 800. 
16 (2023) 1 SCC 497. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 13 of 44 
 
and ratio. However, at this stage, we would like to examine in some 
detail commercial relationships in the nature of an independent 
contractor, that are legally, principal to principal dealings. 
 
14. 
The passage from Bhopal Sugar Industries Limited (supra) 
highlights the principles and the complexities involved in 
determining the correct nature of the legal relationship between a 
principal and an agent. Law permits individuals to enter into 
complex contracts incorporating multiple rights and obligations. The 
relationships 
between 
contacting 
parties 
have 
become             
multi-dimensional, 
which 
may 
not 
strictly 
fall 
within 
an             
employer-employee, 
principal-agent 
or 
principal-principal 
relationship. A singular contract may create different legal 
relationships and obligations. Independent contractors on occasion 
act for themselves, and at other times may be creating legal 
relations between their employers and third persons. For example, 
a solicitor may start by giving advice (independent contractor), and 
then as a consequence make a contract for his employer with 
another person (agent). 
 
15. 
In Labreche v. Harasymiw17, Valin J. delineated the question of 
what an agency involves, stating that: (i) it refers to the power of the 
 
17 (1992) 89 DLR (4th) 95 at 107. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 14 of 44 
 
agent to affect the principal’s position. However, this is not the sole 
test, though it still remains one of the main criteria in determining 
whether someone is an agent. There are several features in the 
definition of an agent18. There can be several situations where one 
person represents or acts for another, but this does not create the 
relationship of principal and agent. It is only when the 
representation or action on another’s behalf affects the latter’s legal 
position, that is to say his rights against, or his liability towards, 
other people, that the law of agency applies; (ii) the second feature 
is the importance of the way in which law regards the relationship 
which is created. The effect of the law is that it regulates the way in 
which parties conduct themselves. The conduct of the parties is 
considered in terms of law, regardless of the language or 
nomenclature used by the parties. The true factual position must be 
investigated to determine whether a relationship of agency has 
come into existence between a set of parties or individuals.  
 
16. 
The significant observation in the aforesaid judgment is that all 
kinds of interactions with third parties or interested parties, resulting 
from the introduction of the third parties with one who wishes a 
particular undertaking to be performed, may not be a result of an 
agency. For instance, a retail dealer or supplier of goods, obtains 
 
18 See ¶8 of the judgment. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 15 of 44 
 
goods from a wholesale supplier or a manufacturer for subsequent 
resale to retail customers or suppliers who, in turn, deals with retail 
dealers or shopkeepers. Such ‘middlemen’ are sometimes referred 
to as ‘agents’, when in fact they are franchisees of the manufacturer 
or supplier, or are distributors of the manufactures’ goods, perhaps 
with a ‘sole agency’ or special dealership for his goods. Such 
‘agents’ can be real buyers, acting as principals on their own behalf. 
Consequently, they are not liable to the manufacturer or supplier in 
the way an agent might be for failure of duty, nor do their contracts 
with other parties – whether it be suppliers, retail dealers or 
individual customers – hold the party who sold to them, liable, for 
any breach including misrepresentation or sale of defective goods. 
The seller’s contractual or tortious liability is different from the 
manufacturer’s liability on account of warranty/guarantee, statutory 
liability or even obligation to a third party who purchases the goods 
or avails services from/through the independent contractor. An 
agent renders service to the principal, who he/she represents, and 
therefore the principal, and not the agent, is liable to the third 
parties. Further, the money received by an independent contractor 
from his customers will belong to the independent contractor and 
not to the party who sold to him. The money will be a part of such 
independent contractor’s property in the event of his bankruptcy or 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 16 of 44 
 
liquidation. This may be the case even if the contract of sale is one 
of ‘sale or return’. It is important to avoid confusion, by applying the 
legal tests, that may arise where the functions of the             
‘buyer’ – described as an ‘agent’ – is really as that of a ‘middleman’, 
and the necessary elements for creation of principal and an agent 
relationship are absent. Two level commercial transaction can 
result in an tripartite arrangement/agreement with respective rights 
and obligations, without any of the two parties having             
principal-agent relationship. 
 
17. 
Clause (d) in paragraph 8 observes that the agent is liable to render 
accounts to the principal as the business done by the agent is on 
principal’s account. The agent is entitled to remuneration from the 
principal for the work he performs. To decide whether a contracting 
party acts for himself as an independent contractor, we may 
examine whether in the course of work, he intends to make profits 
for himself, or is entitled to receive prearranged remuneration. If the 
party is concerned about acting for himself and making the 
maximum profits possible, he is usually regarded as a buyer, or an 
independent contractor and not as an agent of the principal. This 
would be true even when certain terms and conditions have been 
fixed relating to the manner in which the seller conducts his 
business. We shall subsequently further elucidate on the 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 17 of 44 
 
characteristics of an independent contractor, and differentiate them 
from the principal-agent relationship.  
 
18. 
We now turn to the facts of the present case. The assessees, as 
noticed above, are cellular mobile telephone service providers in 
different circles as per the licence granted to them under Section 4 
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 188519 by the Department of 
Telecommunications20, Government of India. To carry on business, 
the assessees have to comply with the licence conditions and the 
rules and regulations of the DoT and the Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India.21 Cellular mobile telephone service providers 
have wide latitude to select the business model they wish to adopt 
in their dealings with third parties, subject to statutory compliances 
being made by the operators. As per the business model adopted 
by the telecom companies, the users can avail post-paid and 
prepaid connections. In the present case, we are only concerned 
with the business operations under the prepaid model. 
 
19. 
Under the prepaid business model, the end-users or customers are 
required to pay for services in advance, which can be done by 
purchasing recharge vouchers or top-up cards from the retailers. 
 
19 The ‘1885 Act’, for short. 
20 ‘DoT’, for short. 
21 ‘TRAI’, for short. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 18 of 44 
 
For a new prepaid connection, the customers or end-users 
purchase a kit, called a start-up pack, which contains a Subscriber 
Identification Mobile card22, commonly known as SIM card, and a 
coupon of the specified value as advance payment to avail the 
telecom services. 
 
20. 
The assessees have entered into franchise or distribution 
agreements with several parties, the terms and conditions of which 
we would refer to subsequently. It is the case of the assessees that 
they sell the start-up kits and recharge vouchers of the specified 
value at a discounted price to the franchisee/distributors. The 
discounts are given on the printed price of the packs. This discount, 
as per the assessees, is not a ‘commission or brokerage’ under 
Explanation (i) to Section 194-H of the Act. The Revenue, on the 
other hand, submits that the difference between ‘discounted price’ 
and ‘sale price’ in the hands of the franchisee/distributors being in 
the nature of ‘commission or brokerage’ is the income of the 
franchisee/ distributors, the relationship between the assessees 
and the franchisee/distributor is in the nature of principal and agent, 
and therefore, the assesses are liable to deduct tax at source under 
Section 194-H of the Act. 
 
 
22 ‘SIM card’, for short. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 19 of 44 
 
21. 
In order to decide the dispute in question, we would like to refer to 
some of the relevant clauses of the franchisee/distributor 
agreement 
between 
Bharti 
Airtel 
Limited 
and 
the 
franchisee/distributors, which read as under23: 
 
Bharti Airtel Limited 
 
“WHEREAS THE FRANCHISEE has approached BML and 
have expressed their keen desire to be one of the 
FRANCHISEE’s to undertake the job of promoting and 
marketing of Pre Paid and also other related services all 
under the brand name of “MAGIC” to the potential 
subscribers, under the terms of this Agreement. The 
FRANCHISEE has also represented that they have 
infrastructure, manpower and experience in the above area 
and they possess the financial to perform the above functions 
and such other functions as may be assigned to them by BML 
from time to time. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
A. It is expressly understood that the Agreement does not 
confer any exclusive right to the FRANCHISEE to market the 
Services nor does the Agreement gives any territorial right to 
the FRANCHISEE. The BML expressly reserves its right to 
enter into similar arrangements with other party(ies) to 
market and promote the Services and to market the Services 
directly to the customers if considered appropriate in terms of 
business exigency and market requirements. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
2.1 Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, 
BML hereby appoints Central Supply Corporation, as its 
FRANCHISEE to promote and market the Pre Paid Services 
of BML and more particularly in terms of the policies of BML 
as shall be informed by BML from time to time and the 
FRANCHISEE hereby accepts the appointment as the 
FRANCHISEE of BML. 
 
 
23 Agreements in the case of assessees Vodafone Idea Limited (formerly known as Vodafone Mobile 
Services Limited) and Idea Cellular Limited (now known as Vodafone Idea Limited) are somewhat 
different. To avoid repetition or prolixity, we are not reproducing the said clauses. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 20 of 44 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
2.3 The parties recognize that it is commercially prudent and 
desirable for the FRANCHISEE in the performance of the 
obligations under this Agreement to appointment (sic) 
Retailers/outlets for the retail promotion and marketing of Pre 
Paid services. In such an event the FRANCHISEE shall 
obtain the prior approval of BML for appointment(s) of 
Retailers/outlets, and also to the terms and conditions of such 
appointment. 
 
2.4 The FRANCHISEE acknowledges that the business of 
cellular mobile services is extremely competitive and exists 
in an ever expanding market. The FRANCHISEE agrees and 
acknowledges that during the term of this Agreement it shall 
not undertake the activities under this Agreement for any 
other provider of Cellular Mobile Telephone Services or any 
similar competitive business. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
3.1 The FRANCHISEE warrants and represents that: 
 
(a) It has all necessary statutory, regulatory and 
municipal permissions, approvals and permits for 
the running and operation of its establishment and 
for the conduct of its business, more particularly for 
the business as provided for in this Agreement. 
 
(b) It is in compliance of all laws, regulars and rules in 
the conduct of its business and the running of its 
business establishment. 
 
3.2 
The FRANCHISEE shall indemnify and keep 
indemnified BML from and against all and any costs, 
expenses and charges imposed on BML as a result of any 
action by a statutory, regulatory or municipal authority arising 
out of non-compliance by the FRANCHISEE of laws, rules or 
regulations in the running, operation and conduct of its 
business and business establishment, more particularly with 
respect to the conduct of its business provided for in this 
Agreement. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 21 of 44 
 
4.1 
The 
FRANCHISEE 
shall 
maintain 
a 
suitable 
establishment for the conduct of its business and the 
performance of its obligations under this Agreement. The 
FRANCHISEE shall use its best efforts to actively provide 
effective ways to market and promote the Pre Paid Services 
and shall always act in the interest of both BML and the 
subscribers to the Services of BML. 
 
4.2 
As covenanted for in clause 2.4, the FRANCHISEE 
shall not involve himself in any manner either directly or 
indirectly in any business or activity which is competitive with 
the business of activities of BML. The FRANCHISEE 
acknowledges that the adherence to this provision is a 
material obligation of the FRANCHISEE under this 
Agreement. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
4.4 The FRANCHISEE shall, in the conduct of its business 
and performing its obligations under this Agreement, conform 
and adhere to the policies of BML communicated to the 
FRANCHISEE from time to time. The FRANCHISEE shall not 
charge the customers of BML for the services anything more 
than the rates specified by the BML from time to time. 
 
4.5 
The 
FRANCHISEE 
shall 
employ 
adequate 
employees for performing its obligations under this 
Agreement and in the promoting and marketing of the Pre 
Paid Services. All contractual and statutory payments, 
including wages and salaries to the employees of the 
FRANCHISEE, shall be the sole liability and responsibility of 
the FRANCHISEE. 
 
4.6 
The FRANCHISEE in respect of its business 
establishment shall, if so desired by BML, in order to 
effectively project the Franchisee, make alterations, 
modifications in and install such furniture, fixture and air 
conditioning equipment, fax, computer, with internet 
connection as required necessary and mutually agreed upon 
and the cost of such alterations, renovation shall be borne 
exclusively by the FRANCHISEE. 
 
4.7 
The FRANCHISEE agrees and undertakes to 
maintain proper and sufficient quantities of the prepaid start 
up packs and recharge coupons in respect of the Pre Paid 
service in order to meet the market requirements at all times 
and in accordance with the guidelines and instructions issued 
by BML from time to time. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 22 of 44 
 
 
4.8 
The FRANCHISEE shall use its best efforts and 
endeavours to market and promote the Pre Paid Services to 
meet the growing demands of the Subscribers. At no point of 
time shall any right, title or interest pass to the FRANCHISEE 
in respect of the Pre-Paid Cards for the Pre Paid Services 
given to the subscribers for connection to the Service and all 
right, title, ownership and property rights in such cards shall 
at all times vest with BML. 
 
4.9 
The FRANCHISEE shall seek prior written approval 
from BML for its promotional literature campaign (including 
promotional material which bears the Trademarks, logos and 
trade names of BML) for the Pre Paid Services. BML will not 
share the expenditure incurred by the FRANCHISEE for such 
advertising and publicity of the Services unless agreed to 
earlier in writing. Any share of the expenditure stated above 
and the ratio for the same shall be decided by BML from time 
to time at its sole discretion. 
 
4.10 The FRANCHISEE shall be solely liable and 
responsible, at its business premises, for the safety and 
storage of all pre paid start up kits, recharge cards and other 
material in respect of the Pre Paid Services. BML shall not be 
liable for any loss, pilferage or damage to the items as stated 
here above and the FRANCHISEE shall indemnify BML from 
all loss caused to BML arising out of any loss, pilferage or 
damage to the items as stated here above. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
4.12 The liability to insure and keep insured the items as 
stated in Clause 4.10 at the business establishment of the 
FRANCHISEE shall be of the FRANCHISEE and the liability 
for any loss or damage due to any fire, burglary, theft, etc. will 
be that of the FRANCHISEE. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
4.14 The FRANCHISEE shall be responsible for collection of 
all necessary agreement/contract forms and other related 
forms, and for obtaining the signature of the customer on 
these forms. The FRANCHISEE shall forward all such forms, 
duly completed in all respects and signed by customers to 
BML for its verification and records. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 23 of 44 
 
 
5.1 From time to time, BML will review with the FRANCHISEE 
minimum subscription, targets for the Pre Paid Services, 
taking into account the market development and market 
potential and other relevant factors. The achievements of 
these prescribed targets by the FRANCHISEE is a material 
obligation of the FRANCHISEE under this Agreement. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
6.2 The FRANCISEE shall employ a fully trained service staff 
whose training has been completed in accordance with the 
standards set out by BML. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
8.1 The FRANCHISEE’s price and payment for services will 
be specified by BML from time to time. The rates are subject 
to variation during the terms of this Agreement at the sole 
discretion of BML and shall be intimated to the Distributor 
from time to time. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
8.3 
All other tax liabilities arising in connection with or out 
of 
the 
agreement 
transactions 
pertaining 
to 
the 
FRANCHISEE 
shall 
be 
the 
responsibility 
of 
the 
FRANCHISEE. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
10.1 The FRANCHISEE accepts for all purposes that all 
trademarks, logos, trade names or identifying marks and 
slogans used by BML in respect of the Service and the Pre 
Paid Services, whether registered or not, constitute the 
exclusive property of BML or their affiliated companies as the 
case may be, and cannot be used by the FRNCHISEE except 
in connection with the promotion and marketing of the 
Services of BML and that too with the express written consent 
of BML. The FRANCHISEE shall not contest, at any time, the 
right of the BML or its affiliated companies to any such 
Trademark or trade name used or claimed by BML or such 
affiliated companies in respect of the Service or Pre Paid 
Services. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 24 of 44 
 
11.2 During the term of this Agreement, the FRANCHISEE is 
authorised to use BML’s trademarks, logos and trade names 
only in connection with the FRANCHISEE’s use of such 
trademarks, logos and trade names as set out in this 
Agreement. The FRANCHISEE’s use of such trademarks, 
logos and trade names shall be in accordance with the 
guidelines issued by BML. Nothing herein shall give the 
FRANCHISEE any right, title or interest in such trademarks, 
logos or trade names, in the event of termination of this 
Agreement, however caused, the FRANCHISEE’S right to 
use such Trademarks, logos or trade names shall cease 
forthwith. The FRANCHISEE agrees not to attach any 
additional trademarks, logos or trade designation to the 
Trademarks of BML. 
 
11.3 For as long as this Agreement continues in force but not 
thereafter, the FRANCHISEE may identify itself as an 
authorised FRANCHISEE of BML, but shall not use the 
Trademarks, logos and trade names of BML as part of its 
proprietorship 
name/corporate/partnership 
name 
or 
otherwise indicate to the public that it is an affiliate of BML. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
11.5 BML shall allow the FRANCHISEE to use its logo to be 
displayed on the sign board to be placed at the 
FRANCHISEE’s outlet(s) and on the each memos and/or 
official business documents issued by the FRANCHISEE 
towards the services effected from the outlet(s). However, the 
intellectual property rights associated with Trademarks, logos 
and trade names are and shall remain the sole property of 
BML. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
14.1 BML shall not be liable to the FRANCHISEE or any other 
party by virtue of the termination of this Agreement for any 
reason whatsoever, including but not limited to any claim for 
loss of profits or compensation or prospective profits or on 
account of any expenditure, investments, leases, capital 
improvements or any other commitments made by the 
FRANCHISEE in connection with the business made in 
reliance upon or by virtue of FRANCHISEE’s appointment 
under this Agreement. It is expressly agreed that no 
compensation whatsoever shall be payable by BML to the 
FRANCHISEE upon the termination of this Agreement. 
 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 25 of 44 
 
14.2 Upon receipt of any notice of termination of this 
Agreement the FRANCHISEE shall conduct all its operations 
until the effective date of termination mentioned in such 
notice in the manner which is consistent with the obligation of 
the FRANCHISEE hereunder and the FRANCHISEE shall 
not prejudice the reputation or goodwill of BML and the 
interests of the subscribers in any manner whatsoever. 
 
14.3 Upon termination of this Agreement for any reason, the 
FRANCHISEE shall cease to represent himself as the 
authorised FRANCHISEE of BML and shall not act in a 
manner, which is likely to cause confusion or to deceive the 
public. The FRANCHISEE shall promptly remove all 
Trademarks, signs, words, trademarks (sic), logos and any 
other representations connected with BML. In the event the 
FRANCHISEE fails to comply with the above, BML shall have 
the right to enter upon the FRANCHISEE’s premises and 
remove, without liability, all Trademarks, signs, logos, 
trademarks (sic), materials written documents and any other 
representations connected with BML and the FRANCHISEE 
shall reimburse to BML all costs and expenses incurred 
thereof. 
 
14.4 In the event of termination of this Agreement, 
FRANCHISEE shall return to BML by the effective date of 
termination all advertising and promotional materials, 
marketing aids and other documents and materials received 
and all Confidential Information received under this 
Agreement. 
 
14.5 Both parties agree that goodwill created with respect to 
Service and Pre Paid Services is the exclusive property of 
BML. Any expenditure for promotion, advertising and other 
efforts by FRANCHISEE is made with the knowledge that this 
Agreement may be terminated pursuant to Article 13 hereof. 
Under no circumstance shall BML be obliged to pay to the 
FRANCHISEE upon termination of this Agreement any 
termination pay or compensation for subscriber acquisition, 
special 
indemnification, 
or 
any 
other 
termination 
compensation. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
16.1 The FRANCHISEE understands that it is an 
independently owned business entity and this Agreement 
does not make the FRANCHISEE, its employees, associates 
or agents as employees, agents or legal representatives of 
BML for any purpose whatsoever. The FRANCHISEE has no 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 26 of 44 
 
express or implied right or authority to assume or to 
undertake any obligation in respect of or on behalf of or in the 
name of BML, or to bind BML in any manner. In case, the 
FRANCHISEE, its employees, associates or agents hold out 
as employees, agents, or legal representatives of BML, the 
FRANCHISEE shall forthwith upon demand make good 
any/all loss, cost, damages, including consequential loss, 
suffered by BML on this account. 
 
16.2 It is understood that the relationship between the parties 
is solely on principal-to-principal. FRANCHISEE shall not 
acquire, by virtue of any provision of this Agreement or 
otherwise, any right, power or capacity to act as an agent or 
commercial representative of BML for any purpose 
whatsoever. Nothing contained in the contract shall be 
deemed or construed as creating a joint venture relationship 
or 
legal 
partnership 
etc. 
between 
BML 
and 
the 
FRANCHISEE. 
 
16.3 The FRANCHISEE shall not obtain/offer the pre paid 
cards and/or recharge coupons for the Pre Paid Service from 
any other source other than BML unless such permission is 
granted in writing by BML in order to meet the specific needs 
of the market and subscribers as determined by BML. 
 
xx 
xx 
Xx” 
 
 
22. 
As per the agreement, the franchisee/distributor is appointed for 
marketing of prepaid services and for appointing the retailer or 
outlets for sale promotion. It is pertinent to note that the retailers or 
outlets for sale promotion are appointed by the franchisee/ 
distributor and not the assessee. The franchisees/distributors have 
agreed not to undertake activities mentioned in the agreement for 
any other competitive cellular mobile telephone service provider in 
the business. The franchisees/distributors have to comply with 
statutory, regulatory and municipal permissions while conducting 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 27 of 44 
 
the business. The franchisees/distributors have agreed to 
indemnify and keep indemnified the assessee against any and all 
costs, expenses and charges imposed on the assessee because of 
any action by a statutory, regulatory or municipal authority due to 
non-compliance by the franchisee/distributor. The franchisee/ 
distributor has to maintain a suitable establishment for the conduct 
of business and performance of obligations. While doing so, the 
franchisee/distributor shall conform and adhere to the policies 
communicated to it from time to time by the assessee. The 
franchisee/distributor shall employ adequate employees for 
performing its obligations, and all contractual and statutory 
payments, 
including 
wages, 
are 
to 
be 
paid 
by 
the 
franchisee/distributor. The assessee can, if it so desires, call upon 
the franchisee/distributor to make alterations, modifications in 
furniture, air conditioning equipment etc., as required and 
necessary and mutually agreed. Costs of such alternations and 
distributions are to be borne by the franchisee/distributor. 
 
23. 
The franchisee/distributor has to maintain proper and sufficient 
quantities of prepaid start-up packs and recharge coupons to meet 
the market requirements. The franchisee/distributor shall follow the 
guidelines and directions issued by the assessee from time to time. 
At no point of time, the right, title, or interest in the prepaid cards 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 28 of 44 
 
shall pass on to the franchisee/distributor. All rights, title ownership 
and property rights in the cards shall rest with the assessee. The 
franchisee/distributor shall be solely responsible and liable for 
safety and storage of prepaid start-up kits, recharge cards and 
other material. The assessee will not be liable for any loss, pilferage 
or damage to the pre-paid coupons/starter-kits. The franchisee/ 
distributor is to indemnify the assessee for any loss caused on this 
account. The franchisee/distributor is to insure the prepaid start-up 
kits/ recharge coupons. The liability for any loss or damage due to 
fire, burglary, theft etc. is that of the franchisee/distributor. 
 
24. 
On termination of the agreement, the franchisee/distributor shall 
continue its operation till the effective date of termination mentioned 
in the notice. Upon termination, the franchisee/distributor is 
required to return all advertising and promotional material, etc. to 
the assessee by the effective date of termination. Further, the 
assessee is not liable to the franchisee/distributor or any other party 
for any loss of profits or compensation or prospective profits or on 
account of any expenditure, etc. in the event of termination. 
 
25. 
The assessee is to review the minimum subscriptions/targets for 
prepaid services taking into account market development and 
potential and other relevant factors. The franchisee/distributor is to 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 29 of 44 
 
employ a fully trained service staff, who have undergone training in 
accordance to the standards set out by the assessee. The 
franchisee/distributor will be responsible to collect all necessary 
agreement/contract forms and other related forms, after obtaining 
signatures of the customers on the said forms. These forms, duly 
completed in all respects and signed by the customers, will be 
forwarded to the assessee for its verification and record.  
 
26. 
The franchisee’s/distributor’s price and payment for services will be 
specified by the assessee from time to time. The rates can be varied 
during the terms of the agreement at the discretion of the assessee 
and such variation is to be intimated to the franchisee/distributor. 
All tax liabilities in connection with, or arising out of, the transactions 
pertaining to the agreement shall be the responsibility of the 
franchisee/distributor. 
 
27. 
The trademarks, logos, trade names or identifying marks and 
slogans used by the assessee, whether registered or not, are 
exclusive property of the assessee or the affiliated companies. The 
use of such marks, logos etc. will be in accordance with the 
guidelines issued by the assessee. As long as the agreement is in 
force, but not thereafter, the franchisee/distributor shall identify 
itself as an authorised franchisee, but shall not use trademarks, 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 30 of 44 
 
logos, tradenames, as part of its proprietorship name/corporate/ 
partnership name or otherwise. The franchisee/distributor is entitled 
to use its logo on the side door at its outlets and on its memos and 
official business documents towards the services effected from the 
outlet. 
 
28. 
On the question of actual business financial model adopted and 
followed, it is an admitted position that the franchisees/distributors 
were required to pay in advance the price of the welcome kit 
containing the SIM card, recharge vouchers, top-up cards, e-tops, 
etc. The abovementioned price was a discounted one. Such 
discounts were given on the price printed on the pack of the prepaid 
service products. The franchisee/distributor paid the discounted 
price regardless of, and even before, the prepaid products being 
sold and transferred to the retailers or the actual consumer. The 
franchisee/distributor was free to sell the prepaid products at any 
price below the price printed on the pack. The franchisee/distributor 
determined his profits/income. 
 
29. 
The Revenue has highlighted that the prepaid SIM cards were not 
the property of franchisee/distribution and no right, title or interest 
was transferred to them. These were always to remain the property 
of the assessee. This is correct, but it is equally true that this is a 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 31 of 44 
 
mandate and requirement of the licence issued to the assessee by 
the DoT. In actual practice, the right to use the SIM card and its 
possession is handed over and given to the end-user, that is, the 
customer who installs the SIM card in his phone to avail the 
telecommunication services. Similarly, the franchisees/distributors 
are to ensure that the post-paid customers/end-users fill up the form 
as prescribed along with the documents which are given and 
submitted to the assessee. These are mandates prescribed by the 
licence issued by the DoT to the assessees. The contractual 
obligations of the distributors/franchisees, do not reflect a fiduciary 
character of the relationship, or the business being done on the 
principal’s account.    
 
30. 
The franchisees/distributors earn their income when they sell the 
prepaid products to the retailer or the end-user/customer. Their 
profit consists of the difference between the sale price received by 
them from the retailer/end-user/customer and the discounted price 
at which they have ‘acquired’ the product. Though the discounted 
price is fixed or negotiated between the assessee and the 
franchisee/distributor, the sale price received by the franchisee/ 
distributor is within the sole discretion of the franchisee/distributor. 
The assessee has no say in this matter. 
 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 32 of 44 
 
31. 
It is not the case of the Revenue that the tax at source under 
Section 194-H of the Act is to be deducted on the difference 
between the printed price and the discounted price. This cannot be 
the 
case 
as 
the 
Revenue 
cannot 
insist 
that 
the 
franchisee/distributor must sell the products at the printed price and 
not at a figure or price below the printed price. The obligation to 
deduct tax at source is fixed by the statute itself, that is, on the date 
of actual payment by any mode, or at the time when income is 
credited to the account of the franchisee/distributor, whichever is 
earlier. In the context of the present case, the income of the 
franchisee/distributor, being the difference between the sale price 
received by the franchisee/distributor and the discounted price, is 
paid or credited to the account of the franchisee/distributor when he 
sells the prepaid product to the retailer/end-user/customer. The 
sale price and accordingly the income of the franchisee/distributor 
is determined by the franchisee/distributor and the third parties. 
Accordingly, the assessee does not, at any stage, either pay or 
credit the account of the franchisee/distributor with the income by 
way of commission or brokerage on which tax at source under 
Section 194-H of the Act is to be deducted. 
 
32. 
Faced with the above situation, the Revenue has relied upon the 
use of the expression “payment received or receivable directly or 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 33 of 44 
 
indirectly by a person acting on behalf of the other person”, that is, 
‘the principal’. It is argued that even if the franchisee/distributor 
receives 
payment 
in 
the 
form 
of 
income 
from 
the             
retailer/end-user/customer, it would require deduction of tax at 
source as payment received or receivable, directly or indirectly, is 
to be subjected to deduction of tax. In support of the argument, 
reliance is placed upon decision in the case of Singapore Airlines 
Limited (supra).  
 
33. 
The decision in Singapore Airlines Limited (supra) is required to 
be understood in the context of the contract in the said case, which 
was in terms of the rules/agreement set up by the International 
Airport Transport Association24. IATA would fix a ceiling price, and 
the price an airline could charge from its customers with a discretion 
to the airlines to sell their tickets at a net fare lower than the base 
fare but not higher. The air carriers were required to furnish a fare 
list to the Director General of Civil Aviation. The arrangement 
between the airlines and travel agents was covered by the 
Passenger Sales Agency Agreement25, which would set out the 
conditions under which the travel agent carried out sale of tickets 
along with other ancillary services. The travel agents were entitled 
 
24 ‘IATA’, for short. 
25 ‘PSA’, for short. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 34 of 44 
 
to 7% commission on sale of the tickets for its services as the 
standard commission based on the price bar set by the IATA. The 
airlines were deducting tax at source under Section 194-H of the 
Act on the 7% commission. In addition to the 7% commission, the 
travel agents were also entitled to additional/supplementary 
commission 
on 
the 
tickets 
sold 
by 
them. 
The 
additional/supplementary commission and the amount at which the 
tickets were sold were computed by the travel agents and 
transmitted to the billing and settlement plan (BSP). The BSP, 
functioning under the aegis of the IATA, managed, inter alia, 
logistics vis-à-vis payments, and acted as a forum for agents and 
airlines to examine details pertaining to the sale of the flight tickets.  
 
33.1 This Court examined the operation of the BSP where the financial 
data regarding sale of tickets was stored. The BSP agglomerated 
the data from multiple transactions. Thereupon, this data was 
transmitted either bimonthly or twice a month to the airlines. It is on 
the basis of this data that the airlines/air carriers were required to 
pay the additional commission to the travel agents. These are the 
striking distinguishing features in Singapore Airlines Limited 
(supra) case. 
 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 35 of 44 
 
33.2 Having considered the aforesaid mechanism and the nature of 
relationship between a principal and an agent26, this Court found 
considerable merit in the argument of the Revenue that the airlines/ 
air carriers utilised the BSP to discern the amount earned as 
additional/supplementary commission and accordingly arrive at the 
income earned by the agent to deduct tax at source, in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 194-H of the Act. If the aforesaid 
mechanism is understood, then it is not difficult to appreciate and 
understand the conclusion arrived at by this Court in the said case. 
 
33.3  Thus, the question whether there was relationship of principal and 
agent was not in dispute, but nevertheless the assessees in the 
said case disputed liability to deduct tax at source on the 
additional/supplementary commission. However, the judgment 
does refer to the difference between the legal relationship of master 
and servant, principal and agent, and between principal and 
principal. In this context, reference is made to the statement of law 
in Halsbury’s Law of England27, which reads: 
“The difference between the relations of master and servant 
and of principal and agent may be said to be this: a principal 
has the right to direct what work the agent has to do: but a 
master has the further right to direct how the work is to be 
done.” 
 
 
26 As stated above the airlines were deducting tax at source under Section 194-H on the 7% 
commission (standard commission). The dispute only related to whether the airlines were liable to 
deduct tax at source on the additional commission (supplementary commission). 
27 Vol. 22, p. 113, ¶ 192 and Vol. 1, at p. 193, Article 345. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 36 of 44 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
“An agent is to be distinguished on the one hand from a 
servant, and on the other from an independent contractor. A 
servant acts under the direct control and supervision of his 
master, and is bound to conform to all reasonable orders given 
him in the course of his work; an independent contractor, on 
the other hand, is entirely independent of any control or 
interference and merely undertakes to produce a specified 
result, employing his own means to produce that result. An 
agent, though bound to exercise his authority in accordance 
with all lawful instructions which may be given to him from time 
to time by his principal, is not subject in its exercise to the direct 
control or supervision of the principal. An agent, as such is not 
a servant, but a servant is generally for some purposes his 
master's implied agent, the extent of the agency depending 
upon the duties or position of the servant.” 
 
34. 
We have already expounded on the main provision of             
Section 194-H of the Act, which fixes the liability to deduct tax at 
source on the ‘person responsible to pay’ –  an expression which is 
a term of art – as defined in Section 204 of the Act and the liability 
to deduct tax at source arises when the income is credited or paid 
by the person responsible for paying.28 The expression “direct or 
indirect” used in Explanation (i) to Section 194-H of the Act is no 
doubt meant to ensure that “the person responsible for paying” 
does not dodge the obligation to deduct tax at source, even when 
the payment is indirectly made by the principal-payer to the agent-
payee. However, deduction of tax at source in terms of Section    
194-H of the Act is not to be extended and widened in ambit to apply 
to true/genuine business transactions, where the assessee is not 
 
28 See ¶ 5 of the judgment. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 37 of 44 
 
the person responsible for paying or crediting income. In the 
present case, the assessees neither pay nor credit any income to 
the person with whom he has contracted. Explanation (i) to Section 
194-H of the Act, by using the word “indirectly”, does not regulate 
or curtail the manner in which the assessee can conduct business 
and enter into commercial relationships. Neither does the word 
“indirectly” create an obligation where the main provision does not 
apply. The tax legislation recognises diverse relationships and 
modes in which commerce and trade are conducted, albeit 
obligation to tax at source arises only if the conditions as mentioned 
in Section 194-H of the Act are met and not otherwise. This principle 
does not negate the compliance required by law.  
 
35. 
Deduction of tax at source is a substantial source of the direct tax 
revenue. The ease of collection and recovery is obvious. Deduction 
and deposit of tax at source checks evasion and non-payment of 
tax. It expands the tax base.  However, the assessee as a deductor 
is not paying tax on his/her income, and collects and pays tax 
otherwise payable by the third party. Liability of the third party to 
pay tax when not deducted remains unaffected. Failure to deduct 
tax at source has serious and quasi-penal consequences for an 
assessee. 
The 
deduction 
of 
tax 
provisions 
should 
be 
programmatically and realistically construed, and not as enmeshes 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 38 of 44 
 
or by adopting catch-as-catch-can approach. In case of a legal or 
factual doubt in a given case, the assessee can rely on the doctrine 
of presumption against doubtful penalisation.29  Whether or not the 
said doctrine should be applied30, will depend on facts and 
circumstances of the case, including the past practice followed by 
the assessee and accepted by the department. When there is 
apparent divergence of opinion, to avoid litigation and pitfalls 
associated, it may be advisable for the Central Board of Direct 
Taxes to clarify doubts by issuing appropriate instruction/circular 
after ascertaining view of the assesses and stakeholders.31 In 
addition to enhancing revenue and ensuring tax compliance, an 
equally important aim/objective of the Revenue is to reduce 
litigation. The instructions/circular, if and when issued, should be 
clear, and when justified – require the obligation to be made 
prospective.   
 
36. 
Notably, the Delhi High Court in Commissioner of Income Tax v. 
Singapore Airlines Ltd.32 had held that tax under Section 194-H 
 
29 See Securities and Exchange Board of India v. Sunil Krishna Khaitan and Others, (2023) 2 SCC 
643. However, in the present case doctrine of presumption against doubtful penalisation is not 
applicable. The assessees were earlier deducting tax at source under Section 194-H of the Act, though 
the amount on which tax was being deducted is unclear. On legal opinion they stopped deducting tax 
at source.   
30 This would include the question of prospective or retrospective application. 
31 We do acknowledge that the Central Board of Direct Taxes has on several occasions quelled doubts 
and issued instructions/circulars.  
32 (2009) 319 ITR 29. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 39 of 44 
 
of the Act is not required to be deducted on the discounted tickets 
sold by the airlines/air carriers through travel agents. Revenue did 
not challenge the decision of the Delhi High Court to this extent and 
therefore, this dictum attained finality. As noted, it is not the case of 
the Revenue that tax is to be deducted when payment is made by 
the distributors/franchisees to the mobile service providers. It is also 
not the case of the revenue that tax is to be deducted under Section 
194-H of the Act on the difference between the maximum retail 
price income of the distributors/ franchisees and the price paid by 
the distributors/franchisees to the assessees. The assessees are 
not privy to the transactions between distributors/franchisees and 
third parties. It is, therefore, impossible for the assessees to deduct 
tax at source and comply with Section 194-H of the Act, on the 
difference between the total/sum consideration received by the 
istributors/ franchisees from third parties and the amount paid by 
the distributors/ franchisees to them.  
 
37. 
The argument of the Revenue that assessees should periodically 
ask for this information/data and thereupon deduct tax at source 
should be rejected as far-fetched, imposing unfair obligation and 
inconveniencing the assesses, beyond the statutory mandate. 
Further, it will be willy-nilly impossible to deduct, as well as make 
payment of the tax deducted, within the timelines prescribed by law, 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 40 of 44 
 
as these begin when the amount is credited in the account of the 
payee by the payer or when payment is received by the payee, 
whichever is earlier. The payee receives payment when the third 
party makes the payment. This payment is not the payment 
received or payable by the assessee as the principal. The 
distributor/franchisee is not the trustee who is to account for this 
payment to the assessee as the principal. The payment received is 
the gross income or profit earned by the distributor/franchisee. It is 
the income earned by distributor/ franchisee as a result of its efforts 
and work, and not a remuneration paid by the assessee as a cellular 
mobile telephone service provider. 
 
38. 
We must, therefore, reject the argument of the Revenue relying 
upon the decision of this Court in Singapore Airlines Limited 
(supra) that assessees would be liable to deduct tax at source even 
if the assessees are not making payment or crediting the income to 
the account of the franchisee/distributor. When the obligation, and 
the time and manner in which the tax is mandated by law to be 
deducted at source, is fixed by the statute, the same cannot be 
shifted/altered/modified or postponed on a concession in the court 
by the Revenue. The concession may be granted, when 
permissible, by way of a circular issued in accordance with Section 
119 of the Act.  We do not think that the decision in Singapore 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 41 of 44 
 
Airlines Limited (supra) can be read in the manner as suggested 
by the Revenue. 
 
39. 
Coming back to the legal position of a distributor, it is to be generally 
regarded as different form that of an agent. The distributor buys 
goods on his account and sells them in his territory. The profit made 
is the margin of difference between the purchase price and the sale 
price. The reason is, that the distributor in such cases is an 
independent contractor. Unlike an agent, he does not act as a 
communicator or creator of a relationship between the principal and 
a third party. The distributor has rights of distribution and is akin to 
a franchisee. Franchise agreements are normally considered as sui 
generis, though they have been in existence for some time. 
Franchise agreements provide a mechanism whereby goods and 
services may be distributed. In franchise agreements, the supplier 
or the manufacture, i.e. a franchisor, appoints an independent 
enterprise as a franchisee through whom the franchisor supplies 
certain goods or services. There is a close relationship between a 
franchisor and a franchisee because a franchisee’s operations are 
closely regulated, and this possibly is a distinction between a 
franchise agreement and a distributorship agreement. Franchise 
agreements are extremely detailed and complex. They may relate 
to distribution franchises, service franchises and production 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 42 of 44 
 
franchises. Notwithstanding the strict restrictions placed on the 
franchisees – which may require the franchisee to sell only the 
franchised goods, operate in a specific location, maintain premises 
which are required to comply with certain requirements, and even 
sell according to specified prices – the relationship may in a given 
case be that of an independent contractor. Facts of each case and 
the authority given by ‘principal’ to the franchisees matter and are 
determinative. 
 
40. 
An independent contractor is free from control on the part of his 
employer, and is only subject to the terms of his contract. But an 
agent is not completely free from control, and the relationship to the 
extent of tasks entrusted by the principal to the agent are fiduciary. 
As contract with an independent agent depends upon the terms of 
the contract, sometimes an independent contractor looks like an 
agent from the point of view of the control exercisable over him, but 
on an overview of the entire relationship the tests specified in 
clauses (a) to (d) in paragraph 8 may not be satisfied. The 
distinction is that independent contractors work for themselves, 
even when they are employed for the purpose of creating 
contractual relations with the third persons. An independent 
contractor is not required to render accounts of the business, as it 
belongs to him and not his employer. 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 43 of 44 
 
 
41. 
Thus, the term ‘agent’ denotes a relationship that is very different 
from that existing between a master and his servant, or between a 
principal and principal, or between an employer and his 
independent contractor. Although servants and independent 
contractors are parties to relationships in which one person acts for 
another, and thereby possesses the capacity to involve them in 
liability, yet the nature of the relationship and the kind of acts in 
question are sufficiently different to justify the exclusion of servants 
and independent contractors from the law relating to agency. In 
other words, the term ‘agent’ should be restricted to one who has 
the power of affecting the legal position of his principal by the 
making of contracts, or the disposition of the principal’s property; 
viz. an independent contractor who may, incidentally, also affect the 
legal position of his principal in other ways. This can be ascertained 
by referring to and examining the indicia mentioned in clauses (a) 
to (d) in paragraph 8 of this judgment. It is in the restricted sense in 
which the term agent is used in Explanation (i) to Section 194-H of 
the Act. 
 
42. 
In view of the aforesaid discussion, we hold that the assessees 
would not be under a legal obligation to deduct tax at source on the 
income/profit component in the payments received by the 

 
 
Civil Appeal No. 7257 of 2011 & Ors. 
 
Page 44 of 44 
 
distributors/franchisees from the third parties/customers, or while 
selling/transferring the pre-paid coupons or starter-kits to the 
distributors. Section 194-H of the Act is not applicable to the facts 
and circumstances of this case. Accordingly, the appeals filed by 
the assessee – cellular mobile service providers, challenging the 
judgments of the High Courts of Delhi and Calcutta are allowed and 
these judgments are set aside. The appeals filed by the Revenue 
challenging the judgments of High Courts of Rajasthan, Karnataka 
and Bombay are dismissed. There would be no orders as to cost. 
Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
......................................J. 
(SANJIV KHANNA) 
 
 
 
......................................J. 
(S.V.N. BHATTI) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
FEBRUARY 28, 2024.