2024 INSC 151
Page 1 of 15 
 
REPORTABLE  
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2886 OF 2012 
 
 
BASAVARAJ 
 
 
 
 
                 
 
…  Appellant(s) 
 
VERSUS 
 
INDIRA AND OTHERS 
 
 
 
 
        … Respondent(s) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
Rajesh Bindal, J. 
 
1. 
    
Vide impugned order1 passed by the High Court2, an 
application filed by respondents No. 1 and 2/plaintiffs for amendment of 
the plaint was allowed subject to costs of ₹2,000/-.   
2.  
 
Briefly, the facts available on record are that respondents No. 
1 and 2 filed a suit3 for partition of the ancestral property belonging to 
their grand father pleading that no actual partition of the property has 
 
1 Order dated 18.08.2010 passed in W.P. No. 82086 of 2010 
2 High Court of Karnataka, Circuit Bench at Gulbarga 
3 Original Suit No. 151 of 2005 
Digitally signed by Dr.
Naveen Rawal
Date: 2024.02.29
16:04:04 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 15 
 
ever taken place. When the suit was at the fag end, an application was 
filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 seeking amendment of the plaint. The 
amendment sought was to add prayer in the suit for a declaration that an 
earlier compromise decree dated 14.10.2004 was null and void. As prayer 
was not made earlier, the court fee required thereon was also sought to 
be affixed. The ground on which the amendment was sought was that due 
to oversight and mistake, the respondents No. 1 and 2/plaintiffs were 
unable to seek the relief of declaration. No prejudice as such would be 
caused to the defendants as limited relief is for fair partition of the 
ancestral property. The Trial Court4 dismissed the application. However, 
when the order5 was challenged before the High Court, the same was set 
aside and the amendment prayed for by the plaintiffs was allowed subject 
to payment of costs. 
3. 
 
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that in the case in 
hand, there was a family partition in Original Suit No. 401 of 2003 filed by 
Smt. Mahadevi and Smt. Sharnamma, wife and daughter-in-law 
respectively of defendant No.1/Shivasharnappa, impleading the plaintiffs 
and the defendants as party. A compromise decree dated 14.10.2004 was 
 
4 First Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division) at Gulbarga 
5 Order dated 31.05.2010 

Page 3 of 15 
 
passed by the Lok Adalat, District Legal Services Authority, Gulbarga. 
Thereafter, respondents No. 1 and 2 filed a fresh suit in 2005 seeking 
partition of the ancestral property. Though in the suit pleading was there 
with reference to the earlier compromise decree, however for the reasons 
best known to the plaintiffs, no challenge was made to the same. As a 
result of the order passed by the High Court, the nature of the suit was 
changed from partition to declaration, which is impermissible.  
3.1   
Further in terms of proviso to Order VI Rule 17 CPC, no 
amendment could be allowed after commencement of the trial. In the case 
in hand, the suit was at the fag end, as fixed for arguments. 
3.2   
It was further submitted that the compromise decree was 
passed on 14.10.2004. In terms of the provisions of Order XXIII Rule 3 
CPC, the same could be challenged only before the same Court and not 
before any other Court.  
3.3 
 
He further contended that there was a specific stand taken by 
the appellant/defendant No. 2 in the written statement that there being a 
compromise decree in existence, no relief may be admissible to 
respondents No. 1 and 2, unless that decree is challenged. The written 
statement was filed in August 2005, still no steps taken by the respondents 

Page 4 of 15 
 
No. 1 and 2 in that direction. Part of the suit property having been sold, an 
amendment was carried out in the plaint in July 2006 to implead the 
subsequent purchaser. Even at that stage, this relief was not sought. 
3.4 
 
It was further contended that the relief of declaration of 
compromise decree being null and void prayed for by way of amendment 
otherwise also was time barred as the compromise decree was passed on 
14.10.2004. The application for amendment was filed on 08.02.2010. Even 
the court fee was sought to be affixed at the time of filing of application 
for amendment.  
3.5   
The application filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 did not meet 
the pre-conditions laid down in Order VI Rule 17 CPC for permitting 
respondents No. 1 and 2 to amend the pleadings at the fag end of the trial. 
No due diligence was pleaded. All what was stated was that there was 
oversight on the part of respondents No. 1 and 2/plaintiffs.  
3.6 
 
Referring to the parties who were there in the compromise 
decree, it was argued that some of them are not parties in the suit in 
question, hence otherwise also challenge to the compromise decree may 
not be maintainable.  

Page 5 of 15 
 
3.7   
In support of the arguments, reliance was placed upon the 
judgments of this Court in Revajeetu Builders and Developers v. 
Narayanaswamy and sons and others6  and Vidyabai and others v. 
Padmalatha and another7 
4. 
 
In response, learned counsel for respondents No. 1 and 2 
submitted that it was merely an oversight mistake which occurred at the 
time of filing of the suit and at the subsequent stage for which the 
amendment was prayed for by respondents No. 1 and 2. It is not a case 
where the pleadings to that effect are not available on record.  
Respondents No. 1 and 2 had fairly pleaded about the earlier compromise 
decree. Inadvertently, the prayer for declaration thereof as null and void 
could not be made. The court fee also could not be deposited. No fresh 
evidence is to be led. The case is at the arguments stage. The same can 
be argued with mere re-framing of the issues. It will avoid multiplicity of 
litigation and ultimately complete justice will be done amongst the 
parties, who are merely praying for partition of the ancestral property. 
The other side can be compensated with costs, as was even done by the 
High Court. No prejudice as such will be caused to the appellant. 
 
6 (2009) 10 SCC 84 
7 (2009) 2 SCC  409 

Page 6 of 15 
 
Substantial justice will be done to the parties. In support of the arguments, 
reliance was placed upon a judgment of this Court in Dondapati 
Narayana Reddy v. Duggireddy Venkatanarayana Reddy and others8  
and Estralla Rubber v. Dass Estate (P) Ltd.9 
5. 
 
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the 
relevant referred record. 
6. 
 
It is a case in which the appellant has been forced into 
avoidable unnecessary litigation to rush to this Court. The suit was filed 
by respondents No. 1 and 2 in 2005 seeking partition of the ancestral 
property. It was specifically pleaded in the suit that there was a 
compromise decree between the parties. However, as may be the advice 
to respondents No. 1 and 2, despite there being a compromise decree 
existing between the parties, no prayer was made in the suit with 
reference thereto, if any grievance was there. It remained simpliciter a 
suit for partition. A specific stand was taken by the appellant in the written 
statement to the effect that the suit is not maintainable unless cancellation 
of the compromise decree is prayed for as the same would operate as res-
judicata. The written statement was filed in August 2005. Despite the 
 
8 (2001) 8 SCC 115 
9 (2001) 8 SCC 97 

Page 7 of 15 
 
specific pleading of the appellant, the respondents No. 1 and 2 did not 
take any steps.  
6.1.   
During the pendency of the suit, an amendment was carried 
out by respondents No. 1 and 2 to implead respondent No. 4 in the suit 
who was the purchaser of a part of the suit property. The same was 
allowed on 01.07.2006. Thereafter, trial of the suit continued. When it 
reached at the stage of arguments in February 2010 an application was 
filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 seeking amendment of the plaint. The 
reasons assigned to file the belated application seeking amendment of 
the plaint were that due to oversight and by mistake, the respondents 
No.1 and 2 failed to seek relief of declaration of the compromise decree 
being null and void and were unable to deposit the court fee.  
7. 
 
The law with reference to challenge to a compromise decree 
is well settled. It was opined in Pushpa Devi Bhagat (Dead) through 
L.R. Sadhna Rai (Smt.) v. Rajinder Singh and others10  that (i) appeal 
is not maintainable against a consent decree; (ii) no separate suit can be 
filed; (iii) consent decree operates as an estoppel and binding unless it is 
set aside by the court by an order on an application under the proviso to 
 
10 (2006) 5 SCC 566 

Page 8 of 15 
 
Order XXIII Rule 3 C.P.C.; and (iv) the only remedy available to a party to 
a consent decree is to approach the Court which recorded the 
compromise as it was opined to be nothing else but a contract between 
the parties superimposed with the seal of approval of the Court. Relevant 
part of paragraph No. 17 thereof is extracted below: 
“17.  
The position that emerges from the amended 
provisions of Order 23 can be summed up thus: 
(i) No appeal is maintainable against a consent 
decree having regard to the specific bar contained 
in section 96(3) CPC.  
(ii) No appeal is maintainable against the order of 
the court recording the compromise (or refusing to 
record a compromise) in view of the deletion of 
clause (m) Rule 1 Order 43.  
(iii) No independent suit can be filed for setting 
aside a compromise decree on the ground that the 
compromise was not lawful in view of the bar 
contained in Rule 3A.  

Page 9 of 15 
 
(iv) A consent decree operates as an estoppel and is 
valid and binding unless it is set aside by the court 
which passed the consent decree, by an order on an 
application under the proviso to Rule 3 of Order 23. 
 Therefore, the only remedy available to a party to a 
consent decree to avoid such consent decree, is to 
approach the court which recorded the compromise and 
made a decree in terms of it, and establish that there was 
no compromise. In that event, the court which recorded 
the compromise will itself consider and decide the 
question as to whether there was a valid compromise or 
not. This is so because a consent decree, is nothing but 
contract between parties superimposed with the seal of 
approval of the court. The validity of a consent decree 
depends wholly on the validity of the agreement or 
compromise on which it is made…” 
8. 
 
Proviso to Order VI Rule 17 CPC provides that no application 
for amendment shall be allowed after the trial has commenced, unless the 
Court comes to the conclusion that in spite of due diligence, the party 

Page 10 of 15 
 
could not have raised the matter before the commencement of trial.  In 
the case in hand, this is not even the pleaded case of respondents No. 1 
and 2 before the Trial Court in the application for amendment that due 
diligence was there at the time of filing of the suit in not seeking relief 
prayed for by way of amendment. All what was pleaded was oversight. 
The same cannot be accepted as a ground to allow any amendment in the 
pleadings at the fag end of the trial especially when admittedly the facts 
were in knowledge of the respondents No. 1 and 2/plaintiffs. 
8.1.  
The relevant paragraphs of the application seeking 
amendment of the plaint are reproduced hereunder: 
 “2. 
That, due to over sight and by mistake the Plaintiff was 
unable to sought relief declaration of decree as null and void 
and unable to pay required court fee some unavoidable 
circumstances and the proposed amendment is very essential 
for deciding the matter in dispute. 
 3. 
xxx 
 4. 
That, if the proposed amendment is allowed no 
prejudice will be cause to the other side, on the other hand if 
it is not allowed then the deponent will be put to great loss and 

Page 11 of 15 
 
will also leads multiplicity of litigation’s. Hence it is just and 
proper to allow the proposed amendment to meet the ends of 
justice.”(sic) 
9. 
 
This Court in M. Revanna v. Anjanamma (Dead) by legal 
representatives and others11 opined that an application for amendment 
may be rejected if it seeks to introduce totally different, new and 
inconsistent case or changes the fundamental character of the suit. Order 
VI Rule 17 C.P.C. prevents an application for amendment after the trial 
has commenced unless the Court comes to the conclusion that despite 
due diligence the party could not have raised the issue. The burden is on 
the party seeking amendment after commencement of trial to show that in 
spite of due diligence such amendment could not be sought earlier. It is 
not a matter of right. Paragraph No. 7 thereof is extracted below: 
“7. 
Leave to amend may be refused if it introduces a 
totally different, new and inconsistent case, or challenges 
the fundamental character of the suit. The proviso to 
Order 6 Rule 17 CPC virtually prevents an application for 
amendment of pleadings from being allowed after the 
 
11 (2019) 4 SCC 332 

Page 12 of 15 
 
trial has commenced, unless the court comes to the 
conclusion that in spite of due diligence, the party could 
not have raised the matter before the commencement of 
the trial. The proviso, to an extent, curtails absolute 
discretion to allow amendment at any stage. Therefore, 
the burden is on the person who seeks an amendment 
after commencement of the trial to show that in spite of 
due diligence, such an amendment could not have been 
sought earlier. There cannot be any dispute that an 
amendment cannot be claimed as a matter of right, and 
under all circumstances. Though normally amendments 
are allowed in the pleadings to avoid multiplicity of 
litigation, the court needs to take into consideration 
whether the application for amendment is bona fide or 
mala fide and whether the amendment causes such 
prejudice to the other side which cannot be compensated 
adequately in terms of money.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 

Page 13 of 15 
 
10. 
 
Initially, the suit was filed for partition and separate 
possession. By way of amendment, relief of declaration of the 
compromise decree being null and void was also sought. The same would 
certainly change the nature of the suit, which may be impermissible.  
 11.  
This Court in Revajeetu’s case (supra) enumerated the factors 
to be taken into consideration by the court while dealing with an 
application for amendment. One of the important factor is as to whether 
the amendment would cause prejudice to the other side or it 
fundamentally changes the nature and character of the case or a fresh suit 
on the amended claim would be barred on the date of filing the 
application. 
12. 
 
If the amendment is allowed in the case in hand, certainly 
prejudice will be caused to the appellant. This is one of the important 
factors to be seen at the time of consideration of any application for 
amendment of pleadings. Any right accrued to the opposite party cannot 
be taken away on account of delay in filing the application.  
12.1  
In the case in hand, the compromise decree was passed on 
14.10.2004 in which the plaintiffs were party. The application for 
amendment of the plaint was filed on 08.02.2010 i.e. 5 years and 03 

Page 14 of 15 
 
months after passing of the compromise decree, which is sought to be 
challenged by way of amendment. The limitation for challenging any 
decree is three years (Reference can be made to Article 59 in Part-IV of 
the Schedule attached to the Limitation Act, 1963). A fresh suit to 
challenge the same may not be maintainable. Meaning thereby, the relief 
sought by way of amendment was time barred. As with the passage of 
time, right had accrued in favour of the appellant with reference to 
challenge to the compromise decree, the same cannot be taken away. In 
case the amendment in the plaint is allowed, this will certainly cause 
prejudice to the appellant. What cannot be done directly, cannot be 
allowed to be done indirectly. 
13. 
 
Further, a perusal of the memo of parties in the suit in question 
and in the compromise decree shows that the plaintiffs i.e. Sharnamma @ 
Mahananda wife of Basvaraj and Mahadevi wife of Shivsharnappa Nasi in 
Original Suit No. 401 of 2003 are not party to the present litigation. Even 
if on any ground the amendment could be permitted, still no relief could 
be claimed with reference to setting aside of the compromise decree as 
all the parties thereto were not before the Court in the  suit in question. 

Page 15 of 15 
 
14. 
 
For the reasons mentioned above, the present appeal is 
allowed. The impugned order passed by the High Court is set aside. The 
application filed for amendment of the plaint is dismissed. The appellant 
shall be entitled to cost of the proceedings, which are assessed at 
₹1,00,000/- to be paid jointly or severally by respondents No. 1 and 2. The 
appellant shall be paid the amount of cost on the next date of hearing 
before the Trial Court by way of demand draft. 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
……………….……………..J. 
 (C.T. RAVIKUMAR) 
 
……………….……………..J. 
(RAJESH BINDAL) 
 
New Delhi 
February 29, 2024.