2024 INSC 156
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  1427  OF 2011 
 
 
KUMAR @ SHIVA KUMAR   
 
 
 
APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF KARNATAKA 
 
                  
RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
UJJAL BHUYAN, J. 
 
 
This appeal by special leave takes exception to the 
conviction of the appellant under Section 306 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (IPC).  
2. 
 
It may be mentioned that the Fast Track Court – III 
Mysore vide the judgment and order dated 06.07.2004 passed in 
S.C. No. 26/2002 convicted the appellant for the offence under 
Section 306 IPC and sentenced him to undergo rigorous 
imprisonment (RI) for three years and to pay fine of Rs. 2,000/-, in 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.03.01
15:18:33 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
default to undergo RI for four months for the aforesaid offence. 
Appeal filed by the appellant under Section 374 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.P.C.) before the High Court of 
Karnataka, being Criminal Appeal No. 1139/2004 (SJ-A) was 
dismissed vide the judgment and order dated 17.09.2010 by 
upholding the conviction and sentence imposed by the trial court. 
Prosecution case 
3. 
 
Case of the prosecution is that the appellant was earlier 
residing in the house of the deceased as a tenant though on the 
date of the incident he was residing elsewhere as the term of the 
lease agreement had expired. On 05.07.2000 at about 09:00 AM, 
the deceased was returning home after dropping the children of 
her sister in the school. When she had reached near the Canara 
Bank, the appellant was waiting there and teased her to marry 
him. The deceased refused to respond. Appellant threatened her 
that if she did not agree to marry him, he would destroy the family 
of her sisters, outrage their modesty and would kill them. After she 
reached home, she informed her sisters about the above incident 
over telephone. Thereafter, she consumed poison in the house. The 
neighbours saw through the window of the house the deceased 
lying on the floor in a painful condition. They got the door of the 

3 
 
house opened. The deceased was suffering from pain due to 
consumption of poison. In the meanwhile, one of her sisters and 
her husband came to the house. All of them took the deceased to 
the Nirmala Devi Hospital whereafter she was shifted to the 
Mission Hospital. Ultimately, she died on 06.07.2000 at 07:30 PM. 
4. 
 
Raju, the father of the deceased, lodged the first 
information alleging that appellant was responsible for his 
daughter committing suicide. The first information was lodged on 
07.07.2000 at 06:30 AM. 
5. 
 
On receipt of the first information, police registered 
Crime No. 100/2000 under Section 306 IPC. In the course of the 
investigation, post-mortem examination of the deceased was 
carried out and the viscera was sent for chemical analysis to the 
Forensic Science Laboratory, Bangalore (FSL). The chemical 
analysis report indicated presence of Organophosphate pesticide 
in stomach, small intestine, liver, kidney and blood. Therefore, the 
doctor who had carried out the post-mortem examination opined 
that the death of the deceased was due to respiratory failure as a 
result of consumption of substance containing Organophosphate 

4 
 
compound. On completion of the investigation, police submitted 
chargesheet where the appellant was named as the accused. 
6. 
 
In order to prove its case, prosecution examined as 
many as thirteen witnesses and got eleven documents marked as 
exhibits. After closure of the prosecution evidence, the appellant 
was examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C. 
7. 
 
On examination of the evidence on record and after 
hearing both the sides, the trial court held that the prosecution 
had proved the charge against the appellant that he had abetted 
the deceased to commit suicide beyond reasonable doubt. 
Accordingly, the appellant was convicted for the said offence 
whereafter he was sentenced to undergo RI for three years and to 
pay fine of Rs. 2,000/- with a default stipulation. 
8. 
 
As already mentioned above, the appellant had appealed 
against the aforesaid conviction and sentence before the High 
Court of Karnataka (for short ‘the High Court’ hereinafter). By the 
impugned judgment and order, the High Court held that there was 
no ground to interfere with the order of conviction. Accordingly, 
the appeal was dismissed as being devoid of any merit. 

5 
 
9. 
 
Aggrieved thereby, appellant moved this Court by filing 
a petition for special leave to appeal. While the prayer of the 
appellant for exemption from surrendering was rejected on 
13.12.2010, notice was issued on 28.02.2011. Thereafter, this 
Court passed order dated 18.04.2011 directing the appellant to be 
released on bail subject to satisfaction of the trial court. 
Submissions 
10.  
Learned counsel for the appellant submits that both the 
trial court and the High Court had failed to appreciate the evidence 
on record in the proper perspective. Conviction of the appellant 
under Section 306 IPC is not supported by the evidence on record. 
Therefore, such conviction and the resultant sentence cannot be 
sustained. 
10.1.  
There are material contradictions in the evidence of the 
prosecution witnesses. According to learned counsel for the 
appellant, even if the prosecution case is accepted, no case for 
abetment to commit suicide by the deceased could be made out 
against the appellant. There is no evidence pointing out any act of 
instigation, conspiracy or aiding on the part of the appellant which 
had compelled the deceased to commit suicide.  

6 
 
10.2.  
In so far the testimony of PW Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 12 are 
concerned, 
there 
is 
a 
great 
deal 
of 
inconsistency 
and 
contradictions in their evidence. Besides, those witnesses being 
the relatives of the deceased, the trial court as well as the High 
Court 
ought 
to 
have 
considered 
their 
deposition 
with 
circumspection. PW-1 is the father of the deceased whereas PW 
Nos. 2 and 4 are the sisters of the deceased. On the other hand, 
PW No. 12 is the brother of the deceased. Their evidence are highly 
inconsistent. He submits that it has come on record that PW-1 i.e. 
the father of the deceased was living separately from the deceased 
with a woman outside marriage. On the other hand, PW-2 i.e. 
sister of the deceased in her deposition stated that it was the 
neighbours who had told her that deceased had consumed poison 
and that the neighbours had taken the deceased to Nirmala 
Nursing Home. She had never stated before the police under 
Section 161 Cr.P.C. that the appellant used to harass the 
deceased. Therefore, it was evident that she had improved upon 
her statement when in her deposition she stated that the appellant 
used to tease the deceased. 
10.3.  
Learned counsel also submits that there were injury 
marks on the body of the deceased. The front of the right wrist 

7 
 
showed superficial linear incised injury measuring 5cms in length, 
which was partially healed. This injury was not explained by the 
prosecution. That apart, the presence of the injury and the partial 
healing of the same was indicative of the fact that the said injury 
had occurred sometime prior to the date of occurrence. This would 
also be a reflection on the suicidal tendency of the deceased. 
10.4.  
It is further submitted that though the deceased was 
hospitalised on 05.07.2000, there was delay in lodging of the first 
information. The First Information Report (FIR) was lodged only on 
07.07.2000 at 06:30 AM though the deceased had died on the 
previous evening at 07:30 PM. This fact coupled with the non- 
disclosure of alleged harassment of the appellant to anyone by the 
deceased creates a great deal of doubt about the veracity of the 
prosecution case. Moreover, the appellant had got married just 
about two months prior to the incident. Therefore, there was no 
reason for the appellant to threaten the deceased to marry him 
failing which she and her family members would be visited with 
dire consequences. 
10.5.  
In support of his submissions, learned counsel for the 
appellant has placed reliance on the following two decisions of this 
Court: 

8 
 
(i) Ude Singh and Others Vs. State of Haryana, (2019) 17 
SCC 301 
(ii) Mahendra K.C. Vs. State of Karnataka and Another, 
(2022) 2 SCC 129. 
 
11.  
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent submits 
that the evidence on record unmistakably point to the guilt of the 
appellant. Prosecution could prove that it was the appellant who 
had abetted the deceased to commit suicide. The charge against 
the appellant was proved by the prosecution beyond all reasonable 
doubt and therefore the trial court was fully justified in convicting 
the appellant under Section 306 IPC and imposing the sentence as 
above.  
11.1.  
The High Court rightly affirmed the conviction of the 
appellant imposed by the trial court. 
11.2.  
There is no rule of evidence that conviction cannot be 
based on the testimony of the evidence of the family members of 
the deceased. A holistic reading of the evidence of the prosecution 
witnesses more particularly that of PW Nos. 1, 2 and 4 would 
clearly establish the prosecution case which was further 
strengthened by the evidence of the doctor i.e. PW-13. He, 
therefore, submits that there is no merit in the appeal which is 
liable to be dismissed.  

9 
 
12.  
Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties 
have received the due consideration of the Court. 
Evidence 
13.  
Let us first deal with the evidence on record. 
14.   
PW-1 Raju is first informant and father of the deceased. 
In his evidence he stated that his deceased daughter X was a final 
year B.Com student of Maharai College, Mysore. The accused 
(appellant) used to reside in the ground floor of his house at 
Vinayakanagar, Mysore. He had stayed there for five years as a 
tenant and had vacated the house after the tenancy period was 
over. 
14.1.  
The deceased used to regularly take the two children of 
his 
another 
daughter 
Meena 
to 
Chinamaya 
School 
at 
Jayalakshmipuram around 9:00 AM. During that time, the 
accused used to meet her and often used to ask her to marry him. 
In fact, he had threatened his deceased daughter that if she 
refused to marry him, he would murder her and her sisters. The 
deceased had told him about these facts. On 06.07.2000 (corrected 
to 05.07.2000 during further examination of PW-1), the accused 
had threatened the deceased at about 09.30 AM near Canara 
Bank, Jayalakshmipuram that if she refused to marry him, he 

10 
 
would pour acid on her and her sisters and murder them. 
According to him, on that day when he came to the house at 10:00 
AM his daughter X was admitted to Kiran Hospital for consuming 
poison. He stated that the deceased was shifted to Mission 
Hospital, Mysore for further treatment. At about 7:00 PM on 
06.07.2000 his daughter X died. The deceased had consumed 
poison due to the unbearable harassment and cruelty of the 
accused. The deceased had told him about the cruel treatment and 
harassment meted out by the accused to her one week earlier to 
her death. She had consumed poison when she was in the house. 
The deceased had no other disappointment in her life except the 
harassment and cruelty of the accused. 
14.2.  
In his cross-examination PW-1 stated that at the time of 
death of his daughter X, he was living in the house at 
Vinayakanagar, Mysore. His deceased daughter had informed him 
about the harassment of the accused one week prior to her death. 
However, he did not confront the accused in this regard; neither 
did he tell any other person nor lodged any complaint before the 
police.  On the day of the incident he had left the house at 7:00 
AM. When he came back home at 10:00 AM his daughter X was 
taken to the Kiran Hospital. When she was in the Mission Hospital, 

11 
 
he visited the said hospital. His daughter X was being treated in 
the said hospital and she was not in a condition to walk. He went 
to the Mission Hospital at about 1:00 PM and was in the hospital 
till the death of his daughter. Police had come to the hospital at 
around 3:00 to 4:00 PM on the day of her death when PW-1 and 
his other daughters were present. Police tried to question and talk 
with his daughter X but she was not in a position to talk. Till her 
death she did not talk. She died on 06.07.2000 at about 07:30 PM. 
Police had visited the hospital about two to three times. He stated 
that on 07.07.2000 he had lodged the complaint which was written 
by Jayarama, who was present in the hospital till her death.  
14.3.  
He further stated in the cross-examination that the 
accused was running a chit fund of which he was also a member. 
His daughter X was of marriageable age.  He denied the suggestion 
put by the defence that he wanted to give his deceased daughter 
in marriage to the accused but the accused had refused. After the 
death of his daughter X, he came to know that the accused was a 
married man. However, he stated that he did not know where 
accused used to stay after he had left his house.  

12 
 
15.   
Sister of the deceased Meena is PW-2. In her deposition, 
she stated that she, her two children and her deceased sister were 
living together at Paduvarahalli (Vinayakanagar). Her two children 
were studying in Chinmaya Vidyalaya at Jayalakshmipuram. The 
two children were studying in 3rd and 5th standard. The deceased 
used to take the children to school everyday and also used to bring 
them back from school. She used to take the children at around 
9:00 AM in the morning and also used to bring them back home 
from the school.  
15.1.  
She acknowledged that she knew the accused. Fifteen 
days prior to her death, the deceased had told PW-2 that the 
accused was teasing her and asking her to marry him. When she 
refused the proposal on the ground that he was a married man, 
the accused threatened to kill her and her sister. During this 
period of fifteen days, the deceased did not talk and was in a 
pensive mood.  
15.2.  
She further stated in her deposition that on the day of 
the incident i.e. 05.07.2000, she had left for office at 07:45 AM. 
While leaving for her office, she had asked her sister X to take her 
children to school.  According to her, she had received a phone 

13 
 
message from her neighbour that her sister X was not keeping well 
and asked her to come home immediately. According to her, she 
reached home at around 12.30 noon. When she reached the house, 
the neighbours told her that her sister X had consumed poison 
and, therefore, she was taken to the Nirmala (Karuna) Nursing 
Home. Along with the neighbours she went to the Mission Hospital. 
She found her sister X in an unconscious condition. On the next 
day at about 7:30 PM her sister X died. She stated that as the 
accused had threatened her sister X that he would kill her if she 
did not agree to marry him, she had committed suicide. She 
further stated that her father had also visited the hospital. Prior to 
fifteen days of her death i.e. before the accused started harassing 
her sister, the later was happy and healthy.  
15.3.  
In her cross-examination PW-2 stated that the house 
belonged to her mother. Her father PW-1 and her mother resided 
in the said house. Accused used to stay in the ground floor of their 
house for five years and had vacated the said house prior to the 
incident two to three months after expiry of the mortgage (sic) 
period. After vacating the house, the accused used to reside in a 
house at IV cross at Paduvarahalli (Vinayakanagar). He was 

14 
 
working in a cement dealer shop. After vacating the house, he did 
not visit the house again and that PW-2 had not seen him.  
15.4.  
At the time of the incident, her deceased sister X was 
aged about 21 or 22 years. She stated that she and the other family 
members did not try to conduct the marriage of the deceased. Her 
father PW-1 was not living with them as he was residing with 
another woman outside marriage separately. She stated that after 
the death of her husband she started staying in the said house of 
her mother. On the day of the incident, her mother had already 
died.  
15.5.  
PW-2 stated that she had not disclosed to any other 
person the factum of ill treatment and harassment meted out to 
her deceased sister by the accused. She had also not stated before 
the police the fact that her deceased sister X had told her about 
the harassment of the accused fifteen days prior to her death and 
her being in a pensive mood.  
15.6.  
She denied the suggestion of the defence that on the 
date of the incident she had taken her children to the school and 
that when she had returned to the house at 10:30 AM, she found 
her deceased sister X in an unconscious condition.  

15 
 
15.7.  
PW-2 further stated that they did not keep any 
poisonous medicine in the house. She did not find any bottle 
containing poison near the bed of the deceased. She denied a 
suggestion that she along with her another sister Shantha and her 
husband Diwakar had taken her sister X to Karuna Nursing Home.  
15.8.  
PW-2 stated that she saw her father in the Mission 
Hospital at 5:00 PM on 06.07.2000. She had not told and informed 
her father about the incident relating to her sister. Till the dead 
body of X was taken, her father was in the hospital.  
15.9.  
PW-2 stated that while it was true that the accused was 
a married person, she did not know that he had married two 
months prior to the incident. There are residential houses around 
the house. They were having good relation with the neighbours. 
The accused was having a chit fund when he used to reside in the 
house. PW-2 was also a member of the said chit fund. She denied 
the suggestion that they had tried to marry the deceased with the 
accused when he used to reside in their house and that the 
accused had declined to marry her deceased sister which was the 
reason for him to leave the house. She also denied the suggestion 
that they had chit fund amount to be repaid to the accused. She 

16 
 
further denied the suggestion that the deceased might have 
committed suicide for some other reason and that the accused was 
falsely implicated as he had refused to marry the deceased.  
16.   
Diwakar is the husband of Shantha, the second sister 
of the deceased. Diwakar is PW-3. In his examination in chief, he 
stated that at the time of her death the deceased was residing with 
PW-2 at Vinayakanagar. PW-2 was also the sister of his wife 
Shantha.  
16.1.  
On 05.07.2000 at about 09:30 AM, the deceased X had 
telephoned his wife Shantha and told her that she had consumed 
poison. At that time, he was present near his wife Shantha. 
According to PW-3, he and his wife Shantha immediately went to 
the house of the deceased at Paduvarahalli. The deceased talked 
with his wife Shantha. They shifted the deceased X to Nirmala 
Hospital and from there to Mission Hospital. On 06.07.2000, the 
deceased died in the hospital during the night time.  
16.2.  
He stated that his wife Shantha had told him that the 
accused was responsible for the suicidal death of the deceased.  
16.3.  
In his cross-examination PW-3 stated that before the 
death of X his wife Shantha had told him about the accused being 

17 
 
responsible for X consuming poison. When they had gone to the 
house of X and were taking her to the hospital, X had told his wife 
Shantha that due to the harassment of the accused she had 
consumed poison. Earlier thereto he did not know this fact. He had 
seen the accused when he used to reside in a portion of the house 
as a tenant. The accused had vacated the house two years prior to 
the incident whereafter he had neither seen the accused nor knew 
about his whereabouts.  
16.4.  
PW-3 denied the suggestion put forward by the defence 
that he had stated before the police that the deceased X was in an 
unconscious condition when they had reached her house and that 
his wife had not told him that the accused was the reason for the 
deceased consuming poison. However, he stated that he did not 
hear what the deceased X had told his wife Shantha.  
17.   
Shantha herself deposed as PW-4. She stated that on 
05.07.2000 at about 11:00 to 11:15 AM. the deceased had 
telephoned her and told her that while she was returning home 
from the school after dropping the children the accused accosted 
her on the way. He threatened her that she should marry him and 
in case of her refusal he would kill her by pouring acid on her. 

18 
 
Because of this she had consumed poison to finish her life to bring 
an end to the matter. Immediately PW-4 and her husband PW-3 
came to the house of the deceased.  
17.1.   
PW-4 stated that when they reached the house of the 
deceased X, she was lying on the floor and the phone receiver was 
in a hanging position. When PW-4 questioned X, she again told the 
above referred facts and the reason for her consuming poison. PW-
4 stated that she along with PW-3 and the neighbours shifted X to 
Kiran Nursing Home and from there to Mission Hospital, Mysore. 
On 06.07.2000 at about 7:30 PM X died while on treatment in the 
Mission Hospital.  
17.2.  
In her cross-examination, PW-4 stated that she had told 
her neighbour about X telling her that she had consumed poison 
due to the ill treatment and harassment meted out to her by the 
accused. Her neighbours did not come to the house of the deceased 
with her. When she had reached the house of X people had 
gathered. According to PW-4, she knew the neighbours. When she 
talked with X, the said neighbours were present. 
18.  
PW-11 is M.S. Sathyanaraya who was the investigating 
officer. In his testimony he stated that he had visited the spot of 

19 
 
occurrence. He had sent the viscera of the deceased for chemical 
examination. He had submitted the chargesheet against the 
accused on 17.11.2000. He stated that after receiving the FSL 
report he had sent the same to the concerned doctor who had 
conducted post-mortem examination of the deceased for opinion 
regarding cause of death of the deceased. He had obtained the final 
opinion of the doctor in this regard.  
18.1.  
In his cross-examination he stated that he had not 
examined the owner of the house where the accused used to reside. 
He had also not examined the neighbours of the said house. To a 
pointed query, PW-11 stated that his investigation disclosed that 
the accused used to threaten the deceased on public road often. 
He did the same act fifteen days prior to the death of deceased X. 
He admitted that he had not examined the witnesses of that area. 
19.  
R. Vijaya Kumar is the elder brother of the deceased X. 
He is PW-12. He stated that his sister X had consumed poison in 
the house and had died in the hospital while undergoing 
treatment. On 05.07.2000 at about 01:30 PM he had received a 
phone message that his sister X had consumed poison. He reached 
Mysore at about 7:30 PM and went to see his sister X in the 

20 
 
Mission Hospital where she was undergoing treatment. He found 
her to be not in a condition to talk.  
19.1.  
He stated that could come to know from his another 
sister PW-2 Meena that accused had harassed his sister X with 
proposal for marriage which was the reason for her to consume 
poison.  
19.2.  
He further stated that he had not told the police about 
the PW-2 telling him that the accused had threatened his sister. 
He did not know the details as to how his sister X had consumed 
poison and the amount of poison. He denied a suggestion that the 
accused was not responsible for the suicidal death of X and that it 
was because of their enmity with the accused that they had filed a 
false complaint against the accused.  
20.  
Dr. Devdas P.K. PW-13 was the doctor who had 
conducted the post-mortem examination of the deceased on 
07.07.2000. He stated that on examination of the dead body he 
found multiple injection marks present in front of both the elbows. 
The front of the right wrist showed superficial linear incised injury 
measuring 5cm in length which was partially healed. He further 
stated that the stomach, small intestine and contents, liver, kidney 

21 
 
and blood were preserved and sealed and thereafter sent for 
chemical analysis. On 09.01.2001, he received the chemical 
analysis report dated 10.10.2000. The report showed presence of 
organophosphorus compound in the viscera. Death was due to 
respiratory failure as a result of consumption of substance containing 
organophosphorus compound.  
20.1.  
In 
his 
cross-examination 
PW-13 
stated 
that 
organophosphorus compound is a pesticide, however, the quantity 
of the poison in the viscera of the blood of the deceased was not 
mentioned in the FSL report. The amount of organophosphorus 
could be detected during the treatment of the injury. The brain 
would be conscious till the poison effected the brain. PW-13 could 
not say the time when the deceased had consumed poison.  
21.   
PW-1 in the first information had stated that before his 
elder daughter could reach the house the deceased X had become 
unconscious. Neighbours Kumari Hema, Mahesh, and Sarojamma 
along with other neighbours, including Smt. Hiremani, had seen 
through the window that the phone was ringing continuously and 
that his daughter had become unconscious. They had got the door 
opened and when they asked X why she had done so, her reply 

22 
 
was that the accused was responsible and because of his 
harassment she had consumed poison. After that she collapsed. It 
was thereafter that her sister and brother-in-law came and took 
her to Nirmala Devi Hospital and thereafter to Mission Hospital.  
22.   
The post-mortem report is dated 07.07.2000. From an 
external examination of the dead body it was found that there were 
multiple injection marks present over the front of both the elbows. 
The front of the right wrist showed superficial linear incised injury 
measuring 5cm in length, partially healed.  The stomach, small 
intestine and contents, liver, kidney and blood were preserved to 
be sent for chemical analysis. Accordingly, the blood and viscera 
were sealed and sent to FSL, Bangalore for chemical analysis on 
07.07.2000. The final opinion was kept reserved pending receipt of 
the chemical analysis report. The chemical analysis report dated 
10.10.2000 was received on 09.01.2001. As per the report, colour 
test TLC method responded for presence of organophosphorus 
pesticide in stomach, small intestine, liver, kidney and blood. 
Thereafter the doctor gave the final opinion opining that death was 
due to respiratory failure as a result of consumption of substance 
containing organophosphorus compound. 

23 
 
23.  
The evidence on record, as noted above, not only reveal 
glaring inconsistencies but also gaping holes in the version of the 
prosecution. That apart, there are material omissions too. PW-1 is 
the father and the first informant. According to him, he used to 
live in the same house as the deceased. On the fateful day, he had 
gone out of the house at 7:00 AM in the morning and returned 
back to the house at 10:00 AM. When he came back home at 10:00 
AM, he found that his daughter X was admitted to a nursing home 
for consuming poison whereafter the deceased was shifted to 
Mission Hospital, Mysore for further treatment.  On the other 
hand, PW-2 Meena, who is the sister of the deceased and also 
daughter of PW-1, deposed that the house belonged to her mother 
who was already dead on the date of the incident. Father, PW-1, 
was living separately with another woman outside marriage. 
According to her, she along with her two children and her deceased 
sister were living together in the house at Paduvarahalli 
(Vinayakanagar) after the death of her husband. She was rather 
categorical in her cross-examination when she stated that her 
father PW-1 was not living with them, as he was residing with 
another woman outside marriage separately. Interestingly, in her 
cross-examination, she stated that she saw her father in the 

24 
 
Mission Hospital at 05:00 PM on 06.07.2000 i.e., on the second 
day of hospitalization of the deceased.   
24.   
If the version of PW-2 is to be believed then the evidence 
of PW-1, the first informant, cannot be accepted at all. His 
statement that he used to stay in the same house as his deceased 
daughter X was belied by his own daughter PW-2, who stated that 
it was she and her two children, who used to stay in the house of 
her mother along with her deceased sister X, after the death of her 
husband. According to her, she saw PW-1 in the Mission Hospital 
at 05:00 PM on 06.07.2000. This itself is strange and not at all a 
normal behaviour of a father whose daughter had consumed 
poison and was struggling for her life in a hospital. If what PW-2 
says is accepted, then PW-1 had gone to see his daughter in the 
hospital only in the evening of the next day of the incident, hours 
before her death. Be it stated that the deceased died on 06.07.2000 
at 07:30 PM. 
25.  
Both PW-1 and PW-2 claimed that the deceased had told 
them about the harassment meted out to her by the appellant 
fifteen days prior to the incident. However, neither of them 
confronted the appellant nor lodged any complaint before the 
police. 

25 
 
26.   
According to the evidence of PW-4 Shantha, another 
sister of deceased X and daughter of PW-1, the deceased had 
telephoned her in between 11:00 to 11:15 AM on 05.07.2000 
informing her as to what had happened to her while returning 
home from the school that led her to consume poison to end her 
life. It was then that PW-4 and her husband PW-3 rushed to the 
house of the deceased. When they reached the house of the 
deceased, she was lying on the floor with the phone receiver in a 
hanging position. She and her husband along with the neighbours 
took the deceased to the nursing home and from there to the 
Mission Hospital. 
27.   
If the version of PW-4 is to be accepted, then the 
deceased X had called her over telephone at around 11:00 to 11:15 
AM on 05.07.2000. It was thereafter that she and her husband 
rushed to the house from where with the help of the neighbours, 
the deceased was taken to a nursing home and from there to the 
Mission Hospital. In other words, according to PW-4, the deceased 
X was taken to the nursing home only after 11:00 to 11:15 AM. 
This again contradicts the statement of PW-1 that when he had 
come back home on 05.07.2000 at 10:00 AM, his daughter X was 
already taken to the nursing home.  

26 
 
28.  
None of the near relatives of the deceased i.e. PW-1, PW-
2, PW-4 and PW-12 (the elder brother of the deceased) had 
confronted the appellant as to why he was harassing the deceased 
with proposal for marriage and in the event of refusal, threatening 
her with dire consequences. Though they said that they knew 
about such harassment fifteen days prior to the date of incident, 
none of them thought it fit to lodge a police complaint. This creates 
grave doubt about the prosecution version. 
29.   
Though delay in lodging first information by itself cannot 
be a ground to disbelieve the prosecution case, unexplained delay 
coupled with surrounding circumstances can certainly dent the 
prosecution version. Here is a person (PW-1) who evidently goes to 
the hospital to see his daughter struggling for life twenty-four 
hours after her admission in hospital, that too just hours before 
her death. Such a behaviour is unusual for father, to say the least. 
That apart, evidently, he was not stating the truth when he said 
that he used to reside in the same house as that of the deceased 
and when he returned home at 10:00 AM in the morning on the 
fateful day, the deceased was already taken to the nursing home 
by the neighbours. Evidence of PW-2 and PW-4 bely such 
statement of PW-1. His daughter died on 06.07.2000 at 07:30 PM, 

27 
 
whereafter the body was taken by the police for post-mortem 
examination. Yet he waited till the next morning to lodge the police 
complaint. The police had also not examined Jayarama, the scribe, 
who had written the complaint, to ascertain the reason for such 
delay. According to PW-1, Jayarama was in the hospital till the 
death of the deceased. In the face of such glaring conduct of the 
first informant PW-1, adverse inference would have to be drawn.  
But crucially, the tendered evidence, as discussed above, are 
hearsay not worthy of much credence.  
30.  
There is one more aspect. In the first information, PW-1 
stated that neighbours Kumari Hema, Mahesh, Sarojamma and 
others including Smt. Hiremani, wife of police personnel Nanjunda 
Swami had noticed through the window that his deceased daughter 
X was lying unconscious and that the phone was continuously 
ringing. He further stated that these neighbours had got the door 
opened whereafter PW-3 and PW-4 came and took his deceased 
daughter X to the nursing home. Sarojamma and Mahesh had 
deposed as PW-8 and PW-9 but both were declared as hostile 
witnesses. Both stated that the police had not recorded their 
statements and that they did not know the cause of death of the 
deceased. Thus, only two of the neighbours were examined and 

28 
 
even they were declared hostile. No other neighbours were 
examined by the police. There is no explanation by the prosecution 
for such glaring omission. Again, according to the informant PW-1, 
it was the neighbours who had first seen the deceased through the 
window lying on the floor in pain with the phone continuously 
ringing. It is not at all believable that when the receiver was 
hanging (as has come out from the evidence of PW-4 Shantha), how 
the phone could go on ringing continuously. Adverse inference has 
to be drawn from such glaring contradictions and omissions. 
Relevant legal provisions 
31.  
In India attempt to commit suicide is an offence under 
Section 309 IPC. This section provides that whoever attempts to 
commit suicide and does any act towards the commission of such 
offence, he shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year or with fine or with both. But once 
the suicide is carried out i.e., the offence is complete, then 
obviously such a person would be beyond the reach of the law; 
question of penalising him would not arise. In such a case, 
whoever abets the commission of such suicide would be penalised 
under Section 306 IPC. Section 306 IPC reads as under: 

29 
 
306. Abetment of suicide- if any person 
commits suicide, whoever abets the commission 
of such suicide, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
 
31.1.  
Thus, as per Section 306 of IPC, if any person commits 
suicide, then whoever abets the commission of such suicide, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
32.   
The crucial word in Section 306 of IPC is ‘abets’. 
‘Abetment’ is defined in Section 107 of IPC. Section 107 of IPC 
reads thus: 
107. Abetment of a thing- A person abets the 
doing of a thing, who- 
First-Instigates any person to do that 
thing; or 
 Secondly-Engages with one or more other 
person or persons in any conspiracy for the 
doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission 
takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, 
and in order to the doing of that thing; or 
Thirdly- Intentionally aids, by any act or 
illegal omission, the doing of that thing. 
Explanation 1.- A person who, by wilful 
misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment of 
a material fact which he is bound to disclose, 
voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to 
cause or procure, a thing to be done, is said to 
instigate the doing of that thing. 
Explanation 2.- Whoever, either prior to or 
at the time of the commission of an act, does 

30 
 
anything in order to facilitate the commission of 
that act, and thereby facilitates the commission 
thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act. 
 
32.1.  
From a reading of Section 107 IPC what is deducible is 
that a person would be abetting the doing of a thing if he instigates 
any person to do that thing or if he encourages with one or more 
person or persons in any conspiracy for doing that thing or if he 
intentionally aids by any act or illegal omission doing of that thing. 
Explanation 1 clarifies that even if a person by way of wilful 
misrepresentation or concealment of a material fact which he is 
otherwise bound to disclose voluntarily causes or procures or 
attempts to cause or procure a thing to be done, is said to instigate 
the doing of that thing. Similarly, it is clarified by way of 
Explanation-2 that whoever does anything in order to facilitate the 
commission of an act, either prior to or at the time of commission 
of the act, is said to aid the doing of that act. 
Case law 
33.  
Suicide is distinguishable from homicide inasmuch as 
it amounts to killing of self. This Court in M. Mohan Versus State1 
went into the meaning of the word suicide and held as under: 
 
1 (2011) 3 SCC 626 

31 
 
37. The word “suicide” in itself is nowhere 
defined in the Penal Code, however its meaning 
and import is well known and requires no 
explanation. “Sui” means “self” and “cide” 
means “killing”, thus implying an act of self-
killing. In short, a person committing suicide 
must commit it by himself, irrespective of the 
means employed by him in achieving his object 
of killing himself. 
 
34.  
In Ramesh Kumar versus State of Chhattisgarh2, this 
Court delved into the meaning of the word ‘instigate’ or ‘instigation’ 
and held as under:   
20. Instigation is to goad, urge forward, 
provoke, incite or encourage to do “an act”. To 
satisfy the requirement of instigation though it 
is not necessary that actual words must be used 
to that effect or what constitutes instigation 
must necessarily and specifically be suggestive 
of the consequence. Yet a reasonable certainty 
to incite the consequence must be capable of 
being spelt out. The present one is not a case 
where the accused had by his acts or omission 
or by a continued course of conduct created 
such circumstances that the deceased was left 
with no other option except to commit suicide 
in which case an instigation may have been 
inferred. A word uttered in the fit of anger or 
emotion without intending the consequences to 
actually follow cannot be said to be instigation. 
 
 
2 (2001) 9 SCC 618 

32 
 
34.1.  
Thus, this Court held that to ‘instigate’ means to goad, 
urge, provoke, incite or encourage to do ‘an act’. To satisfy the 
requirement of ‘instigation’, it is not necessary that actual words 
must be used to that effect or that the words or act should 
necessarily and specifically be suggestive of the consequence. But, 
a reasonable certainty to incite the consequence must be capable 
of being spelt out. Where the accused by his act or omission or by 
his continued course of conduct creates a situation that the 
deceased is left with no other option except to commit suicide, then 
instigation may be inferred. A word uttered in a fit of anger or 
emotion without intending the consequences to actually follow 
cannot be said to be instigation.  
35.  
Again in the case of Chitresh Kumar Chopra versus 
State3, this Court elaborated further and observed that to 
constitute ‘instigation’, a person who instigates another has to 
provoke, incite, urge or encourage the doing of an act by the other 
by ‘goading’ or ‘urging forward’. This Court held as follows: 
17. Thus, to constitute “instigation”, a person 
who instigates another has to provoke, incite, 
urge or encourage the doing of an act by the 
other by “goading” or “urging forward”. The 
dictionary meaning of the word “goad” is “a 
 
3 (2009) 16 SCC 605 

33 
 
thing that stimulates someone into action; 
provoke to action or reaction” (see Concise 
Oxford English Dictionary); “to keep irritating or 
annoying somebody until he reacts” (see Oxford 
Advanced Learner's Dictionary, 7th Edn.). 
18. Similarly, “urge” means to advise or try 
hard to persuade somebody to do something or 
to make a person to move more quickly and or 
in a particular direction, especially by pushing 
or forcing such person. Therefore, a person who 
instigates another has to “goad” or “urge 
forward” the latter with intention to provoke, 
incite or encourage the doing of an act by the 
latter. 
 
35.1.  
Thus, this Court has held that in order to prove that the 
accused had abetted the commission of suicide by a person, the 
following has to be established: 
(i) the accused kept on irritating or annoying the 
deceased by words, deeds or wilful omission or 
conduct which may even be a wilful silence until 
the deceased reacted or pushed or forced the 
deceased by his deeds, words or wilful omission 
or conduct to make the deceased move forward 
more quickly in a forward direction; and 
(ii) that the accused had the intention to 
provoke, urge or encourage the deceased to 
commit suicide while acting in the manner 
noted above. Undoubtedly, presence of mens 
rea is the necessary concomitant of instigation. 

34 
 
36.   
In Amalendu Pal alias Jhantu versus State of West 
Bengal4, this Court after referring to some of the previous decisions 
held that it has been the consistent view that before holding an 
accused guilty of an offence under Section 306 IPC, the court must 
scrupulously examine the facts and circumstances of the case and 
also assess the evidence adduced before it in order to find out 
whether the cruelty and harassment meted out to the victim had 
left the victim with no other alternative to put an end to her life. It 
must be borne in mind that in a case of alleged abetment of 
suicide, there must be proof of direct or indirect act(s) of 
incitement to the commission of suicide. Merely on the allegation 
of harassment without there being any positive action proximate 
to the time of occurrence on the part of the accused which led or 
compelled the deceased to commit suicide, conviction in terms of 
Section 306 IPC would not be sustainable. Thereafter, this Court 
held as under: 
13. In order to bring a case within the purview 
of Section 306 IPC there must be a case of 
suicide and in the commission of the said 
offence, the person who is said to have abetted 
the commission of suicide must have played an 
active role by an act of instigation or by doing 
certain act to facilitate the commission of 
 
4 (2010) 1 SCC 707 

35 
 
suicide. Therefore, the act of abetment by the 
person charged with the said offence must be 
proved and established by the prosecution 
before he could be convicted under Section 306 
IPC. 
 
37.   
Similar is the view expressed by this court in Ude Singh 
(supra).  
38.  
In Rajesh versus State of Haryana5, this Court after 
referring to Sections 306 and 107 of the IPC held as follows: 
 
9. Conviction under Section 306 IPC is not 
sustainable on the allegation of harassment 
without 
there 
being 
any 
positive 
action 
proximate to the time of occurrence on the part 
of the accused, which led or compelled the 
person to commit suicide. In order to bring a 
case within the purview of Section 306 IPC, 
there must be a case of suicide and in the 
commission of the said offence, the person who 
is said to have abetted the commission of 
suicide must have played an active role by an 
act of instigation or by doing certain act to 
facilitate the commission of suicide. Therefore, 
the act of abetment by the person charged with 
the said offence must be proved and established 
by the prosecution before he could be convicted 
under Section 306 IPC.  
 
39.  
Reverting back to the decision in M. Mohan (supra), this 
Court observed that abetment would involve a mental process of 
 
5 (2020) 15 SCC 359 

36 
 
instigating a person or intentionally aiding a person in doing of a 
thing. Without a positive act on the part of the accused to instigate 
or aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot be sustained. 
Delineating the intention of the legislature and having regard to 
the ratio of the cases decided by this Court, it was concluded that 
in order to convict a person under Section 306 IPC there has to be 
a clear mens rea to commit the offence. It would also require an 
active act or direct act which led the deceased to commit suicide 
seeing no other option and that this act of the accused must have 
been intended to push the deceased into such a position that he 
committed suicide.  
40.  
Sounding a note of caution, this Court in State of West 
Bengal versus Orilal Jaiswal6 observed that the court should be 
extremely careful in assessing the facts and circumstances of each 
case as well as the evidence adduced in the trial for the purpose of 
finding whether the cruelty meted out to the victim had in fact 
induced her to end her life by committing suicide. If it transpires 
to the court that the victim committing suicide was hypersensitive 
to ordinary petulance, discord and differences in domestic life 
 
6 (1994) 1 SCC 73 

37 
 
quite common to the society to which the victim belonged and such 
petulance, discord  and differences were not expected to induce a 
similarly circumstanced individual to commit suicide, the 
conscience of the court should not be satisfied for basing a finding 
that the accused charged of abetting the offence of suicide should 
be found guilty.  
Non-recovery of trace of poison (pesticide) 
41.   
There is one more aspect in this case. In a case of death 
due to consumption or administering of poison or insecticide or 
pesticide, be it homicidal or suicidal, recovery of the trace of such 
poison or insecticide or pesticide is crucial.    
42.  
The post-mortem examination report indicated multiple 
injection marks over the front of both the elbows of the deceased. 
That apart, it was also noticed that there was a superficial linear 
incised injury measuring 5cms in length in the front of the right 
wrist which was partially healed. The stomach, small intestine and 
contents, liver, kidney and blood were preserved. Those were 
sealed and sent for chemical analysis to FSL, Bangalore on 
07.07.2000. The chemical analysis report is dated 10.10.2000. 
The report dated 10.10.2000 stated that colour test for TLC 

38 
 
method was carried out which responded to the presence of 
Organophosphate pesticide in stomach, small intestine, liver, 
kidney and blood. On this basis, the doctor who carried out the 
post-mortem examination i.e. PW-13 gave the final opinion that 
death of the deceased was due to respiratory failure as a result of 
consumption 
of 
substance 
containing 
Organophosphate 
compound. 
43.  
Before proceeding further, it needs to be noted that the 
chemical analysis report is dated 10.10.2000 whereas the final 
opinion of PW-13 is dated 09.01.2001, there being a delay of three 
months. Ofcourse, PW-13 stated that he received the report only 
on 09.01.2001 on which date he gave the final opinion. 
Investigating officer offered no explanation as to why there was 
such delay in handing over of the chemical analysis report to PW-
13. 
44.  
Be that as it may, PW-13 in his deposition also stated 
about multiple injection marks being present over front of both the 
elbows besides the partially healed wrist wound on the body of the 
deceased. He stated that it was only on 09.01.2000 that he had 
received the chemical analysis report dated 10.10.2000 which 

39 
 
showed presence of Organophosphate compound in the viscera. In 
his cross-examination, he explained that Organophosphate 
compound is a pesticide. The quantity of the poison in the viscera 
of the blood of the deceased was not mentioned in the FSL report. 
That apart, he further stated that the smell of Organophosphate 
compound could be detected during the treatment. The patient 
would be conscious till the poison affected the brain. The deceased 
was treated in the hospital before she died. 
45.  
A Textbook of Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology by 
Jaising P Modi is considered as authority on various facets of 
medical jurisprudence and toxicology. In its 27th edition, 
Organophosphate compounds and allied poisons are dealt with 
under the heading Inorganic Irritant Poisons (I) in Chapter 3. It 
says Organophosphate compounds are extensively used as 
pesticides for soft body insects in agriculture. Their easy 
availability and quick action are the reason for their popularity for 
suicidal and homicidal purposes. Worth Health Organisation has 
classified Organophosphate compounds on the basis of their 
lethality into low toxicity, moderate and highly toxic compounds. 
Organophosphate compounds include Hexaethyl Tetraphosphate 
(HETP), Tetraethyl Pyrophosphate (TEPP) – Tetron and Fosvex etc. 

40 
 
The Organophosphate compounds are absorbed from the skin, 
respiratory and GI system. According to the route of entry, the 
respiratory or GI symptoms are more marked. Organophosphate 
toxicity can lead to symptoms such as miosis, urination, diarrhoea 
etc. Early headache, nausea, giddiness, dimness of vision, 
twitching of the eye muscles, tremulous tongue, profuse frothing 
etc. may be present. Later, vomiting, sweating, delirium, weakness 
and paralysis of respiratory muscles, arflexia, incontinence, 
bronchospasm, cyanosis, pulmonary edema, convulsions etc. 
whereafter, coma and death may follow. Tetraethyl pyrophosphate 
is the most toxic and HETP the least. A single dose that will 
produce symptoms is 5 mg intramuscular or 25 mg orally. 44-50 
mg of TEPP intramuscular or 25-100 mg orally will be a fatal dose. 
In fatal cases, the symptoms begin in 30 minutes and death 
results in 30 minutes to 3 hours. 
46.  
In this case, the doctors who had treated the deceased 
in the first nursing home and later on in the Mission Hospital, were 
not examined by the police. They were also not summoned as court 
witnesses. Their testimony could have been crucial. They could 
have thrown light into the nature of intake of the Organophosphate 
compound: whether by way of injection or consumed orally? 

41 
 
Whether they could detect the smell of Organophosphate 
compound emanating from the patient? This serious lacuna is 
further compounded by the fact that the prosecution had failed to 
recover any syringe or needle from the crime scene. No container 
or bottle containing the pesticide were also recovered from the 
room where the deceased was found lying on the floor or in any 
part of the house. There is no evidence to suggest that police had 
made an endeavour to search for such container or bottle. If the 
deceased had injected the poison herself, considering the multiple 
injection marks over the front of both the elbows, then the syringe 
and the needle would have been there, in and around her. If she 
had orally consumed the poison, then also the bottle or the 
container of the poison would have been present in the crime scene 
or near about. There is absolutely no evidence in this regard. There 
is also no evidence to show as to how the deceased had acquired 
the pesticide. In addition to non-recovery of the syringe or the 
needle or the container, the police were unable to show the source 
from where the particular pesticide was obtained by the deceased. 
If the prosecution case is to be believed, then the syringe and the 
needle or the container must have been present in the scene of 
occurrence itself. Those were not found by the prosecution. Neither 

42 
 
any trace of pesticide was seen by the investigating officer in the 
room. The FSL report as well as the chemical analysis report are 
silent as to whether any trace of the pesticide was detected from 
any of the seized articles. Prosecution is silent as to why no 
investigation was done in this regard. In a case of this nature, 
where the oral evidence including that of PW Nos. 1, 2 and 4 are 
not at all convincing, the absence of the container or the bottle 
containing the pesticide from where the deceased had orally 
consumed the pesticide, becomes very crucial. Similarly, recovery 
of syringe and needle if the deceased had injected the poison, is 
also crucial. As a general principle, it can be said that in a case of 
death by poisoning, be it homicidal or suicidal and which is based 
on circumstantial evidence, recovery of the trace of poison 
consumed by or administered to the deceased is of critical 
importance. It forms a part of the chain; rather it would complete 
the chain to prove homicide or suicide. 
Conclusion 
47.   
Human mind is an enigma. It is well neigh impossible 
to unravel the mystery of the human mind. There can be myriad 
reasons for a man or a woman to commit or attempt to commit 

43 
 
suicide: it may be a case of failure to achieve academic excellence, 
oppressive environment in college or hostel, particularly for 
students belonging to the marginalized sections, joblessness, 
financial difficulties, disappointment in love or marriage, acute or 
chronic ailments, depression, so on and so forth. Therefore, it may 
not always be the case that someone has to abet commission of 
suicide. Circumstances surrounding the deceased in which he 
finds himself are relevant.  
48.   
Coming to the facts of the present case, we do not find 
any evidence on the basis of which we can hold the appellant guilty 
of abetting the suicide of the deceased. While the death of a young 
woman is certainly very tragic, it cannot be said with any degree 
of certainty that suicide has been proved; the other essential 
ingredient constituting the offence under Section 306 IPC, viz, 
abetment cannot also be said to have been proved.  
49.  
Thus on a conjoint reading of the entire materials on 
record, this Court is of the opinion that the prosecution had failed 
to prove the charge of abetment to commit suicide under Section 
306 IPC against the appellant. The settled legal position, the 
evidence on record and the glaring omissions of the prosecution 

44 
 
as pointed out above, leaves no room for doubt. We are therefore 
of the unhesitant view that the conviction of the appellant is wholly 
unsustainable.  
50.  
That being the position, conviction of the appellant 
under Section 306 of the IPC is set aside. The judgment and order 
of the trial court dated 06.07.2004 as affirmed by the High Court 
vide the judgment and order dated 17.09.2010 are hereby set aside 
and quashed.  
51.  
Since the appellant is already on bail, the bail bonds 
shall stand discharged. 
52.  
The appeal is accordingly allowed. No costs. 
 
          ...………………………………J 
    [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 
 
 
 
…………………………………J. 
   [UJJAL BHUYAN] 
NEW DELHI;  
01.03.2024