2024 INSC 157
 
 
Civil Appeal no.9360 of 2013          
              Page 1 of 10 
 
Non-Reportable 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9360 OF 2013 
 
 
Major Gen. Darshan Singh (D) By Lrs. & Anr.  … Appellants  
 
versus 
 
Brij Bhushan Chaudhary (D) by Lrs.    
  … Respondent 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
This appeal takes an exception to the judgment of the 
High Court in the second appeal preferred by the appellants.  
Appellant no.1 was the first plaintiff, and appellant no. 1(ii), (iii) 
and (iv), as well as appellant no. 2 were the co-plaintiffs.  The 
original first respondent was the defendant in the suit.  For 
convenience, we are referring to the parties with reference to 
their status before the Trial Court. 
2. 
The defendant (Brij Bhushan Chaudhary) executed an 
agreement for sale dated 16th January 1980 (for short, ‘the suit 
agreement’) in favour of plaintiff no.1 (Major General (retd) 
Darshan Singh) in respect of plot of land admeasuring 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.03.01
15:42:13 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
Civil Appeal no.9360 of 2013          
              Page 2 of 10 
 
approximately 2438 sq. yards with structure thereon being 
residential House no.33, R.P. No. 2829, Sector 2-A, Chandigarh 
(for short, ‘the suit property’).  The agreed consideration was 
Rs.3,50,000/-. A sum of Rs.30,000/- was paid by the plaintiff 
no. 1 to the defendant by way of earnest money.  The sale deed 
was to be executed on or before 30th April 1980.  Clause no.3 
in the suit agreement provided that in the event of the failure 
of the defendant to honour the agreement, his liability will be 
to refund the sum of Rs. 30,000/- along with damages of 
Rs.10,000/- without any interest.  The clause further provided 
that plaintiff no.1 will have no right to claim any other damages 
or to file a suit for specific performance. 
3. 
According to the case of plaintiff no.1, there were further 
negotiations after the execution of the suit agreement, and it 
was 
agreed 
to 
reduce 
the 
price 
to 
Rs.2,90,000/-.   
Consequently, a draft sale deed was executed between plaintiff 
no.1 and the defendant on 18th March 1980.  We may note here 
that along with plaintiff no.1, his daughters Raman, Pawan and 
Narveen were co-plaintiffs.  All of them were signatories to the 
draft sale deed.  According to the plaintiffs' case, necessary sale 
permission under the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 
1976 was granted on 11th August 1980.  The plaintiffs claimed 
that on the date of execution of the draft sale deed, they were 
put in possession of the suit property. The plaintiffs purchased 
stamp papers worth Rs.23,200/- on 19th July 1980, as desired 
by the defendant.  According to the plaintiffs' case, the 
defendant changed his mind as there was a price rise of the 

 
 
Civil Appeal no.9360 of 2013          
              Page 3 of 10 
 
properties in the vicinity of the suit property. Therefore, a 
telegraphic notice was issued by the plaintiffs to the defendant 
on 26th August 1980, calling upon him to remain present in the 
office of the Sub-Registrar at Chandigarh on 29th August 1980 
between 10 am and 4 pm for registration of the sale deed.  The 
case of the plaintiffs is that notwithstanding the service of the 
said notice, the defendant neither replied nor remained present 
before the Sub-Registrar for registration of the sale deed. 
Therefore, a suit for specific performance was filed by the 
plaintiffs.  In the alternative, the plaintiffs claimed relief of 
damages of Rs.40,000/-. 
4. 
The defendant contested the suit by filing a written 
statement in which he contended that the suit property 
belonged to his Hindu Undivided Family and the members of 
the family were in joint possession of the suit property.  The 
defendant denied that the possession of the property was 
handed over to the plaintiffs. Replication (further pleading) was 
filed by the plaintiffs dealing with the averments made in the 
written statement.  
5. 
The Trial Court declined to grant relief of specific 
performance and passed a decree of damages in the sum of 
Rs.40,000/- payable to plaintiff no.1.  The suit as regards 
plaintiff nos. 2 to 4 was dismissed. The Trial Court framed 
eleven issues.  The Trial Court held that though there was a 
clause to the contrary in the suit agreement, it would not bar 
the plaintiff’s remedy to seek a specific performance.  The Trial 
Court held that the suit property was the property of HUF (for 

 
 
Civil Appeal no.9360 of 2013          
              Page 4 of 10 
 
short, ‘HUF property’) of the defendant's family. The Trial Court 
held that the theory of the plaintiffs that there was a fresh 
agreement under which the price was reduced to Rs.2,90,000/- 
was not established.  The Trial Court also held that the 
possession of the suit property was not handed over to plaintiff 
no.1.  The Trial Court further held that plaintiffs nos.2 to 4 
were not parties to the suit agreement and hence, they are not 
entitled to maintain a suit for specific performance.  On the 
issue of readiness and willingness, the Trial Court held that as 
the plaintiffs had kept the Demand Draft in the sum of Rs. 
2,60,000/- ready, it cannot be held that they were not ready 
and willing to perform their part of the agreement. 
6. 
The appeal filed by the appellants before the District 
Court was dismissed. The District Court held that though, even 
according to the case of plaintiff no.1, the suit property was 
HUF property, there was no pleading that there was a legal 
necessity for the sale of the HUF property.  Moreover, the co-
sharers of the defendant were not made parties, and the 
plaintiffs had not given up their claim against the co-sharers of 
the defendant. While dismissing the appeal, the District Court 
held that the trial court's finding on the issue of readiness and 
willingness was correct.  The High Court, in the second appeal, 
held that the suit property was the HUF property. Relying upon 
the decision of this Court in the case of Balmukand v. Kamla 
Wati1, the High Court held that the suit property was 
impartible under the provisions of the Capital of Punjab 
 
1 AIR 1964 SC 1385 

 
 
Civil Appeal no.9360 of 2013          
              Page 5 of 10 
 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1952.  Therefore, the High 
Court confirmed the decrees passed by the Trial Court and the 
First Appellate Court. 
SUBMISSIONS 
7. 
The learned counsel appearing for the appellants pointed 
out the concurrent findings on the issue of readiness and 
willingness in favour of the plaintiffs.  Therefore, the plaintiffs 
satisfied the test laid down by Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief 
Act, 1963 (for short, ‘1963 Act’).  He relied upon several 
decisions of this Court in support of the proposition that a 
decree for specific performance can be passed concerning an 
undivided share of the defendant in the suit property.  He relied 
upon the decision of this Court in the case of Hardeo Rai v. 
Sakuntala Devi2.  The learned counsel relied upon another 
decision of this Court in the case of Surinder Singh v. Kapoor 
Singh3 and submitted that in view of Clause (a) of Section 22 
(1) of the 1963 Act, a decree for partition and separate 
possession can be granted in addition to a decree for specific 
performance.  He urged that, as held by this Court in the case 
of Rachakonda Narayana v. Ponthala Parvathamma4, a 
direction can be issued to the defendant to perform specifically 
so much of his part of the contract as he can perform.  
Therefore, the Trial Court ought to have moulded the relief by 
granting a decree of specific performance concerning the 
undivided share of the defendant.  He submitted that a part of 
 
2 (2008) 7 SCC 46 
3 (2005) 5 SCC 142 
4 (2001) 8 SCC 173 

 
 
Civil Appeal no.9360 of 2013          
              Page 6 of 10 
 
the contract can always be ordered to be performed based on 
the principles laid down in Section 12 of the 1963 Act.  He 
submitted that the suit property can always be subjected to a 
partition.  If it cannot be subjected to a partition, the shares of 
the co-sharers can be auctioned.   Therefore, the Trial Court 
ought to have passed a decree for specific performance limited 
to the undivided share of the defendant. 
8. 
The learned senior counsel appearing for the defendant 
invited our attention to the conduct of the first plaintiff and 
submitted that the conduct, as seen from the record, requires 
the Court to exercise discretion under Section 20 of the 1963 
Act against the plaintiffs.  He submitted that three Courts have 
held against the plaintiffs, and therefore, no interference is 
called for. 
OUR VIEW 
9. 
Under Section 20 of the 1963 Act, the grant of a decree 
for specific performance is always discretionary.  The exercise 
of discretion depends on several factors.  One of the factors is 
the conduct of the plaintiff. The reason is that relief of a decree 
of specific performance is an equitable relief. A person who 
seeks equity must do equity.  
10. 
The suit agreement does not refer to the defendant's 
status as the Karta of the family.  However, in the draft sale 
deed dated 18th March 1980 relied upon by the plaintiffs, the 
defendant was described as a vendor representing HUF as its 
Karta.  Apart from plaintiff no.1, the other three plaintiffs also 

 
 
Civil Appeal no.9360 of 2013          
              Page 7 of 10 
 
signed the sale deed.  Clause (2) of the draft sale deed records 
that the defendant has delivered the vacant possession of the 
suit property to the plaintiffs.  In the plaint, the plaintiffs have 
relied upon the draft sale deed of 18th March 1980, which 
specifically records that the defendant, in his capacity as the 
Karta of HUF, had agreed to sell the property of HUF.  However, 
in the plaint, the plaintiffs have not disclosed that the 
defendant executed the suit agreement in his capacity as the 
Karta of HUF and that the suit property was HUF property. This 
is very relevant as in the draft sale deed relied upon by the 
plaintiffs themselves; the defendant has been described as the 
Karta of HUF.  In the written statement filed by the defendant, 
in paragraph 3, specific reliance was placed on the fact that the 
suit property was HUF property.  In fact, it is specifically 
pleaded that as partition was not permissible, three members 
of HUF were in joint possession thereof.  The plaintiffs pleaded 
in paragraph no. 3 of the replication that the suit property was 
an individual property of the defendant, and he was under 
obligation to sell the same to the plaintiffs.  Thus, in the 
pleadings, the plaintiffs maintained that the suit property was 
the individual property of the defendant. However, in his cross-
examination, the first plaintiff accepted that the suit property 
belonged to HUF, and it was accordingly mentioned in the draft 
sale deed.  Though the first plaintiff knew that the suit property 
was HUF property, this fact was suppressed in the plaint. 
11. 
In paragraph 4 of the plaint, the plaintiffs have pleaded 
that after the suit agreement was executed, there were further 

 
 
Civil Appeal no.9360 of 2013          
              Page 8 of 10 
 
negotiations, and the price was agreed to be reduced to 
Rs.2,90,000/- from Rs.3,50,000/-.  In the written statement, 
there is a specific denial of the case of novation.  In the 
replication, the plaintiffs reiterated that on 18th March 1980, 
when the draft sale deed was executed, the parties agreed to 
reduce the price of the suit property to Rs.2,90,000/-. However, 
in his examination-in-chief, the first plaintiff asserted that the 
terms and conditions of the suit agreement at Exhibit P-4 were 
never varied after its execution. Therefore, he did not come out 
with the case in his evidence that there was a further 
agreement under which the price of the property was reduced 
to Rs.2,90,000/-.  Thus, to the knowledge of the first plaintiff, 
the case pleaded in the plaint regarding the price reduction was 
factually incorrect. 
12. 
The conduct of the first plaintiff does not stop here.  In 
paragraph 4 of the plaint, there is a specific assertion that after 
the draft sale deed dated 18th March 1980 was executed, the 
possession of the suit property was delivered to the plaintiffs.  
This assertion has been specifically denied in the written 
statement. In paragraph 2 of replication, the plaintiffs 
reiterated that the suit agreement was superseded and the 
novated contract of 18th March 1980 exists between the parties.  
In paragraph 3, the plaintiffs reiterated that they were put in 
possession.  However, in the cross-examination, the first 
plaintiff specifically admitted that he never took possession of 
the suit property on 18th March 1980.  He was confronted with 
his affidavit dated 18th October 1980.  He explained the 

 
 
Civil Appeal no.9360 of 2013          
              Page 9 of 10 
 
statements in the affidavit to mean he could get possession 
whenever he liked.  He admitted that though he had not 
received possession, he stated in the affidavit that he had 
received possession of the suit property. He also accepted that 
an application for temporary injunction filed by him in the suit 
was dismissed on the ground that the plaintiffs were not in 
possession.  
13. 
Though the first plaintiff gave up his case of novation and 
reduction of the price of the suit property, he pleaded that he 
had kept a balance consideration of Rs.2,60,000/- ready in the 
form of a Demand Draft. Admittedly, the plaintiffs had paid 
only a sum of Rs.30,000/- by way of earnest money.  Therefore, 
the balance consideration was Rs.3,20,000/-. 
14. 
As observed earlier, the relief of specific performance is 
discretionary and equitable. Considering the plaintiffs' conduct 
of making false and/or incorrect statements in the plaint, 
which were very material, we hold that the plaintiffs are 
disentitled to relief of specific performance. It is pertinent to 
note that plaintiff No. 1 admitted in the examination-in-chief 
that the suit property was HUF property. Even after that, the 
plaintiffs continued to prosecute the suit by seeking a decree 
in respect of the entire suit property.  The plaintiffs did not give 
up their case concerning the shares of other co-sharers who 
were not parties to the suit. Therefore, the Trial Court, 
Appellate Court and High Court were justified in denying 
discretionary relief of specific performance to the plaintiffs.   

 
 
Civil Appeal no.9360 of 2013          
              Page 10 of 10 
 
15. 
However, we find that on the damages of Rs.40,000/-, the 
Trial Court has not granted interest post the decree.  We, 
therefore, modify the decree of the Trial Court by directing that 
the sum of Rs.40,000/- will carry interest @ 6% per annum 
from the date of the decree of the Trial Court till its payment or 
realisation. 
16. 
Only to the above extent, the appeal is party allowed.  
There will be no order as to costs.  
 
….…………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (Abhay S. Oka) 
 
…..…………………...J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (Sanjay Karol) 
New Delhi; 
March 1, 2024.