2024 INSC 159
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS.7768-7769 OF 2023  
 
VINAYAK PURSHOTTAM DUBE (DECEASED),  
THROUGH LRs  
 
 
 
 
     
 …APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
JAYASHREE PADAMKAR BHAT  
& OTHERS 
   
 
 
 
 
      …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
NAGARATHNA, J. 
These appeals have been filed by the legal representatives of 
the opposite party-sole proprietor against the common final 
judgment and order dated 02.05.2018 passed by the National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (hereinafter referred to 
as “NCDRC”) in Review Application No.26 of 2017 in Review 
Petition No.3283 of 2008 and Review Application No.27 of 2017 in 
Review Petition No.2794 of 2008. 
The NCDRC vide the impugned order dismissed the review 
applications while affirming its earlier order dated 31.05.2016 
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2024.03.02
14:40:56 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
passed in review petition with reference to the order dated 
03.01.2017 passed by this Court in Special Leave Petition (Civil)… 
CC Nos.24515-24516 of 2016 granting liberty to the appellants to 
resort to remedy of review before the NCDRC. 
 
2. 
The brief facts giving rise to the present appeal are as follows: 
  
2.1  The appellants herein are the legal heirs of the original 
opposite party in the consumer complaint before the District 
Forum. All the respondents herein are the complainants.  
 
2.2  For the sake of convenience, the parties shall be referred to 
as complainants and opposite party. 
  
2.3  The complainants, Jayashree Padmakar and others, owners 
of property CTS Nos.1465/1 and 1465/2, 'C' Ward, Kolhapur, had 
entered into a Development Agreement dated 30.07.1996 with the 
opposite party. According to the agreement, the complainants were 
entitled to receive eight residential flats and Rs.6,50,000/- as 
consideration. Allegedly, the opposite party failed to fulfill the 
payment obligations, resulting in payment of a balance amount 
and accruing interest at 18% per annum with effect from 
01.04.1997. The complainants alleged breaches of the agreement, 

3 
 
including deviations from sanctioned plan, non-construction of a 
compound wall impacting parking and issues regarding access 
and 
unauthorized 
constructions 
beyond 
sanctioned 
plan, 
subsequently sold to third parties. They also noted defects in the 
building construction, such as cracks, in the building, terrace 
work being not completed and the absence of provision for 
electricity meters. Despite notices issued by the complainants, the 
opposite party denied the allegations asserting that the 
complainants owed them Rs.8,60,000/- for construction and 
amenities. 
  
2.4  Seeking a resolution of the ongoing breaches under the 
Consumer Protection Act, the complainants pursued their legal 
recourse to address the deadlock by filing Complaint No.184 of 
2005 before the District Consumer Forum, Kolhapur. Their 
prayers for relief were several: they demanded payment of 
outstanding dues inclusive of interest; reimbursement of expenses 
incurred and compensation for the mental distress caused to 
them. 
Additionally, 
they 
sought 
structural 
rectification, 
emphasizing on the removal of unauthorized constructions; 
rectification of construction defects; completion of pending work 
and the provision of essential amenities as initially agreed upon. 

4 
 
 
2.5  In his version, the original opposite party disputed the 
existence of any consumer relationship, denied breaches and 
argued for the resolution of contractual disputes through the civil 
court. The opposite party claimed that the complaint was time-
barred and sought its dismissal with compensatory costs of 
Rs.10,000/-. 
  
2.6  The District Consumer Forum at Kolhapur, vide order dated 
16.10.2006, on perusal of various supporting documents, 
including the Development Agreement, building plans, notices, 
replies, certificates, estimates, receipts and affidavits partly 
allowed the Consumer Complaint No.184 of 2005 filed against the 
opposite party. The District Forum observed that as per the 
Development Agreement between the parties, the transaction 
between the parties was not one of sale and purchase of property 
but of development of property. Since the services regarding 
construction are covered by the Consumer Protection Act, the 
dispute was held to be a consumer dispute. Further, the District 
Forum refused to take into consideration the points raised by the 
complainants regarding defects in construction, amenities and 
facilities due to lack of evidence provided in that regard. However, 

5 
 
the opposite party was found to be liable to pay to the 
complainants an amount of Rs. l,65,000/- along with interest at 
the rate of 18% per annum with effect from 01.05.1997 till 
payment; an amount of Rs. 1,85,000/- along with interest at the 
rate of 18% per annum with effect from 31.08.1997 till payment; 
and an amount of Rs.1,50,000/- at the time of conveyance. 
 
2.7  Both the parties challenged the order of the District Forum 
before 
the 
Consumer 
Disputes 
Redressal 
Commission, 
Maharashtra State, Mumbai (for short, “the State Commission”). 
The State Commission, vide its common judgment dated 
08.04.2008 in First Appeal Nos.2570 of 2006 and 1115 of 2007, 
partly modified the order of the District Forum by setting aside the 
directions to pay Rs. 1.85 lakhs and Rs. 1.65 lakhs as the said 
claims were held to be time-barred but upheld the direction to pay 
Rs. 1.5 lakhs. However, the State Commission placed reliance on 
some other clauses of the Development Agreement such as clause 
4(k), to hold that the building was incomplete and that the opposite 
party was liable to get the construction of the compound wall and 
give separate access in terms of Schedule-II of the Development 
Agreement. The opposite party was further directed to obtain and 
handover the Completion Certificate to the complainants; to 

6 
 
execute the Conveyance Deed and to give electricity connections to 
the complainants for which they had already paid Rs.15,000/- to 
the developer-opposite party.  
 
2.8  The complainants as well as the opposite party approached 
the NCDRC by filing Revision Petition Nos.3283 of 2008 and 2794 
of 2008. During the pendency of the petition before the NCDRC, 
the original opposite party-Vinayak Purushottam Dube died and 
his legal representatives i.e., his wife and two sons were brought 
on record, who are the appellants before this Court. The NCDRC, 
vide order dated 31.05.2016, again partly modified the order of the 
State Commission. The NCDRC disagreed with the finding and 
conclusion of the State Commission with respect to the time-
barred transaction of Rs. 1.85 lakhs and Rs. 1.65 lakhs, by 
observing that the limitation of the said claims had to be adjudged 
by looking at the transaction between the parties as a whole, which 
established a continuous cause of action in the matter. The 
NCDRC upheld the directions given by the State Commission with 
respect to the Completion Certificate; Conveyance Deed; Electricity 
Connection, etc., since the developer did not challenge any part of 
those directions as the same were in accordance with the 
Development Agreement. In other words, the NCDRC upheld the 

7 
 
order of payment of 1.65 lakhs and 1.85 lakhs along with interest 
as directed by the District Forum, and also upheld the slew of 
directions issued by the State Commission to the developer-
opposite party.  
  
3. 
The appellants-opposite party thereafter approached this 
Court by preferring Special Leave Petition (Civil)…. CC Nos.24515-
24516 of 2016 to challenge the order of the NCDRC dated 
31.05.2016 in Revision Petition Nos.3283 of 2008 and 2794 of 
2008. This Court, vide order dated 03.01.2017, refused to interfere 
with the view taken by the NCDRC and disposed of the same by 
granting liberty to the appellants-opposite party herein to resort to 
the remedy of review before the National Commission. 
  
4. 
Thereafter, the appellants-opposite party filed Review 
Application No.26 of 2017 and the complainants filed Review 
Application No.27 of 2017, both before the NCDRC and the order 
of review proceeding is assailed in the present case. The NCDRC, 
vide order dated 02.05.2018, upheld its earlier findings on the 
question of limitation, status of complainants as consumers and 
the relief being in excess of the payment made by the 
complainants. Further, NCDRC refused to accept the contention of 

8 
 
the appellants-opposite party that after the death of the original 
owner, the legal representatives are not accountable for the 
liabilities under the agreement. In paragraph 12 of the order, the 
NCDRC held that the death of a developer has no effect upon the 
obligations of the developer under the Development Agreement and 
the same have to be executed by the legal heirs of the developer. 
The relevant part of the said paragraph 12 is extracted as under: 
“12. Further, we have no reason to agree with the 
contention raised by the review applicant that after the 
death of the original owner, the legal representatives are 
not accountable for the liabilities under the agreement. In 
the eventuality of death of the developer, it cannot be 
stated that various clauses of the development agreement 
between 
the 
parties 
becomes 
redundant 
or 
the 
complainant is not entitled to seek execution of the 
provisions of the development agreement. Such execution 
has to be made by the legal heirs of the developer only.” 
 
 
5. 
The legal representatives of the opposite party being 
aggrieved by the aforesaid reasoning of the NCDRC have preferred 
these appeals. 
  
6. 
We have heard learned counsel Sri Aniruddha Deshmukh for 
the appellants and learned counsel Sri Abhishek Yadav for the 
respondents and perused the material on record. 
  

9 
 
7. 
The controversy in these appeals is in a very narrow compass. 
No doubt, the complainants succeeded before the District Forum, 
the State Commission as well as the NCDRC. During the pendency 
of the revision preferred by the original opposite party before the 
NCDRC, the original opposite party died. His legal representatives 
i.e. his widow and two sons were brought on record. In fact, the 
complainants also had preferred their Revision Petition. The 
NCDRC reasoned that the legal representatives of the opposite 
party were liable both with regard to the monetary payments that 
the original opposite party was directed to pay and also liable to 
comply with the other directions issued by the District Forum as 
modified by the State Commission and thereafter modified by the 
NCDRC. 
  
8. 
Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the 
appellants as the legal representatives of the deceased opposite 
party are willing to make the payment as directed. But as far as 
the other set of the directions are concerned, it is not permissible 
for them to comply with them inasmuch as the said directions were 
issued by the District Forum as well as the State Commission 
personally against the opposite party who is since deceased.  Those 
directions are with regard to construction of compound wall so as 

10 
 
to give separate access in terms of Schedule II of the Development 
Agreement; to obtain and handover completion certificate to the 
complainants-respondents; to execute the conveyance deed and to 
give electricity connection and such other directions. 
  
9. 
Learned counsel for the appellants contended that the 
aforesaid directions cannot now be complied with by the legal 
representatives of the deceased - original opposite party inasmuch 
as those were personal directions as issued against the original 
opposite party. He contended that the original opposite party was 
having the proprietorship concern and therefore, the estate of the 
deceased proprietor would be liable insofar as the satisfaction of 
the compensatory payments only but not for complying the other 
directions 
issued 
which 
cannot 
now 
fall 
on 
his 
legal 
representatives to comply. It was contended that the original 
opposite party had skills and expertise to comply with the said 
directions as a developer but on his demise, his legal 
representatives, namely, his widow and two sons, cannot be 
compelled to carry out those directions as they neither possess the 
necessary skills nor expertise and further, they are not continuing 
the proprietorship concern of the original opposite party which has 
now been wound up on the demise of the sole proprietor. Therefore, 

11 
 
learned counsel for the appellants-opposite party contended that 
the various clauses of the Development Agreement which had 
placed duties and obligations on the original opposite party, who 
is since deceased, cannot now be enforced against and performed 
by his legal representatives or heirs. 
  
10. Per 
contra, 
learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
complainants–
respondents submitted that no doubt the legal representatives of 
the original opposite party would comply with the directions for 
payments from out of the estate of the deceased opposite party but 
the complainants would be left high and dry insofar as the other 
obligations which had to be discharged by the opposite party and 
therefore, the NCDRC was justified in directing the legal 
representatives of the deceased opposite party to take steps for also 
complying with those directions. 
  
11. Having heard learned counsel for the respective parties, we 
note that admittedly the original opposite party was in the 
business of real estate and as a developer, had entered into the 
Development Agreement dated 30.07.1996 with the complainants. 
According to the complainants-respondents herein, they were 
entitled to eight residential flats and there were various other 

12 
 
terms and conditions of the said Development Agreement which 
imposed an obligation on the original opposite party.  
 
12. The question is: what would happen to the obligations 
imposed personally on the original opposite party on his demise? 
No doubt, the estate of the original opposite party would be liable 
for any monetary decree or directions for payment issued in the 
present case. However, what about the obligations which had to be 
performed under the Development Agreement such as certain 
construction to be made and certain approvals etc. to be obtained 
by him on completion of the construction. Can the legal 
representatives be liable to comply with those obligations under 
the Development Agreement on the demise of the original opposite 
party? 
  
13. In this regard, it is necessary to discuss the jurisprudential 
status of a proprietary concern. In a report of the Insolvency Law 
Committee submitted in February, 2020, the definition of 
‘Proprietorship Firms’ reads as under: 
“2.DEFINITION OF ‘PROPRIETORSHIP FIRMS’ 
2.2 Proprietorship firms are businesses that are 
owned, managed and controlled by one person.   They 
are the most common form of businesses in India and 
are based in   unlimited   liability   of   the   owner.     

13 
 
Legally, a proprietorship is not a separate legal entity 
and is merely the name under which a proprietor 
carries on business. [Raghu Lakshminarayanan vs. 
Fine Tubes (2007) 5 SCC 103.] 
Due to this, proprietorships are usually not defined in 
statutes. 
Though 
some 
statutes 
define 
proprietorships, such definition is limited to the 
context of the statute. For example, Section 2 (haa) of 
the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 defined a ‘sole 
proprietorship’ as “an individual who engages himself 
in practice of accountancy or engages in services…”. 
Notably, ‘proprietorship firms’ have also not been 
statutorily defined in many other jurisdictions.” 
[Source: Report of the Insolvency Law Committee, 
Page No.117-118, Government of India (Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs, February, 2020).] 
 
14. According 
to 
Salmond, 
there 
are 
five 
important 
characteristics of a legal right:  
1. It is vested in a person who may be distinguished as the 
owner of the right, the subject of it, the person entitled, or 
the person of inherence. 
2. It avails against a person, upon whom lies the correlative 
duty. He may be distinguished as the person bound, or as 
the subject of duty, or as the person of incidence. 
3. It obliges the person bound to an act or omission in favour 
of the person entitled. This may be termed the content of 
the right. 

14 
 
4. The act or omission relates to something (in the widest 
sense of that word), which may be termed the object or 
subject matter of the right.  
5. Every legal right has a title, that is to say, certain facts or 
events by reason of which the right has become vested in 
its owner. 
[Source: PJ Fitzgerald, Salmond on Jurisprudence, Page 
No.221 (Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., 12th 
Edition, 1966)] 
 
15. Salmond also believed that no right can exist without a 
corresponding duty. Every right or duty involves a bond of legal 
obligation by which two or more persons are bound together. Thus, 
there can be no duty unless there is someone to whom it is due; 
there can be no right unless there is someone from whom it is 
claimed; and there can be no wrong unless there is someone who 
is wronged, that is to say, someone whose right has been violated. 
This is also called as vinculum juris which means “a bond of the 
law”. It is a tie that legally binds one person to another.  [Source: 
PJ Fitzgerald, Salmond on Jurisprudence, Page No.220 (Universal 
Law Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., 12th Edition, 1966)].  
 
16. Salmond’s classification of proprietary and personal rights 
are encapsulated as under: 

15 
 
 
Proprietary Rights 
Personal Rights 
1 Proprietary rights means a 
person’s right in relation to 
his own property. Proprietary 
rights have some economic or 
monetary value. 
Personal rights are rights 
arising out of any contractual 
obligation 
or 
rights 
that 
relate to status. 
2 Proprietary 
rights 
are 
valuable. 
Personal 
rights 
are 
not 
valuable in monetary terms. 
3 Proprietary rights are not 
residual in character. 
Personal 
rights 
are 
the 
residuary 
rights 
which 
remain 
after 
proprietary 
rights have been subtracted. 
4 Proprietary 
rights 
are 
transferable. 
Personal 
rights 
are 
not 
transferable. 
5 Proprietary rights are the 
elements of wealth for man. 
Personal rights are merely 
elements of his well-being. 
6 Proprietary rights possess not 
merely 
judicial 
but 
also 
economic importance. 
Personal 
rights 
possess 
merely judicial importance. 
 
[Source: PJ Fitzgerald, Salmond on Jurisprudence, Page No.238 
(Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., 12th Edition, 1966)]. 
 
 
17. Salmond’s classification of inheritable and uninheritable 
rights is stated as under:  
Inheritable Rights 
Uninheritable Rights 
A right is inheritable if it 
survives the owner. 
A right is uninheritable if it dies 
with the owner. 
 
[Source: PJ Fitzgerald, Salmond on Jurisprudence, Page Nos.415 & 
442 (Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., 12th Edition, 1966)]. 
 
 
 
18. On a reading of the above, it is clear, when it comes to 
personal rights (as opposed to a proprietary rights) are rights 
arising out of any contractual obligations or the rights that relate 

16 
 
to status. Such personal rights are not transferable and also not 
inheritable. Correspondingly, Section 306 of the Indian Succession 
Act, 1925 (for short, “1925 Act”) applies the maxim “actio 
personalis moritur cum persona” (a personal right of action dies 
with the person) which is limited to a certain class of cases and 
would apply when the right litigated is not heritable. By the same 
logic, a decree holder cannot enforce the same against the legal 
representatives of a deceased judgment debtor unless the same 
survives as against his legal representatives. Section 306 of the 
1925 Act reads as under:  
“Section 306 – Demands and rights of action of or 
against deceased survive to and against executor 
or administrator.— 
All demands whatsoever and all rights to prosecute or 
defend any action or special proceeding existing 
in favor of or against a person at the time of his 
decease, survive to and against his executors or 
administrators; 
except 
causes 
of 
action 
for 
defamation, assault, as defined in the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (45 of 1860) or other personal injuries not 
causing the death of the party; and except also cases 
where, after the death of the party, the relief sought 
could not be enjoyed or granting it would be 
nugatory.” 
 
19. We may also advert to Sections 37 and 40 of the Indian 
Contract Act, 1872, which read as under:- 

17 
 
“37. Obligation of parties to contracts.—The parties to 
a contract must either perform, or offer to perform, their 
respective 
promises, 
unless 
such 
performance 
is 
dispensed with or excused under the provisions of this 
Act, or of any other law.  
Promises bind the representatives of the promisors in case 
of the death of such promisors before performance, unless 
a contrary intention appears from the contract. 
x   x   x 
40.Person by whom promise is to be performed.—If it 
appears from the nature of the case that it was the 
intention of the parties to any contract that any promise 
contained in it should be performed by the promisor 
himself, such promise must be performed by the promisor. 
In other cases, the promisor or his representatives may 
employ a competent person to perform it.” 
 
20. Section 37 of the aforesaid Act states that a promise made by 
a promisor is binding on his representatives in case of his/her 
death, unless a contrary intention appears from the contract. Legal 
representatives are liable for the debts of their predecessor, but 
their liability is limited to the extent of the estate of the deceased 
inherited by them. Therefore, the representatives of a promisor are 
bound to perform the promisor’s contract to the extent of the 
assets of the deceased falling in their hands. But they are not 
personally liable under the contracts of the deceased and are also 
not liable for personal contracts of the deceased.  Therefore, when 
personal considerations are the basis of a contract they come to 

18 
 
an end on the death of either party, unless there is a stipulation 
express or implied to the contrary. This is especially so when the 
contracts involve exercise of special skills such as expressed in 
Section 40 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. 
    
21. Thus, a contract can be performed vicariously by the legal 
representatives of the promisor depending upon the subject matter 
of the contract and the nature of performance that was stipulated 
thereto. But a contract involving exercise of individual’s skills or 
expertise of the promisor or which depends upon his/her personal 
qualification or competency, the promisor has to perform the 
contract by himself and not by his/her representatives. A contract 
of service is also personal to the promisor. This is because when a 
person contracts with another to work or to perform service, it is 
on the basis of the individual’s skills, competency or other 
qualifications of the promisor and in circumstances such as the 
death of the promisor he is discharged from the contract. 
  
22. Correspondingly, duties or obligations which are personal in 
nature cannot be transmitted from a person who had to personally 
discharge those duties, on his demise, to his legal representatives. 
Just as a right is uninheritable and  the right personal to him  dies 

19 
 
with the owner of the right, similarly, a duty cannot be transferred 
to the legal representatives of a deceased if the same is personal in 
nature. 
In Raghu Lakshminarayanan vs. Fine Tubes, (2007) 5 
SCC 103, while distinguishing a juristic person such as a 
company, a partnership or an association of persons from a 
proprietary concern, it was observed that a person who carries on 
business in the name of a business concern, but he being a 
proprietor thereof, would be solely responsible for conduct of its 
affairs. A proprietary concern is not a company. Further, a 
proprietary concern is only the business name in which the 
proprietor of the business carries on the business. A suit by or 
against a proprietary concern is by or against the proprietor of the 
business. In the event of the death of the proprietor of a proprietary 
concern, it is the legal representatives of the proprietor who alone 
can sue or be sued in respect of the dealings of the proprietary 
business which is by representing the estate of the deceased 
proprietor. The real party who is being sued is the proprietor of the 
said business. Therefore, if a proprietor had to carry on certain 
obligations personally under a contract, the same cannot be 
fastened on his legal representatives. 

20 
 
 
23. Further, Section 2(11) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(for short, “CPC”) defines a “legal representative” to mean a person 
who in law represents the estate of a deceased person, and 
includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the 
deceased and where a party sues or is sued in a representative 
character the person on whom the estate devolves on the death of 
the party so suing or sued. Thus, the legal representatives of a 
deceased are liable only to the extent of the estate which they 
inherit.  
In Custodian of Branches of Banco National Ultramarino 
vs. Nalini Bai Naique, AIR 1989 SC 1589, it was observed that 
the expression "legal representative" as defined in the CPC is 
applicable to proceedings in a suit. It means a person who in law 
represents the estate of a deceased person and includes any 
person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased and 
where a party sues or is sued in a representative character the 
person on whom the estate devolves on the death of the party so 
suing or sued. The definition is inclusive in character and its scope 
is wide as it is not confined to legal heirs only, instead, it stipulates 
a person who may or may not be a heir, competent to inherit the 
property of the deceased or he should represent the estate of the 

21 
 
deceased person. It includes heirs as well as persons who 
represent the estate even without title, either as executors or 
administrators in possession of the estate of the deceased. All such 
persons would be covered by the expression "legal representative". 
If there are many heirs, those in possession bona fide, without 
there being any fraud or collusion, are also entitled to represent 
the estate of the deceased. 
 
24. The aforesaid judgment refers to representation of an estate 
of a deceased person which would devolve on his legal 
representatives and where the decree has to be executed vis-à-vis 
such an estate. In such a case, the heirs of the deceased judgment 
debtor would be under a legal obligation to discharge their duties 
to satisfy the decree or an order from the estate of a deceased. 
But in the case of sole proprietorship, which is a common form 
of business in India, when a legal obligation arises under a 
contract which has to be discharged personally by the sole 
proprietor, who is since deceased, had entered into the agreement, 
such as, in the case of a Development Agreement in the instant 
case, can such obligations be imposed on his legal representatives 
or heirs who are not parties to the Development Agreement and 
where the obligations under such an agreement per se cannot be 

22 
 
fulfilled inasmuch as they neither have the skills nor the expertise 
to do so and those obligations depend purely on the skills and 
expertise of the deceased sole proprietor? In other words, where 
the decree or order is not against the estate of a deceased sole 
proprietor but based on the skills and expertise of the sole 
proprietor, we are of the view that in the latter case, the obligations 
which had to be performed by the sole proprietor would come to 
an end on his demise and the same cannot be imposed on his legal 
heirs or representatives. We reiterate that such a position is 
distinguished from a position where the estate of the deceased sole 
proprietor would become liable to satisfy the decree in monetary 
terms. This is because a proprietorship firm is not a separate legal 
entity as compared to the proprietor and his estate would become 
liable only to satisfy a decree or an order in monetary terms on his 
demise. 
In this context, the following terms of the Development 
Agreement dated 30.07.1996 would clearly indicate that the 
obligations on the opposite party were to be carried out personally 
by him: 
“NOW THIS AGREEMENT WINESSETH AND IS AGREED 
BY AND BETWEEN THE PARTIES HERETO AS 
FOLLOWS: 

23 
 
1.1 The owners hereby grant to the developer sole and 
exclusive development rights in respect of the property 
bearing C.S. No. C. 1465 situated in 'C' Ward, Laxmipuri 
Kolhapur -416002 in the form of license to enter upon the 
said property in the capacity of the licensee of the owners 
for the sole purpose of developing the said property and 
selling the offices/premises / shops to the extent and in 
the manner stipulated hereafter and upon the terms and 
conditions agreed by the between the parties hereto and 
set out here below in this agreement. Subject to clause No. 
2. the license hereby granted is irrevocable till the entire 
property is developed and all the premises constructed 
thereon are sold out. It is however, hereby expressly 
understood that the right of entry granted under this 
clause is for the sole purpose of developing the said 
property selling all premises (except those to be allotted to 
owners) including the shop/s basement/offices therein 
and common restricted areas or facilities as the case may 
be and such entry shall not be construed to mean that the 
owners have placed the developer in legal or physical 
possession of the said property. 
x   x   x 
16. The developer undertakes to comply with and carry out 
all the legal and contractual obligations that may be 
entered into for the construction of the buildings and for 
the sale of the various premises in the said buildings. The 
developer further undertakes to indemnify and keep 
indemnified the owners from and against any action either 
civil or criminal suit proceedings, damages, penalties or 
any other similar actions which may be initiated, made or 
ledged by any person or persons by reason of the failure of 
the developer to comply with, carry out or perform any 
such legal and contractual obligations.” 
  
25. In this regard, it would be useful to illustrate that in a general 
sense, an injunction is a judicial mandate operating in personam 
by which upon certain established principles of equity, a party is 
required to do or refrain from doing a particular thing. On the other 

24 
 
hand, a direction to pay money either by way of final or interim 
order is not considered to be an injunction. An order of injunction 
is normally issued against a named person and is addressed to the 
defendant personally and on his demise the cause of action would 
come to an end insofar as such a person who is since deceased 
even if it relates to a proprietary right unless his legal 
representatives are also causing a threat in which case the cause 
of action would continue vis-à-vis the legal representatives also. 
 
 
26. Therefore, if the estate of the deceased becomes liable then 
the legal representatives who in law represent the estate of a 
deceased person or any person who intermeddles with the estate 
of the deceased and where a party sues or is sued in a 
representative character, the person on whom the estate devolves 
on the death of the party so suing or sued is liable to the extent 
the estate has devolved. Hence, what is crucial is that the estate of 
a deceased person which becomes liable and the legal 
representatives must discharge their liability to a decree holder or 
a person who has been granted an order to recover from the estate 
of the deceased which they would represent and not beyond it. 
  

25 
 
27. But in the case of a personal obligation imposed on a person 
under the contract and on the demise of such person, his estate 
does not become liable and therefore, the legal representatives who 
represent the estate of a deceased would obviously not be liable 
and cannot be directed to discharge the contractual obligations of 
the deceased. 
 
28. In Ajmera Housing Corporation vs. Amrit M. Patel (Dead) 
through LRs, (1998) 6 SCC 500, this Court observed that the 
defendants in the said case had no privity of contract with the 
plaintiff therein and the contract had been entered into on the 
basis of the skills and capacity of the party to perform under the 
contract and the rights and duties were also personal to the party 
who had to discharge the obligations under the contract. In the 
circumstances, it was observed that the legal representatives of the 
builder under the contract had neither the capacity nor the special 
skills to discharge the obligations of the deceased. 
  
29. This position is also clear on a reading of Section 50 of the 
CPC which states as under: 
“Section.50:- (1) Where a judgment-debtor dies 
before the decree has been fully satisfied, the holder 
of the decree may apply to the Court which passed it 

26 
 
to execute the same against the legal representative of 
the deceased. 
 
(2) Where the decree is executed against such legal 
representative, he shall be liable only to the extent of 
the property of the deceased which has come to his 
hands and has not been duly disposed of; and, for the 
purpose of ascertaining such liability, the Court 
executing the decree may, of its own motion or on the 
application of the decree-holder, compel such legal 
representative to produce such accounts as it thinks 
fit.” 
 
30. Thus, any decree which is relatable to the extent of the 
property of the deceased which has come to the hands of the legal 
representatives and has not been duly disposed of, the same would 
be liable for execution by a decree holder so as to compel the legal 
representatives to satisfy the decree. In this context, even a decree 
for   preventive injunction can also be executed against the legal 
representatives of the deceased judgment-debtor if such a decree 
is in relation to the property or runs with the property if there is a 
threat from such legal representatives. 
 
31. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we hold that the legal 
representatives of the deceased opposite party-appellants herein 
are not liable to discharge the obligation which had to be 
discharged by the deceased opposite party in his personal capacity 
and hence that portion of the impugned orders of the NCDRC, 

27 
 
State Commission and District Forum are set aside. Needless to 
observe that the direction for payments shall be made by the legal 
representatives from the estate of the deceased opposite party if 
not already satisfied. 
  
32. The appeals are allowed in the aforesaid terms. 
  
33.   Parties to bear their respective costs. 
 
 
………………………...J. 
[B.V. NAGARATHNA] 
 
 
 
…………………………J. 
[UJJAL BHUYAN] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
MARCH 01, 2024.