2024 INSC 168
NON­REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1076 OF 2024
Murari Lal Chhari & Ors.
            … Appellants
versus
Munishwar Singh Tomar & Anr.          
 ... Respondents
J  U  D  G  M  E  N  T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTS
1.
The first respondent filed a complaint under Section 200
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, the ‘CrPC’)
against the appellants.   The dispute relates to land bearing
Survey Nos.1822 and 1823 having an area of 2 bighas and 1
biswa in Gwalior city (the Suit property). According to the first
respondent   –   complainant,   about   353   acres   of   land
comprising   several   survey   nos.   situated   in   the   adjacent
villages has been allotted for the use of the Special Armed
Forces   (SAF)   by   the   Home   Department.     The   present
appellants are officers of SAF.  
Criminal Appeal no.1076 of 2024 
Page 1 of 9
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.03.04
18:11:19 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2.
The first respondent filed a civil suit in respect of the
said property for a declaration of his title as Bhumiswami and
a permanent injunction.  The Trial Court dismissed the suit.
The first Appellate Court dismissed the appeal against the
decree of the Trial Court. However, in the Second Appeal, the
High Court interfered and passed a decree of declaration and
permanent injunction. A Special Leave Petition filed against
the decree of the High Court was dismissed with costs. In
2016, the first respondent filed a Contempt Petition against
the   first  appellant,   who   was   the   Commandant   of   the   14th
Battalion of SAF at Gwalior. The allegation was of a breach of
the decree passed on 20th March 2013 by the High Court in
the Second Appeal preferred by the first respondent.   The
allegation was that the first appellant attempted to violate the
decree of the High Court in the Second Appeal and trespass
upon   the   suit   property.     The   High   Court   dismissed   the
Contempt Petition by Order dated 11th  October 2017.   The
High Court held that the demarcation of the suit property
bearing Survey nos. 1822 and 1823 was carried out ex­parte
by the first respondent in the absence of a representative of
SAF.  It was observed that a boundary dispute has cropped
up between the SAF and the first respondent.   During the
pendency of the Contempt Petition, in 2017, the complaint
subject matter of this petition under Section 200 of CrPC was
filed   by   the   first   respondent   alleging   the   commission   of
offences under Sections 323, 294, 427, 341, 447, 506B read
with Section 34 and Sections 107, 141 of the Indian Penal
Criminal Appeal no.1076 of 2024 
Page 2 of 9

Code (IPC). The allegation in the complaint was that though
the first respondent was declared as the owner of the suit
property by the High Court and though the demarcation of
the suit property was carried out after notice to the SAF, the
first appellant conspired with the other appellants to illegally
capture   the   suit   property.     The   specific   allegation   in   the
complaint is that on 8th January 2017, the appellant nos. 2 to
6   were   present   on   the   suit   property,   and   they   broke   the
fencing,   which   caused   a   loss   of   Rs.50,000   to   the   first
respondent.     It   is   alleged   that   when   the   first   respondent
objected, the appellants verbally abused the first respondent,
and he was pushed several times.  Even a death threat was
administered by the appellants to the first respondent.  The
appellants also threatened the first respondent to send him to
jail.
3.
The learned Judicial Magistrate, Gwalior, before whom
the complaint was filed, recorded the statement of the first
respondent under Section 200 of CrPC.   It appears that the
learned Magistrate took recourse to the inquiry under Section
202   of   CrPC   and   recorded   statements   on   oath   of   two
witnesses   of   the   first   respondent,   Hari   Singh   Yadav   and
Lakhan Singh Tomar.
4.
By Order dated 23rd  June 2018, the learned Magistrate
dismissed the complaint in exercise of powers under Section
203   of   the   CrPC.   The   learned   Magistrate   held   that   the
mandatory requirement of obtaining a sanction to prosecute
Criminal Appeal no.1076 of 2024 
Page 3 of 9

the appellants in accordance with Section 197 of CrPC was
not obtained.  In a revision preferred by the first respondent
against the order of dismissal of the complaint, the learned
Additional Sessions Judge interfered. The learned Additional
Sessions Judge held that there was no inquiry made by the
learned Magistrate on the  issue of whether the appellants
committed   the   acts   constituting   alleged   offences   in   the
discharge   of   official   duties,   the   non­performance   of   which
would have made the accused persons answerable for the
dereliction of the official duties. Therefore, an order of remand
was   passed   to   enable   the   learned   Magistrate   to   record   a
finding   on   the   necessity   of   obtaining   sanction   for   all   the
offences alleged. After the order of remand, by Order dated
11th  October 2018, the learned Magistrate passed an order
directing the cognizance to be taken under Sections 294,323,
427, 447, and 506­II of IPC.  The learned Magistrate did not
record any finding on the issue of sanction.  This Order of the
learned Magistrate was subjected to a challenge before the
High Court by invoking provisions of Section 482 of CrPC.  By
the   impugned   Judgment,   the   High   Court   dismissed   the
petition.
SUBMISSIONS
5.
The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants
urged that even taking the averments made in the complaint
as correct, the acts attributed to the appellants were done by
them in the performance of the statutory duties as officers of
Criminal Appeal no.1076 of 2024 
Page 4 of 9

the   SAF,   and   the   learned   Magistrate   has   completely
overlooked this aspect.   In fact, he has not decided on the
issue of the requirement of sanction at all. He submitted that
even   otherwise,   in   view   of   the   earlier   dismissal   of   the
Contempt Petition, the order of summoning ought not to have
been issued by the learned Magistrate.  
6.
The learned counsel appearing for the first respondent
submitted   that   with   due   application   of   mind,   the   learned
Magistrate   issued   process.   The   learned   Magistrate   had
recorded the statements of three witnesses, including the first
respondent. That was done based on materials on record.  He
submitted that committing acts of trespass cannot be a part
of   the   appellants'   official   duty.     Therefore,   sanction   to
prosecute under Section 197 of CrPC was not required.   He
submitted that a full­fledged trial is necessary.  All issues can
be decided at the time of the final hearing of the complaint.
He would submit that no interference is called for. We have
also heard the learned Deputy Advocate General for the State
of Madhya Pradesh.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
7.
There   is   no   dispute   that,   at   the   relevant   time,   the
appellants were the officers of SAF.   We have perused the
Contempt Petition filed by the first respondent alleging breach
of the decree of injunction passed in the Second Appeal dated
20th March 2013.  Only the first appellant was made a party
as the contemnor to the Contempt Petition.   The Contempt
Criminal Appeal no.1076 of 2024 
Page 5 of 9

Petition was filed in the year 2016.  In the Contempt Petition,
a reference is made to the survey of the suit property carried
out with the knowledge of SAF.  The specific allegations in the
Contempt Petition are as follows:
“3. That, the land of Survey No. 211 and
212 situated at Gudi Lashkar is adjacent to
the land of the petitioner and disobeying the
judgement   of   this   Hon'ble   Court   the
demarcation as put i.e. Muddiya stone sign
has been made on the spot. In that regard
an   application   was   made   to   the
Commandant, but the Commandant having
not   given   any   heed   to   the   application
contrarily day to day creating nuisance and
disobey   the   judgement   passed   by   this
Hon'ble Court.  
4. That, when the land of 14th Battalion is
different   not   within   the   area   of   the
petitioner's land despite of that putting
aside the judgement of this Hon'ble Court
are trying to trespass over the land of the
petitioner.   Therefore,   it   is   matter   of
contempt   of  Court.  The  respondents are
deliberately   disobeying   the   judgement
Annexure   A/1   by   this   Hon'ble   Court,
therefore   the   action   of   the   respondents
comes under the definition of the Contempt
of   Court   Act   and   non­compliance   of   the
judgement   of   the   Hon'ble   Court   also
amounts   to   flagrant   violation   of   the
judgement of this Hon'ble Court……” 
(emphasis added)
It   is   pertinent   to   note   that   the   Contempt   Petition   was
dismissed on 11th October 2017.  The Contempt Petition was
Criminal Appeal no.1076 of 2024 
Page 6 of 9

dismissed   by   holding   that   there   was   a   boundary   dispute
between the appellant and SAF.  
8.
In the complaint filed by the first respondent, averments
were made regarding the survey of the suit property.   It is
alleged that the survey was made after due notice to SAF, and
the property was fenced.  Further allegations in the complaint
read thus: 
“…………………
11.
After   the   above­said   proceedings
done,   the   Respondent/Accused   No.1,
advised   and   conspired   with   other
Respondents   to   illegitimately   capture   the
complainant's   land   and   sent   them   for
encroachment.   On   the   date,   08.01.2017,
Respondent nos. 2 to 6 being present there
on   the   complainant's   land,   broke   the
fencing which caused a loss of Rs. 50000/­
to the complainant. 
12.   When   the   complainant   started
defending his land and asked not to break
the fencing, he was abused verbally and was
pushed several times. Death threat was also
given to him and was told that he could be
sent to jail. 
xxx
xxx
  xxx
15. Even after the officers from S.A.F. came
and caused damage to the land belonging to
the   complainant   on   08.01.2017,   he   again
fenced   the   land.   Respondent   no.1   sent
Respondent no. 2 to 6 and again damaged
the   fence.   They   abused   him   verbally   and
gave the complainant a death threat again.
The   complainant   is   scared   that   he   might
face anything in the future.”
Criminal Appeal no.1076 of 2024 
Page 7 of 9

9.
In substance, the cause of action for filing the Contempt
Petition   and   the   alleged   cause   of   action   for   filing   the
complaint was substantially the same.   It is surprising that
though the Contempt Petition was already filed in 2016, the
said fact has not been mentioned in the complaint filed by the
first respondent in the year 2017. The fact that the Contempt
Petition   was   filed   has   not   even   been   disclosed   in   the
statement of the first petitioner recorded in the complaint.
The first respondent did not challenge the dismissal of the
Contempt Petition.   In view of the finding recorded in the
Contempt Petition by the High Court, taking the cognizance of
the said complaint was surely an abuse of the process of law.
The cognizance was taken after the dismissal of the Contempt
Petition by a detailed order.  
10.
There is another factual aspect of the matter.   In the
examination of the first respondent on oath in the complaint,
he   has   not   given   even   the   date   on   which   alleged   acts   of
encroachment and administering threats were made at the
instance of the appellants.  In the complaint, the allegation is
that on 8th January 2017, the appellant nos.2 to 6 broke the
fencing   and   gave   abuses/threats.     Surprisingly,   this   issue
was not raised in the Contempt Petition, which was pending
till 11th October 2017.  Witness nos. 2 and 3 of the deposition
do not name the appellant no.1 at all.   The two witnesses
have   not   given   even   the   approximate   dates   of   the   alleged
incidents.
Criminal Appeal no.1076 of 2024 
Page 8 of 9

11.
Therefore, in our view, the further prosecution of the
complaint   was   itself   an   abuse   of   the   process   of   law,   and
therefore,   the   High   Court   ought   to   have   quashed   the
complaint. 
12.
Accordingly, the impugned order of the High Court and
the   impugned   order   of   the   learned   Magistrate   taking
cognizance are quashed and set aside, and the complaint filed
by the first respondent stands dismissed.  
13.
The Appeal is, accordingly, allowed. 
.…………………J.
      (Abhay S. Oka)
..…………………J.
  
(Ujjal Bhuyan)
New Delhi;
March 4, 2024.
Criminal Appeal no.1076 of 2024 
Page 9 of 9