2024 INSC 163
Page 1 of 19 
 
REPORTABLE  
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                OF 2024 
 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7290 of 2023) 
 
SHAZIA AMAN KHAN  
AND ANOTHER  
 
 
 
 
 
 
…  Appellant(s) 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF ORISSA AND OTHERS                           … Respondent(s) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
Rajesh Bindal, J. 
 
 
Leave granted. 
2. 
 
This Court has been called upon to decide about the issue 
regarding custody of a minor child in parens patriae jurisdiction. 
3. 
 
The child at present is 14 years of age, living since birth with 
the appellants and respondent No.10. 
Digitally signed by Dr.
Naveen Rawal
Date: 2024.03.04
16:43:26 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 19 
 
4. 
 
Aggrieved against the order1 passed by the High Court2 in a 
Writ Petition3 filed by respondent No.2, who is biological father of the 
child, for restoration of her custody, namely, Sumaiya Khanam in his 
favour, the present appeal has been filed.  
5. 
 
The High Court directed the Registrar (Judicial) of the Court to 
recover the child from the custody of appellant No. 2 and respondent No. 
10, particularly from appellant No. 1 and respondent No. 10 and to hand 
over to respondent No.2. The authorities of the State Government were 
also directed to execute the writ of Habeas Corpus and hand over the 
child to respondent No. 2.  
6. 
 
Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that twin 
daughters were born to respondent No. 2 and his wife on 20.03.2010. The 
respondent No. 2 at that time was living at Rourkela. The children were 
born at Ranchi where their maternal grand mother was residing. As he 
was unable to take care of twins, on his request, one was left at Ranchi. 
Appellant No. 2 is the real sister of respondent No. 2. As the maternal 
grand mother could not take care of the small child, she was handed over 
 
1 Order dated 03.04.2023 
2 High Court of Orissa at Cuttack 
3 WPCRL No. 160 of 2021 

Page 3 of 19 
 
to the appellant No. 2. This happened when the child was merely 2-3 
months old. Ever since then, she is living with her. No issue was raised by 
respondent No. 2 at any time. It was only in the year 2015, a complaint was 
filed by respondent No. 2 with the police regarding kidnapping of the 
child against the appellants and respondents No. 7 and 9. As it was not a 
case of kidnapping, as alleged, closure report was filed by the police on 
31.08.2016, which was accepted by the Court, vide order dated 
11.02.2017. No objection was raised by respondent No. 2 to the 
acceptance of the closure report. However, a private complaint4 dated 
27.03.2017 was filed by respondent No. 2 under Sections 363, 346, 120-B 
IPC with reference to the custody of the child by taking a different stand. 
The aforesaid complaint is stated to be still pending. In a petition5 filed by 
the appellants and respondents No. 7 and 9 before the High Court seeking 
quashing of the complaint, further proceedings in the complaint have 
been stayed. 
6.1 
 
Immediately after filing of the aforesaid complaint by the 
respondent No. 2, wife of respondent No.2, namely, biological mother of 
 
4 ICC Case No. 120 of 2017 
5 CRLMC NO. 549 of 2019 

Page 4 of 19 
 
the child, filed petition6 in the High Court of Judicature at Patna praying 
for issuance of directions to the official respondents to recover the child 
from the wrongful confinement of the private respondents therein. 
However, when no case could be made out, the aforesaid petition was 
dismissed as withdrawn with liberty to avail remedy in accordance with 
law.  The fact remains that thereafter the mother of the child did not avail 
any other remedy for seeking custody of the child. In fact, they were not 
interested at all. It was the litigation only for the sake of it. The child was 
left by respondent No. 2 with her maternal grand mother on account of 
the financial difficulty faced by him at that time. 
6.2 
 
More than four years thereafter, respondent No. 2 filed a Writ 
Petition in the High Court praying for custody of the child. While 
entertaining the Writ Petition, the High Court, vide order dated 
11.02.2022, noticed the issues need to be examined in the Writ Petition. 
However, at the time of hearing the matter, the High Court framed 
different issues, as have been noticed in paragraph No. 57 of the 
impugned judgement.  
 
6 Criminal Writ Jurisdiction Case No. 1232 of 2017 

Page 5 of 19 
 
6.3 
 
He further submitted that number of documents were placed 
by the appellants before the High Court which clearly establish that the 
child ever since is living with the appellants and respondent No. 10. At 
the time of her birth, her name was Sumaiya Khanam, which was later on 
changed to Dania Aman Khan. A Petition7 has been filed under the 
Guardianship and Wards Act, 1890 by appellant No.1 and respondent 
No.10, which is stated to be pending. However, he submitted that in the 
present proceedings, the appellants are only raising the issue regarding 
custody of the child and not guardianship. He fairly submitted that there 
is no system of adoption of child in Mohammaden law. It is only Kafalah, 
in terms of which only custody can be given to another person, however, 
the child does not sever relations with biological parents. 
6.4 
 
Learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
appellants 
on 
instructions 
categorically stated that appellant No. 1 and respondent No. 10 have two 
more children. The child, of which they have the custody ever since her 
birth will have equal rights along with two other children. She will not be 
discriminated in any manner whatsoever. 
 
7 Guardianship Case No. 23 of 2016 before the Court of Principal Judge, Family Court, Patna 

Page 6 of 19 
 
6.5 
 
Further raising the issue regarding the conduct of respondent 
No. 2, he submitted that firstly a petition for Habeas Corpus was filed by 
the wife of respondent No. 2 before the High Court of Judicature at Patna 
five years after the child had been living with appellant No. 1 and 
respondent No. 10. The same was dismissed as withdrawn. Four years 
thereafter, similar petition was filed by respondent No. 2 before the High 
Court of Orissa. Time gap shows that the respondent No. 2 is not 
interested in custody of the child.  
6.6   
He further submitted that to show their bonafide, appellant No. 
1 and respondent No. 10 are ready and willing to deposit a sum of 
₹10,00,000/- in FDR in bank in her name and also transfer property having 
market value of about ₹50,00,000/-. At present, the child is grown up.  She 
is 14 years of age. She is capable of forming an opinion about her best 
interest. The welfare of the child is of paramount consideration and not 
the rights of the parties. Stability is most important factor as any order 
passed by this Court may dislodge the child from the family where she is 
settled for the last 14 years. Her transplantation at this stage may  not be  
in her best interest. It is the welfare of the child and not the personal law 
or the statute which has paramount consideration, when the parties are 

Page 7 of 19 
 
fighting. In support of his argument that it is only the best interest of the 
child which is to be considered in such matters and also the difference 
between custody and guardianship, reliance was placed upon the 
judgment of this Court in Athar Hussain v. Syed Siraj Ahmed and 
others8. 
7. 
 
In response, learned counsel for respondent No. 2 submitted 
that it is not the case of abandonment of a child, as is sought to be 
projected by the appellants now. No parents will ever think of that, what 
to talk of actually doing it. The child was left with her maternal grand 
mother and thereafter handed over to appellant No.2 for her initial 
upbringing when she was 3-4 months old. She further submitted that when 
repeated requests for returning back the child were not acceded to, 
respondent No. 2 did not have any choice but to lodge an FIR in which a 
closure report was filed and accepted also. She further submitted that 
even during this period of five years, the child had been coming to her 
parents off and on. It was further submitted that after the closure report in 
the aforesaid FIR was accepted, respondent No. 2 filed a complaint dated 
27.03.2017 under Sections 363, 346, 120-B IPC with reference to the 
 
8 (2010) 2 SCC 654 

Page 8 of 19 
 
custody of the child. The aforesaid complaint is stated to be still pending. 
In a petition9 filed by the appellants and respondents No. 7 and 9 seeking 
quashing of the complaint, further proceedings in the complaint have 
been stayed by the High Court of Orissa. Immediately after filing of the 
aforesaid complaint by respondent No. 2, his wife, i.e., biological mother 
of the child, filed the petition in the High Court of Judicature at Patna 
praying for issuance of directions to the official respondents to recover 
the child from the wrongful confinement of the private respondents 
therein. The aforesaid petition was dismissed as withdrawn with liberty to 
avail any other remedy in accordance with law.   
7.1 
 
Explaining the delay in filing the petition before the High 
Court, learned counsel for respondent No. 2 submitted that it is was 
because of COVID pandemic. She further submitted that since 2015, the 
biological parents of the child have not even been able to meet her. 
Respondent No. 2 was and is able to take care of all the needs of the child 
and provide her best education, as is being provided to the sister of the 
child as twins were born. It was further argued that appellant No. 1 got 
married with respondent No. 10, who is a stranger to the family. In terms 
 
9 CRLMC NO. 549 of 2019 

Page 9 of 19 
 
of Mohammedan law, custody of the child cannot be given to the stranger, 
who is beyond prohibitory degree for marriage but she fairly submitted 
that they all are living in a joint family. 
7.2   
 It was further argued that one of the prayers made by the 
appellants before this Court is that appellant No. 2 be permitted to stay 
for some time with the child in case custody is handed over to respondent 
No. 2 so that the child settles in new atmosphere. Respondent No. 2 does 
not have any objection to the fair offer made by the appellants.  In fact, 
when the child was handed over to appellant No.1, she was un-married. 
However, thereafter she got married and is having two children. The child 
may be discriminated. If the custody of the child is handed over to 
respondent No. 2, the distance between Patna and Rourkela being not 
much, the appellants are always welcome to visit the child. The question 
is also of the identity of the child which has been lost in the process. If she 
comes back, she will also have love, affection and company of her twin 
sister. In support, reliance was placed upon Tejaswani Gaud v. Shekhar 
Jagdish Prasad Tewari10 and Rohith Thammana Gowda v. State of 
Karnataka and others11. The Prayer is for dismissal of the appeal. 
 
10  AIR 2019 SC 2318 
11  AIR 2022 SC 3511 

Page 10 of 19 
 
8. 
 
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the 
relevant referred record. 
9. 
 
The undisputed facts on record are that twins were born to 
respondent No. 2 and his wife on 20.03.2010. One of  them, the custody of 
whom is in question, has undisputedly been living with  appellant No. 2 
ever since she was 3-4 month old and thereafter with the family.  
Presently, she is about 14 years of age. It is not a case in which any of the 
parties is claiming adoption which otherwise is not permissible under 
Mohammedan law. Guardianship is also not being claimed. It is only the 
dispute regarding custody of the child. 
10. 
 
Before we deal with the issue on merits, we deem it 
appropriate to refer to the legal position on the issues.  
11.   
This Court in Athar Hussain v. Syed Siraj Ahmed and 
others’case 
(supra) 
had 
elaborated 
the 
concept 
of 
custody, 
guardianship and stability of child, while holding as under: 
“31.     
We are mindful of the fact that, as far as the 
matter of guardianship is concerned, the prima facie case 
lies in favour of the father as under Section 19 of the GWC 
Act, unless the father is not fit to be a guardian, the Court 

Page 11 of 19 
 
has no jurisdiction to appoint another guardian. It is also 
true that the respondents, despite the voluminous 
allegations leveled against the appellant have not been 
able to prove that he is not fit to take care of the minor 
children, nor has the Family Court or the High Court found 
him so. However, the question of custody is different from 
the question of guardianship. Father can continue to be 
the natural guardian of the children; however, the 
considerations pertaining to the welfare of the child may 
indicate lawful custody with another friend or relative as 
serving his/her interest better. 
                      xx                        xx                      xx 
37. 
 
Stability and consistency in the affairs and 
routines of children is also an important consideration as 
was held by this Court in another decision cited by the 
learned counsel for the appellant in Mausami Moitra 
Ganguli v. Jayant Ganguli, (2008)7 SCC 673. This Court 
held: 
“24…..We are convinced that the dislocation of 
Satyajeet, at this stage, from Allahabad, where he 
has grown up in sufficiently good surroundings, 
would not only impede his schooling, it may also 
cause emotional strain and depression to him.” 

Page 12 of 19 
 
After taking note of the marked reluctance on the part of 
the boy to live with his mother, the Court further 
observed: 
"26.   
Under 
these 
circumstances 
and 
bearing in mind the paramount consideration of 
the welfare of the child, we are convinced that 
child's interest and welfare will be best served if 
he continues to be in the custody of the father. In 
our opinion, for the present, it is not desirable to 
disturb the custody of Master Satyajeet and, 
therefore, the order of the High Court giving his 
exclusive custody to the father with visitation 
rights to the mother deserves to be maintained." 
 
 
 
 
[Emphasis supplied] 
                     xx                      xx                            xx 
41.  
 
 However, the High Court of Rajasthan held 
that in the light of Section 19 which bars the Court from 
appointing a guardian when the father of the minor is alive 
and not unfit, the Court could not appoint any maternal 
relative as a guardian, even though the personal law of the 
minor might give preferential custody in her favour. As is 
evident, 
the 
aforementioned 
decision 
concerned 
appointment of a guardian. No doubt, unless the father is 
proven to be unfit, the application for guardianship filed 

Page 13 of 19 
 
by another person cannot be entertained. However, we 
have already seen that the question of custody was distinct 
from that of guardianship. As far as matters of custody are 
concerned, the Court is not bound by the bar envisaged 
under Section 19 of the Act.” 
  
 
 
 
 
 
[Emphasis supplied] 
12. 
 
This Court in Mausami Moitra Ganguli v. Jayant Ganguli12, 
opined that the stability and security of the child is an essential ingredient 
for full development of child’s talent and personality. Relevant paragraph 
thereof is  extracted below: 
“23.  
  
Having bestowed our anxious consideration 
to the material on record and the observations made by 
the courts below, we are of the view that in the present 
case there is no ground to upset the judgment and order 
of the High Court. There is nothing on record to suggest 
that the welfare of the child is in any way in peril in the 
hands of the father. In our opinion, the stability and 
security of the child is also an essential ingredient for a full 
development of child's talent and personality. As noted 
above, the appellant is a teacher, now employed in a 
school at Panipat, where she had shifted from Chandigarh 
some time back. Earlier she was teaching in some school 
 
12  (2008) 7 SCC 673 

Page 14 of 19 
 
at Calcutta. Admittedly, she is living all alone. Except for 
a very short duration when he was with the appellant, 
Master Satyajeet has been living and studying in 
Allahabad in a good school and stated to have his small 
group of friends there. At Panipat, it would be an entirely 
new environment for him as compared to Allahabad.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
[Emphasis supplied] 
13. 
 
In Nil Ratan Kundu and another v. Abhijit Kundu13, this 
Court laid down the principles governing custody of minor children and 
held that welfare of the children is to be seen and not the rights of the 
parties by observing as under: 
“Principles governing custody of minor children 
53.   
 
In our judgment, the law relating to custody 
of a child is fairly well-settled and it is this. In deciding a 
difficult and complex question as to custody of minor, a 
Court of law should keep in mind relevant statutes and the 
rights flowing therefrom. But such cases cannot be 
decided solely by interpreting legal provisions. It is a 
humane problem and is required to be solved with human 
touch. A Court while dealing with custody cases, is neither 
bound by statutes nor by strict rules of evidence or 
 
13 (2008) 9 SCC 413 

Page 15 of 19 
 
procedure nor by precedents. In selecting proper 
guardian of a minor, the paramount consideration should 
be the welfare and well-being of the child. In selecting a 
guardian, the Court is exercising parens patriae 
jurisdiction and is expected, nay bound, to give due 
weight to a child's ordinary comfort, contentment, health, 
education, intellectual development and favourable 
surroundings. But over and above physical comforts, 
moral and ethical values cannot be ignored. They are 
equally, or we may say, even more important, essential 
and indispensable considerations. If the minor is old 
enough to form an intelligent preference or judgment, the 
Court must consider such preference as well, though the 
final decision should rest with the Court as to what is 
conducive to the welfare of the minor. 
               xx                      xx                          xx 
55.  
 
We are unable to appreciate the approach of 
the Courts below. This Court in catena of decisions has 
held that the controlling consideration governing the 
custody of children is the welfare of children and not the 
right of their parents.” 
   
 
 
 
 
 
[Emphasis supplied] 

Page 16 of 19 
 
14. 
 
This Court has consistently held that welfare of the child is of 
paramount consideration and not personal law and statute. In Ashish 
Ranjan v. Anupam Tandon and another14, this Court held as under: 
“19.  
 
The statutory provisions dealing with the 
custody of the child under any personal law cannot and 
must not supersede the paramount consideration as to 
what is conducive to the welfare of the minor. In fact, no 
statute on the subject, can ignore, eschew or obliterate 
the vital factor of the welfare of the minor.  
15. 
 
This Court in Roxann Sharma v. Arun Sharma15,  opined that 
the child is not a chattel or ball that it is bounced to and fro. Welfare of the 
child is the focal point. Relevant lines from para-No. 18 are reproduced 
hereunder: 
“18………There can be no cavil that when a court is 
confronted by conflicting claims of custody there are no 
rights of the parents which have to be enforced; the child 
is not a chattel or a ball that is bounced to and fro the 
parents. It is only the child’s welfare which is the focal 
point for consideration. Parliament rightly thinks that the 
custody of a child less than five years of age should 
 
14 (2010) 14 SCC 274 
15 (2015) 8 SCC 318 

Page 17 of 19 
 
ordinarily be with the Mother and this expectation can be 
deviated from only for strong reasons…..” 
 16.   
 Another principle of law which is settled with reference to 
custody of the child is the wish of the child, if she is capable of. Reference 
can be made to Rohith Thammana Gowda v. State of Karnataka and 
others’ case (supra). It was held as under: 
“13.     
We have stated earlier that the question ‘what 
is the wish/desire of the child’ can be ascertained through 
interaction, but then, the question as to ‘what would be the 
best interest of the child’ is a matter to be decided by the 
court taking into account all the relevant circumstances. A 
careful scrutiny of the impugned judgment would, 
however, reveal that even after identifying the said 
question rightly the High Court had swayed away from the 
said point and entered into consideration of certain 
aspects not relevant for the said purpose. We will explain 
the raison d’etre for the said remark.” 
17. 
 
In the case in hand, vide order dated 12.12.2023, we had called 
the child in Court. We had interacted with the child, the appellants and 
respondent No. 2 individually in chamber. We found the child to be quite 
intelligent, who could understand her welfare. She categorically stated 
that she is happy with the family where she has been brought up. She has 

Page 18 of 19 
 
other brother and sister. She is having cordial relations with them. She 
does not wish to be destabilized.  
18. 
 
The judgment in Tejaswani Gaud v. Shekhar Jagdish 
Prasad Tewari’s case (supra), relied upon by learned counsel for 
respondent No. 2 does not come to her rescue for the reason that age of 
the child in that case was merely five years. It is a case which lays down 
guidelines as to how custody of the child is to be handed over.  
19.   
The fact that appellant No. 1, when custody of the child was 
handed over to her, was un-married and is now married having two 
children will also not be a deterrent for this Court to come to the 
conclusion that best interest of the child still remains with the appellant 
No. 2  as the child is living with her ever since she was 3-4 months old and 
is now about 14 years of age having no doubt in her mind that she wishes 
to live with them.  
20. 
 
In view of our aforesaid discussions, we find that the welfare 
of the child lies with her custody with the appellants and respondent No. 
10. This is coupled with the fact that even she also wishes to live there. 
Keeping in view her age at present, she is capable of forming an opinion 
in that regard. She was quite categoric in that regard when we interacted 

Page 19 of 19 
 
with her. She cannot be treated as a chattel at the age of 14 years to hand 
over her custody to the respondent No.2, where she has not lived ever 
since her birth. Stability of the child is also of paramount consideration. 
21. 
 
The appeal is accordingly allowed. The impugned order 
passed by the High Court is set aside, as a result of which the writ petition 
filed by respondent No. 2 in the High Court is dismissed. We expect the 
appellants to adhere to the stand taken by them during the course of 
arguments, as noticed above. 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
……………….……………..J. 
 (C.T. RAVIKUMAR) 
 
……………….……………..J. 
(RAJESH BINDAL) 
 
New Delhi 
March 04, 2024.