2024 INSC 179
Non-Reportable
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
Criminal Appeal No._________ of 2024
(@Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 10499 OF 2023)
The State of Jharkhand
 
 
… Appellant
Versus
Sandeep Kumar
 
… Respondent
J U D G M E N T
SANJAY KUMAR, J
1.
Leave granted.
2.
By order dated 06.07.2022 passed in ABA No. 3483 of 2022, the
High  Court  of  Jharkhand  at  Ranchi  granted  pre-arrest  bail  to  the
respondent  herein  in  relation  to  Dhanwar  PS  Case  No.  296  of  2021,
registered for offences under Sections 419, 466, 221, 205, 109 and 120-B/
34 IPC. Aggrieved thereby, the State of Jharkhand filed the present appeal.
1
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2024.03.06
16:51:22 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

3.
The  respondent  was  the  Officer-in-Charge  of  Dhanwar  Police
Station at the relevant time and was the Investigating Officer in Dhanwar
PS Case No. 276 of 2021 registered against one Ranjeet Kumar Saw, son
of Lakhan Saw, under Sections 420, 475, 201, 109 and 34 IPC along with
Sections  65  and  68  of  the  Copyright  Act,  1957.  The  said  case  was
registered upon the complaint made by one Sanjay Kumar Sharma on
behalf of United Spirits Limited. The allegation against the respondent
herein, which led to the registration of the present case against him, was
that he had made interpolations in the FIR in Dhanwar PS Case No. 276 of
2021, whereby he changed the name of the father of Ranjeet Kumar Saw,
the accused therein, from Lakhan Saw to Balgovind Saw and, thereupon,
arrested  Ranjeet  Kumar  Saw,  son  of  Balgovind  Saw,  so  as  to  shield
Ranjeet Kumar Saw, son of Lakhan Saw.
4.
In  the  first  instance,  the  anticipatory  bail  petition  filed  by  the
respondent  was  rejected  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge-V,
Giridih, vide order dated 05.04.2022. The learned Judge noted therein that
the CCTV footage of Dhanwar Police Station revealed that Ranjeet Kumar
Saw,  son  of  Lakhan  Saw,  entered  the  police  station  and  had  several
meetings with the respondent and it was only at about 10 pm, that Ranjeet
Kumar Saw, son of Balgovind Saw, entered the police station and was
2

placed in custody at about 11.22 pm. Further, the learned Judge noted that
the interpolations in the FIR were clearly visible to the naked eye and that
there were sufficient materials indicating the involvement of the respondent
in the alleged offence. Holding so, he dismissed the bail petition.
5.
Thereupon, the respondent approached the High Court by way of
ABA  No.  3483  of  2022  praying  for  anticipatory  bail.  Perusal  of  the
impugned order dated 06.07.2022 passed therein reflects that the High
Court recorded no reasons whatsoever for granting him such relief The
operative portion of the order reads as under: -
‘Considering the submissions of the learned counsels and the
facts as discussed above, the anticipatory bail application is allowed.
Hence, in the event of his arrest or surrender within a period of four
weeks from the date of this order, the petitioner named above shall
be released on bail on furnishing bail bond of Rs. 25,000/- (Rupees
Twenty Five Thousand) with two sureties of the like amount each to
the satisfaction of learned Court below, subject to the conditions laid
down under section 438 (2) Cr. P.C.
The petitioner will cooperate in the investigation and will appear on
notice under Section 41A of Cr. P.C. and comply with the condition as
laid down under Section 438(2) of the Cr. P.C.’ 
    In Ram Govind Upadhyay vs. Sudarshan Singh and others1,
this Court  noted  that,  though  grant  of  bail is discretionary,  it  calls for
exercise of such discretion in a judicious manner and not as a matter of
1
 (2002)   3 SCC 598
3

course. It was observed that an order of bail, bereft of any cogent reason,
could not be sustained. 
6.
Despite this legal position being well settled, it is unfortunate that
the High Court did not deem it necessary to record as to what weighed with
it while granting pre-arrest bail to the respondent. More so, as the accused,
a member of a uniformed service, was holding the responsible position of
Officer-in-Charge of a police station apart from being the Investigating
Officer in the case, wherein he was alleged to have made a wrongful arrest
by making alterations in the FIR. 
7.
The considerations that would normally weigh with the Court while
dealing with a bail petition are the nature and seriousness of the offence;
the character of the evidence; circumstances which are peculiar to the
accused; a reasonable possibility of the presence of the accused not being
secured at the trial; reasonable apprehension of witnesses being tampered
with; the larger interest of the public or the State and other similar factors
relevant in the facts and circumstances of the case. [See State vs. Captain
Jagjit Singh2; Gurcharan Singh vs. State (Delhi Administration)3; and
State  of  Gujarat  vs.  Salimbhai  Abdulgaffar  Shaikh4]. 
Similar
considerations would apply even for grant of anticipatory bail. Therefore,
2
 AIR 1962 SC 253
3
 (1978) 1 SCC 118
4
 (2003) 8 SCC 50
4

circumstances peculiar to the accused and the larger interest of the public
or the State also have to be considered. 
8.
As stated by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, the alterations
in the FIR are clearly visible and it is to be noted that the person who made
the alterations did not even choose to initial the same. It cannot be said at
this stage as to who made those alterations but being the Investigating
Officer in relation to that FIR, it was the responsibility of the respondent to
ensure its sanctity. The statement of the informant, Sanjay Kumar Sharma,
recorded  under  Section  161  Cr.P.C,  was  also  of  relevance  while
considering  the  respondent’s  bail  petition.  He  stated  therein  that,  on
29.11.2021, Ranjeet Kumar Saw, son of Lakhan Saw, was apprehended
with  the  Bolero  vehicle,  bearing  Regn.  No.  JH10BY-4931,  containing
incriminating material, and he and his staff signed the arrest memo and
seizure memos, which were not filled in full, in front of the respondent and
his staff. He further stated that, trusting the respondent, they had signed
those documents but, later, the respondent changed the father’s name of
the person apprehended and released him. In his place, he sent a different
person to jail, viz., Ranjeet Kumar Saw, son of Balgovind Saw. According to
the informant, it was only when he saw the photograph in the newspaper
the next day that he noticed that some other person had been sent to jail, in
5

the place of the person who was caught, and he informed the Police
Inspector and the Deputy Commissioner of Police immediately. 
9.
In the light of these serious allegations made against no less than
a  senior  police  officer,  an  essential  cog  in  the  machinery  of  law
enforcement, the High Court ought not to have taken a liberal view in the
matter  for  the  mere  asking.  Considering  the  position  held  by  the
respondent, even if he was suspended from service and the chargesheet
had already been filed against him, the possibility of his tampering with the
witnesses and the evidence was sufficiently high. That apart, grant of such
relief to a police officer facing allegations of manipulating the investigation
so as to favour an accused would send out a wrong signal in society. It
would be against public interest.
10.
No doubt, none of the provisions under which the respondent is
alleged to have committed offences entail imprisonment in excess of seven
years and most of them were bailable offences. Ordinarily, an accused
facing the prospect of incarceration, if proved guilty of such offences, would
be entitled to the relief of pre-arrest bail. However, the same standard
would not be applicable when the accused is the Investigating Officer, a
police  officer  charged  with  the  fiduciary  duty  of  carrying  forward  the
investigation  to  its  rightful  conclusion  so  as  to  punish  the  guilty.  The
6

respondent is alleged to have failed in this fundamental duty as a police
officer. This consideration must necessarily weigh in with the nature of the
offences and the possible punishment therefor. Presumptions and other
considerations applicable to a layperson facing criminal charges may not
carry the same weight while dealing with a police officer who is alleged to
have abused his office.
11.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the High Court erred on
counts  more  than  one  in  passing  the  impugned  bail  order  dated
06.07.2022. 
    The appeal is accordingly allowed, setting aside the said order. In
the event the respondent is arrested in connection with Dhanwar PS Case
No. 296 of 2021 and applies for regular bail, the same shall be considered
on its own merits, appropriate to that stage,  and in accordance with law
uninfluenced by our observations hereinabove.
   Pending IAs shall stand closed.
                                   
………………………..,J
(VIKRAM NATH)
………………………..,J
(SANJAY KUMAR)
March 6, 2024;
New Delhi.
7