2024 INSC 228
Page 1 of 10 
 
Reportable  
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
Criminal Appeal No 
 
 
of 2024 
Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No 1891 of 2023 
 
 
 
Devu G Nair 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
… Appellant  
 
Versus 
 
The State of Kerala & Ors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
… Respondents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 
 
1. 
Leave Granted.  
 
2. 
These proceedings under Article 136 of the Constitution arose from the interim 
orders of the Kerala High Court dated 13 January 2023 and 02 February 2023 in a 
petition seeking a writ of habeas corpus.  
 
Digitally signed by
Ashwani Kumar
Date: 2024.03.20
15:41:47 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 10 
 
3. 
The appellant and the ‘corpus’ (‘X’ for convenience of reference) are both female 
According to the appellant, they were in an intimate relationship.  The petition 
seeking a writ of habeas corpus was instituted on the ground that the ‘X’ was being 
forcibly kept by her parents in their custody whereas she wished to remain with the 
appellant. On 13 January 2023, at the stage of admission, the Kerala High Court 
ordered the Secretary of the jurisdictional District Legal Services Authority1 to visit 
the fourth and fifth respondents  who are the parents of ‘X’, and record her statement 
to ascertain if she was under illegal detention. The High Court further directed that 
in the event that ‘X’ is in illegal detention, the Station Head Officer of the jurisdictional 
Police Station must ensure that ‘X’ is produced before the Secretary, DLSA to 
facilitate an interaction with the High Court through a video conferencing session. 
The parents of ‘X’ were allowed to join and remain present during the video 
conferencing session.  
 
4. 
On 31 January 2023, the High Court directed the production of ‘X’ before the 
Secretary, DLSA on 2 February 2023 to facilitate an interaction with the High Court. 
After an interaction with ‘X’, the High Court proceeded to direct ‘X’ to undergo a 
counselling session with a psychologist attached to a counselling centre.  
 
5. 
Faced with the above grievance, this Court on 6 February 2023 issued notice and 
 
1 DLSA 

Page 3 of 10 
 
issued interim directions.  The parents of ‘X’ were directed to produce her before the 
Family Court at Kollam by 05:00 pm on 8 February 2023.  Further, the Principal 
Judge of the Family Court was directed to arrange for an interview of ‘X’ with Ms 
Saleena V G Nair, a Member of the e-Committee of the Supreme Court who was, 
at that point in time, on deputation.  Ms Nair is in the judicial service of the State of 
Kerala.   
 
6. 
The interview was directed to be arranged in consultation with the Principal Judge 
of the Family Court and Ms Nair was directed to interact with ‘X’ and submit a report 
after ascertaining her wishes on whether she is voluntarily residing with her parents 
or is kept under illegal detention. 
 
7. 
The Principal Judge of the Family Court has submitted a report on the modalities 
which were followed. 
 
8. 
Ms Saleena V G Nair has also submitted a comprehensive report dealing with her 
interaction with ‘X’.  The report by Ms Nair indicates that sufficient time was granted 
to ‘X’ to express her intent and desire and she was given a break in the course of 
the recording of her statement so as to reflect on what she had stated. 
 
9. 
‘X’ is a major and has completed her Masters degree in Arts.  She has stated that 
she intends to become a lecturer and is focused on her career.  She has stated that 

Page 4 of 10 
 
she is in possession of a mobile phone and is free to move wherever she desires.  
Moreover, she has stated that she is living with her parents out of her own volition. 
While she has stated that the appellant is an “intimate friend”, she has stated that 
she does not wish to marry any person or live with any person for the time being. 
 
10. There is no reason for this Court to disbelieve the report which has been prepared 
by a senior Judicial Officer after duly ascertaining the wishes of ‘X’.   
 
11. Consequently, we are not inclined to entertain the Special Leave Petition on the 
ultimate outcome before the High Court.   
 
12. However, we would wish to address a note of caution. Learned counsel for the 
appellant has submitted that in such matters, the High Court has been passing 
orders directing the counselling of persons similarly situated as ‘X’ and there is an 
apprehension that the counselling should not turn out into a means to overcome the 
will of the corpus particularly in regard to their sexual orientation.  
 
13. The High Courts must duly bear this facet in mind. Ascertaining the wishes of a 
person is one thing but it would be completely inappropriate to attempt to overcome 
the identity and sexual orientation of an individual by a process of purported 
counselling. Judges must eschew the tendency to substitute their own subjective 
values for the values which are protected by the Constitution.   

Page 5 of 10 
 
14. Directions for counseling or parental care have a deterrent effect on members of the 
LGBTQ+ community. Courts must bear in mind that the concept of ‘family’ is not 
limited to natal family but also encompasses a person's chosen family. This is true 
for all persons. However, it has gained heightened significance for LGBTQ+ persons 
on account of the violence and lack of safety that they may experience at the hands 
of their natal family. When faced with humiliation, indignity, and even violence, 
people look to their partner and friends who become their chosen family. These 
chosen families often outlast natal families as a source of immeasurable support, 
love, mutual aid, and social respect. 
 
15. The importance of a chosen family is sometimes lost to the traditional assumption 
that the natal family is respectful of a person’s choices and freedoms. Courts must 
not wittingly or unwittingly become allies in this misunderstanding, more so in cases 
involving habeas corpus petition, petitions for protection of the person, or in missing 
persons’ complaints. Since a direction for counselling has been given by the High 
Court, which we are inclined to set aside, it is imperative that clear guidelines be 
formulated for the courts dealing with habeas corpus petitions and in petitions 
seeking protection from family or police interference.  
 
16. Guidelines for the courts in dealing with habeas corpus petitions or petitions for 
police protection are formulated below: 
a. Habeas corpus petitions and petitions for protection filed by a partner, friend or 

Page 6 of 10 
 
a natal family member must be given a priority in listing and hearing before the 
court. A court must avoid adjourning the matter, or delays in the disposal of the 
case;  
 
b. In evaluating the locus standi of a partner or friend, the court must not make a 
roving enquiry into the precise nature of the relationship between the appellant 
and the person; 
 
c.  The effort must be to create an environment conducive for a free and 
uncoerced dialogue to ascertain the wishes of the corpus; 
 
d. The court must ensure that the corpus is produced before the court and given 
the opportunity to interact with the judges in-person in chambers to ensure the 
privacy and safety of the detained or missing person. The court must conduct 
in-camera proceedings. The recording of the statement must be transcribed 
and the recording must be secured to ensure that it is not accessible to any 
other party; 
 
e. The court must ensure that the wishes of the detained person is not unduly 
influenced by the Court, or the police, or the natal family during the course of 
the proceedings. In particular, the court must ensure that the individuals(s) 
alleged to be detaining the individual against their volition are  not present in 

Page 7 of 10 
 
the same environment as the detained or missing person. Similarly, in petitions 
seeking police protection from the natal family of the parties, the family must 
not be placed in the same environment as the petitioners; 
 
f. Upon securing the environment and inviting the detained or missing person in 
chambers, the court must make active efforts to put the detained or missing 
person at ease. The preferred name and pronouns of the detained or missing 
person may be asked. The person must be given a comfortable seating, access 
to drinking water and washroom. They must be allowed to take periodic breaks 
to collect themselves. The judge must adopt a friendly and compassionate 
demeanor and make all efforts to defuse any tension or discomfort. Courts 
must ensure that the detained or missing person faces no obstacles in being 
able to express their wishes to the court; 
 
g. A court while dealing with the detained or missing person may ascertain the 
age of the detained or missing person. However, the minority of the detained 
or missing person must not be used, at the threshold, to dismiss a habeas 
corpus petition against illegal detention by a natal family; 
 
h. The judges must showcase sincere empathy and compassion for the case of 
the detained or missing person. Social morality laden with homophobic or 
transphobic views or any personal predilection of the judge or sympathy for the 

Page 8 of 10 
 
natal family must be eschewed. The court must ensure that the law is followed 
in ascertaining the free will of the detained or missing person;  
 
i. If a detained or missing person expresses their wish to not go back to the 
alleged detainer or the natal family, then the person must be released 
immediately without any further delay; 
 
j. The court must acknowledge that some intimate partners may face social 
stigma and a neutral stand of the law would be detrimental to the fundamental 
freedoms of the appellant. Therefore, a court while dealing with a petition for 
police protection by intimate partners on the grounds that they are a same sex, 
transgender, inter-faith or inter-caste couple must grant an ad-interim measure, 
such as immediately granting police protection to the petitioners, before 
establishing the threshold requirement of being at grave risk of violence and 
abuse. The protection granted to intimate partners must be with a view to 
maintain their privacy and dignity; 
 
k. The Court shall not pass any directions for counselling or parental care when 
the corpus is produced before the Court. The role of the Court is limited to 
ascertaining the will of the person. The Court must not adopt counselling as a 
means of changing the mind of the appellant, or the detained/missing person; 
 

Page 9 of 10 
 
l. The Judge during the interaction with the corpus to ascertain their views must 
not attempt to change or influence the admission of the sexual orientation or 
gender identity of the appellant or the corpus. The court must act swiftly against 
any queerphobic, transphobic, or otherwise derogatory conduct or remark by 
the alleged detainers, court staff, or lawyers; and 
 
m. Sexual orientation and gender identity fall in a core zone of privacy of an 
individual. These identities are a matter of self-identification and no stigma or 
moral judgment must be imposed when dealing with cases involving parties 
from the LGBTQ+ community. Courts must exercise caution in passing any 
direction or making any comment which may be perceived as pejorative. 
 
17. The above guidelines must be followed in letter and spirit as a mandatory minimum 
measure to secure the fundamental rights and dignity of intimate partners, and 
members of the LGBTQ+ communities in illegal detention. The court must advert to 
these guidelines and their precise adherence in the judgment dealing with habeas 
corpus petitions or petition for police protection by intimate partners. 
 
18. Insofar as the present facts are concerned, the Criminal Appeal is disposed of in 
view of the report of the Judicial Officer.  
 
 

Page 10 of 10 
 
19. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 
 
 
…...…...….......………………....…CJI. 
                                                                    [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]  
 
 
 
 
…...…...….......………………....…..J. 
                                 [J B Pardiwala]  
 
       
 
 
 
 
…...…...….......………………....…..J. 
                                 [Manoj Misra] 
 
 
       
 
New Delhi;  
March 11, 2024 
GKA