2024 INSC 193
 
Page 1 of 22 
                                                                                       NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1098 OF 2024 
 
 
NIRMAL PREMKUMAR & ANR. 
                         
          …APPELLANTS 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE REP. BY INSPECTOR OF POLICE 
    
         …RESPONDENT 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J. 
THE APPEAL  
1. 
The correctness of the judgment and order dated 11th November, 
2022 (“impugned judgment”, hereafter) passed by a learned Judge of the 
High Court of Judicature at Madras (“High Court”, hereafter) is questioned 
in this appeal. By the impugned judgment, the High Court dismissed the 
criminal appeal1 [under section 374(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
 
1 Criminal Appeal No. 697 of 2021 
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
Date: 2024.03.11
16:55:06 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
Page 2 of 22 
(“Cr.P.C.”, hereafter)] carried by the appellants from the judgment and 
order dated 22nd November, 2021 of the Special Court for Exclusive Trial of 
Cases (“Special Court”, hereafter) under the Protection of Children from 
Sexual Offences Act (“POCSO Act”, hereafter) in a sessions case2 registered 
against the two appellants (“A-1” and “A-2”, respectively, hereafter). The 
Special Court having convicted A-1 under section 12 of the POCSO Act 
sentenced him to three (3) years’ rigorous imprisonment together with a 
fine of Rs. 30,000/-, in default to suffer further six (6) months’ rigorous 
imprisonment. Insofar as A-2 is concerned, conviction under section 506 of 
the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“I.P.C.”, hereafter) was recorded and he was 
sentenced to two (2) years rigorous imprisonment with fine of Rs. 20,000/, 
in default to suffer further four (4) months’ rigorous imprisonment.  
BRIEF RESUME OF FACTS 
2. 
The facts, leading to the present appeal, are as follows:  
a) The prosecution's case unfolds in three distinct incidents. The 
victim/P.W.2 (“victim”, hereafter), a minor girl aged about 13 
years, was an eighth-grade student of a Higher Secondary School 
(“school”, hereafter) during the academic year 2017-18. A-1 and 
A-2 held positions as Tamil and Social Science teachers, 
respectively, in such school. The first incident occurred on 14th 
February, 2018, around 10:15 A.M. A-1 entered the classroom, 
approached the victim, and forcefully presented her with roses, 
jasmine flowers, and chocolate in the presence of fellow students. 
 
2 Special Sessions Case No. 13 of 2020 

 
Page 3 of 22 
Despite the victim's refusal to accept the offerings, A-1 resorted 
to twisting her arm, coercing her into accepting the same. The 
second incident took place later in the day on 14th February, 
2018, when the victim was called by A-2 through a girl student 
studying in the seventh grade. A-2 enquired from the victim why 
was she refusing to talk to A-1 and that if she continues to not 
talk to him, A-1 would die and she would be held responsible. The 
third incident transpired on 15th February, 2018, when another 
teacher (“P.W.9”, hereafter) informed the victim that she had 
been called to the physical education teacher's room by A-1. Upon 
reaching the designated room, A-1 inquired why the victim was 
not talking to him. In response, she expressed fear citing 
potential trouble with her family if they were to discover the 
situation. Allegedly dismissive of her concerns, A-1 purportedly 
asserted that the victim's family members would be powerless to 
address the situation even if they became aware of it. The victim's 
parents learnt of her distress resulting from the aforesaid three 
incidents through the victim’s maternal aunt (“P.W.4”, hereafter) 
upon her persistent questioning of the victim. 
b) Following 
this, 
the 
victim’s 
father 
(“P.W.1”, 
hereafter) 
approached the Headmaster of the school (“P.W.10”, hereafter) 
appealing for intervention. However, instead of addressing the 
issue, but upon assuring appropriate action, P.W.10 advised 
P.W.1 to not disclose it to anyone. Due to inaction on the part of 

 
Page 4 of 22 
P.W.10, P.W.1 lodged a formal complaint with the local police 
station on 18th February, 20183. 
c) The aforementioned complaint led to the registration of the First 
Information Report (“F.I.R.”, hereafter) on 19th February, 2018 
against three teachers, viz. A-1, A-2 and A-3, for the offences 
under sections 11(i) and 12 of the POCSO Act. 
d) Upon completion of investigation, a report was filed under section 
173(2), Cr.P.C. While A-1 was charged under sections 11(i) read 
with section 12 of the POCSO Act and A-2 under section 17 of the 
POCSO Act, the proceeding against A-3 was dropped.  
e) Upon committal, charges for the offences under section 12 of the 
POCSO Act and section 506 of the I.P.C. were framed against A-
1. A-2 faced charges under section 12 and section 17 of the 
POCSO Act and section 506 of the I.P.C. A-1 and A-2 entered 
pleas of not guilty and claimed to be tried. 
f) The prosecution examined twelve (12) witnesses. From the trend 
of cross examination to which the prosecution witnesses were 
subjected, it is clear that the defence sought to make out a case 
of false implication of A-1 and A-2 arising out of a previous 
incident, which we propose to refer at a later part of the 
judgment. After the prosecution's evidence, examination of A-1 
and A-2 under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. followed when both 
 
3 CSR No. 90 of 2018 

 
Page 5 of 22 
denied the allegations, while asserting their falsehood. A-1 then 
examined himself in defence. 
3. 
Vide judgment and order dated 22nd November, 2021, the Special 
Court convicted A-1 and A-2 and sentenced them as noted at the beginning 
of this judgment.  
4. 
Challenge to such judgment and order proved abortive. The High 
Court was of the view that the findings recorded by the Special Court did 
not warrant any interference and that the appeal was devoid of any merit; 
hence, it was dismissed. 
SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants took serious 
exception to the findings returned by the Special Court and the High Court 
and advanced the following submissions:  
a) The prosecution has not proved its case beyond reasonable doubt 
and the Court ought to have acquitted the appellants. 
b) Several glaring inconsistencies and contradictions that manifest 
on a bare reading of the oral evidence were brushed aside 
because the Special Court and the High Court were too obsessed 
with the thought that a teacher had indulged in sexual 
harassment / assault of a girl student.  
c) The prosecution could not prove the case beyond a reasonable 
doubt, as none of the witnesses other than the victim testified to 
witnessing A-1 giving flowers and chocolate to her. This crucial 
fact was acknowledged by the Investigating Officer (“P.W.12”, 

 
Page 6 of 22 
hereafter) in course of recording of his testimony. The evidence 
of the victim was thoroughly unreliable and should not have been 
given any credence.  
d) The contradictions in the testimony of the victim cast serious 
doubt as to whether the actions of A-1 and A-2, as framed by the 
prosecution, could be said to carry ‘sexual intent’.  
6. 
Learned counsel, emphasizing the contradictions in the depositions 
and highlighting the flaws in the impugned decisions, urged this Court to 
accept the appeal and acquit A-1 and A-2. 
7. 
Learned senior counsel appearing for the State, in contrast, 
supported the judgment of conviction and order of sentence of the Special 
Court and submitted that the High Court took pains to reassess the evidence 
in arriving at its concurrence with the Special Court’s judgment and order. 
It was emphasised by him that teachers occupy a position of immense trust 
and responsibility in the life of a student, since they not only help shape the 
future of the student, but are also guardians with whom parents entrust the 
care of their child. Thus, the desecration of an educational institution by 
such acts of sexual harassment not only grimly underlines the moral 
depravity of the accused, but also violates the sanctity of the pursuit of 
education, which has larger ramifications for society as a whole, inasmuch 
as such incidents can act as a deterrent in the education of young girls. No 
case having been set up by A-1 and A-2 for interference, he urged this Court 
to dismiss the appeal. 
 

 
Page 7 of 22 
ANALYSIS 
8. 
We have heard the parties, considered the evidence led at the trial 
and perused the judgment and order of the High Court as well as the Special 
Court. 
9. 
The issues that emerge for decision are:  
(i) 
Whether the evidence on record is sufficient to record conviction 
against A-1 and A-2? 
(ii) Should the answer to the above be in the affirmative, what 
should be the appropriate punishment to be imposed on A-1 
and A-2? 
10. 
Before addressing the issues, we consider it appropriate to revisit 
the law laid down by this Court regarding the weight to be attached to the 
testimony of the victim in matters involving sexual offences where the 
prosecution's case hinges on the victim’s evidence—a scenario central to 
the present case. 
11. 
Law is well settled that generally speaking, oral testimony may be 
classified into three categories, viz.: (i) wholly reliable; (ii) wholly 
unreliable; (iii) neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable. The first two 
category of cases may not pose serious difficulty for the Court in arriving at 
its conclusion(s). However, in the third category of cases, the Court has to 
be circumspect and look for corroboration of any material particulars by 
reliable testimony, direct or circumstantial, as a requirement of the rule of 
prudence. 

 
Page 8 of 22 
12. 
In Ganesan v. State4, this Court held that the sole testimony of the 
victim, if found reliable and trustworthy, requires no corroboration and may 
be sufficient to invite conviction of the accused.  
13. 
This Court was tasked to adjudicate a matter involving gang rape 
allegations under section 376(2)(g), I.P.C in Rai Sandeep v. State (NCT 
of Delhi)5. The Court found totally conflicting versions of the prosecutrix, 
from what was stated in the complaint and what was deposed before Court, 
resulting in material inconsistencies. Reversing the conviction and holding 
that the prosecutrix cannot be held to be a ‘sterling witness’, the Court 
opined as under: 
“22. In our considered opinion, the ‘sterling witness’ should be of a 
very high quality and calibre whose version should, therefore, be 
unassailable. The court considering the version of such witness 
should be in a position to accept it for its face value without any 
hesitation. To test the quality of such a witness, the status of the 
witness would be immaterial and what would be relevant is the 
truthfulness of the statement made by such a witness. What would 
be more relevant would be the consistency of the statement right 
from the starting point till the end, namely, at the time when the 
witness makes the initial statement and ultimately before the court. 
It should be natural and consistent with the case of the prosecution 
qua the accused. There should not be any prevarication in the 
version of such a witness. The witness should be in a position to 
withstand the cross-examination of any length and howsoever 
strenuous it may be and under no circumstance should give room 
for any doubt as to the factum of the occurrence, the persons 
involved, as well as the sequence of it. Such a version should have 
co-relation with each and every one of other supporting material 
such as the recoveries made, the weapons used, the manner of 
offence committed, the scientific evidence and the expert opinion. 
The said version should consistently match with the version of every 
other witness. It can even be stated that it should be akin to the test 
applied in the case of circumstantial evidence where there should 
not be any missing link in the chain of circumstances to hold the 
accused guilty of the offence alleged against him. Only if the version 
of such a witness qualifies the above test as well as all other such 
 
4 (2020) 10 SCC 573 
5 (2012) 8 SCC 21 

 
Page 9 of 22 
similar tests to be applied, can it be held that such a witness can be 
called as a ‘sterling witness’ whose version can be accepted by the 
court without any corroboration and based on which the guilty can 
be punished. To be more precise, the version of the said witness on 
the core spectrum of the crime should remain intact while all other 
attendant materials, namely, oral, documentary and material 
objects should match the said version in material particulars in order 
to enable the court trying the offence to rely on the core version to 
sieve the other supporting materials for holding the offender guilty 
of the charge alleged.” 
           (underlining ours, for emphasis) 
 
14. 
In Krishan Kumar Malik v. State of Haryana6, this Court laid 
down that although the victim's solitary evidence in matters related to 
sexual offences is generally deemed sufficient to hold an accused guilty, the 
conviction cannot be sustained if the prosecutrix's testimony is found 
unreliable and insufficient due to identified flaws and lacunae. It was held 
thus: 
“31. No doubt, it is true that to hold an accused guilty for commission 
of an offence of rape, the solitary evidence of the prosecutrix is 
sufficient provided the same inspires confidence and appears to be 
absolutely trustworthy, unblemished and should be of sterling 
quality. But, in the case in hand, the evidence of the prosecutrix, 
showing several lacunae, which have already been projected 
hereinabove, would go to show that her evidence does not fall in that 
category and cannot be relied upon to hold the appellant guilty of 
the said offences. 
 
32. Indeed there are several significant variations in material facts 
in her Section 164 statement, Section 161 statement (CrPC), FIR 
and deposition in court. Thus, it was necessary to get her evidence 
corroborated independently, which they could have done either by 
examination of Ritu, her sister or Bimla Devi, who were present in 
the house at the time of her alleged abduction. The record shows 
that Bimla Devi though cited as a witness was not examined and 
later given up by the public prosecutor on the ground that she has 
been won over by the appellant.” 
 
 
6 (2011) 7 SCC 130 

 
Page 10 of 22 
15. 
What flows from the aforesaid decisions is that in cases where 
witnesses are neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable, the Court should 
strive to find out the true genesis of the incident.  The Court can rely on the 
victim as a “sterling witness” without further corroboration, but the quality 
and credibility must be exceptionally high. The statement of the prosecutrix 
ought to be consistent from the beginning to the end (minor inconsistences 
excepted), from the initial statement to the oral testimony, without creating 
any doubt qua the prosecution’s case. While a victim's testimony is usually 
enough for sexual offence cases, an unreliable or insufficient account from 
the prosecutrix, marked by identified flaws and gaps, could make it difficult 
for a conviction to be recorded.  
16. 
Guided by the law as aforesaid and, in our pursuit, to answer the 
first issue, we record having examined the evidence threadbare and noticed 
manifest contradictions and discrepancies in the oral evidence of the 
prosecution witnesses. To our mind, these have the effect of casting a 
serious doubt with regard to the veracity of the prosecution version. They 
are summarized hereunder:  
a) The prosecution’s narrative attempts to establish that the victim 
had revealed the incident to P.W.4 only on Thursday, 15th 
February, 2018, which led P.W.1 to approach P.W.10 on Friday, 
16th February, 2018. P.W.10 had assured an enquiry, but failed 
to follow through on such promise, which is what led P.W.1 to 
make a complaint to the police. A deeper scrutiny of the evidence 
reveals that though P.W.10 had assured that an enquiry would be 
conducted on Monday, 19th February, 2018, the complaint to the 

 
Page 11 of 22 
police had already been filed on Sunday, 18th February, 2018. It 
is also on record that the victim’s maternal uncle, and husband of 
P.W.4 (“P.W.5”, hereafter) had deposed that he and P.W.1 had 
been to P.W.10 on Monday, i.e., 19th February, 2018. Even 
discounting the version of P.W.5, despite he being more educated 
than the other witnesses (he happened to be the Headmaster of 
another school), it is evident that the complaint was filed in a 
tearing hurry, with absolutely no time being given to P.W.10 to 
conduct any enquiry at all. Though not much would turn on the 
reluctance of P.W.10 to take action against A-1 and A-2, what is 
important, if the version of P.W.5 is to be believed, is that P.W.10 
was approached after the complaint was lodged. Having regard 
to the defence case that there was animosity between A-1 and 
P.W.1, it is difficult to believe what P.W.1 said in the concluding 
paragraph of the complaint as true. Also, nowhere in his 
deposition does P.W.1 say of having approached P.W.10 for his 
intervention. The water is further muddied by the numerous 
contradictions in depositions which makes one question whether 
P.W.10 was approached at all. The victim in her statement 
recorded under section 164, Cr.P.C. states that it was P.W.5, who 
went to P.W.10, but in her deposition on oath she states that it 
was P.W.4 who did so. However, the deposition of P.W.10 makes 
no reference to any such complaint being received by him.  
b) In a strange turn of events, P.W.1 deposes in his cross-
examination that he made an oral complaint to the ‘Head 

 
Page 12 of 22 
Mistress’ of the school, accompanied by his daughter, the victim, 
and P.W.12. There is no reference to the existence of a Head 
Mistress by any witness. However, even if we take this to be a 
reference to P.W.10, the evidence belies the prosecution’s own 
narrative since it has throughout been the case of the prosecution 
that it is only after the reluctance of P.W.10 to take action on the 
oral complaint that the police had been approached.  
c) On the factum of the complaint being made to the local police 
station on 18th February, 2018, there is no clarity whatsoever as 
to who actually approached the police. While the victim deposes 
that she went to the police station along with P.W.1 and P.W.5, 
the depositions of the latter two persons reveals something else 
entirely. According to P.W.1, he was accompanied to the police 
station by his co-brother (which could be P.W.5). Significantly, 
P.W.5 made no mention of going to the police station. The victim’s 
mother (“P.W.3”, hereafter), on the other hand, deposes that it 
was she who went to the police station along with the victim and 
P.W.1. A perusal of the deposition of the Sub Inspector of Police 
(“P.W.11”, hereafter) reveals that it was only P.W.1 who had 
come to the police station. 
d) The dark grey clouds of suspicion, thus, begin to form from the 
very inception, i.e., the contents of the complaint and the mode 
and manner of the same being lodged.  

 
Page 13 of 22 
e) Besides, there are manifest discrepancies between the statement 
of the victim recorded under section 164, Cr.P.C. and her 
deposition recorded in Court. In the former, it was mentioned that 
A-1 “twisted her arm” when she declined to accept the rose, 
jasmine flowers, and chocolate. Conversely, in the latter, the 
victim simply stated that A-1 attempted to give her a flower, and 
upon her refusal, he forcibly placed it in her hand. While this alone 
may not prompt us to reach any immediate conclusion, it has a 
material bearing while we proceed to consider the other attending 
circumstances.  
f) It is alleged by the prosecution that on 14th February 2018, during 
the second period, A-1 singled out the victim and forcibly gave 
her flowers and chocolates. However, while the victim mentions 
both chocolate and flowers being offered in her statement under 
section 164, Cr.P.C., as noted above, she omits the mention of 
the chocolate in her deposition before Court. This could or could 
not be seen as a mere omission. But, importantly, the only other 
classmate who comes forward to depose on the incident is P.W.6, 
but she turns hostile and denies having ever given the police a 
narrative of events. Meanwhile, an examination of the victim’s 
confidante, i.e., P.W.4’s deposition reveals a much more dramatic 
turn of events. According to her, A-1 not only tortured the victim 
into wearing the flowers, but also that he pinched her hand. She 
also deposes that A-1 had allegedly given the victim flowers 
often, whereas the victim nowhere refers to the occurrence of any 

 
Page 14 of 22 
prior incident. These are no doubt embellishments which we 
discard from our consideration. 
g) The crucial question of whether the incident actually transpired 
comes under scrutiny when considering the role of P.W.10 who, 
in addition to being the head of the institution, held the significant 
position of a priest. It is in the evidence of P.W.3 and P.W.4 that 
it was usual for them to go to the priest (read P.W.10), should 
there be any issue with regard to the Christian community. The 
evidence does not reflect that they ever approached P.W.10 once 
they learnt of the incident from the victim. We have, at an earlier 
part expressed our doubt as to whether P.W.10 was at all 
approached prior to lodging of the complaint. Moving further, 
what is apparent is that coupled with his solemn duty as a priest, 
responsibilities of P.W.10 as the master of the entire institution 
included overseeing of daily activities involving both students and 
teachers. In the context of the present case, P.W.10 who was 
brought in as a prosecution witness, should logically have been 
questioned about the alleged incident. However, the absence of 
any query to have the truth elucidated severely dents the 
prosecution's case. It is unbelievable that P.W.10 could either not 
be aware of the incident, if at all the same happened, or even if 
aware, would maintain stoic silence. That would not be in 
consonance with what people like P.W.3 and P.W.4, having faith 
in a priest, would expect.  

 
Page 15 of 22 
h) We must notice another hurdle in the purportedly completed 
sequence of events as asserted by the prosecution. It is a given 
fact that there were other students present in the classroom who 
were eyewitnesses to the incident, as described in the complaint 
and as deposed by the victim. In what could have been a 
determinative factor, none of the students present in the 
classroom was examined except one, i.e., P.W.6 who turned 
hostile to the case set up by the prosecution right from the word 
‘go’. It is quite understandable that the other students may not 
have, for varied reasons, been examined as witnesses for the 
prosecution. However, the victim’s elder brother, a student of 
Class XII in the same school, was also not adduced as a witness. 
Again, there could be multiple reasons for the prosecution not to 
have him lead evidence, but what stands out is that even P.W.6 
deposed that she did not remember as to what happened with 
the victim and it is only through her friends that she became 
aware of the incident. In such a scenario of hearsay evidence, 
failure of the prosecution to elicit the truth from P.W.10 and lack 
of support from him weakens the prosecution case to a significant 
extent.  
i) The Special Court has laid repeated emphasis on the first incident 
being objectionable, especially in view of the fact that 14th 
February, 2018 was Valentine’s Day. True it is, the Court could 
take judicial notice of 14th February being celebrated as 
Valentine’s Day. However, an examination of the evidence reveals 

 
Page 16 of 22 
that the day was significant for the parties involved, all of whom 
are Christians, not owing to Valentine’s Day but because of Ash 
Wednesday which is a day of mourning for Christians. This, we 
find from the evidence of the victim, P.W.4 and P.W.10. The 
complaint makes no mention of the day being Valentine’s Day, 
which is reaffirmed by the depositions of P.W.11 and P.W.12. The 
only hint of 14th February being Valentine’s Day is found from the 
deposition of P.W.5, who said so in the passing and not to 
emphasise the role of A-1 in expressing his love for the victim on 
that day. Drawing of conclusion by the Special Court with 
reference to the date 14th February to indict A-1 does not, 
therefore, seem to be logical and rational.  
j) On its part, the High Court from the very beginning laboured 
under a misconception that A-1 had perpetrated a physical attack 
on the victim by pinching her. Nowhere in the deposition has the 
victim said that she was pinched by A-1. It, therefore, defies 
reason as to how the High Court could perceive, more than once, 
and conclude that A-1 pinched the victim. The High Court 
proceeded to decide the appeal with a coloured vision of the 
victim having been sexually assaulted, which unfortunately led to 
deflection of justice. Quite apart, the obvious conclusion that 
necessarily follows is that the High Court found it difficult to nail 
A-1 based on the insufficient materials on record for which it 
sought to draw support by turning to the statement under section 
164, Cr.P.C and relying on the same.  

 
Page 17 of 22 
k) The second incident does not involve A-1. According to the victim, 
A-2 called her through another student, but this student was not 
examined. His / her identity, therefore, is unknown. Even as per 
the version of the victim, A-2 conveyed to her that if she did not 
talk to A-1, he would die and for A-1’s death, she would be held 
responsible. While there is an assertion by the victim of having 
met A-2 in the evening of 14th February and a denial thereof by 
A-2, the student who was the vital link not having been examined, 
it is extremely doubtful whether the victim at all met A-2.  
l) With regard to the third incident of the victim being summoned 
to the P.E.T room and being threatened by A-1 and A-2, the 
victim’s own version of events is incongruous. The victim states 
in her statement under section 164, Cr.P.C. that A-1 had called 
P.W.9 on phone and asked him to send both the victim and P.W.6 
to the P.E.T. room. However, the deposition of P.W.9 reveals that 
P.W.9’s phone was never even examined by the police to find out 
whether A-1 had called him, thus, revealing yet another lacuna in 
the investigation. Further, in her deposition, the victim states that 
it was P.W.6 who had come to the classroom and informed the 
victim that A-2 had summoned her, and not A-1. It is only in her 
cross-examination that she made an attempt to correct her 
statement by saying that it was A-1 who had actually summoned 
her. Perusal of P.W.6’s deposition reveals that she denied ever 
asking the victim to go to the P.E.T room, and also being in the 
P.E.T room when the threats were allegedly made to the victim. 

 
Page 18 of 22 
The cracks in the prosecution version are further deepened by the 
deposition of P.W.4, who states that no incident happened on 15th 
February, 2018 at all, and it is only A-2 who made the alleged 
threats to the victim on 14th February, 2018.  
17. 
When considering the evidence of a victim subjected to a sexual 
offence, the Court does not necessarily demand an almost accurate account 
of the incident. Instead, the emphasis is on allowing the victim to provide 
her version based on her recollection of events, to the extent reasonably 
possible for her to recollect. If the Court deems such evidence credible and 
free from doubt, there is hardly any insistence on corroboration of that 
version.  
18. 
However, an alleged offence of sexual harassment in a public place, 
as opposed to one committed within the confines of a room or a house, or 
even in a public place but away from the view of the public, stands on 
somewhat different premise. If any doubt arises in the Court's mind 
regarding the veracity of the victim's version, the Court may, at its 
discretion, seek corroboration from other witnesse s who directly observed 
the incident or from other attending circumstances to unearth the truth.  
19. 
In the present case, the alleged sexual harassment transpired in a 
classroom. For corroboration of the victim’s version, P.W.6 was brought in 
as a witness. Although declared hostile, a part of her testimony supports 
the allegation levelled by the victim, indicating that the act of giving a flower 
became a topic of conversation among other students in the class. However, 
the other part of the prosecution's narrative, specifically that A-1 gave 

 
Page 19 of 22 
flowers and chocolate to the victim, lacked support in her testimony. Rather 
strangely, the prosecution made little effort or no effort to have the truth 
spoken to by P.W.10. Notwithstanding that appropriate questions were not 
put to P.W.10, we are inclined to form an opinion that if any untoward 
incident relating to a girl student of his school had taken place, it was 
P.W.10 who as the head of the institution would have been aware and as a 
priest would have disclosed.  
20. 
A-1 and A-2, in support of their defence, sought to make out that 
there was an alleged pre-existing animosity between the parties. What we 
can gather from the questions put in course of cross-examination of the 
witnesses and the deposition of A-1 are that there was an incident of sexual 
harassment in the school in 2012 involving a relative of the victim’s parents. 
He was a teacher in the same school and had been accused of sexually 
harassing a female teacher employed by the school. Disturbed by such 
incident, 
both 
A-1 
and 
A-2 
had 
initiated 
action 
against 
such 
relative/teacher. There is another dimension to this animosity which has 
been elucidated by both A-1 and A-2 through the evidence of P.W.9, and 
that is of promotional politics in the faculty of the school. It is in the 
evidence of P.W.9 that P.W.1 had another relative, who was a teacher at 
the school, and if A-1 and A-2 were removed from their posts, such relative 
would be the beneficiary of a promotion. The victim herein is thus alleged 
to be a mere pawn in an act of revenge orchestrated by P.W.1 to falsely 
implicate the accused. While we do not believe it to be likely that an 
innocent child would be so cruelly used by her parents, we also cannot deem 
it to be entirely outside the realm of possibility. 

 
Page 20 of 22 
21. 
Taking a close look at the overall picture, the inference which could 
reasonably be drawn is that the prosecution's case has been marked by 
lacklustre efforts, revealing a poorly executed endeavour that gives rise to 
substantial doubts regarding the integrity of the case. The material 
contradictions apparent in the depositions of prosecution witnesses, 
including the victim, significantly undermine the credibility of the 
prosecution version. These inconsistencies in the prosecution's narrative, 
render it considerably doubtful. On the face of such evident discrepancies, 
recording conviction becomes untenable, as the foundation of the case 
crumbles under the weight of doubt. While we might have chosen to 
overlook other contradictions and solely relied on the victim's account, 
considering her as a ‘sterling witness’, her version appears muddled and 
prevaricated, much less coherent. It is precisely these inconsistencies and 
contradictions, which are material, that compel us to reject the case set up 
by the prosecution before the Special Court with which the High Court 
concurred adopting a flawed approach.   
22. 
Conviction undoubtedly can be recorded on the sole evidence of a 
victim of crime; however, it must undergo a strict scrutiny through the well-
settled legal principles as established by this Court in a catena of decisions. 
While the actions attributed to A-1, as sought to be demonstrated by the 
prosecution, may fall within the purview of 'sexual harassment' under 
section 11 of the POCSO Act, the evidence in this case has been marred by 
inadequacies from the outset, evident in contradictions within statements 
and testimonies. The evidence led leaves reasonable suspicion as to 
whether A-1 was actually involved in any criminal act.  

 
Page 21 of 22 
23. 
We are left with A-2’s conviction under section 506, I.P.C. In the 
light of the above discussions and the nature of the overt act attributed to 
A-2, the case against him does not justify a conviction under section 506 
I.P.C.  
24. 
The first issue is, thus, answered in the negative. Having regard 
thereto, the second question does not call for any answer. 
CONCLUSION 
25. 
 Upon reviewing the record, we have no other choice but to hold that 
the circumstances on which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn was not 
fully established. 
26. 
We quite agree with the submissions of learned senior counsel for 
the State that an act of sexual harassment of a girl student (who is also a 
minor) by any teacher would figure quite high in the list of offences of grave 
nature since it has far-reaching consequences, which impact more than just 
the parties to the proceeding. At the same time, it is axiomatic that 
reputation is earned by a teacher upon rendering service over the years and 
an accusation like the present would remain as an indelible mark marring 
his entire future life. Care has, therefore, to be taken so that his right to 
live a life of dignity and personal liberty are not put to jeopardy on the basis 
of half-baked evidence.   
27. 
We are, thus, inclined to deem this case unsuitable for securing a 
conviction under section 11 read with section 12 of the POCSO Act, as there 
are enough missing links in the present case to extend the benefit of doubt 
to A-1. As regards A-2, we do not consider that the prosecution was 

 
Page 22 of 22 
successful in proving that the conduct of A-2 was a case of criminal 
intimidation punishable under section 506 of I.P.C.; his conviction, too, is 
also liable to be set aside.  
RELIEF 
28. 
For all the foregoing reasons, the conviction of A-1 and A-2, as 
recorded by the Special Court and the sentence imposed upon them, since 
affirmed by the High Court, stand set aside. The appeal, accordingly, is 
allowed. The appellants are acquitted and set free.  
29. 
A-1 and A-2 are still behind bars. They shall be immediately released 
from custody, if not wanted in any other case. 
 
 
 …………………………………J     
 
 (DIPANKAR DATTA) 
 
 
 
 …………………………………J 
           
 
(K.V. VISWANATHAN) 
 
 
 
 …………………………………J   
         
 
 
               (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
 
New Delhi.  
11th March, 2024.