2024 INSC 199
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 4092-4093/2024 
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO(S). 6370-6371/2024 
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) DIARY NO. 32072 /2021) 
 
 
MAHANADI COALFIELDS LTD. 
  
   …. APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
BRAJRAJNAGAR COAL MINES WORKERS’ 
UNION  
          …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
 
1. 
Delay condoned. Leave granted. 
2. 
The Appellant, Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd., a subsidiary of Coal 
India Ltd. floated a tender for the transportation of crushed coal 
and selected a successful contractor for performance of the 
agreement for the period 1984 to 1994. The contractor 
employed workmen for execution of this contract. 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.03.12
18:17:00 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
3. 
The respondent-union espoused the cause of the workmen who 
were engaged by the contractor and sought permanent status 
for them. It relied on clauses 11.5.1 and 11.5.2 of the National 
Coal Wage Agreement-IV dated 27.07.1989. Under these 
clauses, it was agreed that the employer shall not engage 
contract labour with respect to jobs which are permanent and 
perennial in nature. They also provide that such jobs shall be 
executed through regular employees. 
4. 
Following the representation of the respondent-union, the 
Assistant Labour Commissioner sent a notice to the appellant 
for conciliation. The conciliation process eventually culminated 
in a settlement dated 05.04.1997 under Rule 58 of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 1957. The relevant portion 
of the settlement is as follows:  
“The Union has submitted a list of 32 persons said to 
have been engaged by the contractors and demanded 
for their regularisation. Alter verification, it was 
observed, that the following persons are engaged in 
Bunker for operating Chutes. 
 
SI No. 
Name of the Person 
Father’s Name 
01. 
Sri Sadanand Bhoi 
Keshab 
02. 
Sri Purusottam Dau 
Govardhan 
03. 
Sri Anta Barik 
Gadadhar 
04. 
Sri Aditya Nikhandia 
Cheru 
05. 
Sri Bhabagrahi Pradhan 
D. Pradhan 

3 
 
06. 
Sri Sudarshan Khandit 
Masru 
07. 
Sri Ashok Kumar Rout 
Sitaram 
08. 
Sri Krishna Dau 
Goverdhan 
09, 
Sri Abhimanyu Kisan 
Chhala 
10. 
Sri Lakhan Bhoi 
Keshab 
11. 
Sri Jay Narayan Bhoi 
Chaitan 
12. 
Sri Sanatan Kisan 
Ugresan 
13. 
Sri Giridhari Raudia 
Goverdhan 
14. 
Sri Daitari Pradhan 
Nira 
15. 
Sri Subram Bag 
Buchhu 
16. 
Sri Madhu Marai 
Dasa 
17. 
Sri Fakir Khamari 
Kartik 
18. 
Sri Sanatan Naik 
Ram Krishna 
19. 
Sri Sanatan Bhoi 
Tiharu 
 
Since this operation is of permanent and perennial 
nature, it was agreed to regularise the above 19 
(nineteen) persons as General Mazdoor, Category-I, in 
the NCWA-V Pay Scale of Rs. 65.40-1.08-85.52.  
 
In respect of other persons, it was contended, that they 
are engaged in purely casual nature of jobs, which are 
not prohibited under Contract Labour (R&A) Act, 1970, 
and 
accordingly, 
they 
are 
not 
eligible 
for 
regularisation.” 
5. 
 In view of the fact that the settlement is confined to only 19 
workmen, the Central Government referred the entire dispute 
to the Industrial Tribunal under Section 10 (2A)(1)(d) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, on 20.05.1997 registered as 
Dispute Case no. 27/2001 before the Industrial Tribunal, 
Rourkela, Odisha. Before the Tribunal, the workmen examined 

4 
 
3 witnesses in support of their case and the management 
examined 4 witnesses.  
6. 
By its judgment dated 23.05.2002, the Tribunal allowed the 
industrial dispute and directed the regularization of the 
remaining 13 workmen. The important findings of the Tribunal 
are as follows. At the outset, the Tribunal rejected the 
preliminary objection that it had no jurisdiction under the 
Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition Act), 1970 and 
proceeded to consider the nature of the work that the 13 
workmen were performing. Having considered the matter in 
detail, the Tribunal held that the work of removing spillages in 
the railway siding, below the bunker and operation of chutes (in 
the bunker) are regular and perennial in nature. Having 
considered the evidence of the management witnesses, the 
Tribunal concluded that the nature of the work is perennial. 
Accordingly, the remaining 13 workers were directed to be 
regularized in the following terms: 
“The evidence is straight and clear that all the 32 
persons were attending the same of. The rest 13 
persons whose cases have not been regularized were 
attending the same job, which was being attended by 
19 persons whose services has been regularized. So 

5 
 
standing on the same footing the cases of the rest 13 
persons should not have been ignored on the ground 
that, they did not deserve to be regularized as reflected 
in the settlement. In my opinion when 19 persons have 
been regularized the case of rest 13 persons who were 
attending the same type of work should have been 
regularized without any cause. The ground stated in 
the settlement that they do not deserve, in my opinion 
does not appears to be a genuine ground to discard the 
cases of the rest 13 persons. I am not inclined to 
burden the award by placing all the submissions made 
on behalf of the parties. It is necessary to refer the 
evidence of the Witness No. 2 examined on behalf of 
the 1st Party Management. As per clause 11.5.0 of 
N.C.W.A. IV the Contract Labourers cannot be engaged 
for permanent and perennial nature of job. He has 
further stated that, they had entered to a settlement 
regarding those 19 persons. His further evidence is 
that the persons out of 13 were also working in Coal 
Handling Plant, which is a permanent and perennial in 
nature. The evidence of the Witness No. 3 of the lst 
Party Management is that, the work of railway siding 
is also a regular and perennial in nature for which the 
19 persons have been regularized. All the 32 persons 
were attending the job of removing spillages for 
railway Biding below the bunker and also the 
operation of the chutes in the bunker. So in view of 
such evidence it cannot be said that the rest 13 
persons were not attending the job which were being 
attended by the 19 persons whose services has been 
regularized. So in my opinion, even if there has been a 
settlement between the parties regularizing 19 persons 
the rest of 13 persons has got cause of action to raise 
the Industrial separate and their case should not have 
been ignored. In the other words the action of the 1st 
Party Management in not regularizing the services of 
the rest 13 persons in accordance was N.C.W.A. IV is 
illegal and unjustified. Hence, this Issue is answered 
accordingly.” 
 

6 
 
7. 
Questioning the legality and validity of the Tribunal’s judgment, 
the appellant filed a Writ Petition (C) numbered 2002/2002 
before the Orissa High Court.  
8. 
The Division Bench of the High Court heard the matter, and by 
its judgment, impugned before us, dismissed the writ petition. 
The High Court referred to the nature of work performed by the 
workmen and affirmed the findings of the Tribunal based on the 
evidence of witnesses such as MW3, the personal manager in 
the appellant company. The High Court took note of his 
evidence that the work on railway sidings was regular and 
perennial in nature. He also admitted that it is with respect to 
that work for which the 19 workers were regularized. The High 
Court also observed that there was no evidence to dispute that 
all 32 workers were engaged in removing spillages from railway 
sidings and below the bunker, which is in addition to operating 
chutes. The High Court, therefore, upheld the view taken by the 
Tribunal. The Review Petition bearing No. 77/2017 filed by the 
management was also dismissed by the order dated 
11.11.2021. 

7 
 
9. 
We have heard Mr. Aman Lekhi, learned Senior Counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellant, assisted by Mr. Siddharth 
Jain, Mr. Soumyajit Pani and Ms. Aishwary Bajpai, Advocates 
and also Mr. Ashok Kumar Panda, learned Senior Counsel for 
the respondent-union, assisted by Mr. Tejaswi Kumar Pradhan, 
Mr. Mohan Prasad Gupta, Mr. Manoranjan Paikaray and Mr. 
Shashwat Panda, Advocates.  
10. Submissions of the appellant: Before this court, the appellant 
company contends that the Award dated 23.05.2002 is bad in 
law. It argues that the settlement was binding on the parties 
due to Section 18(1) read with Section 36, Industrial Disputes 
Act and it continues to be so by virtue of Section 19(2) of the 
Act, since the settlement was never terminated. 
10.1 The settlement was reached after verification of the nature of 
works performed. It was found that 19 workers were 
performing perennial and permanent work and the work of the 
remaining 13 workers was ‘casual’ in nature. 
10.2 There was no provision to regularize such workers under the 
NCWA-IV. The only provision under which regularization could 
be claimed would be Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes 

8 
 
Act, but the said provision applies only to workers who worked 
under the direct supervision of the company for a certain 
period and wrongfully stopped thereafter. In the present case, 
as the workmen worked under the supervision of a contractor 
and not the appellant, Section 25F will have no application.  
10.3 Lastly, it is contended that the Tribunal had wrongly directed 
the appellant to disburse backwages to the 13 workers. This is 
contrary to the settled principle that grant of backwages can 
never be automatic or a natural consequence of regularization. 
The workers seeking regularization and backwages have an 
onus to show that they are not gainfully employed. For this, 
the appellant relied on J.K. Synthetics Ltd. v. K.P. Agrawal 
& anr. reported as (2007) 2 SCC 433 to support this 
contention. 
11.  Submissions of the respondent-union: The respondent-
union submitted that all 32 workers were engaged in works of 
a similar nature. They assert that the list in the industrial 
reference dated 20.05.1997 shows that workers were arbitrarily 
deprived of regularization, wherein certain workers from the 
bunker and the plant were left out of the settlement without any 

9 
 
reason. It is also argued that the work in the railway siding was 
perennial and regular in nature, similar to the works in the 
bunker.  
11.1 To support its contentions, the respondent-union relies on the 
evidence of MW3 and MW4, who were the personal manager and 
the project officer in the appellant company, respectively. While 
MW3 categorically admitted that the removal of spilled coal from 
the railway siding, the bunker and the Coal Handling Plant is 
regular and perennial in nature, MW4 stated that all 32 workers 
were engaged similarly. It is therefore submitted that their 
evidence proves that the 13 workers actively participated in 
tasks deemed regular and perennial. 
11.2 Since there was no resolution of the claim of regularization of 
similarly placed workers, they have the right to pursue the 
remedy under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. It is submitted 
that Rule 58 of the Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules, 1957 
under which the settlement occurred, nowhere poses a legal 
obstruction to the remedy.  

10 
 
11.3 It is finally submitted that the 13 workmen suffered for no fault 
of theirs and an order of regularization must naturally lead to 
grant of consequential backwages. 
 
12. Analysis and findings: Having heard the parties in detail, we 
are of the opinion that the present appeals can be disposed of 
for the following reasons.  
13. At the outset, the appellant objected to the Tribunal 
entertaining the industrial dispute passing of the award on the 
ground that a settlement under S. 18(1) read with S. 36 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act is binding on all the parties under S. 
19(2) of the Act. This is the substantive part of the submission 
on behalf of the appellant. The facts of this case, as they unfold, 
leading to the arrival of the settlement, followed by the reference 
to the Industrial Tribunal, and then the award, are necessary 
for our consideration.  
14. At the first place, all the 32 workmen commenced their work 
through the contractor from 1984 and continued till 1994. In 
1994, the respondent-union espoused the cause of all the 32 
workers and the Asst. Labour Commissioner took up the entire 

11 
 
cause. This culminated in the settlement dated 05.04.1997, 
relied upon by the appellant.  
15. To appreciate the submission that the settlement is the last 
word and that the Tribunal could not have entertained the 
reference or passed the Award, the following facts become 
crucial.  
16. The settlement itself talks about the claim of the 32 workers 
raised by the respondent-union. It then talks about the 
contention of the management that others are engaged in 
‘purely casual’ nature of jobs. In the very next sentence, it 
agreed to regularize 19 contractors. It is important to note that, 
being conscious of the fact that the settlement provides for the 
regularization of 19 out of the 32 workmen, the Government 
invoked the power of reference to refer the matter to the 
Tribunal to adjudicate the interest of all the 32 workers. The 
Tribunal was naturally bound by the reference to consider the 
claim of all the 32 workers.  
17. Despite the fact that there was a settlement with respect to 
some of the workmen, the Tribunal was tasked to examine the 
entire reference and give independent findings on the issue. 

12 
 
Thus, the Tribunal was justified in giving its award on the 
reference made by the central government. This answers the 
objection raised by the appellant about the jurisdiction of the 
Tribunal. 
18. We are also conscious of the fact that the jurisdiction that we 
exercise is under Article 136 of the Constitution. The findings 
of fact arrived at by the Tribunal are unassailable. We are also 
of the opinion that the High Court has correctly rejected the writ 
petition filed against the award. Apart from the concurrent 
findings of fact, we see no substantial question of law in these 
appeals.  
19. Even otherwise, the present case is not one where this court 
would exercise its discretion. What appeals to us is that the 32 
workers who entered the service of the appellant in 1984, 
continued uninterruptedly till 1994, when the respondent-
union sought their permanence. In the settlement arrived in 
1997, the stand of the appellant with respect to the 13 workers 
is as follows: 
“In respect of other persons, it was contended that they 
are engaged in purely casual nature of jobs which are 
not prohibited under Contract Labour (R&A) Act, 1970 

13 
 
and 
accordingly, 
they 
are 
not 
eligible 
for 
regularisation.” 
 
20. It is proved that the remaining workers stand on the same 
footing as the regularized employees, and they were wrongly not 
made part of the settlement. This is established by the Tribunal, 
by examining the nature of work undertaken by the first set of 
19 workmen and that of the other 13 workmen. It also examined 
Shri Arun Ch. Hota (WW3), the Deputy General Manager (MW2), 
Mr. Udayshankar Gonelal, the Personal Manager (MW3) and 
Shri S. Agarwal, the Project Officer (MW4). The Tribunal finally 
came to the conclusion that the nature of the duties performed 
by the 13 workmen are perennial in nature. The appellant has 
failed to establish any distinction between the two sets of 
workers. The Tribunal was, therefore, justified in answering the 
reference and returning the finding that they hold the same 
status as the regularized employees. 
21. We are also not impressed with the artificial distinction which 
the appellant sought to bring about between the 19 workers 
who were regularized and the 13 workers who were left out. The 
evidence on record discloses that, of the total 32 workmen, 19 

14 
 
workers worked in the bunker, 6 worked in the Coal Handling 
Plant, and 7 worked on the railway siding. However, of the 19 
workers who were regularized, 16 worked in the bunker, and 3 
worked in the Coal Handling Plant. However, 3 workers from 
the same bunker, 3 workers from the same Coal Handling Plant 
and again 7 workers from the same railway siding were not 
regularized. A tabulated representation of the above description 
is as follows: 
Site of work 
No. 
of 
workers 
who 
executed 
works 
No. 
of 
workers 
who 
were 
regularized 
No. 
of 
workers 
not 
regularized 
Bunker 
19 
16 
3 
Coal Handling 
Plant 
6 
3 
3 
Railway Siding 7 
- 
7 
Total: 
32 
19 
13 
 
22. The above-referred facts speak for themselves, and that is the 
reason why the Tribunal has come to a conclusion that the 
denial of regularization of the 13 workmen is wholly unjustified. 
As stated previously, we do not find any grounds in the artificial 
distinction asserted by the appellant. However, as the case was 
argued at length we thought it appropriate to give reasons for 

15 
 
rejecting the appeals. What we have referred to hereinabove are 
all findings of fact by the Tribunal as affirmed by the High 
Court. In view of the concurrent findings of fact on the issue of 
nature of work, the continuing nature of work, continuous 
working of the workmen, we are of the opinion that there is no 
merit in the appeals filed by the appellant.  
23. This is a case of wrongful denial of employment and 
regularization, for no fault of the workmen and therefore, there 
will be no order restricting their wages.  
24. With respect to payment of backwages, we are of the opinion 
that the workmen will be entitled to backwages as observed by 
the Industrial Tribunal. However, taking into account, the long-
drawn litigation affecting the workmen as well as the appellant 
in equal measure and taking into account the public interest, 
we confine the backwages to be calculated from the decision of 
the Tribunal dated 23.05.2002. This is the only modification in 
the order of the Tribunal, and as was affirmed by the judgment 
of the High Court. 
25. For the reasons stated above, the appeals arising out of the final 
judgment and order of the High Court in W.P. (C) No. 

16 
 
2002/2002 and order in Review Petition No. 77/2017 are 
dismissed with the direction that the concerned workmen shall 
be entitled to backwages with effect from 23.05.2002. There 
shall be no order as to costs. 
 
……………………………………….J. 
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha] 
 
 
 
 
……………………………………….J. 
[Sandeep Mehta] 
 
New Delhi.  
March 12, 2024.