2024 INSC 196
1 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.              OF 2024 
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NO. 1570 OF 2021) 
 
 
 
 
NARESH KUMAR & ANR.                             …APPELLANTS 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF KARNATAKA & ANR.         …RESPONDENTS 
 
 
 
                                                       
J U D G M E N T  
 
 
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J. 
 
Leave granted.  
2. 
The appellants before this Court have challenged the order 
dated 02.12.2020 of the Karnataka High Court by which 
their petition under Section 482 of Criminal Procedure 
Code for quashing the FIR has been dismissed. The case 
of the appellants before the High Court of Karnataka was 
Digitally signed by
Ashwani Kumar
Date: 2024.03.12
17:18:13 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
that the FIR which was instituted by the complainant i.e. 
respondent no. 2 is primarily a civil dispute and has no 
criminal element and the entire criminal proceedings 
initiated against the appellants is nothing but an abuse of 
the process and consequently, they had invoked the 
extraordinary powers of the High Court under Section 482 
of the Criminal Procedure Code. The two appellants before 
this Court are the Assistant Manager (Marketing) and the 
Manging Director of a company, which is a manufacturer 
of bicycles. Respondent no.2 was given a contract, as it has 
been stated before this Court, for the assembly of bicycles, 
their transport and their delivery, at the rate of Rs.122/- 
for each bicycle, and since they had assembled 83,267 
bicycles, 
they 
raised 
invoices 
amounting 
to 
Rs. 
1,01,58,574/- and were liable to be paid the same. 
However, respondent no.2 contends that instead, a 
payment of only Rs.35,37,390/- was given by the 
appellants. Hence, it was a case of criminal breach of trust 
and cheating and the First Information Report  No. 113 of 
2017 against the appellant no. 1 was filed on 24.05.2017 
under Sections 406, 420 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code 
at 
P.S. 
Doddaballapura, 
Bangalore 
Rural 
District. 

3 
 
Subsequently, a Chargesheet dated 30.05.2019, was filed 
in the court where both the appellants were made an 
accused.  
3. 
Meanwhile, an important fact occurred, of which no 
importance seems to have been given by the High Court. 
Subsequent to the filing of FIR there is an admitted 
settlement between the appellants and respondent No. 2 
by a Compromise Deed dated 27.12.2017 by which as a 
full and final settlement between the two parties, an 
additional amount of Rs. 26 lakhs were to be paid by the 
appellant, which has been duly given and accepted. This 
amount was deposited in the account of respondent no. 2 
on 29.12.2017. This was done by the appellants in order 
to give a quietus to the whole situation and to bring peace, 
according to the appellants. Therefore, as of now, a total 
amount of Rs.62 lakhs as against Rs. 1,01,58,574/- which 
was claimed by the complainant has been admittedly paid. 
The case of the respondent no. 2 against the settlement 
dated 27.12.2017 is that the respondent no. 2 was coerced 
in entering into this settlement and this is not a settlement 
arrived at by the free will of the complainant and therefore 
the prosecution of the appellants is necessary under the 

4 
 
criminal law. The High Court has refused to accept the 
contention of the appellants that the dispute between the 
parties in any case is civil in nature. The High Court was 
of the opinion that since the appellants had claimed that 
the complainant assembled only 28,995 bicycles, which 
would make them liable to pay only an amount of Rs.35 
lakhs, but instead the appellants had paid an amount of 
Rs.62 lakhs which shows that the actual number of 
bicycles which were assembled by the complainant was 
much more than 28,995 bicycles, as claimed by the 
appellants and therefore, the appellants had an intention 
to cheat the complainant right from the beginning. Thus, 
it was held by the High Court that prima facie a case of 
cheating is made out against the appellants.  
4. 
Having heard the learned counsel for both the parties, we 
are of the considered view that the findings of the High 
Court on this aspect are not correct. We do not agree with 
the findings arrived at by the High Court for two reasons. 
Firstly, the dispute between the parties is primarily, civil 
in nature. It is after all a question of how many bicycles 
the complainant had assembled and the dispute between 
the parties is only regarding the figure of bicycles and 

5 
 
consequently of the amount liable to be paid. This is a civil 
dispute. The complainant has not been able to establish 
that the intention to cheat the complainant was there with 
the appellants right from the beginning. Merely because 
the appellants admit that only 28,995 bicycles were 
assembled, but they have admittedly paid an amount of 
Rs. 62,01,746/- to the complainant, which is of a much 
higher number of bicycles, would not prove that the 
intention of the appellants right from the beginning was to 
cheat. This amount i.e. the additional amount of Rs. 26 
lacs have been paid by the appellants pursuant to a 
settlement.  The reasons and the logic for arriving at a 
settlement are quite different. In this case it seems, it is 
primarily to bring a quietus to the dispute and to have 
peace and to avoid litigation. The mere fact that the 
appellants have paid an additional amount pursuant to 
the settlement, cannot be presumed as an act of cheating. 
Moreover, the complainant does not deny the fact that a 
settlement was reached between the parties though he 
says he was coerced into the settlement. He does not 
dispute that the additional amount paid by the appellants 
under the terms of the compromise deed, which is an 

6 
 
amount of Rs.25,75,442 (after deducting TDS) was 
received by the complainant, as this amount has been 
received in a bank transaction through NEFT on 
29.12.2017. The allegation that the complainant was 
coerced into a settlement, looks unlikely for two reasons. 
First, there is no FIR or Complaint that the complainant 
was coerced into this settlement. Secondly, this amount 
was duly accepted by the complainant.  
5. 
Under these circumstances, we are of the considered view 
that this is a case where the inherent powers should have 
been exercised by the High Court under Section 482 of the 
Criminal Procedure Code as the powers are there to stop 
the abuse of the process and to secure the ends of justice. 
6. 
In the case of Paramjeet Batra v. State of Uttarakhand 
(2013) 11 SCC 673, this Court recognized that although 
the inherent powers of a High Court under Section 482 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure should be exercised 
sparingly, yet the High Court must not hesitate in 
quashing such criminal proceedings which are essentially 
of a civil nature. This is what was held: 
“12. While exercising its jurisdiction 
under Section 482 of the Code the High 
Court has to be cautious. This power is to 

7 
 
be used sparingly and only for the 
purpose of preventing abuse of the 
process of any court or otherwise to 
secure ends of justice. Whether a 
complaint discloses a criminal offence or 
not depends upon the nature of facts 
alleged 
therein. 
Whether 
essential 
ingredients 
of 
criminal 
offence 
are 
present or not has to be judged by the 
High Court. A complaint disclosing 
civil transactions may also have a 
criminal texture. But the High Court 
must see whether a dispute which is 
essentially of a civil nature is given 
a cloak of criminal offence. In such a 
situation, 
if 
a 
civil 
remedy 
is 
available and is, in fact, adopted as 
has happened in this case, the High 
Court should not hesitate to quash 
the criminal proceedings to prevent 
abuse of process of the court.”     
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Relying upon the decision in Paramjeet Batra (supra), 
this Court in Randheer Singh v. State of U.P. (2021) 14 
SCC 626, observed that criminal proceedings cannot be 
taken recourse to as a weapon of harassment. In Usha 
Chakraborty & Anr. v. State of West Bengal & Anr. 
2023 SCC OnLine SC 90, relying upon Paramjeet Batra 
(supra) it was again held that where a dispute which is 
essentially of a civil nature, is given a cloak of a criminal 
offence, then such disputes can be quashed, by exercising 

8 
 
the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure.  
7. 
Essentially, the present dispute between the parties 
relates to a breach of contract. A mere breach of contract, 
by one of the parties, would not attract prosecution for 
criminal offence in every case,   as held by this Court in 
Sarabjit   Kaur   v.   State   of   Punjab   and   Anr. 
(2023) 5 SCC 360. Similarly, dealing with the distinction 
between the offence of cheating and a mere breach of 
contractual obligations, this Court, in Vesa Holdings (P) 
Ltd. v. State of Kerala, (2015) 8 SCC 293, has held that 
every breach of contract would not give rise to the offence 
of cheating, and it is required to be shown that the accused 
had fraudulent or dishonest intention at the time of 
making the promise.  
8. 
In the case at hand, the dispute between the parties was 
not only essentially of a civil nature but in this case the 
dispute itself stood settled later as we have already 
discussed above. We see no criminal element here and 
consequently the case here is nothing but an abuse of the 
process. We therefore allow the appeal and set aside  the 
order of the High Court dated 02.12.2020. The criminal 

9 
 
proceedings arising out of FIR No.113 of 2017 will hereby 
stand quashed.   
 
 
                                            ...………………………….J. 
    [SUDHANSHU DHULIA] 
 
 
 
                                                         ..……….………………….J. 
                          [PRASANNA B. VARALE] 
 
New Delhi. 
March 12, 2024.