2024 INSC 207
1 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
      
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1607 OF 2009 
 
JAFAR 
 
 
                         
 … APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF KERALA   
 
 
      …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
1. 
This appeal challenges the judgment and order dated 
16.01.2009 passed by the learned Single Judge of the High 
Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in Criminal Appeal No. 643 of 
2008 thereby dismissing the appeal filed by the appellant 
herein and confirming the conviction as recorded by the 
Court of Addl. Sessions Judge (Adhoc-II), Ernakulam (for 
short, ‘trial court’) for the offence punishable under Section 
397 read with Section 395 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 
(for short, ‘IPC’) and sentencing him to undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for seven years, with a fine of Rs.10,000/-; in 
default of payment of fine, to suffer simple imprisonment for 
a period of three months. 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2024.03.15
17:24:07 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
2. 
The case of the prosecution in brief is that, on 
14.05.2004 at about 1:45 a.m., accused Nos.1 to 8 came in a 
vehicle bearing registration number KL 4/C 6021 driven by 
accused No.8 to the building at Perumbavoor, where the 
retail shops of Kerala State Beverages Corporation were 
situated in three rooms bearing Door Nos.17/1221, 1222 and 
1223, with the intention to commit dacoity.  According to the 
prosecution, accused Nos.1 to 4, 6 and 7 armed with deadly 
weapons like iron lever and wooden bar, entered into the 
room No.17/1238.  At the said gate, the security guard (PW-
1) was posted.  The appellant herein (accused No.2) kicked on 
the naval portion of PW-1. Sijo @ Fijo (accused No.4) beat 
him with an iron lever on the right leg, which resulted in 
fracture.  Accused Nos.1 to 3 beat him with the wooden bar 
on various parts of his body. Thereafter, the accused persons 
tied the legs and hands of PW-1 with bath towels and made 
him lie on the cot. Following which, they fastened his body 
on the cot with a piece of bed sheet and the remaining piece 
of the bed sheet was pushed into his mouth and they 
manhandled him. Thereafter, they committed robbery of 
mobile phone, wrist watch and torch belonging to PW-1. 

3 
2.1 It is also the prosecution case that they destroyed the 
light in the building and lock of the shutters of the retail 
shop of the corporation.  On the basis of said allegation, 
Crime 
No.345/2004 
came 
to 
be 
registered 
in 
the 
Perumbavoor Police Station for the offence punishable under 
Section 397 of the IPC. 
2.2 Upon completion of the investigation, a final report was 
filed in the Court of Judicial Magistrate First Class, 
Perumbavoor upon which the Court took cognizance and 
instituted C.P. No.89/2005.  As the accused No.1 was 
absconding, the case against him was split up and refiled in 
the committal court.  Insofar as accused Nos.3 and 6 are 
concerned, since they were minors, charge-sheet against 
them was filed in the Juvenile Court.  The case against 
accused Nos.2, 4, 5, 7 and 8 in the original charge-sheet was 
committed to the Court of Sessions, Ernakulam wherein 
S.C.No.723/2005 was instituted. Before the learned trial 
court, the accused were re-arrayed as accused Nos. 1 to 5.  
The charges came to be framed for offences punishable under 
Section 397 read with Section 395 of the IPC and the 
accused pleaded not guilty.  Thereafter, the accused Nos.1 

4 
and 4 absconded and hence trial was proceeded only against 
accused Nos. 2, 3 and 5.  The trial court only found accused 
Nos.2 and 3 guilty and as such convicted them as aforesaid.  
Insofar as accused No. 5 is concerned, he was acquitted.  
3. 
We have heard Mr. T.N. Singh, learned counsel for the 
appellant and Mr. Harshad V. Hameed, learned counsel for 
the respondent/State.   
4. 
Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the 
conviction is based on no evidence and as such, the appeal 
deserves to be allowed.  As against this, learned counsel for 
the respondent/State submits that both the Courts have 
concurrently, upon appreciation of the evidence, found the 
appellant to be guilty and as such, no interference would be 
warranted. 
5. 
With the assistance of the learned counsel for the 
parties, we have scrutinized the evidence.  The conviction of 
the appellant herein is basically based on the deposition of  
Babu Puttan (PW-1), who was working as a security guard 
and was sitting in a chair in front of the said room.  No doubt 
that he narrates the version, as per the prosecution case.  He 
has also identified accused No.2-Jafar, appellant herein and 

5 
accused no.3-Saneesh in the Court. However, he has clearly 
admitted that police had shown him these two people and as 
such, he has identified them. 
6. 
Anil Kumar (PW-8), who is the Investigating Officer (IO), 
has also admitted that PW-1 identified the accused persons 
by seeing them at the police station. He has further admitted 
that no identification parade was conducted.  As such, it can 
be seen that the identification of the appellant herein by PW-
1 is quite doubtful as no identification parade has been 
conducted.  PW-1 clearly states that he has identified the 
accused persons since the police had shown him those two 
people. 
7. 
In the absence of proper identification parade being 
conducted, the identification for the first time in the Court 
cannot be said to be free from doubt.  We find that the other 
circumstance that the Courts relied for resting the order of 
conviction is with regard to the recovery of an iron rod.  An 
iron rod is an article which could be found anywhere.  It is 
not the case of the prosecution that any stolen article was 
recovered from the appellant herein.  
8. 
In the result, we find that the judgment and order 

6 
passed by the High Court dismissing the appeal and of the 
trial court convicting the appellant are not sustainable in 
law. 
9. 
The appeal is therefore allowed.  The judgment and 
order of the trial court convicting the appellant herein and 
that of the High Court affirming the same are quashed and 
set aside. 
10. The appellant herein is acquitted of all the charges 
charged with.  Since the appellant is on bail, his bail bonds 
shall stand discharged. 
11. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.    
 
 
..............................J.               
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
..............................J.   
(SANDEEP MEHTA)   
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
MARCH 15, 2024