2024 INSC 205
 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 1 of 18 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 741 OF 2024 
 
 
RAKESH RANJAN SHRIVASTAVA                       … APPELLANT 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
THE STATE OF JHARKHAND & ANR.          … RESPONDENTS 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
1. 
The issue involved in this criminal appeal is whether the 
provision of sub-section (1) of Section 143A of the Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881 (for short, ‘the N.I. Act’), which provides 
for the grant of interim compensation, is directory or 
mandatory.  If it is held to be a directory provision, the question 
that arises is, what are factors to be considered while exercising 
powers under sub-section (1) of Section 143A of the N.I. Act. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
The case of the 2nd respondent in the Complaint 
2. 
The 
2nd 
respondent 
(hereinafter 
referred as ‘the 
respondent’) is the complainant in a complaint under Section 
138 of the N.I. Act. The complaint was filed in the Court of the 
Chief Judicial Magistrate at Bokaro. The case in the complaint 
is that the appellant and the respondent formed various 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.03.15
16:34:53 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 2 of 18 
 
companies on different terms and conditions regarding profit 
sharing. On 23rd September 2011, an appointment letter was 
issued by the appellant in his capacity as the Managing 
Director of the company M/s Thermotech Synergy Pvt. Ltd. and 
on behalf of a proprietary concern, M/s Tech Synergy, by which 
the post of Executive Director was offered by the appellant to 
the respondent on consolidated salary of Rs. 1,00,000/- per 
month.  
3. 
On 1st June 2012, the appellant formed a partnership 
with one Rahul Kumar Basu, in which the respondent was 
shown as an indirect partner. According to the respondent's 
case, M/s Tech Synergy was merged with another company - 
M/s Megatech Synergy Pvt. Ltd.  It is alleged by the respondent 
that in August 2012, there was an agreement to pay him 50 
per cent of the profit. One more partnership firm came into 
existence on 3rd June 2013, wherein the appellant, respondent, 
and Rahul Kumar were shown as partners. It is the case of the 
respondent that the appellant agreed to give a 50 per cent share 
in the profits of another company, Geotech Synergy Pvt. Ltd. It 
is alleged that the appellant did not pay the amounts due and 
payable to the respondent. Therefore, a legal notice was issued 
to the appellant by the respondent. According to the case of the 
respondent, the appellant was liable to pay the total amount of 
Rs. 4,38,80,000/- to the respondent, and in fact, a civil suit 
has been filed by the respondent in the Civil Court at Bokaro 
for recovery of the said amount. After that, on 13th July 2018, 
there was a meeting between parties at Ranchi when the 

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 3 of 18 
 
appellant agreed to pay a sum of Rs. 4,25,00,000/- to the 
respondent, and two cheques in the sum of Rs. 2,20,00,000/- 
and 2,05,00,000/- dated 6th August 2018 and 19th September 
2018 respectively were handed over to the appellant.  As the 
first cheque in the sum of Rs. 2,20,00,000/- was dishonoured, 
a complaint was filed after the service of a statutory notice 
alleging the commission of an offence punishable under 
Section 138 of the N.I. Act on which the learned Magistrate took 
cognizance of the offence.  
Application under Section 143A of the NI Act 
4. 
Before the Court of the learned Magistrate, the 
respondent moved an application under Section 143A of the 
N.I. Act seeking a direction against the appellant/accused to 
pay 20 per cent of the cheque amount as compensation. By the 
order dated 7th March 2020, the learned Judicial Magistrate 
allowed the application and directed the appellant to pay an 
interim compensation of Rs. 10,00,000/- to the respondent 
within 60 days.  The Sessions Court affirmed the order of the 
learned Magistrate in a revision application.  The said orders 
were subjected to a challenge before the High Court.  The 
learned Judge of Jharkhand High Court dismissed the petition 
by the impugned judgment. These orders are the subject 
matter of challenge in the present criminal appeal.  
SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant pointed 
out that sub-section (1) of Section 143A of the N.I. Act uses the 
word ‘may’. Therefore, the provision is discretionary. He 

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 4 of 18 
 
submitted that the Trial Court cannot pass an order to pay 
interim compensation mechanically. He submitted that the 
Court must apply its mind to the facts of the case before 
passing the drastic order of deposit. He submitted that the 
existence of a prima facie case is essential for exercising the 
power under Section 143A. Only after prima facie consideration 
of the merits of the complainant's case and defence of the 
accused, the Court must conclude whether a case is made out 
for the grant of interim compensation. After the Court comes to 
the conclusion that a case for grant of interim compensation 
has been made out, the Court has to apply its mind to the 
quantum of interim compensation. In every case, the Court 
cannot grant 20 per cent of the cheque amount as interim 
compensation.  
6. 
The learned counsel appearing for the respondent 
submitted that considering the very object of Section 138 of the 
N.I. Act, sub-section (1) of Section 143A will have to be held as 
mandatory. He submitted that there is a presumption under 
Section 139 of the N.I. Act that unless a contrary is proved, the 
holder of a cheque received the cheque for the discharge, in 
whole or in part, of any debt or liability. He submitted that the 
question of rebutting the said presumption would arise only 
after the evidence is adduced. Therefore, the defence of the 
accused at the stage of considering an application under sub-
section (1) of Section 143A is irrelevant. In every case, an order 
of payment of interim compensation must follow. He submitted 
that unless it is held that sub-section (1) of Section 143A is 

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 5 of 18 
 
mandatory, the very object of the legislature of enacting this 
provision will be frustrated.  
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
The object of Section 143A 
7. 
Section 143A was brought on the statute book by Act No. 
20 of 2018 with effect from 1st September 2018. Section 143A 
reads thus: 
“143-A. 
Power 
to 
direct 
interim 
compensation.—(1) 
Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), 
the Court trying an offence under 
Section 138 may order the drawer of 
the 
cheque 
to 
pay 
interim 
compensation to the complainant— 
(a) in a summary trial or a 
summons case, where he pleads 
not guilty to the accusation 
made in the complaint; and 
(b) in any other case, upon 
framing of charge. 
(2) The interim compensation under 
sub-section 
(1) 
shall 
not 
exceed 
twenty 
per 
cent 
of 
the 
cheque 
amount. 
(3) The interim compensation shall be 
paid within sixty days from the date of 
the order under sub-section (1), or within 
such further period not exceeding thirty 
days as may be directed by the Court on 
sufficient cause being shown by the 
drawer of the cheque. 
(4) If the drawer of the cheque is 
acquitted, the Court shall direct the 

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 6 of 18 
 
complainant to repay to the drawer the 
amount of interim compensation, with 
interest at the bank rate as published by 
the Reserve Bank of India, prevalent at 
the beginning of the relevant financial 
year, within sixty days from the date of 
the order, or within such further period 
not exceeding thirty days as may be 
directed by the Court on sufficient cause 
being shown by the complainant. 
(5) The interim compensation payable 
under this section may be recovered as if 
it were a fine under Section 421 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 
of 1974). 
(6) The amount of fine imposed under 
Section 
138 
or 
the 
amount 
of 
compensation 
awarded 
under 
Section 357 of 
the Code 
of 
Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall be 
reduced by the amount paid or recovered 
as interim compensation under this 
section.” 
(emphasis added) 
7.1. In the statement of objects and reasons, it was stated that 
unscrupulous drawers of the cheques prolong the proceedings 
of a complaint under Section 138 by filing appeals and 
obtaining a stay.  Therefore, injustice is caused to the payee of 
a dishonoured cheque, who has to spend considerable time and 
resources in Court proceedings to realise the value of the 
cheque.  It was further observed that such delays compromise 
the sanctity of the cheque transactions.  Therefore, it was 
proposed to amend the N.I. Act to address the issue of undue 
delay in the final resolution of the cheque dishonour cases. It 

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 7 of 18 
 
was also stated that the proposed amendments would 
strengthen the credibility of cheques and help trade and 
commerce. 
8. 
We may note here that by the same Act No.20 of 2018, 
Section 148 was brought on the statute book, which provides 
that in an appeal preferred by the drawer against conviction 
under Section 138, the Appellate Court may order the appellant 
to deposit such a sum which shall be a minimum 20 per cent 
of the fine or compensation awarded by the Trial Court. The 
proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 148 clarifies that the 
amount payable under sub-section (1) of Section 148 is in 
addition 
to 
interim 
compensation 
paid 
by 
the 
appellant/accused under Section 143A. There are no separate 
objects and reasons set out for the addition of Section 148. 
MANDATORY OR DIRECTORY 
9. 
There is no doubt that the word “may” ordinarily does not 
mean “must”.  Ordinarily, “may” will not be construed as 
“shall”. But this is not an inflexible rule. The use of the word 
“may” in certain legislations can be construed as “shall”, and 
the word “shall” can be construed as “may”.  It all depends on 
the nature of the power conferred by the relevant provision of 
the statute and the effect of the exercise of the power.  The 
legislative intent also plays a role in the interpretation of such 
provisions.  Even the context in which the word “may” has been 
used is also relevant. 

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 8 of 18 
 
10. 
The power under sub-section (1) of Section 143A is to 
direct the payment of interim compensation in a summary trial 
or a summons case upon the recording of the plea of the 
accused that he was not guilty and, in other cases, upon 
framing of charge. As the maximum punishment under Section 
138 of the N.I. Act is of imprisonment up to 2 years, in view of 
clause (w) read with clause (x) of Section 2 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘the Cr.PC’), the cases 
under Section 138 of the N.I. Act are triable as summons cases. 
However, sub-section (1) of Section 143 provides that 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Cr.PC, the learned 
Magistrate shall try the complaint by adopting a summary 
procedure under Sections 262 to 265 of the Cr.PC. However, 
when at the commencement of the trial or during the course of 
a summary trial, it appears to the Court that a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year may have to be 
passed or for any other reason it is undesirable to try the case 
summarily, the case shall be tried in the manner provided by 
the CrPC. Therefore, the complaint under Section 138 becomes 
a summons case in such a contingency. We may note here that 
under Section 259 of the Cr.PC, subject to what is provided in 
the said Section, the learned Magistrate has the discretion to 
convert a summons case into a warrant case. Only in a warrant 
case, there is a question of framing charge. Therefore, clause 
(b) of sub-section (1) of Section 143A will apply only when the 
case is being tried as a warrant case. In the case of a summary 
or summons trial, the power under sub-section (1) of Section 
143A can be exercised after the plea of the accused is recorded.  

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 9 of 18 
 
11. 
Under sub-section (5) of Section 143A, it is provided that 
the amount of interim compensation can be recovered as if it 
were a fine under Section 421 of the Cr.PC.  Therefore, by a 
legal fiction, the interim compensation is treated as a fine for 
the purposes of its recovery.  Section 421 of the Cr.PC deals 
with the recovery of the fine imposed by a criminal court while 
passing the sentence.  Thus, recourse can be taken to Section 
421 of the Cr.PC. for recovery of interim compensation, which 
reads thus: 
“421. Warrant for levy of fine.—(1) 
When an offender has been sentenced to 
pay a fine, the Court passing the 
sentence may take action for the 
recovery of the fine in either or both of 
the following ways, that is to say, it 
may— 
(a) issue a warrant for the levy of 
the amount by attachment and 
sale of any movable property 
belonging to the offender; 
(b) issue a warrant to the Collector 
of the district, authorising him to 
realise the amount as arrears of 
land revenue from the movable or 
immovable property, or both, of the 
defaulter: 
Provided that, if the sentence 
directs that in default of payment of the 
fine, the offender shall be imprisoned, 
and if such offender has undergone the 
whole of such imprisonment in default, 
no Court shall issue such warrant 
unless, 
for 
special 
reasons 
to 
be 
recorded in writing, it considers it 
necessary so to do, or unless it has made 
an order for the payment of expenses or 

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 10 of 18 
 
compensation out of the fine under 
Section 357. 
(2) The State Government may make 
rules regulating the manner in which 
warrants under clause (a) of sub-section 
(1) are to be executed, and for the 
summary determination of any claims 
made by any person other than the 
offender in respect of any property 
attached in execution of such warrant. 
(3) Where the Court issues a warrant to 
the Collector under clause (b) of sub-
section (1), the Collector shall realise the 
amount in accordance with the law 
relating to recovery of arrears of land 
revenue, as if such warrant were a 
certificate issued under such law: 
Provided that no such warrant shall be 
executed by the arrest or detention in 
prison of the offender.” 
12. 
Non-payment of interim compensation by the accused 
does not take away his right to defend the prosecution.  The 
interim compensation amount can be recovered from him 
treating it as fine.  The interim compensation amount can be 
recovered by the Trial Court by issuing a warrant for 
attachment and sale of the movable property of the accused. 
There is also a power vested with the Court to issue a warrant 
to the Collector of the District authorising him to realise the 
interim compensation amount as arrears of land revenue from 
the movable or immovable property, or both, belonging to the 
accused. For recovery of the interim compensation, the 
immovable or movable property of the accused can be sold by 
the Collector. Thus, non-payment of interim compensation 

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 11 of 18 
 
fixed under Section 143A has drastic consequences. To recover 
the same, the accused may be deprived of his immovable and 
movable property. If acquitted, he may get back the money 
along with the interest as provided in sub-section (4) of Section 
143A from the complainant. But, if his movable or immovable 
property has been sold for recovery of interim compensation, 
even if he is acquitted, he will not get back his property. 
Though, the N.I. Act does not prescribe any mode of recovery of 
the compensation amount from the complainant together with 
interest as provided in sub-section (4) of Section 143A, as sub-
section (4) provides for refund of interim compensation by the 
complainant to the accused and as sub-section (5) provides for 
mode of recovery of the interim compensation, obviously for 
recovery of interim compensation from the complainant, the 
mode of recovery will be as provided in Section 421 of the CrPC.  
It may be a long-drawn process involved for the recovery of the 
amount from the complainant. If the complainant has no 
assets, the recovery will be impossible. 
13. 
At this stage, we may note sub-section (1) of Section 148.  
Section 148 reads thus:- 
“148. Power of Appellate Court to 
order 
payment 
pending 
appeal 
against 
conviction.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974), in an appeal by the 
drawer 
against 
conviction 
under 
section 138, the Appellate Court may 
order the appellant to deposit such 
sum which shall be a minimum of 
twenty per cent of the fine or 

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 12 of 18 
 
compensation awarded by the trial 
Court: 
Provided that the amount payable 
under this sub-section shall be in 
addition to any interim compensation 
paid by the appellant under section 
143A.  
(2) The amount referred to in sub-
section (1) shall be deposited within 
sixty days from the date of the order, 
or within such further period not 
exceeding thirty days as may be 
directed by the Court on sufficient 
cause being shown by the appellant.  
(3) The Appellate Court may direct the 
release of the amount deposited by the 
appellant to the complainant at any 
time during the pendency of the 
appeal:  
Provided that if the appellant is 
acquitted, the Court shall direct the 
complainant to repay to the appellant 
the amount so released, with interest 
at the bank rate as published by the 
Reserve Bank of India, prevalent at the 
beginning of the relevant financial 
year, within sixty days from the date of 
the order, or within such further 
period not exceeding thirty days as 
may be directed by the Court on 
sufficient cause being shown by the 
complainant.” 
Sub-section (1) of Section 148 confers on the Appellate Court a 
power to direct the appellant/accused to deposit 20 per cent of 
the compensation amount. It operates at a different level as the 
power 
thereunder 
can 
be 
exercised 
only 
after 
the 
appellant/accused is convicted after a full trial.    

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 13 of 18 
 
14. 
In the case of Section 143A, the power can be exercised 
even before the accused is held guilty.  Sub-section (1) of 
Section 143A provides for passing a drastic order for payment 
of interim compensation against the accused in a complaint 
under Section 138, even before any adjudication is made on the 
guilt of the accused.  The power can be exercised at the 
threshold even before the evidence is recorded.  If the word 
‘may’ is interpreted as ‘shall’, it will have drastic consequences 
as in every complaint under Section 138, the accused will have 
to pay interim compensation up to 20 per cent of the cheque 
amount. Such an interpretation will be unjust and contrary to 
the well-settled concept of fairness and justice. If such an 
interpretation is made, the provision may expose itself to the 
vice of manifest arbitrariness. The provision can be held to be 
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.  In a sense, sub-
section (1) of Section 143A provides for penalising an accused 
even before his guilt is established. Considering the drastic 
consequences of exercising the power under Section 143A and 
that also before the finding of the guilt is recorded in the trial, 
the word “may” used in the provision cannot be construed as 
“shall”. The provision will have to be held as a directory and not 
mandatory.   Hence, we have no manner of doubt that the word 
“may” used in Section 143A, cannot be construed or interpreted 
as “shall”. Therefore, the power under sub-section (1) of Section 
143A is discretionary. 

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 14 of 18 
 
15. 
Even sub-section (1) of Section 148 uses the word “may”.  
In the case of Surinder Singh Deswal v. Virender Gandhi1, 
this Court, after considering the provisions of Section 148, held 
that the word “may” used therein will have to be generally 
construed as “rule” or “shall”.  It was further observed that 
when the Appellate Court decides not to direct the deposit by 
the accused, it must record the reasons.  After considering the 
said decision in the case of Surinder Singh Deswal1, this 
Court, in the case of Jamboo Bhandari v. Madhya Pradesh 
State Industrial Development Corporation Limited & Ors.2, 
in paragraph 6, held thus:  
“6. What is held by this Court is that a 
purposive interpretation should be made 
of Section 148 NI Act. Hence, normally, 
the appellate court will be justified in 
imposing the condition of deposit as 
provided in Section 148. However, in 
a case where the appellate court is 
satisfied that the condition of deposit 
of 20% will be unjust or imposing such 
a condition will amount to deprivation 
of the right of appeal of the appellant, 
exception can be made for the reasons 
specifically recorded.” 
                    (Emphasis added) 
 
15.1. As held earlier, Section 143A can be invoked before the 
conviction of the accused, and therefore, the word “may” used 
therein can never be construed as “shall”. The tests applicable 
for the exercise of jurisdiction under sub-section (1) of Section 
 
1  (2019) 11 SCC 341 
2  (2023) 10 SCC 446 

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 15 of 18 
 
148 can never apply to the exercise of jurisdiction under sub-
section (1) of Section 143A of the N.I. Act. 
FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED WHILE EXERCISING 
DISCRETION 
16. 
When the court deals with an application under Section 
143A of the N.I. Act, the Court will have to prima facie evaluate 
the merits of the case made out by the complainant and the 
merits of the defence pleaded by the accused in the reply to the 
application under sub-section (1) of Section 143A.  The 
presumption under Section 139 of the N.I. Act, by itself, is no 
ground to direct the payment of interim compensation.  The 
reason is that the presumption is rebuttable.  The question of 
applying the presumption will arise at the trial. Only if the 
complainant makes out a prima facie case, a direction can be 
issued to pay interim compensation. At this stage, the fact that 
the accused is in financial distress can also be a consideration.  
Even if the Court concludes that a case is made out for grant 
of interim compensation, the Court will have to apply its mind 
to the quantum of interim compensation to be granted. Even at 
this stage, the Court will have to consider various factors such 
as the nature of the transaction, the relationship, if any, 
between the accused and the complainant and the paying 
capacity of the accused. If the defence of the accused is found 
to be prima facie a plausible defence, the Court may exercise 
discretion in refusing to grant interim compensation.  We may 
note that the factors required to be considered, which we have 
set out above, are not exhaustive. There could be several other 
factors in the facts of a given case, such as, the pendency of a 

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 16 of 18 
 
civil suit, etc. While deciding the prayer made under Section 
143A, the Court must record brief reasons indicating 
consideration of all the relevant factors. 
17. 
In the present case, the Trial Court has mechanically 
passed an order of deposit of Rs.10,00,000/- without 
considering the issue of prima facie case and other relevant 
factors. It is true that the sum of Rs.10,00,000/- represents 
less than 5 per cent of the cheque amount, but the direction 
has been issued to pay the amount without application of mind. 
Even the High Court has not applied its mind. We, therefore, 
propose to direct the Trial Court to consider the application for 
grant of interim compensation afresh. In the meanwhile, the 
amount of Rs. 10,00,000/- deposited by the appellant will 
continue to remain deposited with the Trial Court.   
18. 
Hence, impugned orders are set aside, and the application 
made by the complainant in Complaint Petition No. 1103/2018 
under Section 143A (1) of the N.I. Act is restored to the file of 
Judicial Magistrate First Class, Bokaro. The learned Judge will 
hear and decide the application for the grant of interim 
compensation afresh in the light of what is held in this 
judgment. The amount deposited by the appellant of Rs. 
10,00,000/- shall be invested in a fixed deposit till the disposal 
of the said application. At the time of disposing of the 
application, the Trial Court will pass an appropriate order 
regarding refund and/or withdrawal and/or investment of the 
said amount.  

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 17 of 18 
 
19. 
Subject to what is held earlier, the main conclusions can 
be summarised as follows:  
a. The exercise of power under sub-section (1) of Section 143A 
is discretionary. The provision is directory and not 
mandatory. The word “may” used in the provision cannot be 
construed as “shall.” 
b. While deciding the prayer made under Section 143A, the 
Court must record brief reasons indicating consideration of 
all relevant factors. 
c. The broad parameters for exercising the discretion under 
Section 143A are as follows:  
i. The Court will have to prima facie evaluate the merits 
of the case made out by the complainant and the 
merits of the defence pleaded by the accused in the 
reply to the application. The financial distress of the 
accused can also be a consideration. 
ii. A direction to pay interim compensation can be issued, 
only if the complainant makes out a prima facie case.  
iii. If the defence of the accused is found to be prima facie 
plausible, the Court may exercise discretion in 
refusing to grant interim compensation. 
iv. If the Court concludes that a case is made out to grant 
interim compensation, it will also have to apply its 
mind to the quantum of interim compensation to be 
granted. While doing so, the Court will have to 

 
       Crl. Appeal No. 741 of 2024 
 
Page 18 of 18 
 
consider several factors such as the nature of the 
transaction, the relationship, if any, between the 
accused and the complainant, etc. 
v. There could be several other relevant factors in the 
peculiar facts of a given case, which cannot be 
exhaustively stated. The parameters stated above are 
not exhaustive.  
20. 
The Appeal is partly allowed on the above terms. 
 
 
……………………..J. 
 (Abhay S. Oka) 
 
……………………..J. 
(Ujjal Bhuyan) 
New Delhi; 
March 15, 2024