2024 INSC 212
1|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 270 OF 2019 
 
 
PERIYASAMY   
 
 
 
 
 
   …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE REP.  
BY THE INSPECTOR OF POLICE 
 
                              …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
WITH  
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 271 OF 2019 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
SANJAY KAROL J. 
 
1. 
The present appeals arise from the final judgment and order dated 26th 
November 2014 passed by the Madurai Bench  of  Madras High Court, in Crl. A. 
(MD) No. 238 and 240 of 2014, which confirmed the judgment and order dated 
31st July 2014 in Sessions Case No. 109 of 2005 passed by the Sessions Court, 
Digitally signed by
Nidhi Ahuja
Date: 2024.03.18
16:42:30 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
Tiruchirapalli, 
vide 
which the 
present 
appellants, 
Periyasamy1 
and                      
R. Manoharan2 were convicted in the following terms under the Indian Penal 
Code3: 
 
S.No 
Name 
Crime 
Punishment Awarded 
1.  A1 – Periyasamy IPC – S.302 (2 
counts) 
Imprisonment 
for 
life 
and  
Rs. 1,000 fine 
IPC – S.307 (2 
counts) 
 
Rigorous Imprisonment for seven 
years and Rs. 1,000 fine  
2.  A2 - R. 
Manoharan  
IPC – S.302 r/w 
S.109  
(1 count) 
Imprisonment for life and Rs. 
1,000 fine 
IPC – S.307 r/w 
S.109  
(2 counts) 
Rigorous Imprisonment for seven 
years and Rs. 1,000 fine  
 
 
2. 
The incident in question relates to the death of two persons after being 
stabbed, allegedly by A-1 at the instigation of A-2. The prosecution case 
emerging from the record, as also set out by the Courts below, is as follows:- 
2.1 
On 3rd March 2002, Dharmalingam4 had after already having 
procured liquor in an earlier completed transaction, half an hour later 
demanded more brandy on credit from the owners and workers of 
Saravana Wine Shop located in Neithalur Colony. A quarrel arose, and a 
showcase of the shop was smashed, and the bottles stored therein were 
damaged.  In this course of events, it is alleged that D-1 retrieved a knife 
 
1 Hereinafter ‘A-1’ 
2 Hereinafter ‘A-2’ 
3 Hereinafter ‘IPC’ 
4 Hereinafter ‘D1’ 

3|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
and stabbed one Thangavel5 (one of the owners of the shop). A-1, with a 
knife, caused fatal injuries to D-1. He also stabbed Sakthivel (son of 
Muthuveeran)6 in his stomach repeatedly. When D-2 intervened to prevent 
the attack, A-1 stabbed him. While the injured persons were being taken to 
hospital, on the way, both D-1 and D-2 succumbed to injuries. 
2.2 
Sakthivel, who was injured in the incident, reported it to                      
A. Rajasekar (PW-20), a Police Inspector at the Hospital. Upon this 
statement, FIR no. 87/2002 came to be registered. Upon investigation on 1st 
July 2004, charges were framed against A-1 and A-2, as indicated in the 
above table.  
Trial Court Findings 
3. 
In order to prove the charges, the prosecution examined 22 witnesses; 
exhibited 33 documents and nine material objects. To repel the charges, the 
defence produced a solitary witness and three documents. 
4. 
The Trial Court has relied on ocular and medical evidence to establish the 
charges against the accused persons. PW-1 and K. Sakthivel, son of Kaathaan7 
(PW-2) both deposed that in the quarrel between the deceased and accused 
persons, though they tried to pacify the situation,  A-2 handed a knife to A-1 with 
which the latter stabbed the deceased persons.  
 
5 Hereinafter ‘D2’ 
6 Hereinafter ‘PW-1 
7 Hereinafter ‘PW2’ 

4|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
5. 
The Learned Trial Court found no substance in the challenge put forth by 
the defence attempting to shake the prosecution's case. A-1 was held guilty on 
two counts of Section 302, IPC, i.e., for the murder of D-1 and D-2; A-2 was held 
guilty on one count only, i.e., for abetting the murder of D-1. 
6. 
The charges of attempt to murder were found to be proven against both   
A-1 and A-2. It relied on the evidence of PW-1, PW-2, and PW-3 to hold that     
A-2 instigated A-1 to attack the deceased. The learned Trial Court observed that 
the injuries sustained by PW-1 and K. Sakthivel (PW-2) were of such a nature 
that the act of the accused would be termed as an act of attempt to murder.  
High Court Findings 
7. 
The High Court, in appeal, was faced with the question of the absence of 
the name of A-2 in the FIR. Having referred to certain decisions of this Court, it 
was observed that simply because the name was not mentioned in the FIR, an 
accused can not be absolved of liability for having committed the offence. The 
next question considered by the Court with respect to A-2 was his involvement 
or lack thereof in the occurrence of this offence. The argument on his behalf relies 
on the fact that PW-1's statement did not mention him, and neither did Exhs. P-6 
and P-11, was considered unworthy, keeping in view the testimonies of injured 
eyewitnesses PW-1 and PW-2 as also the statement of PW-3 under Section 161 
(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; it was held that the involvement of 
A-2 stood proved beyond reasonable doubt. 

5|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
8. 
For A-1, three primary arguments were put forth, i.e., Dr. Radhakrishnan8 
(PW-17) Doctor at Seahorse Hospital did not give evidence in regard to the 
surgical procedure undergone by PW-1; the injuries faced by A-1 were not 
sufficiently explained by the prosecution; and about the occurrence, the owner of 
the wine shop stood not examined. 
9. 
It was observed that the genuineness of the statement made by PW-1 to the 
police could not be doubted as he had told PW-17 that he was a victim of an 
attack by A-1. Such genuineness stands buttressed by the fact that the document 
reached the court on the same day.  
10. 
On A-1's injuries being unexplained, it was observed that the same would 
not be sufficient to dispel the entire prosecution case. Reference was made to 
Amar Malla  v. State of Tripura9.   It was held that since both PW-1 and  PW-2 
are consistent on facts, including the place of occurrence, as also the same being 
an admitted fact, the contention in that regard on behalf of A-1 has to be 
negatived. Given that the presence of the owner of the shop has nowhere been 
mentioned, his non-examination cannot be termed fatal to the prosecution case. 
11. 
In such terms, the High Court confirmed the conviction and sentence 
handed down by the Trial Court as regards A1 and A2. 
Submissions 
 
8 Hereinafter ‘PW-17’ 
9 (2002) 7 SCC 91 

6|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
12. 
The present appeals are a challenge to the judgments of the Trial Court and 
High Court. We have heard Mr. S Nagamuthu, learned senior counsel, Mr. S. 
Arun Prakash for A-1, and Mr. Vipin Jai for A-2. Dr. Joseph Aristotle S. was 
heard for the State. 
 Contentions on behalf of A-1  
13. 
The primary ground urged on behalf of A-1 was that nearly all witnesses 
were “interested” in the case's outcome and, therefore, unreliable; and none of 
the witnesses examined were independent. Further, it was canvassed that the 
delay in lodging the FIR stands unexplained, more so when the medical evidence 
does not speak of PW-1 having undergone surgery. Also, it must be noted that 
there was no prior animosity or reason for discord. The events as they unfolded 
were the result of a spur-of-the-moment quarrel in which he also sustained 
grievous injuries. The right of private defence has also been pleaded as an 
alternate argument.  
Contentions on behalf of A-2  
14. 
It was argued on behalf of A-2 that his presence at the scene of the crime 
was never established. Four limbs of A-1’s arguments, i.e., delay in lodging the 
FIR; almost all witnesses qualifying as “interested witnesses”; there being no 
enmity between the involved persons; and the lack of independent witnesses, 
were adopted by A-2. 

7|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
Submissions on behalf of the Respondent 
15. 
The respondent has filed detailed submissions which attempt to discredit 
as a whole the submissions on behalf of the accused persons. In doing so, the 
State relied on various judgments from this Court. We have perused the written 
submissions filed and also examined the cases referred. 
Consideration and Conclusion 
16. 
The question that we are called upon to decide is whether, in the sum total 
of facts, circumstances, and the law applicable,  the convictions handed down to 
A-1 and A-2 are based on the standard of beyond reasonable doubt having been 
met and, therefore, are sustainable. 
17. 
It would be apposite for this Court to consider the law on the various facets 
of the penal laws of the land, involved in this case.   
The Right of Private Defence  
18. 
A-1 has contended that his actions were covered under the ambit of the 
right of private defence. The principle is best captured in the following words 
found in Russel on Crime, 11th Edition Vol.I 
 “… a man is justified in resisting by force anyone who manifestly 
intends and endeavours by violence or surprise to commit a known 
felony against either his person, habitation or property. In these 
cases, he is not obliged to retreat, and may not merely resist the attack 
where he stands but may indeed pursue his adversary until the danger 
is ended and if in a conflict between them he happens to kill his 
attacker, such killing is justifiable”. 
 

8|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
19. 
The right of private defence is not defined under the IPC. Whether under 
the circumstances of each case, such a right is available or not is determined 
within the said boundaries only. No test in the abstract can be laid down for 
determining whether a person legitimately acted in private defence. The law only 
provides that the person claiming such a right bears the onus10 to prove the 
legitimacy of the actions done in furtherance thereof and it is not for the Court to 
presume the presence of such circumstances or the truth in such a plea being 
taken. (See: Raghbir Singh & Ors. v.  State of Haryana11.) The burden on the 
person pleading the right of private defence has been succinctly explained in 
James Martin v. State of Kerala12. This right has been held to be “very valuable, 
serving a social purpose” and, therefore, it should not be construed narrowly. 
(See: Vidhya Singh  v.  State of M.P.13) 
20. 
This Court has summarised the principles in regard to the exercise of right 
of private defence in Darshan Singh v State of Punjab & Anr.14 as referred to in 
Sukumaran v State15  
“(i) Self-preservation is the basic human instinct and is duly 
recognised by the criminal jurisprudence of all civilised countries. 
All free, democratic and civilised countries recognise the right of 
private defence within certain reasonable limits. 
(ii) The right of private defence is available only to one who is 
suddenly confronted with the necessity of averting an impending 
danger and not of self-creation. 
(iii) A mere reasonable apprehension is enough to put the right of 
self-defence into operation. In other words, it is not necessary that 
 
10 Section 105 Indian Evidence Act 1872 
11 (2008) 16 SCC 33 
12 (2004) 2 SCC 203 
13 (1971) 3 SCC 244 
14 (2010) 2 SCC 333 
15 (2019) 15 SCC 117 

9|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
there should be an actual commission of the offence in order to give 
rise to the right of private defence. It is enough if the accused 
apprehended that such an offence is contemplated and it is likely to 
be committed if the right of private defence is not exercised. 
(iv) The right of private defence commences as soon as a reasonable 
apprehension arises and it is coterminous with the duration of such 
apprehension. 
(v) It is unrealistic to expect a person under assault to modulate his 
defence step by step with any arithmetical exactitude. 
(vi) In private defence the force used by the accused ought not to be 
wholly disproportionate or much greater than necessary for 
protection of the person or property. 
(vii) It is well settled that even if the accused does not plead self-
defence, it is open to consider such a plea if the same arises from the 
material on record. 
(viii) The accused need not prove the existence of the right of private 
defence beyond reasonable doubt. 
(ix) The Penal Code confers the right of private defence only when 
that unlawful or wrongful act is an offence. 
(x) A person who is in imminent and reasonable danger of losing his 
life or limb may in exercise of self-defence inflict any harm even 
extending to death on his assailant either when the assault is 
attempted or directly threatened.” 
 
However, this Court will only enter into the question of applicability of the right 
of private defence if the primary submission of complete acquittal fails, for it has 
been submitted by Mr. Nagamuthu, learned senior counsel that this submission 
is an alternate to the arguments advanced by Mr. S. Arun Prakash, learned 
counsel for A-1.  
Independent  and Related or Interested Witnesses 
21. 
It is a well-recognised principle in law that the non-examination of 
independent witnesses would not be fatal to a case set up by the prosecution. The 
difference between a witness who is “interested” and one who is “related” stand 
explained by a Bench of three learned Judges in State of Rajasthan  v. Kalki16  
 
16 (1981) 2 SCC 752 

10|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
“7. …“Related” is not equivalent to “interested”. A witness may be called 
“interested” only when he or she derives some benefit from the result of a 
litigation; in the decree in a civil case, or in seeing an accused person 
punished. A witness who is a natural one and is the only possible 
eyewitness in the circumstances of a case cannot be said to be “interested.” 
 
We may refer to the observation in Sarwan Singh  v.  State of Punjab17 as under 
to appreciate the evidentiary value of such testimonies: – 
“...Moreover, it is not the law that the evidence of an interested witness 
should be equated with that of a tainted evidence or that of an approver so 
as to require corroboration as a matter of necessity. The evidence of an 
interested witness does not suffer from any infirmity as such, but the courts 
require as a rule of prudence, not as a rule of law, that the evidence of such 
witnesses should be scrutinised with a little care. Once that approach is 
made and the court is satisfied that the evidence of interested witnesses 
have a ring of truth such evidence could be relied upon even without 
corroboration. Indeed there may be circumstances where only interested 
evidence may be available and no other, e.g. when an occurrence takes 
place at midnight in the house when the only witnesses who could see the 
occurrence may be the family members. In such cases it would not be 
proper to insist that the evidence of the family members should be 
disbelieved merely because of their interestedness…” 
 
 
 
In other words, if witnesses examined are found to be ‘interested’ then, the 
examination of independent witnesses would assume importance.  
Faulty Police Investigation 
22. 
Recently, this Court in Rajesh and Anr.  v.  State of Madhya Pradesh (3-
Judge Bench)18, while setting aside the conviction of the three Appellants 
therein, remarked:  
“39. Before parting with the case with our verdict, we may note with deep 
and profound concern the disappointing standards of police investigation 
that seem to be the invariable norm. As long back as in the year 2003, the 
Report of Dr. Justice V.S. Malimath's ‘Committee on Reforms of Criminal 
Justice System’ had recorded thus: 
 
‘The manner in which police investigations are conducted is of 
critical importance to the functioning of the Criminal Justice 
 
17 (1976) 4 SCC 369 (3J) 
18 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1202 

11|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
System. Not only serious miscarriage of justice will result if the 
collection of evidence is vitiated by error or malpractice, but 
successful prosecution of the guilty depends on a thorough and 
careful search for truth and collection of evidence which is both 
admissible and probative. In undertaking this search, it is the 
duty of the police to investigate fairly and thoroughly and collect 
all evidence, whether for or against the suspect. Protection of 
the society being the paramount consideration, the laws, 
procedures and police practices must be such as to ensure that 
the guilty are apprehended and punished with utmost dispatch 
and in the process the innocent are not harassed. The aim of the 
investigation and, in fact, the entire Criminal Justice System is 
to search for truth. ……The standard of police investigation in 
India remains poor and there is considerable room for 
improvement. The Bihar Police Commission (1961) noted with 
dismay that “during the course of tours and examination of 
witnesses, no complaint has been so universally made before the 
Commission as that regarding the poor quality of police 
investigation”. Besides inefficiency, the members of public 
complained of rudeness, intimidation, suppression of evidence, 
concoction of evidence and malicious padding of cases…..’ 
 
40. Echoing the same sentiment in its Report No. 239 in March, 2012, the 
Law Commission of India observed that the principal causes of low rate of 
conviction in our country, inter alia, included inept, unscientific 
investigation by the police and lack of proper coordination between police 
and prosecution machinery. Despite passage of considerable time since 
these gloomy insights, we are dismayed to say that they remain sadly true 
even to this day. This is a case in point….” 
 
23. 
 A perusal of the judgment of the Trial Court shows that for both counts 
before it, reliance primarily has been placed on PW-1 to PW-3. Apart from these 
three-star prosecution witnesses, the Investigating Officer (PW-22), by virtue of 
having been “in the driver’s seat” of the case, acquires importance. The salient 
points that can be appreciated from an assay of their respective testimonies may 
be referred to as follows:- 
23.1     PW-1 is Sakthivel, S/o Muthuveeran.  It was stated that upon 
information that D-1 and Senthilkumar were quarreling with the owner 
of the wine shop, he and Sakthivel, S/o Kathan rushed to the shop. It is 

12|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
there that upon the instigation of A-2, who handed A-1 a knife he stabbed 
the witness thrice in the stomach of PW-1 and PW-2, D-1, and D-2 as 
well. SI, Kulithalai, interrogated him at 4.30 a.m. on 4th March 2002, and 
the statement made thereunder is Exh.P-1. In his cross-examination, it has 
come forth that upon his arrival at Seahorse Hospital by 10:00 p.m., he 
was conscious, and it is upon administration of anesthesia for surgery that 
he became unconscious. Regarding the location of a wine shop, it has 
been deposed that the same is located in a crowded area and has a regular 
stream of visitors in and around the area.   
23.2      With respect to A-2, it has been deposed that whether or not he 
was an owner of the wine shop is unclear, but he certainly was a visitor.   
23.3      However, he contradicts his earlier version that upon reaching 
the hospital, he was not in a position to speak and had not informed the 
doctor of the incident, and instead, it was the people who accompanied 
him who briefed the doctor.   
24. 
Sakthivel, S/o Kathan (PW-2) stated that A-1 stabbed him in the stomach 
twice, which was at the instigation of A-2. According to this witness, A-1, A-2, 
and D-2, along with other persons, worked in the wine shop. His statement was 
recorded in the evening after the incident. He states that the showcase upon his 
reaching the wine shop was intact. Further, D-1 was under the influence of 
alcohol when PW-2 saw him, but, significantly, D-1 had not stabbed A-1, and as 
such, no blood was seen on the hands of A-1. 

13|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
25. 
Senthilkumar (PW-3) states that he was interrogated the morning after the 
incident at 7.30 a.m. His deposition reveals him not to know as to whether D-1 
(Dharmalingam) was in a state of intoxication before going to the wine shop. Nor 
has he seen the showcase of the shop in a broken condition.   
26. 
The learned Trial Court found sufficient evidence to convict both A-1 and 
A-2 based on these three testimonies.   
27. 
K. Raajasekar (PW-22) (the Investigating Officer) at the relevant time 
Inspector of Police, Kulithalai, took charge of the investigation of the incident on 
4th March 2002. In his examination-in-chief, he has described how the 
investigation proceeded. It was deposed that on 5th March 2002 at about 12 noon, 
he arrested A-2 from the Pettavaithalai bus stand. He also deposed, having visited 
the scene of the crime twice and interrogated several witnesses. On 9th April 
2002, he examined the witnesses (medical evidence) who had allegedly furnished 
wound certificates for A-1 and A-2. Further witnesses were examined on 10th 
July 2002, and a chargesheet was filed on  15th July 2002.   
28.  
It is undisputed that PWs 1 and 2 are injured witnesses. It is a well-
established principle of law, not requiring any underscoring or reiteration, that 
the evidence of an injured witness is considered to be on a higher pedestal than 
that of a witness simpliciter.    
29.  
The learned Trial Court observed that for the reasons,  (a) that the 
witnesses had nothing to gain from deposing against the accused persons;             

14|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
(b) there is no suggestion that any rival business interest was to be benefitted by 
Sarvana Wines being embroiled in the controversy; (c) A-2 was in fact a “good 
Samaritan” ; (d) that the witnesses were deposing the accused persons at the 
behest of the police being an unsubstantiated claim; and (e) that the witnesses 
cannot be said to be “interested”. The concept of interested witness, as referred 
to hereinabove, shows that for a person to be such, he ought to have an interest 
in seeing the accused persons punished.   
30.  
There is a direct statement by PW-1 that D-1 was his relative, i.e., son of 
his paternal uncle. D-2 was a relative of the owner of the wine shop, who, 
according to him, was A-1, but in another instance, he states that A-1 was only a 
worker. In respect of A-2, the only statement is that it was upon his instigation 
that A-1 stabbed them.   
31.  
It is hard to conceive how the Trial Court concluded that despite being the 
first cousin of D-1 and himself a person injured in the incident, PW-1 was not an 
interested witness. Further, we find a categorical statement that,  “the wine shop 
is in the main road’ and “the wine shop would be crowded always”. In such a 
situation, the joining of independent witnesses ought not to have been a difficult 
task but, yet, it remained unachieved.   
32. 
Further, we note that he admits variation in his statement (Exh.P-1) in 
different ink and hand. He further states that there wasn't much light at the spot 

15|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
of the incident, but then denies it to be “too dark” when the occurrence has 
happened.  
33. 
This Court has to strike a balance between the testimony of the injured 
witness and that of an interested witness. It is also not a case that PW-1 was a 
natural witness, as he stated that he had not been to the wine shop and was only 
near the STD booth where the ensuing quarrel was separated. In striking the 
above-stated balance, other factors must also be considered, which will be 
discussed subsequently.   
34.  
PW-2 was a neighbour of D-1. Upon being informed of the quarrel 
between A-1 and D-1, he and PW-1 allegedly went there and separated the 
parties. He claims to be an eyewitness to the incident. After having undergone 
surgery, he regained consciousness the next day at 6.30 a.m.   
35. 
It was that evening when the police recorded his statement.   At the time 
of recording these statements in Court, i.e., 14th November 2005, a separate case 
preferred by the accused persons was under trial and PW-2 was made an accused 
thereunder. Now, having been made an accused in a case, as also having been 
injured with two stabs in the stomach and additionally being the neighbour of    
D-1, it is difficult to reconcile that PW-2 would be a witness of unquestionable 
integrity upon whose statement convictions can be based. Once again, we find 
that in regard to A2 the only thing stated is that upon the instigation of A-2, A-1 
stabbed them.  There is no other statement as to what may have been said by       

16|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
A-2 to enrage him enough that even after the quarrelling parties were separated 
and they had dispersed in their respective directions, A-1 went ahead angrily and 
repeatedly stabbed them.   
36. 
 He has also deposed that there were about 50 persons at the scene of the 
crime, then, how has the non-examination of independent witness been 
countenanced by the prosecution and “approved” by the Courts below, is 
something that escapes us, or rather confounds us.   
37. 
 Another essential aspect to be examined is that the statement of PW-1 was 
recorded at 4.30 a.m. on 4th March 2002 wherein as summarised above, he has 
clearly mentioned the role of PW-2, however, the latter’s examination by the 
police was only at 5.00 p.m., that too when per his own statement he had regained 
consciousness from his surgery at 6.30 a.m. itself. This gap is entirely 
unexplained and wholly overlooked by the Courts below.    
38. 
Coming to the version of PW-2 again, we notice him to be extremely 
evasive on the issue as to whether the police had visited the spot in the night 
intervening 3/4th March 2002 or not. He denies being interrogated by the police 
before 4th March 2002 till about 5.00 p.m. He admits having visited a private 
hospital and, yet, as discussed earlier, failed to report the matter to the police, 
more so the cause of injuries sustained by him or for that matter others present 
on the spot.   

17|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
39.  
The evidence of PW-3, upon which the counsel has laid considerable 
emphasis for the respondent, appears to us to be fraught with contradictions. In 
his examination-in-chief, it is recorded that D-1 had asked A-2 and A-1 for a 
bottle of liquor on credit, which the latter two refused and scolded him, upon 
which he pushed down the showcase, leading A-1 to grab a beer bottle and break 
it on the head of D-1. When he was cross-examined he deposed as follows:  
“The police recorded what all I have stated and obtained my signature. It 
is not correct to state that Dharmalingam asked 1st Accused in the wine 
shop to provide bottle on credit; that as he has refused, Dharmalingam 
picked up the quarrel, pushed the show case and broken into pieces; that 
Thangavel appeared there to question it; that we and Dharmalingam 
stabbed his relatives and Thangavel;….” 
 
40.  
As is apparent, he states, for one, that D-1 had indeed broken the showcase 
but subsequently states that to depose the same would be incorrect. Furthermore, 
we find his actions not to be akin to that of a prudent man. When A-1 had 
allegedly broken a bottle on the head of D-1, PW-3 took the injured D-1 not to 
the hospital but to an STD booth located nearby, where a quarrel ensued between 
him and A-1, which was eventually separated by PWs 1 and 2. Even more so, 
when A-1 was allegedly stabbing PW-2, he was still at the STD booth with D-1, 
yet not having gone to the hospital and also not having made any attempt to stop 
such stabbing. Why a person would “hold” a person with a grievous head injury 
near an STD booth and not take him to the hospital or, additionally, not try and 
stop others from being grievously injured is something that compromises, in our 
mind, the credibility of the version of PW-3.   

18|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
41.  
Apart from the three star witnesses of the prosecution, in our considered 
view, failing the standard of scrutiny applied to a criminal proceeding, a perusal 
of the records reveals another facet, compromising in nature to the prosecution 
case. It has come forth in the evidence of PW-1 that upon his arrival at the 
hospital, he was in a conscious state, so why the recording of the statement 
delayed till 4.30 a.m. is unsubstantiated. This is further so because while PW-1 
speaks of being operated upon, none of the witnesses examined as medical 
witnesses corroborate such a statement. For emphasis, we may refer to the 
statement of PW-17, the medical officer in the Seahorse Hospital, at the relevant 
time. He stated that upon admission, PW-1 was fully conscious. The wound 
certificate was issued by Dr. Pon Shanthi, who has not been examined.   
42. 
The delay therefore renders the circumstances questionable. Also, as we 
have alluded to earlier, there is a significant gap in the examination of PW-2 as 
well. For all the aforesaid reasons, it cannot be said that the prosecution had 
succeeded in establishing its case against the two accused persons beyond 
reasonable doubt warranting a conviction under Section 302 IPC.     
43. 
We further examine the role of the I.O. The investigation officer of a case 
is the charioteer tasked with using the resources and personnel at his disposal to 
ensure law and order as also that a person who has committed a crime is brought 
to the book. In other words, the role of an investigating officer is that of the 
backbone of the entire criminal proceeding in respect of the particular offence(s) 
he is charged with investigating. A perusal of his testimony reveals certain 

19|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
problematic statements. Nowhere has it come on record as to how the 
investigation reached the bus stand from where A-2 was arrested – who informed 
the authorities about A-2's movement by bus? Further, he has deposed that he 
made two visits to the scene of the crime and that he also examined several 
witnesses. Then how is there a striking lack of independent witnesses to lend 
credence to the prosecution's version of events? He does not know where D-1 
had expired. How? He also did not conduct any scientific investigation at the spot 
of crime. Such an investigation carried out most casually and callously is sought 
to be made the basis by the police in seeking the conviction of the accused.   
44. 
Another direct contradiction concerns his examination of the doctors who 
allegedly gave wound certificates for PWs 1 and 2. In the testimony of PW-17, it 
is clear that he was not the one who gave the wound certificate as he was only on 
duty from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m., and PW-1 was brought to the hospital at 10 p.m. The 
wound certificate was issued by Dr. Pon Shanthi, who had not been examined in 
the instant proceedings.    
45. 
For the charges under Section 307 IPC, the learned Trial Court also 
considered the evidence of PWs 1, 2, and 3. We have considered the evidence of 
these three witnesses in detail and are of the opinion that for the reasons afore-
stated, the said witnesses cannot be relied upon.   
46. 
In addition to the person who led the investigation, we must consider the 
testimonies of the people who aided in it.   

20|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
46.1 PW-20 was the Sub-Inspector, Kulithalai Police Station, at the 
relevant time. His testimony appears to be evasive and full of 
improvements, needing to explain the material interpolations on the 
medical record. He admits not having recorded any information received 
from the Seahorse Hospital on the night of 3rd of March, 2022 at 11.00 
hours. He admits not to have added a version in the sentence - Exhs. P-1 
and  P-24, which, as we notice, record the name of the assailant. He admits 
the jurisdictional police station to carry out the investigation, was not his 
(Tirupathur Town Police Station) but only Kulithalai. He admits that 
neither he nor any one of the police officers from any of the police stations 
visited the spot till the morning after the date of the incident, despite the 
travel distance being less than half an hour. No explanation is forthcoming 
as to why one of the most essential aspects of the criminal investigation 
was ignored or delayed. We notice the witness to have admitted having 
informed the details of the incident both to the Deputy Superintendent of 
Police and K. Rajasekar (PW-22). Was it that the initial investigation was 
being managed so as to shield the real assailants, which could have been 
the complainant party themselves? Or was it that the police were trying to 
frame the accused? Particularly when, as the record reveals, as is so 
admitted by PW-22 of A-2 being a practicing advocate who has been,  (i) 
pursuing the matters against the officials of the police station; (ii) has been 

21|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
lodging complaints against the police officials for inaction; and (iii) had 
nothing to do with the ownership, management or control of the wine shop.   
46.2 There is yet another disturbing feature emanating from his 
statement. Why is it that the police used a private vehicle for carrying out 
the investigation, as was admitted by this witness in any case, whose owner 
and driver in any event not examined during trial or investigation? The 
prosecution doesn’t contend that at the relevant time, no government 
vehicle was available at the police station or that the said private vehicle 
was hired by them. It is also significant that PW-21 admits that PW-1 had 
not named A-2 in his statement,  and, PW-22 when speaking about A-2, 
only states, “On 5.3.2002 at 12.00 noon, I arrested the accused Manoharan 
at Pettavaithalai Bus Stand after enquired sent him to the Court Custody 
on the same day.” 
46.3 In respect of PW-21, we find him to have not denied but feigned 
ignorance of the fact that Sundaravadivel had held Paramasivam S/o 
Kaalimoopan against whom a false case stood fastened by Inspector 
Sundaravadivel, under the Tamil Nadu Prevention of Dangerous Activities 
of Bootleggers, Drug Offenders,  Goondas, Immoral Traffic Offenders, 
Forest Offenders, Sand Offenders, Slum-Grabbers and Video Pirates Act, 
198219 . He only states that “being an Advocate the 2nd accused came to 
 
19 Hereinafter referred to as ‘Goondas Act’ 

22|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
the area police stations.”  This in no way discloses what led either PW-22 
or him to suspect and thence, act on the complicity of A-2 in the crime.    
47.  
Various lapses such as these cumulatively affect the overall sanctity of the 
prosecution case, making it fall short of the threshold of beyond reasonable 
doubt. It is in such circumstances, on analysis of the record, that we are unable 
to sustain the conviction handed down by the Courts below to A-1 and A-2.  The 
injured witnesses and the Investigation Officer in their testimony together are not 
inspiring confidence,  and in our own estimation the prosecution case stands 
shaken beyond a point to which no conviction resting thereupon can be said to 
be just in the eyes of law. 
48. 
We sustain the challenge on the grounds, among others that, (a) examined 
private persons were interested witnesses, with inconsistencies amongst them; 
(b) no independent witnesses were examined; (c) there was a delay in filing the 
FIR; (d) there were interpolations on record; (e) there were numerous lapses in 
the investigation; and  (f) the medical and scientific evidence on record does not 
support the prosecution's version of events. 
49.  
During the course of submissions on behalf of A-1, the learned senior 
counsel appearing on his behalf had urged the right of private defence as a 
secondary submission, in the event of the arguments in favour of complete 
acquittal on finding favour with the court. Given that, upon consideration and 
analysis of the submissions made and the material on record, we have found that 

23|Criminal Appeal 270 and 271 of 2019 
 
the convictions cannot stand in the eyes of law, we need not delineate on that 
submission. 
50.  
In that view of the matter, the appeals are allowed and the convictions 
subject matter thereof, are accordingly set aside. Both appellants are directed to 
be released forthwith, if not required in any other case. Pending application(s), if 
any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
…………….....……….J 
(HRISHIKESH ROY) 
 
 
  
 …………….....……….J 
(SANJAY KAROL) 
  
  
New Delhi; 
18th March 2024.