2024 INSC 217
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
     
  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1638 OF 2024 
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (Crl.) No.6561 OF 2023) 
 
SATYENDAR KUMAR JAIN                                             …APPELLANT 
VERSUS 
DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT 
 
             …RESPONDENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WITH 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1639 OF 2024 
(@SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (Crl.) No. 7129 OF 2023) 
ANKUSH JAIN                                      
                …APPELLANT 
VERSUS 
DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT 
 
             …RESPONDENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AND 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1640 OF 2024 
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (Crl.) No.7130 OF 2023 
VAIBHAV JAIN                                      
                …APPELLANT 
VERSUS 
DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT 
 
             …RESPONDENT 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
1. Leave granted. 
2. All the three appeals arise out of the common impugned judgment 
and order dated 06.04.2023 passed by the High Court of Delhi at 
Digitally signed by
RAVI ARORA
Date: 2024.03.18
18:09:05 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
New Delhi, in the Bail Application Nos. 3590 of 2022, 3705 of 2022 
and 3710 of 2022, whereby the High Court has rejected all the bail 
applications of the appellants. 
3. Earlier the Special Judge (PC Act) (CBI) -23 (MPs/MLAs cases) 
vide the separate detailed orders dated 17.11.2022 had rejected 
the bail applications of all the appellants – accused.  
 
FACTUAL MATRIX 
 
4. An FIR being case No.RC-AC-1-2017-A-0005 dated 24th August, 
2017 came to be registered at the CBI AC-1, New Delhi against 
Shri Satyendar Kumar Jain, Minister in the Government of National 
Capital Territory of Delhi & Others, for the offences under Section 
109 IPC and 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(e) of the PC Act, 1988 
at the instance of the Dy. Superintendent of Police, CBI who had 
conducted a Preliminary Enquiry, being PE AC-1-2017-A0003 
dated 10.04.2017 registered at the said office of the CBI. After the 
investigation, a Charge-sheet came to be filed by the CBI in respect 
of the said FIR on 03.12.2018 in the Court of Special Judge, CBI, 
Patiala House Courts, New Delhi against the six accused viz. Sh. 
Satyendar Kumar Jain, Smt. Poonam Jain, Sh. Ajit Prasad Jain, 
Sh. Sunil Kumar Jain, Sh. Vaibhav Jain and Sh. Ankush Jain. 

3 
 
5. Since Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(e) of the PC Act in the 
said FIR dated 24th August, 2017 were scheduled offences under 
the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002  (hereinafter 
referred to as the “PMLA”) and since it was alleged inter alia that 
Sh. Satyendar Jain with the help of his family members and other 
persons had acquired disproportionate assets during the period 
from 14.02.2015 to 31.05.2017, while he was functioning as 
Minister of Govt. NCT of Delhi, and had laundered tainted cash 
amounts through Kolkata based shell companies, the Directorate 
of 
Enforcement 
had 
registered 
an 
ECIR 
bearing 
No. 
ECIR/HQ/14/2017 dated 30th August, 2017 against Satyendar Jain, 
Vaibhav Jain, Ankush Jain and others for investigation into the 
commission of the offence of Money laundering as defined under 
Section 3 and punishable under Section 4 of the PMLA. On the 
completion of the said investigation, the Prosecution Complaint 
came to be filed on 27.07.2022 by the Directorate of Enforcement 
in the Court of District and Sessions Judge, Rouse Avenue District 
Court, New Delhi, against the accused Sh. Satyendar Jain and 
others with a prayer to take cognizance of the offences of money 
laundering under Section 3 punishable under Section 4 of PMLA. 
The said Prosecution Complaint being CC No.23/2022 is now 

4 
 
pending at the stage of framing of charge against the appellants – 
accused.  
6. During the course of investigation, the appellant- Satyendar Kumar 
Jain was arrested on 30th May, 2022 and the appellants-Vaibhav 
Jain and Ankush Jain were arrested on 30th June, 2022. The gist 
of the allegations made against the appellants-accused as 
mentioned in the said Prosecution Complaint is as under: - 
 
S.No.  
Name of the 
Accused 
  
Role in the case (in brief) 
1. 
Satyendar 
Kumar Jain  
Based on the discussion and material herein above, 
it is clear that Satyendar Kumar Jain hatched the 
criminal conspiracy and conceptualized the idea of 
accommodation entries against cash. To get his idea 
implemented, he recommended appointing his old 
friend Sh. Jagdish Prasad Mohta, Chartered 
Accountant as the auditor of Akinchan Developers 
Pvt. Ltd., Paryas Infosolution Pvt. Ltd., Indo 
Metalimpex Pvt. Ltd. and Mangalayatan Projects Pvt. 
Ltd. He (Satyendar Kumar Jain) first approached Sh. 
Jagdish Prasad Mohta for taking accommodation 
entries in lieu of cash in his aforesaid four 
companies. Shri Mohta arranged a meeting between 
Satyendar Kumar Jain and Rajendra Bansal, Kolkata 
based accommodation entry provider. In this meeting 
all the nitty gritties of these entries was finalized like 
percentage of commission, process of cash transfer, 
documents to be maintained etc. In this way 
Satyendar Kumar Jain was the conceptualizer, 
initiator, and supervisor for the entire operation of 
these accommodation entries. By taking the 
accommodation entries in various companies, 
Satyendar Kumar Jain was hiding behind the 
Corporate Veil. Investigation into the transactions 
and facts prove that Satyendar Kumar Jain initiated, 

5 
 
managed and controlled the companies in which 
these accommodations entries were received. 
Accordingly, the accommodation entries totalling to 
Rs.4.81 Crore (Rs.4.75 crores as entries + Rs.5.32 
lakhs as commission) were received during the 
period 2015-16 from Kolkata based entry operators 
in the bank accounts of the aforesaid companies and 
cash totalling to Rs.4,65,99,635/- i.e. (sum of 
Rs.4,60,83,500/- + Rs.5,16,135/- commission paid to 
entry operators), for this purpose, was paid to them. 
He 
also 
received 
accommodation 
entry 
of 
Rs.15,00,000/- in his company J.J. Ideal Estate Pvt. 
Ltd. during the year 2015-16 from Kolkata based 
entry operators by paying cash amounts of Rs. 
15,00,000 + commission of Rs.16,800/-. By this 
criminal activity, he while holding the public office of 
and functioning as a Minister of Government of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi, during the period 
14.02.2015 to 31.05.2017, acquired assets to the 
tune 
of 
Rs.4,81,16,435/- 
i.e. 
(sum 
of 
Rs.4,60,83,500/- + Rs.15,00,000/- received in J.J. 
Ideal Estate Pvt. Ltd. + Rs.5,16,135/- & Rs.16,800/- 
commission paid to entry operators) - , as discussed 
in above paragraphs, in his name and in the name of 
his family member/ friends, with the help of his 
business associates, which are disproportionate to 
his known sources of income for which he has not 
satisfactorily accounted for and laundered the 
proceeds of crime through a complex web of 
companies controlled by him.  
Satyendar Kumar Jain has thus committed the 
offence of money laundering as defined under 
Section 3 of PMLA by actually acquiring, possessing, 
concealing and using the proceeds of crime to the 
tune of Rs.4,81,16,435/- and projecting and claiming 
the same as untainted in the mode and manner as 
provided in the preceding paragraphs in the present 
complaint.  
 
2. 
Ankush Jain  
Ankush Jain has knowingly assisted Satyendar 
Kumar Jain by making declaration under IDS, 2016 
for declaring undisclosed income of Rs.8.6 crore 
(including Rs.1,53,61,166/- during check period) for 

6 
 
the period from 2010-11 to 2015-16 in order to save 
and shield Sh. Satyendar Kumar Jain. He also 
prepared back dated documents with the help of 
Vaibhav Jain, Sunil Kumar Jain and Jagdish Prasad 
Mohta with regard to his directorship in Akinchan 
Developers Pvt. Ltd., Paryas Infosolution Pvt. Ltd. 
and Indo Metalimpex Pvt. Ltd. by becoming directors 
of aforesaid companies from back date for showing 
his IDS declaration as genuine.  
Ankush Jain has thus committed the offence of 
money laundering as defined under Section 3 of 
PMLA by being actually involved in and knowingly 
assisting Satyendar Kumar Jain in projecting his 
proceeds of crime to the tune of Rs.4,81,16,435/- as 
untainted in the mode and manner as described in 
the preceding paragraphs in the present complaint 
and is therefore, liable for punishment under Section 
4 of PMLA.  
 
3. 
Vaibhav Jain  
Vaibhav Jain is involved in knowingly assisting 
Satyendar Kumar Jain by making declaration under 
IDS, 2016 for declaring undisclosed income of Rs.8.6 
crore (including Rs.1,53,61,166/- during check 
period) for the period from 2010-11 to 2015-16 in 
order to save Sh. Satyendar Kumar Jain. He also 
prepared back dated documents with the help of 
Sunil Kumar Jain, Ankush Jain and Sh. Jagdish 
Prasad Mohta with regard to his directorship in 
Akinchan Developers Pvt. Ltd., Indo Metalimpex Pvt. 
Ltd. and Mangalayatan Projects Pvt. Ltd. by 
becoming directors of aforesaid companies from 
back date for showing his IDS declaration as 
genuine.  
Vaibhav Jain has thus committed the offence of 
money laundering as defined under Section 3 of 
PMLA by being actually involved in and knowingly 
assisting Satyendar Kumar Jain in projecting his 
proceeds of crime to the tune of Rs.4,81,16,435/- as 
untainted in the mode and manner as aforesaid in the 
complaint and is therefore, liable for punishment 
under Section 4 of PMLA. 
 
 
 

7 
 
SUBMISSIONS: 
7. The learned counsels for the parties made their respective 
submissions at length. The learned senior advocate Mr. Abhishek 
Manu Singhvi broadly made following submissions on behalf of the 
appellant Satyendar Kumar Jain: 
 
(i) 
The appellant was already granted bail in the predicate 
offence registered by the CBI, and the arrest of the appellant 
was made by the ED almost five years after the registration 
of the ECIR, though the appellant was cooperating the ED 
by remaining present in response to the summons issued 
under Section 50 of the PMLA. The appellant was in custody 
from 30.05.2022 to 26.05.2023 and since then has been 
granted interim bail on the medical ground. 
(ii) 
No shares of companies as alleged by the ED were acquired 
by the appellant within the check period and even otherwise 
the assets held by the company could not be attributed to its 
shareholders. 
(iii) 
Even if the accommodation entries amounting to Rs. 4.61 
crores are attributed to the appellant through his wife’s 
shareholdings, it would come only to Rs. 59,32,122/- which 

8 
 
is less than 1 crore, and therefore the appellant is entitled to 
bail under the proviso to Section 45 of the PMLA. 
(iv) 
There is gross discrepancy in the amount of proceeds of 
crime calculated by the ED and the amount mentioned in the 
Chargesheet of the CBI in as much as the alleged 
disproportionate amount is Rs.1,62,50,294/- as per the FIR 
whereas as per the ED the amount is Rs. 4,81,16,435/-. 
(v) 
The appellant had neither served as a Director nor had 
signed any financial document during the check period, and 
the appellant had already resigned from the directorship of 
the allegedly involved Companies two years before the 
commission of the alleged offence. It was Vaibhav Jain and 
Ankush Jain and their family members who had a significant 
influence and control over the said companies. 
(vi) 
The appellant’s role in the companies has been delineated 
in the MOU seized from Vaibhav Jain’s locker, which 
underscores the business relations and shows that the 
appellant’s architectural expertise was to be employed for 
the investment to be financed by the families of Vaibhav Jain 
and Ankush Jain. Through the quashing of the provisional 
attachment order by the Delhi High Court, the allegation 

9 
 
against the appellant being the beneficial owner had stood 
refuted. 
(vii) The alleged proceeds of crime through accommodation 
entries were directed to the families of Vaibhav Jain and 
Ankush Jain, and the fresh shares issued to the Kolkata 
based Shell Companies were promptly transferred to 
Vaibhav Jain and Ankush Jain during the check period. The 
appellant therefore was not in possession of any proceeds 
of crime. 
(viii) 
The appellant could not be held to be in constructive 
possession of the property, if there was no dominion or 
control of the appellant over the said property. As per the 
ED’s complaint also the appellant was not in possession of 
the proceeds of crime and therefore also the appellant could 
not be said to be in constructive possession of the same. 
(ix) 
There was no shred of evidence collected by the ED to show 
that the appellant had provided cash to Kolkata companies 
during the check period. It was Vaibhav Jain and Ankush 
Jain who had explained on their Fragrance business as the 
legitimate source of the cash during their recording of 
statements under Section 50 of the PMLA. 

10 
 
(x) 
The Kolkata companies and the persons allegedly providing 
accommodation entries were not made the accused by the 
ED. 
(xi) 
The allegation of the ED in its complaint that the appellant 
had committed a predicate offence of hatching a criminal 
conspiracy and by committing criminal activity had acquired 
assets to the tune of Rs. 4.81 crore in his name and in the 
name of his family members while holding the public office, 
was not the allegation made by the CBI in the FIR registered 
against the appellant and others with regard to the 
disproportionate assets charged under Section 13(1)(e) of 
the Prevention of Corruption Act. 
(xii) 
The assumptions of proceeds of crime on the sole basis of 
accommodation entries is completely contrary to the 
concept of proceeds of crime as explained in the judgment 
of Vijay Madanlal Choudhary and Others vs. Union of 
India and Others1. Such allegation could be a tax violation 
but could not be considered as proceeds of crime. 
(xiii) 
The Prosecution Complaint is silent as to when the 
scheduled offence was committed and as to how and in what 
 
1 2022 SCC OnLine SC 929 

11 
 
manner the proceeds of crime was laundered within the 
meaning of Section 3 of the PMLA. 
(xiv) 
As regards the Income Disclosure Scheme (IDS) declaration 
made by Vaibhav Jain and Ankush Jain for about Rs.16 
crores for the period 2010-2016, it has been submitted that 
the said IDS declarations were rejected by the PCIT vide the 
order 
dated 
09.06.2017, 
on 
the 
ground 
of 
misrepresentation/suppression of facts. The said order of 
PCIT was challenged by Vaibhav Jain and Ankush Jain 
before the Delhi High Court, however the High Court had 
also rejected that petition vide the order dated 01.08.2019. 
Neither the PCIT nor the High Court had given any finding 
that the said amount of Rs. 16 crores belonged to the 
appellant. 
(xv) 
The reliance placed by the ED on the appellant’s letter dated 
27.06.2018 was misleading and incorrect, in as much as the 
appellant vide the said letter had explicitly denied the 
appellant being the beneficial owner. Since Vaibhav Jain 
and Ankush Jain had already deposited the tax on the said 
income, the appellant in the said letter had only requested 
the authorities to adjust the said tax and not to make a 

12 
 
demand again for the same amount from the appellant, 
however from the said letter it could not be assumed that the 
appellant had accepted the additions made in the 
assessment order. 
(xvi) 
As held in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra), the courts 
ought not to conduct mini trial and should consider only the 
broad probability of the matter. The appellant is not a flight 
risk, there is no risk of tampering of documents or witnesses. 
The jail violation as alleged by the ED has not been 
accepted by the concerned Jail visiting Judge and the Jail 
authorities. The appellant being sick and infirm, having 
undergone a spine surgery, is entitled to bail as per the 
proviso to Section 45 of PMLA.    
8. The learned ASG Mr. SV Raju made the following submissions in 
the appeal preferred by the appellant Shri Satyendar Kumar Jain: 
 
(i) 
It was revealed during the course of investigation that the 
appellant Satyendar Kumar Jain while posted and 
functioning as the Minister in the Government of National 
Capital Territory of Delhi, during the period from 2015 to 
2017 had acquired assets in the form of movable and 
immovable properties in his name and in the name of his 

13 
 
family members, which were disproportionate to his known 
source of income. 
(ii) 
During the check period, the accommodation entries against 
cash of about 4.81 crores was received in the companies – 
M/s Akinchan Developers Pvt. Ltd., M/s Paryas Infosolutions 
Pvt. Ltd., M/s. Manglayatan Projects Pvt. Ltd., and M/s JJ 
Ideal Estate Pvt. Ltd., beneficially owned/ controlled by the 
appellant from Kolkata based entry operators through Shell 
Companies. 
(iii) 
From the statements of Rajendra Bansal, Jivendra Mishra, 
both residents of Kolkata, and from Shri J.P. Mohta, the 
Chartered Accountant, it was revealed that Shri Rajendra 
Bansal had arranged accommodation entries in the 
companies of the appellant. Shri Vaibhav Jain in his 
statement under Section 50 had also stated that the cash 
was provided by the appellant himself and had also 
explained about the modus operandi of transferring the cash 
from Delhi to Kolkata through Hawala operators and as to 
how in lieu of cash, accommodation entries were layered 
and received from Kolkata based shell companies into the 

14 
 
companies owned by the appellant, and agricultural lands 
were purchased from the said funds. 
(iv) 
From the documents obtained from the Income Tax 
Department it was revealed that the appellant had submitted 
the application before the income tax authorities requesting 
that the income tax paid by Vaibhav Jain and Ankush Jain 
under IDS, 2016 be adjusted against the demands raised in 
his individual assessments by the IT authorities, which 
established that the IDS declaration made by Vaibhav Jain 
and Ankush Jain were made for the appellant and that the 
amount paid in IDS as well as the tax paid thereon belonged 
to the appellant Satyendar Kumar Jain. 
(v) 
The Special Court having taken the cognizance of the PMLA 
case vide the order dated 29.07.2022 and having held that 
there was prima facie evidence incriminating about the 
involvement of the appellant Satyendar Kumar Jain was 
sufficient to show the existence of the scheduled offence 
and also the existence of proceeds of crime. 
(vi) 
The appellant Satyendar Kumar Jain was the main person 
behind the bogus shell companies based in Kolkata, which 
never did any real business.  He had either incorporated 

15 
 
them or was having majority shareholdings alongwith his 
wife. The accommodation entries of Rs. 16.50 crores 
(approx.) were received in the said companies during the 
financial years 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2015-16 with the 
modus operandi as revealed from the statements of the 
Auditor/Chartered Accountant Shri J.P. Mohta as well as the 
accommodation entry provider Shri Rajendra Bansal and 
also from the statement of Vaibhav Jain. 
(vii) 
Though the principle of company being a separate legal 
entity from its shareholders is an established principle of 
Company law, the lifting of corporate veil has been upheld 
in the cases where the corporate structures have been used 
for committing fraud, economic offences or have been used 
as a facade or a sham for carrying out illegal activities. 
(viii) 
The bogus nature of IDS declarations was substantiated by 
the fact that the entire amount of Rs.16.50 Crores received 
as accommodation entry was split between Vaibhav Jain 
and Ankush Jain. The said declarations showed their modus 
operandi to shield Satyendar Jain and his family members, 
and assume the entire liability upon themselves to give it a 
colour of a tax evasion simplicitor, rather than a criminal 

16 
 
activity relating to disproportionate assets. This modus 
operandi also showed that the appellants themselves had 
disregarded the corporate entities of these companies.  
(ix)  
The disproportionate pecuniary resources earned by the 
appellant by the commission of scheduled offence, were 
used as accommodation entries for concealing and layering 
the tainted origins of the money, and therefore would qualify 
to be the proceeds of crime as defined under Section 2(1)(u) 
of the PMLA. 
(x) 
The two entry operators namely Rajendra Bansal and 
Jivendra Mishra had expressed a fear that Shri Satyendar 
Kumar Jain being an influential politician will create danger 
to them. 
(xi) 
The mandatory twin conditions of Section 45 of PMLA 
having not been satisfied, the appellant should not be 
released on bail.  
9. So far as the appellants Ankush Jain and Vaibhav Jain are 
concerned, the Learned Senior Advocate Ms. Menakshi Arora with 
Learned Advocate Mr. Sushil Kumar Gupta made the following 
submissions: - 

17 
 
(i)   The Scheduled offence in the present case i.e. the 
disproportionate assets case under Section 13(1)(e) of the 
PC Act is a period specific offence and gets accomplished 
only at the end of the check period (14.02.2015 to 
31.05.2017). As stated in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary 
(supra), the proceeds of crime is indicative of criminal 
activity 
related 
to 
a 
scheduled 
offence 
already 
accomplished, and therefore the offence of money 
laundering can be initiated only after the Scheduled Offence 
is accomplished. However, in the instant case, the 
appellants have been roped in for benami transactions from 
2015-2016 which was well before the end of check period i.e 
31.05.2017. 
(ii)     The offence of money laundering against the appellants is 
attributed to their act of filing IDS on 27.09.2016 much before 
the end of check period i.e. 31.05.2017. Hence, the same 
cannot be considered as an act of assisting someone in the 
offence of money laundering as the proceeds of crime could 
have been generated after the end of the check period and 
not before that. 

18 
 
(iii)    The act of declaring IDS by the appellants in respect of 
undisclosed income for the period from 2010-2011 to 2015-
2016 cannot be considered as an act of assisting Satyendar 
Jain in committing the offence of money laundering, in as 
much as the possession of unaccounted property acquired 
by legal means may be actionable for tax violation, but 
cannot be regarded as the proceeds of crime unless the 
concerned tax legislation prescribes such violations as an 
offence and such an offence is included in the Schedule of 
the PML Act. In the instant case, the total amount of 16 
crores has not been considered as the proceeds of crime as 
the ED is relying on the accommodation entries received 
during the check period. 
(iv) 
The IDS filed u/s 183 of the Finance Act, 2013 was declared 
void u/s 193 of the said Act by the Income Tax authorities. 
Hence, the said act of the appellants filing the IDS cannot be 
construed as basis for levelling charges under Section 3 of 
PMLA. Reliance is placed on Karnail Singh vs. State of 
Haryana and Another2 for understanding the meaning of 
“void.” 
 
2  (1995) Supp (3) SCC 376   

19 
 
(v)     It is not made clear by the ED as to the declaration of which 
IDS, whether the one filed by Vaibhav Jain or that filed by 
Ankush Jain has led to the assistance of Satyendar Jain for 
making out the offence under PMLA. Since the allegations 
are vague, the benefit of the same should go to the accused. 
In this regard, reliance is placed on Neelu Chopra and 
Another vs. Bharti3 and Myakala Dharmarajam & Ors. Vs. 
State of Telangana & Anr.4 
(vi)      Since, the generation of proceeds of crime is not an offence 
under Section 3 of PMLA and the said offence could be 
committed only after the accomplishment of the Scheduled 
Offence, the alleged act could not be said to be an offence 
under Section 3 of PMLA. The act of the appellants assisting 
Satyendar Jain for accumulating assets as alleged by the 
CBI, cannot be said to be an offence under the PMLA. 
(vii)     The control of the entire records of the companies was with 
the appellants, including the bank accounts. They were the 
main decision- makers being the Directors, in respect of the 
acts performed on behalf of the Companies, and Mr. 
 
3  (2009) 10 SCC 184 
4  (2020) 2 SCC 743 

20 
 
Satyendar Jain had nothing to do with the said Companies 
after 2013. The prosecution has unnecessarily tried to link 
the appellants with Satyendar Jain from the statements of 
witnesses recorded under Section 50 of the PMLA. 
(viii)     The Scheduled Offence does not allege conspiracy. The day 
Mr. Satyendar Jain decided to enter into politics, all the 
relations with him whether in respect of the Companies or 
any business transactions were severed, and since July 
2013 he was neither a Director nor a shareholder nor had 
any relation with the Companies which were the Companies 
of the appellants. 
(ix)     The appellants are in custody since 30.06.2022 except for 
the period when they were released on the interim bail 
(Vaibhav Jain on 18.08.2023 to 27.12.2023 and Ankush Jain 
on 12.09.2023 to 27.12.2023). 
(x)     The appellants have not violated any conditions imposed by 
the Court when on interim bail, and have also not tried to 
delay the proceedings before the trial court in any manner. 
 
 

21 
 
10. The learned ASG Mr. S.V. Raju appearing on behalf of the 
respondent-Directorate of Enforcement made his submissions in 
the appeals preferred by the appellants- Ankush Jain and Vaibhav 
Jain as under: - 
 
(i) 
The appellants-Ankush Jain and Vaibhav Jain were actively 
involved in the commission of the offence of money 
laundering by assisting the accused-Satyendar Kumar Jain. 
The appellant Ankush Jain was the Director of M/s. 
Mangalayatan Projects Pvt. Ltd. during the check period. 
The said company is one of the accused in the Prosecution 
Complaint filed on 27.07.2022. The said company had 
received 
the 
proceeds 
of 
crime 
amounting 
to 
Rs.1,90,00,000/- during the check period in the form of 
accommodation 
entries 
from 
Kolkata 
based 
shell 
companies. The said appellant-Ankush Jain transferred the 
land possessed by M/s. Mangalayatan Projects Pvt. Ltd. in 
the name of his mother Indu Jain to frustrate the proceeds 
of crime. 
(ii) 
Similarly, the appellant-Vaibhav Jain was the Director of M/s. 
Paryas Infosolution Pvt. Ltd. during the check period. The 
said company is also one of the accused in the Prosecution 

22 
 
Complaint filed on 27.07.2022. The said company had 
received proceeds of crime amounting to Rs.69,00,300/- 
during the check period in the form of accommodation 
entries from the Kolkata based shell companies. The said 
appellant-Vaibhav Jain had transferred the land possessed 
by M/s. Mangalayatan Projects Pvt. Ltd. in the name of his 
mother Sushila Jain and wife-Swati Jain to frustrate the 
proceeds of crime. He also took back the shares without 
consideration from shell companies and thus both the 
appellants helped Satyendar Kumar Jain in projecting the 
tainted money as untainted in the process of money 
laundering. 
(iii)  
Both the appellants had made declarations in their individual 
capacity under the IDS, 2016 for declaring undisclosed 
income of Rs.8.6 Crores during check period i.e. from 2010-
11 to 2015-16, in order to shield Satyendar Kumar Jain for 
concealing the true nature of proceeds of crime. 
(iv) 
Both the appellants prepared back dated documents with 
the help of each other and with the help of Sunil Kumar Jain 
and Jagdish Prasad Mohta for becoming directors in their 
respective companies i.e. Mr. Ankush Jain in M/s. Akinchan 

23 
 
Developers Pvt. Ltd., and M/s. Indo Metalimpex Pvt. Ltd., 
and Mr. Vaibhav Jain in M/s. Akinchan Developers Pvt. Ltd., 
M/s. Mangalayatan Projects Pvt. Ltd. and M/s. Indo 
Metalimpex Pvt. Ltd. for showing the IDS declarations as 
genuine. 
(v) 
The income sought to be disclosed by the appellants under 
the IDS declarations belonged to the appellant- Satyendar 
Jain, and the said IDS declarations were rejected by the 
Income Tax authorities under Section 193 of the Finance 
Act, 2016 on the ground of misrepresentation and 
suppression of facts. The said order was upheld by the High 
Court and the Supreme Court. 
(vi) 
The declarations of the appellants were held void under 
Section 193 of the Finance Act, 2016, which applied only for 
the purpose of the said scheme, however, if the making of 
such declarations was an offence under a separate Act, 
namely, PMLA, then such an act would not be effaced 
merely because of Section 193. 
(vii)  
The very fact that such declarations were made by the said 
appellants, was the relevant fact for the purposes of the 
alleged offence under the PMLA, as both the appellants are 

24 
 
being prosecuted in their individual capacities for allegedly 
actively assisting the appellant- Satyendar Jain in 
concealing the proceeds of crime and projecting the 
proceeds of crime as untainted. 
(viii) 
 Section 13(1)(e) and Section 13(2) are both scheduled 
offences under the PMLA, and Section 3 of PMLA ropes in 
any person who may or may not have any role to play in the 
scheduled offence but has directly or indirectly attempted to 
indulge or knowingly assisted or knowingly is a party 
involved in any process or activity connected with the 
proceeds of crime.   
(ix) 
The money laundering need not commence only after the 
check period, inasmuch as the offence under Section 13(1) 
(e) of the PC Act contemplates that at any time the assets of 
the public servant could be disproportionate to his income, 
which could have been acquired by the public servant either 
at the beginning or in the middle of the check period also. 
(x)       From the statements of bank accounts of the four companies 
and various other Kolkata based shell companies controlled 
by Kolkata based entry operators revealed that the amount 
totalling to Rs. 4,60,83,500/- was received in M/s. Akinchan 

25 
 
Developers Pvt. Ltd., M/s. Mangalayatan Projects Pvt. Ltd. 
and M/s. Paryas Infosolution Pvt. Ltd. from Kolkata based 
shell companies during the period 01.04.2015 to 31.03.2016 
(during the check period) despite no business activities were 
carried out by the said companies and the shares were 
purchased at a very high premium. 
(xi) 
The investigation revealed that the cash acquired by 
Satyendar Jain was given to the Kolkata entry operators for 
the purpose of accommodation entries contemporaneously 
during the check period as and when they were acquired and 
thereafter the same were concealed and projected as 
untainted and sought to be laundered in the form of share 
application money. The said amount was also used for 
repayment of loan and purchase of agricultural lands by the 
said companies. 
(xii) 
Though the CBI in their chargesheet dated 03.12.2018 filed 
in FIR No. RC-AC-I-2017-A 0005  (dated 24.08.2017) had 
quantified the proceeds of crime to be  Rs.1,47,60,497.67, 
in view of the investigation conducted under PMLA it was 
established that all the companies were beneficially owned 
and controlled by Satyendar Jain, and the amount of 

26 
 
Rs.4,81,16,435/- received during the check period was the 
proceeds of crime in the hands of Satyendar Jain. The said 
conclusion along with the facts underlying the same, have 
also been conveyed to the CBI under Section 66(2) of PMLA 
vide the letter dated 31.03.2022. 
(xiii) 
Though the accommodation entries per se may not be the 
proceeds of crime in a given case, since in the instant case, 
it has been specifically alleged that the shares in the three 
companies during the check period which were held by the 
bogus share companies, were purchased by the Kolkata 
based bogus companies as entries in lieu of cash, the 
source of which cash was the public servant, namely, 
Saytendar Jain, he was the beneficial owner of the shares 
which was a vehicle to introduce the unaccounted cash or 
disproportionate pecuniary resources  which squarely fell 
within the meaning of proceeds of crime as defined under 
Section 2(1)(u) of the PMLA. 
11.  During the course of arguments, the Court had sought clarification 
from the learned ASG Mr. Raju with regard to the role of the 
appellants- Ankush Jain and Vaibhav Jain, as also the quantum of 
proceeds of crime with which they were allegedly involved, 

27 
 
specifically in respect of the figures mentioned in the Prosecution 
Complaint against them. Pursuant to the same, the Deputy Director, 
Directorate of Enforcement has filed his affidavit clarifying the role 
of the appellants – Ankush Jain and Vaibhav Jain and further stating 
inter alia that the figure of Rs.1,53,61,166/- was inadvertently 
mentioned at page no.-248, as it was the amount attributed by the 
CBI in its Chargesheet to Satyendar Jain, Ankush Jain and Vaibhav 
Jain individually for the purpose of receiving total accommodation 
entries in lieu of cash of Rs.4.61 Crores, however respondent’s 
investigation has revealed that the entire Rs.4.81 Crores (Rs.4.61 
Crores plus commission plus Rs.15 lakhs in J.J. Ideal Estates Pvt. 
Ltd.) was entirely the property of Satyendar Jain received in his 
companies as accommodation entries in lieu of cash and this entire 
sum was sought to be declared by the appellants Ankush Jain and 
Vaibhav Jain in the IDS as their own income. 
12. In the light of the said clarification, the Learned Senior Advocate 
Ms. Arora had further submitted that the so-called inadvertent error 
was not pointed out before the trial court and the High Court and it 
was only during the course of arguments before this Court, the said 
clarification/rectification was sought to be made, which is not 
permissible. According to her, ED attains jurisdiction to investigate 

28 
 
only after the proceeds of crime is generated and when the same 
is subjected to any process or activity as mentioned in Section 3 of 
PMLA. Therefore, ED could not have increased the proceeds of 
crime beyond what was taken as disproportionate assets by the 
CBI i.e. 1,47,60,497/-. She further submitted that as per the FIR, 
the figure mentioned was Rs. 1,53,61,166/-, during the arguments 
and as per the written submissions the figure mentioned was Rs. 
4,81,16,435/-, and the figure mentioned as per the affidavit is 
Rs.4,65,99,635/- which does not find mention in the complaint. 
Thus, the allegations made against the appellants being vague in 
nature, the benefit should go to the appellants. 
 
ANALYSIS: 
13. We are well conscious of the fact that the chargesheet has already 
been filed in the predicate offence on 03.12.2018 for the offences 
under the Prevention of Corruption Act allegedly committed by the 
present appellants alongwith others, and the cognizance thereof 
has already been taken by the concerned Court. The Prosecution 
Complaint has also been filed by the respondent – ED against the 
present appellants alongwith others for the commission of the 
offence of Money laundering as defined under Section 3 read with 

29 
 
Section 70 punishable under Section 4 of PMLA 2002. We have 
also been apprised that the Special Court has fixed the Prosecution 
Complaint for framing of charge against the appellants alongwith 
others. Under the circumstances any observation made by us may 
influence the process of trial. We, therefore would refrain ourselves 
from dealing with the elaborate submissions made by the learned 
counsels for the parties on the merits of the case, we would rather 
confine ourselves to deal with the bare minimum facts necessary 
for the purpose of deciding whether the appellants have been able 
to satisfy the twin conditions laid down in Section 45 of the PMLA, 
that is (i) there are reasonable grounds for believing that the 
persons accused of the offence under the PMLA is not guilty of such 
offence; and (ii) that he is not likely to commit any offence while on 
bail. 
14. In Gautam Kundu vs. Directorate of Enforcement (Prevention 
of Money-Laundering Act), Government of India 5, while holding 
that the conditions specified under Section 45 of PMLA are 
mandatory, it was observed as under: - 
“30. The conditions specified under Section 45 of PMLA are 
mandatory and need to be complied with, which is further 
strengthened by the provisions of Section 65 and also Section 71 
of PMLA. Section 65 requires that the provisions of CrPC shall 
 
5  (2015) 16 SCC 1 

30 
 
apply insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act and Section 71 provides that the provisions of PMLA 
shall have overriding effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 
PMLA has an overriding effect and the provisions of CrPC would 
apply only if they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act. Therefore, the conditions enumerated in Section 45 of PMLA 
will have to be complied with even in respect of an application for 
bail made under Section 439 CrPC. That coupled with the 
provisions of Section 24 provides that unless the contrary is 
proved, the authority or the Court shall presume that proceeds of 
crime are involved in money-laundering and the burden to prove 
that the proceeds of crime are not involved, lies on the appellant.” 
 
 
15. In Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra), a three-judge bench while 
upholding the validity of Section 45 had observed as under: - 
“387. Having said thus, we must now address the challenge to 
the twin conditions as applicable post amendment of 2018. That 
challenge will have to be tested on its own merits and not in 
reference to the reasons weighed with this Court in declaring the 
provision, (as it existed at the relevant time), applicable only to 
offences punishable for a term of imprisonment of more than 
three years under Part A of the Schedule to the 2002 Act. Now, 
the provision (Section 45) including twin conditions would apply 
to the offence(s) under the 2002 Act itself. The provision post 
2018 amendment, is in the nature of no bail in relation to the 
offence of money-laundering unless the twin conditions are 
fulfilled. The twin conditions are that there are reasonable 
grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty of offence of 
money-laundering and that he is not likely to commit any offence 
while on bail. Considering the purposes and objects of the 
legislation in the form of 2002 Act and the background in which it 
had been enacted owing to the commitment made to the 
international bodies and on their recommendations, it is plainly 
clear that it is a special legislation to deal with the subject of 
money-laundering activities having transnational impact on the 
financial systems including sovereignty and integrity of the 
countries. This is not an ordinary offence. To deal with such 
serious offence, stringent measures are provided in the 2002 Act 

31 
 
for prevention of money-laundering and combating menace of 
money-laundering, including for attachment and confiscation of 
proceeds of crime and to prosecute persons involved in the 
process or activity connected with the proceeds of crime. In view 
of the gravity of the fallout of money-laundering activities having 
transnational impact, a special procedural law for prevention and 
regulation, including to prosecute the person involved, has been 
enacted, grouping the offenders involved in the process or 
activity connected with the proceeds of crime as a separate class 
from ordinary criminals. The offence of money-laundering has 
been regarded as an aggravated form of crime “world over”. It is, 
therefore, a separate class of offence requiring effective and 
stringent measures to combat the menace of money-laundering. 
 
400. It is important to note that the twin conditions provided under 
Section 45 of the 2002 Act, though restrict the right of the 
accused to grant of bail, but it cannot be said that the conditions 
provided under Section 45 impose absolute restraint on the grant 
of bail. The discretion vests in the Court which is not arbitrary or 
irrational but judicial, guided by the principles of law as provided 
under Section 45 of the 2002 Act. 
 
404. As aforementioned, similar twin conditions have been 
provided in several other special legislations validity whereof has 
been upheld by this Court being reasonable and having nexus 
with the purposes and objects sought to be achieved by the 
concerned special legislations. Besides the special legislation, 
even the provisions in the general law, such as 1973 Code 
stipulate compliance of preconditions before releasing the 
accused on bail. The grant of bail, even though regarded as an 
important right of the accused, is not a mechanical order to be 
passed by the Courts. The prayer for grant of bail even in respect 
of general offences, have to be considered on the basis of 
objective discernible judicial parameters as delineated by this 
Court from time to time, on case-to-case basis. 
 
406. It was urged that the scheduled offence in a given case may 
be a non-cognizable offence and yet rigors of Section 45 of the 
2002 Act would result in denial of bail even to such accused. This 
argument is founded on clear misunderstanding of the scheme 
of the 2002 Act. As we have repeatedly mentioned in the earlier 

32 
 
part of this judgment that the offence of money-laundering is one 
wherein a person, directly or indirectly, attempts to indulge or 
knowingly assists or knowingly is a party or is actually involved 
in any process or activity connected with the proceeds of crime. 
The fact that the proceeds of crime have been generated as a 
result of criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence, which 
incidentally happens to be a non-cognizable offence, would make 
no difference. The person is not prosecuted for the scheduled 
offence by invoking provisions of the 2002 Act, but only when he 
has derived or obtained property as a result of criminal activity 
relating to or in relation to a scheduled offence and then indulges 
in process or activity connected with such proceeds of crime. 
Suffice it to observe that the argument under consideration is 
completely misplaced and needs to be rejected.” 
 
16. In the light of the aforestated position of law propounded by the 
three Judge Bench, we have prima facie examined the case alleged 
against the appellants and the prima facie defense put forth by the 
appellants, to satisfy ourselves whether there are reasonable 
grounds for believing that the appellants are not guilty of the alleged 
offences under the Act and that they are not likely to commit any 
offence while on bail. Though it was urged on behalf of the 
respondent – ED that the appellant Satyendar Kumar Jain is a very 
influential political leader and is likely to influence the witnesses if 
released on bail, we would rather objectively decide the appeals on 
merits. 
17. The case in nutshell put forth by the respondent – ED is that the 
appellant Satyendar Kumar Jain had conceptualized the idea of 

33 
 
accommodation entries against cash and at this instance, his close 
associate Shri Jagdish Prasad Mohta had arranged a meeting 
between Satyendar Kumar Jain and Rajendra Bansal, a Kolkata 
based accommodation entry provider in July/ August, 2010. In the 
said meeting the modalities of carrying out accommodation entries, 
percentage of commission, process of cash transfer and 
documents to be maintained etc. were finalized. Thus, according to 
the ED, Satyendar Kumar Jain was the conceptualizer, initiator and 
supervisor for the entire operation of the accommodation entries. It 
has been alleged that the accommodation entries totalling to 
Rs.4.81 crores were received during the period 2015-16 from 
Kolkata based entry operators in the bank accounts of the four 
companies – Paryas Infosolution Pvt. Ltd., Indo Metalimpex Pvt. 
Ltd., Mangalayatan Projects Pvt. Ltd. and Akinchan Developers 
Pvt. Ltd., which companies were owned/controlled by him and his 
family members, and the cash totalling Rs.4,65,99,635/- 
approximately was paid to the said entry operators. It has been also 
alleged that the appellant Satyendar Kumar Jain received 
accommodation entries of Rs.15 lakhs in his company J.J. Ideal 
Estate Pvt. Ltd. during the year 2015-16 from the said Kolkata 
based entry operators by paying cash amounts of Rs.15 lakhs and 
commission of Rs.16,800/-. Thus, it has been alleged that 

34 
 
Satyendar Kumar Jain committed offence of money laundering 
under Section 3 of PMLA by actually acquiring, possessing, 
concealing and using the process of bank to tune of 
Rs.4,81,16,435/- and projecting and claiming the same as 
untainted. 
18. The ED has also alleged against the appellants Ankush Jain and 
Vaibhav Jain inter alia that they had assisted Satyendar Kumar Jain 
in the commission of the alleged offence by making separate 
independent declarations under IDS 2016 for declaring undisclosed 
income of Rs.8.26 crores for period from 2010-11 to 2015-16 in 
order to protect Satyendar Kumar Jain. As per the case of ED, the 
appellants Ankush Jain and Vaibhav Jain had prepared ante dated 
documents with the help of Sunil Kumar Jain and Jagdish Prasad 
Mohta with regard to the Directorship in Akinchan Developers Pvt. 
Ltd. Paryas Infosolution Pvt. Ltd., Indo Metalimpex Pvt. Ltd., and 
Mangalayatan Projects Pvt. Ltd. by becoming the Directors of the 
said companies from the back date for showing their IDS 
declarations as genuine. Thus, the said appellants have also 
committed the offence of money laundering as defined under 
Section 3 of PMLA by being actually involved in and knowingly 
assisting Satyendar Kumar Jain in projecting his proceeds of crime 

35 
 
to the tune of Rs.4,81,16,435/- as untainted in the mode and 
manner stated in the Prosecution Complaint. 
19. It was vehemently argued by the Learned Senior Advocate Mr. 
Singhvi, for the appellant Satyendar Jain that there was gross 
discrepancy in the amount of proceeds of crime calculated by the 
ED in the Prosecution Complaint and in the amount with regard to 
disproportionate assets mentioned by the CBI in the chargesheet 
filed in the predicate offence. According to him, the amount with 
regard to disproportionate assets mentioned by the CBI is Rs. 
1,47,60,497/- whereas as per the ED the proceeds of crime is 
Rs.4,81,16,435/-.  Even if the accommodation entries amounting to 
about Rs.4.6 crores are attributed to the appellant-Satyendar 
Kumar Jain through his wife’s share holdings, it would come to only 
Rs.59,32,122/- which is less than one crore. He has further 
submitted that the appellant-Satyendar Kumar Jain neither served 
as a Director nor had signed any financial document during the 
check period and that he had already resigned from the 
Directorship of the companies two years before the commission of 
the alleged offence. According to him, it was the appellants- 
Vaibhav Jain and Ankush Jain, and their family members who had 

36 
 
the significant influence over the control of the companies involved 
in the case. 
20. In order to appreciate the submissions of Mr. Singhvi, let us have a 
cursory glance over the definitions of the words “beneficial owner” 
as contained in Section 2(1)(fa), “Money laundering” as defined in 
Section 2(1)(p), “Proceeds of Crime” in section 2(1)(u) and 
“Property” in Section 2(1)(v), and the offence under Section 3 of the 
PMLA. The said definitions read as under: 
“Section 2 (1) (fa) 
(fa) "beneficial owner" means an individual who ultimately owns 
or controls a client of a reporting entity or the person on whose 
behalf a transaction is being conducted and includes a person 
who exercises ultimate effective control over a juridical person; 
 
Section 2 (1) (p) 
(p) "money-laundering" has the meaning assigned to it in section 
3; 
 
Section 2 (1)(u) 
(u) "proceeds of crime" means any property derived or obtained, 
directly or indirectly, by any person as a result of criminal activity 
relating to a scheduled offence or the value of any such 
property or where such property is taken or held outside the 
country, then the property equivalent in value held within the 
country or abroad; 
Explanation. --For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that 
"proceeds of crime" include property not only derived or obtained 
from the scheduled offence but also any property which may 
directly or indirectly be derived or obtained as a result of any 
criminal activity relatable to the scheduled offence; 
 

37 
 
Section 2 (1)(v) 
(v) "property" means any property or assets of every description, 
whether corporeal or incorporeal, movable or immovable, 
tangible or intangible and includes deeds and instruments 
evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or assets, 
wherever located; 
Explanation. --For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that 
the term property includes property of any kind used in the 
commission of an offence under this Act or any of the scheduled 
offences; 
 
Section 3 
 
Whosoever directly or indirectly attempts to indulge or knowingly 
assists or knowingly is a party or is actually involved in any 
process or activity connected with the proceeds of crime 
including its concealment, possession, acquisition or use and 
projecting or claiming it as untainted property shall be guilty of 
offence of money-laundering. 
Explanation. --For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified 
that, -- 
(i) a person shall be guilty of offence of money-laundering if such 
person is found to have directly or indirectly attempted to indulge 
or knowingly assisted or knowingly is a party or is actually 
involved in one or more of the following processes or activities 
connected with proceeds of crime, namely: -- 
(a) concealment; or 
(b) possession; or 
(c) acquisition; or 
(d) use; or 
(e) projecting as untainted property; or 
(f) claiming as untainted property, 
in any manner whatsoever; 
(ii) the process or activity connected with proceeds of crime is a 
continuing activity and continues till such time a person is directly 
or indirectly enjoying the proceeds of crime by its concealment or 
possession or acquisition or use or projecting it as untainted 
property or claiming it as untainted property in any manner 
whatsoever.” 
 

38 
 
21. The offence of money laundering as contemplated in Section 3 of 
the PMLA has been elaborately dealt with by the three Judge Bench 
in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra), in which it has been 
observed that Section 3 has a wider reach. The offence as defined 
captures every process and activity in dealing with the proceeds of 
crime, directly or indirectly, and is not limited to the happening of 
the final act of integration of tainted property in the formal economy 
to constitute an act of money laundering. Of course, the authority 
of the Authorised Officer under the Act to prosecute any person for 
the offence of money laundering gets triggered only if there exists 
proceeds of crime within the meaning of Section 2(1)(u) of the Act 
and further it is involved in any process or activity. Not even in case 
of existence of undisclosed income and irrespective of its volume, 
the definition of “Proceeds of Crime” under Section 2(1)(u) will get 
attracted, unless the property has been derived or obtained as a 
result of criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence. The 
property must qualify the definition of “Proceeds of Crime” under 
Section 2(1)(u) of the Act. As observed, in all or whole of the crime 
property linked to scheduled offence need not be regarded as 
proceeds of crime, but all properties qualifying the definition of 

39 
 
“Proceeds of Crime” under Section 2(1)(u) will necessarily be the 
crime properties.  
22. So far as the facts of the present case are concerned, the 
respondent ED has placed heavy reliance on the statements of 
witnesses recorded and the documents produced by them under 
Section 50 of the said Act, to prima facie show the involvement of 
all the three appellants in the alleged offence of money laundering 
under Section 3 thereof. In Rohit Tandon vs. Directorate of 
Enforcement6, a three Judge Bench has held that the statements 
of witnesses recorded by Prosecution – ED are admissible in 
evidence in view of Section 50. Such statements may make out a 
formidable case about the involvement of the accused in the 
commission of the offence of money laundering.  
23. Again, the three Judge Bench in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary 
(supra) while examining the validity of the provisions contained in 
Section 50 held as under: -  
431. In the context of the 2002 Act, it must be remembered that 
the summon is issued by the Authority under Section 50 in 
connection with the inquiry regarding proceeds of crime which 
may have been attached and pending adjudication before the 
Adjudicating Authority. In respect of such action, the designated 
officials have been empowered to summon any person for 
collection of information and evidence to be presented before the 
 
6  (2018) 11 SCC 46 

40 
 
Adjudicating Authority. It is not necessarily for initiating a 
prosecution against the noticee as such. The power entrusted to 
the designated officials under this Act, though couched as 
investigation in real sense, is to undertake inquiry to ascertain 
relevant facts to facilitate initiation of or pursuing with an action 
regarding proceeds of crime, if the situation so warrants and for 
being presented before the Adjudicating Authority. It is a different 
matter that the information and evidence so collated during the 
inquiry made, may disclose commission of offence of money-
laundering and the involvement of the person, who has been 
summoned for making disclosures pursuant to the summons 
issued by the Authority. At this stage, there would be no formal 
document indicative of likelihood of involvement of such person 
as an accused of offence of money-laundering. If the statement 
made by him reveals the offence of money-laundering or the 
existence of proceeds of crime, that becomes actionable under 
the Act itself. To put it differently, at the stage of recording of 
statement for the purpose of inquiring into the relevant facts in 
connection with the property being proceeds of crime is, in that 
sense, not an investigation for prosecution as such; and in any 
case, there would be no formal accusation against the noticee. 
Such summons can be issued even to witnesses in the inquiry 
so conducted by the authorised officials. However, after further 
inquiry on the basis of other material and evidence, the 
involvement of such person (noticee) is revealed, the authorised 
officials can certainly proceed against him for his acts of 
commission or omission. In such a situation, at the stage of issue 
of summons, the person cannot claim protection under Article 
20(3) of the Constitution. However, if his/her statement is 
recorded after a formal arrest by the ED official, the 
consequences of Article 20(3) or Section 25 of the Evidence Act 
may come into play to urge that the same being in the nature of 
confession, shall not be proved against him. Further, it would not 
preclude the prosecution from proceeding against such a person 
including for consequences under Section 63 of the 2002 Act on 
the basis of other tangible material to indicate the falsity of his 
claim. That would be a matter of rule of evidence. 
 
24. In the instant case, it has been found during the course of 
investigation from the statements of witnesses recorded under 

41 
 
Section 50 that the appellant Satyendar Jain and his family directly 
or indirectly were owning/controlling the companies - M/s. Akinchan 
Developers Pvt. Ltd., M/s. Paryas Infosolution Pvt. Ltd., M/s. Indo 
Metalimpex Pvt. Ltd. and M/s. Mangalayatan Projects Pvt. Ltd. He 
was 
the 
conceptualizer, 
initiator 
and 
supervisor 
of 
the 
accommodation entries totalling to Rs.4.81 Crores approximately, 
which were received from the Kolkata based entry operators in the 
Bank accounts of the said four companies. Shri J.P. Mohta in his 
statement had stated inter alia that Mr. Satyendar Jain had 
informed him in June/July, 2010 that he wanted to get 
investment/accommodation entries in his companies against cash 
payment and therefore he introduced Mr. Jain with his friend Mr. 
Rajendra Bansal who was in the business of providing 
accommodation entries against cash. Mr. Rajendra Bansal in his 
statement under Section 50 had stated in detail as to how his 
companies provided accommodation entries to the four companies 
owned/controlled by Satyendar Jain from 2010-11 to 2015-16 
against cash. Mr. Rajender Bansal had also stated that the cash 
was being received from Satyendar Kumar Jain/Jagdish Prasad 
Mohta at Kolkata through Hawala operators, and he used to pass 
on the address of Hawala operators to the other entry operators 
namely Jivendra Mishra and Abhishek Chokhani for collecting cash 

42 
 
after taking token from them. He used to arrange entries for the 
companies of Satyendar Kumar Jain as per the details provided by 
Jagdish Prasad Mohta through his companies and other entry 
operators. He (Mr. Bansal) used to issue cheque/RTGS to 
subscribe the shares of the four companies of Satyendar Kumar 
Jain receiving the amounts in cash. He had further stated that the 
accommodation entries were reflected in the books of accounts of 
his companies as investments in shares. He used to give signed 
share applications along with signed blank transfer deeds to 
Jagdish Prasad Mohta. He had further stated that he had received 
cash through Hawala operators of Kolkata 40-50 times during 
2010-2016 totaling to approximately 17 crores on the instructions 
of Satyendar Jain/Jagdish Prasad Mohta and he had provided 
accommodation entries for Satyendar Jain’s Companies of about 
17 crores, for which he had earned commission of Rs 12,40,000/- 
for providing/arranging such accommodation entries to the 
companies of Satyendar Jain. 
 
25. Mr. Pankul Agarwal had stated in his statement that though he was 
appointed as a Director in M/s. J.J. Ideal Estate Pvt. Ltd., he did 
nothing except signing of the documents and that the said company 
was controlled by Satyendar Kumar Jain and Poonam Jain, and 

43 
 
that he was never informed about any business activity of the said 
company by them. The appellant-Vaibhav Jain himself in his 
statement recorded on 27.02.2018, had stated that the cash 
amount of Rs.16.50 crores (approx.)  was paid by him, Sunil Kumar 
Jain, Ankush Jain and Satyendar Kumar Jain for taking 
accommodation entries in M/s. Akinchan Developers Pvt. Ltd., 
Paryas Infosolution Pvt. Ltd., Indo Metalimpex Pvt. Ltd. and 
Mangalayatan Projects Pvt. Ltd. through Kolkata based entry 
operators, and that the entire idea was mooted by Satyendar 
Kumar Jain to use it for purchasing agricultural lands and to 
develop the township. The said witnesses had clearly stated that 
Satyendar Kumar Jain was the conceptualizer, initiator, fund 
provider and supervisor for the entire operation to procure the 
accommodation, share capital/premium entries. Though, the 
shareholding patterns of the said four companies are quite intricate, 
they do show that Mr. Satyendar Kumar Jain through his family was 
controlling the said companies directly or indirectly and that Mr. 
Satyendar Kumar Jain was the “beneficial owner” within the 
definition of Section 2(1) (fa) of PMLA. 
 

44 
 
26. At this juncture, it is extremely pertinent to note that the appellants-
Vaibhav Jain and Ankush Jain had sought to avail of the Income 
Declaration Scheme, 2016 (IDS) by filing separate declarations 
under Section 183 of the Finance Act, 2016 in Form-I on 
27.09.2016, in which both of the said appellants had individually 
declared an income of Rs.8,26,91,750/- as investments in shares 
of various companies in the assessment years 2011-12, 2012-13 
and 2016-17. The Principal Commissioner, Income Tax (IV), New 
Delhi vide the order dated 09.06.2017 passed under Section 183 of 
the Finance Act, 2016 held that the said declaration of income of 
Rs.8,26,91,750/- by each of the appellants- Vaibhav Jain and 
Ankush Jain was made “by suppression and misrepresentation of 
facts”, and therefore they were “void”. It is further pertinent to note 
that the said order of PCIT was based on the report submitted by 
the ACIT, Special Range (IV) dated 07.06.2017 with regard to the 
assessment proceedings in case of  M/s. Akinchan Developers Pvt. 
Ltd., M/s. Indo Metalimpex Pvt. Ltd., M/s. Paryas Infosolution Pvt. 
Ltd. ,and Mr. Satyendar Kumar Jain. It was noted in the said report 
inter alia that the said companies had taken accommodation entries 
in the form of share capital from Kolkata based shell companies. 
On the basis of the said report, the notices under Section 148 of 

45 
 
the Income Tax Act for the year 2011-12 an 2012-13 were issued to 
Mr. 
Satyendar 
Kumar 
Jain. 
The 
information 
regarding 
accommodation entries was also received by the Initiating officer 
for further examination and necessary action under the Prohibition 
of Benami Property Transactions Act, 1988 (for short “the PBPT 
Act). The Initiating officer had issued provisional attachment orders 
under Section 24(4) of the PBPT Act on 24.05.2017 holding that Mr. 
Satyendar Kumar Jain was the beneficial owner of the bogus share 
capital introduced in the companies. The said order of PCIT dated 
09.06.2017 passed under Section 183 of the FA, 2016 was 
challenged before the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi by the 
appellants-Ankush Jain and Vaibhav Jain by filing Writ Petition 
(C)Nos. 6541 of 2017 and 6543 of 2017 which came to be 
dismissed by the High Court vide the order dated 21.08.2019. The 
High Court in the said judgment had elaborately dealt with all these 
issues and while dismissing the said writ petitions held as under: 
 
“30. There are eight companies whose shares were purchased 
by the two petitioners, whose names have been included in the 
list. Admittedly, in respect of the shares in ADPL, proceedings 
under section 24(4) of the Prohibition of Benami Property 
Transaction Act, 1988 have been initiated. The petitioners have 
themselves enclosed a copy of the order dated May 24, 2017 
passed in respect of the "Benamidar", i.e., ADPL, which inter-alia 
notes that the cash that was routed through accommodation 
entries in the garb of share capital/premium in fact belonged to 
Mr. Satyender Kumar Jain and that it was at his direction that the 

46 
 
entire transaction was orchestrated. It was noted that neither of 
these two petitioners was either a director or shareholder in the 
said company. It was noted that the declarants had not provided 
the name of the "Benamidar" through whom the investment had 
been routed and that these facts were all completely within the 
knowledge of the two petitioners. These conclusions of the 
Principal 
Commissioner 
of 
Income-tax 
have 
not 
been 
convincingly countered by either of the petitioners. In the 
circumstances, the Principal Commissioner of Income-tax was 
right in concluding that neither of the petitioners had made a full 
and true disclosure of all material facts.” 
 
27. The said order of the High Court was challenged by the appellants-
Ankush Jain and Vaibhav Jain before the Supreme Court by filing 
Special Leave Petitions being SLP(C)Nos. 27522 of 2019 and 
27610 of 2019, however they came to be dismissed vide the order 
dated 29.11.2019. 
 
28. From the above stated facts there remains no shadow of doubt that 
the appellant- Satyendar Kumar Jain had conceptualized idea of 
accommodation entries against cash and was responsible for the 
accommodation entries totalling to Rs. 4.81 crores (approx.) 
received through the Kolkata based entry operators in the bank 
accounts of the four companies i.e. M/s. Akinchan Developers Pvt. 
Ltd., M/s. Paryas Infosolution Pvt. Ltd., M/s. Indo Metalimpex Pvt. 
Ltd. and M/s. Mangalayatan Projects Pvt. Ltd., by paying cash and 
the said companies were controlled and owned by him and his 

47 
 
family. Though it is true that a company is a separate legal entity 
from its shareholders and directors, the lifting of corporate veil is 
permissible when such corporate structures have been used for 
committing fraud or economic offences or have been used as a 
facade or a sham for carrying out illegal activities. 
 
29. It has also been found that the appellants - Ankush Jain and 
Vaibhav Jain had assisted the appellant-Satyendar Kumar Jain by 
making false declarations under the IDS each of them declaring 
alleged undisclosed income of Rs.8.26 crores in order to protect 
Satyendar Kumar Jain. Though it was sought to be submitted by 
the learned counsel for the appellants that the said declarations 
under IDS having been held to be “void” in terms of Section 193 of 
FA, 2016 by the income tax authorities, the same could not be 
looked into in the present proceedings, the said submission cannot 
be accepted. The declarations made by the appellants-Ankush Jain 
and Vaibhav Jain under IDS have not been accepted by the Income 
Tax authorities on the ground that they had misrepresented the fact 
that the investments in the said companies belonged to the said 
appellants, which in fact belonged to Mr. Satyendar Kumar Jain. 
The appellants could not be permitted to take advantage of their 
own wrongdoing of filing the false declarations to mislead the 

48 
 
Income Tax authorities, and now to submit in the present 
proceedings under PMLA that the said declarations under the IDS 
were void. The declarations made by them under the IDS though 
were held to be void, the observations and proceedings recorded 
in the said orders passed by the Authorities and by the High Court 
cannot be brushed aside merely because the said declarations 
were deemed to be void under Section 193 of the Finance Act, 
2016. The said proceedings clearly substantiates the case of the 
respondent ED as alleged in the Prosecution Complaint under the 
PMLA.  
 
30. Having regard to the totality of the facts and circumstances of the 
case, we are of the opinion that the appellants have miserably failed 
to satisfy us that there are reasonable grounds for believing that 
they are not guilty of the alleged offences. On the contrary, there is 
sufficient material collected by the respondent-ED to show that they 
are prima facie guilty of the alleged offences. 
 
31. Though Ms. Arora had faintly sought to submit that the so-called 
inadvertent mistake committed by the ED with regard to the figures 
mentioned in the Prosecution Complaint in respect of the role of the 
appellants Ankush Jain and Vaibhav Jain should not be permitted 

49 
 
to be corrected, which otherwise show that the allegations against 
the appellants were vague in nature, we are not impressed by the 
said submission. We are satisfied from the explanation put forth in 
the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent-ED that it was only an 
inadvertent mistake in mentioning the figure Rs.1,53,61,166/- in the 
bracketed portion, which figure was shown by the CBI in its 
chargesheet.  The said inadvertent mistake has no significance in 
the case alleged against the appellants in the proceedings under 
the PMLA.  
32. From the totality of facts and circumstances of the case, it is not 
possible to hold that appellants had complied with the twin 
mandatory conditions laid down in Section 45 of PMLA. The High 
Court also in the impugned judgment after discussing the material 
on record had prima facie found the appellants guilty of the alleged 
offences under the PMLA, which judgment does not suffer from any 
illegality or infirmity.  
33. The appellants were released on bail for temporary period after 
their arrest and the appellant-Satyendar Kumar Jain was released 
on bail on medical ground on 30.05.2022, which has continued till 
this day. He shall now surrender forthwith before the Special Court. 
It is needless to say that right to speedy trial and access to justice 

50 
 
is a valuable right enshrined in the Constitution of India, and 
provisions of Section 436A of the Cr.P.C. would apply with full force 
to the cases of money laundering falling under Section 3 of the 
PMLA, subject to the Provisos and the Explanation contained 
therein. 
34. In that view of the matter, all the appeals are dismissed.  
 
                                                         ……………………………………J. 
  
 
 
                    [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 
 
                         
.……………..……………………. J. 
                                                         [PANKAJ MITHAL] 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
MARCH 18th, 2024.