2024 INSC 218
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
CIVIL APPEAL NOS.___________OF 2024 
[Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos.7573-7574 of 
2021] 
 
NBCC (INDIA) LIMITED  
 
    
 ...APPELLANT (S) 
  
VERSUS 
ZILLION INFRAPROJECTS PVT.LTD. 
 ...RESPONDENT (S) 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
1. 
Leave granted.  
2. 
The present appeals challenge the interim order dated 12th 
March 2021 and final judgment & order dated 9th April 2021, 
passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of Delhi 
(hereinafter, “High Court”), in Arbitration Petition (Arb. P.) No. 44 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2024.03.19
15:55:42 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
of 2021, whereby the High Court allowed the application under 
Section 11(6) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act 1996 
(hereinafter referred to as, “the Arbitration Act”) and appointed 
the Sole Arbitrator to adjudicate the dispute between the parties 
to the present lis, arising from the Letter of Intent dated 4th 
December 2006.  
3. 
Facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeals are as 
follows: 
3.1 The appellant, NBCC (India) Limited (Formerly known as 
National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd.), is a Public 
Limited Company and Government of India undertaking, 
engaged in construction of power plants and other infrastructure 
projects on EPC and/or PMC basis.  
3.2 The respondent, M/s Zillion Infraprojects Pvt. Ltd. 
(Formerly known as Durha Constructions Pvt. Ltd.), is a Private 
Limited 
Company, 
engaged 
in 
the 
construction 
and 
infrastructure sector.   

3 
 
3.3 The appellant issued an invitation for tender, being NIT No. 
01-WEIR/06 dated 3rd November 2006, for “Construction of Weir 
with Allied Structures across river Damodar at DVC, CTPS, 
Chandrapura, Dist – Bokaro, Jharkhand – Package “A” 
(hereinafter referred to as, “Construction of the Weir”), containing 
inter-alia, the General Conditions of Contract, Special Conditions 
of Contract, Bill of Quantity, etc. (collectively referred to as, 
“Tender Documents”).   
3.4 In response to the aforementioned tender, the Respondent 
submitted its Techno Commercial Bid on 16th November 2006.  
3.5 On fulfilment of the tender criteria, vide Letter of Intent No. 
AGM/RAN/CTPS-AWARD/06/1660 dated 4th December 2006, 
the appellant awarded the contract for Construction of the Weir 
to the respondent for a total value of Rs. 19,08,46,612/-.  
3.6 With the passage of time, certain disputes arose between 
the parties to the present lis & as a result, the respondent issued 
a notice dated 6th March 2020, in terms of Clause 3.34 of Section 
III Volume II of the Tender Documents (GCC), thereby invoking 

4 
 
arbitration and further seeking consent of the appellant for the 
appointment of a former Judge of a High Court, as Sole 
Arbitrator.  
3.7 The appellant did not respond to the aforementioned notice 
invoking arbitration, so the respondent filed an application at the 
High Court under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration Act. 
3.8 Vide interim order dated 12th March 2021, the High Court 
allowed the Arbitration Petition and proposed the appointment 
of a former Judge of the High Court, as the Sole Arbitrator, to 
adjudicate the dispute between the parties.  
3.9 Vide final judgment & order dated 9th April 2021, the High 
Court confirmed the proposed appointment of the former Judge 
of the Delhi High Court, as the Sole Arbitrator. 
3.10 Aggrieved by the orders of the learned single judge of the 
High Court, the appellant filed the present appeals thereby 
challenging both the interim order and the final judgement & 
order.  

5 
 
3.11 This Court vide order dated 23rd July, 2021, issued notice 
and stay of further proceedings of the arbitration was granted.  
4. 
We have heard Shri Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned 
Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant & Shri Sumit 
Kumar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent. 
5. 
Shri Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the appellant submits that the High Court has 
grossly erred in invoking its power under Section 11(6) of the 
Arbitration Act.  It is submitted that Clause 2.0 of the Letter of 
Intent dated 4th December 2006 (“L.O.I.” for short) though states 
that all terms and conditions as contained in the tender issued 
by the Damodar Valley Corporation (“DVC” for short) to the NBCC 
shall apply mutatis mutandis, it also makes it clear that where 
the terms and conditions have been expressly modified by the 
NBCC, the same would not be applicable.  It is submitted that 
Clause 1.0 of the L.O.I. specifically states that various conditions, 
i.e., contractual, financial and technical mentioned in the 
documents contained therein shall be binding on the respondent 

6 
 
for execution of works and they shall form part of the agreement.  
Clause 10.0 also states that the L.O.I. shall also form a part of 
the agreement.  It is submitted that the intention is amply clear 
from Clause 7.0 of the L.O.I., which states that the redressal of 
dispute between the NBCC and the respondent shall only be 
through civil courts having jurisdiction of Delhi alone.  It further 
states that the laws applicable to the contract between the parties 
shall be the laws enforceable in India.  It is submitted that merely 
on account of reference in the L.O.I. to the terms and conditions 
as contained in the tender issued by the DVC to the NBCC, 
Clause 3.34 of the Additional Terms & Conditions of Contract 
would not apply in view of specific modification as stated in 
Clause 2.0 of the L.O.I.   
6. 
Learned Senior Counsel submits that a mere reference to 
the terms and conditions without there being an incorporation in 
the L.O.I. would not make the lis between the parties amenable 
to the arbitration proceedings.  Relying on the judgment of this 
Court in the case of M.R. Engineers and Contractors Private 

7 
 
Limited vs. Som Datt Builders Limited1, he submits that 
unless the L.O.I. specifically provides for incorporation of the 
arbitration clause, a reference to the arbitration proceedings 
would not be permitted in view of the provisions of sub-section 
(5) of Section 7 of the Arbitration Act.   
7. 
Shri Sumit Kumar, learned counsel appearing for the 
respondent, on the contrary, submits that there is a specific 
reference in Clause 2.0 of the L.O.I. to the terms and conditions 
in the tender issued by the DVC to the NBCC.  He submits that 
the only modification is that under Clause 3.34 of the Additional 
Terms & Conditions of Contract, the jurisdiction is vested with 
the Court in the City of Kolkata only, whereas in the L.O.I. the 
jurisdiction would be vested in the civil courts having jurisdiction 
of Delhi alone.  It is submitted that the learned single judge of 
the Delhi High Court has rightly considered this aspect and as 
such, no interference would be warranted in the impugned order.  
 
1 (2009) 7 SCC 696 

8 
 
8. 
Sub-section (5) of Section 7 of the Arbitration Act reads 
thus: 
 
 
“7. 
Arbitration Agreement.-1)………………. 
xxx xxx xxx 
(5) 
The reference in a contract to a 
document containing an arbitration clause 
constitutes an arbitration agreement if the 
contract is in writing and the reference is 
such as to make that arbitration clause part 
of the contract.” 
 
9. 
The issue is no more res integra.  The provisions of sub-
section (5) of Section 7 of the Arbitration Act have been 
considered by this Court in the case of M.R. Engineers and 
Contractors Private Limited (supra).  After considering the 
relevant passages from Russell on Arbitration and various English 
judgments, this Court held thus: 
“24. The scope and intent of Section 7(5) of 
the Act may therefore be summarised thus: 
(i) An arbitration clause in another 
document, would get incorporated into a 
contract by reference, if the following 
conditions are fulfilled: 

9 
 
(1) the contract should contain a 
clear reference to the documents 
containing arbitration clause, 
(2) the reference to the other 
document should clearly indicate an 
intention 
to 
incorporate 
the 
arbitration clause into the contract, 
(3) the arbitration clause should be 
appropriate, 
that 
is 
capable 
of 
application in respect of disputes 
under the contract and should not be 
repugnant to any term of the contract. 
(ii) When the parties enter into a 
contract, making a general reference to 
another contract, such general reference 
would not have the effect of incorporating 
the arbitration clause from the referred 
document into the contract between the 
parties. The arbitration clause from 
another contract can be incorporated 
into the contract (where such reference is 
made), only by a specific reference to 
arbitration clause. 
(iii) Where a contract between the 
parties provides that the execution or 
performance of that contract shall be in 
terms 
of 
another 
contract 
(which 
contains the terms and conditions 
relating to performance and a provision 
for settlement of disputes by arbitration), 
then, the terms of the referred contract 
in 
regard 
to 
execution/performance 

10 
 
alone will apply, and not the arbitration 
agreement in the referred contract, 
unless there is special reference to the 
arbitration clause also. 
(iv) Where the contract provides that 
the 
standard 
form 
of 
terms 
and 
conditions of an independent trade or 
professional institution (as for example 
the standard terms and conditions of a 
trade 
association 
or 
architects 
association) will bind them or apply to 
the contract, such standard form of 
terms and conditions including any 
provision 
for 
arbitration 
in 
such 
standard terms and conditions, shall be 
deemed to be incorporated by reference. 
Sometimes the contract may also say 
that the parties are familiar with those 
terms and conditions or that the parties 
have read and understood the said terms 
and conditions. 
(v) Where the contract between the 
parties stipulates that the conditions of 
contract of one of the parties to the 
contract shall form a part of their 
contract (as for example the general 
conditions of contract of the Government 
where the Government is a party), the 
arbitration clause forming part of such 
general conditions of contract will apply 
to the contract between the parties.” 
 

11 
 
10. It could thus be seen that this Court has held that when the 
parties enter into a contract, making a general reference to 
another contract, such general reference would not have the 
effect of incorporating the arbitration clause from the referred 
document into the contract between the parties.  It has been held 
that the arbitration clause from another contract can be 
incorporated into the contract (where such reference is made), 
only by a specific reference to arbitration clause.  It has further 
been held that where a contract between the parties provides that 
the execution or performance of that contract shall be in terms 
of another contract (which contains the terms and conditions 
relating to performance and a provision for settlement of disputes 
by arbitration), then, the terms of the referred contract in regard 
to execution/performance alone will apply, and not the 
arbitration agreement in the referred contract, unless there is 
special reference to the arbitration clause also. 
11. This Court further held that where the contract provides 
that the standard form of terms and conditions of an independent 

12 
 
trade or professional institution will bind them or apply to the 
contract, such standard form of terms and conditions including 
any provision for arbitration in such standard terms and 
conditions, shall be deemed to be incorporated by reference. It 
has been held that sometimes the contract may also say that the 
parties are familiar with those terms and conditions or that the 
parties have read and understood the said terms and conditions. 
It has also been held that where the contract between the parties 
stipulates that the conditions of contract of one of the parties to 
the contract shall form a part of their contract, the arbitration 
clause forming part of such general conditions of contract will 
apply to the contract between the parties. 
12. A perusal of sub-section (5) of Section 7 of the Arbitration 
Act itself would reveal that it provides for a conscious acceptance 
of the arbitration clause from another document, by the parties, 
as a part of their contract, before such arbitration clause could 
be read as a part of the contract between the parties.   

13 
 
13. It is thus clear that a reference to the document in the 
contract should be such that shows the intention to incorporate 
the arbitration clause contained in the document into the 
contract.   
14. The law laid down in the case of M.R. Engineers and 
Contractors Private Limited (supra) has been followed by this 
Court in the cases of Duro Felguera, S.A. vs Gangavaram Port 
Limited2 
and 
Elite 
Engineering 
and 
Construction 
(Hyderabad) Private Limited represented by its Managing 
Director vs Techtrans Construction India Private Limited 
represented by its Managing Director3. 
15. No doubt that this Court in the case of Inox Wind Limited 
vs Thermocables Limited4 has distinguished the law laid down 
in the case of M.R. Engineers and Contractors Private Limited 
(supra).  In the said case (i.e. Inox Wind Limited), this Court has 
held that though general reference to an earlier contract is not 
 
2 (2017) 9 SCC 729 
3 (2018) 4 SCC 281 
4 (2018) 2 SCC 519 

14 
 
sufficient for incorporation of an arbitration clause in the later 
contract, a general reference to a standard form would be enough 
for incorporation of the arbitration clause.  Though this Court in 
the case of Inox Wind Limited (supra) agrees with the judgment 
in the case of M.R. Engineers and Contractors Private Limited 
(supra), it holds that general reference to a standard form of 
contract of one party along with those of trade associations and 
professional bodies will be sufficient to incorporate the 
arbitration clause. In the said case (i.e. Inox Wind Limited), this 
Court found that the purchase order was issued by the appellant 
therein in which it was categorically mentioned that the supply 
would be as per the terms mentioned therein and in the attached 
standard terms and conditions. The respondent therein by his 
letter had confirmed its acceptance. This Court found that the 
case before it was a case of a single-contract and not two-contract 
case and, therefore, held that the arbitration clause as mentioned 
in the terms and conditions would be applicable.   

15 
 
16. The present case is a ‘two-contract’ case and not a ‘single-
contract’ case.  
17. It will be relevant to refer to Clause 3.34 of the Additional 
Terms & Conditions of Contract as contained in the tender issued 
by the DVC to the NBCC.  Clause 3.34 reads thus: 
“3.34  
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES & 
 
 
 
ARBITRATION 
 
Any dispute(s) or difference(s) arising out of or 
in connection with the contract shall to the 
extent possible be settled amicably between 
the owner and supplier/contractor. 
 
In the event of any dispute or difference 
whatsoever arising under the contract or in 
connection therewith including any question 
relating 
to 
existence 
meaning 
and 
interpretation of the contract or any alleged 
breach thereof the same shall be referred to 
the sole arbitration of the Secretary, CEO of 
Damodar Valley Corporation, Kolkata-54 or to 
a person appointed by him for that purpose.  
The arbitration shall be conducted 
in 
accordance with the provisions of arbitration 
and 
conciliation 
law 
1996 
and 
the 
decision/judgment of Arbitrator shall be final 
and binding on both the parties. 
 

16 
 
All suits arising out of this enquiry and 
subsequent purchase order, if any, are 
subject jurisdiction of court in the City of 
Kolkata only and no other door when 
resolution/settlement 
through 
mutual 
discussion and arbitration fails.” 
 
18. No doubt that Clause 3.34 provides for a reference of the 
dispute to the sole arbitration of the Secretary, CEO of Damodar 
Valley Corporation, Kolkata-54 or to a person appointed by him 
for that purpose.   
19. It will also be apposite to refer to Clauses 1.0, 2.0, 7.0 and 
10.0 of the L.O.I., which read thus: 
“1.0 The work shall be executed you on 
contractual, financial and technical 
conditions of contract as contained in 
the following documents which shall 
be applicable and binding on you for 
execution of works and shall form part 
of 
agreement with 
you 
as 
also 
mentioned in the above mentioned 
NIT-01/WEIR/06 dated November 3, 
2006.   
(a) 
Notice Inviting Tender 
(b) 
General Conditions of Contract 
(c) 
Special Conditions of Contract 
(d) 
Bill of Quantity 
 

17 
 
2.0 All terms and conditions as contained 
in the tender issued by DVC to NBCC 
shall apply mutatis mutandis except 
where these have been expressly 
modified by NBCC. 
 
7.0 The redressal of dispute between 
NBCC and you shall only be through 
civil courts having jurisdiction of Delhi 
alone.  The laws applicable to this 
contract shall be the laws enforceable 
in India.  
 
10.0 This letter of intent shall also form a 
part of the agreement.  
 
20. In view of Clause 1.0, the documents stated therein shall 
also form part of the agreement.  In view of Clause 2.0, all terms 
and conditions as contained in the tender issued by the DVC to 
the NBCC shall apply mutatis mutandis except where these have 
been expressly modified by the NBCC.  Clause 7.0 specifically 
provides that the redressal of dispute between the NBCC and the 
respondent shall only be through civil courts having jurisdiction 
of Delhi alone.  Clause 10.0 further provides that the L.O.I. shall 
also form a part of the agreement.  

18 
 
21. It is thus clear that the intention between the parties is very 
clear.  Clause 7.0 of the L.O.I. which also forms part of the 
agreement specifically provides that the redressal of the dispute 
between the NBCC and the respondent shall only be through civil 
courts having jurisdiction of Delhi alone.  It is pertinent to note 
that Clause 7.0 of the L.O.I. specifically uses the word “only” 
before the words “be through civil courts having jurisdiction of 
Delhi alone”. 
22. As already discussed herein above, when there is a 
reference in the second contract to the terms and conditions of 
the first contract, the arbitration clause would not ipso facto be 
applicable to the second contract unless there is a specific 
mention/reference thereto. 
23. We are of the considered view that the present case is not a 
case of ‘incorporation’ but a case of ‘reference’.  As such, a general 
reference would not have the effect of incorporating the 
arbitration clause.  In any case, Clause 7.0 of the L.O.I., which is 
also a part of the agreement, makes it amply clear that the 

19 
 
redressal of the dispute between the NBCC and the respondent 
has to be only through civil courts having jurisdiction of 
Delhi alone.   
24. In that view of the matter, we find that the learned single 
judge of the Delhi High Court has erred in allowing the 
application of the respondent.  The appeals are accordingly 
allowed.  The impugned orders are quashed and set aside. There 
shall be no order as to costs. 
25. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.  
 
 
 
 
 
…….........................J.        
[B.R. GAVAI] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
…….........................J.        
[SANDEEP MEHTA] 
NEW DELHI; 
MARCH 19, 2024