2024 INSC 225
1 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4420 OF 2024 
[ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 19618 OF 2019] 
 
 
 
TAPAS KUMAR DAS 
 
 
                                   …APPELLANT 
 
 
VS. 
 
 
 
HINDUSTAN PETROLEUM  
CORPORATION LIMITED & ORS.      
                    …RESPONDENTS 
 
 
 
J U D G M E NT 
 
 
 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.  
 
 
THE APPEAL 
 
1. 
An intra-court appellate judgment and order1 (“impugned 
judgment”, hereafter) of an Hon’ble Division Bench of the High 
Court at Calcutta (“High Court”, hereafter), reversing the 
judgment and order2 (“order”, hereafter) of a learned Single 
Judge, is called in question in the instant civil appeal. Vide the 
 
1 dated 28th March, 2019 
2 dated 25th January, 2019 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Guglani
Date: 2024.03.19
18:25:24 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
impugned judgment, the Division Bench of the High Court allowed 
the writ appeal3 carried by Hindustan Petroleum Corporation 
Limited (“HPCL”, hereafter) from the order and set aside the same. 
The Single Judge had, while allowing a writ petition4 of Mr. Tapas 
Kumar Das (“appellant”, hereafter), directed HPCL to proceed with 
his candidature for LPG5 distributorship. 
BRIEF RESUME OF FACTS 
2. 
The facts, giving rise to this appeal, lie in a narrow compass. 
3. 
HPCL, Indian Oil Corporation Limited (“IOCL”, hereafter) and 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited issued a joint advertisement 
for LPG distributorships at several locations in the 31st August, 
2017 editions of the Bangla dailies Bartaman and Anandabazar 
Patrika (“the Advertisement”, hereafter). Entries bearing SI. Nos. 
1 to 607 in the Advertisement had 10 (ten) columns (“Part 1”, 
hereafter) and those from SI. No. 608 onwards had 9 (nine) 
columns (“Part 2”, hereafter)6. The header “Gram Panchayat” did 
not feature in Part 2 and, hence, had 1 (one) column less than 
Part 1. 
4. 
Parts 1 and 2 of the Advertisement with the headers and to the 
extent relevant for a decision on this appeal, as per the English 
translation placed before us, are set out hereunder: 
 
3  M.A.T. No. 255 of 2019 with C.A.N. No. 1818 of 2019.  
4  W.P. 1595 (W) of 2019. 
5  Liquified Petroleum Gas. 
6  The Advertisement, by itself, has not been split into Parts 1 and 2; the same has been 
done here for ease of reference.  

3 
 
Part 1 
SI. 
No. 
Oil 
company 
Location 
(detail 
particulars 
of the place 
where 
applicable) 
Gram 
Panchayat 
Block 
District 
Class 
Nature 
of 
market / LPG 
distributorship 
/ City / Urban / 
Rural 
/ 
Inaccessible 
area 
distributorship 
 
Amount 
of 
security 
deposit 
(in lakh) 
Marketing 
plan 
1 
- 
607 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
 
Part 2 
SI. 
No. 
Oil 
company 
Location 
(detail 
particulars 
of the place 
where 
applicable) 
Block 
District 
Class 
Nature of market / 
LPG distributorship / 
City / Urban / Rural 
/ Inaccessible area 
distributorship 
 
Amount 
of 
security 
deposit 
(in 
lakh) 
Marketing 
plan 
608 
- 
623 
[***] 
 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
624 
HPC 
Haripal 
Haripal 
Hooghly 
SC 
Rurban 
 
3 
2017-18 
625 
- 
631 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
[***] 
 
5. 
Interested in obtaining an LPG distributorship qua Sl. No.624 
reserved for a member of the Scheduled Caste community, i.e., 
‘Location’ and ‘Block’ Haripal in the district of Hooghly, the 
appellant submitted an online application for the same under the 
‘SC’ category on 16th October, 2017. The appellant’s application 
was found to be in order, whereupon he was called upon to 
participate in the ensuing computerised draw of lots for selection 
for the distributorship for Haripal. Fortune smiled on the appellant 
and he emerged as winner in the draw of lots. HPCL informed the 
appellant vide a letter dated 4th November, 2018 that he had been 
declared successful and also that he was required to comply with 

4 
 
the instructions contained therein. Diligently, the appellant 
deposited a demand draft of Rs. 30,000/- with HPCL and 
submitted relevant land documents in compliance with the letter 
dated 4th November, 2018. 
6. 
One Sujoy Kumar Das (“added respondent”, hereafter) lodged a 
complaint dated 9th November, 2018 with HPCL questioning the 
appellant’s candidature on the basis that the land offered by him 
for the showroom was in mouza7 Gopinagar and not in mouza 
Haripal. Incidentally, the added respondent had participated in a 
previous round of selection conducted by HPCL for the same 
location, i.e., Haripal, and his candidature was rejected by HPCL 
on the ground that the land for the showroom offered by him was 
not located in village Haripal. Upon cancellation of the appellant’s 
candidature, the Chief Regional Manager of HPCL (“fourth 
respondent”, hereafter) intimated the same to the added 
respondent vide letter dated 2nd January, 2019 and assured to him 
refund of Rs. 5,000/- which he had deposited as complaint fee, 
shortly. 
7. 
Close on the heels thereof, the fourth respondent addressed a 
letter dated 2nd January, 2019 cancelling the appellant’s 
candidature for the LPG distributorship (“Cancellation Letter”, 
 
7 As per Wilson’s Glossary of Judicial and Revenue Terms of British India, ‘Mauza’ or Mauja 
in Hindi and Mauji in Bengali is a village, understanding by that term one or more clusters 
of habitations, and all the lands belonging to their proprietary inhabitants : a Mauza is 
defined by authority to be ‘a parcel or parcels of lands having a separate name in the 
revenue records, and of known limits’.     

5 
 
hereafter). Therein, it was stated that the land offered by the 
appellant for the showroom at “Plot No. LR-1220, Khatian No. LR-
311, Mouza-Gopinagar, Gram Panchayat-Haripal Ashuthsh (sic, 
Ashutosh), Block Haripal, District Hooghly” pursuant to a 
registered lease dated 16th October, 20188 for a period of 16 
(sixteen) years was beyond the advertised location; hence, the 
appellant’s proposed showroom had failed to meet the eligibility 
criteria as per clause 8 A(n) of the Brochure for Unified Guidelines 
for Selection of LPG Distributorships (“Unified Guidelines”, 
hereafter), and the deposit of Rs. 30,000/- would stand forfeited.  
8. 
It was then that the appellant invoked the writ jurisdiction of the 
High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the 
Cancellation Letter. The Single Judge, noticing that the 
Advertisement showed the location of the distributorship as Block 
Haripal, observed that “there was no specific requirement of Gram 
Panchayat or mouza to disqualify” the appellant’s candidature. 
Upon being satisfied that the land offered by the appellant for the 
showroom was within the limits of the advertised location, the 
learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition, set aside the 
Cancellation Letter, and directed HPCL to proceed with the 
evaluation of the appellant’s candidature and decide the same 
 
8 the date was subsequently corrected vide letter dated 10th January, 2019 to read 16th 
October, 2017.  

6 
 
within four weeks upon the appellant completing all required 
formalities. 
9. 
Aggrieved by the order, HPCL invoked the appellate jurisdiction of 
the High Court and laid a challenge thereto. The Division Bench 
referred to the definitions of ‘Gram Panchayat’ and ‘mouza’ in the 
West Bengal Panchayat Act, 1973 (“Panchayat Act”, hereafter) and 
while allowing the appeal by the impugned judgment, held that 
“mouza Haripal has a separate and distinct existence”, the 
“offered land at mouza Gopinagar is not what is contemplated in 
the advertisement for appointment of LPG distributors at Haripal” 
and in such view of the matter HPCL “was justified in coming to 
the conclusion that the writ petitioner failed to fulfil the eligibility 
criteria”.  
RIVAL CONTENTIONS 
10. 
Mr. Sudipta Kumar Bose, learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
the appellant, seeking our interference with the impugned 
judgment submitted inter alia that: 
a. The Division Bench fell into error by reading into the 
Advertisement, conditions which had not been categorically laid 
down by HPCL. The Advertisement did not state that the 
showroom was to be located in any particular mouza, and that 
the Advertisement did not refer to any Gram Panchayat as the 
specific location either.  

7 
 
b. The appellant had been declared as the successful candidate 
after due verification of his eligibility and there could have been 
no occasion for HPCL to disqualify him on the complaint of the 
added respondent, and that too without putting the appellant 
on notice. 
c. HPCL, having issued the Advertisement, could not have altered 
the rules and guidelines after the appellant was declared 
eligible and successful. 
d. The entries from serial no. 608 onwards in the Advertisement 
did not bear any column for Gram Panchayat as the locations 
therein were urban or semi-urban; implying that there was no 
error in the Advertisement and such an omission was 
conscious.   
e. The Single Judge had rightly observed that the advertised 
location for the concerned showroom was Haripal with 
reference to specification of Block Haripal; and since the 
appellant had offered land for the showroom at a location within 
the jurisdictional limits of Haripal Police Station and within 
geographical limits of Haripal Block, consequently, the same 
should have been considered to be covered by the advertised 
location.  
11. 
Mr. Parijat Sinha, learned counsel appearing for HPCL, in support 
of upholding the impugned judgment submitted inter alia that: 

8 
 
a. The Unified Guidelines are comprehensive in nature and left no 
room for ambiguity as to the location requirements to obtain 
an LPG distributorship from inter alia HPCL. 
b. In the State of West Bengal, villages were not identified as units 
of revenue, but they were in fact identified as mouzas. 
Therefore, the boundary of any village could only be defined in 
terms of mouzas. Hence, the Advertisement had not been 
issued for Block Haripal, but only for the mouza/village Haripal 
as per the third column of Part 2 of the Advertisement. Hence, 
the intention of mentioning Haripal in the third column was to 
indicate Haripal mouza/village, and not the cluster of 
villages/towns/cities.  
c. Clause 8 A(n) of the Unified Guidelines provided for the 
requirements of the showroom to be owned/leased by the 
concerned 
applicant 
desirous 
of 
obtaining 
an 
LPG 
distributorship. A reading of the Unified Guidelines, along with 
the fact that the fifth column of Part 2 of the Advertisement 
was for the District, the fourth column was for the Block, and 
the third column was for the Location, meant that the third 
column specified the uniqueness of the location intending it to 
be for the concerned village; it would be incorrect to read the 
third and fourth columns as being synonymous. Hence, a 
mention of Haripal in the third column meant mouza/village 
Haripal and not Block Haripal.   

9 
 
d. In this vein, since the appellant’s showroom fell within mouza 
Gopinagar, the same made his candidature ineligible; though 
located in Block Haripal, it was not within mouza Haripal. 
12. 
Appearing for the added respondent and seeking dismissal of the 
appeal, Mr. Zoheb Hossain, learned counsel submitted inter alia 
that: 
a. The added respondent was a proper and necessary party in W.P. 
1595 (W) of 2019 before the High Court since the Cancellation 
Letter had been issued as a consequence of acceptance of the 
complaint dated 9th November 2018. Further, the added 
respondent’s appeal challenging the order was also decided 
vide the impugned common judgment.  
b. The added respondent was also an applicant for the LPG 
distributorship as per the Advertisement, and that it would be 
prejudicial for him if the impugned judgment were set aside or 
modified.  
c. HPCL had, on an earlier occasion, rejected the added 
respondent’s candidature for LPG distributorship on grounds 
similar to the reasons for cancellation of the appellant’s 
distributorship and, therefore, was justified in taking a 
consistent and uniform stand. 
d. Extending any relief to the appellant, on facts and in the 
circumstances, could be inappropriate.   
 

10 
 
Analysis 
13. 
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the 
impugned judgment of the Division Bench, the order of the Single 
Judge as well as the other materials on record. 
14. 
The limited issues that we are tasked to decide in this appeal are: 
(i) 
Whether the land offered by the appellant for the 
showroom is covered by the extent of “Location” 
stipulated in the Advertisement and is compliant with 
the Unified Guidelines? 
(ii) 
Whether the Division Bench was justified in its 
interference with the order under challenge before it?  
15. 
A cursory look at the Advertisement informs us that it 
contemplated the location of the relevant distributorships in the 
manner such that the fifth column of Part 2 of the Advertisement 
indicated the ‘District’, the fourth column the ‘Block’, and the third 
column the “Location” with the words “particulars of the place 
wherever applicable” following it in brackets. Also, in Part 1 of the 
Advertisement, as noted above, there was an additional column 
for “Gram Panchayat”. This is conspicuously missing from Part 2.  
16. 
Viewed thus, what we find is that HPCL intended to appoint an LPG 
distributor at a location named Haripal, situate within Haripal block 
in the district of Hooghly, reserved for SC, with ‘Rurban’ shown as 
the Type of Market/Distributorship. Much would, in our opinion, 

11 
 
turn on ‘Rurban’ which was not noticed either by the Single Judge 
or the Division Bench, as the discussion follows. 
17. 
In course of arguments, we heard Mr. Sinha submitting that there 
was an error in not mentioning the “Gram Panchayat” in the 
Advertisement for the subject location. In other words, there was 
a mistake in the Advertisement insofar as Sl. No.624 is concerned. 
However, a course correction measure was sought to be adopted 
in the written notes of arguments filed on behalf of HPCL which, 
as would unfold hereafter, does more harm than good to its cause. 
It is stated in the written notes that “from Sl. No.608 onwards, all 
of the locations advertised … were either urban or semi-urban with 
regard to the nature of the market/LPG distributorship; hence, the 
relevant Gram Panchayat was not mentioned in the said 
Advertisement”. It is also stated therein that in terms of the 
Advertisement, the appellant “ought to have offered land located 
within (sic) in village/mouza location – Haripal (column 3), 
which is the advertised location” (bold in original).  
18. 
HPCL having advertised Haripal as the location within Haripal block 
for the LPG distributorship and without there being anything more 
in the Advertisement with specifics as to the ‘locality’, the 
candidature of the appellant and the land offered by him for the 
showroom had to be considered bearing in mind the relevant 
clauses of the Unified Guidelines, viz. clauses 1 c. i. and 1 y. 

12 
 
defining ‘Rurban Vitrak’9 and ‘Location’10, respectively, and 8 A (n) 
regarding ‘Showroom’11.     
19. 
It would be convenient at this stage to look at Sl. Nos. 608 to 631 
of the Advertisement, comprised in Part 2 (supra). In all but one 
of the locations, LPG distributorships were on offer at the instance 
of 
IOCL. 
Majorly, 
the 
locations 
have 
‘Type 
of 
Market/Distributorship’ as ‘Urban’ while the rest are ‘Rurban’. In 
several of the locations advertised ranging between Sl. Nos. 608 
and 631, except Sl. No.624 being the subject location, the 
locations within brackets indicate the locality12 where the 
concerned OMC13 intended to appoint an LPG distributor. As and 
by way of example, one may profitably refer to Sl. Nos. 613 and 
619. While both indicate Kolkata as locations, the former within 
 
9 Rurban Vitrak: In this document, the word Rural Urban means LPG distributor located in 
‘Urban Area’ and also providing service to the LPG Customers in specified ‘Rural Area’, 
generally covering all villages falling within 15 Kms. From the municipal limits of the LPG 
distributorship location and or the area specified by the respective OMCs. LPG distributors 
servicing this area will be called Rurban Vitrak.  
10 Location – In this document, word location means the area identified for setting up of 
new LPG Distributor. It can be a locality/village/cluster of villages/town or city which is 
mentioned in the Notice for Appointment of LPG Distributors.  
11 Showroom: (Applicable only for … Rurban Vitrak … locations and not for …) 
The applicant should ‘Own’ a suitable shop for Showroom of minimum size … as on the 
last date for submission of application as specified either in the advertisement or 
corrigendum (if any) at the advertised location i.e. within the municipal/town/village limits 
of the place which is mentioned under the column of ‘location’ in the advertisement. 
In case locality is also specified under the column of ‘location’ in the advertisement, the 
candidate should own … in the said locality. 
In case an applicant has more than one shop … at the advertised location or locality as 
specified under the column of ‘location’ in the advertisement, the details of the same can 
also be provided in the application. 
The applicant should have ownership as defined under the term ‘Own’ … 
Applicants having registered lease deed commencing on any date prior to the date of 
advertisement will also be considered provided the lease is valid for a minimum period of 
15 years from the date of advertisement. 
…  
12 In terms of the definition of ‘Location’, a locality could also be a location. 
13 Oil Marketing Company. 

13 
 
brackets has Salt Lake within Bidhannagar Municipality and the 
latter China Town within Kolkata Municipal Corporation areas.  We 
read Salt Lake and China Town as the ‘locality’ in the location 
Kolkata to sync locality with ‘Location’. It is also significant to note 
another advertised location in the district of Hooghly. Sl. No. 610 
indicates that in Nabagram (Konnagar), being the ‘Location’ within 
Shrirampur block, IOCL intended to appoint an LPG distributor. We 
take judicial notice of the fact that Konnagar is a town and also a 
municipality in the district of Hooghly with Nabagram as the 
locality14. However, significantly, Sl. No. 624 does not go beyond 
indicating Haripal as the location.  
20. 
Judicial notice is also taken of the fact that Haripal is a community 
development block being part of Chandannagore sub-division, in 
the district of Hooghly, West Bengal. It is true that as per the 
Census 2011 Report downloaded from www.census2011.co.in, 
[being Annexure R-1/1 of the counter affidavit of HPCL filed in this 
proceeding], Haripal and Gopinagar are villages within Haripal 
block but, for reasons more than one, we are not persuaded to 
accept the claim of HPCL that it intended to appoint an LPG 
distributor at Haripal village.    
21. 
First, the stand taken in the written notes entirely demolishes the 
plinth on which the impugned judgment rests. Reference to any 
village or mouza, be it Haripal or Gopinagar, is rendered irrelevant 
 
14 ‘gram’ in Nabagram is not to be mistaken for a village. 

14 
 
in 
the 
circumstances 
in 
the 
light 
of 
the 
‘Type 
of 
Market/Distributorship’ 
being 
shown 
as 
‘Rurban’ 
in 
the 
Advertisement under Column 7, which has to be given the 
meaning attributed to ‘Rurban Vitrak’ in the Unified Guidelines. If 
appointment of a distributor were intended for a village/mouza, 
i.e., Haripal, it defies logic why instead of ‘Gramin Vitrak’15, 
‘Rurban Vitrak’ was shown as the ‘Type of Market/Distributorship’. 
It is also significant to note that if HPCL meant Haripal village as 
the intended location for appointment of an LPG distributor, it has 
not explained why there is no reference to any Gram/Village 
Panchayat in Part 2 (supra) although such reference is available 
under Part 1 (supra). This, we feel, is obvious because HPCL did 
not intend the distributor to cater to any rural area but a ‘Rurban’ 
area which comprises of both rural and urban. 
22. 
Secondly, the contention of HPCL that Haripal as shown both under 
the columns ‘Block’ and ‘Location’ are not synonymous and that 
Haripal should be read and understood as Haripal village appears 
to be one advanced in desperation. The appellant, or for that 
matter any other individual interested in the distributorship, could 
not have possibly projected his own imagination and discover all 
the facts and circumstances that were in the contemplation of the 
 
15 Gramin Vitrak: In this document, the word 'Rural Area' will have the definition of 'Rural' 
as per census 2011. LPG distributorship located in 'Rural Area' will be called as Gramin 
Vitrak and will service the LPG Customers of the specified rural area. Generally it will cover 
all villages falling within 15 KMs from the boundary limits of the LPG distributorship location 
and or the area specified by the respective OMCs. 

15 
 
officers of HPCL to be fulfilled by him. At the cost of repetition, 
Haripal under the column ‘Location’ appears to be unqualified. In 
the present case, Haripal being the advertised location and without 
mention of locality but with the ‘Type of Market/Distributorship’ 
being shown as ‘Rurban’, it is quite but natural for an individual to 
perceive that land offered for the showroom, if not located 
anywhere in the entire Haripal block, must at least be located 
within certain identifiable limits having relation with Haripal, such 
as the jurisdictional limits of Haripal Police Station. If indeed an 
LPG distributor were intended to be appointed in village Haripal, 
the ‘Type of Market/Distributorship’ would undoubtedly have been 
shown as ‘Rural’ and included in Part 1 (supra) and not Part 2 
(supra) of the Advertisement. Unless the relevant Part and the 
columns thereunder of the Advertisement are interpreted in the 
manner as above, the same would lead to utter absurdity.    
23. 
The problem can be viewed from another perspective. While 
completing our task, it is not for us to adjudge the nature of the 
Advertisement or the intention of those who were responsible for 
drawing it up, but whether the appellant’s candidature fell within 
the scope of the ‘Location’ as indicated in the Advertisement. 
24. 
Law is well settled that when an advertisement is made inviting 
applications from the general public for appointment to a post or 
for admission to any course or appointment of the present nature, 
the advertisement constitutes a representation to the public and 

16 
 
the authority issuing it is bound by such representation. It cannot 
act contrary to it. What bears heavy upon us is that, any person 
of reasonable prudence could assume that since there was no 
specific column for “Gram Panchayat” in Part 2 (supra) of the 
Advertisement, which was present in Part 1, and the ‘Type of 
Market/Distributorship’ was not ‘Rural’, complemented by the lack 
of any detail – apart from Haripal in the “Location” without any 
detailed particulars of the place, would imply that the location of 
the concerned showroom was required to be in Haripal block and 
any showroom on land located in Haripal block would fall within 
the requirements of the Advertisement.  
25. 
We have also kept in mind that the specific words ‘mouza’ and 
‘village’ do not find any mention in the Advertisement and 
reference to the definitions of the same in the Panchayat Act by 
the Division Bench as well as by Mr. Sinha in course of his 
submissions is misconceived. An order of cancellation of the 
candidature of an applicant, which is the subject matter of 
challenge in a court of law, has to be defended with reference to 
the Advertisement and the pleadings and not with reference to 
what was in contemplation of the authority issuing the 
Advertisement. It is the norm that a court cannot be swayed by 
the version of a party, which is not its pleaded case, and that it 
should confine its decision to the points of assail/defence raised in 
the pleadings. Any such argument ought to have been traceable 

17 
 
in the pleadings, and could not simply have been put before this 
Court as an afterthought.  
26. 
In a situation akin to this, had the appellant, or any intending 
candidate, known in advance of such a narrower requirement, 
then they would likely have been more vigilant in fulfilling such 
criteria for the location of the distributorship. In arguendo, 
unfortunately, it is HPCL’s cross to bear that the Advertisement, if 
not incorrectly, is inadequately worded. It is not open to a writ 
court, much less an appeal court, to direct the modification of any 
clause/qualification in the Advertisement to suit the interest of any 
particular candidate or the issuing authority even. Any such 
direction would amount to re-writing the clause/qualification 
mentioned in the Advertisement, which would be plainly 
impermissible.  
27. 
Turning to the added respondent, we can only sympathize with 
him. If at all the added respondent had earlier been the victim of 
an arbitrary rejection of his candidature by HPCL, he ought to have 
challenged such action by instituting an appropriate proceeding. 
Not having so instituted, the present appeal is not an appropriate 
proceeding where this Court can look into his grievance and 
address it.  
Conclusion 
28. 
For the reasons aforementioned, the first issue is answered in the 
affirmative while the second in the negative. 

18 
 
29. 
The impugned judgment of the Division Bench is set aside and the 
order of the Single Judge restored. The present appeal is, 
accordingly, allowed leaving the parties to bear their own costs. 
30. 
It is, however, made clear that apart from the questions that we 
have decided, no part of our observations shall be treated as 
expression of opinion on the further requirements/compliances, if 
any, with regard to HPCL proceeding with the appellant’s 
candidature for the LPG distributorship. The same may be decided 
as per the applicable laws and guidelines by the competent 
authority of HPCL. 
31. 
Since the Advertisement is more than half a decade old, we hope 
and trust that HPCL would henceforth proceed with expedition to 
cater to the needs of its future customers. 
32. 
Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of accordingly.  
 
 
 
..............................J. 
[DIPANKAR DATTA] 
 
 
 
 
 
..............................J. 
[SANJAY KUMAR] 
NEW DELHI; 
19TH MARCH, 2024.