2024 INSC 234
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NON-REPORTABLE 
                                                          
     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
                     CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 7966 OF 2022 
 
 
M/S. KOZYFLEX MATTRESSES 
PRIVATE LIMITED  
 
 
 
      .….APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
SBI GENERAL INSURANCE  
COMPANY LIMITED AND ANR. 
           …..RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
This appeal under Section 67 of the Consumer Protection Act, 
2019 (hereinafter being referred to as ‘Act of 2019’) has been 
preferred by the appellant herein for assailing final order dated 24th 
August, 2022 rendered by National Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission 
(hereinafter 
being 
referred 
to 
as 
‘National 
Commission’), rejecting the Consumer Case No. 754 of 2015 filed 
by M/s. Kozyflex Mattresses Private Limited(hereinafter being 
referred to as the ‘insured-appellant’) praying for a direction to the 
SBI General Insurance Company(hereinafter being referred to as 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.03.20
17:32:38 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
the ‘insurer-respondent’) to indemnify it for the loss caused by fire 
in the insured premises being the manufacturing unit of the 
insured-appellant company situated at Sy. No.-41-25, village 
Poosapatirega, Mandal and District Vizianagaram.  
2. 
Brief facts essential for adjudication of the present civil 
appeal are noted hereinbelow.  
3. 
The insured-appellant herein being a Private Limited 
Company registered under the Companies Act, 1956 is engaged in 
the business of manufacture and sale of coir foam mattresses, 
pillows, cushions and other coir by-products. The manufacturing 
unit of the insured-appellant is situated at Sy. No.-41-25, village 
Poosapatirega, Mandal and District Vizianagaram and was 
registered as a small scale industry with the District Industries 
Centre, Vizianagaram. The insured-appellant obtained a ‘Standard 
Fire 
and 
Special 
Perils 
Policy(Material 
Damage)’ 
No.0000000000807725 
(in 
short 
‘Policy’) 
for 
the 
period 
commencing from 28th March, 2013 to 27th March, 2014 for a sum 
of Rs. 1.25 crores on the plant and machinery and a sum of 
Rs.30,00,000/- on stock from the insurer-respondent. By an 
endorsement dated 29th March, 2013, the sum insured for stock 

3 
 
was further enhanced to Rs.1.55 crores and for building the sum 
insured was enhanced to Rs.20,00,000/-.  
4. 
It is claimed that a massive fire incident took place in the 
manufacturing unit of the insured-appellant in the intervening 
night of 13th/14th April, 2013. Immediate action by way of 
informing the police and the fire service station was taken and fire 
tenders were sent to the spot. The insured-appellant informed the 
insurer-respondent about the fire accident and the losses suffered 
in the manufacturing unit in the fire incident on 15th April, 2013. 
The insurer-respondent appointed Professional Surveyor & Loss 
Adjustor Pvt. Ltd., Secunderabad as the surveyor on 15th April, 
2013. The surveyor inspected the factory premises on 16th April, 
2013 and 17th April, 2013 and took photographs, videography and 
prepared inventory. The surveyor asked the insured-appellant to 
remove the collapsed roof from the manufacturing unit premises 
in order to conduct inspection of the machinery and stock and for 
carrying out the measurement and quantification. The collapsed 
roof was not found removed till the subsequent inspection 
conducted by the surveyor on 15th and 16th May, 2013. The third 
inspection was conducted between 15th and 17th July, 2014 and it 
is stated that by that time, the machineries in the manufacturing 

4 
 
unit had been repaired. The insured-appellant submitted an 
insurance claim for a sum of Rs. 3.31 crores i.e. Rs.40,11,152/- 
for building, Rs.1,08,47,435/- for plant and machinery and 
Rs.1,87,72,489/- for stock.  
5. 
The 
insurer-respondent 
appointed 
Mr. 
Kalahasti 
Satyanarayana, Dy.S.P. (Retd.), Insurance Claim Investigator, 
Guntur and Mr. K. Jagannadha Sastry, Advocate, Independent 
Investigator and Fact Finder, Vizianagaram to verify the 
documents submitted by the insured-appellant in support of his 
claim and to submit their independent reports. Mr. Kalahasti 
Satyanarayana submitted his inspection report dated 12th 
October, 2013 and Mr. K. Jagannadha Sastry submitted his 
inspection report dated 25th January, 2014 noting inter-alia that 
the purchase of machinery from M/s. Maheshwari Ribbons, 
Gudivada to the tune of Rs. 1,39,64,475/- and stock from 
Jageswari Enterprises to the tune of Rs. 64,39,810/- were mere 
paper and money transactions which have been done with the 
intention to siphon money from the State Bank of Hyderabad and 
the National Small Scale Industries Corporation Ltd. and that 
there had been no actual sale/purchase of such machinery and 
stock. 

5 
 
6. 
After examining all the documents submitted by the insured-
appellant as well as the reports of the two investigators, the 
surveyor submitted a final survey report dated 11th February, 2014 
observing that the claim was fraudulent and was based on 
fabricated documents and accordingly recommended for the 
repudiation of the claim. The Competent Authority of the insurer-
respondent examined the entire material and repudiated the claim 
of the appellant by invoking Clause 8 of the General Terms and 
Conditions of Policy vide letter dated 3rd March, 2014.  
7. 
The insured-appellant made a representation dated 11th 
January, 2015 to the Grievance Redressal Manager against the 
repudiation of its claim. However, such representation did not 
meet the desired result, upon which the insured-appellant filed 
Complaint No.329 of 2015 before the National Commission which 
was dismissed as withdrawn on 30th June, 2015 with the liberty to 
file a fresh complaint. Thereafter, the subject complaint came to 
be filed on 4th August, 2015 alleging deficiency in service on the 
part of the insurer-respondent. The insured-appellant contested 
the complaint by filing a detailed reply. The factum of obtaining 
the policy and the endorsement dated 29th March, 2013 made 
therein was not disputed.  However, the insurer-respondent 

6 
 
alleged that the loss had occurred within 16 days of obtaining the 
insurance policy and the claim was for a very heavy amount and 
thus, two independent investigators referred to supra were 
appointed to verify the veracity of the documents submitted by the 
insured-appellant in support of his claim and submit their 
independent reports. Both the investigators submitted their 
respective investigation reports wherein, the very factum of 
purchase of machinery and stock by the insured-appellant were 
found to be fabricated and mere paper transactions carried out 
with the intention to siphon money from the State Bank of 
Hyderabad and the National Small Scale Industries Corporation. 
The surveyor examined the reports of the investigators and 
submitted a final report dated 11th February, 2014 stating therein 
that the claim was fraudulent and based on fabricated documents 
and recommended repudiation of the claim. The Competent 
Authority of the insurer-respondent after examining the report of 
the surveyor repudiated the claim by letter dated 3rd March, 2014.  
It was further stated that the claim was repudiated as the same 
was fraudulent and exaggerated. The delay was attributable to the 
insured-appellant who did not cooperate with the surveyor and 
investigators who were not promptly provided with the requisite 

7 
 
documents and clarifications. A preliminary objection was raised 
that the complaint involved complicated issues of fact which 
required examination of voluminous documentary evidence and 
cross-examination of witnesses and hence, it was prayed that the 
insured-appellant should be relegated to Civil Court for redressal 
of its grievances.  
8. 
The insured-appellant filed its documentary evidence and the 
affidavit of evidence. The insurer-respondent also filed reports of 
the investigators, final survey report of the surveyor and affidavits 
of evidence of its authorized representatives. The National 
Commission, in its order referred to Clause-8 of General Terms 
and Conditions of Policy which reads as under: - 
“8. If the claim be in any respect fraudulent, or in any false 
declaration be made or used in support thereof or any 
fraudulent means or devices are used by the Insured or 
any one acting on his behalf to obtain any benefit under 
the policy or if the loss or damage be occasioned by the 
wilful act, or with the connivance of the insured, all 
benefits under this policy shall be forfeited.” 
 
9. 
After referring to the said clause and relying upon the reply 
of the insurer-respondent and the reports of the investigators and 
the surveyor, the National Commission proceeded to accept the 
same and upheld the repudiation letter dated 3rd March, 2014, 

8 
 
rejecting the complaint vide order dated 24th August, 2022 which 
is assailed in the present appeal.  
10. Learned counsel for the insured-appellant submitted that the 
queries raised by the investigators and surveyor were duly replied 
by the insured-appellant and the same forms part of the record 
before the National Commission. Neither the preliminary report 
nor the final report was provided to the insured-appellant and were 
directly produced along with the reply affidavit filed by the insurer-
respondent before the National Commission and hence, there was 
no opportunity for the insured-appellant to rebut the same.  
11. It was further submitted that the stock as well as the 
machinery destroyed in the fire were purchased through properly 
accounted transactions which are clearly reflected in the account 
books of the insured-appellant. All these accounts were produced 
by the insured-appellant before the surveyor and investigators and 
thus, the reports of the surveyor and investigators are partisan 
and unacceptable. The veracity of the surveyor’s report is 
questioned on the ground that the same is contradicted by the 
investigators’ reports. Learned counsel thus prayed that it is a fit 
matter warranting remand of the complaint to the National 
Commission for reconsideration after giving an opportunity to the 

9 
 
insured-appellant to rebut the investigation reports and the 
surveyor report filed on behalf of the insurer-respondent. 
12. Per contra, learned counsel representing the insurer-
respondent vehemently and fervently contended that the insured-
appellant being a body corporate is not a consumer within the 
meaning of Section 2(1)(m) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘Act of 1986’) as it would not be covered 
by the definition of consumer provided under the Act of 1986. He 
contended that the definition of ‘person’ has been amended vide 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019 wherein, the word ‘company’ has 
been included and hence, it has to be presumed that company or 
body corporate was not covered under the definition of a ‘person’ 
under the Act of 1986. In this regard, he placed reliance on the 
judgments rendered by this Court in the cases of Shrikant G. 
Mantri v. Punjab National Bank1 and National Insurance 
Company v. Harsolia Motors and Ors.2 and urged that the 
insured-appellant 
having 
taken 
the 
insurance 
policy 
for 
commercial purposes is not entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of 
forums established under the Consumer Protection Act. On these 
 
1 (2022) 5 SCC 42 
2 (2023) 8 SCC 362 

10 
 
grounds, learned counsel implored the Court to dismiss the 
appeal.  
13. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the material 
placed on record.  
14. We proceed to deal with the preliminary objections raised by 
the learned counsel for the respondent regarding maintainability 
of the complaint before the National Commission. The objections 
are twofold: 
(1)  That the word ‘company’ is not covered within the definition 
of ‘person’ under Section 2(1)(m) of the Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986. 
(2)  That the insured-appellant having taken the policy for 
commercial purposes cannot invoke the jurisdiction of the 
National Commission because the transactions leading to 
filing of the complaint cannot be termed to be lack of 
service/deficiency in service. 
15. We may at the outset record that the definition of ‘person’ as 
provided in the Act of 1986 is inclusive and not exhaustive. 
Consumer Protection Act being a beneficial legislation, a liberal 
interpretation has to be given to the statute. The very fact that in 

11 
 
the Act of 2019, a body corporate has been brought within the 
definition of ‘person’, by itself indicates that the legislature realized 
the incongruity in the unamended provision and has rectified the 
anomaly by including the word ‘company’ in the definition of 
‘person’.  Hence, the first preliminary objection raised by learned 
counsel for the respondent regarding ‘company’ not being covered 
by the definition of ‘person’ under Act of 1986 has no legs to stand 
and deserves to be rejected. 
16. The second preliminary objection raised by the respondent 
was regarding claim being filed for a commercial purpose. We have 
given our thoughtful consideration to the said submission and find 
that the judgments relied upon by learned counsel for the 
respondent in the cases of Shrikant G. Mantri(supra) and 
Harsolia Motors(supra) are totally distinguishable as the same 
deal with the situation wherein, the insurance policy was taken for 
a commercial purpose plain and simple. The situation in the case 
at hand is entirely different. The insurance policy in the present 
case was taken under the title ‘Standard Fire and Special Perils 
Policy(Material Damage)’ and was covering the risk of these 
elements only and nothing else. The claim was also filed for 
indemnifying the insured-appellant for the damage caused in a fire 

12 
 
accident at the insured premises. Hence, this Court has no 
hesitation in holding that both the preliminary objections raised 
by the learned counsel for the respondent are unsustainable. 
Having held so, we now come to the merits of the matter. 
17. The insured-appellant has taken a pertinent plea in the 
instant civil appeal that the copies of the surveyor’s report and the 
investigators’ report were not provided timely and thus, the 
insured-appellant did not get proper opportunity to rebut the 
same. This pertinent plea taken by the insured-appellant in the 
memo of appeal has not been specifically refuted and only a formal 
denial was offered in the counter-affidavit filed by the insurer-
respondent. 
18. In this background, we feel that ends of justice require that 
the insured-appellant should have been provided proper 
opportunity to file its rebuttal/objections to the affidavit/reports 
submitted by the insurer-respondent before the National 
Commission and consequently, the complaint should be 
reconsidered on merits after providing such opportunity to the 
appellant.  
19. As a result of the above discussion, it is hereby directed that 
the appellant shall be permitted to file its rebuttal/rejoinder 

13 
 
affidavit before the National Commission limited to the contents of 
the reports referred to supra. Thereafter, the matter shall be 
reheard and decided on merits afresh.  
20. Resultantly, the impugned order dated 24th August, 2022 is 
set aside. The matter is remitted to the National Commission for 
considering and deciding the complaint afresh in light of the above 
directions. However, we make it clear that none of the observations 
made hereinabove shall prejudice the decision of the consumer 
case on remand. 
21. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. 
22. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
March 20, 2024