2024 INSC 236
1 
 
 
                                          REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1666 OF 2015 
 
SATYANAND SINGH     
                    
                         …APPELLANT 
VS. 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                                …RESPONDENTS 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.  
 
THE CHALLENGE 
 
1. 
The present civil appeal lays a challenge to the judgment and order dated 
05th September, 2012 (“impugned judgment”, hereafter) of the Principal 
Bench of the Armed Forces Tribunal at New Delhi (“AFT”, hereafter), 
whereby the AFT rejected the appellant’s prayer seeking reference of his 
diagnosis as AIDS inflicted, to a fresh Medical Board.  
 
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
Date: 2024.03.20
17:44:44 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
BRIEF RESUME OF FACTS 
 
2. 
The factual matrix of the case, insofar as is relevant for the purpose of a 
decision on this appeal, is noted hereinbelow:  
(i) 
The appellant was enrolled in the Indian Army on 30th October, 1993 
as a Havaldar. He continued discharging his duties on a clerical post 
without impediment until the year 1999, when he began suffering 
from fever, headache and vomiting. For treatment he was referred to 
the Jabalpur Military Hospital. Here, the appellant tested positive for 
HIV. 
(ii) On 9th January, 2000, the Army Headquarters issued a Notice 
(“Notice”, hereafter) stating that all persons who are HIV+ve and are 
suffering from pulmonary or extrapulmonary tuberculosis, would be 
considered as AIDS cases.  
(iii) Thereafter, on 20th August, 2001, the appellant developed similar 
symptoms yet again, for which he was referred to the Jabalpur Military 
Hospital. The doctors there prescribed certain medicines to the 
appellant, which he claims led to his developing double vision. The 
appellant was referred to the Command Hospital at Pune for further 
treatment.  
(iv) In view of the appellant’s ocular afflictions, the doctors, suspecting 
the same to be a symptom of neuro-tuberculosis, began treating him 
for the same. Vide Medical Report dated 14th September, 2001 
(“Medical Report” hereafter), the appellant was reported to be 
suffering from “AIDS defining illness in the form of neuro-

3 
 
tuberculosis”, and thus was officially diagnosed with AIDS. The 
appellant was then recommended to be invalided out in the “P5” 
category. Per the medical categorisation of the Army, “P5” referred to 
those persons who were suffering from “gross limitations in physical 
capacity and stamina”. 
(v) As a consequence of the report dated 14th September, 2001, the 
appellant was referred to the Invaliding Medical Board (“IMB” 
hereafter), which confirmed his diagnosis of suffering from AIDS.  
(vi) On 26th December, 2001, after 8 years and 58 days of service, at the 
young age of 27, the appellant was discharged from service under 
Rule 13 (3), Item III(iii) of the Army Rules, 19541 (“Rules” hereafter) 
on the ground of having been found medically unfit for further service.  
(vii) On 23rd May 2003, the “Guidelines for Management and Prevention of 
HIV/AIDS Infection in the Armed Forces” (“2003 Guidelines” 
hereafter) came into force. In a shift from the Notice, the said policy 
included into its consideration the CD4 cell count of the personnel, 
and that the condition for invalidment would be, inter alia, a CD4 cell 
count below 200 cells/mm3. 
(viii) The appellant approached the Madhya Pradesh High Court, seeking 
quashing of the discharge order dated 26th December, 2001 and 
reinstatement with all consequential benefits. A learned Judge of the 
High Court, vide order dated 20th April, 2006, allowed the appellant’s 
writ petition.  
 
1 An enrolled person under the Army Act who has been attested on the ground of being found 
medically unfit for further service could be discharged by the Commanding Officer, to be carried 
out only on the recommendation of an invaliding Board. 

4 
 
(ix) However, in exercise of intra-court appeal jurisdiction, an Hon’ble 
Division Bench of the High Court vide its order dated 28th March, 2007 
reversed the order under appeal. The Division Bench observed that in 
accordance with Para 355 (f)2 of the Regulations for the Army, 1987 
(“Regulations”, hereafter), the appellant was not discharged solely on 
the ground of having contracted a sexually transmitted disease. The 
appellant’s discharge from service was held to be valid on the ground 
that AIDS would incapacitate his physical capacity, thus coming within 
the ambit of Rule 13 of the Rules. An application for review of the said 
order was also dismissed vide order dated 27th August, 2007.  
(x) The appellant challenged both the orders before the Supreme Court. 
A 3-Judge Bench of this Court vide order dated 01st April, 2009 
allowed the appellant to withdraw his appeal, while directing that he 
could avail of the available statutory remedies.  
(xi) The appellant availed of his statutory remedy by making an 
application to the Director General Armed Forces Medical Service 
(“DGAFMS” hereafter) seeking a Review Medical Board. The DGAFMS, 
vide order dated 20th October, 2009, rejected the appellant’s prayer 
on the ground that the criteria for discharge was satisfied in terms of 
the Army’s prevailing policy at the time, i.e., the “Guidelines for 
 
2 "355. Contraction of sexually transmitted disease - The following principles will be observed in 
dealing with OR including reservists and non - combatants, who contracts sexually transmitted 
disease: 
f) An OR is not to be discharged from service solely on account of his having contracted sexually 
transmitted disease. If, however, he has been absent from duty on account of sexually 
transmitted disease for a total period of four months, whether continuous or not, his case may 
be brought to the notice of the authority empowered to order his discharge from the service, for 
consideration as to whether he should be discharged from the service under the table annexed 
to Army Rule 13 item III if attested, and under item IV if not attested. 

5 
 
Prevention and Control of HIV Infections in the Armed Forces” dated 
30th November, 1992 (“1992 Guidelines” hereafter). Furthermore, the 
appellant was also denied disability pension, AIDS being categorised 
as a self-inflicted condition. 
(xii) The order passed by the DGAFMS was subjected to challenge by the 
appellant before the AFT which, vide the impugned judgment, 
rejected his prayer on the ground that the Medical Report had 
concluded after sufficient investigation and detail that he was 
suffering from (i) CNS Tuberculosis and (ii) Immune Surveillance for 
HIV. The IMB, which confirmed the findings of the Medical Report, was 
held to have been rightly constituted with the required experts. The 
appellant argued that he was misdiagnosed with AIDS, his CD4 cell 
count being 379 cells/mm3 till as late as 05.08.2012 as opposed to 
the benchmark of 200 cells/mm3 set by the World Health 
Organisation. The AFT rejected this argument on the ground that such 
a CD4 cell count was marginal and would not entitle the appellant to 
be declared AIDS free, thus obviating the need for referring him to a 
Review Medical Board.  
CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES 
3. 
Learned counsel for the appellant, Ms. Kawalpreet Kaur, relied on the 1992 
Guidelines to argue that in terms thereof, all personnel with HIV infection 
were to be retained in service, the only restriction on their employment 
being, inter alia, that they would not be posted to high altitude areas. Ms. 
Kaur further contended that there had been an error in diagnosis in the 

6 
 
Medical Report itself, since the appellant never suffered from tuberculosis 
which was taken as a defining illness for AIDS. It was urged that the 
appellant was merely suffering from double vision, which cleared up by 
15th November, 2001. However, the doctors misdiagnosed the appellant’s 
double vision for a tuberculosis related symptom of blindness. 
Consequently, in view of the Notice, the appellant having been found to be 
both HIV+ve and suffering from tuberculosis, was invalided from service. 
Ms. Kaul further argued that as per the Army’s 2003 Guidelines, the 
appellant was fit for service since his CD4 cell count remained above 
200/mm3 till as late as 2012. This defining indicator for AIDS was argued 
to have been erroneously disregarded by both, the IMB and the AFT. In 
support of the same, it was further argued that the appellant was 
asymptomatic till date, without undergoing any anti-retro viral therapy as 
would have been prescribed for a person suffering from AIDS; thus, 
establishing without a doubt, that the appellant never developed AIDS to 
begin with. Ms. Kaur concluded by arguing that the appellant’s case was 
one of wrongful discharge, based on a wrong diagnosis.  
4. 
Per contra, Mr. Balasubramanian, learned senior counsel for the 
respondents contended that the appellant had never been discharged 
solely on the basis of his HIV+ve status, the same being evident from his 
uninterrupted service from 1999 till April 2001. The doctors at the time, 
on the basis of their best professional judgment and giving due regard to 
the medical knowledge prevalent in 2001, diagnosed the appellant with 
neuro-tuberculosis, which led to a change in status of the appellant from 
HIV+ve to “AIDS related complex”. It was further argued that the appellant 

7 
 
responded well to anti-tuberculosis treatment, thus confirming the 
diagnosis of the time. It was further contended that his survival ought to 
be attributed to be a natural variation in the course of the disease rather 
than a misdiagnosis on the part of the medical professionals. With respect 
to the appellant’s allegation that his double vision was mistaken for 
blindness, Mr. Balasubramanian further argued that the appellant had 
placed no documents on record to prove such a claim, and that the 
tuberculosis diagnosis was made only after detailed investigations. It was 
also argued that AIDS would expectedly lead to a deterioration in the 
health of the appellant, which is why he was discharged under the P5 
category, having been found grossly unfit for medical service. 
ANALYSIS 
5. 
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the impugned 
judgment as well as the other materials on record. 
6. 
The AFT, in the impugned judgment, has referred to extensive medical 
literature citing the hazards of HIV and how it can lead to a deterioration 
in the physical condition of those who get detected as HIV+ve. However, 
while the medical literature contemplates myriad infirmities which 
accompany such a disease and consequently render an individual unfit for 
military service, the AFT failed to observe that the appellant in the present 
case was not diagnosed with any such symptoms. The appellant was 
treated by the Command Hospital at Pune in 2001, and by the respondents’ 
admission, successfully responded to the treatment administered. Nothing 

8 
 
has been brought on record to indicate that the appellant was thereafter 
unfit to continue in service as a Clerk.  
7. 
We have no doubt in our mind that this is a case of wrong diagnosis and 
false alarm with imperilling consequences for the appellant. The 
respondents’ contention that doctors in 2001 have used their best 
professional judgment to opine that the appellant was HIV+ve, in our 
opinion, should be rejected, in the absence of any medical literature to 
show that the test results as per then prevailing medical standards justify 
the diagnosis that the appellant was suffering from AIDS defining illness. 
On the other hand, there are lapses galore on the part of the respondents. 
They were, in spite of being aware of the adverse and pernicious impact 
on the appellant, grossly careless and negligent. 
8. 
The appellant was diagnosed with neuro tuberculosis, which diagnosis was 
without examination by a neurologist whose opinion, according to us, 
would seem to be elementary. The AFT’s opinion that the need of the 
medical specialist was fulfilled by placing an oncologist on Board is 
something with which we cannot agree. The appellant while serving in the 
army was being prematurely discharged; thus extreme caution and care 
in ensuring correct diagnoses was required. The respondents have 
deliberately tried to cover up the wrong diagnosis in spite of the 2003 
Guidelines and the test reports of the appellant. The respondents had the 
opportunity from 2007 onwards to rectify and correct themselves after the 
order of the single Judge of the High Court dated 20th April, 2006. The 
Medical Board, which was  constituted  upon the appellant availing the 
statutory remedy, arbitrarily, wrongly and in our opinion deliberately vide 

9 
 
order dated 20th October, 2009 rejected the appellant’s prayer on flimsy 
and wrong grounds by applying the 1992 Guidelines. Even disability 
pension was denied by categorising the appellant as suffering from AIDS, 
a self-inflicted condition.  
9. 
Significantly, the appellant had submitted between the period of 2007 and 
2012, as many as four diagnostic reports, showing that his CD4 cell count 
was above 300 cells/mm3, as opposed to the respondents’ 2003 Guidelines 
defining an AIDS illness to be one where the CD4 cell count is below 200 
cells/mm3.  
10. 
The apathetic attitude of the respondents to the appellant’s plight is 
evident in the repeated submission that has been made before all fora, 
i.e., the appellant’s case had been re-examined several times and thus did 
not merit another look. It is borne out from the record that other than the 
Medical Report, which the appellant alleges was made by a doctor who did 
not treat him, and the review of such report by the IMB, his case was never 
again considered on its merits. The dismissal of the appellant’s application 
by the DGAFMS vide order dated 20th October, 2009 can only be called 
perfunctory at best, since it did not take into account any of the material 
subsequently produced by the appellant.   
11. 
The respondents’ submissions, as elaborate as they may be, in defence of 
the AIDS diagnosis which was used to discharge the appellant from 
service, are rendered unworthy of acceptance on the face of his existence 
today, as an asymptomatic HIV+ve individual without the intervention of 
any anti-retroviral therapy.  

10 
 
12. 
The severance of the employer – employee relationship can never be said 
to be an easy choice, for it not only results in the employee losing his 
livelihood, but also affects those who depend on him for their survival. And 
if the employer happens to be the Indian Army, the loss is even greater, 
since it has the effect of suddenly displacing a soldier from the regimented 
lifestyle of the military. The appellant, who was trained to live a disciplined 
life since the tender age of 19, was unnecessarily and without cogent 
reason thrust into civilian life with little warning or preparation. The 
psychological trauma that such displacement can bring about needs no 
elaboration. However, the cruel passage of time has unfortunately 
rendered the appellant’s original hopes of reinstatement an unrealised 
dream.  
13. 
The appellant, as an alternative relief, has consistently prayed for disability 
pension but was denied the same on the ground that the disease is self-
inflicted.  
14. 
At this juncture, we consider it apposite to refer to certain provisions of 
the Notice published by the Army: 
“4. Pulmonary Tuberculosis and HIV infection will not be 
assessed separately for attributability / aggravation. HIV 
aggravation is a 'STD' and hence AIDS is self-inflicted, neither 
attributable nor aggravated. 
 
5. The policy on awarding longevity and percentage of 
disability for HIV+ve service personnel brought before 
release medical Board is as follows :-  
‘As per existing instructions, JCOs/ORs or their equivalent 
in the Navy/Air Force placed in permanent low Medical 
category are permitted to continue in service only in case 
the Unit COs render a certificate to the effect that sheltered 
appointment shall be provided. Otherwise such individuals 
are brought before Release Medical Board for releasing 

11 
 
from service. It is unlikely that HIV positive cases in perm 
low 
Medical 
Category 
would 
be 
given 
sheltered 
appointment and recommended for retention in service by 
unit cos'. 
 
6. Following procedure will be followed in HIV+ve service 
personnel brought before Release Medical Board. 
a) Longevity: By the time HIV+ve case is brought before 
Release Medical Board, it is likely that he had acquired the 
infection about 1-2 years earlier. Therefore, it is likely that he 
would develop AIDS within next 6-8 years. After development 
of AIDS the average life span is only 1-2 years. Therefore 
loading of age by 2 years at the time of Release Medical Board 
is considered appropriate. 
b) Percentage of disability: In fact viral multiplication during 
this period is average and the immune system being 
systematically destroyed. Apart from infection, HIV+ve cases 
will suffer emotionally, psychologically and socially. Taking all 
these 
factors 
in 
consideration, 
40% 
disability 
for 
asymptomatic cases and upto 100% for symptomatic cases 
will be awarded.” 
 
15. 
A perusal of the Notice reveals that in terms of Para 6A, a person who has 
been diagnosed as HIV+ve was expected to develop AIDS within 6-8 years, 
and thereafter, have a limited lifespan of only 1-2 years. We cannot help 
but record reservation as the policy reflects the systemic discriminatory 
practice and predisposition treating HIV as aggravation of STD and AIDS 
is self-inflicted. In arguendo, even going by the respondents' own policy, 
the appellant could not be said to be suffering from AIDS since, in flagrant 
defiance of the policy assessment, the appellant is reportedly still alive and 
suffering from no serious ailment. 
16. 
A further examination of the respondents’ policy reveals that though AIDS 
was always deemed to be a self-inflicted disease, there was still a provision 
for conferring disability status to those afflicted with the same. Yet, time 
and again, we find the respondents here have mechanically denied the 

12 
 
appellant’s request for disability status in a most arbitrary and 
unreasonable manner. It is pertinent to note that in yet another instance 
of the deep-rooted bias against individuals diagnosed as HIV+ve, the 
Notice allows for sheltered appointments to those diagnosed with such a 
condition, while in the same breath stating that the provision of such 
sheltered appointments is an unlikely possibility. 
17. 
We may note here that in CPL Ashish Kumar Chauhan v. Commanding 
Officer3, the concerned member of the Air Force was diagnosed as HIV+ve 
because of a blood transfusion that did not proceed along laid down 
protocol and went awfully wrong for which this Court had to award 
appropriate quantum of compensation. Reference is made to the said 
decision at this stage only to highlight that AIDS is not always a self-
inflicted disease and there appears to have been no worthy attempt on the 
part of the respondents to ascertain the root cause of the appellant’s 
physical distress.   
18. 
The Constitution, through its Preamble, guarantees to all its people 
‘Justice’, in the deliverance of which, the Courts of the land have developed 
a nuanced compensatory jurisprudence through a catena of judgments, 
for a wide compass of situations.   
19. 
This Court, towards the end of the last century held in D.K. Basu v. State 
of West Bengal4 that: 
“54. Thus, to sum up, it is now a well-accepted proposition in 
most of the jurisdictions, that monetary or pecuniary 
compensation is an appropriate and indeed an effective and 
sometimes perhaps the only suitable remedy for redressal of 
the established infringement of the fundamental right to life 
 
3 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1220 
4 (1997) 1 SCC 416 

13 
 
of a citizen by the public servants and the State is vicariously 
liable for their acts.” 
 
20. 
In P.S.R. Sadhanantham v. Arunachalam5, this 
Court while 
emphasising its power to do full and complete justice, ruminated:  
“6. The jural reach and plural range of that judicial process to 
remove injustice in a given society is a sure index of the 
versatile genius of law-inaction as a delivery system of social 
justice. By this standard, our constitutional order vests in the 
summit Court of jurisdiction to do justice, at once 
omnipresent and omnipotent but controlled and guided by 
that refined yet flexible censor called judicial discretion. This 
nidus of power and process, which master-minds the broad 
observance throughout the Republic of justice according to 
law, is Article 136.” 
 
21. 
While discussing award of ‘just compensation’ in a personal injury case, 
this Court in K. Suresh v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd.6 had the 
occasion to observe that: 
“10. It is noteworthy to state that an adjudicating authority, 
while determining the quantum of compensation, has to keep 
in view the sufferings of the injured person which would 
include his inability to lead a full life, his incapacity to enjoy 
the normal amenities which he would have enjoyed but for 
the injuries and his ability to earn as much as he used to earn 
or could have earned. Hence, while computing compensation 
the approach of the Tribunal or a court has to be broad based. 
Needless to say, it would involve some guesswork as there 
cannot be any mathematical exactitude or a precise formula 
to determine the quantum of compensation. In determination 
of 
compensation 
the 
fundamental 
criterion 
of 
“just 
compensation” should be inhered.” 
 
22. 
Not too long ago, in CPL Ashish Kumar Chauhan (supra), this Court 
while awarding compensation to a person discharged from the Indian Air 
Force, ruled:  
“103. ***People sign up to join the armed forces with 
considerable enthusiasm and a sense of patriotic duty. This 
entails a conscious decision to put their lives on the line and 
be prepared for the ultimate sacrifice of their lives. A 
 
5 (1980) 3 SCC 141 
6 (2012) 12 SCC 274 

14 
 
corresponding duty is cast upon all state functionaries, 
including echelons of power within the armed forces to 
ensure that the highest standards of safety (physical/mental 
wellbeing, medical fitness as well as wellness) are 
maintained. This is absolutely the minimum required of the 
military/air force employer for not only assuring the morale of 
the forces but also showing the sense of how such personnel 
matter and their lives count, which reinforces their 
commitment and confidence. Any flagging from these 
standards - as the multiple instances in the present case have 
established, only entails a loss of confidence in the personnel, 
undermines their morale and injects a sense of bitterness and 
despair not only to the individual concerned but to the entire 
force, leaving a sense of injustice. When a young person, 
from either sex (as is now a days the case) enrols or joins 
any armed forces, at all times, their expectation is to be 
treated with dignity and honour. The present case has 
demonstrated again and again how dignity, honour and 
compassion towards the appellant were completely lacking in 
behaviour by the respondent employer. Repeatedly the record 
displays a sense of disdain, and discrimination, even a hint of 
stigma, attached to the appellant, in the attitude of the 
respondent employer. Although this court has attempted to 
give tangible relief, at the end of the day it realizes that no 
amount of compensation in monetary terms can undo the 
harm caused by such behaviour which has shaken the 
foundation of the appellant's dignity, robbed him of honour 
and rendered him not only desperate even cynical.” 
 
23. It has been submitted by the counsel for the appellant that he is presently 
aged 50 years and is into a small business of his own. Having considered 
the plight of the appellant, which his employer failed to address, as well as 
the social stigma attached to persons who are diagnosed as HIV+ve 
patients, coupled with the position that the appellant’s reinstatement in 
service is not an available option now and also that direction for grant of 
pension, which we propose to make, cannot be considered an equitable 
restitution of what the appellant has suffered by reason of psychological, 
financial and physical trauma, we deem it fit to additionally award him 
monetary compensation. 

15 
 
24. Having been discharged from the services of the Indian Army at the prime 
age of 27, the appellant was robbed of the opportunity of further serving 
the nation for many more years on account of a most unfortunate turn of 
events, the responsibility for which can lie on no shoulders other than the 
respondents 2 to 4. It is also borne from the record that the appellant 
neither received his leave encashment, nor received reimbursement for the 
expenses incurred by him in medical tests.  
25. We would be remiss in not recognising the particular circumstances of the 
appellant’s discharge from service which compounded the agony of the 
process, i.e., a wrongful diagnosis of AIDS and subsequent termination of 
services on the same ground. It is no secret that despite the enactment of 
the Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency 
Syndrome (Prevention and Control) Act, 2017, and the slew of awareness 
measures taken by Governments in recent times, the stigma and 
discrimination which lamentably accompanies an HIV+ve diagnosis is still 
an illness that afflicts the minds of society today. The discriminatory 
sentiment of deeming persons who are HIV+ve to be unfit for employment, 
is starkly evident from the way in which the appellant has been responded 
to and treated by the various authorities. By misdiagnosing the appellant 
with AIDS, the respondents indubitably subjected the appellant to further 
misery in not only combating social stigma against a disease which the 
appellant never suffered from but also from the dreadful thought of an 
imminent death resulting from an incurable disease. 
26. In view of the extreme mental agony thus undergone by the appellant, in 
not only facing the apathetic attitude of the respondents 2 to 4 but in facing 

16 
 
the concomitant social stigma and the looming large death scare that 
accompanied such a discharge from the armed forces, we deem it fit to 
award a lumpsum compensation of Rs.50,00,000/- (Rupees fifty lakh only) 
towards compensation on account of wrongful termination of services, leave 
encashment dues, non-reimbursement of medical expenses and the social 
stigma faced, to be paid  by the respondents 2 – 4 to the appellant within 
eight weeks from the date of this judgment without fail. In addition to the 
above, the appellant shall be entitled to pension in accordance with law as 
if he had continued in service as Havaldar and on completion of the required 
years of service retired as such, without being invalided. We make it clear 
that since the appellant had not continued in service beyond 26th December, 
2001 and there was no occasion to assess his performance for securing a 
promotion, he shall not be entitled to raise any plea in relation thereto. 
However, in computing the quantum of pension payable to the appellant, 
the respondents shall take into account allowances / increments that the 
appellant would have been entitled to, had he continued in service till the 
date of his retirement as Havaldar.    
27. For the reasons aforesaid, the impugned judgment is set aside and the civil 
appeal stands allowed.  
28. We are conscious that whatever amount by way of compensation has been 
directed to be paid to the appellant, by the respondents 2 to 4, can in no 
manner compensate for the ordeal he had to face over the years; there 
could never be an appropriate substitute for such adversity but such 
financial compensation might act as a balm to soothe the mind and steady 
the future. Now that we have been informed that the appellant is active and 

17 
 
involved in a business of his own, our prayers are with him to lead a long 
and healthy life.  
……………………………………J   
(SANJIV KHANNA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           
……………………………………J   
(DIPANKAR DATTA) 
New Delhi; 
20th March, 2024.