2024 INSC 235
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).           OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP (C) No(s). 26179-26180 of 2023) 
 
 
VANSH S/O PRAKASH DOLAS 
 
 
.…APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION &  
THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH &  
FAMILY WELFARE & ORS.                              ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
 
1. 
Leave granted.  
2. 
The appellant has approached this Court for assailing orders 
dated 5th September, 2023 and 26th October, 2023 passed by the 
Division Bench of the Bombay High Court Bench at Nagpur in Writ 
Petition No. 5141 of 2023 and Misc. Civil Application (Review) No. 
980 of 2023 in Writ Petition No. 5141 of 2023, respectively. 
3. 
The appellant is a domicile of the State of Maharashtra and 
his father is employed in the Border Security Force (BSF) as a Head 
Constable (General Duty) [HC(GD)]. Owing to the deployment of his 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.03.20
17:32:38 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
father outside the State of Maharashtra, the appellant was 
compelled to complete his Secondary School Certificate (Standard 
X)(SSC) and Higher School Certificate (Standard XII)(HSC) 
education from a school outside the State of Maharashtra.   
4. 
The appellant appeared in NEET-UG, 2023 craving admission 
in the undergraduate MBBS course against the State quota and 
upon being found meritorious, he was issued a provisional 
selection letter (CAP1) by the State Common Entrance Cell, 
Maharashtra on 4th August, 2023 and was allotted a seat in 
respondent No.6-College. The appellant completed the requisite 
formalities and paid an amount of Rs.13,500/-by way of admission 
fees. It may be noted that the appellant had applied for admission 
under the Other Backward Class/Non-Creamy Layer (OBC/NCL) 
category as being domicile of the State of Maharashtra. 
5. 
However, without issuing notice and without providing any 
opportunity of being heard to the appellant, respondent No.6-
College issued a letter/communication dated 9th August, 2023 
cancelling the admission of the appellant.  
6. 
The letter/communication cancelling the admission was 
challenged by the appellant by filing Writ Petition No. 5141 of 2023 
before the Bombay High Court, Nagpur Bench raising a pertinent 

3 
 
ground that the appellant was entitled to the exception as provided 
under clause 4.8 of the NEET UG-2023 Information Brochure 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘Information Brochure’) which pertains 
to the ‘Children of employees of Government of India or its 
Undertaking’ and that cancellation of his admission was totally 
illegal and arbitrary. 
7. 
The High Court, after considering the entirety of facts and 
circumstances dismissed the Writ Petition No. 5141 of 2023 vide 
order dated 5th September, 2023 holding that the appellant did not 
satisfy the requirements of clauses 4.8 and 9.4.4 of the 
Information Brochure.  It was held that since the appellant did not 
select specified reservation i.e., in the category of Children of 
Defence personnel(DEF), while submitting the online application 
form, he was precluded from raising such a claim at a belated 
stage, as being impermissible in view of the rider contained in 
clause 9.4.4 of the Information Brochure. 
8. 
Being aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order dated 5th 
September, 2023, the appellant filed Misc. Civil Application 
(Review) No. 980 of 2023 which too was rejected vide order dated 
26th October, 2023.  These two orders are assailed in the present 
appeals. 

4 
 
9. 
Mr. Kshitij Kothale, learned counsel representing the 
appellant urged that the High Court misconstrued the appellant’s 
claim to be one under Children of Defence personnel(DEF) category 
because the appellant had sought admission under the OBC/NCL 
category as being domicile of the State of Maharashtra. 
10. He contended that the appellant and his parents are domicile 
of the State of Maharashtra.  The appellant fulfils the requisite 
criteria for being admitted in the State quota and stood in merit 
and was allotted a seat in the OBC/NCL category as a domicile of 
the State of Maharashtra and, thus, cancellation of appellant’s 
admission by the order dated 9th August 2023 is absolutely unjust 
and arbitrary in addition to being in gross violation of principles of 
natural justice.  
11. Learned counsel urged that two Division Benches of the 
Bombay High Court, one at Nagpur Bench in Archana Sudhakar 
Mandulkar v. Dean, Govt. Medical College, Nagpur and 
others1 and the other at Principal Seat at Bombay in Rajiv 
Purshottam Wadhwa v. State of Maharashtra(through it’s 
Dept of Medical Education and Drugs & Others2 examined a 
 
1 1986 SCC OnLine Bom 262 
2 2000 SCC Online Bom 359 

5 
 
similar set of rules/guidelines as prevailing in the present case and 
while reading down the rules, provided relief to the candidates 
therein who were similarly circumstanced as the appellant.  He 
placed reliance on the following excerpts(infra) from the judgment 
in the case of Archana Sudhakar Mandulkar(supra) and 
contended that the impugned orders are bad in the eyes of law and 
the appellant herein deserves the relief sought for by directing the 
respondents to create an additional seat and thereby protecting 
admission of the appellant in the ongoing session of MBBS (UG) 
course:- 
“3. Shri Kherdekar, the learned counsel for the petitioner, 
contended that having regard to the object of the Rules, its 
background, the language used in Clause B(5) and the ratio of 
various Supreme Court decisions on the validity of various 
reservations on region/residence basis, the requirement of 
passing Indian School Certificate Examination “from an 
institution located in Maharashtra State” is not intended to be 
applied to the candidates covered by Rule B(3). It seems to us 
that the contention is well-founded. Course and the 
examination of the Indian School Certificate Examination is 
common all over India. Serviceman has no control on his 
posting which can be anywhere. Rule of denial of admission to 
a meritorious son/daughter of a serviceman who is domicile of 
Maharashtra only because of a fortuitous circumstance of his 
being not posted at the time of his ward studying in 12th 
Standard within the State of Maharashtra cannot have any 
nexus to the object of the Rule. Mere chance cannot be the valid 
disqualifying factor. Such a Rule will not only be arbitrary and 
unreasonable but will permit discrimination between two 
classes of servicemen of Maharashtra domicile lactually posted 
at material time (i) in Maharashtra and (ii) outside 
Maharashtra. This classification will be clearly invidious having 
no nexus whatsoever to the object sought to be achieved. 
Supreme Court has repeatedly held against denial of 
admissions only on the basis of residence and/or region. 
Canons of interpretation mandates that interpretation which 

6 
 
leads to unconstitutionality has to be avoided, and harmonious 
construction to be preferred, if possible. Thus the Rule will have 
to be interpreted keeping the above principles in view. The Rule 
is not clearly worded and does present some difficulty in 
construing it. It is not as if that Clause C applies universally 
and without exception to all admissions under the Rule. Take 
for example cases covered by Rule B(4)(iii) — reservation for son 
or daughter of Non-resident Indians of Maharashtra origin. 
Even 20 per cent seats out of category B(3) are reserved for 
Defence Personnel transferred to the Maharashtra Region. It is 
in this light and background that Rule B(5) has to be read. The 
terminology “after excluding validly reserved seats” used in Rule 
B(5) is significant. It means that all parts of Clause C do not 
universally apply to validly reserved seats under Clause B. This 
is not to suggest that no part of Clause C applies to any varieties 
of reservations mentioned in Clause B. All will depend upon a 
specie of reservation and its intendment. Construed in that 
light it seems to us that the last part of Rule C(3)(ii) reading as 
“from an institution located in Maharashtra State” is not 
intended to be applied to candidate covered by Clause B(3).” 
 
12. Per contra, learned counsel representing the respondents 
controverted the submissions advanced by the appellant’s counsel.  
He submitted that the appellant could not have been considered 
for admission under OBC/NCL category under the State quota 
because he is not covered under clauses 4.5, 4.6 & 4.8 of the 
Information Brochure.  The appellant did not stake a claim for 
admission in defence personnel quota and hence, he could not 
have been given a seat under the said category by virtue of the 
stipulations contained in clause 9.4.4 of the guidelines.  On these 
grounds, he sought dismissal of the appeals. 

7 
 
13. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the 
impugned orders. 
14. There is no dispute that the appellant and his parents are 
domicile of the State of Maharashtra.  The appellant’s father is 
serving in the Border Security Force(BSF). Owing to deployment of 
his father outside the State of Maharashtra, the appellant passed 
his SSC and HSC exams from an institution outside the State of 
Maharashtra. 
15. Clause 4.8 of the Information Brochure provides an 
exception/relaxation for claiming seat in the Maharashtra State 
quota to Children of employees of Government of India or its 
Undertaking who have passed SSC and/or HSC or equivalent 
examination from the recognized institutions situated outside the 
State of Maharashtra.  However, this clause imposes a rider that 
such employee of Government of India or its Undertaking being the 
parent of the candidate seeking admission in the course under the 
State quota “must have been transferred from outside the 
State of Maharashtra at a place of work, located in the State 
of Maharashtra and also must have reported for duty and 
must be working as on the last date of document verification 

8 
 
at a place located in the State of Maharashtra”. The 
appellant’s father was deployed outside the State of Maharashtra 
in connection with service of the nation and thus, proviso to Clause 
4.8 was relied upon by the respondents while cancelling the 
admission granted to the appellant in CAP1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
16. Undisputably, but for the above rider in the guidelines, the 
appellant is qualified to seek admission in the State Domicile 
(OBC/NCL) category by virtue of clause 4.8 of the Information 
Brochure and also stands in merit.  However, the proviso creates 
a situation which would be impossible for the appellant to 
surmount.  The appellant who is a domicile of the State of 
Maharashtra, cannot control the place of deployment of his father 
who is serving in the paramilitary force i.e., Border Security 
Force(BSF).  Needless to state that the place of deployment cannot 
be the choice of the employee serving in the armed forces or a 
paramilitary force. Being the child of a soldier serving on the 
country’s frontiers, the discriminatory and arbitrary treatment 
meted out to the appellant under the guidelines cannot be 
countenanced.  The High Court, while denying relief to the 
appellant held that he had not selected any specified reservation 

9 
 
under the head of Children of Defence personnel(DEF) as provided 
in Clause 9.4.4 of the Information Brochure.  However, the fact 
remains that the appellant had submitted his OBC/NCL 
credentials/certificates along with the application form and, his 
claim for admission was clearly against the Maharashtra State 
quota as being a domicile of the State of Maharashtra whose father 
was deployed as a Head Constable(General Duty)[HC(GD)] in BSF.  
17. The appellant’s application was considered favourably and 
vide communication dated 4th August, 2023, he was granted 
admission in respondent No.6-College. He also paid the admission 
fees etc. However, without issuing any notice and without 
providing opportunity of being heard to the appellant, respondent 
No.6-College issued the letter/communication dated 9th August, 
2023 cancelling his admission in the course. The said 
letter/communication was promptly challenged by the appellant 
by filing the captioned writ petition before the Nagpur Bench of the 
Bombay High Court on the very next day i.e. 10th August, 2023 
and he was also provided interim protection by the Court. 
     18.  Before the High Court, the appellant had placed reliance on 
the Division Bench judgment in the case of Archana Sudhakar 
Mandulkar(supra). The relevant guidelines/rules of admission as 

10 
 
extracted 
in 
the 
judgment 
of 
Archana 
Sudhakar 
Mandulkar(supra) are quoted hereinbelow for the sake of ready 
reference: - 
“Relevant Clauses of Rules for admission (M.B.B.S.) 1986–
87: 
Clause B deals with “Reservations”.  
Sub clause (1) of Clause B refers to Backward Class etc., sub-
clause (2) to Central Government, sub-clause (3) to sons and 
daughters of servicemen and ex-servicemen, sub-clause (4) to 
miscellaneous other reservations including son/daughter of 
Nonresident Indians of Maharashtra origin and sub-clause (5) 
to Regional Reservation.  
Clause B(3) reads thus:—  
“(3) Reservation for sons and daughters of servicemen and 
ex-servicemen— 5 percent seats of the intake capacity of the 
college limited to five shall be reserved for the children of 
servicemen as well as ex-servicemen who are domiciles of 
Maharashtra. The seats so reserved are inclusive of merit;  
Clause B(5) reads thus:-  
“(5) Regional Reservation— Subject to the exception 
mentioned in Rule C(6)(iv) below, 70 percent of open seats, after 
excluding validly reserved seats, available in Government 
Medical Colleges situated within the jurisdiction of any 
University in Maharashtra, shall be reserved for the candidates 
who are eligible as per Rule C below and have passed the 
requisite qualifying examination from the School/College 
situated within the jurisdiction of the same University.” 
19. The relevant extract from guidelines/rules of admission 
prevailing in NEET-UG, 2023 germane to the controversy at hand 
is quoted hereinbelow for sake of ready reference: - 
"4.8 Exception for SSC (10th) and HSC (12th) or 
equivalent examinations: 
Children of employees of Government of India or 
its Undertakings:- 

11 
 
4.8.1 The children of the employees of Government of 
India or its Undertaking shall be eligible for admission 
even though they might have passed the S.S.C. (Std.X) 
and/or H.S.C. (Std. XII) or equivalent exam from the 
recognized Institutions situated outside the State of 
Maharashtra, provided that such an employee of 
Government of India or its Undertaking must have 
been transferred from outside State of Maharashtra at 
a place of work, located in the State of Maharashtra 
and also must have reported for duty and must be 
working as on the last date of Document verification 
at a place located in Maharashtra. 
4.8.2….” 
20. On going through the extracted portion of the Division Bench 
judgment in the case of Archana Sudhakar Mandulkar(supra), 
we find that in an almost identical situation which prevails in the 
case at hand, the Division Bench read down the rule/guideline 
which provided that the ward of servicemen should have passed 
his/her 12th standard from an institution located in the State of 
Maharashtra. The Division Bench held that the servicemen or his 
ward desiring admission under the State quota could not have 
had any control over his posting which can be anywhere.  The 
Division Bench held that the rule of denial of admission to a 
meritorious son/daughter of a serviceman who is domicile of 
Maharashtra only because of a fortuitous circumstance of his 
being not posted at the time of his ward studying in 12th standard 
within the State of Maharashtra cannot have any nexus to the 

12 
 
object of the rule.  Mere chance cannot be a valid disqualifying 
factor.  Such rule will not only be arbitrary and unreasonable but 
will permit discrimination between two classes of servicemen of 
Maharashtra domicile actually posted at the material time (i) in 
Maharashtra and (ii) outside Maharashtra.  This classification will 
be clearly invidious having no nexus whatsoever to the object 
sought to be achieved. 
21. In the extant admission process, a slight modification has 
been made in the guidelines inasmuch as, now as per clause 4.8.1 
of Information Brochure, the children of employees of the 
Government of India or its Undertaking have been made eligible 
for admission even though they might have passed SSC and/or 
HSC or equivalent exam from a recognised institution situated 
outside the State of Maharashtra.  However, while making such 
relaxation, a condition has been imposed that the employee of 
Government of India or its Undertaking being the parent of the 
candidate should have been transferred back to the State of 
Maharashtra and also have reported for duty and must be 
working as on the last date of the document verification at a place 
located in Maharashtra.  We feel that this condition as imposed 
by the guidelines, creates a stipulation which would be impossible 

13 
 
for the candidate or his parent to fulfill.  It may be reiterated that 
the place of posting is not within the control of the employee or 
the candidate.  Thus, the distinction drawn by the clause between 
two categories of employees in the Government of India services 
(i) those posted in Maharashtra and (ii) those posted outside 
Maharashtra has no nexus with the intent and purpose of the 
guidelines/rules and hence the same deserves to be read down to 
such extent.  Thus, this Court has no hesitation in providing that 
the candidate(s) who are born in Maharashtra and whose parents 
are also domicile of the State of Maharashtra and are employees 
of the Government of India or its Undertaking, such candidate(s) 
would be entitled to a seat under the Maharashtra State quota 
irrespective of the place of posting of the parent(s) because the 
place of deployment would not be under the control of the 
candidate or his parents.   
22. The Division Bench of Bombay High Court at Nagpur while 
rejecting the writ petition filed by the appellant, fell into manifest 
error in not considering case of the appellant in the correct 
perspective.  For that reason, the impugned judgment is 
unsustainable in facts as well as in law.  A fortiori, the 
letter/communication dated 9th August, 2023 issued by 

14 
 
respondent No. 6 cancelling the admission granted to the 
appellant against the Maharashtra State quota in CAP1 without 
giving opportunity to show cause is also illegal and arbitrary and 
deserves to be quashed and set aside. 
23. However, there is a practical hurdle which comes in the way 
of the appellant for being provided admission in the MBBS course 
in the current session which has progressed significantly from 
August, 2023.  More than six months have passed by since the 
session started.  As per the reply of the respondents, no seat is 
lying vacant in any college in Maharashtra State quota as on date. 
24. Undisputably, the appellant has been illegally deprived from 
his rightful admission in the first year of the MBBS course owing 
to the insensitive, unjust, illegal and arbitrary approach of the 
respondents and so also on account of the delay occasioned in the 
judicial process.  
25. This Court in the case of Manoj Kumar v. Union of India 
and Others3 considered the concept of restitutive relief.  Hon’ble 
P.S. Narasimha, J. speaking for the Bench, observed that 
concomitant duty of the Constitutional Court is to take reasonable 
measures to restitute the injured which is the overarching 
 
3 2024 SCC OnLine SC 163 

15 
 
Constitutional purpose.  The relevant paras from the aforesaid 
judgment are extracted below:-   
“19.   We are of the opinion that while the primary duty 
of constitutional courts remains the control of power, 
including setting aside of administrative actions that may 
be illegal or arbitrary, it must be acknowledged that such 
measures may not singularly address repercussions of 
abuse of power. It is equally incumbent upon the courts, 
as a secondary measure, to address the injurious 
consequences arising from arbitrary and illegal actions. 
This concomitant duty to take reasonable measures to 
restitute the injured is our overarching constitutional 
purpose. This is how we have read our constitutional text, 
and this is how we have built our precedents on the basis 
of our preambular objective to secure justice.  
 
20. 
In public law proceedings, when it is realised that 
the prayer in the writ petition is unattainable due to 
passage of time, constitutional courts may not dismiss the 
writ proceedings on the ground of their perceived futility. 
In the life of litigation, passage of time can stand both as 
an ally and adversary. Our duty is to transcend the 
constraints of time and perform the primary duty of a 
constitutional court to control and regulate the exercise of 
power or arbitrary action. By taking the first step, the 
primary purpose and object of public law proceedings will 
be subserved. 
21. 
The second step relates to restitution. This operates 
in a different dimension. Identification and application of 
appropriate remedial measures poses a significant 
challenge to constitutional courts, largely attributable to 
the dual variables of time and limited resources. 
22. 
The temporal gap between the impugned illegal or 
arbitrary action and their subsequent adjudication by the 
courts introduces complexities in the provision of 
restitution. As time elapses, the status of persons, 
possession, and promises undergoes transformation, 
directly influencing the nature of relief that may be 
formulated and granted. 
23. 
The inherent difficulty in bridging the time gap 
between the illegal impugned action and restitution is 
certainly not rooted in deficiencies within the law or legal 
jurisprudence but rather in systemic issues inherent in 
the adversarial judicial process. The protracted timeline 

16 
 
spanning from the filing of a writ petition, service of notice, 
filing of counter affidavits, final hearing, and then the 
eventual delivery of judgment, coupled with subsequent 
appellate procedures, exacerbates delays. Take for 
example this very case, the writ petition was filed against 
the action of the respondent denying appointment on 
22.05.2017. The writ petition came to be decided by the 
Single Judge on 24.01.2018, the Division Bench on 
16.10.2018, and then the case was carried to this Court 
in the year 2019 and we are deciding it in 2024. The 
delay in this case is not unusual, we see several such cases 
when our final hearing board moves. Appeals of more than 
two decades are awaiting consideration. It is distressing 
but certainly not beyond us. We must and we will find a 
solution to this problem.” 
   
26. Seen in the light of the above judgment, it is now to be 
considered as to the measures of restitutive relief which can be 
provided to the appellant in the present case.  
27. This Court in the case of S. Krishna Sradha v. State of 
Andhra Pradesh and Others4 examined the issue of wrongful 
denial of admission in a medical course, and propounded the 
theory of ‘restitutive justice’ by holding as below:- 
“13. In light of the discussion/observations made 
hereinabove, a meritorious candidate/ student who 
has been denied an admission in MBBS course illegally 
or irrationally by the authorities for no fault of his/her 
and who has approached the Court in time and so as to 
see that such a meritorious candidate may not have to 
suffer for no fault of his/her, we answer the reference 
as under:  
13.1. That in a case where candidate/student 
has approached the court at the earliest and 
without any delay and that the question is 
with respect to the admission in medical 
 
4 (2017) 4 SCC 516 

17 
 
course all the efforts shall be made by the 
court 
concerned 
to 
dispose 
of 
the 
proceedings by giving priority and at the 
earliest.  
13.2. Under exceptional circumstances, if the 
court finds that there is no fault attributable 
to the candidate and the candidate has 
pursued his/her legal right expeditiously 
without any delay and there is fault only on 
the part of the authorities and/or there is 
apparent breach of rules and regulations as 
well as related principles in the process of 
grant of admission which would violate the 
right of equality and equal treatment to the 
competing 
candidates 
and 
if 
the 
time 
schedule prescribed – 30th September, is 
over, to do the complete justice, the Court 
under exceptional circumstances and in 
rarest of rare cases direct the admission in 
the same year by directing to increase the 
seats, however, it should not be more than 
one or two seats and such admissions can be 
ordered within reasonable time, i.e., within 
one month from 30th September, i.e., cut off 
date and under no circumstances, the Court 
shall order any Admission in the same year 
beyond 30th October.  However, it is observed 
that such relief can be granted only in 
exceptional circumstances and in the rarest 
of rare cases. In case of such an eventuality, 
the Court may also pass an order cancelling 
the admission given to a candidate who is at 
the bottom of the merit list of the category 
who, if the admission would have been given 
to a more meritorious candidate who has 
been denied admission illegally, would not 
have got the admission, if the Court deems it 
fit and proper, however, after giving an 
opportunity of hearing to a student whose 
admission is sought to be cancelled.  
13.3. In case the Court is of the opinion that 
no relief of admission can be granted to such 
a candidate in the very academic year and 
wherever it finds that the action of the 
authorities has been arbitrary and in breach 
of the rules and regulations or the prospectus 
affecting the rights of the students and that 

18 
 
a candidate is found to be meritorious and 
such candidate/student has approached the 
court at the earliest and without any delay, 
the court can mould the relief and direct the 
admission to be granted to such a candidate 
in the next academic year by issuing 
appropriate 
directions 
by 
directing 
to 
increase in the number of seats as may be 
considered appropriate in the case and in 
case of such an eventuality and if it is found 
that the management was at fault and 
wrongly 
denied 
the 
admission 
to 
the 
meritorious candidate, in that case, the Court 
may direct to reduce the number of seats in 
the management quota of that year, meaning 
thereby the student/students who was/were 
denied 
admission 
illegally 
to 
be 
accommodated in the next academic year out 
of the seats allotted in the management 
quota.  
13.4. Grant of the compensation could be an 
additional remedy but not a substitute for 
restitutional remedies. Therefore, in an 
appropriate case the Court may award the 
compensation 
to 
such 
a 
meritorious 
candidate who for no fault of his/her has to 
lose one full academic year and who could not 
be granted any relief of admission in the same 
academic year.  
13.5. It is clarified that the aforesaid 
directions pertain to Admission in MBBS 
Course only and we have not dealt with post 
graduate medical course.”  
                                       (emphasis supplied) 
 
28. In the light of the above judgment, it would neither be 
desirable nor justifiable to grant admission to the appellant in the 
on-going session of the MBBS(UG) course.  However, considering 
the fact that the order cancelling the admission of the appellant 

19 
 
herein was issued on 9th August, 2023 and the writ petition came 
to be filed before the High Court promptly i.e. on 10th August, 
2023, without any delay whatsoever, the appellant is entitled to 
restoration of his seat in the first year of MBBS(UG) course in the 
same college in the next session, i.e., NEET UG-2024. 
29. We further direct that until a suitable rectification is made in 
the guidelines/rules, candidate(s) domicile of the State of 
Maharashtra having acquired SSC and/or HSC qualification from 
any recognized institution: - 
(i) Whose parent(s) are domiciles of Maharashtra and employed 
in the Central Government or its Undertaking, defence 
services and/or in paramilitary forces viz. CRPF, BSF, etc. 
and; 
(ii) Such parent(s) are posted at any place in the country as on 
the last date of document verification, 
shall be entitled for a seat in MBBS Course in the 
Maharashtra State quota. 
30. It is further directed that the appellant shall be provided 
admission in the ‘OBC category domicile of State of Maharashtra 
child of person serving the Government of India’ in the first year of 
the MBBS(UG) course commencing from the year 2024 by creating 

20 
 
an additional seat so as to ensure that there is no reduction in the 
quota of seats to the candidates who succeed in the NEET UG-
2024.  
31. The impugned orders are set aside.  The appeals are 
accordingly allowed.   
32. We also direct respondent No.6-College and respondent No.5-
State of Maharashtra to pay compensation to the tune of Rs.1 
lakh(Rs. 50,000/- each) to the appellant for the deprivation of one 
year and harassment on the account of illegal and arbitrary 
cancellation of his admission.    
33. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      ..….………………………J. 
             (B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
      ..………………………….J. 
 
      (RAJESH BINDAL) 
 
 
   
      …..……………………….J. 
                                                    (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
NEW DELHI 
March 20, 2024.