2024 INSC 20
Page 1 of 10 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1348 OF 2011 
 
 
JITENDRA KUMAR MISHRA 
@ JITTU    
 
 
 
 
 
        …APPELLANT 
  
VERSUS 
 
 
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH 
 
…RESPONDENT 
 
WITH 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1347 OF 2011 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
 
1. 
Heard learned counsel for the parties. 
2. 
Four persons namely Manja alias Amit Mishra, Jitendra Kumar 
Mishra @ Jittu, Gledwin alias Banti Isai and Ajay alias Ajayya 
were convicted to life imprisonment under Section 302 r/w 34 
IPC with a fine of Rs.5000/- each, and in default of payment of 
Digitally signed by
RAVI ARORA
Date: 2024.01.05
18:09:13 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 10 
 
fine with a further rigorous imprisonment for six months in 
Sessions Trial Number 378 of 2007 vide judgment and order 
dated 15.09.2008 passed by the 13th Additional Session Judge 
(Fast Track), Jabalpur, M.P. 
3. 
On appeals, i.e., Criminal Appeal No.2031 of 2008 preferred by 
Manja @ Amit Mishra and Jitendra Kumar Mishra @ Jittu 
together and Criminal Appeal No. 2237 of 2008 preferred by 
Gledwin @ Banti Isai and Ajay @ Ajayya together, the conviction 
and sentence awarded by the Session Trial was upheld and both 
the appeals were dismissed by the High Court.  
4. 
It is in connection with the aforesaid Sessions trial and the 
conviction of the appellants under Section 302/34 IPC that the 
present appeals have been preferred one by Manja @ Amit 
Mishra and Jitendra Kumar Mishra @ Jittu and another by 
Gledwin @ Banti Isai and Ajay @ Ajayya. Both the appeals were 
tagged and leave to appeal was granted on 08.07.2011. During 
the pendency of the appeal, one of the appellants, namely, 
Manja @ Amit Mishra in Criminal Appeal No. 1348 of 2011 died. 

Page 3 of 10 
 
Therefore, the said appeal is being pressed only on behalf of the 
appellant- Jitendra Kumar Mishra @ Jittu. 
5. 
The incident is of 08.06.2007 which probably took place around 
08.45 pm in the night, in front of Machchu Hotel which is 
located near Shukla Hotel within the jurisdiction of Police 
Station Ghamapur, Jabalpur. In the said incident, one Pappu 
alias Rajendra Yadav had died. It is alleged that when he along 
with his friends Virendra Verma and Amit Jha was coming out 
of the Machchu Hotel, he was beaten and assaulted by all the 
four accused with knife and other weapons such as sickle and 
kesia.  
6. 
The information of the alleged incident of beating and assaulting 
the deceased Pappu was given by one Virendra Kumar (PW-1) 
at about 09.00 PM to the brother of the deceased, i.e., Rajkumar 
Yadav and his mother Usha Rani Yadav. On receiving the said 
information, both Rajkumar Yadav and his mother rushed to 
the place of occurrence and found the deceased Pappu Yadav 
lying on road in a pool of blood. The mother of the deceased took 
the head of Pappu Yadav in her lap whereupon clothes were tied 

Page 4 of 10 
 
on his wounds by Rajkumar probably to stop bleeding. They 
took the deceased in a rickshaw to the Police Station 
Ghamapur. After Rajkumar Yadav (complainant) lodged the 
report (FIR exhibit P/2 at 09.30 PM), he took the deceased to 
the Victoria Hospital, Jabalpur for treatment where he was 
declared dead.  
7. 
The prosecution is based upon the dying declaration of the 
deceased. The said dying declaration is in oral form. It was made 
by the deceased to his brother Rajkumar Yadav and mother 
Usha Rani Yadav who have reached the place of occurrence on 
being informed that the deceased was being beaten and 
assaulted by the accused persons near Machchu Hotel. The 
dying declaration as revealed by Rajkumar Yadav was made by 
the deceased on the asking of the mother as to what had 
happened? It is in response to the above query that the deceased 
stated that the Banti Isai, Manja, Ajay have assaulted him with 
knife, dagger and kasia respectively whereas Jittu caught both 
his hands. The above dying declaration is in the shape of an 
answer to the question asked by the mother of the deceased as 

Page 5 of 10 
 
to what had happened to him when she saw him lying on the 
road in a pool of blood. 
8. 
The statement of the mother of the deceased PW-5 also contains 
a similar dying declaration of the deceased.  
9. 
In addition to the above dying declaration, reliance has been 
placed upon the testimony of one of the eye witnesses, Rahul 
Yadav (PW-13). The said witness stated that the incident in 
which the deceased Pappu Yadav was killed had taken place 
between 08.30 pm to 09.00 pm on 08.06.2007 near Machchu 
Hotel. He was returning from his friend’s house and when 
reached near Shukla Hotel, he saw the accused persons namely 
Banti, Manja, Jitendra and Ajay beating Pappu Yadav. He tried 
to rescue Pappu Yadav but the accused persons drove him out. 
He then rushed to the House of Pappu Yadav to inform about 
the incident to his family members, but he found no one at the 
house and therefore left for his home.  
10. It has come in evidence that Rahul Yadav (PW-13) is a relative 
of the deceased Pappu Yadav and as such he is not a free and 
independent witness. He is likely to be an interested witness. 

Page 6 of 10 
 
The evidence reveals that he is a person with criminal 
background. He is involved in one of the cases registered under 
Section 324 and 326 IPC. He has been chargesheeted under 
Section 3/5 of the Explosive Substance Act. He has avoided the 
process of the Court and had been absconding for almost 7 
months.   
11. In view of his above background, his testimony has to be 
considered with great circumspection and cannot be relied upon 
blindly without taking into account available corroborative 
evidence on record, if any. The evidence on record (i.e. site map) 
cast a serious doubt as to whether the place of occurrence or 
the Machchu Hotel was visible from the Shukla Hotel where the 
above witness was standing and from where is said to have seen 
the occurrence of the incident.  
12. The above witness was not found at the place of occurrence by 
the brother and mother of the deceased when they reached the 
place of occurrence immediately after the alleged incident had 
taken place or at the time when the deceased was lying on the 
road. They have not mentioned about his presence though he 

Page 7 of 10 
 
ought to have been there as he had tried to save the deceased. 
Even the deceased has not mentioned in his alleged dying 
declaration or the statement given to his brother and mother 
that someone tried to save him or that the above witness Rahul 
Yadav (PW-13) had come to his rescue but was made to run 
away. Additionally, even the FIR does not mention the presence 
of PW-13. All these factors cast a serious doubt as to presence 
of PW-13 and the conviction cannot be based on his testimony 
alone. 
13. The FIR specifically mentioned that the incident was witnessed 
by Virendra and Amit Jha, the friends of the deceased who were 
with him at the time of incident. Both these two persons have 
not supported the prosecution case.  
14. These two eye-witnesses to the incident (i.e. Virendra (PW-1) 
and Amit Jha (PW-12), were declared hostile and as such their 
depositions are of no use now.  
15. Now coming to the dying declaration made by the deceased to 
his brother and mother. We find that the injuries sustained by 
the deceased were very grave. The doctor (Dr. Abhishek Singh, 

Page 8 of 10 
 
PW-9) who performed the postmortem at Medical College, 
Jabalpur opined that the left lung of the deceased was 
punctured causing respiratory failure and the left lung was 
pale. The heart injury sustained by him could have caused 
excessive bleeding and in that situation the person would have 
died between 5 to 10 minutes of receiving such injuries or within 
a maximum of 15 minutes. The postmortem report on record 
which was duly proved reveals that the deceased had died due 
to haemorrhage shock and cardio-respiratory failure. Apart 
from the injuries referred above, the deceased had suffered 
other serious injuries, not only on neck, chest and abdomen but 
also on the lower limbs from where bleeding had taken place. 
There was also an injury on the skull.  
16. The brother of the deceased Rajkumar Yadav is a lawyer by 
profession. The brother and the mother of the deceased had 
rushed to the spot only after receiving information of the 
incident from PW-1 who after seeing the accused persons 
assaulting the deceased had gone to their house to inform of the 
incident. All this, obviously, could have consumed 15-25 
minutes which means that by the time they reached the place 

Page 9 of 10 
 
of occurrence, the deceased could not have survived so as to 
make any declaration. There is no specific material piece of 
evidence to establish that the deceased was alive or in a position 
to speak when his brother & mother reached the spot. In these 
circumstances, the dying declaration cannot be ex facie 
accepted to be correct unless it stands corroborated by any 
other cogent evidence. There is no material to corroborate the 
said dying declaration.  
17. We are conscious of the fact that the appellate court should be 
slow in interfering with the conviction recorded by the courts 
below but where the evidence on record indicates the 
prosecution has failed to prove the guilt of the accused beyond 
reasonable doubt and that a plausible view, different from the 
one expressed by the courts below can be taken, the appellate 
court should not shy away in giving the benefit of doubt to the 
accused persons. 
18. In the overall facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the 
opinion that the courts below ought to have extended the benefit 
of doubt to the appellants. Accordingly, we are of the opinion 

Page 10 of 10 
 
that the conviction and sentence of the appellants are liable to 
be set aside and are hereby set aside by granting the benefit of 
doubt. They stand acquitted and are set free. They are on bail, 
their bail bonds are discharged. 
19. The appeals are allowed. 
 
……………………………….. J. 
(ABHAY S. OKA) 
 
 
 
……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL) 
NEW DELHI; 
JANUARY 5, 2024.