2024 INSC 238
1 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.      OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP(Criminal) No. 6112 of 2022) 
 
 
RAGHUNATHA AND ANOTHER 
 
    …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF KARNATAKA  
 
…RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
This appeal challenges the judgement dated 14th July, 
2021, passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of 
Karnataka at Bengaluru in Criminal Appeal No. 1389 of 2019, 
thereby partly allowing the appeal filed by the appellants, 
namely, Raghunatha (Accused No. 1) and Manjunatha (Accused 
No. 2) and modifying the order of conviction and sentence 
awarded to them by the Court of III Additional District & 
Sessions Judge, Kolar (sitting at K.G.F.) (hereinafter referred to 
as “trial court”) in S.C. No. 276 of 2014 on 17th June, 2019. 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.03.21
12:54:27 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
3. 
Shorn of details, brief facts leading to present appeal 
are as under: 
3.1. On 7th July 2014, upon complaint being lodged by Sri 
R. Lokanathan (PW-1), Kaamasamudram police registered 
Crime No. 44/2014 for offence punishable under section 302 
of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as ‘IPC’) 
against unknown persons. 
3.2. The prosecution case, in a nutshell, is that complainant 
and his father-Ramu (hereinafter referred to as ‘deceased’) 
were running a fertilizer shop and were also involved in 
agriculture and money lending business. There were 
misunderstandings in the business run by complainant and 
accused No.1 on account of which the accused No. 1 bore 
enmity with the complainant due to loss suffered in the 
business. Following which, the appellants hatched a 
conspiracy to murder the deceased. On 7th July 2014, 
deceased left the house at about 6:45 am on a ‘TVS Moped’ to 
go to Tholampalli for recovery of loan amount from Ahmed 
(PW-12). The appellants were waiting on Bisanathamm-
Tholampalli road and attempted to assault the deceased with 
a chopper from backside. When the deceased tried to escape, 

3 
 
he fell down, after which accused No.1 caught hold of the 
deceased while accused No.2 assaulted him on the head with 
the chopper and murdered him. 
3.3. At about 8 am, complainant’s uncle-Babu (PW-6) came 
and informed the complainant that a TVS Moped was found 
lying between Bisanathamm-Tholampalli road and took the 
complainant to the said spot. Complainant identified the 
Moped and found the deceased lying in prone position in the 
mud with bleeding injuries on his head. Deceased was not 
conscious; however, he was alive and his hands were 
shaking. Thereafter, the complainant and Babu (PW-6) took 
the deceased to KGF Hospital, where the doctor declared him 
dead. 
3.4. The appellants came to be arrested on 23rd July, 2014. 
On completion of investigation, charge-sheet was filed 
against the appellants for offences punishable under 
Sections 120-B and 302 read with Section 34 of IPC. Since 
the case was exclusively triable by the Sessions Judge, the 
same was committed to the Sessions Judge vide order dated 
10th December, 2014. 

4 
 
3.5. On 6th May 2015, charges were framed against the 
appellants for offences punishable under Sections 120-B and 
302 of IPC. Thereafter, on 11th June 2019, altered charges 
were framed under Sections 120-B and 302 read with 34 of 
IPC. 
3.6. The appellants denied the charges and claimed to be 
tried. Prosecution examined 23 witnesses and 20 exhibits to 
bring home the guilt of the appellants. 
3.7. At the conclusion of trial, the learned trial court found 
that the prosecution had succeeded in proving that the 
appellants had committed the murder of the deceased. 
Therefore, the learned trial court convicted the appellants for 
offences punishable under Sections 120-B and 302 read with 
34 of the IPC and were awarded a sentence of life 
imprisonment. Further, a fine of Rs. 7,500/- for each offence 
was imposed on both the appellants and out of the said fine 
amount, Rs. 25,000/- was to be paid as compensation to the 
complainant. 
3.8. Being aggrieved thereby, the appellants preferred 
Criminal Appeal No. 1389 of 2019 before the High Court. The 
High Court, vide impugned judgment, partly allowed the 

5 
 
appeal and modified the conviction to Section 304 Part-I of 
IPC and sentenced them to undergo imprisonment for 10 
years. Further, the High Court imposed a fine of Rs. 75,000/- 
on each of the appellants and directed a sum of Rs. 
1,40,000/- of the fine amount to be paid to PW-7-Sarla, wife 
of deceased. 
3.9. Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal. 
4. 
We have heard Shri Shekhar G. Devasa, learned 
counsel appearing for the appellants, Shri Aman Panwar, 
learned Additional Advocate General (AAG) appearing for the 
respondent-State.   
5. 
Shri Devasa, learned counsel appearing for the 
appellants submits that the trial court and the High Court 
have grossly erred in convicting the appellants.  He submits 
that the present case is a case based on circumstantial 
evidence.  It is submitted that the prosecution has failed to 
prove any of the incriminating circumstances.  Further, the 
prosecution has not been in a position to prove the chain of 
circumstances which leads to no other conclusion than the 
guilt of the accused.  He therefore submits that the appeal 

6 
 
deserves to be allowed and the appellants are to be acquitted 
of the charges charged with.  
6. 
Shri 
Panwar, 
learned 
AAG 
appearing 
for 
the 
respondent-State submits that both the courts have 
concurrently held that the prosecution has proved the chain 
of circumstances which leads to no other conclusion than the 
guilt of the accused. He therefore submits that no 
interference is warranted in the present appeal. 
7. 
Undoubtedly, 
the 
prosecution 
case 
rests 
on 
circumstantial evidence. The law with regard to conviction on 
the basis of circumstantial evidence has very well been 
crystalized in the judgment of this Court in the case of 
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra1, 
wherein this Court held thus:  
“152. Before discussing the cases relied upon by 
the High Court we would like to cite a few decisions 
on the nature, character and essential proof 
required in a criminal case which rests on 
circumstantial 
evidence 
alone. 
The 
most 
fundamental and basic decision of this Court is 
Hanumant v. State of Madhya Pradesh [(1952) 2 
SCC 71 : AIR 1952 SC 343 : 1952 SCR 1091 : 1953 
Cri LJ 129]. This case has been uniformly followed 
and applied by this Court in a large number of later 
decisions up-to-date, for instance, the cases of 
Tufail (Alias) Simmi v. State of Uttar Pradesh [(1969) 
 
1 (1984) 4 SCC 116 : 1984 INSC 121 

7 
 
3 SCC 198 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 55] and Ramgopal v. 
State of Maharashtra [(1972) 4 SCC 625 : AIR 1972 
SC 656]. It may be useful to extract what Mahajan, 
J. has laid down in Hanumant case [(1952) 2 SCC 
71 : AIR 1952 SC 343 : 1952 SCR 1091 : 1953 Cri 
LJ 129] :  
“It is well to remember that in cases 
where the evidence is of a circumstantial 
nature, the circumstances from which 
the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn 
should in the first instance be fully 
established, 
and 
all 
the 
facts 
so 
established should be consistent only 
with the hypothesis of the guilt of the 
accused. 
Again, 
the 
circumstances 
should be of a conclusive nature and 
tendency and they should be such as to 
exclude every hypothesis but the one 
proposed to be proved. In other words, 
there must be a chain of evidence so far 
complete as not to leave any reasonable 
ground for a conclusion consistent with 
the innocence of the accused and it must 
be such as to show that within all human 
probability the act must have been done 
by the accused.”  
153. A close analysis of this decision would show 
that the following conditions must be fulfilled before 
a case against an accused can be said to be fully 
established:  
(1) the circumstances from which the 
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should 
be fully established.  
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that 
the circumstances concerned “must or should” and 
not “may be” established. There is not only a 
grammatical but a legal distinction between “may be 
proved” and “must be or should be proved” as was 
held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade v. 
State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 793 : 1973 SCC 
(Cri) 1033 : 1973 Crl LJ 1783] where the 

8 
 
observations were made: [SCC para 19, p. 807: SCC 
(Cri) p. 1047]  
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that 
the accused must be and not merely may 
be guilty before a court can convict and 
the mental distance between ‘may be’ and 
‘must be’ is long and divides vague 
conjectures from sure conclusions.”  
(2) the facts so established should be 
consistent only with the hypothesis of the 
guilt of the accused, that is to say, they 
should not be explainable on any other 
hypothesis except that the accused is 
guilty,  
(3) the circumstances should be of a 
conclusive nature and tendency,  
(4) they should exclude every possible 
hypothesis except the one to be proved, 
and  
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so 
complete as not to leave any reasonable 
ground for the conclusion consistent with 
the innocence of the accused and must 
show that in all human probability the 
act must have been done by the accused.  
154. These five golden principles, if we may say so, 
constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case 
based on circumstantial evidence.”  
 
8. 
It can thus clearly be seen that it is necessary for the 
prosecution that the circumstances from which the 
conclusion of the guilt is to be drawn should be fully 
established. The Court held that it is a primary principle 
that the accused ‘must be’ and not merely ‘may be’ proved 

9 
 
guilty before a court can convict the accused. It has been 
held that there is not only a grammatical but a legal 
distinction between ‘may be proved’ and ‘must be or should 
be proved’. It has been held that the facts so established 
should be consistent only with the guilt of the accused, that 
is to say, they should not be explainable on any other 
hypothesis except that the accused is guilty. It has further 
been held that the circumstances should be such that they 
exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be 
proved. It has been held that there must be a chain of 
evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground 
for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the 
accused and must show that in all human probabilities the 
act must have been done by the accused.  
9. 
It is settled law that the suspicion, however strong it 
may be, cannot take the place of proof beyond reasonable 
doubt. An accused cannot be convicted on the ground of 
suspicion, no matter how strong it is. An accused is 
presumed to be innocent unless proved guilty beyond a 
reasonable doubt.  

10 
 
10. In the light of these guiding principles, we will have to 
examine the present case. 
11. The circumstances on which the prosecution relies are 
as follows: 
(i) 
Last seen theory; 
(ii) 
Motive; and 
(iii) 
Recovery of the chopper used in the crime. 
12. Insofar as the ‘last seen’ circumstance is concerned, the 
learned Judges of the High Court have relied on the 
testimonies of Sarla (PW-7) and Shivaraj (PW-8).  The 
testimonies of Sarla (PW-7) and Shivaraj (PW-8) would reveal 
that they had seen accused Nos. 1 and 2 nearby the place of 
incident before the incident had occurred.  They further 
stated that they had seen accused No. 1 holding chopper in 
his hand.  The High Court further relied on the evidence of 
Babu (PW-6) who had noticed the unattended two-wheeler 
belonging to the deceased and informed about the same to 
Sri R. Lokanathan (PW-1) and Murthy (PW-5) i.e. son and 
brother of the deceased.  Thereafter, the said witnesses 
started searching for the deceased and the deceased was 
found lying injured in the close vicinity.  The learned Judges 

11 
 
of the High Court found the said evidence to be sufficient to 
establish the last seen theory. 
13. No doubt that where the prosecution proves that the 
deceased was last seen in the company of the appellants and 
the death of the deceased has occurred soon thereafter, the 
burden would shift upon the appellants.  However, for that, 
initially the prosecution will have to discharge the burden.  
Merely because the appellants were seen nearby the place 
where the crime occurred and the accused No. 1 was holding 
the chopper, it cannot be said that the deceased was last 
seen in the company of the appellants.  In our view, this will 
be nothing but basing the finding of conviction on 
conjectures and surmises. 
14. Further, the perusal of evidence of PW-7 would reveal 
that she has not deposed that the appellants were seen 
nearby the place where the dead body of the deceased was 
found. 
15. The trial court found that the prosecution has proved 
the motive behind the crime. However, the High Court has 
reversed the finding on the said issue.  It will be relevant to 
refer to the following observations of the High Court:  

12 
 
“21. …….But what exactly is the financial loss and 
whether that loss and intervention of deceased 
resulted in sufficient enmity between the deceased 
and accused No.1 and the same being nurtured 
from the date of closure of business till the date of 
death is not deposed to by prosecution witnesses. 
Therefore, the case of the prosecution that accused 
No.1 possessed and nurtured enmity resulting in 
taking away the life of the deceased by accused No.1 
is not established by the prosecution with cogent 
and convincing evidence on record. Prosecution did 
not 
examine 
none 
else 
to 
establish 
misunderstanding especially when PW.6 in his 
cross examination has admitted that there was a 
panchayath convened in that regard. Investigating 
agency did not cite the panchaythdar as witness to 
establish the question of motive. Therefore, the 
finding recorded by the trial Judge that prosecution 
has established motive for the incident cannot be 
countenanced in law and to that extent, the 
reasoning assigned by the learned trial Judge needs 
interference at the ends of this Court.” 
 
16. Now, what is left, is only the third circumstance with 
regard to recovery.  The recovery is from an open place 
accessible to one and all.  In any case, only on the basis of 
the circumstance of recovery, it cannot be said that the 
prosecution has proved the case beyond reasonable doubt. 
17. It is further to be noted that though the High Court has 
concurred with the trial court that it is the appellants, who 
have committed the crime but has altered the conviction to 
Part-I of Section 304 of IPC from Section 302 of IPC.  No 

13 
 
discussion for the same has been offered in the impugned 
judgment. 
18. In that view of the matter, we find that the impugned 
judgment is not sustainable. 
19. In the result, we pass the following order: 
(i) 
The appeal is allowed; 
(ii) 
The impugned judgment dated 14th July 2021 
passed by the High Court of Karnataka at 
Bengaluru in Criminal Appeal No. 1389 of 2019 
and the judgment dated 17th June 2019 passed by 
the trial court in S.C. No. 276 of 2014 are quashed 
and set aside; 
(iii) 
The appellants are acquitted of all the charges 
charged with and are directed to be released 
forthwith, if not required in any other case. 
20. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
….........................J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   (B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
 
….........................J. 
 
 
 
       (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
NEW DELHI; 
MARCH 21, 2024.