2024 INSC 244
NON­REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1642 OF 2024
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 313 of 2024)
Amudha
            
           … Appellant
versus
The State represented by the 
Inspector of Police & Anr.     
       ... Respondents
J  U  D  G  M  E  N  T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTS
1.
The   appellant   is   accused   no.4,   who   has   been
charged with an offence punishable under Section 306 of
the Indian Penal Code (for short, ‘the IPC’).  The appellant
filed a petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘the Cr. PC’) before the High
Court   of   Judicature   at   Madras.     By   the   impugned
judgment, the petition has been rejected. 
Criminal Appeal No.1642 of 2024     
                   Page 1 of 8
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.03.22
17:10:05 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2.
The   second   respondent   is   the   complainant.     The
second   respondent   had   five   brothers   and   two   sisters.
The deceased (Kanagasabha) was one of her two younger
brothers.  All of them were married except the deceased.
On  5th  March  2020,   the   deceased   allegedly   committed
suicide   by   consuming   poison.     There   was   a   dispute
between the deceased and his elder brother  Baskar @
Annamalai. Another brother of the deceased, Anandraj,
had   constructed   a   new   house,   which   he   sold   to   the
deceased.     However,   the   said   house   was   occupied   by
Annamalai,   his   wife,   son,   and   daughter   Amutha
(appellant).     According   to   the   case   of   the   second
respondent, Annamalai refused to vacate the house and
filed a civil suit against the deceased.  Though Annamalai
(co­accused) failed in the suit, he declined to vacate the
house.   Therefore, the deceased sought the intervention
of   the   local   MLA.     However,   the   local   MLA   could   not
resolve the dispute. The second respondent has made a
general   allegation   that   Annamalai   and   his   family
members,   including   the   appellant,   used   to   harass   the
deceased by insulting him on the ground that he was a
bachelor. They used to tell the deceased to go anywhere
else and die. 
Criminal Appeal No.1642 of 2024     
                   Page 2 of 8

3.
After the charge sheet was filed, the appellant filed a
petition   for   quashing,   which   was   dismissed   by   the
impugned judgment.  
SUBMISSIONS
4.
The submission of the learned counsel appearing for
the appellant is that even by taking the statements of all
the prosecution witnesses as correct, no offence is made
out against the appellant.   The learned counsel pointed
out that after her marriage, the appellant left for the USA
on 11th September 2019, and till the date of suicide, she
continued to stay in the USA.   His submission is that
there is nothing placed on record to show that during this
period, the appellant instigated the deceased to commit
suicide.
5.
The learned counsel appearing for the State opposed
the appeal by submitting that without the Trial Court
recording   oral   evidence,   one   cannot   conclude   at   this
stage   that   no   case   of   commission   of   the   offence
punishable   under   Section   306   of   IPC   was   made   out
against the appellant. 
6.
The   second   respondent   did   not   appear   despite
service of notice. 
Criminal Appeal No.1642 of 2024     
                   Page 3 of 8

OUR VIEW
7.
We   have   carefully   perused   the   statements   of   the
second respondent, her husband and other prosecution
witnesses.     Apart   from   a   general   allegation   that   the
appellant, her father and other family members used to
insult the deceased and tell him to go out and die, there
is   no   other   allegation   made   against   the   appellant.
However, another incident was brought on the record by
the witnesses. The marriage of the appellant was fixed on
4th September 2019.  After reading the wedding card, the
deceased objected to printing of his name on the card
without   his   consent.     Two   days   before   4th  September
2019,   there   was   a   quarrel   between   the   family   of   the
appellant and the deceased on the issue.   It is alleged
that the appellant told the deceased not to attend the
marriage.
8.
The   State   Government   has   placed   on   record   an
additional   affidavit   along   with   a   photocopy   of   the
appellant's passport. The photocopy shows that on 11th
September 2019, the appellant left India from Chennai
and   reached   the   USA   on   12th  September   2019.       On
instructions, the learned counsel appearing for the first
respondent   accepted   that   till   5th  March   2020,   the
appellant never returned to India.  We may note here that
in the charge sheet, no material is placed on record to
Criminal Appeal No.1642 of 2024     
                   Page 4 of 8

show that any telephonic conversation occurred between
the appellant and the deceased between 12th  September
2019 and 5th March 2020.
9.
The other material placed on record is in the form of
four suicide notes allegedly written by the deceased.  In
the said suicide note, there is a general allegation against
the appellant and her family members (her father, mother
and brother) that they are responsible for his suicide.  It
is also stated therein that the local MLA had also given
him a threat, and therefore, he committed suicide due to
mental torture.  Taking the suicide note as it is, the same
does   not   help   the   prosecution   at   all,   especially   when
there is no evidence on record to show that the appellant
was in touch with the deceased on the telephone or in
any other manner from 12th September 2019 to 5th March
2020.
10.
A   Bench   of   three   Hon’ble   Judges   in   the   case   of
Pawan Kumar v. State of Himachal Pradesh,1  after
considering the provisions of Sections 107 and 306 of the
IPC, in paragraph 43, held thus: 
“43.
Keeping   in   view   the   aforesaid
legal   position,   we   are   required   to
address   whether   there   has   been
abetment in committing suicide. Be it
clearly stated that mere allegation
1 (2017) 7 SCC 780
Criminal Appeal No.1642 of 2024     
                   Page 5 of 8

of harassment without any positive
action in proximity to the time of
occurrence   on   the   part   of   the
accused   that   led   a   person   to
commit   suicide,   a   conviction   in
terms   of   Section   306   IPC   is   not
sustainable. A casual remark that is
likely   to   cause   harassment   in
ordinary  course of things  will not
come   within   the   purview   of
instigation. A mere reprimand or a
word in a fit of anger will not earn
the status of abetment. There has
to be positive action that creates a
situation for the victim to put an
end to life.”
(emphasis added)
In the case of Amalendu Pal alias Jhantu v. State of
West Bengal2, in paragraph 12, this Court held thus: 
“12. Thus,
 
this
 
Court
 
has
consistently   taken   the   view   that
before holding an accused guilty of
an   offence   under   Section   306   IPC,
the   court   must   scrupulously
examine
 
the
 
facts
 
and
circumstances of the case and also
assess   the   evidence   adduced
before   it   in   order   to   find   out
whether
 
the
 
cruelty
 
and
harassment   meted   out   to   the
victim had left the victim with no
other alternative but to put an end
2 (2010) 1 SCC 707
Criminal Appeal No.1642 of 2024     
                   Page 6 of 8

to her life. It is also to be borne in
mind   that   in   cases   of   alleged
abetment of suicide there must be
proof of direct or indirect acts of
incitement   to   the   commission   of
suicide.  Merely on the allegation of
harassment without there being any
positive action proximate to the time
of   occurrence   on   the   part   of   the
accused which led or compelled the
person to commit suicide, conviction
in terms of Section 306 IPC is not
sustainable.”  
                
(emphasis added)
11.
Taking   the   charge   sheet   as   correct,   we   find   that
there   were   no   acts   of   incitement   on   the   part   of   the
appellant proximate to the date on which the deceased
committed suicide.  No act is attributed to the appellant
proximate to the time of the suicide which was of such a
nature that the deceased was left with no alternative but
to take the drastic step of committing suicide.  Therefore,
no offence is made out against the appellant.
12.
Accordingly, the impugned order is set aside, and
proceedings   in   P.R.C.   No.32/2021   (Charge   Sheet
No.14/2021) pending on the file of the learned Judicial
Magistrate­II, Puducherry stands quashed as against the
appellant.     We   make   it   clear   that   the   adjudication   is
confined to only the case of the present appellant, and
Criminal Appeal No.1642 of 2024     
                   Page 7 of 8

the   Trial   Court   is   free   to   proceed   against   the   other
accused   in   accordance   with   the   law.     However,   the
defences of the other accused are kept open. 
13.
The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.
..…………..………J.
(Abhay S. Oka)
..…………..………J.
      (Ujjal Bhuyan)
New Delhi;
March 22, 2024.
Criminal Appeal No.1642 of 2024     
                   Page 8 of 8