2024 INSC 21
 
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1338 OF 2010 
 
PRADEEP KUMAR  
 
 
 
        ...APPELLANT 
VERSUS 
STATE OF HARYANA 
                 
      …RESPONDENT 
J U D G M E N T 
  
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
The sole appellant herein was tried along with another 
accused for the murder of one Samsher Singh and convicted under 
Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 
for murder and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for life by the 
Trial Court1. In appeal, the High Court of Punjab & Haryana2 by 
the judgment impugned herein dismissed the appeal and 
confirmed the conviction and sentence. Thus, the present appeal. 
2. 
The case of the prosecution is that while the Assistant Sub-
Inspector Balbir Singh, later examined as PW-21 was with other 
police officials on duty at Deyod Kheri Village, Jind-bypass road, 
 
1 The Additional Sessions Judge Kaithal in Sessions Case No. 43 of 2004 dated 31.08.2007. 
2 In Criminal Appeal No. 805-DB 2007 dated 05.09.2009. 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.01.05
17:40:47 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
2 
 
Kaithal, on 11.04.2004, the complainant-Sunil Kumar Bhura 
(later examined as PW-20) met him and got his statement (EX.PY) 
recorded. The statement had that he is a resident of Nehru Garden 
Colony, Kaithal and the deceased-Shamsher Singh is related to 
him, being son of his paternal aunt. PW-20 was in business of real 
estate and was living in Adarsh Nagar, Kaithal. The previous day, 
that is on 10.04.2004, when PW-20 was in the office of the 
deceased along with one Balwant Singh (PW-18), the deceased 
received a call on his mobile phone at about 9.15 PM. A little 
thereafter, that is about 9.30 PM, the deceased received another 
phone call. After conversing on the mobile phone, the deceased 
informed them that he has to go to Gole Market and left on his 
motorcycle. The complainant and Balwant Singh also left the shop 
of the deceased. In the morning, the deceased’s wife informed  
PW-20 that the deceased had not returned the previous night. On 
receiving the said information, PW-20 and PW-18 reached the 
house of the deceased and thereafter went on a search for the 
deceased.  
3. 
When PW-20 got the information that a dead body was found 
lying, he along with PW-18 and one Mr. Naresh (PW-13) reached 
the spot and saw that the deceased lying there, with his throat 

 
3 
 
having knotted with some cloth, and the right eye being badly 
injured. They also noticed some injuries on the head of the 
deceased. The motorcycle of the deceased was parked by the side. 
While Naresh and PW-18 remained at the spot, PW-20 had come 
to inform the police about the incident and his statement was thus 
recorded and read over to him by the investigating officer (PW-21) 
with his endorsement at Ex. PW-21/1. After the FIR was 
registered, PW-24 took over the investigation and recorded the 
statements of witnesses.  
4. 
During the investigation, the police recorded the statement of 
Rajesh, later examined as PW-11 and Jogi Ram later examined as 
PW-12. The statement and deposition of these two persons 
assumed importance as their evidence was relied on by the Trial 
Court as well as the Appellate Court.  
5. 
The statement of Rajesh (PW-11) was that on 10.04.2004 
while he was driving from Chandigarh to Hisar, about half a 
kilometre before Karnal bypass his vehicle got punctured. As he 
was changing the wheel, he saw four young people on motorcycle 
coming from eastern side and they had to slow down because of 
the Karnal bypass. At that time, he saw the accused were carrying 
dandas and one of the boy’s clothes were stained with blood. Being 

 
4 
 
suspicious he noted the registration number of the motorcycle 
being HR 08 E 4962. This witness also says that he read about the 
murder of the deceased in the newspaper two days later, i.e. on 
12.04.2004 and while he was returning back to Chandigarh on 
13.04.2004, he saw a police vehicle standing at the Karnal bypass 
Chowk with some police officials and the accused. He stopped his 
vehicle and informed the police about the occurrence on 
10.04.2004. The prosecution thus relied on this person in support 
of the case as a witness to have last seen the deceased with the 
accused. 
6. 
Similarly, PW-12 made a statement to the police. His version 
is that he is a resident of Sector 19/1 Huda, Kaithal and on 
10.04.2004, he was taking an evening walk on Kaithal Road T-
Point near Huda Road/Street. About 9.45-10 pm, while urinating 
by the roadside, he saw a motorcycle ridden by 3 young boys of 
about 20-21 years of age holding dandas in their hands. He 
recognised the appellant and when he started coughing, that is 
while urinating, the 3 boys drove away towards Karnal Road. His 
statement was recorded by the police on 12.04.2004. 

 
5 
 
7. 
The police also recorded the statement of one Dilbag Singh, 
later examined as PW-16 who recorded his version of having seen 
the deceased in the company of the accused at the same spot. 
8. 
It is the case of the prosecution that on 17.04.2004, the 
Appellant (A-1), Sumit Gupta (A-2), Anil & Jaswinder surrendered 
before the investigating officer through Ex-Sarpanch of village 
Geong, Balbir Singh (PW-10) to whom the accused made an extra-
judicial confession. Pursuant to the surrender, the prosecution 
says that disclosure statements of A-1, A-2, Anil & Jaswinder were 
recorded, and certain recoveries were also made.  
9. 
Upon completion of investigation, charge sheet was filed. It 
may be mentioned at this stage that prosecution of Anil and 
Jaswinder was separated from this case after they were declared 
to be juveniles. Thus, only the Appellant and Sumit Gupta (A-2) 
stood trial. Before the Trial Court, the prosecution examined 24 
witnesses and marked certain exhibits. The defence on the other 
hand examined 3 witnesses as DW 1, 2 and 3.  
10. The Trial Court having noticed that there are no eyewitnesses 
and that the case of the prosecution is based only on 
circumstantial evidence, copiously referred to the statements of 
each witness, but rested its decision only on the evidence of  

 
6 
 
PW-10, 11 & 12 and certain recoveries and the FSL Report. The 
reasoning, which is in two paragraphs is extracted herein below 
for ready reference:  
“In the present case, the chain of circumstances is 
interwoven which has been corroborative through 
the testimony of PW-11 Rajesh and PW-12 Jogi 
Ram who have last seen accused Sumit Gupta and 
accused Pradeep Kumar with Shamsher Singh 
deceased. Extra Judicial confession has been 
made before Ex. Sarpanch Balbir Singh. Motive is 
also proved through cheques which have been 
issued by accused Sumit Gupta in the name of 
Shamsher Singh (deceased) from which accused 
Sumit Gupta has taken a loan of Rs. 29,000/- and 
failed to return back that money in time. There is 
recovery of Mobile Phone of accused Sumit Gupta 
and Shamsher Singh vide recovery memo Ex. PV. 
In FSL report Ex. PRR/1 blood group of deceased 
Shamsher Singh is cited to be ‘O’ group. In the 
‘danda’ recovered from accused vide recovery 
memo Ex. PQQ, blood group ‘O’ tallies. Similarly, on 
the pant worn by the accused Pardeep Kumar 
recovered later, blood ‘O’ group has been found on 
the stains of pant vide recovery memo Ex. PJ. 
Hence, the prosecution case is also proved through 
scientific investigation also. Hence, these are chain 
of evidence so far complete, so as not to leave any 
reasonable ground for conclusion consistent with 
the guilt of the accused. The guilt of accused Sumit 
Gupta and accused Pardeep Kumar is proved to the 
fact that in all human probability act of murder has 
been committed by accused Sumit Gupta and 
Pardeep Kumar.  
Hence, it is proved to the hilt that on 10.04.2004, 
at about 10 PM in the area of Dhand Road Deokheri 
turning accused Sumit Gupta and Pardeep Kumar 
in furtherance of their common intention caused 
death of deceased Shamsher Singh intentionally 

 
7 
 
and committed offence punishable under Section 
302 read with Section 34 IPC.” 
 
11. In appeal by the Appellant herein and accused No.2, Sumit 
Gupta, the High Court also relied on the evidence of PW-11 
and 12. In fact, the High Court seemed to have accepted the 
submission of the defence that the evidence of Ex. Sarpanch,  
PW-10 is unreliable. However, without discussing the evidence of 
PW-10, the High Court observed that the evidence of PW-11 and 
PW-12 are sufficient to confirm the conviction and sentence 
imposed by the Trial Court.  
12. We heard Mr. Pranab Kumar Mullick, learned counsel for the 
appellant who took us through his meticulously prepared written 
submissions and statements of relevant witness and the reasoning 
of the High Court.  
13. As the case of the prosecution, as accepted by the Trial Court 
and High Court, is based on circumstantial evidence said to have 
been established by PW-10, 11 and 12, we will examine them in 
detail.  
14. PW-10 is an Ex. Sarpanch of the village Geong. His testimony 
is that on 17.04.2004, while he was in his house, the Appellant (A-
1), Sumit (A-2), Anil and Jaswinder came to him and confessed 

 
8 
 
about committing the murder of the deceased. He stated that 
Sumit Gupta (A-2) disclosed to him that he borrowed money from 
the deceased and as such there was pressure on him to return the 
money. When the deceased demanded the money on 10.04.2004, 
he was apprehensive of being insulted and therefore planned to kill 
the deceased with the help of other accused. For this purpose, he 
called the deceased to the T-Point at Kaithal, Dhand Road at 9.30 
PM saying that he has arranged the repayment. By the time the 
deceased came there, other accused were already present at the 
spot, they all assaulted the deceased with dandas, killed him and 
threw the dead body in the field near Shergha Road. This witness 
also stated that all other accused disclosed similar version. Himself 
being an Ex. Sarpanch, he has thereafter produced the accused 
before the SHO Police Station Kaithal.  
15. Having considered the submissions of the appellant about 
contradictions in the statement of this witness (PW-10), the High 
Court concluded, “even if we ignored the evidence of PW-10 before 
whom the appellants have made an extra judicial confession having 
committed the crime, there is more emphatic evidence led by the 
prosecution compelling this Court to believe that the appellants had 
committed the crime of murdering Shamsher Singh.” In other words, 

 
9 
 
the High Court has not relied on the evidence of PW-10 as it found 
other sufficient evidence. 
16. We have however independently examined the evidence of 
PW-10 and come to the conclusion that this witness is not 
trustworthy and this is evident from the following: 
 a. 
This witness denied having met the deceased earlier “I 
have never met Shamsher Singh earlier”. However, the 
complainant (PW-20) in his statement on 11.04.2004 says 
“today we came to know that Malkhan, Prem Singh, Balbir 
Sarpanch met Shamsher on Dhand Road, Kaithal at about 10 
PM.” The said statement is also recorded in the FIR and 
charge sheet, though he leaves doubt about this version in 
his deposition.  
 b. 
Similarly, Balwant Singh (PW-18) in his deposition on 
08.12.2006 states that, “since Shamsher Singh did not reach 
back to home and hence his family members started searching 
for him. Malkhan, Prem Singh and Balbir Singh r/o Geong 
informed that Shamsher Singh was seen at Dhand Road, 
Kaithal”. 
 c. 
Further, Balbir Singh, ASI (PW-21) also deposed about 
the deceased having met the Sarpanch. He says “it is correct 
to state that Balbir Sarpanch, Malkhan and Prem Singh 
residents of Geong had met Shamsher Singh deceased on 
10.04.2004 at 10 PM at Dhand Road, Kaithal, according to 

 
10 
 
statements of PWs gathered at the spot that is Sunil and 
Balwant PWs.”   
17. Apart from the above referred contradiction, yet another fact 
about the extra-judicial confession on 17.04.2004 is noteworthy. 
The statement of the accused Sumit Gupta (A-2) in his Section 313 
CrPC statement is that they were arrested on 11.04.2004 itself and 
not 17.04.2004. This statement gets corroborated by the 
deposition of Rajesh (PW-11), who stated that; “Thereafter I read 
news in newspaper regarding murder on 12.04.2004. On 
12.04.2004 I read in the newspaper regarding murder at Kaithal in 
the surrounding area in which I was changing the stepney. On 
13.04.2004 in the morning, I was going to Chandigarh through 
Kaithal and I saw a police vehicle standing on Karnal by pass 
Chowk in the area of Kaithal. I saw police inspector along with 4/5 
police officials and saw the same accused along with police. Then I 
stopped and told the police regarding occurrence on 10.04.2004. 
Police recorded my statement on the spot.” If the statement of  
PW-11 is to be accepted, which the prosecution wants us to 
believe, then the arrest had already taken place by 13.04.2004 and 
therefore the accused were seen in the presence of the police on 
that day. If this is true, then there is no doubt in our mind that 

 
11 
 
the extra judicial confession on 17.04.2004 is false and 
unbelievable. The evidence of this witness that is PW-11 is strongly 
relied on by the prosecution. In fact, the Trial Court as well as the 
High Court proceeded on the basis of this witness’s statement to 
convict and sentence the Appellant. This is perhaps the reason 
why the High Court did not consider it appropriate to rely on the 
evidence of PW-10 and proceeded to confirm conviction and 
sentence on the basis of other evidence. There are some other 
aspects which Mr. Mullick has relied on to cast a doubt about 
evidence of PW-10 but we are of the opinion that the above referred 
factors are sufficient to reject the version of PW-10. 
18. PW-11 – His evidence is relied on by the Trial Court as well 
as the High Court. He is admittedly a chance witness. In fact, he 
chances the episode twice over, first on 10.04.2004 at about 10.30 
PM when he was going from Chandigarh to Hisar. His version is 
that at about 1.5 kilometres near Karnal bypass, his car tyre got 
punctured and when he was putting the stepney, he saw four 
people on motorcycle armed with dandas. He noticed blood stain 
on the deceased’s pant and also records the registration number 
of the motorcycle. Secondly, he again chances the police party 

 
12 
 
standing with the accused on his way back to Chandigarh. He 
stops and gets the incidence of 10.04.2004 recorded by the Police.  
19. This witness is completely unreliable. It is his own statement 
that he started from Chandigarh at 6 PM on 10.04.2004. The 
distance between Chandigarh and the place of occurrence is about 
120 kilometres and takes about 2 hours to cover the distance even 
by car. There is no explanation as to how he took more than four 
hours to reach the scene of offence. This uncertainty is 
compounded when he admits his ignorance about the person in 
whose name the car is registered. Further, upon being questioned 
about where he stayed in Chandigarh the night of 09.04.2004, his 
answer is simply that he does not remember the name of the lodge. 
He could not even remember the shops near by the lodge. It is 
rather surprising that this witness while engrossed in changing the 
wheel of his car at 10.30 PM manages to note the blood stains on 
the pant and also recorded the registration number of the 
motorcycle. There is nothing to indicate that he had a pen or a 
paper to readily note the registration number. His statement is to 
be contrasted with the version of Ram Kumar IO (PW-24) who 
stated that “I did not see any arrangement of the light on the Karnal 
bypass road especially the alleged place where the car of Rajesh 

 
13 
 
Kumar got punctured and he saw the accused while riding the 
motorcycle. It is correct that there is no light arrangement on the 
place of occurrence because it is an agriculture area.” We are not at 
all impressed with the evidence of PW-11. There are too many 
coincidences in his version and his story is improbable in the 
context of the facts and circumstances of the case. He is certainly 
an unreliable witness. 
20. PW-12 – He is again a chance witness, relied on by the 
prosecution to prove the last seen theory. This witness is said to 
have gone out for an evening walk on Kaithal Road between 9.45 
to 10 PM. While urinating by the roadside, he sees a motorcycle 
with three accused on it. He states that the accused moved away 
towards Karnal bypass, the moment he started coughing while 
urinating. He reports this incident two days later, that is on 
12.04.2004 by going to Sadar Police Station, Kaithal.  We will 
analyse his statement. 
21. As per the statement of PW-12, he went on an evening walk 
between 9.45 to 10 PM, two Kilometres away from his house, 
particularly in an area which does not have streetlights. The multi-
tasking of urinating, coughing, seeing the motorcycle, noting the 
blood stains clothes and recording the registration number 

 
14 
 
happens simultaneously. There is no evidence as to the manner in 
which he had recorded the registration number. He is said to have 
studied only up to 6th class. How could he notice and also 
memorise the registration number having seen it from a long 
distance. He himself says the motorcycle was at a distance. His 
version is highly improbable. 
22. This witness says that the blood stained trouser and dandas 
in the hands of the accused caused suspicion and therefore, he 
recorded the number. However, that did not compel him to go to 
the police station. Instead, he reports the incident only on the 
12.04.2004, that is two days later. Strangely, instead of reporting 
the incident to the police chowki which is next to his residence, he 
goes all the way to Sadar Police Station, Kaithal. We are of the 
opinion that the evidence of PW-12 does not inspire confidence at 
all.  
23. PW-16 – This is yet another witness relied on by the 
prosecution, however, the Trial and the High Court have not laid 
much emphasis. We will nevertheless examine the evidence of this 
witness. He is a witness who was on his way to Haridwar along 
with his Fufa (father’s sister’s husband). He is supposed to have 
seen the deceased sitting on a motorcycle along with A-2 at T-Point 

 
15 
 
at Karnal bypass. After speaking to him for 2 to 3 minutes, he 
proceeded further. This witness reports this incident to the Police 
on 14.04.2004 when he comes back from Haridwar. His statement 
is similarly relied on by the prosecution in support of the last seen 
theory. 
24. This witness is a relative of the deceased. The Fufa who was 
travelling with him is not examined. He does not even know the 
driver of the vehicle in which he travelled or its registration 
number, even though he went all the way to Haridwar and stayed 
there for two to three days. This witness describes the incidence of 
meeting the deceased and A-2 at a place where even PW-12 is 
supposed to have seen the deceased. Neither this witness spoke of 
PW-12, nor did PW-12 speak about this witness. Nothing much 
flows from the evidence of this witness, apart from his own version 
which is highly improbable and therefore unreliable.  
25. Apart from the improbable and contradictory versions of the 
three witnesses, Mr. Mullick has also brought to our notice that 
the weapons recovered by the IO and the ones seen by the 
witnesses are only sticks. However, the deceased has suffered an 
incise wound which according to the doctor, PW-14 who conducted 
the post-mortem, is caused by a sharp-edged weapon. The 

 
16 
 
prosecution has not recovered any sharp-edged weapon. In fact, 
there is no mention about a sharp-edged weapon at all.  
26. The FSL report states that the “pant” sent to them for 
examination was one dirty blue “terikot pant”. However, as per the 
recovery memo a “jeans pant” was recovered from the Appellant. 
Additionally, the FSL report states that the blood on the sticks, 
blood-stained pants and the blood group of the deceased is the 
same “O+”. Mr. Mullick has rightly contended that this is not an 
indication of the guilt. Moreover, nothing of these recoveries took 
place in the presence of an independent witness. In fact, the IO 
(PW-24) has admitted that he did not try to join any private person 
before carrying out the recoveries.  
27. Mr. Mullick has also made detailed submission with respect 
to place and time of the recovery of the body of the deceased and 
the alleged motive behind the crime. We are of the opinion that it 
is not necessary to examine those aspects in detail. Admittedly, 
there are no eyewitnesses, and the entire case of the prosecution 
depends upon circumstantial evidence. 
28. In a recent decision, Pritinder Singh v. State of Punjab, (2023) 
7 SCC 727, one of us (Justice Gavai) has taken note of the 

 
17 
 
judgment in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra3, 
(1984) 4 SCC 116 and observed:  
17. It can thus be seen that this Court has held that 
the circumstances from which the conclusion of 
guilt is to be drawn should be fully established. It 
has been held that the circumstances concerned 
“must or should” and not “may be” established. It 
has been held that there is not only a grammatical 
but a legal distinction between “may be proved” 
and “must be or should be proved”. It has been held 
that the facts so established should be consistent 
only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, 
that is to say, they should not be explainable on 
any other hypothesis except that the accused is 
guilty. It has been held that the circumstances 
should be of a conclusive nature and tendency and 
they should exclude every possible hypothesis 
except the one sought to be proved, and that there 
must be a chain of evidence so complete so as not 
to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion 
 
3 “153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the following conditions must be 
fulfilled before a case against an accused can be said to be fully established: 
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be fully 
established. 
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the circumstances concerned “must 
or should” and not “may be” established. There is not only a grammatical but a legal 
distinction between “may be proved” and “must be or should be proved” as was held by 
this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra [Shivaji Sahabrao 
Bobade v. State of Maharashtra, (1973) 2 SCC 793: 1973 SCC (Cri) 1033] where the 
following observations were made: (SCC p. 807, para 19) 
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused must be and not merely may be 
guilty before a court can convict and the mental distance between “may be” and “must 
be” is long and divides vague conjectures from sure conclusions.” 
(2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of 
the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis 
except that the accused is guilty, 
(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency, 
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved, and 
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground 
for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show that in 
all human probability the act must have been done by the accused. 
154. These five golden principles, if we may say so, constitute the panchsheel of the proof 
of a case based on circumstantial evidence.” 
 

 
18 
 
consistent with the innocence of the accused and 
must show that in all human probability the act 
must have been done by the accused. 
18. It is a settled principle of law that however 
strong a suspicion may be, it cannot take place of a 
proof beyond reasonable doubt. In the light of these 
guiding principles, we will have to consider the 
present case.”  
 
In the background, we have analysed the evidence and the 
testimonies of the witnesses.  
29. There is a yawning gap between the charge against the 
Appellant and the evidence that the prosecution has adduced. The 
circumstances do not establish the guilt of the Appellant at all. 
While the principle applicable to circumstantial evidence requires 
that the facts must be consistent with the hypothesis of the guilt 
of the accused, in the present case the evidence adduced gives rise 
to doubts, improbabilities and inconsistencies.  
30. Having considered the matter in detail and having noted the 
various discrepancies and improbabilities, we are of the firm view 
that the prosecution has not established its case beyond 
reasonable doubt. The Appellant is entitled to be acquitted. 
31. We, therefore, allow Criminal Appeal No. 1338 of 2010 and 
set aside the judgment of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana 

 
19 
 
at Chandigarh in Pradeep Kumar & Anr. v. State of Haryana in Crl. 
Appeal No. 805-DB of 2007 dated 05.09.2009 and the judgment of 
the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Kaithal in Sessions Case 
No. 43 of 2004 dated 31.08.2007 convicting and sentencing the 
appellant under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian 
Penal Code, 1860.  
32.  The Appellant is acquitted of all charges, and his bail bonds, 
if any, stand discharged.  
33. Pending interlocutory applications, if any, stand disposed of 
in terms of the above order. 
34. The parties shall bear their own costs. 
 
……..……………………………….J. 
                                         [B.R. Gavai] 
 
 
 
.………….………………………….J. 
                                         [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha] 
 
New Delhi; 
January 05, 2024