2024 INSC 263
Page 1 of 7 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1791 OF 2024 
 
 
STATE OF HARYANA  
 
            
            …  Appellant (s) 
 
VERSUS 
 
DR. RITU SINGH AND ANOTHER          
 
  … Respondent(s) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
Rajesh Bindal, J. 
1.  
 
The State has filed the present appeal impugning the order1 
passed by the High Court2 whereby the petition3 filed by the respondent 
no.1 seeking quashing of the FIR was allowed and the same was quashed 
on the basis of the compromise entered into between the complainant-
respondent no.2 and the accused-respondent no.1. 
2. 
 
Briefly stated, the facts available on record are that a 
complaint was filed by the respondent no.2 with the police alleging 
 
1 Dated 27.02.2019 
2 High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh 
3 CRM-M-51493 of 2018 
Digitally signed by
Ashwani Kumar
Date: 2024.04.03
17:41:39 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 7 
 
certain offences committed by the respondent no.1, on the basis of which 
FIR4 in question was registered.   Respondent no.1 at the relevant point 
of time was working as veterinary doctor in Policlinic, Sonipat Animal 
Husbandry Department.  Immediately, after registration of the FIR while 
the matter was still under investigation, the respondent no.1 filed a 
petition in the High Court seeking quashing thereof.  A perusal of the 
impugned order passed by the High Court shows that respondent no.1-
accused as well as respondent no.2-complainant submitted before the 
High Court that the matter in dispute has been amicably settled between 
the parties, hence, the FIR may be quashed on the basis of the 
compromise.  Even though in the reply filed by the State to the quashing 
petition, the stand taken was that the FIR does not deserve be quashed as 
there are serious allegations against the respondent no.1-accused.  
However, still the High Court merely because the complainant had 
compromised the matter with the respondent no.1-accused, quashed the 
FIR.  The aforesaid order is impugned by the State before this Court.   
3. 
 
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that once on the 
basis of a complainant, submitted to the Police, an FIR had been 
 
4 FIR No.0116 dated 12.05.2018, Police Station Barauda, Dist. Sonipat, Haryana 

Page 3 of 7 
 
registered with the allegations that the respondent no.1 was involved in 
commission of serious offences during her service career and the matter 
was still under investigation, the High Court exceeded its jurisdiction in 
quashing the FIR, merely because the complainant-respondent no.2 had 
compromised the matter with the accused-respondent no.1.  After the FIR 
was registered or even before that, it was not the complainant only who 
was the sufferer, rather it was an offence against the State.  Allegation 
against the respondent no.1 was of defrauding the State, her employer. 
The FIR was registered as cognizable offence was found to have been 
committed by the respondent no.1.  The stand taken by the State before 
the High Court was not even considered. 
4. 
 
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent no.1 
submitted that the respondent no.2-complainant had no locus to involve 
in the issue.  He had filed a complaint to the police with certain allegations 
with regard to her service career referring to certain documents, which 
were not privy to him. Registration of FIR against respondent no.1 was 
merely to harass her, who had otherwise exposed various irregularities 
in the Animal Husbandry Department.  Even in the departmental 
proceedings, the respondent no.1 has been exonerated after due 

Page 4 of 7 
 
enquiry. If FIR is allowed to be proceeded with, it will be nothing else but 
an abuse of process of law.  The High Court has not committed any error 
in the exercise of jurisdiction to quash the FIR. 
5. 
 
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused 
the paper book. 
6. 
 
In the case in hand, on the basis of information received under 
the Right to Information Act, 2015 the respondent no.2 filed complaint to 
the police, on the basis of which FIR in-question was registered.  The 
contents of the same are extracted below: 
“Sir, in concern to abovementioned subject, I draw your 
attention that Dr. Ritu Singh Veterinary Doctor Policlinic 
Sonipat Animal Husbandry Department was appointed in 
year 2013-2014 at Nizampur Gohana.  Thereafter, Dr. Ritu 
Singh visited foreign countries 6-7 times without the 
permission of department.  During these visits, she had 
shown her presence at State Veterinary Hospital Nizampur.  
During this period (Foreign Trips), showing false presence, 
self verified and withdraw the salary from Govt. Treasury.  
During this period, she also presented false medical 

Page 5 of 7 
 
certificates and intentionally, under a scheme, she withdrew 
the salary from Govt. Treasury and committed loss to Govt. 
Treasury.  It is requested to you that this complaint be fairly 
investigated and legal action be taken against her.  Enclosed: 
Information received under RTI.  26 Applicant: Satish Saroha 
S/o Sh. Lekhi Ram Village Veyapur, Sonipat.” 
6.1 
 
Immediately after registration of FIR, respondent no.1 filed a 
petition before the High Court seeking quashing thereof, on the basis of 
the compromise with the complainant, which was allowed by the High 
Court. 
7. 
 
A perusal of the contents of the FIR would show that it was not 
the complainant who was the victim with reference to the allegations 
made in the complaint to the police, to enable the High Court to exercise 
the power to quash the FIR on the basis of compromise.  The allegations 
are with reference to withdrawal of salary for the period the respondent 
no.1 was on unauthorized foreign trips and also withdrawal of salary by 
producing false medical certificates5.  When the FIR in-question was 
quashed the matter was still being investigated by the police.  It was even 
 
5 The victim was not the complainant but the State. 

Page 6 of 7 
 
so submitted by the State in its reply to the quashing petition in the High 
Court. 
8. 
 
In the facts of the present case after setting the criminal 
machinery into motion, which had relevance with the fraud allegedly 
committed by the respondent no.1 with her employer, the complainant 
did not have any locus to compromise the matter with the accused when 
the FIR had been registered.  Even the High Court had failed to consider 
that aspect of the matter. Even though the reply filed by the State to the 
quashing petition was taken on record but without even referring to the 
stand taken therein, merely on the basis of compromise entered into 
between the complainant and the accused, the FIR was quashed. The 
order cannot be legally sustained. The allegations against the accused 
are of defrauding the State. How can such a matter be settled on the basis 
of a “compromise” between two private individuals? The simple answer 
is that it cannot be done.   
8.1 
 
The argument raised by the learned counsel for the 
respondent no.1 that in the departmental proceedings initiated on the 
same ground, she has already been exonerated is merely to be noticed 
as this may be a defence of the accused, which was not at all the ground 

Page 7 of 7 
 
on the basis of which the FIR in-question was quashed, at the stage of 
investigation.  
9. 
 
For the reasons mentioned above, the present appeal is 
allowed.  The impugned order passed by the High Court is set aside.  The 
petition filed by the respondent no.1 seeking quashing of the FIR in-
question on the basis of compromise is dismissed.  However, we make it 
clear that nothing said above will prejudice the case of the respondent 
no.1 for taking any defence in the proceedings against her at any 
appropriate stage.  The limited issue considered by this Court was with 
reference to quashing of the FIR in-question on the basis of the 
compromise. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
……………….……………..J. 
 (SUDHANSHU DHULIA) 
 
 
……………….……………..J. 
(RAJESH BINDAL) 
New Delhi 
March 22, 2024.