2024 INSC 253
 
Page 1 of 24 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
Original Suit No. 1 of 2024 
 
State of Kerala 
…Plaintiff(s) 
versus 
Union of India 
…Defendant(s) 
 
with 
 
I.A. No. 6149 of 2024 
ORDER 
SURYA KANT, J. 
 
1. 
State of Kerala has instituted this Original Suit under Article 
131 of the Constitution of India against the Union of India, 
challenging, inter alia, the following (collectively, the “Impugned 
Actions”): 
(a) 
Amendment Act No. 13 of 2018 (dated 28.03.2018): 
By this Amendment Act, the Parliament has amended Section 
4 of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2024.04.01
13:22:21 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
Page 2 of 24 
 
2003, whereby the Central Government is obligated to ensure 
that the aggregate debt of the Central Government and the 
State Governments does not exceed sixty percent of the gross 
domestic product by the end of Financial Year (F.Y.) 2024-25; 
(b) 
Letter No. 40(1)/PF-S/2023-24 (dated 27.03.2023):  
Through this letter, the Defendant has imposed a ‘Net 
Borrowing Ceiling’ on the Plaintiff - State, to restrict the 
maximum possible borrowing that Plaintiff could make under 
law. This ceiling was quantified as three percent of the 
projected Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) for the F.Y. 
2023-24, which came to INR 32,442 crores. This Net 
Borrowing Ceiling covered all sources of borrowings, 
including open market borrowings, loans from Financial 
Institutions, and the liabilities arising out of the Public 
Account of the Plaintiff. Additionally, to prevent the States 
from by-passing the Net Borrowing Ceiling by using State-
Owned Enterprises, the ceiling has also been applied to 
certain borrowings by such enterprises; and 
 

 
Page 3 of 24 
 
(c) 
Letter 
No. 
40(12)/PF-S/2023-24/OMB-52 
(dated 
11.08.2023): 
In this letter, the Defendant has accorded its consent to the 
Plaintiff to raise open market borrowing of INR 1,330 crores. 
It has also noted that the total open market borrowing 
allowed to the Plaintiff for the F.Y. 2023-24 was INR 21,852 
crores.  
2. 
The instant suit has been filed on the premise that by 
undertaking the Impugned Actions, the Defendant - Union of India 
has exceeded its power under Article 293 of the Constitution of 
India, which provides: 
“293. Borrowing by States.— 
(1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the 
executive power of a State extends to borrowing 
within the territory of India upon the security of the 
Consolidated Fund of the State within such limits, if 
any, as may from time to time be fixed by the 
Legislature of such State by law and to the giving of 
guarantees within such limits, if any, as may be so 
fixed.  
(2) The Government of India may, subject to such 
conditions as may be laid down by or under any law 
made by Parliament, make loans to any State or, so 
long as any limits fixed under article 292 are not 
exceeded, give guarantees in respect of loans raised 
by any State, and any sums required for the purpose 
of making such loans shall be charged on the 
Consolidated Fund of India.  
(3) A State may not without the consent of the 
Government of India raise any loan if there is still 

 
Page 4 of 24 
 
outstanding any part of a loan which has been made 
to the State by the Government of India or by its 
predecessor Government, or in respect of which a 
guarantee has been given by the Government of 
India or by its predecessor Government.  
(4) A consent under clause (3) may be granted 
subject to such conditions, if any, as the Government 
of India may think fit to impose.” 
3. 
Besides the afore-mentioned final relief in the suit, the 
Plaintiff -State also seeks interim injunction, inter alia, to mandate 
Union of India: (a) to restore the position that existed before the 
Defendant imposed ceiling on all the borrowings of the Plaintiff; 
and (b) to enable the Plaintiff to borrow INR 26,226 crores on an 
immediate basis. 
4. 
We have heard Mr. Kapil Sibal, Ld. Senior Advocate, for the 
Plaintiff - State, and Mr. R. Venkataramani, Ld. Attorney General 
for India and Mr. N. Venkataraman, Ld. Additional Solicitor 
General of India, on behalf of the Defendant – Union of India at a 
considerable length, and have perused the Plaint and other 
documents on record on the issue of maintainability of suit as well 
as the interim relief sought by the Plaintiff - State.  
5. 
In support of its prayer for the interim injunction, the Plaintiff 
- State has mainly urged that: (i) under Article 293 of the 
Constitution, the Union of India does not have the power to 

 
Page 5 of 24 
 
regulate all the borrowings of a State and conditions can be 
imposed only on the loans sought from the Central Government; 
(ii) the liabilities arising out of the Public Account and State-Owned 
Enterprises cannot be included in the borrowings of the Plaintiff; 
(iii) the Plaintiff – State is in dire need of INR 26,226 crores to pay 
dues arising out of various budgetary obligations including 
dearness allowance, pension scheme, subsidies, etc.; (iv) there has 
been under-utilization of permissible borrowing space from 
previous years, which the Plaintiff should be allowed to use now; 
(v) the over-borrowing from the years before F.Y. 2023-24 cannot 
be adjusted from the Net Borrowing Ceiling of this F.Y. and must 
instead be repaid at the date of maturity of such borrowing; and 
(vi) the debt is sustainable because it satisfies the Domar model, 
such that the GSDP of the Plaintiff – State is rising faster than the 
effective interest rate. 
6. 
Per contra, the Defendant – Union of India controverted the 
Plaintiff’s interim claim and has argued that: (i) since management 
of public finance is a national issue, the Union of India has the 
power to regulate all the borrowings of the Plaintiff - State to 
maintain the fiscal health of the country; (ii) the liabilities arising 
out of Public Account and State-Owned enterprises can be 

 
Page 6 of 24 
 
included in the borrowings of the Plaintiff since they may be used 
to by-pass the borrowing ceiling; (iii) the pending dues have arisen 
on account of the fiscal mismanagement by the State of Kerala and 
are not a consequence of regulation of borrowing by the Union of 
India; (iv) the Plaintiff’s contention regarding under-utilized 
borrowing space from the previous years is based on erroneous 
facts; (v) the over-borrowing done in a F.Y. has to be adjusted 
against the borrowing amount of the next F.Ys.; and (vi) the fiscal 
health of the country will be jeopardized if the Plaintiff – State is 
allowed to undertake more debt. 
7. 
On a critical analysis of the contentions of both the sides, it 
seems to us that the instant suit raises more than one substantial 
questions regarding interpretation of the Constitution, including: 
(a) 
What is the true import and interpretation of the 
following expression contained in Article 131 of the 
Constitution: “if and in so far as the dispute involves any 
question (whether of law or fact) on which the existence or 
extent of a legal right depends”?  
(b) 
Does Article 293 of the Constitution vest a State with an 
enforceable right to raise borrowing from the Union 

 
Page 7 of 24 
 
government and/or other sources? If yes, to what extent such 
right can be regulated by the Union government?  
(c) 
Can the borrowing by State-Owned Enterprises and 
liabilities arising out of the Public Account be included under 
the purview of Article 293(3) of the Constitution? 
(d) 
What is the scope and extent of Judicial Review 
exercisable by this Court with respect to a fiscal policy, which 
is purportedly in conflict with the object and spirit of Article 
293 of the Constitution? 
8. 
Since Article 293 of the Constitution has not been so far the 
subject to any authoritative interpretation by this Court, in our 
considered opinion, the aforesaid questions squarely fall within the 
ambit of Article 145(3) of the Constitution. We, therefore, deem it 
appropriate to refer these questions for pronouncement by a Bench 
comprising five judges. 
9. 
In addition, and as a necessary corollary to these questions, 
it appears that on merits also, various questions of significant 
importance impacting the Federal Structure of Governance as 
embedded in our Constitution, like, the following, arise for 
consideration: 

 
Page 8 of 24 
 
(a) 
Is 
fiscal 
decentralization 
an 
aspect 
of 
Indian 
Federalism? If yes, do the Impugned Actions taken by the 
Defendant purportedly to maintain the fiscal health of the 
country violate such Principles of Federalism? 
(b) 
Are the Impugned Actions violative of Article 14 of the 
Constitution on the ground of ‘manifest arbitrariness’ or on 
the basis of differential treatment meted out to the Plaintiff 
vis-à-vis other States? 
(c) 
What has been the past practice regarding regulation of 
the Plaintiff’s borrowing by the Defendant? If such practice 
has been restrictive of Plaintiff’s borrowings, can it estop the 
Plaintiff from bringing the present suit? Conversely, if such 
practice has not been restrictive, can it serve as the basis for 
the Plaintiff’s legitimate expectations against the Defendant - 
Union of India? 
(d) 
Are the restrictions imposed by the Impugned Actions 
in conflict with the role assigned to the Reserve Bank of India 
as the public debt manager of the Plaintiff? 

 
Page 9 of 24 
 
(e) 
Is it mandatory to have prior consultation with States 
for giving effect to the recommendations of Finance 
Commission? 
10. The Registry is accordingly directed to place this matter 
before Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India for the constitution of an 
appropriate Bench to answer the aforementioned questions and/or 
such other issues as may be identified by the Five-Judge Bench. 
11. We may now advert to the issue as to whether, pending the 
decision on the questions formulated above, the Plaintiff – State 
can be granted the ad-interim injunction as briefly noticed in 
paragraph 3 of this Order?  
12. The globally acknowledged golden principles, collectively 
known as the Triple-Test, are followed by the Courts across the 
jurisdictions as the pre-requisites before a party can be 
mandatorily injuncted to do or to refrain from doing a particular 
thing. These three cardinal factors, that are deeply embedded in 
the Indian jurisprudence as well, are: 
(a) 
A ‘Prima facie case’, which necessitates that as per the 
material placed on record, the plaintiff is likely to succeed in 
the final determination of the case;   

 
Page 10 of 24 
 
(b) 
‘Balance of convenience’, such that the prejudice likely 
to be caused to the plaintiff due to rejection of the interim 
relief will be higher than the inconvenience that the 
defendant may face if the relief is so granted; and 
(c) 
‘Irreparable injury’, which means that if the relief is not 
granted, the plaintiff will face an irreversible injury that 
cannot be compensated in monetary terms. 
13. At this juncture, it is necessary to distinguish the standard 
of scrutiny in applying these parameters for ‘prohibitory’ and 
‘mandatory’ injunctions. Prohibitory injunctions vary from 
mandatory injunctions in terms of the nature of relief that is 
sought. While the former seeks to restrain the defendant from 
doing something, the latter compels the defendant to take a 
positive step.1 For instance, hypothetically, in the context of a 
construction dispute, if a plaintiff seeks to prevent the defendant 
from demolishing a structure, it would be deemed a prohibitory 
injunction. Whereas, if a plaintiff wants to compel the defendant 
to demolish a structure, then this would amount to mandatory 
injunction. 
 
1 State of Haryana v. State of Punjab, (2004) 12 SCC 673, para 37-38. 

 
Page 11 of 24 
 
14. In that sense, prohibitory injunctions are forward-looking, 
such that they seek to restrict a future course of action. 
Conversely, mandatory injunctions are backward-looking, because 
they require the defendant to take an active step and undo the past 
action.2 Since mandatory injunctions require the defendant to take 
a positive action instead of merely being restrained from 
performing an act, they carry a graver risk of prejudice for the 
defendant if the final outcome subsequently turns out to be in its 
favour. For instance, in the example above, preventing the 
demolition of a structure for the time being cannot be perceived to 
be on the same pedestal as mandating the demolition of a 
construction. While the former may still be undone, i.e., the 
defendant may still be compelled to demolish the structure should 
the plaintiff succeeds in his final claim, undoing the latter, i.e., 
rebuilding the construction, would cause graver injustice. The 
Courts are, therefore, relatively more cautious in granting 
mandatory injunction as compared to prohibitory injunction and 
thus, require the plaintiff to establish a stronger case.3 
15. Reverting to the facts of the case in hand, the Plaintiff – State 
has sought mandatory injunction and not a prohibitory one. 
 
2 Shepherd Homes Ltd. v. Sandham, [1970] 3 WLR 348. 
3 Id., Dorab Cawasji Warden v. Coomi Sorab Warden, (1990) 2 SCC 117, para 16. 

 
Page 12 of 24 
 
Instead of arguing that the Defendant – Union of India should 
refrain from imposing a Net Borrowing Ceiling during the next F.Y., 
the Plaintiff has applied for a backward-looking injunction, i.e., for 
an injunction to undo the imposition of the Net Borrowing Ceiling 
that covered various liabilities and to restore the position that 
existed before such ceiling. Hence, the Plaintiff is required to meet 
a higher standard for the triple-test of interim relief as mentioned 
in paragraph 12 above of this order. 
16. Coming to the first factor, i.e., the prima facie case, the 
Plaintiff – State has raised various substantive questions of 
constitutional interpretation. Generally speaking, the phrase 
‘prima facie case’ is not a term of art and it simply signifies that at 
first sight the plaintiff has a strong case. According to Webster’s 
International Dictionary, ‘prima facie case’ means a case 
established by ‘prima facie evidence’, which in turn means the 
evidence that is sufficient in law to raise a presumption of fact 
unless rebutted. 
17. The Plaintiff – State has argued that based on the States 
Finance Accounts audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India and the achievements of the fiscal deficit targets, the 
Plaintiff – State has under-utilized permissible borrowing space in 

 
Page 13 of 24 
 
the last three F.Ys. (2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022-23) to the extent 
of INR 24,434 crores. The Plaintiff – State contends that even going 
by the stand of the Union, the under-utilized space of the Plaintiff 
for the said period borrowings is INR 10,722 crores, which it 
should be allowed to borrow. 
18. Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Counsel for the Plaintiff – 
State, submitted that under the recommendations of the 15th 
Finance Commission, the State is entitled to borrow up to the 
maximum permissible fiscal deficit for the year. He relied on 
paragraphs 12.64 and 12.65 of the Report of the 15th Finance 
Commission, which read as under: 
“12.64 If a State is not able to fully utilise its 
sanctioned borrowing limit, as specified above, 
in any particular year during the first four 
years of our award period (2021-22 to 2024 -
25), it will have the option of availing this 
unutilised borrowing amount (calculated in 
rupees) in any of the subsequent years within 
our award period.  
12.65 Based on these assumptions, we have worked 
out the debt path for States, as presented in Table 
12.4. Since all estimated revenue deficits are met by 
equivalent provision of revenue deficit grant, the 
revenue surpluses run by the States are reflected by 
the negative numbers on revenue deficit presented in 
the table. The State debt in aggregate tapers off 
gradually after 2022-23. This is similar to the 
pattern in the debt path of the Union shown in Table 
12.2. The State-specific indicative debt paths are 
given in Annex 12.1. 
 

 
Page 14 of 24 
 
Table 12.4: Indicative Deficit and Debt Path for 
State Governments 
(% of GSDP) 
 
2020-
21 
2021-
22 
2022-
23 
2023-
24 
2024-
25 
2025-
26 
Revenue 
deficit* 
-0.1 
-0.5 
-0.8 
-1.2 
-1.7 
-2.5 
Fiscal 
deficit 
4.5 
4.0 
3.5 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
Total 
liabilities 
33.1 
32.6 
33.3 
33.1 
32.8 
32.5 
*negative values indicate surplus and positive 
values indicate deficit 
Note: While arriving at the total liabilities of States 
for the year 2021-22, an aggregate fiscal deficit of 
3.5 per cent of GSDP is taken because some States 
may not avail of the full unconditional net borrowing 
space of 4 per cent.” 
19. According to the learned Senior Counsel, since the fiscal 
deficit for 2023-24 is 3% of GSDP, they should be allowed the full 
borrowing without any restrictions. 
20. Mr. N. Venkataraman, learned ASG, controverted the 
submission of the Plaintiff – State.  According to learned ASG, 
while the figures as projected by the State are themselves in 
dispute, the State is not entitled to borrow the amounts as claimed 
since the over-borrowing by the State of Kerala from F.Ys. 2016-
17 to 2019-20 is INR 14,479 crores.  According to him, if these 
over-borrowings are factored in the borrowing space, it will be 
found that the State has not under-utilized but over-utilized its 
borrowing capacity by INR 2,941.82 crores till F.Y. 2022-23.  The 

 
Page 15 of 24 
 
learned ASG, relying on paragraph 14.64 of the Report of the 14th 
Finance Commission, contended that if the State is not able to fully 
utilize its sanctioned borrowings limit of 3% of GSDP in any 
particular year during the first four years of the award period 
(2015-16 to 2018-19), the State will have the option of availing this 
un-utilized borrowing amount (calculated in Rupees) only in the 
following year within the award period.  However, there is a 
difference between under-utilization of the borrowing limit and 
over-utilization of the borrowing limit. Learned ASG maintained 
that over-utilization is dealt with in Annexure 14.2 of Chapter-XIV 
in the Report of the 14th Finance Commission, which clearly 
prescribes as under: 
“Case II. Over-utilizing the borrowing amount: 
 
If a State, in a given year, borrows over and above 
the sanctioned borrowing limit by x amount, then in 
the succeeding year, the same x amount of the 
previous year will be deducted from the States 
borrowing limit of that year.” 
 
21. According to learned ASG, the Plaintiff – State is wrong in 
contending that such deduction in the succeeding year can only 
be made within the award period of the 14th Finance Commission.  
He explained that over-borrowings of the previous year were 
adjusted for the F.Ys. 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24 (as on date) 

 
Page 16 of 24 
 
to the tune of INR 9,197.15 crores, INR 13,067.78 crores and INR 
4,354.72 crores respectively. According to learned ASG, the State 
was fully conscious of the correct position in law and had rightly 
acquiesced in the adjustments of the over-borrowings.  Having 
acquiesced, it does not lie in the mouth of the Plaintiff – State to 
contend that once the period for the 15th Finance Commission has 
set in from F.Ys. 2021-22 to 2025-26, the over-borrowings of the 
previous years have absolutely no relevance.  Learned ASG 
vehemently argued that the Plaintiff is wrong in contending that a 
reading of the report of the 14th and 15th Finance Commission 
indicates that for both under-utilization and over-utilization, all 
adjustments have to be made within the period covered by the 
Report of the Commission. 
22. Prima facie, we are inclined to accept the argument of the 
Union that where there is over-utilization of the borrowing limit in 
the previous year, to the extent of over-borrowing, deductions are 
permissible in the succeeding year, even beyond the award period 
of the 14th Finance Commission.  This is, however, a matter which 
will have to be finally decided in the suit. 
23. At this stage, based on the contentions of the Plaintiff – State 
with which we are not prima facie convinced, permitting any 

 
Page 17 of 24 
 
borrowing—whether INR 24,434 crores as claimed in the written 
note or INR 10,722 crores as alternatively claimed—would not be 
tenable. 
24. In fact, it has been admitted by the Plaintiff – State that there 
has been over-borrowing/over-utilization of the borrowing limit 
between the F.Ys. 2017-18 and 2019-20.  It is not denied that if, 
as contended by the Union, such over-borrowings are adjustable 
in the succeeding years, then the State has already exhausted its 
borrowing limits for the F.Y. 2023-24. 
25. We find, prima facie, that there is a difference in the 
mechanism which operates when there is under-utilization of 
borrowing and when there is over-utilization of borrowing. The 
Plaintiff – State has not been able to demonstrate at this stage that 
even after adjusting the over-borrowings of the previous year, there 
is fiscal space to borrow. 
26. Our attention has also been invited to the Kerala Fiscal 
Responsibility Act, 2003.  The Act is enacted to provide for the 
responsibility of the government to ensure prudence in fiscal 
management and fiscal stability by progressive elimination of 
revenue deficit and sustainable debt management consistent with 
fiscal stability, greater transparency in fiscal operations of the 

 
Page 18 of 24 
 
government and conduct of fiscal policy in a medium term fiscal 
framework and for matters connected there with and incidental 
thereto.  The Preamble of the Act also states that it was felt 
expedient to provide for the responsibility of the government to 
ensure prudence in fiscal management and fiscal stability by 
progressive elimination of revenue deficit and sustainable debt 
management consistent with fiscal stability. 
27. In view of above, we find prima facie merit in the submission 
of the Union of India that after inclusion of off budget borrowing 
for F.Y. 2022-23 and adjustments for over-borrowing of past years, 
the State has no unutilized fiscal space and that the State has 
over-utilized its fiscal space.  Hence, we are unable to accept the 
argument of the Plaintiff at the interim stage that there is fiscal 
space of unutilized borrowing of either INR 10,722 crores as was 
orally prayed during the hearing or INR 24,434 Crores which was 
the borrowing claimed in the negotiations with the Union. 
28. Therefore, the Plaintiff – State has failed to establish a prima 
facie case regarding its contention on under-utilization of 
borrowing. Further, with respect to its other contentions, while the 
Plaintiff has sought to construe Article 293 restrictively to limit the 
Central government’s power only to the loans granted by it, the 

 
Page 19 of 24 
 
Defendant has contended that if Article 293 is read in such a 
manner, it would render this provision redundant as the Central 
Government has an inherent power as a lender to impose 
conditions on such loans even in the absence of any express 
constitutional provision. Similarly, the Defendant has contested 
the Plaintiff’s narrow reading of the term ‘borrowing’ and has 
argued that off-budget borrowings could also be included in the 
same if they are used to by-pass the conditions imposed under 
Article 293 of the Constitution. 
29. Since this Article has not been the subject of an authoritative 
pronouncement of this Court so far, we cannot readily accept the 
Plaintiff’s contention over the Defendant’s interpretation by taking 
it on face value. In this regard, we have referred the matter to a 
larger bench of five judges, as mentioned in paragraph 10 of this 
order.  
30. Hence, on consideration of the limited material available on 
record so far, the Plaintiff – State has not established a prima facie 
case to the extent required in the instant suit. 
31. With respect to the second prong for claiming the interim 
relief, the Plaintiff – State has argued that if the interim injunction 
is not granted, it is likely to face extreme financial hardship on 

 
Page 20 of 24 
 
account of its pending dues. As against this, the Defendant – Union 
of India has highlighted the grave consequences regarding the 
fiscal health of the country if the Plaintiff is allowed the interim 
relief. The Union of India has argued that additional borrowing by 
the State will have spill-over effects and may raise the prices of 
borrowing in the market, possibly crowding out the borrowing by 
private investors. This may then have an adverse impact on the 
production of goods and services in the market, possibly affecting 
the economic well-being of every citizen. Since the Central 
government borrows money from outside the country and lends 
money to the State governments, borrowings of the States are 
intricately linked to the creditworthiness of the country in the 
international market. Hence, the Union of India argued that in 
case such borrowings by State Governments are not regulated, it 
may negatively impact the macro-economic growth and stability of 
the entire nation. 
32. On a comparative evaluation of the submissions, it seems to 
us that the mischief that is likely to ensue in the event of granting 
the interim relief, will be far greater than rejecting the same. If we 
grant the interim injunction and the suit is eventually dismissed, 
turning back the adverse effects on the entire nation at such a 

 
Page 21 of 24 
 
large scale would be nearly impossible. Au contraire, if the interim 
relief is declined at this stage and the Plaintiff - State succeeds 
subsequently in the final outcome of the suit, it can still pay the 
pending dues, may be with some added burden, which can be 
suitably passed on the judgment - debtor. The balance of 
convenience, thus, clearly lies in favour of the Defendant – Union 
of India. 
33. Finally, as regards to the third pre-condition, we find that the 
Plaintiff – State has sought to equate ‘financial hardship’ with 
‘irreparable injury’. It appears prima facie that ‘monetary damage’ 
is not an irreparable loss, as the Court can always balance the 
equities in its final outcome by ensuring that pending claims are 
adjusted along with resultant additional liability on the opposite 
party. 
34. We may hasten to remind ourselves at this stage that 
according to the Defendant-Union of India, the Plaintiff – State is 
apparently a highly debt stressed State that has mismanaged its 
finances. This statement, however, is strongly refuted by the State. 
According to the Union, the Plaintiff has the highest ratio of 
Pension to Total Revenue Expenditure among all States and 
requires urgent measures to reduce its expenditure. Instead of 

 
Page 22 of 24 
 
doing so, the Plaintiff is borrowing more funds to meet its day-to-
day expenses such as salaries and pensions. Accordingly, the 
Defendant has contended that the financial hardship is not 
attributable to the regulation of Plaintiff’s borrowing and is 
actually a consequence of its own actions. Furthermore, the 
Defendant maintains that restriction on the borrowing is a step 
towards the betterment of fiscal health of the State because if such 
borrowings are not restricted, the Plaintiff’s position will become 
more precarious, leading to a vicious cycle of deteriorating 
financial health and increased borrowing to repair the same. 
35. If the State has essentially created financial hardship 
because of its own financial mismanagement, such hardship 
cannot be held to be an irreparable injury that would necessitate 
an interim relief against Union. There is an arguable point that if 
we were to issue interim mandatory injunction in such like cases, 
it might set a bad precedent in law that would enable the States to 
flout fiscal policies and still successfully claim additional 
borrowings. 
36. In any case, we cannot be oblivious of the fact that in light of 
the Plaintiff’s contention regarding pending financial dues, the 
Defendant has already made an offer to allow additional borrowing. 

 
Page 23 of 24 
 
In a meeting dated 15.02.2024, the Defendant first offered consent 
for INR 13,608 crores, out of which INR 11,731 crore was subject 
to the pre-requisite of withdrawal of the suit, a condition that we 
disapproved of. Subsequently, in a meeting dated 08.03.2024, the 
Union offered a consent for INR 5,000 crores. Further, vide 
circulars dated 08.03.2024 and 19.03.2024, the Union has 
accorded consent for INR 8,742 crores and INR 4,866 crores 
respectively, which comes to a sum total of INR 13,608 crores. 
Even if we assume that the financial hardship of the Plaintiff is 
partly a result of the Defendant’s Regulations, during the course 
of hearing this interim application, the concern has been assuaged 
by the Defendant – Union of India to some extent so as to bail out 
the Plaintiff – State from the current crisis. The Plaintiff thus has 
secured substantial relief during the pendency of this interim 
application. 
37. To sum up, we are of the view that since the Plaintiff – State 
has failed to establish the three prongs of proving prima facie case, 
balance of convenience and irreparable injury, State of Kerala is 
not entitled to the interim injunction, as prayed for. 
38. In light of the above observations, I.A. No. 6149 of 2024 is 
disposed off. 

 
Page 24 of 24 
 
39. It is clarified that the observations made hereinabove are for 
the limited purpose of deciding the prayer for ad-interim injunction 
and shall have no bearing on the final outcome of the Original Suit. 
40. The main case be placed before Hon’ble the Chief Justice of 
India for constitution of an appropriate Bench. 
 
 
………..………………… J. 
(SURYA KANT) 
 
 
…………………………… J. 
(K.V. VISWANATHAN) 
 
NEW DELHI 
DATED: 01.04.2024