2024 INSC 258
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1167 of 2018 
 
BALLU @ BALRAM @ BALMUKUND  
AND ANOTHER 
 
 
 
 
      ...APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  ...RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
1. 
The present appeal challenges the judgment dated 6th April 
2018 passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur 
in Criminal Appeal No. 261 of 1995, thereby allowing the appeal 
of the respondent-State which was filed challenging the 
judgment dated 26th March 1994 passed in S.T. No. 160 of 1992, 
vide which the learned 2nd Class Sessions Judge, Damoh 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘the learned trial Judge’) had acquitted 
the appellants of the charges under Sections 302, 201 and 34 
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as ‘IPC’). 
The High Court, reversing the judgment of the learned trial 
Judge, had convicted the appellant No. 1 (Ballu Chaurasiya @ 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.04.02
17:37:53 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Balram @ Balmukund) under Sections 302 and 201/34 of IPC 
and appellant No. 2 (Halki Bahu @ Jamna Bai @ Jamuna Bai) 
under Sections 302/34 and 201 of IPC and awarded rigorous 
imprisonment for life under Sections 302 and 302/34 with fine 
of Rs. 1000/-, in default of payment of fine to further undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for three months.  Insofar as Sections 
201 and 201/34 of IPC are concerned, the High Court further 
awarded sentence of rigorous imprisonment for seven years with 
a fine of Rs. 3000/-, in default of payment of fine to further 
undergo rigorous imprisonment for 5 months. 
2. 
The prosecution story in brief is as under:  
2.1 The deceased-Mahesh Sahu was in a love relation with 
Anita, who is the daughter of respondent No.2-Jamna Bai 
(appellant No.2 herein) and sister of Ballu @ Balram @ 
Balmukund (appellant No.1 herein). Anita and deceased 
Mahesh Sahu resided at Agra for about eight months and then 
returned to Damoh. Thereafter, the marriage of Anita was 
solemnized with another person. Even then, they were in 
contact with each other.  Due to this enmity, on 7th June, 1992 
at about 11:00 P.M., the appellants caused death of the 
deceased in furtherance of their common intention. The 
prosecution relies on the evidence of Govind (PW-7), who saw 

3 
 
that appellant No. 1 was dragging a dead body from his house. 
He had also seen his mother, appellant No. 2, who was washing 
the blood stains at the door of their house.  
2.2 After Beni Prasad @ Beri Prasad (PW-1) and Sumitra Bai 
(PW-6), who are the father and mother of the deceased, came to 
know about the incident, they came to the spot of the incident. 
On the basis of the oral report of PW-1, an FIR (Exh. P-1) came 
to be registered at Police Station, Damoh.  
2.3 Upon completion of the investigation, the chargesheet 
came to be filed in the Court of Judicial Magistrate First Class. 
Since the case was exclusively triable by the learned trial Judge, 
it was committed to the learned trial Judge.  
2.4 At the conclusion of the trial, the learned trial Judge has 
acquitted the accused persons since the prosecution has failed 
to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. The respondent-
State preferred an appeal before the High Court.  
2.5 The High Court, by the impugned judgment, reversed the 
finding of the learned trial Judge, as aforesaid.  
2.6 Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal. 
3. 
We have heard Mr. Varun Thakur, learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellants and Shri Pashupathi Nath 
Razdan, learned counsel for the respondent-State. 

4 
 
4. 
Mr. Varun Thakur, learned counsel, submits that the High 
Court has grossly erred in reversing the well-reasoned judgment 
of acquittal. He submits that the learned trial Judge by giving 
elaborate reasonings, found that the prosecution has failed to 
prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. He submits that the 
High Court in a cursory manner interfered with the said finding.  
He submits that the present case is a case of circumstantial 
evidence and unless the prosecution is able to prove the chain 
of circumstances beyond reasonable doubt it is not permissible 
to interfere with the findings of the trial Judge and to record the 
finding of conviction. He further submits that, in an appeal 
arising from acquittal, the scope is limited. Unless the finding is 
shown to be perverse or impossible, it will not be permissible for 
the Appellate Court to interfere with the same. 
5. 
Shri Pashupathi Nath Razdan, learned counsel for the 
respondent-State, on the contrary, submits that the learned 
trial Judge has totally misread the evidence. He submits that 
the evidence of Beni Prasad (PW-1) and Sumitra Bai (PW-6), 
coupled with the medical evidence, would show that the 
prosecution has proved the case beyond reasonable doubt.  
6. 
Undoubtedly, the prosecution case rests on circumstantial 
evidence. The law with regard to conviction on the basis of 

5 
 
circumstantial evidence has very well been crystalized in the 
judgment of this Court in the case of Sharad Birdhichand 
Sarda v. State of Maharashtra1, wherein this Court held 
thus:  
“152. Before discussing the cases relied upon by the 
High Court we would like to cite a few decisions on 
the nature, character and essential proof required in 
a criminal case which rests on circumstantial 
evidence alone. The most fundamental and basic 
decision of this Court is Hanumant v. State of 
Madhya Pradesh [(1952) 2 SCC 71 : AIR 1952 SC 343 
: 1952 SCR 1091 : 1953 Cri LJ 129]. This case has 
been uniformly followed and applied by this Court in 
a large number of later decisions up-to-date, for 
instance, the cases of Tufail (Alias) Simmi v. State of 
Uttar Pradesh [(1969) 3 SCC 198 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 55] 
and Ramgopal v. State of Maharashtra [(1972) 4 SCC 
625 : AIR 1972 SC 656]. It may be useful to extract 
what Mahajan, J. has laid down in Hanumant case 
[(1952) 2 SCC 71 : AIR 1952 SC 343 : 1952 SCR 1091 
: 1953 Cri LJ 129] :  
“It is well to remember that in cases where 
the evidence is of a circumstantial nature, 
the 
circumstances 
from 
which 
the 
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should 
in the first instance be fully established, 
and all the facts so established should be 
consistent only with the hypothesis of the 
guilt 
of 
the 
accused. 
Again, 
the 
circumstances should be of a conclusive 
nature and tendency and they should be 
such as to exclude every hypothesis but 
the one proposed to be proved. In other 
words, there must be a chain of evidence 
so far complete as not to leave any 
reasonable 
ground 
for 
a 
conclusion 
consistent with the innocence of the 
 
1 (1984) 4 SCC 116 = 1984 INSC 121 

6 
 
accused and it must be such as to show 
that within all human probability the act 
must have been done by the accused.”  
153. A close analysis of this decision would show 
that the following conditions must be fulfilled before 
a case against an accused can be said to be fully 
established:  
(1) the circumstances from which the 
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should 
be fully established.  
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that 
the circumstances concerned “must or should” and 
not “may be” established. There is not only a 
grammatical but a legal distinction between “may be 
proved” and “must be or should be proved” as was 
held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade v. 
State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 793 : 1973 SCC 
(Cri) 1033 : 1973 Crl LJ 1783] where the observations 
were made: [SCC para 19, p. 807: SCC (Cri) p. 1047]  
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that 
the accused must be and not merely may 
be guilty before a court can convict and 
the mental distance between ‘may be’ and 
‘must be’ is long and divides vague 
conjectures from sure conclusions.”  
(2) the facts so established should be 
consistent only with the hypothesis of the 
guilt of the accused, that is to say, they 
should not be explainable on any other 
hypothesis except that the accused is 
guilty,  
(3) the circumstances should be of a 
conclusive nature and tendency,  
(4) they should exclude every possible 
hypothesis except the one to be proved, 
and  
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so 
complete as not to leave any reasonable 
ground for the conclusion consistent with 
the innocence of the accused and must 

7 
 
show that in all human probability the act 
must have been done by the accused.  
154. These five golden principles, if we may say so, 
constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case based 
on circumstantial evidence.”  
 
7. 
It can thus clearly be seen that it is necessary for the 
prosecution that the circumstances from which the conclusion 
of the guilt is to be drawn should be fully established.  The Court 
holds that it is a primary principle that the accused ‘must be’ 
and not merely ‘may be’ proved guilty before a court can convict 
the accused.  It has been held that there is not only a 
grammatical but a legal distinction between ‘may be proved’ and 
‘must be or should be proved’.  It has been held that the facts 
so established should be consistent only with the guilt of the 
accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on any 
other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty.  It has 
further been held that the circumstances should be such that 
they exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be 
proved.  It has been held that there must be a chain of evidence 
so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the 
conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and 
must show that in all human probabilities the act must have 
been done by the accused. 

8 
 
8. 
It is settled law that the suspicion, however strong it may 
be, cannot take the place of proof beyond reasonable doubt. An 
accused cannot be convicted on the ground of suspicion, no 
matter how strong it is. An accused is presumed to be innocent  
unless proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. 
9. 
Apart from that, it is to be noted that the present case is a 
case of reversal of acquittal. The law with regard to interference 
by the Appellate Court is very well crystallized. Unless the 
finding of acquittal is found to be perverse or impossible, 
interference with the same would not be warranted.  Though, 
there are a catena of judgments on the issue, we will only refer 
to two judgments which the High Court itself has reproduced in 
the impugned judgment, which are as reproduced below: 
“13.  In case of Sadhu Saran Singh vs. State of 
U.P. (2016) 4 SCC 397, the Supreme Court has held 
that:-  
"In an appeal against acquittal where the 
presumption of innocence in favour of the 
accused is reinforced, the appellate Court 
would interfere with the order of acquittal 
only when there is perversity of fact 
and !aw. However, we believe that the 
paramount consideration of the Court is to 
do 
substantial 
justice 
and 
avoid 
miscarriage of justice which can arise by 
acquitting the accused who is guilty of an 
offence. A miscarriage of justice that may 
occur by the acquittal of the guilty is no 
less than from the conviction of an 
innocent. 
Appellate 
Court, 
while 

9 
 
enunciating the principles with regard to 
the scope of powers of the appellate Court 
in an appeal against acquittal, has no 
absolute restriction in law to review and 
relook the entire evidence on which the 
order of acquittal is founded."  
 
14.  Similar, In case of Harljan Bhala Teja vs. State 
of Gujarat (2016) 12 SCC 665, the Supreme Court 
has held that:-  
"No doubt, where, on appreciation of 
evidence on record, two views are 
possible, and the trial court has taken a 
view of acquittal, the appellate court 
should not interfere with the same. 
However, this does not mean that in all 
the cases where the trial court has 
recorded acquittal, the same should not 
be interfered with, even if the view is 
perverse. Where the view taken by the 
trial court is against the weight of 
evidence on record, or perverse, it is 
always open far the appellate court to 
express the right conclusion after re-
appreciating the evidence If the charge is 
proved beyond reasonable doubt on 
record, and convict the accused."  
  
10. In view of the above settled principles of law, we will have 
to examine the present case. 
11. It is not in dispute that the death of the deceased is a 
homicidal death and as such, it will not be necessary to refer to 
the medical evidence. The only question that remains is as to 
whether the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable 
doubt and as to whether the appellants are guilty of committing 

10 
 
the crime. 
12. Learned trial Judge, by elaborately discussing the 
evidence, had found that the appellants were not guilty. We 
crystallize the findings of the learned trial Judge, as under: 
12.1       Beni Prasad (PW-1), who is the father of the deceased, 
had deposed that when he went to call his son Mahesh Sahu 
for dinner then Mahesh Sahu was standing at the Chowk with 
Pappu Tamrakar and two boys. Mahesh Sahu told him that he 
would come later, then Beni Prasad (PW-1) went to his house 
and fell asleep and later at night around 11:45 P.M., one boy 
came to him and told him that Ballu Chaurasiya (appellant No. 
1), Santosh Chaurasiya and other persons were beating Mahesh 
Sahu. On hearing this, he ran towards the house of Ballu 
Chaurasiya wearing chaddhi and baniyan. He saw that Ballu 
Charuasiya, Santosh Chaurasiya and his two brothers were 
dragging Mahesh Sahu in dead condition and put his body 10 
feet away from their house. After that the accused Ballu 
Chaurasiya went inside his house. Beni Prasad (PW-1) went 
near the place where Mahesh Sahu’s body was lying and he 
found him to be dead. At that point of time, Sumitra Bai (PW-
6), the mother of the deceased also came there and she saw that 
Jamuna Bai (appellant No. 2), who is the mother of the accused 

11 
 
Ballu Chaurasiya, was cleaning the blood on the door.  
12.2 Beni Prasad deposed that in the last month of the year 
1991 (December 1991) his son Mahesh Sahu went to Bhopal for 
an interview and there was no news about him for about eight 
months. Thereafter, a letter came to him from his son in the 
fourth month of the year 1992 (April 1992) informing him that 
he was working at Agra and that he had married a girl named 
Anita, who is the sister of the accused/appellant No. 1 Ballu 
Chaurasiya. Thereafter, the deceased Mahesh Sahu and Anita 
returned to Damoh (in the fourth month of the year 1992 i.e., 
April 1992), and Anita started living in her house and thereafter 
Anita was married to another person in Ujjain by her brother 
Ballu Chaurasiya (appellant No. 1). Thereafter, Anita left for her 
in-laws house and thereafter correspondence of letters started 
between Mahesh Sahu and Anita. He stated that this 
correspondence of letters was not liked by Ballu Chaurasiya 
(appellant No. 1) and he started to give death threats to Mahesh 
Sahu.  
12.3  The learned trial Judge found that the statement given by 
Beni Prasad (PW-1), before the trial Judge was totally contrary 
to his statement recorded under Section 161 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Exh. D/1). It was found that Beni 

12 
 
Prasad (PW-1) had totally improved his story in his deposition 
before the Court. Learned trial Judge also found the behaviour 
of Beni Prasad (PW-1) to be abnormal. In his cross-examination, 
Beni Prasad (PW-1) admitted that when he saw four persons 
dragging the dead body, he said nothing because he was alone. 
However, he admitted that the dead body of Mahesh Sahu was 
lying in a dense basti and people have houses around the said 
place and there was also a dispensary of the (Nagar Palika) 
Municipality situated at Gauri Shankar Temple, about 9 feet 
away from his house. Learned trial Judge also found that within 
the same dispensary itself, the Police Chowki was situated, 
manned by hawaldar and constables. The learned trial Judge 
found that the conduct of the Beni Prasad (PW-1) in not 
informing about the dead body of the deceased being dragged 
away to anyone and particularly at the Police Chowki which was 
hardly any distance from the place of occurrence to be 
absolutely unnatural. The learned trial judge found that when 
a panchnama of the dead body (Exh. P-2) was being conducted, 
he did not give the name of the killers. The explanation given by 
Beni Prasad (PW-1) was that the police did not ask him. The 
learned trial Judge also found that Beni Prasad (PW-1) admitted 
in his evidence that at the time of panchnama of dead body 

13 
 
(Exh. P-2), there was a crowd of around 150 people.  
12.4      Ms. Sumitra Bai (PW-6), mother of the deceased, also 
stated about the relationship between the deceased Mahesh 
Sahu and Anita. She stated that the accused/appellant No. 1 
Ballu Chaurasiya was threatening the deceased Mahesh Sahu 
on a day prior to the date of the incident.  She also informed 
about one boy coming at about 11:45 P.M./12 A.M. and 
informing her that a fight was going on between Mahesh Sahu 
and Ballu Chaurasiya. When she went to the house of the 
accused, she saw accused Ballu Chaurasiya, his elder brother, 
his manjhla brother and accused Jamuna Bai dragging her son 
and leaving her son in front of bade father’s house. Learned trial 
Judge found that the evidence of this witness was also totally 
improvised. Learned trial Judge also found that there was 
extreme exaggeration in the depositions given by this witness in 
the Court as compared to the statements under Section 161 
Cr.P.C. (Exh. D-2). The learned trial Judge, as a result, 
disbelieved the evidence of these two witnesses, i.e., the father 
and mother of the deceased.  
12.5      Learned trial Judge also found that the prosecution 
had relied on the evidence of Raju (PW-4), Dharmendra Singh 
(PW-5) and Govind (PW-7) to establish the circumstances 

14 
 
regarding the accused being last seen with the deceased 
Mahesh Sahu. Further all these three witnesses had turned 
hostile and not supported the prosecution case.  
12.6       Learned trial Judge also discarded the circumstances 
relied on by the prosecution regarding cutting the nails of both 
the hands of the accused Ballu Chaurasiya and the said nails 
containing the blood of the deceased Mahesh Sahu. Learned 
trial Judge also found that the nails were cut after a period of 
six days from the date of the incident. The prosecution has also 
relied on the circumstances of recovery of the blood stained 
clothes and the knife. Learned trial Judge found that the said 
circumstances were also of no assistance in the case of the 
prosecution, inasmuch as there were no evidence to show that 
the blood found on these articles was a human blood.  
12.7       Insofar as the circumstances with regard to the mother 
of the appellant No. 1, Jamuna Bai (appellant No. 2), are 
concerned, the learned trial Judge found that the independent 
witnesses had turned hostile, and the only evidence in that 
regard was that of S.K. Banerjee @ S.K. Banerji @ Sukant 
Banerjee/Investigating Officer (PW-15).  
12.8        Learned trial Judge found that Rajesh Kumar (PW-
14), who was a panch witness, in his evidence, had stated that 

15 
 
the deceased was his cousin brother and he has signed the 
documents on the directions of the S.K. Banerjee/Investigating 
Officer (PW-15). As such, the learned trial Judge found that the 
circumstances with regard to the memorandum under Section 
27 of the Evidence Act, 1872 and subsequent recovery was also 
not proved beyond reasonable doubt. Learned trial Judge 
further found that though from the panchnama, it was shown 
that the blood was found at various places, he had not made 
any attempt to seize the samples nor had he provided an 
explanation as to why he had not seized the samples of the said 
blood. 
12.9       Learned trial Judge found that the knife was seized on 
a memorandum of the accused (Exh. P-14) on 14th June 1992 
from an open place in the same room as mentioned in 
panchnama (Exh. P-11). Learned trial Judge also found that if 
immediately on the next day of incident, the Investigating 
Officer had visited and searched the room but he did not see the 
knife, then the subsequent recovery of knife from the very same 
room appears to be planted.  
12.10 
      Learned trial Judge also found that though the 
incident was of 7th June 1992 at around 12:00 A.M. and it had 
been reported to the Investigating Officer at 12:40 A.M., the 

16 
 
arrest of the accused persons had been made only on 15th June 
1992, which creates a doubt on the prosecution version. This is 
more so when the distance between the place of occurrence and 
the police station is hardly 1 to 1 ½ kms.  
13. The above points, that we have culled out from the 
judgment of the learned trial Judge, make it clear that the 
learned trial Judge has done a very elaborate exercise of 
discussing the evidence in great detail. We therefore would not 
like to burden our judgment with more details. The aforesaid 
points are more than sufficient to come to a conclusion that the 
prosecution has failed to prove any of the incriminating 
circumstances beyond reasonable doubt and in no case, the 
chain of circumstances, which was so interlinked to each other 
that leads to no other conclusion, than the guilt of the accused 
persons. We have no hesitation to hold that the findings of the 
learned trial Judge are based on correct appreciation of the 
material placed on record.  
14. This elaborate exercise of the learned trial Judge, has been 
washed away by the learned Division Bench of the High Court 
in a totally cursory manner. Insofar as the testimony of Beni 
Prasad (PW-1) and Sumitra Bai (PW-6) is concerned, the 
Division Bench of the High Court observed thus: 

17 
 
 “8.…...After considering the entire testimony of Beni 
Prasad (PW-1) and Sumitra Bai (PW-6) we come to 
the conclusion that there are improvements and 
exaggerations in their court statement. But on this 
ground their whole testimony cannot be brushed out 
as the principle "Falsus in uno, Falsus in Omnibus” is 
not applicable in criminal trial. Sometimes, the 
witnesses are in fear that if their testimony cannot be 
relied upon by the Court, the main culprit may be 
acquitted. Therefore, naturally they improve their 
statement to some extent.”  
  
15. The testimony of S.K. Banerjee/Investigating Officer (PW-
15), which has been disbelieved by the learned trial Judge, 
giving sound reasons, has been believed by the learned Division 
Bench of the High Court, by placing it in paragraph 12 as under: 
“12. We do not find any reason to disbelieve the 
testimony of Investigation Officer who impartially 
performed his duty with sincerity. He had no enmity 
with the respondents or relationship with the 
deceased. Therefore, we are inclined to rely upon his 
testimony. It cannot be brushed aside simply on the 
basis of conjectures and surmises in favour of the 
respondents.” 
 
16. We find that the learned trial Judge had given sound and 
cogent reasons for discarding the testimony of the IO and the 
other witnesses.  We are of the view that the High Court has 
totally erred in observing that the trial Judge had brushed aside 
the evidence of the IO simply on the basis of conjectures and 
surmises.  Rather, it is the judgment of the High Court which is 

18 
 
based on conjectures and surmises.  
17. After reproducing the aforementioned two judgments of 
this Court, discussing the settled law on the scope of an appeal 
against acquittal, the Division Bench of the High Court observed 
thus: 
 “15.   As discussed above, we find that there is 
sufficient ground to reverse the impugned the 
judgment. 
Dr. 
J.P.Parsai 
(PW-8) 
examined 
respondent No. 1 Ballu. He found some injuries on 
the body of respondent no. 1 which also indicate that 
before the death, the deceased struggled to save 
himself from the respondents. Dr. J.P.Parsai took 
sample of nails of both the hands of the deceased and 
sent them for FSL examination.”  
 
18. After discussing this, the High Court noted that the articles 
which were seized by S.K. Banerjee/Investigating Officer (PW-
15) contained blood stains as per the FSL report. The High Court 
observed that the accused failed to offer any explanation with 
regard to the presence of blood on these articles. The High Court 
observed thus: 
 “18...Respondent No. 1 did not offer any explanation 
with regard to presence of blood on these articles. 
This is a strong link along with the blood marks of 
dragging found from the house of the respondent to 
the spot where the body of the deceased was lying. 
This establishes that the respondents committed 
murder of the deceased Mahesh because he had love 
relation with Anita. After his death, six love letters of 
Anita were found in the pocket of the deceased which 
indicates that Anita also wanted to reside with the 

19 
 
deceased against the will and consent of her family 
members.”  
 
19. At the cost of repetition, we are compelled to say that the 
findings of the High Court are totally based on conjectures and 
surmises. Though the High Court has referred to the law laid 
down by this Court with regard to the scope of interference in 
an appeal against acquittal, the High Court has totally 
misapplied the same and a very well-reasoned judgment based 
upon the correct appreciation of evidence by the trial Court has 
been reversed by the High Court, only on the basis of 
conjectures and surmises.  
20. The High Court could have interfered in the criminal 
appeal only if it came to the conclusion that the findings of the 
trial Judge were either perverse or impossible. As already 
discussed hereinbefore, no perversity or impossibility could be 
found in the approach adopted by the learned trial Judge. 
21. In any case, even if two views are possible and the trial 
Judge found the other view to be more probable, an interference 
would not have been warranted by the High Court, unless the 
view taken by the learned trial Judge was a perverse or 
impossible view.  
 

20 
 
22. In that view of the matter, we find that the judgment 
passed by the High Court is totally unsustainable in law.  
23. In the result, we pass the following order: 
(i) 
The appeal is allowed; 
(ii) 
The impugned judgment dated 6th April 2018 passed by 
the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur in 
Criminal Appeal No. 261 of 1995 is quashed and set 
aside; and 
(iii) The accused persons (appellants herein) are acquitted 
of all the charges they were charged with. The appellants 
are already on bail. Hence, their bail bonds shall stand 
discharged.  
24. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
…….........................J.        
[B.R. GAVAI] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   …….........................J.        
                                                     [SANDEEP MEHTA] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
APRIL 02, 2024.