2024 INSC 262
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO.                   OF 2024
(arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 21096 of 2019) 
 
UNION OF INDIA & ANR.
                …APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
JAHANGIR BYRAMJI JEEJEEBHOY
…RESPONDENT(S) 
(D) THROUGH HIS LR        
J U D G M E N T
J.B. PARDIWALA, J. :
 
Leave granted.
2.
This  appeal  arises  from  an  order  passed  by  a
learned single Judge of the High Court of Judicature
at Bombay dated 09.07.2019 in Civil Application No.
1494 of 2019 filed in Writ Petition No. 2307 of 1993 by
which the High Court declined to condone the delay of
12 years and 158 days in filing the application for
1
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2024.04.03
16:40:54 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

restoration  of  the  Writ  Petition  No.  2307  of  1993
referred  to  above  which  came  to  be  dismissed  for
non-prosecution vide order dated 10.10.2006.
3.
The  facts  giving  rise  to  this  appeal  may  be
summarized as under.
4.
The suit property bearing S. No. 402, Bungalow
No. 15A, situated at Staveley Road, Pune Cantonment,
Pune–1 was leased by the respondent in favour of the
appellants on 09.03.1951.
5.
As the appellants committed breach of the terms of
the lease deed, the respondent herein instituted civil
suit bearing No. 2599 of 1981 before the Court of the
4th Additional  Small  Causes  Judge,  Pune  for  the
recovery  of  the  possession  of  the  suit  property  &
arrears towards the rent.
6.
On 02.05.1987, the suit came to be allowed and
the final decree came to be passed in the following
terms:
2

“ORDER
1) The plaintiffs are entitled to possession of
the suit premises.
2) The defendant shall deliver vacant and
peaceful possession of the suit premises to
the plaintiffs or before 30.6.1987.
3)  The  defendants  do  pay  by  way  of
damages  and  mesne  profits  and  notice
charges Rs. 17,383/- to the plaintiffs.
4)  The  defendant  shall  also  pay  future
mesne profits at the rate of Rs. 316/- per
month from the date of filing of the suit till
recovery of possession of the suit premises
under order 20 rule 12(1) of CPC.
5)  The defendant shall pay costs of this suit
to the plaintiffs and shall bear their own.”
7.
The  appellants  herein  challenged  the  judgment
and decree referred to above by preferring Civil Appeal
bearing No. 850 of 1987 in the Court of the District
Judge, Pune. The appeal filed by the appellants herein
came  to  be  dismissed  vide  the  judgment  and  order
dated 29.08.1992 passed by the 8th Additional District
Judge, Pune.
8.
The  judgment  and  order  passed  by  the  first
appellate court dismissing the appeal referred to above
3

came to be challenged by the appellants herein by filing
the Petition No. 2307 of 1993 before the High Court of
Bombay  invoking  its  supervisory  jurisdiction  under
Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
9.
On  10.10.2006,  the  Petition  No.  2307  of  1993
referred  to  above  came  to  be  dismissed  for  non-
prosecution. The order reads thus:
“Coram : D.G. Deshpande – J.) on 10.10.06
AND UPON hearing Shri. D.S. Mhaispurkar
for Respondent Nos. 1A to 1C and 2 this
Court has passed the following order:-
"None  for  the  Petitioners.  Mr.  D.S.
Mhaispurkar for the  Respondents 1A to C
and 2.
Petition  is  dismissed.  Rule  discharged.
Interim order is vacated.
IT IS ACCORDINGLY ordered that this writ
petition  is  disposed  of  as  per  the
accompanying court's order. The directions
given in the court's order hereinabove shall
be  carried 
out  and  complied  with
scrupulously. 
It is accordingly ordered that this order be
punctually  observed  and  carried  into
execution by concerned.”
4

10. On  26.11.2013  the  respondent  herein  filed
Execution  Petition  bearing  No.  16  of  2014.  The
appellants herein were served with the notice in the
execution proceedings on 18.03.2016 by the Executing
Court.
11. On  20.08.2018,  the  appellants  herein  filed  an
application seeking to set aside the order passed by the
Executing Court. On 30.10.2018 the Executing Court
set aside the said order referred to above.
12. On 12.04.2019, the appellants  herein filed Civil
Application No. 1294 of 2019 seeking restoration of the
Petition No. 2307 of 1993 referred to above and for
condonation  of  delay  of  12  years  and  158  days  in
preferring such restoration application.
13. On 09.07.2019, a learned single Judge of the High
Court vide the impugned order declined to condone the
delay of 12 years and 158 days in filing the restoration
application. 
14. In view of the aforesaid, the appellants are here
before this Court with the present appeal.
5

Submissions on behalf of the appellants
15. Mr.  R.  Venkataramani,  the  learned  Attorney
General  for  India  appearing  for  the  appellants
vehemently submitted that he has a very good case on
merits and considering the merits alone, the delay of
12 years and 158 days deserves to be condoned. The
learned Attorney General laid much emphasis on the
fact that the suit property is situated within the Pune
cantonment which is under the ownership of the Union
of  India and  the  same  was  held  by  the  respondent
herein on old grant lease and in such circumstances,
according  to  the  learned  Attorney  General,  the
respondent in his capacity as a private party should
not be permitted to deprive the Government of its land
after having admitted that the super structure alone
belongs  to  him  and  that  the  land  belongs  to  the
Government.
16. On the aspect of delay of 12 years and 158 days in
filing the restoration application before the High Court,
6

the learned Attorney General has no explanation worth
to offer.
Submissions on behalf of the respondent
17. Mr.  Sudhanshu  Chaudhari,  the  learned  senior
counsel  appearing  for  the  respondent,  on  the  other
hand,  vehemently  opposed  the  present  appeal  and
submitted that no error not to speak of any error of law
could  be  said  to  have  been  committed  by  the  High
Court in passing the impugned order.
18. He  submitted  that  no  sufficient  case  worth  the
name  has  been  assigned  by  the  appellants  for  the
purpose of getting such a long and inordinate delay of
more than 12 years condoned for filing the restoration
application.
19. In  such  circumstances  referred  to  above,  the
learned counsel prayed that there being no merit worth
the  name  in  the  present  appeal,  the  same  may  be
dismissed.
7

Analysis
20. Having heard  the  learned  counsel appearing  for
the parties and having gone through the materials on
record,  the  only  question  that  falls  for  our
consideration  is  whether  the  High  Court  committed
any error in passing the impugned order?
21.  When this matter was heard for the first time by
this Bench, we brought to the notice of the learned
Attorney General something very relevant as observed
by the High Court in para 18 of its impugned order.
Para 18 of the impugned order reads thus:
“18.  During  the  course  of  hearing,  I
suggested  Mr.  Singh  that  in  case  the
defendants  are  ready  and  willing  to
handover possession of the suit property to
the  respondents,  the  Court  will consider
restoring the Petition to its original position.
The  respondents  in  turn  will  give
undertaking to the effect that in case the
defendants succeed  in  the Petition, before
approaching  the  Apex  Court,  they  will
handover possession of  the suit property to
the  defendants.  Upon  taking  instructions,
Mr. Singh submitted that defendants are not
ready and willing to handover possession of
the suit property. In view of the aforesaid
discussion,  no  case  is  made  out  for
condoning the delay.” 
8

22. Thus,  it  appears  that  the  High  Court  made  a
reasonable  suggestion  to  the  appellants  that  if  the
possession of the suit property is handed over to the
respondent,  then  probably  the  Court  may  consider
restoring the Petition No. 2307 of 1993 which came to
be  dismissed  for  default  on  10.10.2006.  The  High
Court  noted  as  above  that  the  learned  counsel
appearing for the appellants declined to hand over the
possession  of  the  suit  property  to  the  respondent
herein. We reiterated the very same suggestion before
the learned Attorney General that if the appellants are
ready and willing to hand over the suit property to the
respondent,  then,  despite  there  being  a  long  and
inordinate delay, we may consider condoning the same
and remanding the matter back to the High Court so
that the High Court may be in a position to hear the
matter  on  its  own  merits.  However,  the  learned
Attorney  General,  after  taking  instructions  from  his
clients,  regretted  his  inability  to  persuade  the
9

appellants  to  hand  over  the  possession  of  the  suit
property to the respondent.
23. In such circumstances referred to above, we were
left with no other option but to call upon the learned
Attorney General to make submissions as to why we
should  look  into  only  the  merits  of  the  matter  and
condone the delay of 12 years and 158 days.
24. In the aforesaid circumstances, we made it very
clear that we are not going to look into the merits of
the  matter  as  long  as  we  are  not  convinced  that
sufficient cause has been made out for condonation of
such a long and inordinate delay.
25. It hardly matters whether a litigant is a private
party or a State or Union of India when it comes to
condoning the gross delay of more than 12 years. If the
litigant chooses to approach the court long after the
lapse  of  the  time  prescribed  under  the  relevant
provisions of the law, then he cannot turn around and
say that no prejudice would be caused to either side by
the delay being condoned. This litigation between the
10

parties  started  sometime  in  1981.  We  are  in  2024.
Almost 43 years have elapsed. However, till date the
respondent has not been able to reap the fruits of his
decree. It would be a mockery of justice if we condone
the delay of 12 years and 158 days and once again ask
the respondent to undergo the rigmarole of the legal
proceedings.
26. The length of the delay is a relevant matter which
the  court  must  take  into  consideration  while
considering whether the delay should be condoned or
not. From the tenor of the approach of the appellants,
it appears that they want to fix their own period of
limitation for instituting the proceedings for which law
has prescribed a period of limitation. Once it is held
that  a  party  has  lost  his  right  to  have  the  matter
considered on merits because of his own inaction for a
long, it cannot be presumed to be non-deliberate delay
and in such circumstances of the case, he cannot be
heard to plead that the substantial justice deserves to
be preferred as against the technical considerations.
While considering the plea for condonation of delay, the
11

court  must  not  start  with  the  merits  of  the  main
matter.  The court owes a duty to first ascertain the
bona  fides of  the  explanation  offered  by  the  party
seeking condonation. It is only if the sufficient cause
assigned by the litigant and the opposition of the other
side is equally balanced that the court may bring into
aid  the  merits  of  the  matter  for  the  purpose  of
condoning the delay.
27. We are of the view that the question of limitation is
not  merely  a  technical  consideration.  The  rules  of
limitation are based on the principles of sound public
policy and principles of equity. We should not keep the
‘Sword  of  Damocles’  hanging  over  the  head  of  the
respondent  for  indefinite  period  of  time  to  be
determined at the whims and fancies of the appellants.
28. At  this  stage,  we  would  like  to  quote  few
observations made by the High Court in its impugned
order  pointing towards lack of bona fides on the part
of the appellants.  The observations are as under:-
“9.  A  perusal  of  paragraph  4  extracted
hereinabove  shows  that  on  oath,  solemn
12

statement is made that notice of Darkhast
No.16 of 2014 for execution of the decree
issued by the executing Court was received
by  the  Department  on  25.02.2019.  As
against  this,  in  paragraph  3  of  the
additional affidavit dated 04.07.2019 made
by  Rajendra  Rajaram  Pawar,  it  is  stated
that the averments made in paragraph 4 as
regards service of Darkhast on 25.02.2019
is factually incorrect. Notice of Darkhast No.
16 of 2014 was received by the defendants
on 18.03.2016. The error in the application
is out of inadvertence for which he tendered
unconditional  apology.  It is  further stated
that  inadvertent  mistake  on  facts  as  to
knowledge  of  execution  proceedings  was
purely because of oversight in the light of
possibilities  of  issuance  of  possession
warrant  by  the  executing  court  and
requirement  of  expeditious  urgency  of
moving  before  this  Court  to  save  the
proceeding in  litigation  since  1981  which
otherwise  would  have  got  frustrated.  He
stated  that  the  same  is  nothing  beyond
human error.
x
x
x
x
12. The assertions made in paragraph 4 are
bereft  of  any  particulars  and  are  totally
vague. In fact the solemn statement made in
paragraph  4  that  notice  of  Darkhast  for
execution  of  the  decree  issued  by  the
executing  Court  was  received  by  the
Department on 25.02.2019, to put it mildly,
is incorrect statement. In view of paragraph
3  of  the  additional  affidavit  dated
04.07.2019  made  by  Rajendra  Rajaram
Pawar, it is evident that notice of Darkhast
was  received  by  the  defendants  on
18.03.2016. It is material to note that no
particulars  are  given  as  to  when  the
13

Department sought legal opinion. There is
also no explanation as to why Department
did not instruct lawyer in the High Court to
apply for restoration of the Petition and why
the  Department  defended  execution
proceedings.  It  is  worthwhile  to  note  that
execution  proceedings  were  filed  by  the
respondents only because Writ Petition was
dismissed. If the Writ Petition was restored,
automatically  the  execution  proceedings
would have been stayed by the executing
Court.  Instead of  adopting  appropriate
proceedings, the  defendants  unnecessarily
went  on  defending  the  execution
proceedings. In paragraph 4(b) though it is
stated  that  Department  was  regularly
following up with its panel lawyer till 2003,
this statement is also not substantiated by
producing any document. Even if I accept
that the Department was regularly following
up with its panel lawyer till 2003, there is
no explanation worth the name as to why
the Department did not follow up the matter
between 2003 and 2006 when the Petition
was  dismissed  in  default.  That  apart,
equally, there is no explanation as to why
no  follow  up  action  was  taken  by  the
officers  between  2006  and  2016  when
Department  acquired  knowledge  about
dismissal of Writ Petition on 18.03.2016.
13.
 It
 is  no  doubt  true  that  while
considering the application for condonation
of  delay,  the  expression  ‘sufficient  cause’
has to be liberally construed. It, however,
does  not  mean  that  without  making  any
sufficient cause, the Court will condone the
delay regardless of the length of the delay.
In the present case, the delay is of 12 years
and 158 days. A perusal of the application
as  also  the  additional  affidavit  hardly
indicates any sufficient cause for condoning
14

the  unpardonable  delay  of  12  years  and
158 days.”
 
29. In Oriental Aroma Chemical Industries Limited
v.  Gujarat  Industrial  Development  Corporation,
(2010) 5 SCC 459, this Court rejected the application
for  condonation  of  delay  of  4  years  in  filing  an
application  to  set  aside  an  exparte decree  on  the
ground that the explanation offered for condonation of
delay is found to be not satisfied.
30. In  Postmaster  General  and  others  v.  Living
Media India Limited,  (2012) 3 SCC 563, this Court,
while  dismissing  the  application  for  condonation  of
delay of 427 days in filing the Special Leave Petition,
held that condonation of delay is not an exception and
it should not be used as an anticipated benefit for the
government departments. In that case, this Court held
that  unless  the  Department  has  reasonable  and
acceptable reason for the delay and there was  bona
fide effort,  there  is  no  need  to  accept  the  usual
explanation that the file was kept pending for several
months/years due to considerable degree of procedural
15

red tape in the process cannot be accepted. In Para
Nos. 25, 26, 27, 28, and 29 respectively, this Court
dealt with the scope of ‘sufficient cause’ and held as
follows:
“25. We have already extracted the reasons
as mentioned in the “better affidavit” sworn
by  Mr.  Aparajeet  Pattanayak,  SSRM,  Air
Mail  Sorting  Division,  New  Delhi.  It  is
relevant to note that in the said affidavit, the
Department  has  itself  mentioned  and  is
aware of the date of the judgment of the
Division Bench of the High Court in Office of
the Chief Postmaster v. Living Media India
Ltd. [(2009) 8 AD 201 (Del)] as 11-9-2009.
Even  according  to  the  deponent,  their
counsel had applied for the certified copy of
the said judgment only on 8-1-2010 and the
same was received by the Department on
the very same day. There is no explanation
for not applying for the certified copy of the
impugned  judgment  on  11-9-2009  or  at
least  within  a  reasonable  time.  The  fact
remains that the certified copy was applied
for only on 8-1-2010 i.e. after a period of
nearly four months. 
26. In spite of affording another opportunity
to file better affidavit by placing adequate
material,  neither  the  Department  nor  the
person-in-charge has filed any explanation
for not applying the certified copy within the
prescribed  period.  The  other  dates
mentioned in the affidavit which we have
already extracted, clearly show that there
was  delay  at  every  stage  and  except
mentioning the dates of receipt of the file
and  the  decision  taken,  there  is  no
16

explanation  as  to  why  such  delay  had
occasioned.  Though  it  was  stated  by  the
Department  that  the  delay  was  due  to
unavoidable  circumstances  and  genuine
difficulties, the fact remains that from day
one the Department or the person/persons
concerned  have  not  evinced  diligence  in
prosecuting  the  matter  to  this  Court  by
taking appropriate steps. 
27. It  is  not  in  dispute  that  the  person(s)
concerned  were  well aware  or conversant
with  the  issues  involved  including  the
prescribed period of limitation for taking up
the matter by way of filing a special leave
petition  in  this  Court.  They  cannot  claim
that  they  have  a  separate  period  of
limitation  when  the  Department  was
possessed with competent persons familiar
with court  proceedings. In  the  absence  of
plausible  and  acceptable  explanation,  we
are posing a question why the delay is to be
condoned mechanically merely because the
Government or a wing of the Government is
a party before us. 
28. Though we are conscious of the fact that
in a matter of condonation of delay when
there was no gross negligence or deliberate
inaction  or  lack  of  bona  fides,  a  liberal
concession has to be adopted to advance
substantial justice, we are of the view that
in  the  facts  and  circumstances,  the
Department  cannot  take  advantage  of
various  earlier  decisions.  The  claim  on
account  of  impersonal  machinery  and
inherited  bureaucratic  methodology  of
making several notes cannot be accepted in
view of the modern technologies being used
and  available.  The  law  of  limitation
undoubtedly binds everybody, including the
Government. 
17

29. In our view, it is the right time to inform
all  the  government  bodies,  their  agencies
and instrumentalities that unless they have
reasonable and acceptable explanation for
the delay and there was bona fide effort,
there  is  no  need  to  accept  the  usual
explanation that the file was kept pending
for  several  months/years  due  to
considerable degree of procedural red tape
in the process. The government departments
are under a special obligation to ensure that
they perform their duties with diligence and
commitment.  Condonation  of  delay  is  an
exception  and  should  not  be  used  as  an
anticipated  benefit  for  the  government
departments.  The  law  shelters  everyone
under  the  same  light  and  should  not  be
swirled for the benefit of a few.”
31. In the case of Lanka Venkateswarlu (D) by LRs v.
State of Andhra Pradesh & others, (2011) 4 SCC
363, this Court made the following observations:
“20. In N. Balakrishnan, [(1998) 7 SCC 123]
this  Court  again  reiterated  the  principle
that: (SCC p. 127, para 11)
“11.  Rules  of  limitation  are  not
meant  to  destroy  the  rights  of
parties. They are meant to see that
[the] parties do not resort to dilatory
tactics,  but  seek  their  remedy
promptly.”
21 to 27.........
18

28. We are at a loss to fathom any logic or
rationale,  which  could  have  impelled  the
High  Court  to  condone  the  delay  after
holding the  same  to  be  unjustifiable. The
concepts such as “liberal approach”, “justice
oriented  approach”,  “substantial  justice”
cannot  be  employed  to  jettison  the
substantial law of limitation. Especially, in
cases where the court concludes that there
is  no  justification  for  the  delay.  In  our
opinion, the approach adopted by the High
Court tends to show the absence of judicial
balance  and  restraint,  which  a  Judge  is
required  to  maintain  whilst  adjudicating
any lis between the parties. We are rather
pained to notice that in this case, not being
satisfied with the use of mere intemperate
language, the High Court resorted to blatant
sarcasms. 
29. The use of unduly strong intemperate or
extravagant  language  in  a  judgment  has
been repeatedly disapproved by this Court
in  a  number of cases.  Whilst  considering
applications for condonation of delay under
Section 5 of the Limitation Act, the courts do
not  enjoy  unlimited  and  unbridled
discretionary  powers.  All  discretionary
powers, especially judicial powers, have to
be  exercised  within  reasonable  bounds,
known to the law. The discretion has to be
exercised in a systematic manner informed
by reason. Whims or fancies; prejudices or
predilections  cannot  and  should  not  form
the  basis  of  exercising  discretionary
powers.” 
19

32. In the case of Pundlik Jalam Patil (D) by LRs. v.
Executive  Engineer,  Jalgaon  Medium  Project  &
others, (2008) 17 SCC 448, this Court held as follows:
“19. In Ajit  Singh  Thakur  Singh v. State  of
Gujarat [(1981) 1 SCC 495 : 1981 SCC (Cri)
184] this Court observed: (SCC p. 497, para
6)
“6.  …  it  is  true  that  a  party  is
entitled to wait until the last day of
limitation for filing an appeal. But
when it allows limitation to expire
and pleads sufficient cause for not
filing  the  appeal  earlier,  the
sufficient cause must establish that
because  of  some  event  or
circumstance
 
arising
 
before
limitation  expired  it  was  not
possible  to  file  the  appeal  within
time. No  event  or  circumstance
arising after the expiry of limitation
can constitute sufficient cause.” 
                         (emphasis supplied) 
This judgment squarely applies to the facts
in hand.
 x
x
x
x
21. Shri  Mohta,  learned  Senior  Counsel
relying on the decision of this Court in N.
Balakrishnan v. M.  Krishnamurthy [(1998)
7 SCC 123] submitted that length of delay is
no matter and acceptability of explanation
is the only criterion. It was submitted that if
the explanation offered does not smack of
mala fides or it is not put forth as a part of
dilatory tactics, the court must show utmost
consideration  to  the  suitor. The  very  said
20

decision  upon  which  reliance  has  been
placed holds that the law of limitation fixes
a  lifespan  for  every  legal  remedy  for  the
redress  of  the  legal  injury  suffered.
Unending period for launching the remedy
may  lead  to  unending  uncertainty  and
consequential anarchy. The law of limitation
is  thus  founded  on  public  policy.  The
decision does not lay down that a lethargic
litigant can leisurely choose his own time in
preferring appeal or application as the case
may  be.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  said
judgment  it is said  that court  should  not
forget the opposite party altogether. It was
observed: (SCC p. 128, para 11)
“11.  …  It  is  enshrined  in  the
maxim interest reipublicae ut sit finis
litium (it  is  for  the  general  welfare
that  a  period  be  put  to  litigation).
Rules of limitation are not meant to
destroy  the  rights  of  the  parties.
They are meant to see that parties
do not resort to dilatory tactics but
seek  their  remedy  promptly.  The
idea is that every legal remedy must
be kept alive for a legislatively fixed
period of time.”
22. In Ramlal v. Rewa  Coalfields  Ltd. [AIR
1962 SC 361] this Court held that: (AIR pp.
363-65)
“In  construing  Section  5  of  the
Limitation Act, it is relevant to bear in
mind two important  considerations.
The  first  consideration  is  that  the
expiration  of  period  of  limitation
prescribed  for  making  an  appeal
gives  rise  to  right  in  favour  of  the
21

decree-holder to treat the decree as
binding between the parties and this
legal right which has accrued to the
decree-holder by lapse of time should
not be light-heartedly disturbed. The
other consideration which cannot be
ignored is that if sufficient cause of
excusing delay is shown discretion is
given  to  the  court  to  condone  the
delay  and  admit  the  appeal.  It  is
further necessary to emphasise that
even if the sufficient cause has been
shown a party is not entitled to the
condonation of delay in question as a
matter  of  right.  The  proof  of  a
sufficient  cause  is  a  condition
precedent  for  the  exercise  of  the
discretionary  jurisdiction  vested  in
the court by Section 5. This aspect of
the  matter  naturally  introduces  the
consideration of all relevant facts and
it is at this stage the diligence of the
party or its bona fides may fall for
consideration.”   (emphasis supplied)
23. On the facts and in the circumstances,
we are of the opinion that the respondent
beneficiary was not diligent in availing the
remedy of appeal. The averments made in
the  application  seeking  condonation  of
delay  in  filing  appeals  do  not  show  any
acceptable cause much less sufficient cause
to exercise courts' discretion in its favour.”
33. In the case of Esha Bhattacharjee v. Managing
Committee  of  Raghunathpur  Nafar  Academy  &
Others,  (2013)  12  SCC  649,  this  Court  made  the
following observations:
22

“21. From  the  aforesaid  authorities  the
principles  that  can  broadly  be  culled  out
are:
21.1. (i)  There  should  be  a  liberal,
pragmatic,  justice-oriented,  non-pedantic
approach while dealing with an application
for condonation of delay, for the courts are
not  supposed to legalise  injustice  but are
obliged to remove injustice.
21.2. (ii) The terms “sufficient cause” should
be  understood  in  their  proper  spirit,
philosophy and purpose regard being had to
the  fact  that  these  terms  are  basically
elastic  and  are  to  be  applied  in  proper
perspective to the obtaining fact-situation.
21.3. (iii)
 
Substantial
 
justice
 
being
paramount  and  pivotal  the  technical
considerations should not be given undue
and uncalled for emphasis.
21.4. (iv) No presumption can be attached to
deliberate  causation  of  delay  but,  gross
negligence  on  the  part  of  the  counsel  or
litigant is to be taken note of.
21.5. (v) Lack of bona fides imputable to a
party  seeking  condonation  of  delay  is  a
significant and relevant fact.
21.6. (vi)  It  is  to  be  kept  in  mind  that
adherence to strict proof should not affect
public  justice  and  cause  public  mischief
because  the  courts  are  required  to  be
vigilant  so  that  in  the  ultimate  eventuate
there is no real failure of justice.
21.7. (vii)  The  concept  of  liberal  approach
has  to  encapsulate  the  conception  of
23

reasonableness and it cannot be allowed a
totally unfettered free play.
21.8. (viii)  There  is  a  distinction  between
inordinate  delay  and  a  delay  of  short
duration  or  few  days,  for  to  the  former
doctrine of prejudice is attracted whereas to
the  latter  it  may  not  be  attracted.  That
apart, the first one warrants strict approach
whereas  the  second  calls  for  a  liberal
delineation.
21.9. (ix)  The  conduct,  behaviour  and
attitude of a party relating to its inaction or
negligence are relevant factors to be taken
into  consideration.  It  is  so  as  the
fundamental principle is that the courts are
required to weigh  the scale of balance of
justice  in  respect  of  both  parties  and  the
said principle cannot be given a total go by
in the name of liberal approach.
21.10. (x)  If  the  explanation  offered  is
concocted  or  the  grounds  urged  in  the
application are fanciful, the courts should
be  vigilant  not  to  expose  the  other  side
unnecessarily to face such a litigation.
21.11. (xi) It is to be borne in mind that no
one
 
gets
 
away
 
with
 
fraud,
misrepresentation or interpolation by taking
recourse  to  the  technicalities  of  law  of
limitation.
21.12. (xii) The entire gamut of facts are to
be carefully scrutinised and the approach
should be based on the paradigm of judicial
discretion  which  is  founded  on  objective
reasoning and not on individual perception.
24

21.13. (xiii) The State or a public body or an
entity representing a collective cause should
be given some acceptable latitude.
22. To the aforesaid principles we may add
some  more  guidelines  taking  note  of  the
present day scenario. They are:
22.1. (a) An application for condonation of
delay  should  be  drafted  with  careful
concern  and  not  in  a  haphazard  manner
harbouring  the  notion  that  the  courts  are
required to condone delay on the bedrock of
the principle that adjudication of a lis on
merits  is  seminal  to  justice  dispensation
system.
22.2. (b) An application for condonation of
delay should not be dealt with in a routine
manner  on  the  base  of  individual
philosophy which is basically subjective.
22.3. (c) Though no precise formula can be
laid down regard being had to the concept
of judicial discretion, yet a conscious effort
for achieving consistency and collegiality of
the adjudicatory system should be made as
that is the ultimate institutional motto.
22.4. (d)  The  increasing  tendency  to
perceive delay as a non-serious matter and,
hence,  lackadaisical  propensity  can  be
exhibited in a nonchalant manner requires
to  be  curbed,  of  course,  within  legal
parameters.”
 
34. In  view  of  the  aforesaid,  we  have  reached  to  the
conclusion that the High Court committed no error much
25

less any error of law in passing the impugned order. Even
otherwise, the High Court was exercising its supervisory
jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
35. In a plethora of decisions of this Court, it has been
said  that  delay  should  not  be  excused  as  a  matter  of
generosity. Rendering substantial justice is not to cause
prejudice to the opposite party. The appellants have failed
to prove that they were reasonably diligent in prosecuting
the matter and this vital test for condoning the delay is not
satisfied in this case.
36. For all the foregoing reasons, this appeal fails and is
hereby dismissed.  There shall be no order as to costs. 
37. Pending application, if any, shall also stand disposed
of accordingly.
………………………………..J.
 ( ANIRUDDHA BOSE )  
NEW DELHI;                  ………………………………..J.
APRIL 03, 2024
( J.B. PARDIWALA )
26