2024 INSC 252
REPORTABLE
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4806 OF 2011
KRISHNADATT AWASTHY 
…..APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.       …..RESPONDENTS
WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4807 OF 2011
SUMER SINGH 
…..APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.       …..RESPONDENTS
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4808 OF 2011
SMT. RAMRANI SINGH 
…..APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.       …..RESPONDENTS
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4809 OF 2011
SMT. SHYAMA DEWEDI & ORS.
…..APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
1
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2024.04.04
17:09:47 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.       …..RESPONDENTS
J U D G M E N T
J.K. MAHESHWARI J.
1.
After   perusal   of   the   judgment   and   view   expressed   by
esteemed brother Justice K.V. Viswanathan, in the facts of
this case, I am not in a position to agree with the reasoning
and   conclusions   as   drawn   by   him,   for   which   detailed
reasons supporting my view is in succeeding paragraphs.
2.
As per the facts of the case, the controversy in the present
case   revolves   around   selection  and   appointment   for   the
post   of   Shiksha   Karmi   Grade­III   in   Janpad   Panchayat
Gaurihar,   District   Chhatarpur   in   the   State   of   Madhya
Pradesh   which   relates   back   to   the   year   1998.   The
appellants who are ten (10) in number and four (4) other
candidates,   in   total   fourteen   (14)   candidates   who   were
close relatives of the members of selection committee, had
been placed in the final selection list of 249 Shiksha Karmi
Grade­III.   For   ready   reference   the   appellants   and   their
relations are described in a tabular form as under: ­ 
2

Sl.
No.
Candidate
Committee
Member
Relationship
1.
Krishnadatt
Awasthy
Pushpa
Dvivedi
(Chairman)
Maternal
Nephew
2.
Shyama Dvivedi
Pushpa
Dvivedi
(Chairman)
Sister­in­law
(Nanad)
3.
Prabha Dvivedi
Pushpa
Dvivedi
(Chairman)
Sister­in­law
(Devrani)
4.
Rekha Avasthi
Pushpa
Dvivedi
(Chairman)
Niece 
5.
Prabhesh
Kumari
Pushpa
Dvivedi
(Chairman)
Niece
6.
Devendra
Awasthi
Pushpa
Dvivedi
(Chairman)
Nephew
(Sister’s son)
7.
Sumer Singh
Swami   Singh
(Member)
Son
8.
Ramrani Singh
Swami   Singh
(Member)
Daughter   in
law
9.
Gita Rawat
Pushpa
Dvivedi
(Chairman)
Sister
10.
Rita Dwivedi
Pushpa
Dvivedi
(Chairman)
Sister of Vibha
who is Devrani
of Chairman
Thus,   from   the   table   above,   the   relationship   of
appellants with the members of the selection committee is
apparent and un­disputed.
3.
It is not inapposite to mention that at the previous stage of
selection,   after   preparation   of   the   select   list   of   Shiksha
3

Karmi Grade­III by Janpad Panchayat, Gaurihar, the same
was   challenged   by   one   Kunwar   Vijay   Bahadur   Singh
Bundela by filing an appeal before the Collector, District
Chhatarpur, who vide order dated 31.08.1998 quashed the
selection list and remitted the matter for fresh selection.
Pursuant to the directions, fresh selection was conducted
and the final selection list consisting of 249 candidates
including   the   names   of   appellants   and   four   others  was
published   on   16.09.1998.   As   per   the   said   select   list
appointment orders were issued on 17.09.1998 appointing
the   candidates   including  the   present  appellants.   Being
aggrieved   by   the   selection   and   appointment   of   the
appellants   who   were   near   relatives   of   members   of   the
selection   committee   and   non­selection   of   Smt.   Archana
Mishra who was an aspirant, filed  an appeal  before the
Collector,   District   Chhatarpur   on   various   grounds
including the allegations as quoted in paragraph 14 of the
order passed by esteemed brother. It is not in dispute that
the present appellants were not impleaded as parties in the
appeal before the Collector, though Chief Executive Officer
Janpad Panchayat, Block Development Education Officer
4

and   the   President   of   the   Education   Committee   were
arrayed as parties.
4.
On issuing notice in the said appeal, the counter affidavit
was filed by the Chief Executive Officer, Janpad Panchayat,
attaching   the  certificate  given   by   the   Sarpanch   of   the
Panchayat   acknowledging   the   relationship   of   the
selected/appointed   candidates   with   the   members   of
selection   committee.   As   per   the   material   placed,   the
findings recorded by the Collector are relevant, which is
reproduced as under: ­
“3. ……So far as the question of selection of the
relatives   of   the   members   of   Select   Committee   is
concerned, it is proved that the members of the
Committee   have   selected   their   relatives   and   the
same   is   against   the   principles   of   law.   The   facts
given   in   the   appeal   have   been   admitted   by   the
Respondent Janpad Panchayat in its Reply that the
Committee President Smt. Pushpa Dvivedi's sister­
in­law (Nanad) Shyama Dvivedi daughter of Shiv
Dass   Dvivedi,   her   sister­in­law   (Devrani)   Vibha
Dvivedi wife of Kailash Dvivedi, two sisters of the
Devrani (Vibha Dvivedi) of the Committee President
namely Kum. Rashmi Dvivedi and Km. Rita Dvivedi
have been appointed at Serial No. 9 and 4 of the
Select List. The certificate of Sarpanch has been
attached   by   the   Respondent   as   evidence   in   this
regard.   The   Respondent   has   also   admitted   that
Devender   Kumar   Avasthi   son   of   Brij   Bhushan
Avasthi, Rekha Awasthi, daughter of Brij Bhushan
Awasthi, Pravesh Kumar, daughter of Brij Bhushan
Awasthi   are   also   the   maternal   niece   of   the
Chairman   of   the   Selection   Committee.   Their
5

Selection   No.   is   176   and   30   respectively.   Chief
Executive Officer has also stated in his reply that
Summer Singh, son of other member Swami Singh
Sengar, daughter in law Ram Rani, wife of Rudra
Pratap Singh, nephew Rajesh Singh Chauhan, son
Som Prakash Singh have also been selected. Facts
which have been admitted by the Chief Executive
Officer   in   his   reply,   they   are   reliable.   Chief
Executive Officer has admitted in his reply Exh.­A
that   selection   of   Badri   Prasad,   son   of   Bhagwat
Prasad has been made. He has been allocated 9
marks   for   experience,   but   the   Experience
Certificate   is   not   found   enclosed   with   his
application.   It   is   also   proved   from   the   reply
submitted by District Panchayat that selection of
Shri   Krishan   Dutt   Awasthi,   son   of   Sita   Ram
Awasthi has been made at No. 64. He is also the
maternal   nephew   of   the   Chairman   and   at
Appointment   Order   No.   90   selection   of   Geeta
Rawat, ­ Ganga Prasad Rawat has been made. She
is   the   real   sister   of   Chairperson.  Committee   of
District Panchayat has made the selection of his
relatives in contravention of various Sections of MP
Panchayat Raj Act. It has been restricted in Section
40(C) of Panchayat Raj Act that any of the office
bearers   shall   not   cause   financial   gain   to   his
relatives. As per Section 40(C), act of any of the
office bearers of Panchayat to get job for his any
relative in Panchayat through his direct or indirect
influence or to act to cause financial benefit to any
of his relatives like carrying out of any work of the
Panchayat   through   any   kind   of   contract   shall
amount to gross negligence towards duties under
the above Section and in such circumstances, if it
is done, then office bearers of the Panchayat could
be   terminated.  In   Section   100   of   the   Act,
acquisition of any interest by any member office
bearer   or   employee   directly   or   indirectly   in   any
contract   or   any   employment   made   is   strictly
prohibited.  In  the  present   case,   members   of   the
Committee of the District Panchayat have made the
6

selection of their relatives in order to cause benefit
to them in the entire selection procedure, which is
contrary to the principles settled by the law.  Any
person cannot be the judge for himself. There is a
principle of natural justice that judge should see all
persons with same eye. Selection of the relatives of
the members by the members has definitely caused
the   discrimination   with   other   members.   In   such
circumstances,   selection   of   the   relatives   of   the
District Panchayat is not lawful, which is liable to
be cancelled…
As per the facts given in the case like respondents
have admitted in the above paras that selection of
the   relatives   of   the   members   has   been   made   in
illegal   manner,  selection   of   these   relatives   is
cancelled   and   the   appointment   so   made   is
terminated.” 
(emphasis supplied)
From the above observation it can be safely perceived
that the members of the selection committee appointed the
appellants who were their relatives and had given benefit to
them   which   is   arbitrary   and   discriminatory     therefore
vitiated. 
5.
The appellants assailed the said order of Collector by filing
revision under Section 5 of the Madhya Pradesh Panchayat
(Appeal and Revision) Rules, 1995 (hereinafter referred to
as “A&R Rules”). It was submitted that quashment of their
appointment   by   the   Collector   without   joining   them   and
affording an opportunity is in violation of the Principle of
7

Natural Justice. The appellants in the memo of revision
had not denied their relationships with the members of the
selection committee and only averred that “it is the wrong
allegation that the appointments of the petitioners have been
cancelled   by   the   Collector,   Chhatarpur   on   the   charge   of
being relatives.”
6.
The   revisional   authority   (Commissioner   Revenue)
dismissed the revision vide order dated 14.03.2000, in para
(6) of the order it was observed that the selection of the
appellants   is   contrary   to   Section   40(C)  of   the   Madhya
Pradesh   Panchayat   Raj   Avam   Gram   Swaraj   Adhiniyam,
1993   (hereafter   referred   to   as   ‘Adhiniyam’).   The   plea   of
non­joinder and not affording an opportunity  of hearing
was not found appealing  because  the relationship of the
appellants with the members of the selection committee,
gave undue favour to them and the same was not denied.
The revisional authority was of the opinion that in the facts
and circumstances of the case, not joining the appellants
did not prejudice them. Further, the violation of principle
of bias attracts in this case which vitiates the selection.
8

However,   in   absence   of   any   prejudice,   decision   of   the
Collector is not required to be altered with. 
7.
Aggrieved by the order of revisional authority, appellants
filed a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India before the High Court. Learned Single Judge with
intent   to   afford   an   opportunity   allowed   the   appellants
herein   to   inspect   the   records   of   selection   through   their
counsel, as spelt out in paragraph 13 of the order of Single
Judge which is reproduced as under: ­
“13. During the course of hearing of this petition,
as ordered earlier the Chief Executive Officer of the
Janpad Panchayat was present with the original
records  of   selection.   Shri  M.L.   Choubey,   learned
counsel for the petitioners, was granted permission
to inspect the records he inspected the records on
29.07.2008. The records have been perused by this
Court and is returned back to Shri Shailesh Mishra
after perusal.”
Later, learned Single Judge formulated following three
questions: ­             
(i)
“The first question would be as to whether the
appeal   was   maintainable   before   the   Collector
under Rule 3;
(ii)
The second question is as to what is the effect of
cancellation   of   the   appointment   of   the
petitioners, ordered without hearing them and
without impleading them as parties; and, 
(iii)
The   third   and   final   question   would   be   as   to
whether the Collector and Commissioner were
9

right   in   interfering   with   the   selection   of   the
petitioners for the reasons indicated by them in
the  impugned order  i.e…  the presence  of the
relatives as members of the selection committee
in which petitioners had participated”   
8.
Question No. (i) relating to maintainability of appeal was
answered against the appellants. The said question is not
of much relevance at this stage, thus, in my view it is not
required to be dealt with in detail. Further, the Learned
Single Judge dealt questions no. (ii) and (iii) in detail as
they relate to non­joinder of the appellants and affording
them an opportunity of hearing and presence of relatives of
appellants in the selection committee. The said question
had been answered in paragraphs 20, 21, 22 and 23 of the
order. In my view para 20 of the order of learned Single
Judge   is   the   foundational   discussion   on   the   issues
therefore it is relevant and reproduced as under: ­
“20. Item No.3 of Rule 2 deals with Shiksha Karmi
­ Grade III, the educational qualification is Higher
Secondary Certificate Examination passed, and the
Selection   Committee   is   to   consist   of:   (i)
Chairperson, Standing Committee of Education of
Janpad   Panchayat;   (ii)   Chief   Executive   Officer,
Janpad   Panchayat;   (iii)   Block   Education   Officer
(Member   Secretary);   (iv)   Two   specialists   in   the
subject   to   be   nominated   by   the   Standing
Committee   for   Education   of   whom   one   shall   be
woman;   and,   (v)   All   members   of   the   Standing
10

Committee   of   Education   of   whom   at   least   one
belongs to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
or OBC. In the present case, there is no dispute
that the Selection Committee was constituted as
per  the   aforesaid  provision,   but  presence  of   two
members in the Selection Committee is to be taken
note of. The President of the selection Committee is
one Smt. Pushpa Dwivedi. She is Chairman of the
Education Committee and she has participated in
the   process   of   selection   of   various   candidates.
Another member of the Selection Committee was
one Shri Swami Singh, who is a Member of the
Janpad   Panchayat   and   has   participated   in   the
process of selection as a Member of the Education
Committee. It is found  by the Collector and the
finding   of   the   Collector   is   affirmed   by   the
Commissioner   to   the   extent   that   petitioner   No.1
Smt.  Shyama  Dwivedi is  the  sister­in­law of  the
President of the Selection Committee Smt. Pushpa
Dwivedi.   According   to   the   finding   recorded   Smt.
Pushpa   Dwivedi's   sister­in­law   (Nanand)   Smt.
Shyama Dwivedi; her Devrani Smt. Vibha Dwivedi;
two sisters Rashmi Dwivedi and Rita Dwivedi have
been   appointed.   Apart   from   these   persons,   her
nephew Devendra Awasthi and her two nieces Ku.
Rekha   Awasthi   and   Ku.   Prabhesh   Kumari   have
been appointed. That apart, it is found that Smt.
Gita Rawat, petitioner No.8, is also sister of Smt.
Pushpa   Dwivedi.   From   the   aforesaid   facts,   it   is
clear that eight members of the family belonging to
the   President   Smt.   Pushpa   Dwivedi   have   been
selected for appointment on the post in question.
Apart from the aforesaid eight persons petitioner
Smt. Ramrani Singh is found to be daughter­in­law
of   Shri   Swami   Singh,   who   was   Member   of   the
Committee; Shri Sumer Singh, petitioner No.6, is
found to be son of Shri Swami Singh and one of his
nephew Shri Rajesh Singh has also been found to
be appointed. Finding in this regard is recorded by
the Collector and the Commissioner on the basis of
the statement made by the Chief Executive Officer.
11

The   order­sheets   dated   4.6.2002   and   24.6.2002
indicates   that   petitioners   were   directed   to   file
affidavits to show as to whether this is a correct
fact   or   not.   The   order­sheet   dated   24.6.2002
indicates that time was sought by learned counsel
for the petitioners to file specific affidavit of the
petitioners   denying   their   relationship   with
Members   of   the   Selection   Committee   or   office
bearers of the Janpad Panchayat. Even though in
pursuance to the aforesaid order, affidavits have
been filed, but in these affidavits the facts are not
denied and during the course of hearing Shri M.L.
Choubey fairly admitted that petitioners are related
to Smt. Pushpa Dwivedi and Shri Swami Singh, as
recorded by the Collector and the Commissioner
and he accepts the same, that being so, the finding
recorded by the Collector and the Commissioner to
the effect that all the petitioners are very closely
related either to the President of the Committee, or
its Member is a correct finding.  According to the
Collector and the Commissioner, the Panchayat Raj
Adhiniyam prohibits grant of any undue benefit by
Members  and  office  bearers  of  the   Panchayat to
any   of   its   relatives   or   family   members.   Finding
recorded is that in this case some benefit has been
granted.”
(emphasis supplied)
  
9.
Paragraphs 21, 22 and 23 have already been reproduced
by   esteemed   brother   in   para   27   in   his   judgment.
Discernibly, in para 21 thereto the arguments regarding
presence of the members of the selection committee do not
materially affect the selection process was raised by the
appellants, which is answered in paragraphs 22 and 23. As
reflected from paragraph 22, it drew the inference that one
12

of   the   appellants   had   obtained   less   marks   in   higher
secondary examination but she was accorded higher marks
in oral interview and experience category, and included in
her merit. While dealing with the case of other candidates
observed they secured less marks in higher secondary in
comparison   to   wait   listed   candidates   and   granted   more
marks in oral interview due to which, they found place in
the   selection   list.   In   scrutiny   of   facts   and   the   record
learned Single Judge was of the opinion that the appellants
herein received less marks in higher secondary whereas
many persons whose names appearing in wait list received
78% to 79% marks and they were given less than three
marks in oral interview, therefore, they have not been given
place in selection list.   In paragraph 23 of the order, the
Learned   Single   Judge   further   dealt   with   the   individual
cases of the appellants and concluded that the appellants
whose   relatives   were   the   members   of   the   selection
committee  found   favour  in  their  appointment,  therefore,
due to bias such appointments stood vitiated. Applying the
said analogy, the arguments of appellant(s) were not found
convincing   enough   to   interfere   with  the   orders   of   the
13

Collector and Commissioner in exercise of scope of Article
226 to warrant interference by the High Court. 
10.
On analysing the order of the learned Single Judge in detail
it is quite vivid that despite affording due opportunity to
controvert the factum of relationship with the members of
the selection committee and other fact findings, they have
not refuted those allegations disputing their relationship.
The   record   of   the   selection   was   produced   before   the
Learned Single Judge bench and it was inspected by the
advocate of the appellant(s) but they were not in a position
to   deny   such   facts   and   allegations.   Accordingly,   it   was
observed   that   the   selection   of   the   appellants   who   were
relatives of the members of the selection committee, is not
as per the spirit of Section 40 and 100 of the Adhiniyam
which prohibits the office bearers to use any undue benefit
to any of its relative and family members. Learned Single
Judge applying the principles enunciated in the judgment
of the  A.K. Kraipak and others Vs. Union of India and
others; (1969) 2 SCC 262 and evaluating the facts refused
to   exercise   the   jurisdiction   under   Article   226   of   the
14

Constitution of India. In the light of the judgment of the
State Bank of Patiala and others Vs. S.K. Sharma 1996
(3) SCC 364 learned Single Judge observed that appellants
have afforded ample opportunity of hearing therefore not
joining them party at the first instance before the Collector,
should   not   prejudice   them   and   the   plea   of   violation   of
principle of natural justice is not justified.  
11.
The appellants challenged the order of the learned Single
Judge in Writ Appeal before the Division Bench which was
dismissed by the impugned judgement and the same is
under challenge before us.  In the impugned judgement, it
is said that relationship of appellants with the members of
selection committee has not been denied.   Analysing the
findings of paras 21 to 23 of learned Single Judge, it is
seen   how   the   relatives   of   the   members   of   the   selection
committee were given higher marks in interview though
they were having less marks in higher secondary and in
the   category   of   experience   with   the   other   wait­listed
candidates who were given less marks in interview with an
intent   to   push   down   the   meritorious   candidates   in   the
15

merit list The Division Bench referring the judgments of
A.K. Karipak (supra), J. Mohapatra & Co. & Anr. Vs.
State of Orissa & Anr.; (1984) 4 SCC 103, Ashok Kumar
Yadav & Ors. Vs. State of Haryana & Ors.; (1985) 4 SCC
417,   Kirti   Deshmankar   Vs.   Union   of   India   &   Ors.;
(1991) 1 SCC 104, Gurdip Singh Vs. State of Punjab &
Ors.;   (1997)   10   SCC   641,   Utkal   University   Vs.
Nrusingha   Charan   Sarangi;   (1999)   2   SCC   193,   G.N.
Nayak Vs. Goa University; (2002) 2 SCC 712, Govt. of
T.N.  Vs.   Munuswamy   Mudaliar   and   Anr.;   1988   Supp
SCC   651:  AIR   1988   SC   2232,   Bihar   State   Mineral
Development   Corporation   Vs.   Encon   Builders   (I)   (P)
Ltd.; (2003) 7 SCC 418 and in paragraph 23 observed as
under: ­
“The present factual matrix is to be tested on the
aforesaid enunciation of law. We have reproduced
the analysis made by the learned Single Judge. He
has categorically recorded that the relatives of the
members   of   the   selection   committee   have   been
selected. The submission of the learned counsel for
the appellants is that if the marks awarded by the
interested   persons   are   excluded   then   also   they
would be selected. The said submission, if we are
permitted to say  so,  is  a justification  from  hind
sight.  The result manifests itself. In the  case at
hand, it does not require Solomon’s wisdom that
16

bias is in stricto sensu as from a reasonable mind
could   be   thought.   As   we   have   referred   to   the
authorities above, bias is a state of mind at work.
Quite   apart   from   above,   when   the   degree   of
relationship   is   in   quite   proximity,   bias   is   to   be
inferred and the authorities below have inferred the
same   and   after   detailed   discussion,   the   learned
Single Judge has given the stamp of approval to
the same.”  
(emphasis supplied)
12.
In the backdrop of the above factual matrix, as analysed
and recorded, the Division Bench did not find any fault in
the findings of two quasi­judicial authorities and learned
Single Judge.  While dismissing the appeal and refusing to
entertain the plea of violation of principle of natural justice,
it was observed that since the selected candidates were
relatives   of   the   office   bearers   of   the   committee,   the
possibility   of   reasonable   likelihood   of   bias   cannot   be
obliterated. Once the possibility of likelihood of bias kicks
in, the selection process stands vitiated.  It is said that in
absence of any demonstrable prejudice to the appellants,
their appointment cannot be approved.  On the plea of not
joining   them   as   party   before   the   Collector,   the   Division
Bench observed in paragraph 11 as thus:
“11. The second aspect is whether the orders passed
by the Collector and the Commissioner should have
been quashed  by  the learned Single Judge  as the
17

appellants who had been visited with adverse civil
consequence were not arrayed as parties before the
Collector. It is urged by the learned counsel for the
appellants   that   in   view   of   the   law   laid   down   in
Inderpreet   Singh   Kahlon   (supra)   and   M/s   Laksmi
Precision Screws Limited (supa), no person should be
visited   with   an   adverse   civil   consequence   without
affording him a reasonable opportunity of hearing.
There   cannot   be   any   cavil   on   the   aforesaid
proposition.   The   learned   Single   Judge   has   placed
reliance on the decision rendered in State Bank of
Patiala and Others v. V.K. Sharma, (1996) 3 SCC 364
to come to hold that unless prejudice is caused due
to non­granting of hearing, the orders should not be
mechanically interfered with.  It is worth noting that
the   appellants   had   preferred   the   revision.   They
participated   in   the   hearing   before   the   revisional
authority   in   all   aspects.   The   Commissioner   had
called for the entire selection proceeding and other
documents on record were available to the petitioners
therein. There was due deliberation in respect of the
defence put forth by the revisionists. That apart, the
learned Single Judge had called for the parties. In
view   of   the   aforesaid,   we   are   of   the   considered
opinion that though it was imperative on the part of
appellants to implead the affected parties, yet as the
affected parties had been given full opportunity from
all aspects by the revisional forum as well as by the
learned   Single  Judge,  we   do  not  think   it  apt  and
apposite to quash the order and remand the matter
to   the   Collector   to   re­adjudicate   singularly   on   the
ground that the appellants herein should have been
impleaded as a parties and that the matter should be
reheard. The said exercise in the peculiar facts and
circumstance so the case is unwarranted.”   
(emphasis supplied)
13.
In view of the foregoing, it is clear that while challenging
the selection and appointment of the appellant before the
18

Collector,  they  were  not  the  party.  However,  in  revision
they challenged the said and afforded the opportunity but
their   contentions   did   not   find   favour   with   revisional
authority. As per the findings recorded and also by Learned
Single Judge, it is clear that the appellants were relatives of
the   members   of   the   selection   committee   which   is   not
permissible as per the spirit of Sections 40 and 100 of the
Adhiniyam. The Division Bench confirmed those findings
holding that in the facts of the case, reasonable likelihood
of bias cannot be ruled out.  It was also held that at initial
stage the appellants were required to be joined as parties
before the Collector but because they have been given due
opportunity   by   the   revisional   authority,   before   learned
Single Judge, it has not caused any prejudice.  Looking to
the uncontroverted facts only their non­joinder before the
Collector would not vitiate the order impugned. 
14.
In   the   above   factual   background,   it   is   required   to   be
appreciated that whether due to non­joining the appellants
before the Collector violates  the principle of natural justice
? Consequently, whether the findings recorded against the
appellants  by two quasi­judicial authorities, writ court and
19

the writ appellate court  is liable to be interfered with  in
this appeal?
15.
For  appreciating  the   said  issue,   it  is  necessary   to  refer
Sections   40   and   100   of   the   Adhiniyam,   which   are
reproduced as thus: ­ 
“40. Removal of office­bearers of Panchayat­ (1) The
State Government or the prescribed authority may
after such enquiry as it may deem fit to make at any
time, remove an office­bearer­
(a)if   he   has   been   guilty   of   misconduct   in   the
discharge of his duties; or
(b)if his continuance in office is undesirable in the
interest of the public:
Provided that no person shall be removed unless he
has been given an opportunity to show cause why he
should not be removed from his office. 
Explanation­   For   the   purpose   of   this   sub­section
“Misconduct” shall include­
(a)any action adversely affecting,­
(i)
the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India; or
(ii)
the   harmony   and   the   spirit   of   common
brotherhood   amongst   all   the   people   of   State
transcending religious, linguistic, regional, caste
or sectional diversities; or
(iii)
the dignity of women; or 
(b)gross   negligence   in   the   discharge   of   the   duties
under this Act;
[(c)   the   use   of   position   or   influence   directly   or
indirectly to secure employment for any relative in
the   Panchayat   or   any   action   for   extending   any
pecuniary benefits to any relative, such as giving out
any   type   of   lease,   getting   any   work   done   through
them   in   the   Panchayat   by   an   office­bearer   of
Panchayat. 
20

Explanation. – For the purpose of this clause, the
expression   “relative”   shall   mean   father,   mother,
brother,   sister,   husband,   wife,   son,   daughter,
mother­in­law,   father­in­law,   brother­in­law,   sister­
in­law, son­in­law or daughter­in­law:]”  
“100.   Penalty   for   acquisition   by   a   member,   office
bearer   or   servant   of   interest   in   contract.   ­   If   a
member   or   office   bearer   or   servant   of   Panchayat
knowingly   acquires,   directly   or   indirectly   any
personal   share   or   interest   in   any   contract   or
employment, with, by or on behalf of a Panchayat
without   the   sanction   of   or   permission   of   the
prescribed   authority   he   shall   be   deemed   lo   have
committed   an   offense   under   Section   168   of   the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (XLV of 1860).”
16.
On   perusal   of   the   said   provision,   the   intention   of   the
legislators is lucid that a person can be removed from the
office mainly on two instances, firstly, if they are guilty of
misconduct and secondly, their continuation in office is
undesirable   in   public   interest.   The   provision   further
attempts to enlist the events which typically fall within the
definition of misconduct. Clause (c) of the first explanation
to Section  40  encompasses use  of position  by direct or
indirect influence to secure employment for the relatives
and   extending   any   pecuniary   benefits   to   them   as
misconduct. Upon perusal, it is irrefutably inferred that
functioning of the Panchayat must be free from influence in
21

selection and appointment and no undue benefit should be
given to relatives in employment or any other pecuniary
benefit. Otherwise contravention of this provision attracts
removal of the office bearers. Further, it is apparent from
the   Explanation   to   clause   (c),   that   the   term   ‘relative’
encompasses   father,   mother,   brother,   sister,   husband,
wife, son, daughter, mother­in­law father­in­law brother­
in­law   of   the   office   bearer   and   such   relationships   are
implied   to   be   falling   within   the   category   of   ‘prohibited
degree of relationship’ in the matter of employment or to
grant pecuniary benefit. Thus, it is explicit that relatives of
elected   office   bearers,   if   secures   an   employment   by   the
process where the office bearers were actively participating
and controlling the process, it gives cause for removal of
such office bearers. 
17.
As   per   factual   matrix   of   the   instant   case,   out   of   14
candidates whose selection was set aside, 7 fall within the
prohibited degree of relationships and others can be said to
be in near relation. Though in the present case we are not
concerned with the removal of office bearers, nonetheless,
we should not lose track of the fact that the conduct of the
22

office   bearers   in   giving   undue   benefits   to   their   near
relatives   in   an   orchestrated   manner   to   deprive   other
candidates of the opportunities despite them securing more
marks in qualifying higher secondary examination, by and
large   amounts   to   ‘misconduct’   under   the   law.   Upon
challenge,   the   selection   and   appointment   of   successful
candidates who were alleged to be in relationships with the
office   bearers   has   been   set   aside   by   the   orders   of   the
authorities  and  the  High Court on  the  ground  that the
presence   of   reasonable   likelihood   of   bias   vitiates   the
selection   process   and   consequently   the   appointment.
Further, the plea of their non­joinder at initial stage was
not found favour by both, the authorities and the High
Court,   by   stating   that   since   the   candidates   have   been
afforded sufficient opportunity however, their non­joinder
before Collector would not be detrimental to the principle of
natural justice. At this juncture it is imperative to address
the question that when the selection and appointment is
made   in   blatant   violation   of   the   principle(s)   of   natural
justice what effect would it have on the selection of such
candidates?
23

18.
In the case at hand, the appellants countered the findings
of Collector, Commissioner, learned Single Judge and the
Division Bench on the ground of violation of audi alteram
partem.   It   was   contended   that   their   appointment   was
cancelled   without   joining   them   at   in   initial   proceedings
before the Collector. The principle of natural justice does
not solely depend on  audi alteram partem.  It needs to be
prefaced   by   an   action   of   the   administrative   or   quasi­
judicial   authorities   and   the   courts   of   common   law
jurisdiction in India to invalidate the orders based on rule
of   principle   doctrine.   The   principle   of   natural   justice
emphasises   the   basic   values   which   a   common   man
cherishes throughout. The said principle is based on rules
relating   to   fairness,   reasonableness,   equity   and   justice,
good   faith,   and   good   conscience.   It   gives   assurance   of
justice with the intent to develop confidence in the justice
delivery process. The English law recognized two facets of
natural justice  “nemo debet esse judex in propia causa”
which means no one can be a judge in his own cause and
“audi alteram partem” means no one should be condemned
24

unheard.   The   preceding   principle   emphasises   about   the
decision­making   authority   and   the   latter   emphasises   a
procedure to be adopted in decision making, however, the
deciding   authority   must   be   impartial   and   without   bias,
therefore,   the   element   of   the   bias   in   the   mind   of   the
authority   is   an   essential   facet   and   the   initial   step   to
observe  the   principle   of   natural   justice.   The   preceding
principle emphasises that a man should not be a judge in
his   own   cause.   Thus   as   per   the   first   requirement,   the
person who  is  involved in the process including  a  judge
should be impartial and neutral and must be free from
bias. 
19.
In the English judgement of R Vs. Rand, (1866) LR 1 QB
230, Blackburn, J observed thus “…Wherever there is a
real likelihood that the judge would, from kindred or any
other cause, have a bias in favour of one of the parties, it
would be very wrong in him to act; and we are not to be
understood to say, that where there is a real bias of this
sort this Court would not interfere;..”
25

20.
In another English judgment  R Vs. Sussex JJ, ex parte
McCarthy (1924) 1 KB 256, the King’s Bench quashed the
conviction on the ground of bias. Lord Hewart, CJ posed
the question as thus: ­
“… The question therefore is not whether in this case
the deputy clerk made any observation or offered any
criticism which he might not properly have made or
offered; the question is whether he was so related to
the case in its civil aspect as to be unfit to act as
clerk to the justices in the criminal matter.”
and answered as under: ­
“… The answer to that question depends not upon
what actually was done but upon what might appear
to be done. Nothing is to be done which creates even
a   suspicion   that   there   has   been   an   improper
interference with the course of justice. Speaking for
myself,   I   accept   the   statements   contained   in   the
Justices' affidavit, but they show very clearly that the
deputy   clerk   was   connected   with   the   case   in   a
capacity   which   made   it   right   that   he   should
scrupulously abstain from referring to the matter in
any way, although he retired with the Justices; in
other words, his one position was such that he could
not, if he had been required to do so, discharge the
duties which his other position involved. His twofold
position   was   a   manifest   contradiction.   In   those
circumstances   I   am   satisfied   that   this   conviction
must be quashed, unless it can be shown that the
applicant or his solicitor was aware of the point that
might be taken, refrained from taking it, and took his
chance of an acquittal on the facts, and then, on a
conviction being recorded, decided to take the point.
26

21.
In   the   case   of  R   Vs.   Camborne   JJ,   ex   parte   Pearce,
(1955) 1 QB 41 the QB observed that 
‘real likelihood was the proper test and that a real
likelihood of bias had to be made to appear not only
from the materials in fact ascertained by the party
complaining, but from such further facts as he might
readily   have   ascertained   and   easily   verified   in   the
course of his inquiries’
The question arose before the QB was 
“…   ‘What   interest   in   a   judicial   or   quasi­judicial
proceeding   does   the   law   regard   as   sufficient   to
incapacitate a person from adjudicating or assisting
in   adjudicating   on   it   upon   the   ground   of   bias   or
appearance of bias?”
After discussing various judgements, it was held that – 
“In the judgment of this Court the right test is that
prescribed   by   Blackburn,   J.,   namely,   that   to
disqualify a person from acting in a judicial or quasi­
judicial capacity upon the ground of interest (other
than pecuniary or proprietary) in the subject­matter
of the proceeding, a real likelihood of bias must be
shown. This Court is further of opinion that a real
likelihood of bias must be made to appear not only
from the materials in fact ascertained by the party
complaining, but from such further facts as he might
readily   have   ascertained   and   easily   verified   in   the
course of his inquiries.”
In the present case, for example, the facts relied on
in   the   applicant's   statement   under   RSC   Order   59
Rule 3(2), might create a more sinister impression
than the full facts as found by this Court, all or most
of which would have been available to the applicant
had he pursued his inquiries upon learning that Mr
Thomas   was   a   member   of   the   Cornwall   County
Council, and none of these further facts was disputed
at the hearing of this motion.
27

The frequency  with which allegations  of  bias  have
come   before   the   courts   in   recent   times   seems   to
indicate that Lord Hewart's reminder in Sussex JJ
case [(1924) 1 KB 256: 1923 All ER Rep 233] that it
is of fundamental importance that justice should not
only be done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly
be seen to be done’ is being urged as a warrant for
quashing   convictions   or   invalidating   orders   upon
quite   unsubstantial   grounds   and,   indeed,   in  some
cases   upon   the   flimsiest   pretexts   of   bias.   Whilst
endorsing and fully maintaining the integrity of the
principle reasserted by Lord Hewart, this Court feels
that the continued citation of it in cases to which it is
not applicable may lead to the erroneous impression
that it is more important that justice should appear
to be done than that it should in fact be done.”
22.
In the case of Metropolitan Properties Co. (FGC) Ltd. Vs.
Lannon, (1969) 1 QB 577,  Lord Denning observed and
held as thus: ­ 
“the principle evolved by Lord Hewart, CJ that
‘justice should not only be done, but manifestly
and   undoubtedly   be   seen   to   be   done’.   In
considering whether there was ‘real likelihood’ of
bias,   Court   does   not   look   at   the   mind   of   the
decision­maker himself. “The Court looks at the
impression which would be given to other people.
Even   if,   he   was   as   impartial   as   could   be,
nevertheless,   if   right­minded   persons   would
think   that,   in   the   circumstances,   there   was   a
‘real   likelihood’   of   bias   on   his   part,   then   he
should not sit. And if he does sit, his decision
cannot stand.”
“There   must   be   circumstances   from   which   a
reasonable man would think it likely or probable
that the justice, or chairman, as the case may
28

be, would, or did, favour one side at the expense
of the other. The Court will not enquire whether
he did, in fact, favour one side unfairly. Suffice it
that reasonable people might think that he did.”
The said test was explained in the case of Hannam Vs.
Bradford Corporation, (1970) 2 All ER 690 as thus: ­
“If a reasonable person who has no knowledge of
the matter beyond knowledge of the relationship
which   subsists   between   some   members   of   the
tribunal and one of the parties would think that
there   might   well   be   bias   and   there   is   in   his
opinion   a   real   likelihood   of   bias.   Of   course,
someone   else   with   inside   knowledge   of   the
characters of the members in question might say
“Although   things   don’t   look   very   well,   in   fact
there is no real likelihood of bias.” That, however,
would be beside the point, because the question
is not whether the tribunal will in fact be biased,
but  whether   a  reasonable   man  with   no  inside
knowledge   might   well   think   that   it   might   be
biased.” 
23.
In another English judgment R Vs. Gough, 1993 AC 646,
the question came before the House of Lords which used
the expression ‘real danger’ of bias while applying the test
of reasonable likelihood of bias. The Court emphasised the
term “possibility of bias” rather than “probability of bias”
and held as under: ­
“… In my opinion, if, in the circumstances of the
case (as ascertained by the court), it appears that
there was a real likelihood, in the sense of a real
possibility,   of   bias   on  the   part  of   a  justice   or
other   member   of   an   inferior   tribunal,   justice
29

requires that the decision should not be allowed
to stand. I am by no means persuaded that, in its
original   form,   the   real   likelihood   test   required
that   any   more   rigorous   criterion   should   be
applied. Furthermore, the test as so stated gives
sufficient effect, in cases of apparent bias, to the
principle that justice must manifestly be seen to
be done, and it is unnecessary, in my opinion, to
have recourse to a test based on mere suspicion,
or even reasonable suspicion, for that purpose.”
“In   conclusion,   I   wish   to   express   my
understanding of the law as follows. I think it
possible,   and   desirable,   that   the   same   test
should   be   applicable   in   all   cases   of   apparent
bias,   whether   concerned   with   Justices   or
members   of   other   inferior   tribunals,   or   with
jurors, or with arbitrators. Likewise, I consider
that, in cases concerned with jurors, the same
test   should   be   applied   by   a   Judge   to   whose
attention the possibility of bias on the part of a
juror has been drawn in the course of a trial, and
by the court of appeal when it considers such a
question   on   appeal.   Furthermore,   I   think   it
unnecessary, in formulating the appropriate test,
to   require   that   the   court   should   look   at   the
matter through the eyes of a reasonable man,
because   the   court   in   cases   such   as   these
personifies the reasonable man; and in any event
the   court   has   first   to   ascertain   the   relevant
circumstances   from   the   available   evidence,
knowledge   of   which   would   not   necessarily   be
available to an observer in court at the relevant
time. Finally, for the avoidance of doubt, I prefer
to state the test in terms of real danger rather
than real likelihood, to ensure that the court is
thinking   in   terms   of   possibility   rather   than
probability   of   bias.   Accordingly,   having
ascertained the relevant circumstances, the court
should ask itself whether, having regard to those
circumstances, there was a real danger of bias on
the part of the relevant member of the tribunal in
30

question,   in   the   sense   that   he   might   unfairly
regard (or have unfairly regarded) with favour, or
disfavour, the case of a party to the issue under
consideration by him….”
24.
The above said English principles having been adopted by
the   Indian   Courts,   the   Constitutional   Bench   in   the
celebrated judgment of  A.K. Kraipak and others (supra)
held as thus: 
“…..The   real   question   is   not   whether   he   was
biased. It is difficult to prove the state of mind of
a   person.   Therefore   what   we   have   to   see   is
whether there is reasonable ground for believing
that he was likely to have been biased. We agree
with the learned Attorney General that a mere
suspicion of bias is not sufficient. There must be
a reasonable likelihood of bias.  In deciding the
question   of   bias   we   have   to   take   into
consideration human probabilities and ordinary
course of human conduct.” 
(emphasis supplied)
25.
Further,   in   the   case   of  S.   Parthasarathi   Vs.   State   of
Andhra   Pradesh;   (1974)   3   SCC   459  while  drawing
distinction   of   bias,   “real   likelihood”   and   “reasonable
suspicion”,   the   Court   expanded   the   scope   of   bias.   The
relevant paragraphs of the said judgment are reproduced
as under: ­ 
“13. ……We   are   of   the   opinion   that   the
cumulative   effect   of   the   circumstances   stated
above was sufficient to create in the mind of a
31

reasonable man the impression that there was a
real   likelihood   of   bias   in   the   inquiring   officer.
There must be a “real likelihood” of bias and that
means there must be a substantial possibility of
bias. The Court will have to judge of the matter
as a reasonable man would judge of any matter
in   the   conduct   of   his   own   business
(see R. v. Sunderland, JJ.) [(1901) 2 KB 357 at
373]
14. The test of likelihood of bias which has been
applied in a number of cases is based on the
“reasonable apprehension” of a reasonable man
fully   cognizant   of   the   facts.   The   courts   have
quashed   decisions   on   the   strength   of   the
reasonable   suspicion   of   the   party   aggrieved
without   having   made   any   finding   that   a   real
likelihood
 
of
 
bias
 
in
 
fact
 
existed
(see R. v. Huggins [(1895)
 
1
 
QB
563] ; R. v. Sussex, JJ., ex. p. McCarthy [(1924)
1   KB   256]   ; Cottle v. Cottle [(1939)   2   All   ER
535] ; R. v. Abingdon, JJ. ex. p. Cousins [(1964)
108 SJ 840] .) But in R. v. Camborne, JJ. ex. p
Pearce [(1955) 1 QB 41 at 51] the Court, after a
review   of   the   relevant   cases   held   that   real
likelihood of bias was the proper test and that a
real likelihood of bias had to be made to appear
not only from the materials in fact ascertained by
the   party   complaining,   but   from   such   further
facts as he might readily have ascertained and
easily verified in the course of his inquiries.
XXX 
XXX 
XXX
16. The tests of “real likelihood” and “reasonable
suspicion”   are   really   inconsistent   with   each
other.   We   think   that   the  reviewing   authority
must make a determination on the basis of the
whole evidence before it, whether a reasonable
man would in the circumstances infer that there
is real likelihood of bias. The Court must look at
the   impression   which   other   people   have.   This
32

follows from the principle that justice must not
only be done but seen to be done. If right minded
persons would think that there is real likelihood
of  bias  on the  part of  an  inquiring  officer,  he
must   not   conduct   the   enquiry;   nevertheless,
there must be a real likelihood of bias. Surmise
or conjecture would not be enough. There must
exist circumstances from which reasonable men
would   think   it   probable   or   likely   that   the
inquiring   officer   will   be   prejudiced   against   the
delinquent. The Court will not inquire whether he
was really prejudiced. If a reasonable man would
think on the basis of the existing circumstances
that   he   is   likely   to   be   prejudiced,   that   is
sufficient to quash the decision...”
  
26.
This Court while emphasising upon bias in the case of Dr.
G. Sarana Vs. University of Lucknow and others; (1976)
3 SCC 585 held that what has to be seen is whether there
is a reasonable ground for believing that he was likely to
have been biased. In deciding the question of bias, human
probabilities and ordinary course of human conduct have
to be taken into consideration. In case, the member of the
group or board may be in a position to influence the other,
then his bias is likely to operate in a subtle manner.  
27.
In the case of  J. Mohapatra & Co. & Anr. (supra), this
Court emphasised that the doctrine of necessity applies not
only   to   judicial   matters   but   also   to   quasi­judicial   and
administrative matters. While reiterating the principle of
33

bias, it has been held that doctrine of necessity cannot be
invoked   because   the   members   of   the   committee   were
appointed by a Government Resolution and some of them
were appointed because they were holding official position.
Such members, by virtue of the orders or statutes were
made a part of the selection committee, are required to
inform their position to the Government, however, without
taking such recourse they cannot take a plea to apply the
doctrine of bias.   
28.
This Court in another Constitution Bench case of  Ashok
Kumar Yadav & Ors. (supra) has reaffirmed the principle
of bias holding that if a selection committee is constituted
for the purpose of selecting candidates on merits and one
of the members of the selection committee is closely related
to a candidate appearing for the selection, it would not be
enough   for   such   member   merely   to   withdraw   from
participation in the interview of the candidate and ask the
authorities to nominate another person in his place on the
selection committee, because otherwise all the selections
made would be vitiated on account of reasonable likelihood
of bias affecting the process of selection.
34

29.
In the case of Sk. Golap and others Vs. Bhuban Chandra
Panda   and   others;   1990   SCC   Online   Cal   264,   while
dealing with the issue of likelihood of bias, applying the
principle “justice should not only be done but it should be
seen to have been done” the Court held as under: ­
“7. ……We have no hesitation in believing also
that he had no personal contact with the writ
petitioners who were his erst­while clients since
the previous writ petition was not decided in the
recent   past.   These   considerations   do   not,
however,   detract   from   the   validity   of   the   legal
objection raised on behalf of the appellants. It is
not necessary for the appellants to establish that
the learned single Judge actually had a bias and
that the said bias was the cause of the adverse
verdict.  The test to be applied in such cases is
not   whether   in   fact   a   bias   has   affected   the
judgment but whether there was a real likelihood
of   bias.   The   answer   depends   not   upon   what
actually was done but upon what might appear
to be done. Justice must be rooted in confidence;
and confidence is destroyed when right minded
people may have reason to go away thinking: “the
Judge might have been biased.”
30.
Similarly, in the case of  Kirti Deshmankar (supra)  this
Court   re­emphasised   that   if   the   mother­in­law   of   the
selected candidate was interested in the admission of her
daughter­in­law, her presence in the meeting of the council
vitiates   the   selection   and   it   was   not   necessary   to
35

categorically establish the bias. The Court observed that if
in   the   selection   process   it   is   shown   that   there   was   a
reasonable likelihood of bias, it is sufficient to set aside the
such selection. 
31.
This   Court   in   the   case   of  G.N.   Nayak   (supra)  again
emphasising   the   element   of   impartiality   in   the   mind   of
judicial, quasi­judicial or administrative body held as thus:
­
“33. Bias may be generally defined as partiality
or   preference.   It   is   true   that   any   person   or
authority required to act in a judicial or quasi­
judicial matter must act impartially.
“If however, ‘bias’ and ‘partiality’ be defined to
mean the total absence of preconceptions in the
mind of the Judge, then no one has ever had a
fair trial and no one ever will. The human mind,
even at infancy, is no blank piece of paper. We
are born with predispositions and the processes
of   education,   formal   and   informal,   create
attitudes which precede reasoning in particular
instances and which, therefore, by definition, are
prejudices.”   [   Per   Frank,   J.   in Linahan,   Re,
(1943) 138 F 2d 650, 652]
34. It is not every kind of bias which in law is
taken to vitiate an act. It must be a prejudice
which is not founded on reason, and actuated by
self­interest   —   whether   pecuniary   or   personal.
Because of this element of personal interest, bias
is also seen as an extension of the principles of
natural justice that no man should be a judge in
his own cause. Being a state of mind, a bias is
sometimes   impossible   to   determine.   Therefore,
the courts have evolved the principle that it is
sufficient for a litigant to successfully impugn an
36

action by establishing a reasonable possibility of
bias   or   proving   circumstances   from   which   the
operation   of   influences   affecting   a   fair
assessment   of   the   merits   of   the   case   can   be
inferred”.
32.
The   case   of  Gurdip   Singh   (supra)  is   a   case   of   similar
nature as on hand, in paragraph 3 of the said case, this
Court has observed as thus: 
“3. …..It has been established beyond doubt that
the father of Respondent 3 being the Secretary of
the   Managing   Committee   of   the   school
participated   in   the   selection   of   his   daughter,
Respondent   3   and   later   on   confirmation   was
given   about   such   selection   in   favour   of
Respondent 3 where Respondent 3 by virtue of
improper selection also constituted as one of the
members   of   the   Managing   Committee   giving
confirmation. In the aforesaid circumstances, we
set aside the selection of Respondent 3 as the
Headmistress of the said school.”  
33.
On the other side, learned counsel for the appellants has
heavily placed reliance on the judgment of  Javid Rasool
Bhat & Ors. Vs. State of Jammu and Kashmir & Ors.;
(1984)   2   SCC   631  to   contend   that   in   absence   of   any
allegation of mala fide, it would not be right to set aside the
selection merely because one of the candidates happened
to be related to a member of the selection committee who
abstained   from   participating   in   the   interview   of   that
37

candidate. The case of Javid Rasool Bhat (supra) is based
on   a   written   and   oral   test   wherein   the   member   of   the
selection committee for oral test was unaware of the marks
obtained by the candidate in the written examination. The
father of the candidate who was on the interview panel had
left the premise at the time of interview. Thus, the Court
found that there was no bias. While in the present case, as
per the procedure prescribed and discussed, the members
of selection committee were aware, how many marks have
been obtained by individual candidates in qualifying exam
and also in experience category and by shortage of how
many   marks   they   may   be   out   from   the   merit   list   of
selection.   The   members   were   aware   that   their   relatives
would   appear   for   interview,   therefore,   they   themselves
passed a resolution on 01.08.2003 prior to starting the
process   of   selection   and   decided   to   abstain   from   the
interview of those particular candidates. Having knowledge
of   the   fact   that   their   relatives   are   appearing   and   even
without intimating the same to the higher authorities for
change of selection committee, they had participated in the
process of selection and about 5% relatives got selected
38

and appointed by such an act. Therefore, in my opinion the
judgment of Javid Rasool Bhat (supra) is disqualifiable on
facts and is of no help to the appellants. 
34.
As ascertained from the discussion above, whether in a
particular   case,   principles   of   natural   justice   have   been
contravened or not is a matter for the courts to decide from
case to case.   However, even with all its vagueness and
flexibility, its two elements have generally been accepted,
viz, (i) that the body in question should be  free from bias,
and (ii) that it should hear the person affected before it
decides   the   matter.   The   first   principle   denotes   that   the
adjudicator   should   be   disinterested   and   unbiased;   the
prosecutor himself should not be a judge; the judge should
be a neutral and disinterested person; a person should not
be a judge in his own cause; a person interested in one of
the parties to the dispute should not, even formally, take
part   in   the   adjudicatory   proceedings.   The   basis   of   this
principle   is   that   justice   should   not   only   be   done,   but
should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done.
According to Lannon (Supra), the actual existence of bias
39

is   not   necessary.     The   test   is   “reasonable   likelihood   of
bias”, if a reasonable man would think on the basis of the
existing circumstances that he is likely to be prejudiced,
that is sufficient to quash the decision. Mere apprehension
of bias is not enough and there must be cogent evidence
available on record to come to the conclusion. In my view
the said Doctrine has been adopted in pith and substance
by Indian Courts. 
35.
As per the judgment of Ridge Vs. Baldwin; 1964 AC 40, it
is said that the doctrine of natural justice is not only to
secure justice but to prevent the miscarriage of justice.
Such doctrine was held to be incapable of exact definition
but   what   a   reasonable   man   would   regard   as   a   fair
procedure   in  particular  circumstances   would  amount  to
prevent the miscarriage of justice. In the case of  Russell
Vs.   Duke   of   Norfolk;   (1949)   1   AII   ER   109   (CA),   As
Tucker, L.J. has expounded when the principles of natural
justice are required to be seen, everything will depend on
the actual facts of the case. He observed as thus: ­  
“The   requirements   of   natural   justice   must
depend   on   the  circumstances   of   the   case,   the
nature of the inquiry, the rules under which the
40

tribunal   is   acting,   the   subject­matter   that   is
being dealt with and so forth.”
36.
On   reverting   to   the   facts   of   the   present   case   and   as
observed in the table in Para 2 of this judgement, five of
the present appellants fall within the prohibited degree of
relatives as prescribed in the explanation of Section 40 of
the   Adhiniyam,   while   the   remaining   five   have   near
relationships with the Committee members. It is also to
observe that their relationships have not been denied by
the present appellants at any juncture of this litigation.
The process of selection is the same in which some of the
appellants   having   prohibited   degree   of   relationship   and
near relationship. To apply the test of reasonable likelihood
of   bias,   the   relationship   of   candidates   with   the   office
bearers   is  material  which  may   have   relevance  when  an
action for removal of the office bearer is required.  But by
such an act substantial likelihood of bias in selection of
relatives by the members of the Committee cannot be ruled
out from the mind of a reasonable man as expressed by
Lord Denning in the case of Metropolitan Properties Co.
(FGC)   Ltd.   (supra).  Additionally,   the   observation   of   the
41

learned Single Judge in paragraphs 17, 21, 22 and 23 of
his   judgement   demonstrate   the   orchestrated   manner   in
which bias has vitiated the selection process. In my view, it
is sufficient to plant the seed of likelihood of bias in the
mind of a reasonable man, thus, the test of reasonable
likelihood of bias as propounded in the abovementioned
judgements is satisfied if tested on the anvil of the facts of
the present case.
37.
In the present case, in my considered opinion, the findings
recorded by the two quasi­judicial authorities, writ court
and   writ   appellate   court   are   based   on   the   analysis   of
reasonable likelihood of bias which rightly stirs bias in the
mind of a common man who could not get selected because
the   appellants   have   relations   with   the   members   of   the
selection committee. The detailed analysis of irregularities
has been explained by the learned Single Judge  and has
been  re­affirmed by the Division Bench. In my view the
said stamp of approval should not be disturbed by this
Court in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 136 of the
Constitution of India. 
42

38.
Appellants have also vehemently contended that they have
not been afforded an opportunity to be heard at the first
stage   before   the   collector,   thus,   non­adhesion   to   the
principle   of   natural   justice   vitiates   the   process.   At   this
stage, it is also crucial to mention that Indian Courts time
and again have reiterated that principles of natural justice
are neither treated with absolute rigidity nor as imprisoned
in a  straitjacket. It     has     many facets. Sometimes, this
doctrine is applied in a broad way, sometimes in a limited
or narrow. Applicability and requirements of natural justice
depend upon the facts and circumstances of the case and
it is not possible to lay down rigid rules as to when the
principles of natural justice are to apply; nor as to their
scope  and   extent.   Everything   depends  on  the  facts  and
circumstances.
39.
In   the   case   of  Kumaon   Mandal   Vikas   Nigam   Ltd.   Vs.
Girja Shankar Pant and others; (2001) 1 SCC 182, this
Court   on  refinement   of  principles  of   natural   justice
observed in paragraph 2 as thus: ­  
“2. While it is true that over the years there has
been   a   steady   refinement   as   regards   this
particular   doctrine,   but   no   attempt   has   been
made and if we may say so, cannot be made to
43

define   the   doctrine   in   a   specific   manner   or
method.   Strait­jacket   formula   cannot   be   made
applicable but compliance with the doctrine is
solely   dependent   upon   the   facts   and
circumstances of each case. The totality of the
situation  ought   to  be  taken   note  of  and   if  on
examination   of   such   totality,   it  comes   to   light
that the executive action suffers from the vice of
non­compliance with the doctrine, the law courts
in   that   event   ought   to   set   right   the   wrong
inflicted upon the person concerned and to do so
would be a plain exercise of judicial power. As a
matter of fact the doctrine is now termed as a
synonym of fairness in the concept of justice and
stands as the most­accepted methodology of a
governmental action.”
  
In   view   of   the   above,   due   to   steady   refinement   as
regards to the doctrine of natural justice, there cannot be
any straitjacket formula to apply. The doctrine will now be
termed as a synonym of fairness in the concept of justice
and   stand   as   the   most­accepted   methodology   for   a
governmental action.
40.
This Court in the case of Ashok Kumar Sonkar Vs. Union
of India & Ors.; (2007) 4 SCC 54 while dealing with the
principle of natural justice doctrine observed that it is well
settled   that   the   said   doctrine   cannot   be   put   in   any
straitjacket formula. It may not be applied in each case
unless   prejudice   is   shown.   It  is   not   necessary  where   it
44

would be a futile exercise. The similar observations have
been made by this Court in the case of  H.P. Transport
Corpn. v. K.C. Rahi, (2008) 11 SCC 502. In the said case,
this Court in paragraphs 7 and 8 has observed as thus: ­ 
“7. The principle of natural justice cannot be put
in a straitjacket formula. Its application depends
upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
To   sustain   a   complaint   of   non­compliance
with the principle of natural justice, one must
establish that he has been prejudiced thereby
for non­compliance with principle of natural
justice.
8. In   the   instant   case   we   have   been   taken
through   various   documents   and   also   from   the
representation   dated   19­10­1993   filed   by   the
respondent himself it would clearly show that he
knew that a departmental enquiry was initiated
against him yet he chose not to participate in the
enquiry   proceedings   at   his   own   risk.   In   such
event   plea   of   principle   of   natural   justice   is
deemed to have been waived and he is estopped
from raising the question of non­compliance with
principles   of   natural   justice.   In   the
representation submitted by him on 19­10­1993
the subject itself reads “Departmental Enquiries”.
It is stated at the Bar that the respondent is a
law graduate, therefore, he cannot take a plea of
ignorance of law. Ignorance of law is no excuse
much less by a person who is a law graduate
himself.”
41.
The theory of prejudice had further been considered by this
Court   in   the   case   of  Jankinath   Sarangi   Vs.   State   of
45

Orissa; (1969) 3 SCC 392, this Court while dealing with
the facts of the case observed as thus: ­
“5. …..If anything had happened the earth would
have swollen rather than contracted by reason of
rain and the pits would have become bigger and
not smaller. Anyway the questions which were
put to the witnesses were recorded and sent to
the Chief Engineer and his replies were received.
No doubt the replies were not put in the hands of
the appellant but he saw them at the time when
he was making the representations and curiously
enough he used those replies in his defence. In
other words, they were not collected behind his
back and could be used to his advantage and he
had   an   opportunity   of   so   using   them   in   his
defence. We do not think that any prejudice was
caused   to   the   appellant   in   this   case   by   not
examining   the   two   retired   Superintending
Engineers   whom   he   had   cited   or   any   one   of
them. The case was a simple one whether the
measurement book had been properly checked.
The   pleas   about   rain   and   floods   were   utterly
useless   and   the   Chief   Engineer's   elucidated
replies were not against the appellant. In these
circumstances   a   fetish   of   the   principles   of
natural justice is not necessary to be made. We
do not think that a case is made out that the
principles of natural justice are violated.” 
42.
In my considered opinion, the principle of law laid down on
prejudice in the case of S.K. Sharma (supra) duly applies
in the facts of this case in such a scenario. In the said case
in   paragraph   33,   the   Court   summarises   the   principle
emerging   on   discussion   of   the   issue   of   violation   of   the
46

doctrine of natural justice. The relevant paragraph of the
seven principles are reproduced as thus: ­ 
“33. We may summarise the principles emerging
from   the   above   discussion.   (These   are   by   no
means intended to be exhaustive and are evolved
keeping   in   view   the   context   of   disciplinary
enquiries and orders of punishment imposed by
an employer upon the employee):
(1) An order passed imposing a punishment on
an
 
employee
 
consequent
 
upon
 
a
disciplinary/departmental enquiry in violation of
the
 
rules/regulations/statutory
 
provisions
governing such enquiries should not be set aside
automatically. The Court or the Tribunal should
enquire whether (a) the provision violated is of a
substantive nature or (b) whether it is procedural
in character.
(2)   A   substantive   provision   has normally to   be
complied with as explained hereinbefore and the
theory of substantial compliance or the test of
prejudice would not be applicable in such a case.
(3)   In   the   case   of   violation   of   a   procedural
provision,   the   position   is   this:   procedural
provisions   are   generally   meant   for   affording   a
reasonable   and   adequate   opportunity   to   the
delinquent officer/employee. They are, generally
speaking, conceived in his interest. Violation of
any and every procedural provision cannot be
said to automatically vitiate the enquiry held
or order passed.  Except cases falling under —
“no notice”,  “no opportunity” and  “no  hearing”
categories,  the   complaint   of   violation   of
procedural provision should be examined from
the point of view of prejudice, viz., whether
such violation has prejudiced the delinquent
officer/employee   in   defending   himself
properly and effectively.  If it is found that he
has been so prejudiced, appropriate orders have
to be made to repair and remedy the prejudice
47

including setting aside the enquiry and/or the
order   of   punishment.   If   no   prejudice   is
established   to   have   resulted   therefrom,   it   is
obvious,   no   interference   is   called   for.   In   this
connection,   it   may   be   remembered   that   there
may be certain procedural provisions which are
of a fundamental character, whose violation is by
itself proof of prejudice. The Court may not insist
on proof of prejudice in such cases. As explained
in the body of the judgment, take a case where
there is a provision expressly providing that after
the evidence of the employer/government is over,
the employee shall be given an opportunity to
lead defence in his evidence, and in a given case,
the enquiry officer does not give that opportunity
in spite of the delinquent officer/employee asking
for it. The prejudice is self­evident. No proof of
prejudice as such need be called for in such a
case. To repeat, the test is one of prejudice, i.e.,
whether the person has received a fair hearing
considering   all   things.   Now,   this   very   aspect
can also be looked at from the point of view of
directory and mandatory provisions, if one is so
inclined.   The   principle   stated   under   (4)
hereinbelow is only another way of looking at the
same aspect as is dealt with herein and not a
different or distinct principle.
(4)(a) In the case of a procedural provision which
is not of a mandatory character, the complaint of
violation has to be examined from the standpoint
of substantial compliance. Be that as it may, the
order passed in violation of such a provision can
be   set   aside   only   where   such   violation   has
occasioned prejudice to the delinquent employee.
(b)   In   the   case   of   violation   of   a   procedural
provision, which is of a mandatory character, it
has to be ascertained whether the provision is
conceived in the interest of the person proceeded
against or in public interest. If it is found to be
the  former,  then  it must be seen  whether the
delinquent   officer   has   waived   the   said
48

requirement, either expressly or by his conduct.
If he is found to have waived it, then the order of
punishment cannot be set aside on the ground of
the   said   violation.   If,   on   the   other   hand,   it  is
found that the delinquent officer/employee has
not waived it or that the provision could not be
waived   by   him,   then   the   Court   or   Tribunal
should make appropriate directions (include the
setting   aside   of   the   order   of   punishment),
keeping in mind the  approach  adopted by the
Constitution   Bench   in B.   Karunakar [(1993)   4
SCC 727 : 1993 SCC (L&S) 1184 : (1993) 25 ATC
704] . The ultimate test is always the same, viz.,
test of prejudice or the test of fair hearing, as it
may be called.
(5) Where  the   enquiry   is   not   governed   by   any
rules/regulations/statutory   provisions   and   the
only   obligation   is   to   observe   the   principles   of
natural justice — or, for that matter, wherever
such principles are held to be implied by the very
nature   and   impact   of   the   order/action   —   the
Court or the Tribunal should make a distinction
between a total violation of natural justice (rule
of audi alteram partem) and violation of a facet of
the said rule, as explained in the body of the
judgment. In other words, a distinction must be
made
 
between
 
“no
 
opportunity”
 
and
no adequate opportunity,   i.e.,   between   “no
notice”/“no hearing” and “no fair hearing”. (a) In
the   case   of   former,   the   order   passed   would
undoubtedly be invalid (one may call it ‘void’ or a
nullity   if   one   chooses   to).   In   such   cases,
normally,   liberty   will   be   reserved   for   the
Authority to take proceedings afresh according to
law, i.e., in accordance with the said rule (audi
alteram partem). (b) But in the latter case, the
effect of violation (of a facet of the rule of audi
alteram   partem)  has   to   be   examined   from   the
standpoint of prejudice; in other words, what the
Court or Tribunal has to see is whether in the
totality   of   the   circumstances,   the   delinquent
49

officer/employee   did   or   did   not   have   a   fair
hearing and the orders to be made shall depend
upon the answer to the said query. [It is made
clear that this principle (No. 5) does not apply in
the case of rule against bias, the test in which
behalf are laid down elsewhere.]
(6)  While   applying   the   rule   of   audi   alteram
partem   (the   primary   principle   of   natural
justice)   the   Court/Tribunal/Authority   must
always   bear   in   mind   the   ultimate   and
overriding objective underlying the said rule,
viz., to ensure a fair hearing and to ensure
that there is  no failure of justice. It  is  this
objective which should guide them in applying
the rule to varying situations that arise before
them.
(7) There may be situations where the interests of
State or public interest may call for a curtailing
of   the   rule   of   audi   alteram   partem.   In   such
situations,   the   Court   may   have   to   balance
public/State   interest   with   the   requirement   of
natural   justice   and   arrive   at   an   appropriate
decision.”
After going through the facts of this case as discussed
above,   the   present   case   falls   within   the  ambit   of   the
principle  laid  down  in  paragraph  33  (3)  and   (6),  of  the
above case.    
43.
In the recent decision this Court in State of Uttar Pradesh
Vs. Sudhir Kumar Singh & Ors.; 2020 SCC Online SC
847, in paragraph 39 explaining the principle of natural
50

justice   and   prejudice   theory   has   been   made   which   is
reproduced as thus: ­
“(1) Natural justice is a flexible tool in the hands
of   the   judiciary   to   reach   out   in   fit   cases   to
remedy   injustice.  The   breach   of   the audi
alteram partem rule cannot by itself, without
more, lead to the conclusion that prejudice is
thereby caused.
(2)   Where   procedural   and/or   substantive
provisions   of   law   embody   the   principles   of
natural justice, their infraction per se does not
lead   to   invalidity   of   the   orders   passed.   Here
again, prejudice must be caused to the litigant,
except in the case of a mandatory provision of
law   which   is   conceived   not   only   in   individual
interest, but also in public interest.
(3)   No   prejudice   is   caused   to   the  person
complaining of the breach of natural justice
where such person does not dispute the case
against him or it. This can happen by reason of
estoppel,   acquiescence,   waiver   and   by   way   of
non­challenge   or   non­denial   or   admission   of
facts,  in   cases   in   which   the   Court   finds   on
facts that no real prejudice can therefore be
said   to   have   been   caused   to   the   person
complaining of the breach of natural justice.
(4)  In cases where facts can be stated to be
admitted   or   indisputable,   and   only   one
conclusion   is   possible,   the   Court   does   not
pass futile orders of setting aside or remand
when there is, in fact, no prejudice caused.
This conclusion must be drawn by the Court on
an appraisal of the facts of a case, and not by the
authority who denies natural justice to a person.
(5)  The  “prejudice”  exception  must  be  more
than   a   mere   apprehension   or   even   a
reasonable suspicion of a litigant. It should
exist as a matter of fact, or be based upon a
51

definite   inference   of   likelihood   of   prejudice
flowing   from   the   non­observance   of   natural
justice.”
In view of the foregoing, it is clear that the doctrine of
natural justice would not apply as a straitjacket formula,
violation of one limb of natural justice that is audi altrem
partem  can   be   accepted   when   the   prejudice   has   been
shown to be caused. A person who alleges the breach of the
principle of natural justice is required to dispute the case
against him in order to establish prejudice. In the cases
where facts are not in dispute, the courts ought to refrain
from   passing   order   of   remand.   Lastly,   the   exception   of
prejudice must be more than the reasonable suspicion and
should exist as strongly as a matter of fact.
44.
In the narration of the facts as discussed above, it is clear
that the appellants have emphasized  on  their non­joinder
at the initial stage before the Collector. A bare perusal of
the order passed by the Collector reflects that it is based on
the   counter­affidavit   filed   by   the   Janpad   Panchayat
whereby it is established that the appellants were related
to the members of the selection committee. Subsequently,
52

the   collector held  the   process  to be  vitiated  by  bias  by
applying   the   test  of   reasonable   likelihood   of   bias.   Once
again, upon challenge being made by the appellants before
the   revisional   authority,   their   relationship   with   the
members of the selection committee was not disputed yet
violation   of   doctrine   of  audi   altrem   partem  was   alleged
merely due to non­joinder. After hearing them, the plea of
non­impleadment did not find force before the revisional
authority   and   the   challenge   did   not   succeed.   Aggrieved
appellants   moved   a   writ   petition   before   the   High   Court
where   ample   opportunity   was   given   by   learned   Single
Judge and they were allowed to inspect the records. Thus,
an opportunity to controvert the findings of the Collector
and the Commissioner and factual narration thereof was
duly afforded. After sufficient opportunities given by the
Ld.   Single   Judge,   the   appellants   neither   denied   their
relationship with the members of the selection committee
nor demonstrated that how the findings are perverse or
contrary to record, causing any prejudice to them. 
45.
In   the   sequel   of   above   factual   narration,   first   limb   of
natural justice that is ‘rule against bias’ was proved as
53

reasonable   likelihood   of   bias   was   fully   established
irrefutably. The violation of another limb i.e. audi alteram
partem,  which   is   procedural,   has   been   prayed   by   the
appellants on the pretext of their non­joinder at the initial
stage; in my opinion, without showing prejudice mere non­
joinder even at initial stage does not violate the natural
justice doctrine in the case at hand.  
46.
As   discussed,   time   and   again,   Indian   Courts   have
emphasized that procedural formalities can be dispensed
with   when   facts   are   admitted   and   undisputed   and   no
apparent prejudice is caused to the parties from the alleged
non­compliance   of   the   procedure.   The   Courts   have
propounded   ‘useless   formality’   theory   which   revolves
around the idea that in cases where there are admitted or
undisputed   facts,   procedures   and   formalities   may   lose
their relevance or serve no meaningful purpose, since the
outcome may be no different in the absence thereof.  This
Court   in M/s.   Escorts   Farms   (Ramgarh)   Ltd.   v.
Commissioner, Kumaon Division, Nainital, U.P. & Ors.
2004 (4) SCC 281  observed that “rules of natural justice
are to be followed for doing substantial justice and not for
54

completing a mere ritual of hearing without possibility of any
change in the decision of the case on merits”. 
47.
This Court in the case of  Canara Bank v. Debasis Das,
(2003)   4 SCC  557  where  order  of   removal was   passed
against   charged  employee  as   he   could   not   produce   his
written   brief   within   the   time   as   provided,   the   order   of
removal was passed without considering his written brief.
Upon   preferring   statutory   appeal,   though   the   employee
filed written brief yet he could not convince the appellate
authority   and   it   was   dismissed.   While   exercising   writ
jurisdiction, the Learned Single Judge Bench allowed the
writ petition on the ground of violation of natural justice
which was  confirmed  by Learned  Division Bench of  the
High   Court.   This   Court   while   exercising   its   jurisdiction
under Art. 136 quashed the order of the Learned Single
Judge   and   the   Division   Bench   based   on   the   finding   of
violation of natural justice.
12. Residual and  crucial  question that remains
to be adjudicated is whether principles of natural
justice   have   been   violated;   and   if   so,   to   what
extent any prejudice has been caused. It may be
noted at this juncture that in some cases it has
been observed that where grant of opportunity in
terms of  principles of  natural  justice does not
55

improve the situation, “useless formality theory”
can be pressed into service.
23. As was observed by this Court  we need not
go   into   “useless   formality   theory”   in   detail;   in
view   of   the   fact   that   no   prejudice   has   been
shown.  As   is   rightly   pointed   out   by   learned
counsel   for   the   appellants,   unless   failure   of
justice is occasioned or that it would not be in
public interest to dismiss a petition on the fact
situation   of   a   case,   this   Court   may   refuse   to
exercise   the   said   jurisdiction   (see
 
   Gadde
Venkateswara Rao
 
   v.
     Govt. of A.P.
 
   [AIR 1966 SC
828] ).  It is to be noted that legal formulations
cannot be divorced from the fact situation of the
case. 
48.
Circling back to the facts of the instant case, when the
hindsight   a   reasonable   man   looks   at   the   action   of
appellants of not controverting their relationship with the
parties and not demonstrating the manner in which they
have been prejudiced before the revisional authority and
Learned Single Judge Bench and Learned Division Bench
of High Court, one would not be hesitant to hold that their
representation   before   the   collector   would   not   have
improved their case or compelled the collector to arrive at a
different finding. Hence, in such a scenario, the plea of
non­impleadment   is   a   useless   formality   and   the   court
should not entangle itself in procedural complexities.
56

49.
In view of the principle of prejudice as carved out in the
aforesaid judicial precedents and in the facts of this case,
in my considered view the judgment passed by the learned
Single Judge as confirmed in writ appeal reaffirming the
judgment of the Collector and Commissioner, setting aside
the selection of the appellants  does  not suffer from any
infirmity, warranting the scope of interference of this Court
in exercise of power under Article 136 of the Constitution
of India. Accordingly, the appeals filed by the appellants
stand dismissed affirming the order(s) impugned.
…………………………J.
[J.K. Maheshwari]
New Delhi;
04 April, 2024.
57

REPORTABLE
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4806 OF 2011
KRISHNADATT AWASTHY 
 …Appellant (s)
Versus
 
STATE OF M.P. AND OTHERS                   ...Respondent(s)
WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4807 OF 2011
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4808 OF 2011
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4809 OF 2011
J U D G M E N T
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.
Important  questions  in  administrative  law  arise  for
consideration in these appeals.  These are four Civil Appeals.
They are filed in all by ten individuals.  Together they call in
question  the  judgment  dated  15.12.2008  of  the  Division
1

Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Jabalpur in Writ
Appeal Nos. 892 of 2008, 896 of 2008, 879 of 2008 and 878
of 2008.  The appointments of the appellants as Shiksha
Karmis-Grade III in the Janpad Panchyat, Gaurihar stands set
aside  by  the  proceedings  before  the  Courts  below.
Aggrieved, they are before this Court.  
Relevant facts:
2.
The  Madhya  Pradesh  Panchayat  Shiksha  Karmis
(Recruitment  and  Conditions  of  Service)  Rules,  1997
(hereinafter  referred  to  as  ‘the  Recruitment  Rules’)  were
framed in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (2)
of Section 53, sub-section (1) of Section 70 read with sub-
section (1) of Section 95 of the Madhya Pradesh Panchayat
Raj Adhiniyam, 1993.
3.
Under Rule 2(h), a “Shiksha Karmi” means the person
appointed by Zila Panchayat or Janpad Panchayat, as the case
may be, for teaching in the schools under their control.  
2

4.
Rule  5  prescribes  the  Methods  of  Selection  and
Recruitment.  It provides for two modes of selection, namely,
by direct recruitment and by promotion.  
5.
Under Rule 5(8), the Selection Committee for direct
recruitment was statutorily prescribed and was to consist of
members  as  specified  in  Schedule  II  and  was  to  be
constituted by the Zila Panchayat or the Janpad Panchayat.
Under Schedule II for Siksha Karmi Grade III, the Selection
Committee was to consist of the following:-
1.  Chairperson,  Standing  Committee  of  Education  of
Janpad Panchayat;
2. Chief Executive Officer, Janpad Panchayat;
3. Block Education Officer (Member Secretary);
4. Two specialist in the subject to be nominated by the
Standing Committee for Education of whom one shall be
woman; and
5. All members from the Standing Committee of whom
atleast one belongs to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
or OBC, in case there is no SC/ST/OBC member in the
3

Standing Committee then the same shall be nominated
from the General Body.
6.
Under sub-rule (9) of Rule 5, the Committee was to
assess the candidates called for interview and award marks as
follows:-
a)  60%  marks  for  marks  obtained  in  the  qualifying
examination as prescribed;
b) 25% marks for teaching experience;
c)  15%  marks  for  oral  test  which  may  include  i)
communication skills in local dialect ii) knowledge of local
environment iii) general knowledge iv) training and teaching
aptitude and v) any other test which the Selection Committee
may deem fit.
7.
Under Rule 12, Appeal against the order passed under
the recruitment rules may be made as per the provisions of
the Adhiniyam.  Rule 12 of the rules reads as under:-
“12.  Appeal.- Appeal against the order passed under these
rules may be made as per provision of the Adhiniyam.” 
4

8.
Independently, there is the Madhya Pradesh Panchayats
(Appeal and Revision) Rules, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as
‘the A&R Rules’).
9.
Under Rule 3 of the A&R Rules, the appeal was to lie
in the case of an order passed by the Janpad Panchayat to the
Collector of the District.
10.
Rules  5  and  9,  which  are  important  are  extracted
hereinbelow:
“5.  Revision.  -  (1)  (a)  The  State  Government,  the
Commissioner, the Director of Panchayat, the Collector
may on its/his own motion or on the application by any
party,  at  any  time  for  the  purpose  of  satisfying
itself/himself as to the legality or propriety of any order
passed by or as to the regularity of the proceeding of, the
authority subordinate to it/him call for and examine the
record of any case pending before, or disposed of by, such
authority and may pass such order in reference thereto as
it/he may think fit :
Provided that it/he shall not vary or reverse any order
unless notice has been served on the parties interested and
opportunity given to them for being heard:
Provided further that no application for revision shall
be entertained against an order appealable under the Act.
(b) An application for revision by any party shall only
be entertained if it is on the point of law and not on facts.
5

(2)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub-rule
(1),-
(i) Where proceedings in respect of any case have been
commenced by the State Government under sub-rule (1),
no action shall be taken by other Officer mentioned in the
said sub-rule in respect thereof; and
(ii) Where proceedings in respect of any such case
have been commenced by the Officer mentioned in sub-
rule (1), the State Government may either refrain from
taking any action under this rule in respect of such case
until the final disposal of such proceeding by such officer
or may withdraw such proceeding and pass such order as
it may deem fit.
9. Power of appellate or revisional authority.- The
appellate  or  revisional  authority  after  giving  an
opportunity to parties to be heard and after such further
enquiry, if any, as it may deem necessary subject to the
provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder, may
confirm, vary or set aside the order or decision appealed
against.”
These are the important rules for the disposal of this
case. 
Resolution for recusal – during Interview:
11.
The  Standing  Committee  of  the  Janpad  Panchayat,
before  the  recruitment  process,  on  01.08.1998,  passed  a
resolution whereunder it was resolved that members of the
selection committee whose close relatives are candidates
6

will not participate in the proceedings/deliberations and the
two marks available to them for allotment to the candidate
will be allotted to the Chief Executive Officer.
12.
 It was also resolved that if any close relative of any
member, officer or subject expert appears for interview, then
the marks to be given by that member, officer or subject
expert should be given by the Chief Executive Officer and
that member, officer or subject expert shall not be present at
the venue of interview.  The relevant part of the resolution is
extracted hereinbelow:-
“(C)  Letter  No.  423/S.T.98  dated  26.07.1998  of  the
Collector, Chhatarpur was read over by Chief Executive
Officer, in which it has been mentioned that at the time of
recruitment of teachers those members and officers also
take part in the interview whose close relatives are the
candidates due to which the entire selection process is
likely to be affected. Therefore, the directions are given to
immediately examine whether any candidate is the close
relative of the member of the Committee in the interview.
If  any near relative of the member or the officer is the
candidate, then such member or officer should not be
present on the date of interview and any impartial person
should be kept in his place. The Committee unanimously
decided that if any close relative of any member, officer
or subject expert appears for interview then the marks to
be given by that member, officer or subject specialist
7

should  be given by Chief  Executive Officer  and  that
member,      officer or subject expert shall not be present
at the venue of interview. This resolution has been passed
unanimously.”  
        (Emphasis supplied)
Appointment of the appellants:
13.
The Janpad Panchayat, Gaurihar, after conducting the
process  of  selection  by  direct  recruitment,  published  the
select list on 16.09.1998 and 249 candidates were notified for
appointment.   Orders  of  appointment  were  issued  on
17.09.1998.   The  appellants  joined  duties  and  started
discharging their functions.  This is an undisputed fact.
Proceedings by R-4 – without impleading the appellants:
14.
On 29.09.1998, Archana Mishra (R-4), who did not
qualify, filed an Appeal (though called an appeal it is in the
nature of an original proceeding challenging the selection) to
the Collector, Chhatarpur.  Only three people ex-officio, were
made  the  respondents,  namely,  i)  The  Chief  Executive
Officer, Janpad Panchayat, Gaurihar; ii) Block Development
Education Officer, Janpad Panchayat, Gaurihar and iii) the
8

President,  Education  Committee,  Development  Block
Gaurihar.  The appointed candidates were not impleaded.
What is of importance to note is in para 9 of the memo of
appeal, few of the selected candidates were named and the
appointments challenged.  Archana Mishra (R-4), inspite of
having knowledge did not implead them.  Para 9 is extracted
hereunder:-
“9.  That  the  nepotism  has  been  adopted  during  the
selection process by violating the principles of natural
justice by misusing the post by the President of the Select
Committee  and  other  members  by  appointing  their
relatives,  for  example  the  candidates  who  have  been
selected at Serial No. 56 and 57 of the Selection List are
Shyama Dvivedi daughter of Shiv Dass Dvivedi who is
the  sister-in-law  (Nanad)  of  Educational  Committee's
President  Smt.  Pushpa  Dvivedi  and  her  sister-in-law
(Devrani) Smt. Vibha Dvivedi wife of Kailash Dvivedi,
her nephew (sister's son) Devender Kumar Avasthi and
her niece (sister's daughter) Rekha Avasthi daughter of
Bran Bhushan Avasthi. In the same way, by misusing his
post, the member of the Committee namely Swami Singh
Senger has got selected his son Shamsher Singh (112), his
daughter-in-law  Ramrani  wife  of  Rudra  Pratap  Singh
(195), nephews Rajesh Singh Chauhan and Om Prakash
Singh  Chauhan  and  the  Member  Shri  Harsh  Vardhan
Tripathi has got selected his real nephew Ravinder Singh
son of Shri Jitender Singh Tripathi.”
9

It will be clear that at least five of the appellants were
named in the body of the appeal memo.  This is set out
to show that the present was not a case where the
selected candidates remained unidentified.  Even the
members  of  the  Committee  against  whom  certain
allegations  were  made  were  not  impleaded  by
Respondent No.4.  The following grievances were set
out in the Appeal: a) The selection of candidates in the
interview  and  the  process  of  selection  was  very
clumsy; b) There were a lot of irregularities and in-
stances  of   corruption  committed  by  the  Selection
Committee; c) Nepotism was adopted by the President
of the Selection Committee and other members by vio-
lating the          principles of natural justice and misus-
ing their posts; and d) Some instances were set out to
indicate how few selected candidates  were the rela-
tives of the members of the Selection Committee.
Order of the Collector:
10

15.
By an order of 02.06.1999, the Collector allowed the
Appeal even in the absence of the appointed candidates being
made parties.  He set aside the selection of 14 candidates
(including the selection and appointment of the 10 appellants
herein).   Concerning the marks awarded to the appellant –
Archana Mishra, it was, however, held by the Collector that
marks for experience were given by the Committee and that
she was also interviewed.  As such, it was held that it was not
possible  to  consider  the  determination  of  marks  in  the
interview, since it was the discretion of the Committee to
give the marks.  
16.
However, on the question of selection of the relatives of
the members of the Selection Committee, it was held that
members  of  the  Selection  Committee  have selected  their
relatives.  It was also held that these facts had been admitted
by the Janpad   Panchayat in its reply.  It was held that
evidence of relationship was certified by the Sarpanch, whose
certificate was attached as evidence by the respondent.  It
11

was  held  that  as  far  as  the  Committee  President  was
concerned,  the  Committee  President’s  husband’s  sister,
husband’s  brother’s  wife,  nieces  (2),  nephews  (2), sister,
sister-in-law’s sister (2) were alleged to have been appointed.
It was also found that in the reply to the Chief Executive
Officer it has been mentioned that the Standing Committee
Member  Swamy  Singh’s  sons  and  daughter-in-law  and
nephew; and one son of Bhagwat Prasad had been selected.
In all, 14 individuals including the 10 appellants by name,
figured in the order of the Collector in para 3.   
17.
The Collector found that under Section 40(c) of the
Panchayat Raj Act, any of the Office Bearers shall not cause
financial gains to their relatives.  It was also found that under
Section 100 of the Panchayat Raj Act, acquisition by any
member, office bearer or employee of any interest directly or
indirectly  in  any  contract  or  employment  was  strictly
prohibited.  
12

18.
The  Collector  held  that  there  was  no  necessity  to
summon  the  relatives  since  it  was  proved  that  the
appointment of the relatives was contrary to the procedure.  It
was  also  held  that  since  the  ex-officio  respondents  have
admitted about the selection of the relatives, the selection of
the 14 candidates, including the 10 appellants, was cancelled
and their appointments were terminated.  
19.
It is important to notice at this stage itself, Section 40(c)
and Section 100 of the M.P. Panchayat Raj Avam Gram
Swaraj Adhiniyam, 1993, which reads as under:-
“40  (c)  the  use  of  position  or  influence  directly  or
indirectly to secure employment for any relative in the
Panchayat  or  any  action  for  extending  any  pecuniary
benefits to any relative, such as giving out any type of
lease,  getting  any  work  done  through  them  in  the
Panchayat by an office-bearer of Panchayat.
Explanation.-For  the  purpose  of  this  clause,  the
expression 'relative' shall mean father, mother, brother,
sister,  husband,  wife,  son,  daughter,  mother-in-law,
father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law or
daughter-in-law :
100.  Penalty  for  acquisition  by  a  member,  office
bearer or servant of interest in contract. - If a member
or  office  bearer  or  servant  of  Panchayat  knowingly
acquires,  directly  or  indirectly  any  personal  share  or
13

interest in any contract or employment, with, by or on
behalf  of  a  Panchayat  without  the  sanction  of  or
permission of the prescribed authority he shall be deemed
to have committed an offense under Section 168 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (XLV of 1860)”
  
20.
Under  the  explanation  to  Section  40(c),  nieces,
nephews,  sister-in-law’s  sister  are  not  covered  under  the
definition of relative.  Of the fourteen candidates, whose
appointments were set aside, without making them parties,
several fall outside the definition of relative even going by
the case of the Complainant.  Of the total 14, seven fell
outside the definition.  Of the ten before us, five fall in the
category  outside  the  definition  of  relative.   Since  the
appointed candidates were not made parties, these facts could
not be brought to notice.
Revision before the Commissioner:-
21.
On a revision being filed by the appellants, an interim
order staying the execution of the order of 02.06.1999 was
made on 25.06.1999.  The interim order was also given effect
to.   The appellants  were posted  back to  their  respective
14

positions.   In  the  revision,  the  appellants  canvassed  the
ground  of  the  violation  of  principles  of  natural  justice.
Before the revisional authority, the appellants specifically
contended that they were appointed in accordance with law
based on the merit list and that there was no irregularity.
They disputed the allegation that they were appointed on
account of the fact that they were relatives.    However, the
Commissioner rejected the argument holding that, if selection
has been made in violation of the scheme, then the same can
be cancelled without giving an opportunity.  The Revisional
Authority failed to notice that the entire selection had not
been cancelled and only the selection of the 14 appointees
including the 10 appellants had been cancelled.  Ultimately,
the revision was dismissed by an order of the Commissioner
dated 14.03.2000.  Since the order of the Commissioner in
revision proceedings is crucial, the operative part is extracted
hereinbelow:-
15

“6.  (sic)  On  going  through  the  record  received  for
consideration on the arguments of both the parties, I have
found that while examining the selection process, the
Collector, Chhatarpur has clearly mentioned in his order
dated  02.06.1999  that  the  members  of  the  Selection
Committee  have  selected  their      relatives.   The
respondent  Janpad  Panchayat  has  admitted  that  the
Committee        President Smt. Pushpa Dvivedi's sister-in-
law (Nanad) Shyama Dvivedi, her daughter Shiv Dass
Dvivedi, her     sister-in-law (Devrani) Smt. Vibha, two
real sisters of her sister-in-law namely Kumari Rashmi
Dvivedi and Kumari Rita Dvivedi have been selected at
Serial No. 9 and 4 of the Select List. The Respondent has
also admitted that Devender Kumar Avasthi son of Brij
Bhushan Avasthi is the nephew (sister's son) of President
and  Rekha  Avasthi  daughter  Brij  Bhushan  Avasthi,
Pravesh Kumari daughter of Brij Bhushan Avasthi are
also the nieces (sister's    daughters) of the President who
have been selected at      Serial No. 176 and 30 of the
Select List. The Chief            Executive Officer has also
mentioned in his reply that       another Member Swami
Singh  Senger's  son  Sumer  Singh,  daughter-in-law
Raamrani wife of Rudra Pratap Singh, nephew Rajesh
Singh Chauhan son of Som Prakash Singh have also been
selected.  9 marks on the basis of experience have been
given  to  the  selected  candidate  Badri  Prasad  son  of
Bhagwat Prasad but the Experience Certificate has not
been attached with his application. Shri Krishan Dutt
Avasthi son of Sita Ram Avasthi, who has been selected
at Serial No. 64, is the nephew (sister's son) of President
and  Gita  Rawat  (selected  at  Serial  No.  190  of  the
appointment        order) is the real sister of the President.
In this way, after the above examination, holding of the
Collector, Chhatarpur that the Select Committee of the
Janpad       Panchayat has selected their relatives contrary
to the       provisions of section 40-C of Madhya Pradesh
Panchayat Raj Act and the selection rules, is. completely
justified in view of the facts. So far as the plea of the
Revisionists that the information and the opportunity of
hearing was not given to the Revisionists in the appeal by
16

the Collector, Chhatarpur nor they have been joined in the
present  appeal,  therefore,  the  order  dated  2.6.1999  is
liable to be set aside, I am not agreed to this argument.
(sic) In this regard, the Hon'ble High Court has clearly
established in "Hira Lal   Patel Versus Chief Executive
Officer, Janpad Panchayat,  Sargarh" reported in 1998
Volume-2 M.P.W.N. 39 that if the selection has not been
made in accordance to the scheme then the same can be
cancelled without giving the opportunity of hearing. 
It clearly appears from the above facts of the case that
selection of the petitioners has been made contrary to the
provisions of Madhya Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act, 1993
and principles prescribed for the selection. In the above
situation,  the  order  dated  02.06.1999  passed  by  the
Collector, Chhatarpur is not liable to be interfered….”
Writ Petitions in the High Court:
22.
The appointed candidates totaling eleven (including the
ten appellants herein) filed Writ Petition No. 2522 of 2000
before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur. On
03.03.2000,  in  the  writ  petition  filed,  an  order  directing
maintenance of status quo was made.  The writ petition came
to be dismissed by the learned Single Judge on 31.07.2008.
Before the learned Single Judge, grounds of violations of
natural justice were argued. Apart from that, one of the other
main grounds argued was that the role played by the relatives
17

has  not  been  examined  and  that  it  was  not  established
whether the selection was influenced by their participation.  
23.
It was pointed out that pursuant to the resolution passed
before  the  selection  by  the  Standing  Committee  on
01.08.1998, the relatives concerned had left the process of
selection during the interview of the candidates who were
their relatives.  It was also pointed out that the marks to be
given by the relatives were, as per the resolution, allotted to
the Chief Executive Officer, who gave the marks.  As such, it
was argued that there was no reason to set aside the selection
merely  because  there  were  relatives  in  the  Selection
Committee since they had recused when the case of the
relatives  came  up.   Yet  another  ground  about  the
maintainability of the appeal was raised.  Since that was not
pressed before us, that is not being elaborated herein.  
Reasons of the learned Single Judge:
24.
The learned Single Judge permitted inspection of the
records to the counsel for the appellants.  The learned Single
18

Judge held that the argument of violation of natural justice
was to be tested on the touchstone of actual prejudice.  It was
held by the learned Single Judge that when action or orders
are  challenged  on  the  ground  of  non-grant  of  hearing,
mechanical interference is not to be resorted to.  The learned
Single Judge held that the prejudice caused due to non-grant
of hearing and the fact of the prejudice on the final outcome
ought to be established.  
25.
The  learned  Single  Judge  noticed  that  wherever
statutes contemplate a hearing, hearing ought to be given.
However, the learned Single Judge overlooked the specific
provision in Rule 9 of the A&R Rules which applied to the
present  case.  The  learned  Single  Judge  relied  on  the
judgment of  State Bank of Patiala and Others vs.  S.K.
Sharma, (1996) 3 SCC 364 and held that the order setting
aside the appointment could not be quashed on the grounds
of violation of natural justice.  The learned Single Judge also
held that the proceedings did not stop with the Collector;
19

that the matter travelled to the Commissioner where full
opportunity of hearing was granted.  The learned Single
Judge  held  that  the  Commissioner  decided  the  revision
afresh on merits after hearing each and every objection of
the  appellants.   Here  again,  the  learned  Single  Judge
completely  overlooked  Rule  5(1)(b)  of  the  A&R  Rules
which clearly stipulated that an application for revision by
any party shall be entertained only on point of law and not
on facts.  
26.
The learned Single Judge further held that, during the
course of hearing in the writ petition, entire documents were
made available.  It was held that the petitioners were not able
to demonstrate as to what prejudice was caused by non-grant
of hearing by the Collector.  
27.
Dealing with the argument that the presence of the
relatives did not influence the selection, it was held: 
20

“21. It is not in dispute that Smt. Pushpa Dwivedi and Shri
Swami Singh were Members of the Selection Committee
and they participated in the process of selection. However,
the      resolution and other documents only indicate that
when            relatives of Smt. Pushpa Dwivedi appeared for
the interview, she left the interview board and the two marks
available  with  her  for  allotment  to  the  candidate  were
allotted by the Chief   Executive Officer. Similarly, when
relatives of Shri Swami Singh appeared for the interview, he
is said to have left the     proceedings and the two marks
available with him were        allotted by the Chief Executive
Officer. On this ground, it was emphasized by Shri M.L.
Choubey  that  the  presence  of  relatives  was  of  no
consequence and it has not materially       affected the
process  of  selection.  This  aspect
 requires
consideration.
22. As already indicated hereinabove under the statutory
rules, out of l00 marks to be allotted 60% marks is based on
the educational qualification. 25% marks is to be allotted by
the Members of the Committee on the basis of experience
and     various other factors and thereafter 15% marks is to
be           allotted for oral interview. Records indicate that in
the          Selection Committee there were about 10
Members and out of these Members, two marks each were
to be allotted by Smt. Pushpa Dwivedi, Shri Swami Singh,
Smt. Rajrani Shukla - Member, Shri Bhurelal Khangar -
Member, Shri                Harshvardhan Singh,  another
Member. Thereafter, one mark each were to be allotted by
Shri  Ramdeo  Patel,  representative  of  MLA;  Shri  C.L.
Maravi, Chief Executive Officer; Shri K.S. Chauhan - Block
Education Officer; Ku. Meera         Vishwakarma - Subject
Expert; and, Shri A.P. Ahirwar,       another Subject Expert.
In this manner 15 marks were            allotted. If the
allotment  made of marks under various         category is
taken note of and if it is compared with the marks allotted to
some of the wait-listed candidates certain             disparities
can be apparently seen. Petitioner Smt. Shyama Dwivedi
had  obtained  50%  in  the  Higher  Secondary
Certificate Examination. Accordingly, she has been allotted
21

30% marks for qualification. In the oral interview, she is
allotted 11.10 marks. After adding the marks for experience
she has received 58.10 marks. Compared to this is the case
of  Shri  Yogendra  Nigam,  Shri  Yogendra  Soni,  Shri
Shivsharan, Shri Dinesh Kumar and Shri Satyendra Kumar.
All these    persons have received more than 75% marks in
the  Higher  Secondary  Certificate  Examination  and,
therefore,  they  have  received  very  high  marks
approximately  between  46-47%  for  educational
qualification,  but  by  giving  them  only  3  marks  in  the
interview their overall total percentage is kept around 50
and they are eliminated from the process of selection. In this
manner, some benefit is granted to each of the petitioners.
That apart, petitioner Smt. Vibha Dwivedi has received 57%
marks in the Higher Secondary    Certificate Examination;
petitioners Devendra Awasthy and Krishnadutt Awasthi have
received 55% and 69% marks; whereas petitioner Sumer
Singh son of Shri Swami Singh has received 53% marks,
accordingly  their  percentage  for  the      qualifying
examination  is  very  less  compared  to  other  wait-listed
candidates. These persons have been allotted 12.25, 8.95
and 15 marks in the interview and their overall mark is
made over  55, so as to bring them within the zone of
consideration. It is, therefore, apparent from a scrutiny of
these results that most of the      petitioners have received
very less marks in the qualifying examination i.e. Higher
Secondary Certificate Examination, whereas many persons
whose name appear in the wait-list have received 78% and
79% marks in the qualifying              examination, but they
are allotted very low marks in the         interview and
experience, in some cases even less than 3 marks is allotted
in the oral interview, as a result their             selection is
adversely effected. This is the reason why the Collector and
the Commissioner thought it appropriate to     interfere in
the matter. 
23- Petitioner No.6 Sumer Singh is son of Shri Swami
Singh, a Member of the Selection Committee, and he has
been         allotted full 15 marks i.e. 100% marks have been
allotted by each of the Committee Members. It is found that
22

in this     manner benefit in some way or the other is
extended to each of the petitioners and this is the reason
why the Collector and the Commissioner interfered in the
matter. It is further found that one Badri Prasad, son of
Bhagwat Prasad has been          appointed and he has been
given  9  marks  for  the  experience,  but  in  his  file  no
experience certificate is available. It is found that petitioner
Gita Rawat is the real sister of Smt. Pushpa Dwivedi and
she has been selected after giving her high marks in the oral
interview, even though she has only             received 55%
marks in the qualifying examination i.e. Higher Secondary.
It is clear from a perusal of the records that eight close
relatives  of  Smt.  Pushpa  Dwivedi,  President  of  the
Selection Committee, and Shri Swami Singh, a Member of
the Selection Committee, have been appointed. The relatives
selected are either sons, daughter, sisters, sister-in-law of the
Members  and  after  appreciating  all  these  factors,  the
Collector and the Commissioner found that the selection of
these close relatives are vitiated.” 
28.
Thereafter, the learned Single Judge held that there was
no case warranting interference under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India and dismissed the writ petition.  The
learned Single Judge also relied on the judgment of this
Court in A.K. Kraipak and Others vs. Union of India and
Others, (1969) 2 SCC 262.
Appeal to the Division Bench:
23

29.
The  matter  was  carried  in  appeal  to  the  Division
Bench.   Before  the  Division  Bench,  the  arguments  on
violation  of  natural  justice  and  the  correctness  of  the
procedure  adopted  by  the  Selection  Committee  were
canvassed.  It was reiterated by the appellants that no case of
the Selection Committee members influencing the selection
of their relatives has been made out. The Division Bench
cites the Single Judge’s reliance on S.K. Sharma (supra) to
hold that unless prejudice is caused due to non-grant of
hearing, the order ought not to be mechanically interfered
with. The following crucial findings of the Division Bench
are important:
“…. In view of the aforesaid, we are of the considered
opinion that  though it  was  imperative on the part  of
appellants  to  implead  the  affected  parties, yet  as  the
affected parties had been given full opportunity from all
aspects by the revisional forum as well as by the learned
single Judge, we do not think it apt and apposite to quash
the order and remand the matter to the Collector to re-
adjudicate singularly on the ground that the appellants
herein should have been impleaded as parties and that the
matter  should  be  reheard.   The  said  exercise  in  the
peculiar  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case  is
unwarranted.”
24

30.
Ultimately, the Division Bench though held that it was
imperative on the part of Respondent No.4 to implead the
affected parties, however, since the affected parties had been
given full opportunity before the revisional authority and the
learned  Single  Judge,  thought  it  fit  not  to  interfere.
Thereafter, it examined the issue as to whether the selection
was vitiated because of the participation of the relatives.  On
this aspect, it extracted the findings of the learned Single
Judge and after relying on A.K. Kraipak (supra)  and other
cases in the context of bias upheld the order of the learned
Single Judge.  It appears that even during the pendency of
the writ appeal, the appellants continued to work.
Appeal in this Court:
31.
Challenging the order of the Division Bench dated
15.12.2008,  special  leave  petitions  were  filed  and  on
19.01.2009, while issuing notice, this Court granted status
quo in  the  matter.   Thereafter,  leave  was  granted  on
25

12.05.2011 and the ad-interim orders granted earlier were
made absolute till the disposal of the appeals.
Contentions of the parties:-
32.
Before us, Mr. Neeraj Shekhar, learned counsel for the
appellants has reiterated the contentions raised in the courts
below on the issue of violation of natural justice and also
about the factum of the committee members not influencing
the  selection.  
 Reliance  is  placed  on
 Daffodills
Pharmaceuticals Limited and Another vs.  State of Uttar
Pradesh and Another, 2019:INSC:1366 = (2020) 18 SCC
550 and Javid Rasool Bhat and Others vs. State of Jammu
and Kashmir and Others, (1984) 2 SCC 631.  Learned
counsel for the appellants has also sought to distinguish A.K.
Kraipak (supra) and S. K. Sharma (supra).  He also relied
upon Chairman, State Bank of India and Another vs. M.J.
James, 2021:INSC:732 = (2022) 2 SCC 301 to highlight the
distinction between cases of “no opportunity at all” and
26

“adequate opportunity”.  Ultimately, it is pleaded that the
appellants have been working for the last 25 years and that
one of the appellants has, in fact, retired while others are on
the verge of retirement.  A chart has been filed to show that
some of the appellants have received lesser marks than the
complainant as well as the parties who seek to implead
themselves here, which is set out hereinbelow.
Chart Indicating Marks of Interview-
S.NO
NAME
OF
THE
APPLICANT
MARKS OB-
TAINED IN %
(INTERMEDI
ATE)
60%
OF
MARKS OB-
TAINED
MARKS
ON
EXPERIENCE
MARKS 
OBTAINE 
D
IN
INTERVIE
W
TOTAL
488
KRISHNA
DUTT
AWASTHY S/O SITA
RAM AWASTHY
69.72
41.77
9(ONE YEAR)
8.95
59.72
2098
REKHA AWASTHY
D/O BRIJ BHUSHAN
AWASTHY
63
37.80
17(TWO
YEAR)
4.35
59.15
27

49
SMT. RAM RANT 
SINGH SENGAR 
D/O SHRI RUDRA
PRATAP SINGH
58.80
35.28
17(TWO
YEAR)
7.35
59.65
1231
PRAWESH 
KUMARI
D/O
BRIJ BHUHAN
AWASTHY
58.62
35.17
17(TWO
YEAR)
4.95
57.12
1587
SMT. SHYAMA 
DIWEDI
D/O
SHIV
DAS
DWIVEDI
50
30
17(TWO
YEAR)
     11.10
58.10
1588
SMT. VIBHA DIWEDI
D/O
KAILASH 
DWIVEDI
57.25
34.35
17(TWO
YEAR)
5.40
56.75
1228
RITA DIWEDI
D/O J.P. DIWEDI
68.00
40.80
9(ONE 
YEAR)
8.4
58.20
332
SUMMER SINGH
S/O SWAMI SINGH
53.33
31.99
17(TWO
YEAR)
15
63.99
1590
GITA RAWAT
D/O GANGA PD. 
RAWAT
55.12
33.00
17(TWO
YEAR)
5.30
55.30
2099
DEVENDRA
AWASTHY
55
33.00
17(TWO
YEAR)
    12.25
62.25
1230
RASHMI DWIVEDI
D/O J.P DWIVEDI
73.55
44.13
9(ONE 
YEAR)
4.40
57.53
Charts showing marks obtained by the Respondent No. 4 (Complainant) -
 
   
S.NO
NAME OF 
THE APPLI-
CANT
MARKS OB-
TAINED IN % (IN-
TERMEDIATE)
60% OF 
MARKS 
OBTAINED
MARKS ON 
EXPERIENCE
MARKS 
OBTAIN 
ED IN 
INTERVI
EW
TOTAL
524
ARCHANA
MISHRA
47.75
28.65
17(TWO
YEAR)
4.65
50.30
28

Charts showing marks obtained by the Applicants (Impleadment) –
S.N
O
NAME OF 
THE AP-
PLICAN T
MARKS OB-
TAINED IN % 
(INTERMEDIAT 
E)
60% OF 
MARKS 
OBTAINE
D
MARKS ON 
EXPERIENC 
E
MARKS 
OBTAINED
IN INTER-
VIE
W
      TOTA L
124
RAM 
SAKHA 
S/O RAM
MILHAN
HARDENIA
46.25
27.75
17(TWO 
YEAR)
13.60
58.35
538
ANIL 
KUMAR 
S/O VIPIN
BIHARI
60
36
9(ONE YEAR)
13.70
58.70
227
SAJID 
HUSSAIN
S/O JA-
MUED
HUSSAIN
72.62
43.57
---
15
58.57
  
33.
We have also heard Ms. Mrinal Gopal Elker, learned
counsel for the respondent-State of M.P. and Mr. Avadhesh
Kumar  Singh,  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.  4  –
Archana Mishra and the parties who have filed applications
for impleadment.  Though no formal orders of impleadment
were made, arguments were heard on the application.  They
contend that the orders of the Collector, revisional authority,
learned Single Judge and the Division Bench warranted no
29

interference.   They  relied  on  S.K.  Sharma  (supra) and
reiterated the aspect of there being no prejudice due to the
non-compliance of the principles of natural justice.  They
highlighted the fact that even though the appellants received
less marks in the basic qualifying examination, they have
obtained higher marks in the interview; that relatives have
come to be appointed; that there was reasonable likelihood
of bias and that the relatives of committee members have
obtained higher marks during the interview.  They also relied
on Section 40(c) and Section 100 of the M.P. Panchayat Raj
Avam  Gram  Swaraj  Adhiniyam.   They  relied  on  the
judgments of this Court on the aspect of bias and likelihood
of bias, among them being, Dr. (Mrs.) Kirti Deshmankar vs.
Union  of  India  and  Others,  (1991)  1  SCC  104,  J.
Mohapatra and Co. and Another vs.  State of Orissa and
Another, (1984)  4 SCC  103,  Ashok Kumar Yadav and
Others vs. State of Haryana and Others, (1985) 4 SCC 417,
A.K. Kraipak (supra) and Reference under Article 317(1)
30

of the Constitution of India, In Re (2009) 1 SCC 337.  They
prayed for the dismissal of the appeals.  The intervenors
have also filed written statements supporting the State and
reiterating the submissions that natural justice did not cause
any prejudice.
Questions for consideration:
34.
On  the  above  factual  background,  the  following
questions arise for consideration:-
i)
Were the principles of natural justice violated, during
the conduct of the proceedings before the Collector under
Rule 3 of the A&R Rules, 1995 read with Rule 12 of the
Recruitment Rules?
ii)
If indeed there was a violation of the  audi alteram
partem rule,  would  the  appellants  still  fail  for  want  of
demonstration of any prejudice being caused to them?
31

iii)
Further,  if  indeed  there  was  violation  of  the  audi
alteram partem rule before the Collector, did the violation
stand cured on account of the availment of the revisional
proceedings before the higher authority?
iv)
On facts, are the appellants entitled to a declaration of
the invalidity of the orders setting aside their appointments
to the post of Shiksha Karmi Grade-III?
Question Nos. 1 & 2:
i)
Were  the  principles  of  natural  justice  violated,
during  the  conduct  of  the  proceedings  before  the
Collector under Rule 3 of the A&R Rules, 1995 read with
Rule 12 of the Recruitment Rules?
ii)
If indeed there was a violation of the audi alteram
partem rule, would the appellants still fail for want of
demonstration of any prejudice being caused to them?
32

35.
It is an undisputed factual position that the appellants,
after  a  process  of  selection,  were  appointed  as  Shiksha
Karmi  Grade-III  in  the  Panchayat  and  orders  of
appointments were issued to them on 17.09.1998.  It is also
undisputed that the appellants joined the post and started
discharging their duties. This being the undisputed factual
position,  when  Archana  Mishra  (R-4)  challenged  the
selection and the consequential appointment, there was an
obligation on her part, under Rule 9, to implead the selected
candidates whose selection she was expressly challenging.
At least at the stage when the Collector identified all the 14
names,  Rule  9  of  the  A&R  Rules,  ought  to  have  been
complied with and notices ought to have been issued giving
an opportunity to the selected candidates to set out their
version and thereafter hold such enquiry as the Collector
may deem necessary.  This was also not done.  This is all the
more when only the appointment of the 14 candidates of the
249 appointees/candidates were set aside on the ground that
33

they were relatives and it was not a case of setting aside of
the entire selection.  It is well settled that in service matters
when  an  unsuccessful  candidate  challenges  the  selection
process,  in  a  case  like  the  present  where  the  specific
grievance was against 14 candidates under the category of
relatives and when the overall figure was only 249, at least
the candidates against whom specific allegations were made
and who were identified ought to have been given notices
and made a party.  This Court has, even in cases where the
selected candidates were too large, unlike in the present
case, held that even while adjudicating the writ petitions at
least some of the selected candidates ought to be impleaded
even it is in a representative capacity.  It has also been held
that in service jurisprudence, if an unsuccessful candidate
challenges  the  selection  process  the  selected  candidates
ought to be impleaded.  [See J.S. Yadav vs. State of Uttar
Pradesh and Another, (2011) 6 SCC 570 (para 31) and
Prabodh Verma and Others vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and
34

Others, (1984) 4 SCC 251 (para 28) and  Ranjan Kumar
and Others vs. State of Bihar and Others, 2014:INSC:276 =
(2014) 16 SCC 187 (paras 4,5,8,9 & 13)] This is not a case
where  the  allegation  was  that  the  mischief  was  so
widespread  and  all  pervasive  affecting  the  result  of  the
selection in a manner as to make it difficult to sift the grain
from the chaff.  It could not be said and it is not even the
case of the State that it was not possible to segregate the
allegedly tainted candidates from the untainted candidates.
[See Union of India and Others vs. G. Chakradhar, (2002)
5 SCC 146 (paras 7 & 8), Abhishek Kumar Singh vs. G.
Pattanaik and Others, 2021:INSC:305 = (2021) 7 SCC 613
(para 72). 
36.
From time immemorial, the importance of the  audi
alteram partem rule has been emphasized and re-emphasized
in several judicial pronouncements.  Two of them are set out
to  highlight  the  underlying  rationale.   Chief  Justice
35

Sabyasachi Mukharji in  Charan Lal Sahu vs.  Union of
India, (1990)  1  SCC  613  felicitously  described  its
importance:-
“124. … It is true that not giving notice, was not proper
because principles of natural justice are fundamental in
the constitutional set up of this country.  No man or no
man’s right should be affected without an opportunity to
ventilate his views.  We are also conscious that justice is a
psychological yearning, in which men seek acceptance of
their viewpoint by having an opportunity of vindication
of  their  viewpoint  before  the  forum  or  the  authority
enjoined or  obliged to take a decision affecting their
right….” 
        [Emphasis supplied]
The  above  passage  very  much  echoes  what  Lord
Megarry said in  John vs.  Rees and Others, [1969] 2 All
E.R. 274 at 309 FG:-
“It may be that there are some who would decry the
importance which the courts attach to the observance of
the  rules  of  natural  justice.   "When  something  is
obvious," they may say, "why force everybody to go
through the tiresome waste of time involved in framing
charges and giving an opportunity to be heard? The
result is obvious from the start." Those who take this
view  do  not,  I  think,  do  themselves  justice.  As
everybody who has anything to do with the law well
knows, the path of the law is strewn with examples of
open  and  shut  cases  which,  somehow,  were  not;  of
unanswerable  charges  which,  in  the  event,  were
36

completely  answered;  of  inexplicable  conduct  which
was  fully  explained;  of  fixed  and  unalterable
determinations that, by discussion, suffered a change.
Nor are those with any knowledge of human nature who
pause to think for a moment likely to underestimate the
feelings of resentment of those who find that a decision
against them has been made without their being afforded
any opportunity to influence the course of events.” 
 
        [Emphasis supplied]
37.
This  Court  has  held  that  the  principles  of  natural
justice reinforce the maxim that justice should not only be
done but should be seen to be done.  It has been held that
non-observance of natural justice is itself prejudice to any
individual.   [S.L.  Kapoor vs.  Jag  Mohan  and  Others,
(1980) 4 SCC 379].  It has been held that the principle that
no one can be inflicted with an adverse order without being
afforded a minimum opportunity of hearing was a constant
lode star that has lit the judicial horizon of this country. [See
Daffodills Pharmaceuticals Limited and Another (supra)
 
 ].
Even the Division Bench, in the impugned order, recognizes
the fact that it was imperative to implead affected parties
though ultimately it rested the case on certain exceptions
37

which  did  not  apply.   This  aspect  has  been  elaborated
hereinbelow.  
38.
In the light of the specific rule namely, Rule 9 of the
A&R Rules, there was no escape from the fact that the
affected  parties,  like  the  appellants,  ought  to  have  been
impleaded by the Collector.  Even de hors Rule 9, if civil
consequences are to result to a party, opportunity ought to be
given. 
39.
One of the two reasons given to justify the violation of
the  audi alteram partem rule is the finding that prejudice
caused due to non-grant of hearing has not been established.
Reference has been made to S.K. Sharma (supra) to justify
this conclusion.  
40.
It is time to have a closer look at the facts in  S.K.
Sharma (supra) to understand as to in what circumstances
that exception was carved out.  The grievance raised by the
delinquent employee in  S.K. Sharma (supra) was  not that
38

there was total absence of notice.  The grievance was that a
set  of  nine  documents including  the  statements  of three
individuals was not supplied to him.  The delinquent was
advised  to  peruse,  examine  and  take  notes  of  the  said
documents/statements  half  an  hour  before  the
commencement of the enquiry proceedings.  It was admitted
that  the  list  of documents/statements  was  supplied.  This
Court found that though the copies of the statements were
not supplied, the delinquent was permitted to peruse the
same more than three days prior to the examination of the
witnesses.   In  that  background,  the  Court  examined  the
question  whether  under  the  circumstances  there  was
substantial  compliance  of  the  clause  in  the  regulations,
providing for supply of copies of statements, not later than
three days before the commencement of the examination by
the witness before the enquiring authority.  It was expressly
noticed in the judgment that the records of the case did not
39

disclose that the delinquent had protested about denial of
adequate opportunity to cross-examine.
41.
In fact, S.K. Sharma’s case (supra), after noticing the
leading case of Ridge vs. Baldwin, 1964 AC 40 expressly
records that where there is total violation of principles of
natural justice, the violation would be of a fundamental
nature.  S.K. Sharma’s case (supra) explicitly records that
“a distinction ought to be made between violation of the
principle of natural justice,  audi alteram partem, as such
and violation of a facet of the said principle.  In other words,
distinction  between  “no  notice”/“no  hearing”  and  “no
adequate  hearing”  or  to  put  it  in  different  words,  “no
opportunity”  and  “no  adequate  opportunity”,  was
highlighted. The principle in  S.K. Sharma’s case (supra)
about  the  distinction  between  “no  opportunity”  and “no
adequate  opportunity”  has  also  been  followed  in M.J.
James (supra).  
40

42.
Unlike in  S.K. Sharma’s case (supra) on which both
the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench have relied
upon to non-suit the appellants, the present is a case of no
notice and no hearing in breach of an express rule.  
43.
In  the  present  case,  before  the  Collector,  only  the
Complainant  –  Archana  Mishra  and  the  ex-officio
respondents were arrayed as parties.  Allegations directly on
the conduct of the appellants and the committee members
were traded thick and fast.  The order of the Collector and the
Revisional Authority, in fact, makes no reference either to the
definition of relative in the explanation to Section 40(c) or to
the resolution providing for recusal of committee members
who had their near relations appearing for the interview.  The
categories excluded from the definition of relatives are also
not noticed.  Based on inferences drawn from the records
produced by the ex-officio respondents, conclusive findings
were recorded by the Collector and the appointments of the
41

appellants and four others were set aside.  The order of the
revisional  authority  is  a  reiteration  of  the  order  of  the
Collector.  These have been endorsed in the judgment of the
learned Single Judge and the Division Bench.  
44.
As this Court observed in  Charan Lal Sahu (supra),
justice is a psychological yearning in which individuals seek
acceptance  of  their  viewpoint  by  having  an  opportunity,
before their rights are affected.  Lord Megarry in John vs.
Rees and Others (supra) rightly emphasized the feeling of
resentment to those who find that decision against them has
been made behind their back.  Those are telling observations.
45.
The material that worms into the record behind the back
of a party does have a tendency to condition the minds of the
reviewing authorities.  Very often, it may happen that the said
one-sided version smuggled in stealthily, may cloud their
mind and make them oblivious to the plight of the party who
is denied audi alteram partem.  Strong convictions then get
42

mollified; the initial sense of outrage gets dampened and the
feeling of unfairness that engulfed one at the commencement
of the proceeding may slowly wither away.  The opposing
parties to justify the breach may then hunt for a rule from the
basket of exceptions to the principles of audi alteram partem
and offer it, to lend a veneer of legitimacy to the order
originally  made  in  violation  of  the  principles  of  natural
justice. All this may seduce the mind and propel it to condone
the total denial of opportunity. A conscious effort needs to be
made to steer clear of that trap.  
46.
The principle of prejudice as set out in S.K. Sharma’s
case (supra) had absolutely no application to the present case
as the present was a case of complete denial of opportunity.
The exception was wrongly invoked and misapplied to the
facts of the present case.   
Question No.3
43

Does the violation at the original stage of the principles
of  natural  justice  stand  cured  by  the  revisional
proceeding?:-
47.
The second reason given by the learned Single Judge
and affirmed by the Division Bench was that the appellants
had full opportunity before the revisional authority and the
High Court.  The relevant finding from the judgment of the
learned Single Judge is extracted hereinbelow:-
“17.  Even  though  when  the  appeal  was  filed  by
respondent Smt. Archana Mishra before the Collector,
petitioners were never heard and the Collector passed the
order without hearing the petitioners, the matter did not
end there. Petitioners availed of the opportunity of filing a
revision  before  the  Commissioner.  When  the  matter
travelled  to  the  Commissioner  in  this  manner,  full
opportunity of hearing was granted to the petitioners and
the entire selection record and other documents, which
formed the basis for passing of the order by the Collector,
were available before the Commissioner, petitioners had
access  to  the  same  and  Commissioner  decided  the
revision afresh on merits after considering each and every
objection of the petitioners.     Thereafter, during the
course of hearing in this petition also, the entire selection
proceedings  and  other  documents  were  available  on
record and the petitioners were given full opportunity to
demonstrate before this Court that their selection was
proper or that the finding with regard to their relatives
participating in the selection process is an incorrect or
44

improper finding. Petitioners admitted that their relatives
had participated in the selection, but only argued that
their presence did not influence their selection. This is a
matter which can be looked into on the basis of the
material     available on record and during the course of
hearing of this petition, the petitioners were not in a
position to            demonstrate as to what was the
prejudice  caused  for  non-grant  of  hearing  by  the
Collector. Even if no hearing was granted before the
Collector,  but  when  full  opportunity  of  hearing  was
granted and was availed of by the petitioners before the
Commissioner  in  the  revision  and  when  the
Commissioner had passed the order after so hearing the
petitioners,  merely  because  petitioners  were  not
impleaded as party in the proceedings held before the
Collector it cannot be said that the entire action of the
appellate  authority  and  the  revisional  authority  stands
vitiated on this ground. This is a case where petitioners
had ample opportunity of putting up their defence and
objections  before  the  Commissioner  and  the
Commissioner having appreciated the dispute on merits
after hearing the petitioners, this court is not inclined to
interfere in the matter merely on the technical ground of
non-grant of      opportunity. It has to be held that non-
grant of opportunity during the proceedings held before
the Collector does not vitiate the action taken against the
petitioners  as  they  were  given  full  and  reasonable
opportunity by the                     Commissioner before
passing the order and petitioners having availed of the
same,  cannot  have  any  grievance  on  this  count.
Accordingly, the second ground of attack also fails being
unsustainable.” 
The above finding for a start overlooks Rule 5(1)(b) and the
body of case law that are relevant. 
45

48.
The question about whether at all the breach of natural
justice can be cured at the appellate stage and if so in what
circumstances  has  vexed  the  courts  for  the  last  several
decades.  In England, it was Lord Megarry who spoke first
in Leary vs. National Union of Vehicle Builders, [1970] 2
All ER 713.   The learned Judge had no doubt in his mind
when he proclaimed, “As a general rule, at all events, I hold
that a failure of natural justice in the trial body cannot be
cured by a sufficiency of natural justice in an appellate
body.”  This remained the legal position till Ferd Dawson
Calvin vs. John Henry Brownlow Carr & Ors., (1979) 2
WLR 755 came on the horizon.  Lord Wilberforce, speaking
for the Privy Council felt that the principle elucidated by
Lord Megarry was too broadly stated.  The Privy Council
held:
“It remains to apply the principles above stated to the
facts of the present case. In the first place, their Lordships
are clearly of the view that the proceedings before the
Committee were in the nature of an appeal, not by way of
an invocation, or use, of whatever original jurisdiction the
46

Committee may have had. The nature of the appeal is laid
down by Section 32 of the Australian Jockey Club Act
1873, and by the Rules. Under the Act, the appeal is to be
in the nature of a re-hearing - a technical expression
which  does  little more  than  entitle  the Committee  to
review the facts as at the date when the appeal is heard
(see  Builders  Licensing  Board   (N.S.W.)  v.  Sperway
Constructions (Sydney) Pty. Ltd. (1976) 51 A.L.J.R. 260,
261, per Mason J.), not one which automatically insulates
their findings from those of the Stewards. The decision is
to be " upon the real merits and justice of the case " -- an
injunction  to  avoid  technicalities  and  the  slavish
following of precedents but not one which entitles the
Committee  to  brush  aside  defective  or  improper
proceedings  before  the  Stewards.  The  section  is  then
required to be construed as supplemental to and not in
derogation of or limited by the Rules of Racing. This
brings the matter of disputes and discipline clearly into
the consensual field.   The Rules of Racing (Local Rules
70-74) allow the Committee to take account of evidence
already taken and of additional evidence, and confer wide
powers as to the disposal of appeals.”
49.
The issue was again grappled with by the House of
Lords in Lloyd and Others vs. McMahon, [1987] 1 AC 625
which ultimately gravitated to the view that the answer to
the  question  would  depend  on  the  particular  statutory
provision providing for the higher remedy.  Lord Bridge of
Harvich stated the following in his judgment:
“…This is because the question arising in the instant case
must be answered by considering the particular statutory
47

provisions  here  applicable  which  establish  an
adjudicatory system in many respects quite unlike any
that has come under examination in any of the decided
cases to which we were referred. We are concerned with a
point of statutory construction and nothing else.”
In their Lordships opinion:
“…But  I  cannot  see  any  reason  why  it  should  be
necessary  to  seek  leave  to  invoke  the  supervisory
jurisdiction of the court when any party aggrieved by the
certificate is entitled as of right to invoke the much more
ample appellate jurisdiction which the statute confers. It
is the very amplitude of the jurisdiction which, to my
mind, is all- important. Whether the auditor has decided
to certify or not to certify, the court is empowered to
confirm or quash the decision, to vary the decision if a
certificate has been issued by the auditor, and in any case
to give any certificate which the auditor could have given.
The language describing the court's powers could not
possibly  be  any  wider.  Procedurally  there  is  nothing
either in the statute or in the relevant rules of court to
limit in any way the evidence which may be put before
the court on either side….”
50.
Applying this test in Lloyd (supra), the answer in the
present case is simple.  Rule 5(1)(b) of the A&R Rules does
not provide an ample review or a full-fledged enquiry at the
revisional stage.  The revision was to be entertained only if
it is on the point of law and not on facts.  The discussion,
48

however, on this issue would not be complete unless a
survey of the judgments of this Court is done.  
51.
The seeds for this thought-process was sown by Chief
Justice  S.R.  Das  in  The  State  of  Uttar  Pradesh vs.
Mohammad Nooh, 1958 SCR 595.  In fact, Justice Jeevan
Reddy noticed this judgment in S.K. Sharma’s case (supra).
Chief  Justice  Das  speaking  for  the  majority  in  the
Constitution Bench held as follows:-
“On the authorities referred to above it appears to us that
there may conceivably be cases-and the instant case is in
point-where the error, irregularity or illegality touching
jurisdiction or procedure committed by an inferior court
or  tribunal  of  first  instance  is  so  patent  and  loudly
obtrusive that it leaves on its decision an indelible stamp
of infirmity or vice which cannot be obliterated or cured
on appeal or revision. If an inferior court or tribunal of
first instance acts wholly without jurisdiction or patently
in  excess  of  jurisdiction  or  manifestly  conducts  the
proceedings before it in a manner which is contrary to the
rules of natural justice and all accepted rules of procedure
and which offends the superior court's sense of fair play
the superior court may, we think, quite properly exercise
its power to issue the prerogative writ of certiorari to
correct the error of the court or tribunal of first instance,
even if an appeal to another inferior court or tribunal was
available and recourse was not had to it or if recourse was
had to it, it confirmed what ex facie was a nullity for
reasons aforementioned. This would be so all the more if
49

the tribunals holding the original trial and the tribunals
hearing the appeal or revision were merely departmental
tribunals  composed  of  persons  belonging  to  the
departmental hierarchy without adequate legal training
and background and whose glaring lapses occasionally
come to our notice. The superior court will ordinarily
decline to interfere by issuing certiorari and all we say is
that in a proper case of the kind mentioned above it has
the power to do so and may and should exercise it. We
say no more than that.”
52.
In Shri Farid Ahmed Abdul Samad and Another vs.
The Municipal Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad and
Another, (1976) 3 SCC 719, an attempt was made to cover
up the breach of the  audi alteram partem rule by seeking
refuge under the principle that proceedings in the higher
body would cure the breach in the original body.  Justice
P.K. Goswami, speaking for a three-Judge Bench, rebuffed it
and echoed sentiments similar to the one expressed in Lloyd
(supra) in the following words:- 
“22. We should make it clear that provision for appeal is
not a complete substitute for a personal hearing which is
provided for under Section 5A of the Land Acquisition
Act. This will be evident from a perusal of Clause 3 of
Schedule  B  itself.  The  character  of  the  appeal
contemplated under Clause 3(ii) of Schedule B is only
with regard to the examination of the following aspects:
50

(1) whether the order or approval of the plan is
within the powers of the Bombay Act, and
(2) whether the interests of the appellant have been
substantially prejudiced by any requirement of this Act
not having been complied with.
The appeal is confined under Clause 3 of Schedule B to
the  examination  of  only  the  twin  aspects  referred  to
above.  There is no provision for entertainment of any
other relevant objection to the acquisition of land. For
example a person whose land is acquired may object to
the  suitability  of  the  land  for  the  particular  purpose
acquired. He may again show that he will be at an equal
disadvantage if his land and house have to be acquired in
order to provide accommodation for the poorer people as
he himself belongs to the same class of the indigent. He
may further show that there is a good alternative land
available  and  can  be  acquired  without  causing
inconvenience to the occupants of the houses whose lands
and houses are sought to be acquired. There may be other
relevant objections which a person may be entitled to take
before the Commissioner when the whole matter is at
large. The Commissioner will be in a better position to
examine those objections and consider their weight from
all  aspects  and  may  even  visit  the  locality  before
submitting his report to the Standing Committee with his
suggestions. For this purpose also a personal hearing is
necessary. The appeal court under the Schedule B to the
Bombay Act, on the other hand, is not required under
Clause 3 to entertain all kinds of objections and it may
even refuse to consider the objections mentioned earlier
in  view  of  the  truncated  scope  of  the  hearing  under
Clause 3(ii) as noted above. We are, therefore, unable to
accept the submission that the appeal provided for under
Schedule B is a complete substitute for a right to personal
hearing and as such by necessary implication ousts the
applicability of Section 5A of the Land Acquisition Act.”
51

53.
In  Institute of Chartered Accountants of India vs.
L.K. Ratna and Others, (1986) 4 SCC 537, Justice R.S.
Pathak (as the learned Chief Justice then was) negated a
valiant attempt by the counsel for the appellant to cling on
to the appellate proceeding as a panacea for the violation of
audi alteram partem at the original stage.  His Lordship
aligned with the Leary line of reasoning. 
“17. It is then urged by learned counsel for the appellant
that the provision of an appeal under Section 22-A of the
Act is a complete safeguard against any insufficiency in
the original proceeding before the Council, and it is not
mandatory  that  the  member  should  be  heard  by  the
Council before it proceeds to record its finding. Section
22-A of the Act entitles a member to prefer an appeal to
the High Court against an order of the Council imposing a
penalty under Section 21(4) of the Act. It is pointed out
that no limitation has been imposed on the scope of the
appeal, and that an appellant is entitled to urge before the
High Court every ground which was available to him
before the Council. Any insufficiency, it is said, can be
cured  by  resort  to  such  appeal.  Learned  counsel
apparently has in mind the view taken in some cases that
an appeal provides an adequate remedy for a defect in
procedure during the original proceeding. Some of those
cases as mentioned in Sir William Wade's erudite and
classic work on "Administrative Law" 5th edn. But as
that learned author observes (at p. 487), "in principle
there ought to be an observance of natural justice equally
at both stages", and 
52

If natural justice is violated at the first stage, the right of
appeal is not so much a true right of appeal as a corrected
initial hearing: instead of fair trial followed by appeal, the
procedure is reduced to unfair trial followed by fair trial. 
And he makes reference to the observations of Megarry,
J. in Leary v. National Union of Vehicle Builders. Treating
with another aspect of the point, that learned Judge said: 
If one accepts the contention that a defect of natural
justice in the trial body can be cured by the presence of
natural justice in the appellate body, this has the result of
depriving the member of his right of appeal from the
expelling body. If the rules and the law combine to give
the member the right to a fair trial and the right of appeal,
why should he be told that he ought to be satisfied with
an unjust trial and a fair appeal? Even if the appeal is
treated  as  a  hearing  de  novo,  the  member  is  being
stripped of his right to appeal to another body from the
effective decision to expel him. I cannot think that natural
justice is satisfied by a process whereby an unfair trial,
though  not  resulting  in  a  valid  expulsion,  will
nevertheless have the effect of depriving the member of
his right of appeal when a valid decision to expel him is
subsequently  made.  Such  a  deprivation  would  be  a
powerful result to be achieved by what in law is a mere
nullity; and it is no mere triviality that might be justified
on the ground that natural justice does not mean perfect
justice. As a general rule, at all events, I hold that a
failure of natural justice in the trial body cannot be cured
by a sufficiency of natural justice in an appellate body.
The view  taken  by  Megarry,  J.  was  followed  by  the
Ontario High Court in Canada in Re Cardinal and Board
of Commissioners of Police of City of Cornwall. The
Supreme Court of New Zealand was similarly inclined in
Wislang v. Medical Practitioners Disciplinary Committee,
and so was the Court of Appeal of New Zealand in Reid v.
Rowley".
53

54.
The learned Judge (Pathak, J.) followed up the above
principle by setting out an approach to cases, which repays
study.  It was held: 
“18. But perhaps another way of looking at the matter lies
in examining the consequences of the initial order as soon
as it is passed. There are cases where an order may cause
serious injury as soon as it is made, an injury not capable
of being entirely erased when the error is corrected on
subsequent appeal. For instance, as in the present case,
where a member of a highly respected an publicly trusted
profession  is  found  guilty  of  misconduct  and  suffers
penalty, the damage to his professional reputation can be
immediate and far-reaching.  "Not all the King's horses
and all the King's men" can ever salvage the situation
completely, notwithstanding the widest scope provided to
an appeal. To many a man, his professional reputation is
his most valuable possession. It affects his standing and
dignity among his fellow members in the profession, and
guarantees the esteem  of his clientele. It is often the
carefully garnered fruit of a long period of scrupulous,
conscientious and diligent industry. It is the portrait of his
professional honour. In a world said to be notorious for its
blase  attitude  towards  the  noble  values  of  an  earlier
generation, a man's professional  reputation is still his
most  sensitive  pride.  In  such  a  case,  after  the  blow
suffered  by  the  initial  decision,  it  is  difficult  to
contemplate  complete  restitution  through  an  appellate
decision. Such a case is unlike an action for money or
recovery of property, where the execution of the trial
decree may be stayed pending appeal, or a successful
appeal may result in refund of the money or restitution of
the property, with appropriate compensation by way of
interest or mesne profits for the period of deprivation.
And, therefore, it seems to us, there is manifest need to
ensure that there is no breach of fundamental procedure
54

in the original proceeding, and to avoid treating an appeal
as an overall substitute for the original proceeding.”
55.
L.K. Ratna’s case (supra) was distinguished in United
Planters  Association  of  Southern  India vs.  K.G.
Sangameswaran and Another, (1997) 4 SCC 741.   That
was a case where the jurisdiction of the Appellate Authority
to record evidence and to come to its own conclusion on the
questions involved was very wide.  The appellate provision
provided  that  even  if  the  evidence  is  recorded  in  the
domestic  enquiry  and  the  order  of  dismissal  is  passed
thereafter, it would still be open to the appellate authority to
record evidence.  In those state of affairs, this Court, in para
18, 27 and 28 of the said judgment, has held as under:-
“18. From a perusal of the provisions quoted above, it
will  be  seen  that  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Appellate
Authority to record evidence and to come to its own
conclusion on the questions involved in the appeal is very
wide. Even if the evidence is recorded in the domestic
enquiry and the order of dismissal is passed thereafter, it
will still be open to the Appellate Authority to record, if
need  be,  such  evidence  as  may  be  produced  by  the
parties. Conversely, also if the domestic enquiry is ex
parte  or  no  evidence  was  recorded  during  those
55

proceedings,  the  Appellate  Authority  would  still  be
justified in taking additional evidence to enable it to come
to its own conclusions on the articles of charges framed
against the delinquent officer.
27. The learned counsel, in support of his arguments that
the  defect  is  not  curable  has  placed  reliance  on  the
decision  of  this  Court  in  Institute  of  Chartered
Accountants of India v. L. K. Ratna.  It was, no doubt, laid
down in this case that a post-decisional hearing cannot be
an effective substitute of pre-decisional hearing and that
if an opportunity of hearing is not given before a decision
is taken at the initial stage, it would result in serious
prejudice, inasmuch as if such an opportunity is provided
at the appellate stage, the person is deprived of his right
of appeal to another body. There may be cases where
opportunity of hearing is excluded by a particular service
or statutory rule. In Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, pre-
decisional hearing stood excluded by the second proviso
to Article 311(2) of the Constitution and, therefore, the
Court  took  the  view  that  though  there  was  no  prior
opportunity to a government servant to defend himself
against  the  charges  made  against  him,  he  got  an
opportunity to plead in an appeal filed by him that the
charges for which he was removed from service were not
true. Principles of natural justice in such a case will have
to be held to have been sufficiently complied with. In
Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India and in Liberty Oil Mills
v.  Union  of  India an  opportunity  of  making  a
representation after the decision was taken, was held to be
sufficient compliance. All depends on facts of each case.
28. In the instant case, the appellant has contended that
the respondent did not participate in the domestic enquiry
in  spite  of  an  opportunity  of  hearing  having  been
provided to him. He was also offered the inspection of the
documents, but he did not avail of that opportunity. He
himself  invoked  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Appellate
Authority and the order of dismissal passed against him
was set aside on the ground that the appellant did not hold
any domestic enquiry. It has already been seen above that
56

the Appellate Authority has full jurisdiction to record
evidence to enable it to come to its own conclusion on the
guilt  of  the employee  concerned.  Since the Appellate
Authority has to come to its own conclusion on the basis
of the evidence recorded by it, irrespective of the findings
recorded in the domestic enquiry, the rule laid down in
Ratna case
 
  will not strictly apply and the opportunity of
hearing which is being provided to the respondent at the
appellate stage will sufficiently meet his demands for a
just and proper enquiry.
[emphasis supplied]
56.
In Jayantilal Ratanchand Shah vs. Reserve Bank of
India and Others, (1996) 9 SCC 650, A Constitution Bench
of this Court held that opportunity even if assumed to be
denied at the original stage, no grievance could be raised as
the appellate authority gave such an opportunity: 
“16.  In impugning the order of the Currency Officer of
the Bank it was submitted on behalf of the petitioner that
no opportunity of being heard was given to the Society so
as  to  enable  it  to  explain  the  reasons  for  delay  in
submitting the declaration form.  Even if we proceed on
the  assumption  that  such  an  opportunity  of  personal
hearing  was  imperative  to  comply  with  the  rules  of
natural justice the petitioner cannot raise any grievance
on that score for the appellate authority gave them such
an opportunity before dismissing their appeal.  This apart,
as  noticed  earlier,  the  appellate  authority  has  given
detailed reasons for its inability to accept the explanation
of the Society for not filing the declaration in time….”
57

The provision providing for appeal in Section 8(3) of the High
Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Act, 1978 reads as
under:-
“8(3). Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the Reserve
Bank to pay the value of the notes under sub-section (2)
may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within
fourteen days of the communication of such refusal to
him.”
57.
Three other cases need only a brief mention.  In Olga
Tellis and Others vs. Bombay Municipal Corporation and
Others, (1985) 3 SCC 545, (Para 51) Chief Justice Y.V.
Chandrachud found that no opportunity was given to the
petitioners.  However, it was observed that hearing in ample
measure was given by this Court.  Ultimately, the case was
found to be covered by the exception carved out in  S.L.
Kapur (supra) and writ was denied since on admitted and
indisputable facts only one conclusion was possible. It was
held that Court should not issue futile writs.  For the issue
under consideration, this is really not an authority.  Equally
so,  in  Charan  Lal  Sahu  (supra),  the  Court  expressly
58

recorded that on the facts and circumstances of that case,
since sufficient opportunity was available when the review
application was heard on notice, no further opportunity was
necessary.  The Court recorded that it could not be said that
injustice was done and further recorded that “to do a great
right” after all it is permissible sometimes “to do a little
wrong”. That case concerned a challenge to the validity of
the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing of Claims) Act,
1985.  
58.
In  The Chairman, Board of Mining Examination
and Chief Inspector of Mines and Another vs.  Ramjee,
(1977) 2 SCC 256 cited by the learned counsel for the
private respondents in the written submissions again does
not directly deal with this issue.  There the issue was about
the  interpretation  of  Regulation  26  of  the  Coal  Mines
Regulations, which read as under:-
“26.  Suspension  of  an  Overman's  Sirdar's,  Engine
driver's, shot firer's or Gas-testing Certificate- (1) If,
59

in the opinion of the Regional Inspector, a person to
whom  an  Overman's,  Sirdar's,  Engine-driver's,  Shot-
firer's  or  Gas-testing  Certificate  has  been  granted  is
incompetent or is guilty of negligence or misconduct in
the performance of  his duties, the Regional  Inspector
may, after giving the person an opportunity to give a
written explanation, suspend his certificate by an order in
writing. 
(2)  Where  the  Regional  Inspector  has  suspended  a
certificate under sub-regulation (1) he shall within a week
of such suspension report the fact to the Board together
with all connected papers including the explanation if any
received from the person concerned. 
(3) The Board may, after such inquiry as it thinks fit,
either  confirm  or  modify  or  reduce  the  period  of
suspension of the certificates, or cancel the certificate.” 
In this case, the delinquent handed over an explosive to an
unskilled hand resulting in injury to an employee.  The
Regional Inspector of Mines immediately enquired and on
the delinquent’s virtual admission found the incident to be
true.   The  Regional  Inspector  gave  an  opportunity  for
explanation and, after considering the materials before him,
forwarded  the  papers  to  the  Chairman  with  a
recommendation for cancellation of the certificate under
Regulation  26.   The  Board  had  an  explanation  (styled
appeal) from the delinquent and also recommendation by the
60

Regional Inspector for cancellation of the certificate.  The
Regional Inspector had not suspended the delinquent but
had merely held an enquiry and made a recommendation for
cancellation  of  the  certificate.   One  of  the  delinquent’s
argument in this Court was that since the Regional Inspector
did not suspend the respondent’s certificate, the Board had
no jurisdiction and that the Regional Inspector had no power
to  recommend,  but  only  to  report  and  that  the
recommendation  influenced  the  Board.   It  was  further
argued that the Board should have  given a fresh opportunity
to be heard before cancellation.  The argument was repelled
by  holding  that  the  difference  between  suspension  plus
report and recommendatory report was a distinction without
a difference.  It was also held that the delinquent had filed
an appeal against the report of the Regional Inspector to the
Chairman of the Board.  He was heard in compliance with
the Regulation 26.    
61

In  conclusion,  Justice  Krishna  Iyer  held  the
following:-
“15. These general observations must be tested on the
concrete facts of each case and every miniscule violation
does not spell illegality. If the totality of circumstances
satisfies the Court that the party visited with adverse
order  has  not  suffered  from  denial  of  reasonable
opportunity the Court will decline to be punctilious or
fanatical as if the rules of natural justice were sacred
scriptures.”
Not only was that a case where the Regional Inspector
held  an  enquiry,  additionally,  the  Board  also  heard  the
delinquent.   That  was  not  a  case  on  the  issue  under
consideration here.  This case also is of little assistance to
the respondents.  
59.
The principles deducible are as follows:-
i) audi alteram partem as a facet of natural justice wherever
applicable at the original stage ought to be strictly complied
with. 
62

ii)
In  cases  where  the  jurisdiction  of  the
appellate/revisional/higher  body  is  circumscribed  like  in
Farid (supra) and in the case at hand, courts ought to reject
the argument that the hearing before the appellate/revisional/
higher body, has cured the breach of the audi alterm partem
rule at the original stage.
iii)
Ordinarily, violation of the audi alteram partem rule,
at the original stage, will not be curable in appeal/revision.
However,
 
if
 
the
 
jurisdiction
 
of
 
the
appellate/revisional/higher body is comprehensive as found
in  Jayantilal Ratan Chand (supra) and  Sangameswaran
(supra), the Courts may be justified in concluding on the
given facts, that the breach of the audi alteram partem rule,
in the original stage, has stood redressed due to the scope
and sweep of the higher proceeding. However, it will be
purely within the discretionary power of the court depending
on the facts of the case.  This, in turn, will depend on the
63

court being satisfied that the fair opportunity given by the
higher body has ensured complete justice.  Even in cases
where the appellate jurisdiction/jurisdiction of the higher
body is comprehensive as found in the provisions of the
Jayantilal  Ratan  Chand  (supra) and  Sangameswaran
(supra), there may be circumstances where the court may
find that the violation does not stand cured.  If, on a given
set  of  facts,  the  court  is  of  the  opinion  that  ample
opportunity has not been forthcoming and complete justice
has  not  been  done,  the  court  in  its  discretion,  will  be
justified in concluding that the violation of the principles of
natural  justice  does  not  stand  cured.  In  exercising  the
discretion, the court will be justified in factoring in the
circumstances as the one set out in para 18 of L.K. Ratna
(supra).  
60.
Applying the above principles, it is found that the
present case is covered by proposition (ii) above.  The
64

revisional power is severely circumscribed by Rule 5(1)(b)
of the A& R Rules and is confined to points of law.  
61.
In view of that, on facts, it is held that the breach of
principles of natural justice in the proceedings before the
Collector did not stand cured on account of the proceedings
before the revisional authority.  Equally so, judicial review
proceedings being a review of the decision-making process
and  not  being  a  merits  review,  such  proceedings  also
cannot be a cure for the violation of the  audi alteram
partem rule before the fact-finding authority. 
Question No.4
To what relief the appellants are entitled to? 
62.
As would be clear from the sequence of facts set out
above,  the  appellants  were  appointed  as  Shiksha  Karmi
Grade-III and they joined their duties in September, 1998.
Of all the candidates who appeared, only one of them -
Archana Mishra (R-4) took up the matter in challenge and
65

filed proceedings before the Collector under Rule 3 of the
A&R Rules read with Section 12 of the Recruitment Rules.
Before the Collector, she impleaded only the Officers ex-
officio.   Even  though  allegations  of  mala  fide and
favouritism in the markings during interview were made
neither the members of the Committee in their individual
capacity nor the selected and appointed candidates, like the
appellants were made parties.  A reading of the order of the
Collector and the revisional authority, discloses that, the
resolution  passed  by  the  Standing  Committee  of  the
Panchayat  on  01.08.1998  providing  for  recusal  of  the
committee members from the statutory committee and for
re-allocation of marks by vesting it in the Chief Executive
Officer, was not even discussed in the orders.   It is difficult
to speculate, what the response of the Collector and the
revisional authority would have been, if they were posted of
the recusal resolution. Neither in the order of the Collector
nor in the order of the revisional authority is the definition
66

of relative as available in explanation 40(c) of the M.P.
Adhiniyam set out or discussed.  Admittedly, seven out of
the 14 candidates did not come within the definition of
‘relative’, under the explanation to Section 40(c).
63.
Learned counsel for the appellants here have, citing
the  resolution  of  01.08.1998,  contended  that  adequate
precautions like recusal and absence from the venue was
taken.  Learned counsel contends that there is no material to
show that the committee members influenced the selection
process.  Even the Collector, it is pointed out, has recorded
in the order that it was not possible for the Collector to
consider the determination of the marks of interview since it
was the discretion of the committee.  Even after so holding,
the  Collector  set  aside  the  appointments  only  of  the
appellants merely on the basis that there was an admission
by the Chief Executive Officer, impleaded ex-officio, about
the  factum  of  some  candidates  being  related  to  the
67

committee members.  While the Collector and the revisional
authority only put it on the factum of some candidates being
related, without examining the definition of relative, the
learned  Single  Judge  drew  some  inferences  additionally
based on the qualifying marks and the marks awarded in the
interview.  
64.
It will be of interest to notice that in B.N. Nagarajan
and Ors. Vs. State of Mysore and Ors., [1966] 3 SCR 682,
a similar inference drawn only on the basis of the low
qualifying  marks  was  not  favourably  looked  at  by  this
Court.  This Court held:-  
“… For example, it was alleged in para 15 that one Shri
D.C. Channe Gowda who is the son-in-law of the Second
Member  of  the  Public  Service  Commission,  Shri
Appajappa, was an ordinary B. E. Graduate with only
49.8% marks.  But even if he had only 49.8% of the
marks, this is not conclusive to show that he should not
have  been  selected  because  the  whole  object  of
interviewing candidates is to judge their eligibility or
suitability apart from the standard displayed by them in
the written examination.  We are unable to hold that on
these facts any mala fides or collateral object has been
proved.”
66.
68

65.
What  is  also  of  concern  is  that  the  resolution  of
recusal, even though specifically argued before the learned
Single Judge, has been brushed aside only because of the
inferences drawn based on the marks.  There was gross
violation of the principles of natural justice at the original
stage and on facts it is held that the violation did not get
cured at the revisional stage.
66.
Neither  the  learned  Single  Judge  nor  the  Division
Bench have examined the legal effect of the resolution dated
01.08.1998 providing for recusal.  Learned counsel for the
appellants has placed reliance on the judgment in  Javid
Rasool Bhatt (supra) which also distinguishes the judgment
in  A.K.  Kraipak (supra).  Learned Counsel relies on the
following paragraph in Javid Rasool Bhatt (supra).
“14. Great reliance was placed by the learned counsel on
A.K. Kraipak v. Union of India on the question of natural
justice. We do not think that the case is of any assistance
to the petitioners. It was a case where one of the persons,
who sat as member of the Selection Board, was himself
one of the persons to be considered for selection. He
participated in the deliberations of the Selection Board
69

when  the  claims  of  his  rivals  were  considered.  He
participated  in  the  decisions  relating  to the  orders  of
preference and seniority. He participated at every stage in
the deliberations of the Selection Board and at every
stage there was a conflict between his interest and duty.
The Court had no hesitation in coming to the conclusion
that  there  was  a  reasonable  likelihood  of  bias  and
therefore, there was a violation of the principles of natural
justice. In the case before us, the principal of the Medical
College, Srinagar, dissociated himself from the written
test and did not participate in the proceedings when his
daughter  was  interviewed.  When  the  other  candidates
were interviewed, he did not know the marks obtained
either by his daughter or by any of the candidates. There
was no occasion to suspect his bona fides even remotely.
There was not even a suspicion of bias, leave alone a
reasonable likelihood of bias. There was no violation of
the principles of natural justice.”
67.
It is also seen that Javid Rasool Bhatt (supra) finds
express  mention  and  approval  in  Ashok  Kumar  Yadav
(supra) [Para 18]. 
“18……The  procedure  adopted  by  the  Selection
Committee and the member concerned was in accord
with  the  quite  well-known  and  generally  accepted
procedure adopted by the Public Service Commissions
everywhere.  It is not unusual for candidates related to
members of the Service Commission or other Selection
Committee  to  seek  employment.  Whenever  such  a
situation arises, the practice generally is for the member
concerned  to  excuse  himself  when  the  particular
candidate is interviewed.  We notice that such a situation
had  also  been  noticed  by this  Court  in  the case  of
Nagarajan 
 
 v. 
  State of Mysore
 
  where it was pointed out
that in the absence of mala fides, it would not be right to
set  aside  the  selection  merely  because  one  of  the
70

candidates happened to be related to a  member of the
Selection  Committee  who  had  abstained  from
participating in the interview of that candidate. Nothing
unusual was done by the present Selection Committee.
The  girl’s  father  was  not  present  when  she  was
interviewed.   She  was  one  among  several  hundred
candidates. The marks obtained by her in the written test
were not even known when she was interviewed….  In
the case before us, the Principal of the Medical College,
Srinagar, dissociated himself from the written test and
did not participate in the proceedings when his daughter
was  interviewed.   When  the  other  candidates  were
interviewed, he did not know the marks obtained either
by his daughter or by any of the candidates.  There was
no occasion to suspect his bona fides even remotely.
There was not even a suspicion of bias, leave alone a
reasonable likelihood of bias.  There was no violation of
the principles of natural justice.
We wholly endorse these observations.”
             (emphasis supplied)
68.
Equally so, in  Jaswant Singh Nerwal vs.  State of
Punjab and Others, 1991 Supp (1) SCC 313 distinguishing
A.K. Kraipak (supra), this Court reiterated the finding in
Javid Rasool Bhatt (supra) and B.N. Nagarajan (supra).
69.
Learned counsel for the appellants rightly argued that
in Javid Rasool Bhatt (supra), while the Chairman of the
J&K Public Service Commission was the Chairman of the
71

Selection  Committee,  the  other  two  members  were  the
Principal  of  the  two  government  medical  colleges  in
Srinagar and Jammu, respectively.  As contended by the
learned counsel for the appellants, even to a case other than
a Public Service Commission the principle of recusal has
been recognized and that judgment in Javid Rasool Bhatt
(supra) has been endorsed in Ashok Kumar Yadav (supra).  
70.
In  the  present  case,  it  was  a  statutory  committee
framed under the Recruitment Rules and to ensure a fair
selection,  recusal  resolution was passed  by the standing
committee  before  the  selection.   J.  Mohapatra  (supra)
recognizes the distinction between committees constituted
under  administrative  measures  and  committees  under
statutory rules or regulations, while explaining the ease with
which composition in cases of non-statutory committees
could be changed. 
72

71.
Learned counsel drew attention to the chart (set out in
para 32 above) to demonstrate that, in some instances, the
marks obtained by the Complainant - Archana Mishra and
the parties seeking impleadment in the interview, were more
than the marks secured by some of the appellants. Had an
opportunity being given to them before the Collector they
would have demonstrated these facts, to dispel the argument
of bias and favouritism, contends the learned counsel.
72.
Learned counsel for the State and the parties seeking
impleadment have vehemently countered these submissions.
They contended first that the principle of  Ashok Kumar
Yadav  (supra) can  only  apply  to  Public  Service
Commissions.  They relied  on  Reference under Article
317(1) of the Constitution of India, In Re (2009) 1 SCC
337 to reinforce this point.  This contention overlooks the
fact that  Javid Rasool Bhatt (supra) affirmed in  Ashok
Kumar Yadav (supra) was not a case of Public Service
73

Commission.  It is only that the Chairman of the Public
Service  Commission  was  the  Chairman  of  the  selection
committee with the other two Members in that case being
the Members of the two Government Medical Colleges in
Srinagar and Jammu respectively.  Moreover, in the present
case, the Committee is a statutory Committee set up under
the Recruitment Rules of 1997.  This aspect is independent
of the point of breach of natural justice at the original stage.
73.
Learned  counsel  for  the  State  and  the  private
respondents contends that the selection and appointment is
vitiated  on  the  ground  of  bias  and  likelihood  of  bias
irrespective  of  recusal  of  the  relative  members  in  the
committee.  The judgment of Dr. (Mrs.) Kirti Deshmankar
(supra) cited by them was a case where the mother-in-law
of the candidate did not recuse.  Equally so, in the case of J.
Mohapatra (supra) there was no recusal. The judgment of
A.K.  Kraipak  (supra) cited  by  them  also  stands
74

distinguished in Javid Rasool Bhatt (supra), Ashok Kumar
Yadav (supra) and in Jaswant Singh Nerwal (supra) for the
reasons rightly stated therein.
74.
This is not a case where from the facts, only one
admitted  or  indisputable  factual  position  emerges,
warranting denial of the issuance of the writ.  This Court,
following the limited exception carved out by Chinnappa
Reddy, J. in S.L.Kapur (supra) has held that since Courts do
not  issue  futile  writs,  in  cases  where  on  admitted  or
indisputable facts only one conclusion is possible, then writs
will not follow.  This is, even if there was violation of
principles  of  natural  justice.   This  principle  has  been
followed in M.C. Mehta vs. Union of India, (1999) 6 SCC
237  and  Aligarh  Muslim  University  and  Others vs.
Mansoor Ali Khan, (2000) 7 SCC 529. These cases have no
application whatsoever to the facts of the present case.  This
is not such a case. In this case, it could not be said that only
75

one admitted or indisputable factual position is possible.
Hence issue of a writ will not be futile. 
75.
Given  a  chance  before  the  Collector  perhaps  the
appellants would have met each and every objection of the
sole Complainant-Archana Mishra (R-4).  Perhaps they may
have not.  One does not know.  Respondent No.4 ought to
have  impleaded  the  candidates  who  were  selected  and
appointed, including the appellants, before the Collector.
Even if she failed, the Collector ought to have given an
opportunity to implead, with a stern direction that failure to
implead would result in a dismissal.  This is all the more so
in the teeth of Rule 9 of the A&R Rules.  For the failure of
Respondent No.4 and the Collector, the appellants cannot be
made to pay.
76.
Approaching  the  home  stretch,  one  question  still
remains:-  Whether at this distance of time should the matter
be remitted back to the Collector for a fresh enquiry?  The
76

selection is of the year 1998.  By virtue of interim orders
through out, the appellants have functioned in office and are
discharging their duties for the past more than twenty five
years.   One  of  them  has  even  superannuated.   At  this
distance of time, it will not be in the interest of justice to
remand the matter for a fresh enquiry.
77.
In view of the above, the appeals are allowed.  The
judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court passed in
the writ appeals are set aside.  The result would be that the
appeal filed by Respondent No.4 Archana Mishra before the
Collector,  Chhatarpur,  would  stand  dismissed.   The
appellants would be entitled to continue in service, deeming
their appointments as valid and would be entitled to all
service benefits.    No order as to costs.    
                                    .
…..…………………J.
          (K.V. Viswanathan)
New Delhi;
April 04, 2024.   
77

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4806 OF 2011
KRISHNADATT AWASTHY 
…..APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.       …..RESPONDENTS
WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4807 OF 2011
SUMER SINGH 
…..APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.       …..RESPONDENTS
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4808 OF 2011
RAMRANI SINGH 
…..APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.       …..RESPONDENTS
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4809 OF 2011
SHYAMA DEWEDI & ORS.
…..APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.       …..RESPONDENTS
1

O R D E R
In view of the divergent views expressed by us in the
aforesaid   appeals,   the   Registry   is   directed   to   place   the
matter   before   Hon’ble   the   Chief   Justice   of   India   for
constitution of a larger Bench.   In the meantime, interim
order passed earlier shall remain in operation.   
..….…………...................J.
(J.K. MAHESHWARI)
...….…………...................J.
                
   (K.V. VISWANATHAN)
NEW DELHI; 
APRIL 04, 2024.
2