2024 INSC 271
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.788 OF 2012 
 
 
 
CHANDAN  
                                           …APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
 
 THE STATE (DELHI ADMN.)      
            …RESPONDENT 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
 
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J. 
 
1. 
The appellant before this Court was convicted under Section 
302 of IPC. The conviction and sentence have been upheld by 
the High Court in appeal. As per the prosecution it is a case of 
a daylight murder with a reliable eye-witness.  
2. 
Brief facts of the case are that on 28.05.1993 at about           
8:15 pm while PW-2, who was sister-in-law of the deceased 
was returning from Ram Bazar, the deceased and the accused 
were walking a few steps ahead of her. After a few minutes she 
saw the two, i.e. the deceased Rakesh and Chandan,  
grappling with each other and then she saw the accused 
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2024.04.05
15:43:12 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
stabbing the deceased multiple times with the knife he was 
carrying. The deceased fell on the ground and the 
accused/appellant fled away.  The deceased, Rakesh, was first 
taken to the adjacent clinic which was a private clinic of Dr. 
Kalra in the vicinity, where they were advised to take him to 
Hindu Rao hospital which was the nearest hospital where an 
emergency treatment could be given to the deceased. By the 
time the deceased reached the hospital he was declared dead.  
Post-mortem was conducted on the deceased the next day i.e. 
on 29.05.1993, and the following ante-mortem injuries were 
detected: 
 
“1. An incised stab wound 22 cm x 2 cm x? 
places vertically on the left claricular area. 
(cellar bone region). 
 
2. An incised wound 2 cm x 1 cm x? vertically 
present just below an moidal to the left nipple. 
 3. An incised wound 3 cm. x 1.5 cm x? 
transversally places on the middle on left arm 
over anterolateral surface. The medial end 
was actually cut. 
 
4. An incised wound 1.5 cm. x. 0.8 cm. x ? 
transversally placed on the back of let arm 
upper part. The posterior end of the injury 
was actually cut. 
 
Injury No. 3 and 4 were found to be 
communicating with each other. 
 

3 
 
5. An incised wound 2.5 cm x 1.5 x ? vertically 
placed on the left lateral chest wall  on the  
seventhribs, lower and was acute. 
 
 6. An incised wound 20. cm. x · 1.5 cm. x ? 
 sprindle shape on the top of let shoulder. 
 
7. An incised wound 2 cm. x 0.5 cm. x muscle 
 deep on the left scapular area. 
8. An incised wound 2 cm. x 1 cm. x? placed 
vertically on the left renal angle.” 
It was further observed: 
“Injury no. 1 on the chest was only muscle 
deep. So was injury No. 2 Injury No. 5 had 
entered 
left 
chest 
cavity 
through 
7th 
intercostals space and was directed upwards 
and medially where it involved pericardium 
and tip of the left ventricle of the hear… 
 
Injury no. 5 was sufficient the ordinarly 
course of nature to cause death. Death was 
due to shock and haemorrhage consequent to 
injuries… 
 
In my opinion, injuries found on the body of 
deceased Rakesh were possible with this 
weapon. I had also made sketch of the said 
weapon along with P.M. report which is 
Ex.PW9/A which is signed me and is correct. 
 
The weapon knife Ex.Pl is taken out. The 
weapon Ex. Pl shown to me in the court is the 
name with was produced before me police in 
sealed parcel at the time P.M. and the injury 
could be caused with Ex.Pl.” 
 
An FIR was registered on the date of incident itself i.e., 
28.05.1993, at Police Station, Kashmere Gate, Delhi on the 
statement of PW-2, the complainant, where she narrated the 

4 
 
incident as already stated above. The police after investigation 
filed the chargesheet against the sole accused, Chandan, 
under Section 302 IPC. After committal of the case to the 
Sessions, 18 witnesses were examined by the prosecution. The 
star witness of the prosecution was PW-2, who was the eye-
witness. She was put to a lengthy cross-examination by the 
defence but nothing has come out which may discredit this 
witness. This witness in her testimony narrates the entire 
sequence of events as to how the accused stabbed the 
deceased to death and how she watched from a short distance 
the act being committed before her, and how all this happened 
in quick time.  
3. 
The accused, it must be stated here, was caught the same day 
in the vicinity itself along with the knife, which was the 
weapon, used in the commission of the crime. The forensic 
report and other evidences show that this was the knife which 
was recovered from the possession of the sole accused and was 
used in the commission of the crime. The blood of the deceased 
was found to be matching with the blood found on the knife, 
which was recovered from the accused/appellant. Brahm Pal 
Singh (PW-12) Head Constable is a witness to this recovery. 
He states that upon receiving information of stabbing, he  

5 
 
along with constable Mahabir found the accused at Hamilton 
Road. They saw the accused coming out from the side of ‘ganda 
Nala’, carrying a blood stained knife and wearing a blood 
stained shirt. The accused was then apprehended by constable 
Brahm Pal and  the knife and shirt were accordingly recovered.  
4. 
There were certain doubts raised on the manner of recovery of 
the knife from the accused, but nothing moves on this aspect 
alone, more particularly, in view of the fact that the blood of 
the deceased clearly matches with the blood which was found 
on the knife, together with the ocular evidence in the form of 
an eyewitness (PW-2), who is a reliable eye-witness of the 
incident. We can also not lose sight of the fact that the murder, 
the arrest of the accused and the recovery of the knife from 
him happened in quick succession, with a very little time gap. 
The entire evidence put together by the prosecution does 
establish the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Both the Trial Court as well as the Appellate Court have rightly 
held that the prosecution has proved their case as such.  
5. 
The argument of the defence that the prosecution has not been 
able to establish any motive on the accused for committing 
this dastardly act is in fact true, but since this is a case of eye-
witness where there is nothing to discredit the eye-witness, the 

6 
 
motive itself is of little relevance. It would be necessary to 
mention some of the leading cases on this aspect which are as 
under: 
In Shivaji Genu Mohite v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 
SC 55, it was held that it is a well-settled principle in criminal 
jurisprudence that when ocular testimony inspires the 
confidence of the court, the prosecution is not required to 
establish motive. Mere absence of motive would not impinge on 
the testimony of a reliable eye-witness.  Motive is an important 
factor for consideration in a case of circumstantial evidence.  
But when there is direct eye witness, motive is not significant. 
This is what was held: 
“In case the prosecution is not able to discover 
an impelling motive, that could not reflect upon 
the credibility of a witness proved to be a 
reliable eye-witness. Evidence as to motive 
would, no doubt, go a long way in cases wholly 
dependent on circumstantial evidence. Such 
evidence would form one of the links in the 
chain of circumstantial evidence in such a 
case. But that would not be so in cases where 
there are eye-witnesses of credibility, though 
even in such cases if a motive is properly 
proved, such proof would strengthen the 
prosecution case and fortify the court in its 
ultimate conclusion. But that does not mean 
that if motive is not established, the evidence 
of an eye-witness is rendered untrustworthy” 
 

7 
 
The principle that the lack or absence of motive is 
inconsequential when direct evidence establishes the crime 
has been reiterated by this Court in Bikau Pandey v. State 
of Bihar, (2003) 12 SCC 616; Rajagopal v. Muthupandi, 
(2017) 11 SCC 120; Yogesh Singh v. Mahabeer Singh, 
(2017) 11 SCC 195.  
6. 
In view of above, we see no reason to interfere with the orders 
of the Trial Court and that of the High Court, accordingly the 
appeal is dismissed. Interim order dated 09.05.2012 granting 
bail to the appellant stands vacated. Appellant, who is 
presently on bail, is directed to surrender before the Trial 
Court within a period of four weeks from today. A copy of this 
judgment shall be sent to the Trial Court to ensure that the 
appellant undergoes the remaining part of his sentence.   
 
 
 
     ...………………………….J. 
    [SUDHANSHU DHULIA] 
 
 
                
..……….….……………….J. 
                          [PRASANNA B. VARALE] 
 
New Delhi. 
April 05, 2024.