2024 INSC 272
Criminal Appeal No.1609 of 2011      
                   Page 1 of 8 
 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1609 OF 2011 
 
Manikandan 
 
 
     
                      … Appellant 
 
 
versus 
 
 
 
State by the Inspector of Police                         … Respondent 
 
 
WITH 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 407 OF 2019 
 
J U D G M E N T 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 407 of 2019 is the 
accused no.1, and the appellant in Criminal Appeal No.1609 of 
2011 is the accused no.2.  The Trial Court convicted both the 
appellants for an offence punishable under Section 302, read 
with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘the 
IPC’).  By the impugned judgment, the High Court has 
confirmed the conviction and life sentence of the appellants.  
2. 
We are referring to the prosecution case in brief. The 
name of the deceased is Balamurugan.  He was staying with 
his parents – PW-l Mahalingam and PW-2 Veerammal.  
According to the prosecution case, the deceased had instructed 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.04.05
17:08:20 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Criminal Appeal No.1609 of 2011      
                   Page 2 of 8 
 
 
 
accused no.1 to deliver idlis at his home.  On 4th October 2007, 
at about 9 pm, the deceased came home and enquired with his 
mother PW-2 whether accused no.1 had delivered the idlis. On 
learning that accused no.1 had not delivered the idlis, he 
immediately went out and reached the house of accused no.1.  
It appears that there was a commotion due to his altercation 
with the accused no.1. According to the prosecution case, after 
hearing the commotion, PW-2 and PW-3 (the brother-in-law of 
the deceased) rushed to the spot.  Accused no.2 was present at 
the spot.  After that, accused no.1 entered his house, brought 
with him a billhook and assaulted the deceased with the 
billhook.  The first blow fell on the right index finger of the 
deceased.  Thereafter, the deceased ran away to the nearby 
garden of one Karunanidhi.  The accused followed him.  The 
accused no.2 held the deceased, and accused no.1 assaulted 
the deceased with the billhook on his neck.  Both the accused 
fled after that.  According to the prosecution case, PW-2, PW-
3, PW-4 (sister of PW-1), and PW-5 (son of PW-4) witnessed the 
incident.  
 
SUBMISSIONS 
3. 
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant pointed 
out that the first information report shows that the incident 
occurred at 10.30 pm.  However, from the approximate time of 
death mentioned in the post-mortem notes, it appears that the 
incident must have happened before 7 pm. His second 
submission is that though other independent eyewitnesses 
were available, the prosecution had chosen to examine only the 
witnesses closely related to the deceased who were interested 

Criminal Appeal No.1609 of 2011      
                   Page 3 of 8 
 
 
 
and tutored witnesses. Therefore, their testimony deserves to 
be discarded.  Without prejudice, his further submission is that 
it was the deceased who went to the house of accused no.1 to 
enquire about the failure of accused no.1 to deliver idlis at his 
home. The fight started only because the deceased went to the 
house of accused no.1.  He submitted that the post-mortem 
notes show that the deceased sustained one cut injury on his 
neck and one minor injury to his finger.  He further submitted 
that there was a sudden fight between the deceased and the 
accused no.1, and in their sudden fight, without any 
premeditation, the accused no.1 assaulted the deceased. He 
would, therefore, submit that this is a case where Exception 4 
of Section 300 of IPC will apply, and thus, it will amount to an 
offence under Part 1 of Section 304 of IPC.  He relied upon 
various decisions of this Court in the cases of:- 
(i) 
No.15138812Y L/Nk Gursewak Singh v. Union of 
India & Anr.1  
(ii) 
Ram Manohar Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh2  
(iii) 
Ghapoo Yadav & Ors. v. the State of M.P.3 
(iv) 
Sukhbir Singh v. State of Haryana4 
(v) 
Sandhya Jadhav v. State of Maharashtra5 
(vi) 
Prakash Chand v. State of H.P.6 and 
(vii) Pulicherla Nagaraju v. State of A.P.7 
 
 
1 2023 INSC 648 : 2023 SCC OnLine SC 882 
2 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1084 
3 (2003) 3 SCC 528 
4 (2002) 3 SCC 327 
5 (2006) 4 SCC 653 
6 (2004) 11 SCC 381 
7 (2006) 11 SCC 444 

Criminal Appeal No.1609 of 2011      
                   Page 4 of 8 
 
 
 
4. 
The learned counsel appearing for the respondent - State 
urged that the evidence of PW-2 to PW-5 is free of any material 
contradictions and omissions and, thus, inspires confidence. 
He submitted that the fact that accused no.1, after a dispute 
with the deceased, entered his house, brought billhook and 
then assaulted the deceased shows that there was a clear 
intention on his part to assault the deceased. Learned counsel 
submitted that after one blow was given by the accused no.1 
on the index finger of the deceased, the deceased attempted to 
run away.  Both the accused chased the deceased; the accused 
no.2 held the deceased, and after that, accused no.1 gave a 
fatal blow to the neck of the deceased with Billhook.  He urged 
that Exception 4 of Section 300 of IPC will not apply in this 
case. 
 
OUR VIEW 
5. 
We have perused the evidence of the material prosecution 
witnesses.  PW-1 is the father of the deceased, who had 
admittedly not seen the incident.  PW-2 is the mother of the 
deceased.  PW-2 in her examination-in-chief stated thus:  
“About one year ago, my son came at 9.00 
P.M. to house.  My son asked me whether 
the 1st accused Siva had given idli to me. I 
told him Siva did not give idli. Immediately 
thereafter he said that he will go and ask 
Siva why he did not give idli and went from 
there. Thereafter, after sometime we heard 
a sound from the side of Siva's house. I ran 
and saw there. By that time, the 1st 
accused Siva had cut my son with the 
billhook. That cut fell on the index finger. 
Immediately my son escaped and ran 

Criminal Appeal No.1609 of 2011      
                   Page 5 of 8 
 
 
 
towards 
the 
tract 
of 
Karunanidhi. 
Immediately Siva and Manikandan chased 
my 
son 
and 
ran 
behind 
him 
and 
Manikandan had held my son. Siva had cut 
my son on his neck. My son inclined and 
fell down. I ran and screamed 'Ayyo, Ayyo'.  
By 
hearing 
my 
noise, 
Annappattu, 
Ganesan, Arivazhagi, Velayudham came 
there running. The accused had thrown the 
billhook in their hands. After I saw my son, 
and lifted him, I came to know that my son 
was dead.” 
 
6. 
In her examination-in-chief, she attempted to make out a 
case that the accused had spoken ill about her daughter-in-
law.  Admittedly, she did not say so in her statement recorded 
by the police.  Most importantly, in the cross-examination by 
the advocate for accused no.1, she stated, “Yesterday, I, my 
husband and other witnesses went to Haridwarmangalam 
Police station. There, the police authorities taught us how to 
adduce evidence.”  It is pertinent to note that the evidence of 
PW-1 to PW-5 was recorded on 20th November 2008. Thus, it is 
apparent that on 19th November 2008, the first five interested 
witnesses, PW-1 to PW-5, who were closely related to the 
deceased, were called to the Police Station and were taught by 
the police how to depose against the accused. It is pertinent to 
note that the prosecution did not put questions to the witness 
by way of re-examination on this aspect. The investigation 
officer did not offer any explanation for this. Therefore, we must 
proceed on the footing that the first five witnesses were “taught” 
at the Police Station how to depose. This happened a day before 
the day their evidence was recorded before the Court. 

Criminal Appeal No.1609 of 2011      
                   Page 6 of 8 
 
 
 
 
7. 
PW-3 is the brother-in-law of the deceased.  He deposed 
that he was residing near the house of the accused no.1. His 
version in the examination-in-chief about the incident is the 
same as the version of PW-2.  PW-4 knew the family of the 
deceased and the accused, as he stated that the accused were 
residing in the same colony in which he was residing.  His 
version of the incident in the examination-in-chief is the same 
as that of PW-2 and PW-3.    PW-5 also knew the accused and 
the family of the deceased as he was also staying in the same 
colony in which the accused were staying.  His version of the 
actual incident of the assault is the same as the other three 
prosecution eyewitnesses. PW-3 to PW-5 were admittedly the 
relatives of the deceased.  PW-5, in his cross-examination, 
stated that he, along with five persons, attempted to prevent 
accused no.1 from assaulting the deceased. The other five 
witnesses referred to by PW-5 have not been examined as 
witnesses.   
 
8. 
Thus, the scenario which emerges is that precisely a day 
before the evidence of PW-1 to PW-5 was recorded before the 
Trial Court, they were called to the Police Station and were 
taught to depose in a particular manner. One can reasonably 
imagine the effect of “teaching” the witnesses inside a Police 
Station. This is a blatant act by the police to tutor the material 
prosecution witnesses. All of them were interested witnesses. 
Their evidence will have to be discarded as there is a distinct 
possibility that the said witnesses were tutored by the police on 

Criminal Appeal No.1609 of 2011      
                   Page 7 of 8 
 
 
 
the earlier day.  This kind of interference by the Police with the 
judicial process, to say the least, is shocking. This amounts to 
gross misuse of power by the Police machinery. The Police 
cannot be allowed to tutor the prosecution witness. This 
conduct becomes more serious as other eyewitnesses, though 
available, were withheld.  We are surprised that both the 
Courts overlooked this critical aspect. It is pertinent to note 
that the defence of the accused, as can be seen from the line of 
cross-examination, was that they were not present at the place 
of the incident at the time of the incident. PW-2 admitted that 
accused no.1 was working in another village called Tirrupur.  
Although available, independent witnesses were not examined 
by the Prosecution. Therefore, adverse inference must be 
drawn against the prosecution. Hence, there is a serious doubt 
created about the genuineness of the prosecution case. The 
benefit of this substantial doubt must be given to the 
appellants. Before the appellants were enlarged on bail by this 
Court, they had undergone incarceration for more than 10 
years.    
 
9. 
Therefore, in our considered view, both the Sessions 
Court and the High Court have committed an error in 
convicting the appellants.  Hence, the appeals are allowed.  The 
impugned judgments and orders are set aside, and the 
appellants are acquitted of the offences alleged against them. 
Their bail bonds stand cancelled.  
 

Criminal Appeal No.1609 of 2011      
                   Page 8 of 8 
 
 
 
10. 
The Director General of Police of the State of Tamil Nadu 
shall cause an enquiry to be made into the conduct of the police 
officials of tutoring PW-1 to PW-5 at the concerned Police 
Station. Needless to add, appropriate action shall be initiated 
against the erring officials in accordance with the law.   
 
 
……………………..J. 
     (Abhay S. Oka) 
 
 
……………………..J. 
     (Pankaj Mithal) 
New Delhi; 
April 5, 2024.