2024 INSC 269
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2595 OF 2023
SHOMA KANTI SEN
        ...APPELLANT(S)
VS
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.     …RESPONDENT(S)
J U D G M E N T 
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.
The appellant before us assails the order of a Division Bench
of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay passed on 17.01.2023,
disposing her application for bail with liberty to approach the
Trial Court for filing a fresh application for bail.
2.
The appellant was detained on 06.06.2018 in connection
with  First  Investigation  Report  (“FIR”)  no.  04/2018  dated
08.01.2018  registered  with  Vishrambaug  Police  Station,  Pune
1
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2024.04.05
15:58:55 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

alleging commission of offences under Sections 153A, 505 (1b),
117 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“1860
Code”). The complaints therein related to violence that broke out
at a function organised by Elgar Parishad. Certain acts of violence
had taken place at Shanivarwada, Pune on 31.12.2017 thereafter.
The prosecution’s case is that in the said programme, provocative
speeches  were delivered  and there were  cultural performances
which had the effect of creating enmity between caste groups,
resulting in disruption of communal harmony, violence, and loss
of life. The said FIR was initially lodged against the organisers of
the Elgar Parishad event, which included activists of a cultural
body, known as Kabir Kala Manch. The appellant before us was
not named in that FIR as an accused at that point of time.
3.
Subsequently, the scope of investigation was expanded and
Section 120-B of the 1860 Code was added to the list of offences
on 06.03.2018.  The State Police, who were investigating the case
at that point of time raided houses of eight accused persons on
17.04.2018, namely (1) Rona Wilson of Delhi, (2) Surendra Gading
of Nagpur, (3) Sudhir Dhawale of Mumbai, (4) Harshali Potdar of
Mumbai,  (5)  Sagar  Gorkhe  of  Pune,  (6)  Deepak  Dhaeagale  of
Pune, (7) Jyoti Jagtap of Pune and (8) Ramesh Gaychore of Pune.
2

The State Police, allegedly, found incriminatory materials from the
residences of the raided persons. The State Police seemed to have
had discovered a larger conspiracy of which the appellant was a
part, according to the prosecution.  They found that Communist
Party  of  India  (Maoist)  [“CPI  (Maoist)”]  to  be  behind  such
conspiracy. The latter is a banned terrorist organisation, and has
been included in the First Schedule of the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967 (“1967 Act”) by an order of the Union Home
Ministry dated 22.06.2009. This led to invoking offences under
Sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 18B, 20, 38, 39 and 40 of the 1967 Act.
On  06.06.2018,  appellant’s  residence  was  raided  and  certain
literatures, electronic devices and mobile phones were seized from
her. On that date itself, the appellant came to be arrested by the
State Police. 
4.
On 02.11.2018, statement of one Kumarasai was recorded.
He  had  also  recorded  two  other  subsequent  statements  on
23.12.2018  (Annexure  P-6  to  the  appeal-petition)  and
24.08.2020.  All  these  statements  form  a  part  of  the  three
chargesheets which have been submitted in connection with the
subject case and we shall refer to the contents thereof later in this
judgment.  We  would  also  point  out  here  that  on  behalf  of
3

prosecution, four sets of statements have been produced before us
as statements of protected witnesses. But status of two of those
witnesses  as  ‘protected’  was  removed  by  the  Special  Court
constituted  under the  National Investigation Agency Act,  2008
(“2008 Act”) by an order passed on 27.04.2022. The investigation
was transferred to the National Investigation Agency (“NIA”) on
24.01.2020  and  the  same  case  was  renumbered  as  RC-
01/2020/NIA/MUM,  with  NIA  police  station,  Mumbai.   The
Special Court held that prior directions to maintain secrecy in
respect of identity of KW2 and KW4 ought to be set aside. The
names of KW2 and KW4 thus stood removed from the list of
protected witnesses. This was done mainly on the ground that
copies of statements of those two witnesses had been supplied to
the defence under Section 207 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973  (“1973  Code”),  which  transmitted  their  names  and
identities. KW4 is Kumarasai, whose statement we have referred
to earlier in this paragraph.
5.
On 15.11.2018, the initial chargesheet was submitted by
the State Police invoking allegations of commission of offences
under Sections 153A, 501(1)(b), 117, 120B, 121, 121A, 124A &
34 of the 1860 Code read with Sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 18B, 20,
4

38, 39 & 40 of the 1967 Act. The appellant was implicated in the
said chargesheet as accused no. 4 for having committed offences
under the aforesaid provisions.  In column 10 of this chargesheet,
under  the  heading  “Details  of  accused  charge-sheeted  (with
absconding  accused)”  names  of  Sudhir  Prahlad  Dhavle,  Rona
Jacob  Wilson,  Surendra  Pundlikrao  Gadling,  Shoma  Sen  (the
appellant) and Mahesh Sitaram Raut appear as arrested accused
whereas names of five other accused persons have been shown as
“at present underground”.  A supplementary chargesheet was also
filed by the State Police on 21.02.2019, broadly under the same
provisions, implicating certain other individuals, Varavara Rao,
Vernon  Gonzalves,  Arun  Ferreira  and  Sudha  Bhardwaj  as
accused persons in the same case.
6.
After  filing  of  the  initial  chargesheet,  the  appellant  had
preferred a bail application before the Sessions Court at Pune on
13.12.2018. The Additional Sessions Judge, upon going through
the two chargesheets dated 15.11.2018 and 21.11.2019, rejected
her bail plea by an order dated 06.11.2019.  The Sessions Court
applied the bail restricting provision contained in Section 43-D (5)
of  the  1967  Act  to  deny  bail  to  the  appellant.  Thereafter,  on
09.01.2020,  the  appellant  had  filed  a  regular  bail  application
5

before  the  High  Court  of  Judicature  at  Bombay,  invoking  the
provisions of Section 439 of the 1973 Code. 
7.
As the investigation had been transferred to the NIA during
subsistence of the bail application before the High Court, the
learned Single Judge, before whom the appellant’s petition was
pending, directed that the  bail application ought to be placed
before  a  Division  Bench  and  the  NIA  was  also  impleaded  as
respondent to the said petition. Under normal circumstances, the
bail petition would have been heard by a learned Single Judge
only.  This  direction,  however,  was  made  considering  the
provisions  of  Section  21(2)  of  the  2008  Act.  The  order  dated
17.07.2021 passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court,
placing the bail application before the Division Bench, reads: -
“1. Learned counsel for the applicant states that, the
case is now being investigated by N.I.A. under the
N.I.A. Act. He seeks leave to add N.I.A. as a party
respondent. Learned counsel for the applicant seeks
two  weeks  time  to  carry  out  amendment.  Time  is
granted. 
2. Since the N.I.A. has taken over the investigation,
the matter will have to be placed before the Division
bench.  I  have taken  this  view  in  Criminal  Bail
Application  No.2024  of  2021  vide  order  dated
11/06/2021 based on the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s
Judgment in the case of State of Andhra Pradesh,
through  Inspector  General,  National  Investigation
Agency, Vs. Mohd. Hussain @ Salim, as reported in
(2014) 1 Supreme Court Cases 258.
3. Hence, the following order is passed:
ORDER
6

(i) Leave to amend is granted to add N.I.A. as a party
respondent.
(ii) Amendment shall be carried out within a period of
two weeks from today.
(iii) Office to take steps to place this matter before the
appropriate Division Bench.
(iv)  The  applicant  shall  supply  second  set  of  this
application.”
8.
The Division Bench heard the bail application and by an
order passed on 17.01.2023, which is assailed before us, disposed
of the appellant’s prayer for bail, giving liberty to the appellant to
approach the Trial Court for filing a fresh application for bail.
Prior to the passing of the order which is impugned before us, the
NIA had submitted a second supplementary chargesheet dated
09.10.2020, implicating seven more persons as accused in the
case.  They are Anand Teltumbde, Gautam Navlakha, Hany Babu,
Sagar Gorkhe, Ramesh Gaychore, Jyoti Jagtap and Stan Swamy.
It is the case of the prosecution that the second supplementary
chargesheet  filed  by  the  NIA  contains  certain  incriminating
materials against the appellant as well. It is primarily on account
of the second supplementary chargesheet being filed, the Division
Bench  of  the  High  Court  refused  to  consider  the  appellant’s
petition for bail on merit. The reasoning for such a course being
7

directed by the Division Bench would appear from the following
passage of the impugned order: -
“2. As noted in Order dated 2nd December, 2022, the
investigation  of  present  Crime  was  subsequently
transferred to the National Investigation Agency (for
short “the NIA”) in the month of January, 2020 i.e.
after passing of the impugned Order. After completion
of  further  investigation,  the  NIA  has  filed
supplementary  charge-sheet  in  the  Special  Court
(under NIA Act) at Mumbai. The said case arising out
of present crime is now pending for final adjudication
in the Special Court (under NIA Act) at Mumbai. 
3.  It  is  to  be  noted  here  that,  after  the  NIA  filed
supplementary  charge-sheet,  in  view  of  the
substantive change in circumstance, the Applicant did
not approach the trial Court, at the first instance for
appreciation of evidence by it. This Court therefore
does  not  have  the  benefit  of  assessment  of  entire
evidence on record by the trial Court. It is therefore
necessary for the Petitioner to approach the trial Court
afresh for seeking bail under Section 439 of Criminal
Procedure Code, so that the trial Court will get an
opportunity  to  assess  entire  material  available  on
record against the Applicant. Even otherwise, in view
of substantive change in circumstance it is necessary
for the Applicant to approach the trial Court by filing a
fresh Application for bail.”
 9. Appearing  on  behalf  of  NIA,  learned  Additional  Solicitor
General,  Mr.  Nataraj,  took  preliminary  objection  on
maintainability of the present appeal. His counter-affidavit is also
founded on that factor.  He stressed on the fact that since the first
Court of bail had no opportunity to examine  the fresh set of
accusations  emanating  from  the  second  supplementary
8

chargesheet, no error was committed by the Division Bench in
remanding the matter to the Court of first instance.
10.
His argument is that the High Court is an appellate forum
on the question of bail, where the 2008 Act is applicable and thus
ought not to examine, for the first time, a fresh set of accusations
made by the investigating agency. He relied on a judgment of this
Court in the case of State of Haryana -vs- Basti Ram [(2013) 4
SCC 200]. A Coordinate Bench of this Court observed in this
case:-
“27. Normally, we would have gone through the entire
evidence on record and decided whether the acquittal
of Basti Ram should be sustained or not. However, in
the  absence  of  any  discussion  or  analysis  of  the
evidence by the High Court in the first appeal, we are
of the opinion that a right of appeal available to Basti
Ram would be taken away if we were to consider the
case on its merits without the opinion of the High
Court. Additionally, for a proper appreciation of the
case, it is necessary for us to have the views of the
High Court on record. This is important since the High
Court has reversed a finding of conviction given by the
trial Judge.” 
11.
This  was  a  case  where  the  respondent-accused  was
implicated  in  offences  of  sexual  assault  and  kidnapping  of  a
minor girl along with other related offences and the accused was
convicted by the Trial Court. Conviction of the respondent along
with the co-accused was set aside by a Single Judge of the High
9

Court. It was contended by the State before this Court that the
judgment of acquittal was passed by the High Court ignoring the
statement of prosecutrix, made under Section 164 of the 1973
Code, as also her testimony before the trial court. It was in the
context  of  this  argument  that  the  aforesaid  judgment  was
delivered  and  observations  were  made  in  the  passage  quoted
above. The same course, in our opinion, would not be mandatory
on the question of considering pre-trial bail plea.
12.
So  far  as  the  initial  and  the  first  supplementary
chargesheets filed by the State Police are concerned, the Court of
first instance had the occasion to go through the same. But the
High Court opined that after transfer of investigation to NIA and
filing of the second supplementary chargesheet, which was also
placed before the High Court, it should be the Special Court itself
which should examine, at the first instance, the content of all the
chargesheets, before considering the prayer of an accused for bail.
In the present case, when the bail application was filed before the
Single Judge of the High Court under Section 439 of the 1973
Code,  the  second  supplementary  chargesheet  had  not  been
submitted.  Under  the  provisions  of  the  1973  Code,  the
jurisdiction of the High Court to consider the question of bail is
10

coordinate with that of the Sessions Court and it has evolved as a
matter of practice that an accused seeking bail ought to approach
the Sessions Court before approaching the High Court. Thus, at
the point of time when the bail petition was filed by the appellant
before  the  High  Court,  there  was  no  apparent  jurisdictional
shortcoming in the High Court examining the appellant’s plea for
bail. It was also, in our opinion, the proper course which was
adopted by the High Court exercising jurisdiction under Section
439 of the 1973 Code to refer the matter to a Division Bench to
decide the bail plea in accordance with Section 21(2) of the 2008
Act. This course has been prescribed in the judgement of this
court  in  the  case  of  State  of  Andhra  Pradesh,  through
Inspector General, National Investigation Agency -vs- Mohd.
Hussain alias Salim [(2014) 1 SCC 258], which was relied upon
by the learned Single Judge while placing the bail application
before a Division Bench. The relevant portion of this judgement
passed by a Coordinate Bench of this Court stipulates: -
“27. The  order  passed  by  this  Court  on  2-8-2013
in State  of  A.P. v. Mohd.  Hussain [State  of
A.P. v. Mohd. Hussain, (2014) 1 SCC 706] is therefore
clarified as follows:
27.1. Firstly, an appeal from an order of the Special
Court  under  the  NIA  Act,  refusing  or  granting  bail
shall lie only to a Bench of two Judges of the High
Court.
11

27.2. And, secondly as far as Prayer (b) of the peti-
tion for clarification is concerned, it is made clear that
inasmuch as the applicant is being prosecuted for the
offences under the MCOC Act, 1999, as well as the
Unlawful  Activities  (Prevention)  Act,  1967,  such  of-
fences  are  triable  only  by  the  Special  Court,  and
therefore application for bail in such matters will have
to be made before the Special Court under the NIA
Act, 2008, and  shall not lie before  the  High Court
either under Section 439 or under Section 482 of the
Code. The application for bail filed by the applicant in
the present case is not maintainable before the High
Court.
27.3. Thus, where the NIA Act applies, the original
application for bail shall lie only before the Special
Court, and appeal against the orders therein shall lie
only to a Bench of two Judges of the High Court.”
13.
The factual position which forms the background of the
present appellant’s plea for bail is, however, different from that in
which  the  aforesaid  judgments  were  delivered.  The  appellant
before us, at each stage, had applied for bail before the Court
which, at that point of time, had regular jurisdiction to consider
her application. It was because of supervening circumstances the
NIA  entered  into  the  picture  and  then  issued  the  second
supplementary  chargesheet.  The  Division  Bench,  being  an
appellate forum, has the jurisdiction to look into the facts which
may arise subsequent to the order of bail passed by the Court of
regular jurisdiction. The order by which the Single Judge, hearing
the bail application under Section 439 of the 1973 Code, placed
the matter before the Division Bench (in essence, giving the said
12

application the form or character of an appeal under Section 21(2)
of the 2008 Act), had not been assailed by any of the parties. We
also do not find any error in such a direction having been issued
by  the  Single  Judge  of  the  High  Court  exercising  jurisdiction
under  Section  439  of  the  1973  Code.  It  was  the  same
investigation which was continued by the NIA, based on the same
FIR. Only the investigating agency had changed. Just because the
second supplementary chargesheet had been issued by the NIA
after disposal of the bail application by the Sessions Court, it was
not the only legal course available to the High Court to remand
the  matter  to  the  Special  Court  for  examining  the  second
supplementary chargesheet at the first instance. As an Appellate
Forum,  in the  facts  of  the  given case,  it was  well within the
jurisdiction of the High Court exercising its power under Section
21(2)  of  the  2008  Act,  to  examine  the  second  supplementary
chargesheet  as  well,  while  sitting  in  appeal  over  the  order  of
rejection of bail by the regular Sessions Court upon considering
the first two chargesheets. 
14.
Now, the question arises as to whether the course adopted
by the High Court ought to be invalidated by us simply because
another course, which is suggested by the appellant, could also
13

be  adopted  by  the  High  Court.  In  our  view,  under  ordinary
circumstances, we might not have had interfered with the High
Court's judgment and order which is under appeal before us. The
course adopted by the High Court was a permissible course. We,
however, must take into account that the High Court had passed
the aforesaid order when the appellant, a lady, was in detention
for over four and a half years. At present, the appellant has been
in detention for almost six years, her age is over 66 years and
charges have not yet been framed. The appellant has also moved
an application before us, registered as CRL MP No. 166531 of
2023, in which various ailments  from which she suffers have
been cited and prayer is made for bail on medical grounds as well.
15.
Having taken these factors into account, we do not think it
would be in the interest of justice to remand the matter to the
Special Court constituted under the 2008 Act at this stage. We
are taking this view as in our opinion, it would not have been
beyond jurisdiction of the High Court Division Bench, even in
exercise of appellate power under Section 21(2) of the 2008 Act, to
examine the second supplementary chargesheet as well. For these
reasons, we decline to accept the preliminary objection raised by
Mr. Nataraj and shall proceed to consider here, the appellant’s
14

plea  for  bail  on  merit.  Now  that  we  have  given  leave  to  the
appellant in her petition for special leave to appeal, the same
appellate jurisdiction which vested in the High Court will vest in
us as well and in exercise of such appellate jurisdiction, we shall
consider the appellant’s prayer for bail, which was not considered
by the High Court on merit.
16.
It was also urged by Mr. Nataraj that in the appeal-petition,
the  appellant  has  only  asked  for  setting  aside  the  impugned
judgment and order. No specific prayer for bail has been made.
But in our opinion, the plea for bail in the context of the present
appeal  is  implicit.  The  petition  which  was  transferred  to  the
Division Bench carried prayer of the appellant for being released
on bail and argument advanced by Mr. Grover, learned senior
counsel appearing for the appellant is that the High Court itself
ought  to  have  granted  bail  to  the  appellant  on  the  basis  of
available materials. Moreover, the appellant in the appeal-petition
has also asked  for bail as  interim  relief.  Since  the  appeal, in
substance, is against the judgment by which prayer for bail was
refused,  merely  based  on  the  manner  of  framing  of  reliefs  or
prayers in the subject-petition, the actual relief sought by the
appellant would not stand eclipsed.
15

17.
Mr.  Nataraj  had  also  contended  that  the  NIA  must  be
permitted to contest the bail plea of the appellant before the first
Court of bail on the basis of materials disclosed in the second
supplementary charge-sheet, because the prosecution would also
be entitled to a right of appeal.  His submission is that such right
of appeal would stand lost if the High Court itself had examined
the second supplementary charge-sheet and decided the question
of  bail  in  favour  of  the  appellant-accused.  These  are  cogent
arguments, but we must not lose sight of the fact that we are
concerned here with the question of liberty of a pre-trial detenue,
who is a senior citizen, in custody for almost six years, against
whom charges are yet to be framed. The question of losing right of
an appellate forum would have greater significance in substantive
proceedings but on the question of bail, in a proceeding where the
detenue herself has volunteered to forego an appellate forum by
arguing before us her case for bail, the approach of this Court
would be to address the question on merit, rather than to send it
back to the Court of first instance for examining the materials
available against the appellant.
18.
This argument of the prosecution would have had stronger
impact if the last charge-sheet, which the first bail Court could
16

not  examine,  had  disclosed  any  new  or  egregious  set  of
accusations  against  the  appellant,  far  removed  from  those
contained in the earlier charge-sheets. We have gone through the
second supplementary chargesheet but do not find disclosure of
any such material. This question shall be examined by us in the
subsequent paragraphs of this judgment.
19.
Another point urged by Mr. Nataraj was that the entirety of
incriminating material in the chargesheets, which forms the basis
for  implicating  the  appellant did  not  form  part of  petition for
special leave to appeal and to that extent the investigating agency
did not have full opportunity to meet the appellant’s case. But as
would be evident from various paragraphs of this judgment, these
materials  were  brought  on  record  and  both  parties  had  the
opportunity to consider these materials and advance submissions
on that basis. This is not a case where equitable relief is snatched
ex-parte, for instance in case of an ad-interim injunction, by not
bringing to the notice of the Court the entire factual basis of a
given case. In this appeal, both the parties have had sufficient
opportunity to deal with the relevant materials and the appellant
cannot be non-suited on the sole ground of non-disclosure of
such materials.
17

20.
We shall now test the appellant’s claim for bail on merit.
Having regard to the proviso to Section 43D (5)1 of 1967 Act, the
1 43-D. Modified application of certain provisions of the Code.
1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or any other law, every offence punishable under this Act
shall be deemed to be a cognizable offence within the meaning of clause (c) of section 2 of the Code, and "cognizable case"
as defined in that clause shall be construed accordingly.
(2) Section 167 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case involving an offence punishable under this Act subject
to the modification that in sub-section (2),--
(a) the references to "fifteen days", "ninety days" and "sixty days", wherever they occur, shall be construed as refer-
ences to "thirty days", "ninety days" and "ninety days" respectively; and
(b) after the proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:--
"Provided further that if it is not possible to complete the investigation within the said period of ninety days, the
Court may if it is satisfied with the report of the Public Prosecutor indicating the progress of the investigation and the spe-
cific reasons for the detention of the accused beyond the said period of ninety days, extend the said period up to one hun-
dred and eighty days:
Provided also that if the police officer making the investigation under this Act, requests, for the purposes of in-
vestigation, for police custody from judicial custody of any person in judicial custody, he shall file an affidavit stating the
reasons for doing so and shall also explain the delay, if any, for requesting such police custody.
(3) Section 268 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case involving an offence punishable under this Act subject
to the modification that--
(a) the reference in sub-section (1) thereof
(i) to "the State Government" shall be construed as a reference to "the Central Government or the State Govern-
ment.";
(ii) to "order of the State Government" shall be construed as a reference to "order of the Central Government or
the State Government, as the case may be"; and
(b) the reference in sub-section (2) thereof, to 'the State Government" shall be construed as a reference to "the
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be".
(4) Nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply in relation to any case involving the arrest of any person ac-
cused of having committed an offence punishable under this Act.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person accused of an offence punishable under Chapters
IV and VI of this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond unless the Public Prosecutor has been
given an opportunity of being heard on the application for such release:
Provided that such accused person shall not be released on bail or on his own bond if the Court, on a perusal of
the case diary or the report made under section 173 of the Code is of the opinion that there are reasonable grounds for be -
lieving that the accusation against such person is prima facie true.
(6) The restrictions on granting of bail specified in sub-section (5) is in addition to the restrictions under the Code
or any other law for the time being in force on granting of bail.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (5) and (6), no bail shall be granted to a person accused
of an offence punishable under this Act, if he is not an Indian citizen and has entered the country unauthorisedly or illeg-
ally except in very exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing.”
18

Court hearing the question of bail is under duty to scan through
the case diary or report made under Section 173 of the Code for
the purpose of forming an opinion to the effect that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the accusation against the
appellant  is  prima  facie  true.  This  test  would  apply  in  only
relation to offences stipulated under Chapters IV and VI of the
1967  Act.  So  far  as  the  prosecution’s  accusation  against  the
appellant  is  concerned,  allegations  of  commission  of  offences
under Sections 16, 17, 18, 18B, 20, 38, 39 and 40 of the 1967
Act come within the  purview of  the  bail restricting clause as
specified in the aforesaid provision. The manner in which the
Court shall come to such a finding at the stage of considering
petition  for  bail  has  been  dealt  with  and  explained  in  two
judgments of two Coordinate Benches of this Court in the cases of
National Investigation Agency -vs-Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali
[(2019) 5 SCC 1] and Vernon -vs- The State of Maharashtra &
Anr. [2023 INSC 655]. (One of us, Aniruddha Bose J., was a party
to the latter judgement).
21.
In the case of Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali (supra), it has
been, inter-alia, held:-
"23. By virtue of the proviso to sub-section (5), it is the duty of
the Court to be satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for
19

believing that the accusation against the accused is prima
facie true or otherwise. Our attention was invited to the de-
cisions of this Court, which has had an occasion to deal with
similar special provisions in TADA and MCOCA. The principle
underlying those decisions may have some bearing while con-
sidering the prayer for bail in relation to the offences under
the 1967 Act as well. Notably, under the special enactments
such as  TADA, MCOCA and the Narcotic Drugs and Psycho-
tropic Substances Act, 1985, the Court is required to record its
opinion that there are reasonable grounds for believing that
the accused is “not guilty” of the alleged offence. There is a
degree of difference between the satisfaction to be recorded
by the Court that there are reasonable grounds for believing
that the accused is “not guilty” of such offence and the satis-
faction to be recorded for the purposes of the 1967 Act that
there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accusation
against such person is “prima facie” true. By its very nature,
the expression “prima facie true” would mean that the materi-
als/evidence collated by the investigating agency in reference
to the accusation against the accused concerned in the first
information report, must prevail until contradicted and over-
come or disproved by other evidence, and on the face of it,
shows the complicity of such accused in the commission of the
stated offence. It must be good and sufficient on its face to es-
tablish a given fact or the chain of facts constituting the stated
offence, unless rebutted or contradicted. In one sense, the de-
gree of satisfaction is lighter when the Court has to opine that
the accusation is “prima facie true”, as compared to the opin-
ion of the accused “not guilty” of such offence as required un-
der the other special enactments. In any case, the degree of
satisfaction to be recorded by the Court for opining that there
are  reasonable  grounds  for  believing  that  the  accusation
against the accused is prima facie true, is lighter than the de-
gree of satisfaction to be recorded for considering a discharge
application or framing of charges in relation to offences under
the 1967 Act. Nevertheless, we may take guidance from the
exposition  in Ranjitsing  Brahmajeetsing  Sharma v. State  of
Maharashtra, [(2005)  5 SCC 294 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 1057],
wherein a three-Judge Bench of this Court was called upon to
consider the scope of power of the Court to grant bail. In
paras 36 to 38, the Court observed thus : (SCC pp. 316-17)
“36. Does this statute require that before a person is
released on bail, the court, albeit prima facie, must
come to the conclusion that he is not guilty of such
offence? Is it necessary for the court to record such a
finding? Would there be any machinery available to
the court to ascertain that once the accused is en-
larged  on  bail,  he  would  not  commit  any  offence
whatsoever?
20

37. Such findings are required to be recorded only for
the purpose of arriving at an objective finding on the
basis of materials on record only for grant of bail and
for no other purpose.
38. We are furthermore of the opinion that the restric-
tions on the power of the court to grant bail should
not be pushed too far. If the court, having regard to
the materials brought on record, is satisfied that in
all probability he may not be ultimately convicted, an
order granting bail may be passed. The satisfaction
of the court as regards his likelihood of not commit-
ting an offence while on bail must be construed to
mean an offence under the Act and not any offence
whatsoever be it a minor or major offence. … What
would further be necessary on the part of the court is
to see the culpability of the accused and his involve-
ment in the commission of an organised crime either
directly or indirectly. The court at the time of consid-
ering the application for grant of bail shall consider
the question from the angle as to whether he was
possessed of the requisite mens rea.”
And again in paras 44 to 48, the Court observed : (SCC pp.
318-20)
“44. The wording of Section 21(4), in our opinion,
does not lead to the conclusion that the court must
arrive at a positive finding that the applicant for bail
has not committed an offence under the Act. If such a
construction is placed, the court intending to grant
bail must arrive at a finding that the applicant has
not committed such an offence. In such an event, it
will  be  impossible  for the  prosecution  to  obtain  a
judgment of conviction of the applicant. Such cannot
be  the  intention  of  the  legislature.  Section  21(4)
of MCOCA, therefore, must be construed reasonably. It
must be so construed that the court is able to main-
tain a delicate balance between a judgment of acquit-
tal and conviction and an order granting bail much
before commencement of trial. Similarly, the court will
be required to record a finding as to the possibility of
his committing a crime after grant of bail. However,
such an offence in futuro must be an offence under
the Act and not any other offence. Since it is difficult
to predict the future conduct of an accused, the court
must necessarily consider this aspect of the matter
having regard to the antecedents of the accused, his
propensities and the nature and manner in which he
is alleged to have committed the offence.
45. It is, furthermore, trite that for the purpose of con-
sidering an application for grant of bail, although de-
21

tailed reasons are not necessary to be assigned, the
order granting bail must demonstrate application of
mind at least in serious cases as to why the applic-
ant has been granted or denied the privilege of bail.
46. The duty of the court at this stage is not to weigh
the evidence meticulously but to arrive at a finding
on the basis of broad probabilities. However, while
dealing with a special statute like MCOCA having re-
gard to the provisions contained in sub-section (4) of
Section 21 of the Act, the court may have to probe
into the matter deeper so as to enable it to arrive at a
finding that the materials collected against the ac-
cused during the investigation may not justify a judg-
ment of conviction. The findings recorded by the court
while granting or refusing bail undoubtedly would be
tentative in nature, which may not have any bearing
on the merit of the case and the trial court would,
thus, be free to decide the case on the basis of evid-
ence adduced at the trial, without in any manner be-
ing prejudiced thereby.
47.  In Kalyan  Chandra  Sarkar v. Rajesh  Ranjan 
[(2004) 7 SCC 528 : 2004 SCC (Cri) 1977] this Court
observed : (SCC pp. 537-38, para 18)
‘18. We agree that a conclusive finding in regard
to the points urged by both the sides is not expec-
ted of the court considering a bail application.
Still one should not forget, as observed by this
Court  in Puran v. Rambilas [(2001)  6  SCC  338:
2001 SCC (Cri) 1124] : (SCC p. 344, para 8)
“8. …Giving reasons is different from dis-
cussing merits or demerits. At the stage of
granting  bail  a  detailed  examination  of
evidence and elaborate documentation of
the merits of the case has not to be under-
taken. … That did not mean that whilst
granting bail some reasons for prima facie
concluding why bail was  being granted
did not have to be indicated.”
We respectfully agree with the above dictum of
this Court. We also feel that such expression of
prima facie reasons for granting bail is a require-
ment of law in cases where such orders on bail
application are appealable, more so because of
the fact that the appellate court has every right to
know the basis for granting the bail. Therefore,
we are not in agreement with the argument ad-
dressed by the learned counsel for the accused
that the High Court was not expected even to in-
dicate a prima facie finding on all points urged
22

before it while granting bail, more so in the back-
ground of the facts of this case where on facts it
is established that a large number of witnesses
who were examined after the respondent was en-
larged on bail had turned hostile and there are
complaints made to the court as to the threats ad-
ministered by the respondent or his supporters to
witnesses in the case. In such circumstances, the
court was duty-bound to apply its mind to the al-
legations  put  forth by the  investigating agency
and ought to have given at least a prima facie
finding  in  regard  to  these  allegations  because
they go to the very root of the right of the accused
to seek bail. The non-consideration of these vital
facts as to the allegations of threat or inducement
made to the witnesses by the respondent during
the period he was on bail has vitiated the conclu-
sions arrived at by the High Court while granting
bail to the respondent. The other ground apart
from the ground of incarceration which appealed
to the High Court to grant bail was the fact that a
large number of witnesses are yet to be examined
and there is no likelihood of the trial coming to an
end in the near future. As stated hereinabove,
this ground on the facts of this case is also not
sufficient either individually or coupled with the
period of incarceration to release the respondent
on bail because of the serious allegations of tam-
pering with the witnesses made against the re-
spondent.’
48.
In
 
Jayendra
 
Saraswathi
Swamigal v. State of T.N. (2005) 2 SCC 13 : 2005
SCC (Cri) 481] this Court observed [(SCC pp. 21-
22, para 16)]
‘16.  …  The  considerations  which  normally
weigh with the court in granting bail in non-
bailable offences have been explained by this
Court  in State v. Jagjit  Singh [(1962)  3  SCR
622 : AIR 1962 SC 253 : (1962) 1 Cri LJ 215]
and Gurcharan  Singh v. State  (UT  of  Delhi)
[(1978) 1 SCC 118 : 1978 SCC (Cri) 41] and
basically they are — the nature and serious-
ness of the offence; the character of the evid-
ence; circumstances which are peculiar to the
accused; a reasonable possibility of the pres-
ence of the accused not being secured at the
trial; reasonable  apprehension of  witnesses
being tampered with; the larger interest of the
public or the State and other similar factors
23

which may be relevant in the facts and cir-
cumstances of the case.’”
22.
In the case of Vernon (supra), it was observed:-
“36. In the case of Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali (supra), it has
been held that the expression “prima facie true” would mean
that  the  materials/evidence  collated  by  the  investigating
agency in reference to the accusation against the accused
concerned in the chargesheet must prevail, unless overcome
or disproved by other evidence, and on the face of it, materi-
als must show complicity of such accused in the commission
of the stated offences. What this ratio contemplates is that on
the face of it, the accusation against the accused ought to pre-
vail. In our opinion, however, it would not satisfy the prima
facie “test” unless there is at least surface-analysis of probat-
ive value of the evidence, at the stage of examining the ques-
tion of granting bail and the quality or probative value satis-
fies the Court of its worth………”
23.
We must point out here that Mr. Nataraj has taken a fair
stand in this case and in response to our query on necessity of
detention of the appellant at this stage, for further investigation,
he  has  submitted  that  the  prosecution  at  present  would  not
require  custody  of  the  appellant  for  such  purpose.  He  has
simultaneously  emphasised  on  gravity  and  seriousness  of  the
offences  alleged  against  the  appellant  and  submitted  that  the
question of entitlement of the appellant to be enlarged on bail
would have to be examined in the light of the bail restricting
clause of Section 43D (5) of the 1967 Act and on that basis, he
has contested the appeal. We shall first examine the applicability
of the offences contained in Chapters IV and VI in relation to the
24

materials which have been disclosed before us and then go on to
apply  the  normal  principle  of  granting  bail,  only  on  our
satisfaction that the materials disclosed before us do not establish
reasonable grounds for believing that the accusations against the
appellant under the bail restricting provisions of the 1967 Act are
prima  facie  true.  The  substance  of  allegations  against  the
appellant  are,  inter-alia,  contained  in  paragraphs  17.4,  17.5,
17.8,  17.10.1,  17.11,  17.12,  17.15,  17.16  and  17.18  of  the
chargesheet dated 15.11.2018 and  paragraphs  17.4,  17.5 and
17.16 of the first supplementary chargesheet dated 21.02.2019.
The allegations against the appellant are, inter-alia, contained in
paragraphs  17.24,  17.25,  17.29,  17.32,  17.39,  17.45,  17.55,
17.56,  17.73,  17.74,  17.75  and  17.78  of  the  second
supplementary chargesheet dated 09.10.2020. 
24. It  is  admitted  position  that  appellant  was  present  at
Shanivarwada within the district of Pune on 31.12.2017 when
the Elgar Parishad event took place. But there is no allegation at
this stage that apart from being present, she had any further
active participation on that date in the programme. For instance,
there  is  no  allegation  that  she  had  delivered  any  provocative
speech. She was also not named in the initial FIR which was
25

registered at Vishrambaug Police Station, Pune on 08.01.2018.
The prosecution’s case is that the appellant is an active member
of  CPI  (Maoist)  and  conspired  with  other  accused  persons  to
violently  overthrow  democracy  and  the  State.  There  are  also
allegations that she provided party funds and also received party
funds from another accused Mahesh Raut, she was paid a sum of
Rs.  five  lakhs  by  two  other  co-accused  persons  and  made
constant attempts to further terrorist activities of the banned CPI
(Maoist).  It  is  also  the  prosecution’s  case  that  she  has  been
encouraging youngsters and recruited them as members in the
banned organization and participated in a broad conspiracy to
organize Elgar Parishad programme. It is further alleged that the
appellant is  associated  with the Indian Association of Peoples
Lawyer  (“IAPL”),  Committee  for  the  Protection  of  Democratic
Rights  (“CPDR”)  Anuradha  Ghandy  Memorial  Committee
(“AGMC”)  and  Kabir  Kala  Manch  (“KKM”)  which  have  been
described  as  frontal  organization  of  the  CPI  (Maoist)  on  the
ground that they are instrumental in organizing meetings and
exchange of messages for implementation of aims and policies of
the said banned organization. Her involvement in the controversy
hatched by two other accused and underground members has
26

also been highlighted. As we have already indicated, there was a
search  in  her  residential  premises  on  06.06.2018.  It  is  the
prosecution’s case that materials recovered from her, as also other
accused persons, revealed her participation in the meetings and
conferences  of  Revolutionary  Democratic  Front  (“RDF”),  which
again has been alleged to be a frontal organization to spread the
propaganda  of  the  banned  CPI  (Maoist).  The  presence  of  the
appellant  in  the  National  Conference  of  RDF  conducted  in
Hyderabad  is  sought  to  be  demonstrated  through  the  first
supplementary chargesheet.
25.
In  the  second  supplementary  chargesheet,  allegations
against  her  are  contained  in  the  paragraphs  which  we  have
already referred to. Here also, the video of the RDF Conference
held on 22-23.04.2012 has been highlighted. It is also indicated
that she took active part in the Elgar Parishad function. In this
chargesheet, her conduct and coordination with other accused
persons  has  been  sought  to  be  demonstrated,  which  include
Anand Teltumbadde, Gautam Navlakha, Hany Babu, Jyoti Jagtap
and Stan Swamy (since deceased). It is also pointed out that she
was in close connection with the other members of CPI (Maoist)
through e-mail and  mobile  phones.  But we  do not find  these
27

allegations  to  reveal  involvement  of  the  appellant  in  any
outrageously  offensive  act  or  activities  having  characters
altogether  different  from  those  contained  in  the  two  earlier
chargesheets.  In  this  chargesheet,  only  her  interaction  and
connection with other accused persons has been revealed and
forms part of the same chain of accusations.
26.
In  its  counter-affidavit,  the  NIA,  being  the  contesting
respondent before us, has primarily taken the stand confined to
its preliminary objections on maintainability of this appeal, which
we have already noted. But in course of hearing before us, we
were  addressed  on  merit  of  the  appeal  on  the  question  of
entitlement of the appellant to be released on bail, having regard
to the proviso of Section 43D(5) of 1967 Act. The materials which
form  part  of  the  three  chargesheets,  were  brought  on  record
before us by the appellant through two additional affidavits. Apart
from these of these of the appellant, detailed written submission
has  been  filed  by  Mr.  Nataraj,  which  contains  a  series  of
documents found to be incriminating by the prosecution along
with witness statements implicating the appellant.
28

27. So far as the appellant is concerned, the prosecution has
emphasised on the following list of materials forming part of this
appeal:- 
(i)
A  Letter  dated  08.06.2017  from  one  “Comrade  M”
addressed to “Comrade Surendra”, which carries reference to the
appellant to the limited extent that the party leadership has sent
instructions to “Comrade Shomasen” for strengthening CPDR and
Radical  Student’s  Union  in  Nagpur,  Chandrapur  and  Gondia
region. This letter also records that necessary funds have been
sent, but no specific person is named as the recipient of such
funds. 
(ii) 
Letter  dated  23.12.2017  from  one  “R”  addressed  to
“Comrade Prakash” which relates to constituting a fact-finding
team to gauge the truth about fake encounters in Gadchiroli and
it has been indicated that letter that “Shoma” will speak to the
friends, presumably of the author and addressee of the letter, in
Nagpur who might join the team. 
(iii) 
Next is a letter dated 02.01.2018 from one “Com. M” to
“Comrade Rona” and the offending part of this letter, so far as the
appellant is concerned, is to the effect that “Com. Shoma” and
“Com. Surendra” were authorised to provide funds for the future.
29

(iv) 
Next  document  bears  the  character  of  a  minutes  of  a
meeting  dated  02.01.2008,  which  marks  the  presence  of
“Shomasen”  as  a  “leading  CPDR  member”,  along  with  certain
other accused individuals.  
(v) Thereafter, an undated account statement is relied on by the
prosecution,  which  mentions  “Shoma”  as  recipient  of  “1L”
(presumably Rs. one lakh) from “Surendra” who is the accused
no. 3 in the present case.
(vi) The  prosecution  has  relied  on  another  letter  dated
25.09.2017, written by “Com. Prakash” addressed to “Comrade
Surendra” where  the author  asks the  addressee to  coordinate
with “shomasen” and ensure that all pgp files are securely wiped
out from all the computers. 
(vii) Then there is another letter dated 05.11.2017 purported to
have  been  written  by  “Comrade  Surendra”  and  addressed  to
“Comrade Prakash” wherein the author informs the addressee
that the information from the party has been communicated to
“Soma” and she has destroyed all the data on her computer in
addition to all the APT files sent by the party, old and new letters
and the party’s resolutions etc. 
30

(viii) The last set of documents includes the panchnama of the
search conducted at the house of the appellant, along with the
Forensic  Science  Laboratory  (‘FSL”)  Report  containing  the
analysis  of  the  materials  seized  from  the  appellant.  These
documents  have  been  cited  by  Mr.  Nataraj  to  corroborate  the
allegations of destruction of evidence at the instance of the co-
accused persons. The FSL report reveals that deleted audio and
video files were retrieved from hard disk and also mentions that
uninstalled softwares have been recovered, but no substantive
content  of  the  deleted  materials  has  been  placed  in  the
chargesheets. The material placed before us only indicates that
the process of deletion had taken place. 
It appears that all the letters and other materials mentioned in
the above list have been purported to have been recovered from
the electronic devices of co-accused Rona Wilson.
28.
The next set of evidences to which our attention has been
drawn by Mr. Nataraj are four witness statements, two of whom
were originally given the status of protected witnesses. We have
referred  to  their  present  status  earlier  in  this  judgment.  The
accusations  made  by  the  four  witnesses  in  their  respective
statements placed before us are as follows:- 
31

(i) 
The  first  protected  witness  (KW1)  statement  carries
reference to Shoma Sen as having addressed the delegates of the
conference of RDF held in April 2012. The relevant part of the
said recorded statement reads:-
“………Shoma Sen said that we have to understand the es-
sence of the Maoist slogan 'women hold up half the sky'. To
solve the problems women in our country, as well as in other
countries, the struggle for New Democratic Revolution is the
only way forward. Simply she was advocating women to join
CPI Maoist to solve their issues……....”
(ii) 
The statement of KW-2 recorded by the NIA under Section
161 of the 1973 Code on 10.08.2020 reveals alleged presence of
the appellant in the office of a co-accused person i.e. Surendra
Gadling, when KW-2 purported to have joined the CPI (Maoist) at
the instance of Surendra. 
(iii)
A redacted statement of KW-3, who is a protected witness,
has been produced by the NIA in its written submissions.  This
witness,  on  being  asked  about  senior  Naxal  members  of  CPI
(Maoist), stated that he first met the appellant in 2007-08, during
the classes of communist ideology, revolutionary movement, party
working  etc.  in  Nagpur,  which  were  attended  by  some  other
individuals. The same witness goes on implicate the appellant in
certain  message  channels  working  to  exchange  messages
32

regarding urban work of CPI (Maoist). In this regard, he has stated
that:-  
“……..During year 2017, there were 3-4 message channels
were working to exchange message between Deepak and
Angela regarding urban work of CPI (Maoist) viz (i) Deepak
-Nandu  (Myself)-  Kalyan  Hirekhan-Gadling-Angela;  for
legal  work  (ii)  Deepak-Nandu  (Myself)-Kalyan  Hirekhan-
Angela Sontakke at Shoma Sen's house for meeting with
Deepak in Nagpur (iii) Deepak-Nandu (Myself)- Arif Shaikh
(WCL worker and Journalist)-Vipalav Teltumbde (Nephew
of Deepak Teltumbde)-Angela; this was the second option
for meeting of Deepak & Angela (iv) Deepak-Nandu (My-
self)-Arif Shaikh-NT Maske- Angela Sontakke; alternative
meeting channel……...”
This statement, however, does not prima facie show any direct
involvement of the appellant in the offending acts with which she
has been charged vis-à-vis the bail restricting provisions of the
1967 Act.
(iv) From the three statements of Kumarasai who was originally
identified as “KW-4”, there are only two purported incriminating
references to the appellant, in the second and the third ones,
recorded  on  23.12.2018  and  24.08.2020  respectively.  In  the
former  statement,  which was  recorded by  the  State  Police, he
stated  that  appellant  was  working  along  with  an  intellectual
group for solving problems of women and students. In the latter
statement, recorded by the NIA, he stated that the appellant was
an urban Naxalite working with CPI (Maoist). The name of the
33

appellant, however, does not figure in his first statement recorded
by the State Police on 02.11.2018.
29.
In the light of these materials we shall have to examine the
strength of prosecution’s case to implicate the appellant in the
offences specified under Sections 16, 17, 18, 18B, 20, 38, 39 and
40  of  the  1967  Act.  There  is  also  allegation  against  her  for
commission of offence under Section 13 of the same statute, but
that  offence  does  not  come  under  the  purview  of  the  bail
restricting provision of Section 43D (5) of the 1967 Act and we
shall deal with that accusation in the succeeding paragraphs of
this judgment. The offences under Chapter IV of the 1967 Act
with  which  the  appellant  has  been  charged  with  by  the
prosecuting agency, mainly stem from commission of a terrorist
act or any act in connection therewith. Section 15 of the 1967 Act
stipulates: - 
“15. Terrorist act.— (1) Whoever does any act with intent to
threaten or likely to threaten the unity, integrity, security, eco-
nomic security, or sovereignty of India or with intent to strike
terror or likely to strike terror in the people or any section of
the people in India or in any foreign country,—
(a)  by  using  bombs,  dynamite  or  other  explosive  sub-
stances  or inflammable substances or firearms  or other
lethal  weapons  or poisonous  or noxious  gases  or other
chemicals or by any other substances (whether biological
radioactive, nuclear or otherwise) of a hazardous nature or
by any other means of whatever nature to cause or likely
to cause—
(i) death of, or injuries to, any person or persons; or
34

(ii) loss of, or damage to, or destruction of, property; or
(iii) disruption of any supplies or services essential to the
life of the community in India or in any foreign country;
or
 (iii-a) damage to, the monetary stability of India by way
of production or smuggling or circulation of high quality
counterfeit Indian paper currency, coin or of any other
material; or
(iv) damage or destruction of any property in India or in
a foreign country used or intended to be used for the de-
fence of India or in connection with any other purposes
of the Government of India, any State Government or
any of their agencies; or
(b) overawes by means of criminal force or the show of
criminal force or attempts to do so or causes death of any
public functionary or attempts to cause death of any public
functionary; or
(c) detains, kidnaps or abducts any person and threatens
to kill or injure such person or does any other act in order
to compel the Government of India, any State Government
or the Government of a foreign country or an international
or inter-governmental organisation or any other person to
do or abstain from doing any act; or commits a terrorist act.
 Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section,—
(a) “public functionary” means the constitutional authorit-
ies or any other functionary notified in the Official Gazette
by the Central Government as public functionary;
(b) “high quality counterfeit Indian currency” means the
counterfeit currency as may be declared after examination
by an authorised or notified forensic authority that such
currency imitates or compromises with the key security fea-
tures as specified in the Third Schedule.
 (2) The terrorist act includes an act which constitutes an of-
fence within the scope of, and as defined in any of the treat-
ies specified in the Second Schedule.”
30.
We  are  not  concerned  with  sub-section  (2)  of  the  said
provision. In this appeal, there is no allegation of any act of the
appellant constituting an offence within the scope of the Second
Schedule to the same statute. Sub-section (1) of Section 15 refers
35

to certain acts which would constitute a terrorist act but the first
part of sub-section (1) of Section 15 cannot be read in isolation.
In our reading of the said provision of the statute, to qualify for
being  a  terrorist  act,  such  act  must  be  done  with  intent  to
threaten  or  likely  to  threaten  the  unity,  integrity,  security,
economic security or sovereignty of India or such act must be
accompanied with an intent to strike terror or likely to strike
terror in the people or any section of the people in India or in any
foreign country.  These are initial requirements to invoke Section
15(1) of the 1967 Act.  The legislature, however, has not left the
nature of such acts unspecified and in sub-clauses (a), (b), and (c)
of  the  said  sub-section,  the  law  stipulates  the  manner  of
commission of the acts specified in first part of sub-section (1) of
said Section 15. If any offender attempts to commit any of the
acts specified in Section 15(1), to come within the ambit of the
expression “terrorist act” under the 1967 legislation, action or
intention to cause such act must be by those means, which have
been specified in sub-clauses (a), (b), and (c) of the said provision.
This is the line of reasoning broadly followed by this Court in the
case of Vernon (supra) in construing the applicability of the said
provision. If we examine the acts attributed to the appellant by
36

the various witnesses or as inferred from the evidence relied on
by the prosecution, we do not find prima facie commission or
attempt to commit any terrorist act by the appellant applying the
aforesaid test for invoking Section 15 read with Section 162 of the
1967 Act. 
31.
On  the  allegations  of  raising  funds  for  a  terrorist  act
forming part of charges under Section 17 of the 19673 Act, most
of the materials have emanated from recovery of documents from
devices of third parties and at this stage, on the strength of the
materials produced before us, the prosecution has not been able
to  corroborate  or  even  raise  a  hint  of  corroboration  of  the
allegation that the appellant has funded any terrorist act or has
received any money for that purpose. What we can infer on the
2 16. Punishment for terrorist act
 
 .—
(1) Whoever commits a terrorist act shall,—
(a) if such act has resulted in the death of any person, be punishable with death or imprisonment for life, and
shall also be liable to fine;
(b) in any other case, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
3 17. Punishment for raising funds for terrorist act.—Whoever, in India or in a foreign country, directly or indirectly,
raises or provides funds or collects funds, whether from a legitimate or illegitimate source, from any person or persons or
attempts to provide to, or raises or collects funds for any person or persons, knowing that such funds are likely to be used,
in full or in part by such person or persons or by a terrorist organisation or by a terrorist gang or by an individual terrorist
to commit a terrorist act, notwithstanding whether such funds were actually used or not for commission of such act, shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,—
(a) participating, organising or directing in any of the acts stated therein shall constitute an offence;
(b) raising funds shall include raising or collecting or providing funds through production or smuggling or circula-
tion of high quality counterfeit Indian currency; and
(c) raising or collecting or providing funds, in any manner for the benefit of, or, to an individual terrorist, terrorist
gang or terrorist organisation for the purpose not specifically covered under Section 15 shall also be construed as an
offence.
37

basis of the materials produced before us, are mere third-party
allegations that money has been directed to be sent to her.  None
of the materials reveal receipt of any funds by her or her direct
role in raising or collecting funds. We are conscious of the fact
that in course of trial, the prosecution will have the opportunity
to bring more detailed evidence in that regard, but here we are
only examining whether the offences under Part IV & VI of the
1967 Act, alleged to have been committed by the appellant, are
prima facie true or not. 
32.
As  regards  the  allegation  against  the  appellant  for
committing an offence  under Section 184 of the  1967 Act are
concerned, which includes conspiracy or attempt on her part to
commit, advocate, abet, advice, incite or facilitate commission or
any terrorist act, the materials collected so far, even if we believe
them to be true at this stage, applying the principles enunciated
by this Court in the case of Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali (supra),
only reveal her participation in some meetings and her attempt to
encourage  women  to  join  the  struggle  for  new  democratic
revolution.  These  allegations,  prima  facie,  do  not  reveal  the
commission of an offence under Section 18 of the 1967 Act. 
4 18. Punishment for conspiracy, etc.—Whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or advocates, abets, advises or incites,
directs or knowingly facilitates the commission of, a terrorist act or any act preparatory to the commission of a terrorist
act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to im -
prisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
38

33. KW-2 has found her to be present in the office of another co-
accused Surendra, when he was being convinced by Surendra to
join CPI (Maoist), but her mere presence on the spot, by itself,
would  not  constitute  an  offence  of  recruiting  any  person  or
persons for a terrorist act, as specified in Section 18 thereof. As
regards  the  statement  of  KW-3,  he  claims  to  have  met  the
appellant in 2007-08 during her lectures on communist ideology
and party-functioning of CPI (Maoist) at Nagpur. At that point of
time, CPI (Maoist) had not been included in the First Schedule of
the 1967 Act enumerating terrorist organisations. It came to be
banned on 22.06.2009, as we have already specified. Kumarasai,
i.e. KW-4 in his third statement recorded on 24.08.2020 has only
stated she is an urban Naxal working for CPI (Maoist). On this
thin thread, we cannot apply the rigors of Section 43D (5) of the
1967 Act against her. Apart from that, there is no evidence that
she was a member of CPI (Maoist). There are no specific materials
or statements produced by the prosecution which attribute acts of
recruitment in banned organization by the appellant. Thus, at
this stage, we cannot form an opinion that the accusation against
her under Section 18-B5 of the 1967 Act is prima facie true. 
5 18-B. Punishment for recruiting of any person or persons for terrorist act.—Whoever recruits or causes to be
recruited any person or persons for commission of a terrorist act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
39

34. So far as the allegation of prosecution of the appellant being
member of frontal organisation of CPI (Maoist), reference has been
made to RDF, IAPL, CPDR, AGMC and KKM. But apart from mere
allegations that these are frontal organizations of CPI (Maoist), no
credible evidence has been produced before us through which
these organisations can be connected to the aforesaid banned
terrorist organization. Thus, the offence under Section 20 of the
1967 Act relating to membership of a terrorist organisation which
is involved in a terrorist act, cannot be made out against the
appellant at this stage, on the basis of materials produced before
us. Relying on the judgement of this Court in the case of Vernon
(supra), we have already dealt with the position of the appellant
vis-à-vis terrorist acts in the earlier paragraphs of this judgement
and we prima facie do not think that Section 206 of the 1967 Act
can be made applicable against the appellant at this stage of the
proceeding based on the available materials.
35. The  next set of  allegations  against  her  to bring  her  case
within the bail restricting provisions relates to offences specified
under Chapter VI of 1967 Act. This set of allegations relates to
being associated with a terrorist organization. We have already
6 20. Punishment for being member of terrorist gang or organisation.—Any person who is a member of a terrorist
gang or a terrorist organisation, which is involved in terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
40

given  our  finding  on  such  allegations  and  in  our  prima  facie
opinion, the allegations of the prosecution that the appellant is a
member of a terrorist organisation or that she associates herself
or professes to associate herself with a terrorist organization are
not  true,  and  at  this  stage,  she  cannot  be  implicated  in  the
offence under Sections 387 of 1967 Act. Mere meeting of accused
individuals or being connected with them through any medium
cannot implicate one in Chapter VI offences under of the 1967
Act, in the absence of any further evidence of being associated
with  a  terrorist  organisation.  Such  association  or  connection
must be in relation to furtherance of terrorist act. It has been held
by this Court in the case of Vernon (supra):- 
“32. “Terrorist act” as defined under Section 2(k) of the
1967 Act carries the meaning assigned to it in Section 15.
This Section also stipulates that the expressions “terror-
ism” and “terrorist” shall be construed accordingly. This
implies construction of these two expressions in the same
way as has been done in Section 15.
“terrorist organisation” has been independently defined in
Section 2(m) to mean an organisation listed in the First
Schedule  or  an  organisation  operating  under  the  same
name as an organisation so listed. But so far as the word
7 38. Offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation.—
(1) A person, who associates himself, or professes to be associated, with a terrorist organisation with intention to
further its activities, commits an offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply where the person charged is able to prove—
(a) that the organisation was not declared as a terrorist organisation at the time when he became a member or
began to profess to be a member; and
(b) that he has not taken part in the activities of the organisation at any time during its inclusion in the First
Schedule as a terrorist organisation.
(2) A person, who commits the offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation under sub-section (1),
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, or with fine, or with both.
41

“terrorist” is concerned, in this Section also, the interpreta-
tion thereof would be relatable to the same expression as
used in Section 15. It is one of the basic rules of statutory
construction that an expression used in different parts of a
statute shall ordinarily convey the same meaning – unless
contrary intention appears from different parts of the same
enactment itself. We do not find any such contrary inten-
tion in the 1967 Act.
33. Section 38 of the 1967 Act carries the heading or title
“offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation”.
As we have already observed, a terrorist act would have to
be construed having regard to the meaning assigned to it
in Section 15 thereof. We have given our interpretation to
this provision earlier. “terrorist organisation” [as employed
in Section 2(m)], in our opinion is not a mere nomenclature
and this expression would mean an organisation that car-
ries on or indulges in terrorist acts, as defined in said Sec-
tion 15. The term terrorism, in view of the provisions of
Section 2(k) of the said Act, ought to be interpreted in tan-
dem with what is meant by ‘terrorist Act’ in Section 15
thereof.
34. In this context, to bring the appellants within the fold of
Section 38 of the 1967 Act, the prosecution ought to have
prima facie establish their association with intention to fur-
ther the said organisation’s terrorist activities. It is only
when such intention to further the terrorist activities is es-
tablished prima facie, appellants could be brought within
the fold of the offence relating to membership of a terrorist
organisation. To bring within the scope of Section 38 of the
1967 Act, it would not be sufficient to demonstrate that one
is an associate or someone who professes to be associated
with a terrorist organisation. But there must be intention to
further the activities of such organisation on the part of the
person implicated under such provision. But the same line
of reasoning in respect of membership of a terrorist organ-
isation under Section 20, ought to apply in respect of an al-
leged offender implicated in Section 38 of the 1967 Act.
There must be evidence of there being intention to be in-
volved in a terrorist act. So far as the appellants are con-
cerned, at this stage there is no such evidence before us on
which we can rely.”
We, further,  do not think the  undated account statement has
sufficient probative value at this stage to prima facie sustain a
case against her and implicate her for offences relating to the
42

provision  of  support  or  raising  of  funds  for  a  terrorist
organisation, specified under Section 398 and 409 of 1967 Act.
Evidence of her involvement in any fund-raising activities for the
CPI  (Maoist)  or  her  support  to  the  said  organisation  has  not
transpired through any reliable evidence before us at this stage.
36.
In the light of our observations made in this judgment and
on our perusal of the evidences collected against her as also the
allegations made by prosecution witnesses, we are of the opinion
8 39. Offence relating to support given to a terrorist organisation. —
(1) A person commits the offence relating to support given for a terrorist organisation,—
(a) who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist organisation,—
(i) invites support for the terrorist organisation, and
(ii) the support is not or is not restricted to provide money or other property within the meaning of Sec-
tion 40; or
(b) who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist organisation, arranges, manages or assists in arran-
ging or managing a meeting which, he knows, is—
(i) to support the terrorist organisation, or
(ii) to further the activity of the terrorist organisation, or
(iii) to be addressed by a person who associates or professes to be associated with the terrorist organisa-
tion; or
(c) who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist organisation, addresses a meeting for the purpose of
encouraging support for the terrorist organisation or to further its activity.
(2) A person, who commits the offence relating to support given to a terrorist organisation under sub-section (1)
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, or with fine, or with both.
9 40. Offence of raising fund for a terrorist organisation.—
(1) A person commits the offence of raising fund for a terrorist organisation, who, with intention to further the
activity of a terrorist organisation,—
(a) invites another person to provide money or other property, and intends that it should be used, or has reason-
able cause to suspect that it might be used, for the purposes of terrorism; or
(b) receives money or other property, and intends that it should be used, or has reasonable cause to suspect that
it might be used, for the purposes of terrorism; or
(c) provides money or other property, and knows, or has reasonable cause to suspect, that it would or might be
used for the purposes of terrorism.
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, a reference to provide money or other property includes—
(a) of its being given, lent or otherwise made available, whether or not for consideration; or
(b) raising, collecting or providing funds through production or smuggling or circulation of high quality counter-
feit Indian currency. 
(2) A person, who commits the offence of raising fund for a terrorist organisation under sub-section (1), shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years, or with fine, or with both.
43

that  there  is  no  reasonable  ground  for  believing  that  the
accusations against the appellants for commission of the offences
incorporated in Chapter IV and VI of the 1967 Act are prima facie
true. 
37. In the case of K.A. Najeeb -vs- Union of India [(2021) 3 SCC
713], a three Judge Bench of  this Court (of which one of us
Aniruddha Bose, J was a party), has held that a Constitutional
Court is not strictly bound by the prohibitory provisions of grant
of  bail  in  the  1967  Act  and  can  exercise  its  constitutional
jurisdiction  to  release  an  accused  on  bail   who  has  been
incarcerated for a long period of time, relying on Article 21 of
Constitution  of  India.  This  decision  was  sought  to  be
distinguished by Mr. Nataraj on facts relying on judgment of this
Court in the case of Gurwinder Singh -vs- State of Punjab [2024
INSC 92]. In this judgment, it has been held:- 
“32. The Appellant’s counsel has relied upon the case of
KA Najeeb (supra) to back its contention that the appellant
has been in jail for last five years which is contrary to law
laid down in the said case. While this argument may ap-
pear compelling at first glance, it lacks depth and 22 sub-
stance. In KA Najeeb’s case this court was confronted with
a  circumstance  wherein  except  the  respondent-accused,
other co-accused had already undergone trial and were
sentenced to imprisonment of not exceeding eight years
therefore this court’s decision to consider bail was groun-
ded in the anticipation of the impending sentence that the
respondent accused might face upon conviction and since
the respondent-accused had already served portion of the
44

maximum  imprisonment  i.e.,  more  than  five  years,  this
court took it as a factor influencing its assessment to grant
bail. Further, in KA Najeeb’s case the trial of the respond-
ent-accused was severed from the other co-accused owing
to his absconding and he was traced back in 2015 and
was being separately tried thereafter and the NIA had filed
a long list of witnesses that were left to be examined with
reference to the said accused therefore this court was of the
view of unlikelihood of completion of trial in near future.
However, in the present case the trial is already under way
and 22 witnesses including the protected witnesses have
been examined. As already discussed, the material avail-
able on record indicates the involvement of the appellant in
furtherance  of terrorist activities backed  by members of
banned terrorist organization involving exchange of large
quantum of money through different channels which needs
to be deciphered and therefore in such a scenario if the ap-
pellant is released on bail there is every likelihood that he
will influence the key witnesses of the case which might
hamper the process of justice. 23 Therefore, mere delay in
trial pertaining to grave offences as one involved in the in-
stant  case  cannot  be  used  as  a  ground  to  grant  bail.
Hence, the aforesaid argument on the behalf the appellant
cannot be accepted.”
38.
Relying on this judgement, Mr. Nataraj, submits that bail is
not a fundamental right. Secondly, to be entitled to be enlarged
on  bail,  an  accused  charged  with  offences  enumerated  in
Chapters IV and VI of the 1967 Act, must fulfil the conditions
specified in Section 43D (5) thereof. We do not accept the first
part of this submission. This Court has already accepted right of
an accused under the said offences of the 1967 Act to be enlarged
on bail founding such right on Article 21 of the Constitution of
India.  This  was  in  the  case  of  Najeeb (supra),  and  in  that
judgment, long period of incarceration was held to be a valid
45

ground  to  enlarge  an  accused  on  bail  in  spite  of  the  bail-
restricting  provision  of  Section  43D  (5)  of  the  1967  Act.  Pre-
conviction  detention  is  necessary  to  collect  evidence  (at  the
investigation stage), to maintain purity in the course of trial and
also to prevent an accused from being fugitive from justice. Such
detention  is  also  necessary  to  prevent  further  commission  of
offence  by  the  same  accused.  Depending  on  gravity  and
seriousness of the offence alleged to have been committed by an
accused, detention before conclusion of trial at the investigation
and post-chargesheet stage has the sanction of law broadly on
these reasonings. But any form of deprival of liberty results in
breach of Article 21 of the Constitution of India and must be
justified on the ground of being reasonable, following a just and
fair procedure and such deprival must be proportionate in the
facts of a given case. These would be the overarching principles
which  the  law  Courts  would  have  to  apply  while  testing
prosecution’s plea of pre-trial detention, both at investigation and
post-chargesheet stage.
39.
As regards second part of Mr. Nataraj’s argument which we
have  noted  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  we  accept  it  with  a
qualification. The reasoning in  Najeeb’s (supra) case would also
46

have to be examined, if it is the Constitutional Court which is
examining prosecution’s plea for retaining in custody an accused
charged  with  bail-restricting  offences.  He  cited  the  case  of
Gurwinder Singh (supra) in which the judgement of K. A. Najeeb
(supra) was distinguished on facts and a judgment of the High
Court rejecting the prayer for bail of the appellant was upheld.
But this was a judgment in the given facts of that case and did
not  dislocate  the  axis  of  reasoning  on  constitutional  ground
enunciated  in  the  case  of  Najeeb (supra).  On  behalf  of  the
prosecution,  another  order  of  a  Coordinate  Bench  passed  on
18.01.2024, in the case of Mazhar Khan -vs- N.I.A. New Delhi
[Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 14091 of 2023] was cited. In this
order, the petitioner’s prayer for overturning a bail-rejection order
of the High Court under similar provisions of the 1967 Act was
rejected by the Coordinate Bench applying the ratio of the case of
Watali (supra) judgment and also considering the case of Vernon
(supra).  We  have  proceeded  in  this  judgment  accepting  the
restrictive provisions to be valid and applicable and then dealt
with the individual allegations in terms of the proviso to Section
43D (5) of the 1967 Act. Thus, the prosecution’s case, so far as
47

the appellant is concerned, does not gain any premium from the
reasoning forming the basis of the case of Mazhar Khan (supra). 
40.
Two authorities have been cited by the appellant in which
gross delay in trial was held to be a ground for granting bail in
statutes in which there was restriction on such grant. These are
the judgements of this court in the cases of  Shaheen Welfare
Association -vs- Union of India and Others [(1996) 2 SCC 616]
and Angela Harish Sontakke -vs- State of Maharashtra [(2021)
3 SCC 723]. But each of these cases has been decided on their
own facts and so far as the appellant’s case is concerned, we have
examined the materials disclosed before us and given our finding
as regards applicability of Section 43D (5) of the 1967 Act in her
case.
41.
Once we find that Section 43D (5) of the 1967 Act would
not be applicable in the case of the appellant, we shall have to
examine  the  case  of  the  appellant  in  relation  to  accusation
against her under Section 13 of the 1967 Act and also other
offences under the provisions of the 1860 Code, which we have
narrated earlier. We have already indicated that she is a lady of
advanced age, suffering from various ailments. The ailments by
themselves  may  not  be  serious  enough  for  granting  bail  on
48

medical ground. But taking cognizance of the composite effect of
delay in framing charge, period of detention undergone by her, the
nature of allegations against her vis-à-vis the materials available
before this Court at this stage in addition to her age and medical
condition, we do not think she ought to be denied the privilege of
being enlarged on bail pending further process subsequent to
issue of chargesheets against her in the subject-case.  
42. We repeat here that our observations as regards the nature of
allegations against her are only prima facie views and the future
course of her prosecution would be dependent upon framing of
charge  and  if  charges  are  framed,  the  nature  of  evidence  the
prosecution  can  adduce  against  her  in  trial  as  also  her  own
defence.  With  these  observations,  we  set  aside  the  impugned
judgment and direct that the appellant be released on bail on
such conditions the Special Court may consider fit and proper
but the conditions shall include the following:-
(a)
The  appellant  shall  not  leave  the  State  of  Maharashtra
without leave of the Special Court.
(b)
The appellant shall surrender her passport, if she possesses
one, with the Special Court, during the period she remains
enlarged on bail. 
49

(c)
The appellant shall inform the Investigating Officer of the NIA
the address where she shall reside during the period she re-
mains enlarged on bail.
(d)
The appellant shall use only one mobile number, during the
time she remains on bail, and shall inform her mobile num-
ber to the Investigating Officer of the NIA. 
(e)
The appellant shall also ensure that her mobile phone re-
mains active and charged round the clock so that she re-
mains constantly accessible throughout the period she re-
mains enlarged on bail. 
(f)
During this period, i.e. the period during which she remains
on bail, the appellant shall keep the location status (GPS) of
her  mobile phone active, twenty-four hours a day, and her
phone shall be paired with that of the Investigating Officer of
the  NIA to enable him,  at any  given time,  to identify the
appellants’ exact location. 
(g)
The appellant, while on bail, shall report to the Station House
Officer of the  Police  Station within whose  jurisdiction she
shall  reside, once every fortnight. 
43.
In the event there is breach of any of these conditions or
any other condition that may be imposed by the Special Court
50

independently,  it  would  be  open  to  the  prosecution  to  seek
cancellation of bail granted to the appellant before the Special
Court only, without any further reference to this Court.
44.
The appeal stands allowed in the above terms and Criminal
Miscellaneous  Petition  No.166531  of  2023  shall  also  stand
disposed of.
45. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
………................................J.
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE)
.……..................................J.
             (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)
NEW DELHI
April 5th, 2024
51

ITEM NO.1501               COURT NO.5               SECTION II-A
(For Judgment)
               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Criminal Appeal No. 2595/2023
SHOMA KANTI SEN                                    Appellant(s)
                                VERSUS
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.                    Respondent(s)
(IA No. 166531/2023 - INTERIM BAIL)
 
Date : 05-04-2024 This matter was called on for pronouncement of 
   judgment today.
For Appellant(s)   Mr. Anand Grover, Sr. Adv.
                   Mr. Paras Nath Singh, Adv.
                   Ms. Nupur Kumar, AOR
                   Mr. Rohin Bhatt, Adv.                   
                   
For Respondent(s)  Mr. Aniruddha Joshi, Adv.
                   Mr. Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Adv.
                   Mr. Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, AOR
                   Mr. Bharat Bagla, Adv.
                   Mr. Sourav Singh, Adv.
                   Mr. Aditya Krishna, Adv.
                   Mrs. Preet S. Phanse, Adv.
                   Mr. Omkar Deshpande, Adv.
                   Mr. Aadarsh Dubey, Adv.
                   
                   Mr. K. M. Nataraj, ASG
                   Mr. Sharath Nambiar, Adv.
                   Mr. Kanu Agarwal, Adv.
                   Mr. Annam Venkatesh, Adv.
                   Mr. Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Adv.
                   Mr. Chitransh Sharma, Adv.
                   Ms. Indra Bhakar, Adv.
                   Mr. Vinayak Sharma, Adv.
                   Mr. Vatsal Joshi, Adv.
                   Mr. Anuj Udupa, Adv.
                   Mr. Yogya Rajpurohit, Adv.
                   Satwika Thakur, Adv.
                   Mr. Shubham Mishra, Adv.
                   Mr. Siddhant Kohli, Adv.
                   Mr. Anirudh Bhatt, Adv.
                   Mr. Arvind Kumar Sharma, AOR                   
        
52

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Aniruddha Bose pronounced
the  judgment  of  the  Bench  comprising  His  Lordship
and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Augustine George Masih.
The
 
appeal
 
stands
 
allowed;
 
Criminal
Miscellaneous  Petition  No.  166531  of  2023  shall
stand disposed of and the appellant is directed to
be  released  on  bail  in  terms  of  the  signed
reportable  judgment.  The  operative  portion  of  the
signed  reportable  judgment  held,  inter  alia,  as
under:-
“……………..With  these  observations,  we  set
aside  the  impugned  judgment  and  direct
that the appellant be released on bail on
such  conditions  the  Special  Court  may
consider fit and proper but the conditions
shall include the following:-
(h)
The  appellant  shall  not  leave  the
State of Maharashtra without leave of
the Special Court.
(i)
The  appellant  shall  surrender  her
passport,  if  she  possesses  one,  with
the  Special  Court,  during  the  period
she remains enlarged on bail. 
(j)
The appellant shall inform the Inves-
tigating  Officer  of  the  NIA  the  ad-
dress  where  she  shall  reside  during
the  period  she  remains  enlarged  on
bail.
(k)
The appellant shall use only one mo-
bile number, during the time she re-
mains  on  bail,  and  shall  inform  her
mobile number to the Investigating Of-
ficer of the NIA. 
(l)
The appellant shall also ensure that
her  mobile  phone  remains  active  and
charged  round  the  clock  so  that  she
53

remains constantly accessible through-
out the period she remains enlarged on
bail. 
(m) During  this  period,  i.e.  the  period
during which she remains on bail, the
appellant shall keep the location sta-
tus (GPS) of her  mobile phone active,
twenty-four hours a day, and her phone
shall be paired with that of the In-
vestigating Officer of the NIA to en-
able him, at any given time, to iden-
tify the appellants’ exact location. 
(n)
The  appellant,  while  on  bail,  shall
report to the Station House  Officer
of the Police Station within whose ju-
risdiction she shall reside, once ev-
ery fortnight. 
43.
In the event there is breach of any
of these conditions or any other condition
that may be imposed by the Special Court
independently,  it  would  be  open  to  the
prosecution  to  seek  cancellation  of  bail
granted  to  the  appellant  before  the
Special  Court  only,  without  any  further
reference to this Court.”
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand
disposed of.
(SNEHA DAS)                                  (VIDYA NEGI)
SENIOR PERSONAL ASSISTANT                     ASSISTANT  REGISTRAR
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)
54