2024 INSC 270
REPORTABLE 
1 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8821 OF 2011 
 
 
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.     …APPELLANT(S) 
Versus 
 
NATIONAL ORGANIC CHEMICAL  
INDUSTRIES LTD.                              …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J. 
 
1.  
The State of Maharashtra is in appeal before us challenging 
the order of the Division Bench of Bombay High Court dated 
18.08.2009, which has allowed the writ petition of the respondent, 
while setting aside the order of the Deputy Superintendent of 
Stamps, Maharashtra (appellant no.2). 
We have heard learned counsel Mr. Aniruddha Joshi for the 
appellants and learned senior counsel Ms. Madhavi Divan for the 
respondents. 
2. 
National Organic Chemical India Ltd. (respondent) was 
incorporated with an initial share capital of Rs.36 crores. In 1992 
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2024.04.05
15:43:13 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
2 
it increased its share capital to Rs. 600 crores and accordingly paid 
a stamp duty of Rs.1,12,80,000/- as per Article 10 of Schedule-I 
of the Bombay Stamp Act, 1958 (hereinafter “Stamp Act”). At that 
time, the provision read as under: 
1 
2 
Description of Instrument 
Proper Stamp Duty 
10. 
ARTICLES 
OF 
ASSOCIATION 
OF 
A 
COMPANY – Where the 
Company has no share 
capital or nominal share 
capital or increased share 
capital. 
One thousand rupees for 
every rupees 5,00,000 or 
part thereof. 
 
 
The State of Maharashtra (appellant no.1) on 02.08.1994 
amended Article 10 and introduced a maximum cap of Rs.25 lakhs 
on stamp duty which would be payable by a company. The 
amending notification is reproduced below in part: 
“In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (a) of 
Section 9 of the Bombay Stamp Act, 1958 (Born. LX 
of 1958), the Government of Maharashtra, having 
satisfied that it is necessary to do so in the public 
interest, hereby reduces, with effect from the 1st 
August, 1994, the maximum duty chargeable on 
Article of Association of a Company under Article 
10 of Schedule-I to the said Act, to Rs. Twenty Five 
Lakhs.” 
 

 
3 
 
Subsequently, the respondent passed a resolution for a 
further increase in its share capital to Rs.1,200 crores and paid 
Rs. 25 lakhs as stamp duty when it filed its Notice in Form No.5,1 
pursuant to Section 97 of the Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter 
“Companies Act”). However, according to the respondent this was 
done inadvertently as it was soon realised that stamp duty was not 
liable to be paid by them since the maximum stamp duty which 
was of Rs. 25 lakhs payable on Articles of Association as per the 
provisions of the Stamp Act, had already been paid by them in 
1992. Consequently, the respondent wrote a letter to appellant 
no.2 seeking a refund of the payment of Stamp Duty of Rs. 25 
lakhs. 
This request was turned down by appellant no.2, vide Order 
dated 20.01.1998 where it was stated that whenever the 
authorised share capital of a company is increased, stamp duty is 
payable on each such occasion at the time of filing of Form No. 5 
and it is not a one time measure. Aggrieved, the respondent filed a 
writ petition before the Bombay High Court challenging the 
 
1 Form No. 5 of the Companies (Central Government’s) General Rules & Forms, 1965 is the 
prescribed form of notice, which has to be sent under Section 97 of the Companies Act. 
 

 
4 
aforesaid order and seeking refund of Stamp Duty of Rs. 25 lakhs 
with interest, paid by them inadvertently.  
 
The Bombay High Court, after hearing the parties, concluded 
that Form No.5 is not an instrument as defined by Section 2 of the 
Stamp Act and that stamp duty can only be charged on Articles of 
Association, where the maximum duty (Rs.25 Lakhs), payable as 
per the amendment has already been paid by the respondent. The 
High Court allowed the writ petition and directed the appellants to 
refund Stamp Duty of Rs.25 lakhs along with interest @ 6% per 
annum. 
3. 
Learned counsel for the appellants submits that a company 
increases its share capital by sending a notice in Form No.5 as per 
Section 97 of the Companies Act. Thus, he contends that every 
time a company increases its share capital, it is a separate taxing 
event and stamp duty is liable to be paid irrespective of whether 
the maximum amount payable under the section has previously 
been paid. 
The learned counsel further relies on Section 14A of the 
Stamp Act to contend that any material or substantial alteration 
in the character of an instrument requires a fresh stamp duty 
according to its altered character. 

 
5 
Finally, it is also contended that the maximum cap or upper 
ceiling of Rs. 25 lakhs was introduced after the payment of Stamp 
Duty of Rs.1,12,80,000/-. Therefore, the stamp duty paid earlier 
cannot be taken into consideration in any case. 
4. 
On the other hand, learned senior counsel for the respondent 
submits that it is only the Articles of Association of a company 
which are chargeable to Stamp Duty under Article 10. Form No.5 
which is being contended by the appellants to be a separate 
instrument, is completely alien to the Stamp Act as it serves a very 
limited purpose of giving notice to the Registrar that a company 
has increased its share capital beyond the authorised share 
capital. 
She would further submit that increase in the share capital 
of a company does not materially or substantially alter the 
character of the Articles of Association so as to fall within Section 
14A of the Stamp Act. She refers to Section 31 of the Companies 
Act to submit that any alterations made to the Articles of 
Association are valid and are to be taken as if originally contained 
therein.  
Finally, she relies on a catena of judgements to contend that 
fiscal statutes have to be construed strictly and in case of any 

 
6 
ambiguity in the charging provision, the same has to be resolved 
against the Department. 
 5. 
Let us now examine the relevant provisions of the Stamp Act. 
Section 3 of the Stamp Act provides that inter alia stamp duty is 
payable on instruments which are executed in the State of 
Maharashtra and the duty payable is the amount indicated in 
Schedule-I of the Stamp Act. The definition of instrument is 
provided under Section 2(l) of the Stamp Act, which is reproduced 
below: 
“(l) instrument” includes every document by which 
any right or liability is, or purports to be, created, 
transferred, limited, extended, extinguished or 
recorded, but does not include a bill of exchange, 
cheque, promissory note, bill of lading, letter of 
credit, policy of insurance, transfer of share, 
debenture, proxy and receipt.” 
 
6. 
The first question that we now have to answer is whether the 
notice sent to the Registrar in Form No.5 is an “instrument” as 
defined under Section 2(l).  
Learned counsel for the appellants contends that Form No.5 
records or purports to record the right or extension of the right of 
a company to increase its share capital as recorded in its Articles 

 
7 
of Association and thus falls within the definition of an 
“instrument”. 
 
Share capital of a company refers to the amount invested in 
the company for it to carry out its operations while Articles of 
Association contain the prescribed rules and regulations that a 
company adopts for its internal management.2 When a company is 
incorporated it has to present certain documents, including its 
Articles of Association, to the Registrar under Section 33 of the 
Companies Act and if the Registrar is satisfied that all necessary 
requirements have been complied with, he then registers the 
documents submitted. This is because of the implication that 
provisions contained in the articles amount to a public notice to 
all those who deal with the company.  
7. 
Section 2(2) of the Companies Act inter alia defines “articles” 
as the Articles of Association of a company as originally framed or 
as altered from time to time.  A company is empowered to alter its 
Articles of Association by passing a special resolution in the 
manner provided in Section 31 of the Companies Act, which states 
that: 
 
2 Section 26 of the Companies Act, 1956. 

 
8 
“31. 
Alteration 
of 
articles 
by 
special 
resolution.— (1) Subject to the provisions of this 
Act and to the conditions contained in its 
memorandum 
a 
company 
may, 
by 
special 
resolution, alter its articles: 
Provided that no alteration made in the articles 
under this sub-section which has the effect of 
converting a public company into a private 
company, shall have effect unless such alteration 
has been approved by the Central Government. 
(2) Any alteration so made shall, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, be as valid as if originally 
contained in the articles and be subject in like 
manner to alteration by special resolution. 
(2-A) … 
(3) …” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Any alteration in the share capital of a limited company is provided 
under Section 94 of the Companies Act, which reads as under: 
“94. Power of limited company to alter its 
share capital.— (1) A limited company having a 
share capital, may, if so authorised by its articles, 
alter the conditions of its memorandum as follows, 
that is to say, it may— 
(a) increase its share capital by such amount as it 
thinks expedient by issuing new shares; 
(b) … 
(c) … 
(d) … 
(e) … 
(2) The powers conferred by this section shall be 
exercised by the company in general meeting and 
shall not require to be confirmed by the Court. 

 
9 
(3) …” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
A perusal of Section 94 of the Companies Act shows that a 
company is empowered to increase its share capital, by such 
amount as it thinks expedient, by passing a resolution in a general 
meeting. It is pertinent to note that no approval or confirmation by 
the Court is required to exercise this power. 
Once a resolution for authorising increase in share capital 
has been passed in terms of Section 94 of the Companies Act, a 
notice is required to be sent by the company in Form No.5 to the 
Registrar, pursuant to Section 97 of the Companies Act. The 
provision is reproduced below: 
“97. Notice of increase of share capital or of 
members.— (1) Where a company having a share 
capital, whether its shares have or have not been 
converted into stock, has increased its share 
capital beyond the authorised capital, and where a 
company, not being a company limited by shares, 
has increased the number of its members beyond 
the registered number, it shall file with the 
Registrar, notice of the increase of capital or of 
members within thirty days after the passing of the 
resolution authorising the increase; and the 
Registrar shall record the increase and also make 
any alterations which may be necessary in the 
company's memorandum or articles or both. 
(2) … 
(3) …” 
(emphasis supplied) 

 
10 
A perusal of the provisions referred above shows that it is the 
Registrar who is the custodian of the articles of a company and not 
the company. Thus, when a company has to alter the same or 
modify its share capital as recorded therein, it has to pass a 
resolution and file its Form No. 5. The relevant portion of Form    
No.5 is reproduced below: 
“Notice is hereby given – 
1… 
2. In accordance with Section 97 of the Companies 
Act, 1956, that by ordinary resolution / special 
resolution of the company dated the day of ______ 
(i) the authorised share capital of the company has 
been increased by the addition thereto of the sum 
of Rs. ______ beyond the present authorised capital 
of Rs. ______. 
(ii)... 
3… 
4…” 
 
8. 
The appellants have relied on Hindustan Lever v. State of 
Maharashtra, (2004) 9 SCC 438, and would submit that Form 
No.5 is an instrument. In this case, the question whether an order 
passed by the Court (under Section 394 read with Section 391 of 
the Companies Act), sanctioning a scheme of amalgamation of two 
companies is an instrument within the meaning of Section 2(l) of 
the Stamp Act, was answered in the affirmative. It was observed 

 
11 
that the Court passes the order of sanction based on the 
arrangement arrived at between the parties and thereby affects 
transfer of assets and liabilities between them, which binds all. 
This is what was said: 
“32. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we hold 
that the order passed by the Court under Section 
394 of the Companies Act is based upon the 
compromise between two or more companies. 
Function of the court while sanctioning the 
compromise or arrangement is limited to oversee 
that the compromise or arrangement arrived at is 
lawful and that the affairs of the company were not 
conducted in a manner prejudicial to the interest of 
its members or to public interest, that is to say, it 
should not be unfair or contrary to public policy or 
unconscionable. Once these things are satisfied the 
scheme has to be sanctioned as per the 
compromise arrived at between the parties. It is an 
instrument which transfers the properties and 
would fall within the definition of Section 2(1) of the 
Bombay Stamp Act which includes every document 
by which any right or liability is transferred…” 
 
 
The above judgment nowhere states that Form No. 5 is an 
instrument. The reliance of the appellant here, on the above 
judgment, seems to be misconceived.  An order of the Court 
sanctioning a scheme of amalgamation cannot be equated to Form 
No. 5. Any increase in the share capital by a company is neither 
required to be confirmed by the Court in view of Section 94(2), nor 

 
12 
does the Registrar exercise any discretion, provided Form No. 5 is 
duly filled. 
On the other hand, learned senior counsel for the respondent 
has relied on New Egerton Woollen Mills, In re, 1899 SCC 
OnLine All 22, where the Allahabad High Court was faced with a 
similar question; as to whether stamp duty is payable on the 
document whereby alterations were made to Articles of 
Association. A Full Bench of the High Court (in the context of the 
Indian Companies Act, 1882) answered in the negative with the 
following reasoning: 
“... we are satisfied that the document which was 
submitted to the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies 
was submitted to him under s. 79 to be recorded by 
him, and not, as he states, for registration. The 
document was not new articles of association, or 
articles of association at all within the meaning of 
the Indian Companies Act. It was a copy of the 
special resolution passed by the company, 
notifying to the Registrar, and through him to the 
world concerned, that the regulations of the 
company, which were covered by the resolution, 
would be the regulations by which the company 
would in future be bound. These regulations, even 
though they were new regulations to the exclusion 
of all the existing regulations of the company, are, 
by the second paragraph of s. 76, to be deemed to 
be regulations of the company of the same validity 
as if they had been originally contained in the 
articles of association. The law does not say that 
they are to be deemed articles of association, but 
expressly declares that they are to be deemed 

 
13 
regulations of the same validity as if they had been 
contained in the articles of association. The 
document which has been forwarded to us is 
certainly not one which falls within art. 8 of sch. I 
of the Stamp Act of 1879, and is not liable to stamp-
duty as provided by that article.” 
 
9. 
We agree with the view taken by the Allahabad High Court. 
Filing of Form No. 5 is only a method prescribed, whereby “notice” 
of increase in share capital or of members of a company has to be 
sent to the Registrar, within 30 days of passing of such resolution. 
The Registrar then has to record such increase in share capital or 
members, and carry out the necessary alterations in the articles. 
Stamp Duty is affixed on Form No. 5 as a matter of practical 
convenience because a company itself cannot carry out the 
alterations and record the increase in share capital in its Articles 
of Association. It is only the articles which are an instrument 
within the meaning of Section 2(l) of the Stamp Act and accordingly 
have been mentioned in Article 10 of Schedule-I of the Stamp Act. 
10. Counsel for the appellants, however, contends that increase 
in the share capital of the respondent from Rs. 600 crores to         
Rs.1,200 crores, materially alters the character of the instrument, 
i.e., Articles of Association. As such, it requires a fresh stamp 

 
14 
according to its altered character and needs to be charged as a 
separate instrument. 
On the other hand, learned senior counsel for the respondent 
refers to Section 31(2) of the Companies Act, which provides that 
any alteration of the articles shall, subject to the provisions of this 
Act, be valid as if it were originally in the articles. She further 
submits that whether an instrument has been materially altered 
or not is a question of fact and the appellants have neither taken 
this plea while rejecting the request for the refund, nor before the 
High Court. 
11. It is a settled position of law that in case of conflict between 
two laws, the general law must give way to the special law. A 
conjoined reading of the Stamp Act and the Companies Act would 
show that while the former governs the payment of stamp duty for 
all manner of instruments, the latter deals with all aspects relating 
to companies and other similar associations.  
 
In the case at hand, we are concerned with an instrument 
which is chargeable to Stamp Duty and finds its origin in the 
Companies Act. The various provisions of the Companies Act 
provide the purpose and scope of the instrument. Thus, it has to 
be said that the Companies Act is the special law and the Stamp 

 
15 
Act is the general law with regards to Articles of Association, and 
the special will override the general. 
12. A Division Bench of the High Court of Madras in M. 
Swaminathan v. Chairman and Managing Director, 1987 SCC 
OnLine Mad 438 discussed Section 31(2) of the Companies Act 
and made the following observations: 
“The section cannot be understood to mean that 
any alteration made in the Articles of Association 
would have retrospective effect as if it was there 
from the inception of the Articles of Association. The 
section is intended only to confer validity on the 
alteration made to the Articles. It is only for the 
limited purpose of making the alteration valid it is 
to be treated as if it was originally in the Articles. It 
is seen from Sec. 29 and 30 of the Companies Act, 
that certain formalities are prescribed for Articles of 
Association. Unless the requirements of Ss. 29 and 
30 are satisfied, the Articles of Association will not 
be valid in law. If the same formalities are to be 
gone through whenever any alteration is made, it 
may lead to several difficulties.” 
 
Section 31(2) was thus introduced with the intention to 
confer validity on any alterations to the articles as if they were 
originally contained therein. Therefore, any increase in the share 
capital of the company also shall be valid as if it were originally 
there when the Articles of Association were first stamped. As 
discussed by the Allahabad High Court in New Egerton Woollen 

 
16 
Mills, In re, (supra) there is no concept of a company having new 
Articles of Association.  Thus, Section 14A of the Stamp Act would 
not be of any help to the appellants.  
13. We may here add that the Legislature has specifically 
mentioned Articles of Association in Article 10 of Schedule-I of the 
Stamp Act, where stamp duty is to be charged inter alia on increase 
in the share capital of a company. Thus, in spite of Section 31(2) 
of the Companies Act stamp duty will be payable on increased 
share capital. This is however subject to the maximum, i.e., Rs. 25 
lakhs which we shall refer to in a while.  
If there is no specific provision for charging the increase, then 
no stamp duty is payable for any increase in the share capital of a 
company. In order to clarify, we may refer to a decision of the Delhi 
High Court in S.E. Investments Ltd. v. Union of India, 2011 
SCC OnLine Del 1867. In Delhi, the charging provision of the 
Indian Stamp (Delhi Amendment) Act, 2007 which was under 
consideration of the High Court was as follows: 
10 
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION OF A COMPANY:- 
 
(a) When the 
authorized capital of 
the company does not 
exceed one lac 
0.15% of the Authorized 
share capital with a 
monetary ceiling of Rs. 
25 Lakhs. 

 
17 
 
(b) In other cases 
 
 
0.15% of the Authorized 
share capital with a 
monetary ceiling of Rs. 
25 Lakhs. 
 
The Single Judge of the High Court3 observed that other State 
Legislatures have included a specific provision for levy of stamp 
duty on increase in authorised share capital and held as follows: 
“13. In the absence of a specific provision that 
permits the levy of stamp duty on the increase in 
authorized share capital, it would not be open to 
the Respondents to insist upon the Petitioner 
having to pay stamp duty for the increased 
authorized share capital. The fact that the 
Petitioner earlier paid stamp duty when the 
authorized share capital was increased to Rs. 8.5 
crores cannot act as an estoppel against the 
Petitioner.” 
 
14. The second question is whether the maximum cap on stamp 
duty is applicable every time there is an increase in the share 
capital or it is a one-time measure.  It is an admitted fact that when 
the respondent increased its share capital from Rs. 36 crores to 
Rs. 600 crores it paid a stamp duty of Rs.1,12,80,000/- and at 
 
3 The judgement of the Single Judge was upheld by the Division Bench in Collector of Stamps 
v. Se Investment Ltd., 2012 SCC OnLine Del 3857. 

 
18 
that time there was no provision for a maximum cap or upper 
ceiling on the amount payable. 
On 02.08.1994, the State Legislature amended Article 10 of 
Schedule-I of the Stamp Act and the amended provision, which 
was applicable when the respondent passed a resolution to 
increase its authorised share capital to Rs. 1200 crores, is 
reproduced below: 
1 
2 
Description of Instrument 
Proper Stamp Duty 
10. 
ARTICLES 
OF 
ASSOCIATION 
OF 
A 
COMPANY – Where the 
Company has no share 
capital or nominal share 
capital or increased share 
capital. 
One thousand rupees for 
every rupees 5,00,000 or 
part thereof, subject to a 
maximum of Rs.25,00,000. 
 
 
15. The appellant has relied on Collector of Stamps v. Se 
Investment Ltd., 2012 SCC OnLine Del 3857 to contend that 
each increase in authorised share capital will be chargeable to 
stamp duty in Maharashtra due to the inclusion of “increased 
share capital” in the charging provision and hence, respondent has 
rightfully paid Rs. 25 lakhs (for the subsequent increase from 

 
19 
Rs.600 crores to Rs.1200 crores) as stamp duty in view of the 
maximum cap. 
The Stamp Act authorises involuntary exaction of money and 
is in the nature of a fiscal statute, which has to be interpreted 
strictly. This Court in CWT v. Ellis Bridge Gymkhana, (1998) 1 
SCC 384 held as under: 
“5. The rule of construction of a charging section is 
that before taxing any person, it must be shown 
that he falls within the ambit of the charging section 
by clear words used in the section. No one can be 
taxed by implication. A charging section has to be 
construed strictly. If a person has not been brought 
within the ambit of the charging section by clear 
words, he cannot be taxed at all.” 
 
Thus, even though “increased share capital” is a part of 
Article 10, which column it has been placed in assumes 
importance. Column 1 of the Schedule describes the instrument 
on which stamp duty is to be levied whereas Column 2 prescribes 
the stamp duty payable. 
Column 1 has to be construed as describing three situations 
or contingencies relating to Articles of Association, i.e., “where the 
company has no share capital or nominal share capital or 
increased share capital”. In cases where a company has no share 
capital it would have to pay no stamp duty and if a company is 

 
20 
submitting its articles for the first time, stamp duty would be 
calculated as per the nominal share capital. The effect of adding 
“increased share capital” is that stamp duty will be charged on 
subsequent increases in the authorised share capital, subject to 
the maximum cap. In other words, the ceiling of Rs. 25 lakhs in 
Column 2 is applicable on Articles of Association and the increased 
share capital therein, not on every increase individually. In case 
stamp duty equivalent to or more than the cap has already been 
paid, no further stamp duty can be levied. For a better 
understanding, let us consider a hypothetical example: 
SHARE 
CAPITAL OF 
A COMPANY 
STAMP 
DUTY 
PAYABLE  
STAMP DUTY TO 
BE ACTUALLY 
PAID DUE TO CAP 
TOTAL 
STAMP 
DUTY 
50 crores 
10 lakhs 
10 lakhs 
10 lakhs 
100 crores 
10 lakhs 
10 lakhs 
20 lakhs 
150 crores 
10 lakhs 
5 lakhs 
25 lakhs 
200 crores 
10 lakhs 
Nil 
25 lakhs 
 
16. The fact that the maximum cap of Rs.25 lakhs would be 
applicable as a one-time measure and not on each subsequent 
increase in the share capital of a company is fortified directly by 
the Maharashtra Stamp (Amendment) Act, 2015 which amended 

 
21 
the charging section for Articles of Association i.e., Article 10 of the 
Stamp Act. The Section as it stands now is reproduced below: 
1 
2 
Description of Instrument 
Proper Stamp Duty 
10. 
ARTICLES 
OF 
ASSOCIATION 
OF 
A 
COMPANY – Where the 
Company has no share 
capital or nominal share 
capital or increased share 
capital. 
[0.2 per cent. on share 
capital or increased share 
capital, as the case may be] 
subject to a maximum of 
Rs.50,00,000. 
 
The effect of the 2015 amendment is that “increased share 
capital” has also been added in Column 2 and proper stamp duty 
shall be calculated, for either of the three situations, as per the 
share capital or increased share capital. This means that the cap 
will now be applicable on each individual increase. 
17. A reference can also be made to the provisions of Stamp Duty 
Acts of a few other States where Articles of Association are 
chargeable: 
STATE 
Description of 
Instrument 
Proper Stamp Duty 
Gujarat 
7. 
Alteration 
of 
Articles 
of 
Association 
of 
a 
Company under the 
Companies 
Act, 
A sum equal to the 
duty that would have 
been leviable under 
Article 12 as though 
the 
company's 

 
22 
2013 (18 of 2013), 
in consequence of 
increase 
of 
the 
company’s 
share 
capital; instrument 
of– 
 
Exemption… 
nominal share capital 
had been when the 
company was formed, 
equal to the total share 
capital so increased, 
less the sum already 
paid under Article 12. 
Art. 12. Articles of 
Association 
of 
a 
Company.— Where 
the Company has 
no share capital or 
nominal 
share 
capital. 
Subject to maximum 
of five lakhs rupees, 
fifty paise for every 
hundred 
rupees 
or 
part thereof. 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
11. 
Articles 
of 
Association 
of 
a 
Company– 
 
(a) 
where 
the 
company has no 
share capital 
 
(b) 
where 
the 
company 
has 
nominal 
share 
capital or increased 
share capital 
 
 
 
 
Five thousand rupees. 
 
 
 
0.15% of such nominal 
or 
increased 
share 
capital, subject to a 
minimum 
of 
five 
thousand rupees and 
a maximum of twenty 
five lakh rupees. 
 
 
18. We also do not agree with the appellant that stamp duty paid 
before the amendment cannot be taken into account. It is true that 
the amendment does not have retrospective effect, however since 
the instrument ‘Articles of Association’ remains the same and the 
increase was initiated by the respondent after the cap was 

 
23 
introduced, the duty already paid on the same very instrument will 
have to be considered. It is not a fresh instrument which has been 
brought to be stamped, but only the increase in share capital in 
the original document, which has been specifically made 
chargeable by the Legislation. 
19. For the reasons stated above, we dismiss this civil appeal and 
uphold the order of the High Court of Bombay. Accordingly, we 
direct the appellants to refund Rs. 25 lakhs paid by the respondent 
along with interest @ 6% per annum. Let the needful be done 
within 6 weeks from today. 
20. Interim order(s) shall stand vacated. Pending application(s), 
if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
……...……….………………….J. 
     [SUDHANSHU DHULIA] 
 
 
 
      ..….....………………………….J.    
      [PRASANNA B. VARALE] 
 
 
New Delhi. 
April 05, 2024.