2024 INSC 282
 
 
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
    
                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6282 OF 2023 
 
KARIM UDDIN BARBHUIYA  
 
 
 
 …. APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
AMINUL HAQUE LASKAR & ORS.  
 
       …. RESPONDENT(S) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
 
1. The instant Appeal filed by the appellant - Karim Uddin Barbhuiya 
(Original Respondent No. 1) is directed against the impugned 
judgment and order dated 26.04.2023 passed by the Gauhati High 
Court at Guwahati in I.A. (Civil) No. 1278 of 2021 in Election Petition 
No. 01 of 2021, whereby the High Court has dismissed the said IA 
filed by the present appellant under Order VII Rule 11 CPC seeking 
rejection of the Election Petition filed by the respondent No. 1 - Aminul 
Haque Laskar (Original Election Petitioner). 
 
 
Digitally signed by
Nirmala Negi
Date: 2024.04.08
16:36:54 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
2 
 
2. A brief conspectus of relevant facts may be stated as under: 
(i) 
On 05.03.2021, General Election to the Legislative Assembly of 
Assam was notified by the Election Commission of India, whereunder 
the last date for filing of nomination papers was 12.03.2021. 
(ii) On 11.03.2021, the appellant filed his nomination papers as a 
candidate of All India United Democratic Front (AIUDF) along with the 
Declaration, by way of an affidavit in Form-26 of The Conduct of 
Election Rules, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Said Rules). The 
last date for scrutiny of nomination papers was 15.03.2021. 
(iii) On 01.04.2021, the election for the Legislative Assembly 
Constituency no. 10, Sonai was concluded and the appellant secured 
71,937 votes out of total votes polled, while the respondent no. 1 
herein secured 52,283 votes in his favour. 
(iv) On 04.06.2021, the respondent no. 1 (Election Petitioner) filed the 
Election Petition being no. 01 of 2021 before the High Court under 
Section 100(1)(b) and Section 100(1)(d)(i) of The Representation of 
the People’s Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as the RP Act) 
questioning the election of the appellant, mainly making four 
allegations - (a) false declaration of educational qualification of B.A. 
(b) suppression of the educational qualification of Diploma in 
Engineering (c) suppression of bank loan details of M/s. Allied 
Concern and (d) suppression of un-liquidated provident fund dues. 

 
 
3 
 
(v)  On 24.06.2021, the High Court issued notice in the said Election 
Petition. 
(vi) On 23.08.2021, the appellant herein (Original Respondent No.1-
Returned Candidate) filed an application under Order VII Rule 11, 
CPC read with Section 86 of the RP Act for rejection of the Election 
Petition, which was registered as I.A (Civil) No. 1278 of 2021 in the 
said Election Petition. 
(vii) On 26.04.2023, the High Court passed the impugned judgment 
dismissing the said I.A. filed by the appellant. Hence, the present 
Appeal has been filed. 
3. The Appeal has been contested by the respondent no. 1 and the 
respondent no. 13 by filing their respective counter affidavits. 
4. We have heard the learned Senior Counsel Mr. Kapil Sibal for the 
appellant and Mr. Jaideep Gupta for the respondent no.1 at length. 
5. Learned Senior Advocate Mr. Kapil Sibal appearing for the appellant 
vehemently submitted that the respondent no. 1 has sought to upset 
the election results by filing the baseless, motivated and malafide 
election petition, based on mere bald allegations that the information 
disclosed in Form No. 26 filed by the appellant along with his 
nomination form was inaccurate. None of the allegations made in the 
Election Petition is supported by either primary documents or reliable 

 
 
4 
 
source of information. The pleadings in the Election Petition are not 
the averments of material facts but are facts based speculation and 
do not disclose any triable issue. He further submitted that the 
Election Petition does not disclose a complete cause of action, nor 
does it contain all “material facts” as required under Section 83(1)(a) 
and also does not plead “full particulars” of the alleged corrupt 
practice of undue influence, as required under Section 81(1)(b) of the 
RP Act. 
6. Mr. Sibal taking us to the particulars disclosed by the appellant in 
Form No. 26 submitted that there was neither suppression of 
educational qualification nor suppression of bank loan details or of un-
liquidated provident fund dues, as alleged by the respondent no.1. He 
further submitted that the respondent no. 1 had admittedly not raised 
any objection in writing at the time of scrutiny of the nomination papers 
by the Returning Officer, and therefore it could not be said that there 
was improper acceptance of nomination of the appellant.  He pressed 
into service various provisions contained in the RP Act, particularly 
Section 100 and Section 123 to submit that the allegations and 
averments made in the Election Petition could never constitute 
“undue influence” much less “corrupt practices” as contemplated in 
Section 123, for declaring the Election to be void under Section 100 
of the RP Act. Much reliance has been placed by him on the decision 

 
 
5 
 
of this court in case of Kanimozhi Karunanidhi Vs. A. Santhana 
Kumar and Others1 to submit that the Election Petition filed by the 
respondent no. 1 be dismissed at the threshold under Order VII Rule 
11, CPC read with Section 83 of the RP Act. 
7. The learned Senior Advocate Mr. Jaideep Gupta per contra submitted 
that the election of the appellant is liable to be set aside firstly on the 
ground that the nomination paper of the appellant was improperly 
accepted, as the affidavit in the Form-26 filed by the appellant along 
with his nomination paper, contained false statements with regard to 
his educational qualification and his liability in respect of the loan and 
his default in the deposit of employer’s contribution of provident fund 
as the partner of the Partnership firm. He further submitted that the 
election is also liable to be set aside on the ground of the appellant 
having indulged into corrupt practices, he having failed to make the 
disclosures as required by the RP Act and by the judicial 
pronouncements by this Court. According to him, the RP Act was 
amended with effect from 24.08.2002 incorporating therein Section 
33A in the RP Act and incorporating Rule 4A in the Conduct of Election 
Rules, 1961 with effect from 03.09.2002, prescribing the form of 
affidavit to be filed by the candidate at the time of delivering the 
 
1 2023 SCC Online SC 573 

 
 
6 
 
nomination paper in Form-26 to the said Rules. In Lok Prahari vs. 
Union of India & Others2, this Court has held that non-disclosure 
would amount to “undue influence” as defined in the RP Act. Further 
relying on the decision in case of Krishnamoorthy vs. Sivakumar 
and Others3,  he submitted that if the “corrupt practice” is alleged 
under Section 100(1)(b), it is not necessary to state that the “corrupt 
practice” has materially affected the outcome of the election. Lastly, 
he submitted that there are number of triable issues involved in the 
Election Petition, and the cause of action also having been disclosed 
in the Election Petition, the High Court has rightly rejected the 
application of the appellant under Order VII Rule 11, CPC, which order 
being just and legal, this Court may not interfere with the same. 
8. Before adverting to the rival contentions raised by the learned 
counsel for the parties, let us glance over the relevant provisions of 
the RP Act. Part-V of the RP Act deals with the Conduct of Elections, 
and Chapter-I thereof deals with the Nomination of Candidates. 
Section 33A contained in the said Chapter pertains to the obligation 
of the candidate to furnish the information as stated therein, and 
Section 36 thereof pertains to the scrutiny of nominations. Rule 4A of 
the said Rules requires the candidate or his proposer, as the case 
 
2 (2018) 4 SCC 699  
3 (2015) 3 SCC 467 

 
 
7 
 
may be, to file an affidavit in Form-26 at the time of delivering 
nomination paper. The said rule 4A reads as under: 
“4A. Form of affidavit to be filed at the time of delivering 
nomination paper. — The candidate or his proposer, as the 
case may be, shall, at the time of delivering to the returning officer 
the nomination paper under sub-section (1) of section 33 of the 
Act, also deliver to him an affidavit sworn by the candidate before 
a Magistrate of the first class or a Notary in Form 26.” 
 
9. Section 80 of the RP Act states that no election shall be called in 
question except by an Election Petition presented in accordance with 
the provisions of Part-VI. Section 81 pertains to the presentation of 
the Election Petition. Section 82 pertains to the parties to the Election 
Petition. Section 83 pertaining to the contents of the Election Petition, 
being relevant for the purposes of this appeal, it is reproduced as 
under: - 
“83. Contents of petition. — (1) An election petition—  
(a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on 
which the petitioner relies;  
(b) shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice that the 
petitioner alleges, including as full a statement as possible of the 
names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt 
practice and the date and place of the commission of each such 
practice; and  
(c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner 
laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the 
verification of pleadings:  
[Provided that where the petitioner alleges any corrupt practice, 
the petition shall also be accompanied by an affidavit in the 

 
 
8 
 
prescribed form in support of the allegation of such corrupt 
practice and the particulars thereof.] 
(2) Any schedule or annexure to the petition shall also be signed 
by the petitioner and verified in the same manner as the petition.” 
 
10. Section 87 lays down the procedure to be followed before the High 
Court, which inter alia states that subject to the provisions of the RP 
Act and of any Rules made thereunder, every Election Petition shall 
be tried by the High Court, as nearly as may be, in accordance with 
procedure applicable under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
Section 100 deals with the grounds for declaring the election to be 
void, which reads as under: - 
“100. Grounds for declaring election to be void. — 
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) if the High court is 
of opinion—  
(a) that on the date of his election a returned candidate was not 
qualified, or was disqualified, to be chosen to fill the seat under 
the Constitution or this Act 5 [or the Government of Union 
Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963)]; or  
(b) that any corrupt practice has been committed by a returned 
candidate or his election agent or by any other person with the 
consent of a returned candidate or his election agent; or  
(c) that any nomination has been improperly rejected; or  
(d) that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a 
returned candidate, has been materially affected—  
(i) by the improper acceptance or any nomination, or  
(ii) by any corrupt practice committed in the interests of the 
returned candidate 6 [by an agent other than his election agent], 
or  

 
 
9 
 
(iii) by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any vote or 
the reception of any vote which is void, or  
(iv) by any non-compliance with the provisions of the Constitution 
or of this Act or of any rules or orders made under this Act, 
the High Court shall declare the election of the returned 
candidate to be void.   
(2) If in the opinion of the High Court, a returned candidate has 
been guilty by an agent, other than his election agent, of any 
corrupt practice but the High Court is satisfied—  
(a) that no such corrupt practice was committed at the election 
by the candidate or his election agent, and every such corrupt 
practice was committed contrary to the orders, and without the 
consent, of the candidate or his election agent; 
- Clause (b) omitted by Act 58 of 1958, s. 30 (w.e.f. 30-12-1958). 
(c) that the candidate and his election agent took all reasonable 
means for preventing the commission of corrupt practices at the 
election; and  
(d) that in all other respects the election was free from any corrupt 
practice on the part of the candidate or any of his agents, then 
the High Court may decide that the election of the returned 
candidate is not void.” 
 
11.  Section 123 deals with the “Corrupt Practices”, which covers the 
“undue influence” as the corrupt practice for the purposes of the RP 
Act. The relevant part of Section 123 reads as under: - 
“123. Corrupt practices. —The following shall be deemed to be 
corrupt practices for the purposes of this Act: — 
(1) …. 
(2) Undue influence, that is to say, any direct or indirect 
interference or attempt to interfere on the part of the candidate or 
his agent, or of any other person 7 [with the consent of the 
candidate or his election agent], with the free exercise of any 
electoral right:  
Provided that—  

 
 
10 
 
(a) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this 
clause any such person as is referred to therein who—  
(i) threatens any candidate or any elector, or any person in whom 
a candidate or an elector is interested, with injury of any kind 
including social ostracism and ex-communication or expulsion 
from any caste or community; or  
(ii) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or an elector to 
believe that he, or any person in whom he is interested, will 
become or will be rendered an object of divine displeasure or 
spiritual censure, shall be deemed to interfere with the free 
exercise of the electoral right of such candidate or elector within 
the meaning of this clause;  
(b) a declaration of public policy, or a promise of public action, or 
the mere exercise of a legal right without intent to interfere with 
an electoral right, shall not be deemed to be interference within 
the meaning of this clause. 
(3) to (8) ……….” 
 
12. At the outset, it may be noted that as per the well settled legal 
position, right to contest election or to question the election by means 
of an Election Petition is neither common law nor fundamental right. 
It is a statutory right governed by the statutory provisions of the RP 
Act. Outside the statutory provisions, there is no right to dispute an 
election. The RP Act is a complete and self-contained code within 
which any rights claimed in relation to an election or an election 
dispute must be found. The provisions of Civil Procedure Code are 
applicable to the extent as permissible under Section 87 of the RP 
Act. 

 
 
11 
 
13. It hardly needs to be reiterated that in an Election Petition, pleadings 
have to be precise, specific and unambiguous, and if the Election 
Petition does not disclose a cause of action, it is liable to be dismissed 
in limine. It may also be noted that the cause of action in questioning 
the validity of election must relate to the grounds specified in Section 
100 of the RP Act. As held in Bhagwati Prasad Dixit ‘Ghorewala’ 
vs. Rajeev Gandhi4 and in Dhartipakar Madan Lal Agarwal vs. 
Rajiv Gandhi5, if the allegations contained in the petition do not set 
out the grounds as contemplated by Section 100 and do not conform 
to the requirement of Section 81 and 83 of the Act, the pleadings are 
liable to be struck off and the Election Petition is liable to be rejected 
under Order VII, Rule 11 CPC. 
14. A beneficial reference of the decision in case of Laxmi Narayan 
Nayak vs. Ramratan Chaturvedi and Others6 be also made, 
wherein this Court upon review of the earlier decisions, laid down 
following principles applicable to election cases involving corrupt 
practices: -  
“5. This Court in a catena of decisions has laid down the 
principles as to the nature of pleadings in election cases, the sum 
and substance of which being: 
 
 
4 (1986) 4 SCC 78 
5 (1987) Supp SCC 93 
6 (1990) 2 SCC 173 

 
 
12 
 
(1) 
The pleadings of the election petitioner in his petition 
should be absolutely precise and clear containing all necessary 
details and particulars as required by law vide Dhartipakar 
Madan Lal Agarwal v. Rajiv Gandhi [1987 Supp SCC 93] 
and Kona Prabhakara Rao v. M. Seshagiri Rao [(1982) 1 SCC 
442] . 
 
(2) 
The allegations in the election petition should not be 
vague, general in nature or lacking of materials or frivolous or 
vexatious because the court is empowered at any stage of the 
proceedings to strike down or delete pleadings which are 
suffering from such vices as not raising any triable issue 
vide Manphul Singh v. Surinder Singh [(1973) 2 SCC 599: 
(1974) 1 SCR 52] , Kona Prabhakara Rao v. M. Seshagiri 
Rao [(1982) 
1 
SCC 
442] 
and Dhartipakar 
Madan 
Lal 
Agarwal v. Rajiv Gandhi [1987 Supp SCC 93] . 
 
(3) 
The evidence adduced in support of the pleadings should 
be of such nature leading to an irresistible conclusion or 
unimpeachable result that the allegations made, have been 
committed rendering the election void under Section 100 
vide Jumuna Prasad Mukhariya v. Lachhi Ram [(1955) 1 SCR 
608: 
AIR 
1954 
SC 
686] 
and Rahim 
Khan v. Khurshid 
Ahmed [(1974) 2 SCC 660] . 
 
(4) 
The evidence produced before the court in support of the 
pleadings must be clear, cogent, satisfactory, credible and 
positive and also should stand the test of strict and scrupulous 
scrutiny vide Ram Sharan Yadav v. Thakur Muneshwar Nath 
Singh [(1984) 4 SCC 649] . 
 
(5) 
It is unsafe in an election case to accept oral evidence at 
its face value without looking for assurances for some surer 
circumstances 
or 
unimpeachable 
documents 
vide Rahim 
Khan v. Khurshid Ahmed [(1974) 2 SCC 660] , M. Narayana 
Rao v. G. Venkata Reddy [(1977) 1 SCC 771: (1977) 1 SCR 490] 
, Lakshmi Raman Acharya v. Chandan Singh [(1977) 1 SCC 
423: (1977) 2 SCR 412] and Ramji Prasad Singh v. Ram Bilas 
Jha [(1977) 1 SCC 260] . 
 
(6) 
The onus of proof of the allegations made in the election 
petition is undoubtedly on the person who assails an election 
which has been concluded vide Rahim Khan v. Khurshid 
Ahmed [(1974) 2 SCC 660] , Mohan Singh v. Bhanwarlal [(1964) 
5 SCR 12: AIR 1964 SC 1366] and Ramji Prasad Singh v. Ram 
Bilas Jha [(1977) 1 SCC 260].” 
 

 
 
13 
 
15. The legal position with regard to the non-compliance of the 
requirement of Section 83(1)(a) of the RP Act and the rejection of 
Election Petition under Order VII Rule 11, CPC has also been 
regurgitated recently by this Court in case of Kanimozhi 
Karunanidhi vs. A. Santhana Kumar and Others (supra): -  
“28. The legal position enunciated in afore-stated cases may be 
summed up as under: — 
i. Section 83(1)(a) of RP Act, 1951 mandates that an Election 
petition shall contain a concise statement of material facts on 
which the petitioner relies. If material facts are not stated in an 
Election petition, the same is liable to be dismissed on that 
ground alone, as the case would be covered by Clause (a) of 
Rule 11 of Order 7 of the Code. 
ii. The material facts must be such facts as would afford a basis 
for the allegations made in the petition and would constitute the 
cause of action, that is every fact which it would be necessary for 
the plaintiff/petitioner to prove, if traversed in order to support his 
right to the judgment of court. Omission of a single material fact 
would lead to an incomplete cause of action and the statement 
of plaint would become bad. 
iii. Material facts mean the entire bundle of facts which would 
constitute a complete cause of action. Material facts would 
include positive statement of facts as also positive averment of a 
negative fact, if necessary. 
iv. In order to get an election declared as void under Section 
100(1)(d)(iv) of the RP Act, the Election petitioner must aver that 
on account of non-compliance with the provisions of 
the Constitution or of the Act or any rules or orders made under 
the Act, the result of the election, in so far as it concerned the 
returned candidate, was materially affected. 
v. The Election petition is a serious matter and it cannot be 
treated lightly or in a fanciful manner nor is it given to a person 
who uses it as a handle for vexatious purpose. 
vi. An Election petition can be summarily dismissed on the 
omission of a single material fact leading to an incomplete cause 

 
 
14 
 
of action, or omission to contain a concise statement of material 
facts on which the petitioner relies for establishing a cause of 
action, in exercise of the powers under Clause (a) of Rule 11 of 
Order VII CPC read with the mandatory requirements enjoined 
by Section 83 of the RP Act.” 
16. Bearing in mind the aforestated legal position, let us consider the 
averments and allegations made by the respondent no. 1 in the 
Election Petition in which the election of the Appellant is sought to be 
challenged basically on two grounds: (1) that the appellant has 
committed corrupt practice and (2) the result of the election in so far 
as it concerned the appellant, was materially affected by the improper 
acceptance of his nomination. In short, the respondent no. 1 has 
invoked Section 100(1)(b) and Section 100(1)(d)(i) of the Act, for 
declaring the election of the Appellant as void. 
17. As transpiring from the Election Petition, the respondent no.1 along 
with 13 other candidates including the present appellant had 
submitted their nomination papers for LA - 10 Sonai LAC, however 
according to the respondent no. 1, the affidavit in Form 26 filed by the 
appellant along with his nomination paper was invalid and defective 
as the same contained false statements, and suppression and 
misrepresentation of facts with regard to the educational qualification 
and suppression of facts with regard to his liability in respect of the 
loan availed by him by way of a Cash Credit Limit (CCL) for a 
partnership firm namely M/s. Allied Concern of which he was an 

 
 
15 
 
active partner, and suppression of facts with regard to his default in 
deposit of employer’s contribution of provident fund in respect of the 
employees of the said M/s. Allied Concern. As regards the false claim 
of educational qualification, the respondent no.1 has alleged in the 
Election petition inter alia that the appellant had mentioned in Column 
no. 9 of his affidavit in Form 26 appended to his nomination paper 
that his educational qualification was Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) which he 
passed from Chaudhary Charan Singh University, Meerut in Uttar 
Pradesh in the year 2019, but the appellant had never passed B.A. 
from the said University or from any other Institution or University. It 
is further alleged in the Election petition that the appellant did not 
mention about his so-called technical qualification of diploma in Civil 
Engineering in the nomination paper, which he had mentioned in the 
affidavit in Form 26 when he contested 2016 General Election. The 
respondent no. 1 has also alleged that though the appellant was a 
partner in M/s. Allied Concern, which availed a loan from United Bank 
of India (PNB), Tarapur Branch at Silchar, the appellant had 
deliberately suppressed the details of the CC Limit Loan Account with 
the said bank and also the defaults made in repayment of the said 
loan. The respondent no. 1 has also alleged that the appellant had 
deliberately not mentioned about the liabilities of the appellant as the 
partner of M/s. Allied Concern with regard to the employer’s 

 
 
16 
 
contribution of provident fund for its employees. According to the 
respondent no. 1 he had raised an objection before the returning 
officer on the date of scrutiny that is on 15.03.2021 that the appellant 
did not possess the educational qualification of B.A. from Chaudhary 
Charan Singh University, Meerut and therefore his nomination paper 
was liable to be rejected. According to him, another independent 
candidate Karim Uddin Barbhuiya, (the respondent no. 8 in the 
Election petition) had also raised an objection by submitting a written 
complaint dated 15.03.2021 before the returning officer, however the 
returning officer had failed to exercise his jurisdiction and authority 
under Section 36 of the RP Act and refused to make even a summary 
enquiry by calling upon the appellant to meet with the objections 
raised by him. Thus, according to the respondent no. 1, there was an 
improper acceptance of the nomination paper of the appellant. He 
also alleged that the misrepresentation and false representation of 
educational qualification by the appellant in the affidavit in Form 26 
and suppression and misrepresentation of the liability of the appellant 
in the said affidavit in respect of the cash credit facility, and non-
disclosure of the default of the appellant in respect of his liabilities 
towards employer’s contribution to the provident fund tantamount to 
commission of “Corrupt practice” of undue influence within the 
meaning of Section 123(2) of the RP Act. The respondent no. 1 

 
 
17 
 
therefore has filed the Election Petition under Section 100 of the Act 
seeking declaration that the election of the appellant - the returned 
candidate, was void.  
18. The appellant, who is respondent no. 1 in the Election petition before 
the High Court, had submitted an I.A. being no. 1278 of 2021 seeking 
rejection of the Election petition under Order VII Rule 11 of CPC read 
with Section 87 of the RP Act. It was contended by the appellant in 
the said application that the paragraphs alleging “Corrupt practices” 
of undue influence contained in the Election petition do not constitute 
“material facts” of alleged Corrupt practices so as to give rise to a 
cause of action for filing the Election Petition. None of the statements 
made in the various paragraphs of the Election petition could be said 
to be a Concise statement of “material facts” or “material particulars” 
to give rise to a cause of action with triable issues on falsity in 
nomination papers, improper acceptance of nomination paper and 
commission of corrupt practice.  
19. Now, from the bare reading of the Election petition, it emerges that 
the respondent no. 1 has made only bald and vague allegations in 
the Election Petition without stating the material facts in support 
thereof as required to be stated under Section 83(1)(a) of the RP Act. 
Apart from the fact that none of the allegations with regard to the false 

 
 
18 
 
statements, and suppression and misrepresentation of facts allegedly 
made by the respondent no. 1 with regard to his educational 
qualification or with regard to his liability in respect of the loan availed 
by him for his partnership firm or with regard to his default in 
depositing the employer’s contribution to provident fund, would fall 
within the definition of “Corrupt practice” of “undue influence” as 
envisaged in Section 123(2) of the RP Act, the Election petition also 
lacks concise statement of “material facts” as contemplated in 
Section 83(a), and lacks “full particulars” of the alleged Corrupt 
practice as contemplated in Section 83(b) of the RP Act.  
20. So far as the allegations of “Corrupt practice” are concerned, the 
respondent no. 1 was required to make concise statement of material 
facts as to how the appellant had indulged into “Corrupt practice” of 
undue influence by directly or indirectly interfering or attempted to 
interfere with the free exercise of any electoral right. Mere bald and 
vague allegations without any basis would not be sufficient 
compliance of the requirement of making a concise statement of the 
“material facts” in the Election Petition. The material facts which are 
primary and basic facts have to be pleaded in support of the case set 
up by the Election petitioner to show his cause of action. Any 
omission of a single material fact would lead to an incomplete cause 

 
 
19 
 
of action entitling the returned candidate to pray for dismissal of 
Election petition under Order VII Rule 11(a) of CPC read with Section 
83(1)(a) of the RP Act. The said legal position has been well settled 
by this Court in Azhar Hussain vs. Rajiv Gandhi7, wherein this Court 
after referring to the earlier pronouncements in Samant N. 
Balkrishna and Another vs. George Fernandez and Others8 and 
Shri Udhav Singh vs. Madhav Rao Scindia9, observed that the 
omission of a single material fact would lead to incomplete cause of 
action, and that an Election petition without the material facts is not 
an Election petition at all. It was further held that all the facts which 
are essential to clothe the petition with complete cause of action must 
be pleaded and omission of even a single material fact would amount 
to disobedience of the mandate of Section 83(1)(a) of the Act and an 
Election petition can be and must be dismissed, if it suffers from any 
such vice.  
21. It is also pertinent to note at this juncture that a charge of “Corrupt 
practice” is easy to level but difficult to prove because it is in the 
nature of criminal charge and has got to be proved beyond doubt. 
The standard of proof required for establishing a charge of “Corrupt 
 
7  (1986) Supp. SCC 315 
8  (1969) 3 SCC 238 
9  (1977) 1 SCC 511 

 
 
20 
 
practice” is the same as is applicable to a criminal charge. Therefore, 
Section 83(1)(b) mandates that when the allegation of “Corrupt 
practice” is made, the Election Petition shall set forth full particulars 
of the corrupt practice that the Election Petitioner alleges, including 
as full a statement as possible of the names of parties alleged to have 
committed such corrupt practice and the date and place of the 
commission of each such practice. The pleadings with regard to the 
allegation of corrupt practice have to be precise, specific and 
unambiguous whether it is bribery or undue influence or other corrupt 
practices as stated in Section 123 of the Act. If it is corrupt practice in 
the nature of undue influence, the pleadings must state the full 
particulars with regard to the direct or indirect interference or attempt 
to interfere by the candidate, with the free exercise of any electoral 
right as stated in Section 123(2) of the Act. We are afraid, Mr. Gupta 
has failed to point out from the pleadings of the Election petition as to 
how the appellant had interfered or attempted to interfere with the 
free exercise of any electoral right so as to constitute “undue 
influence” under Section 123(2) of the Act.  
22. So far as the ground contained in clause (d) of Section 100(1) of the 
Act, with regard to improper acceptance of the nomination of the 
Appellant is concerned, there is not a single averment made in the 

 
 
21 
 
Election Petition as to how the result of the election, in so far as the 
appellant was concerned, was materially affected by improper 
acceptance of his nomination, so as to constitute a cause of action 
under Section 100(1)(d)(i) of the Act. Though it is true that the 
Election Petitioner is not required to state as to how corrupt practice 
had materially affected the result of the election, nonetheless it is 
mandatory to state when the clause (d)(i) of Section 100(1) is invoked 
as to how the result of election was materially affected by improper 
acceptance of the nomination form of the Appellant. 
23. As transpiring from the Election Petition, the respondent no. 1 himself 
had not raised any objection in writing against the nomination filed by 
the Appellant, at the time of scrutiny made by the Returning Officer 
under Section 36 of the Act. According to him, he had raised oral 
objection with regard to the education qualification stated by the 
Appellant in the Affidavit in Form-26. If he could make oral objection, 
he could as well, have made objection in writing against the 
acceptance of nomination of the Appellant, and in that case the 
Returning Officer would have decided his objection under sub-section 
(2) of Section 36, after holding a summary inquiry. Even if it is 
accepted that he had raised an oral objection with regard to the 
educational qualification of the Appellant before the Returning Officer 

 
 
22 
 
at the time of scrutiny, the respondent no. 1 has failed to make 
averment in the Election Petition as to how Appellant’s nomination 
was liable to be rejected by the Returning Officer on the grounds 
mentioned in Section 36(2) of the Act, so as to make his case fall 
under clause (d)(i) of Section 100(1) that there was improper 
acceptance of the nomination of the Appellant. The non-mentioning 
of the particulars as to how such improper acceptance of nomination 
had materially affected the result of the election, is apparent on the 
face of the Election Petition. 
24. As stated earlier, in Election Petition, the pleadings have to be 
precise, specific and unambiguous. If the allegations contained in 
Election Petition do not set out grounds as contemplated in Section 
100 and do not conform to the requirement of Section 81 and 83 of 
the Act, the Election Petition is liable to be rejected under Order VII, 
Rule 11 of CPC. An omission of a single material fact leading to an 
incomplete cause of action or omission to contain a concise 
statement of material facts on which the Election petitioner relies for 
establishing a cause of action, would entail rejection of Election 
Petition under Order VII Rule 11 read with Section 83 and 87 of the 
RP Act. 

 
 
23 
 
25. In that view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the Election 
Petition being No. 1 of 2021 filed by the Respondent No. 1 (Election 
Petitioner) before the High Court deserves to be dismissed and is 
accordingly dismissed. 
26.  The Appeal stands allowed accordingly. 
 
 
      ……………………………………J. 
       [ANIRUDDHA BOSE] 
   
 
 
            
 
 
      ……………..……………………. J.     
                                                 
       [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
  
08.04.2024