2024 INSC 285
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1547 OF 2024  
                                             
KHENGARBHAI LAKHABHAI DAMBHALA  
  …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF GUJARAT  
 
                 …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
 
1. The appellant, claiming to be the owner of the vehicle being Eicher 
10.80 (Blue) bearing no. GJ 05-BT-0899, seized as Muddamal Article 
in 
connection 
with 
the 
FIR 
bearing 
Criminal 
No.11200038231465/2023, for the offence Under Section 65-
(a)(e),81,98(2),116(2) of Gujarat Prohibition Act and U/s 465, 468, 
471, 114 of IPC registered with the Pardi Police Station, District 
Valasad, had filed the Special Criminal Application No.6465 of 2023 
before the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad seeking release of 
the said vehicle. The said Application having been dismissed by the 
High Court vide the impugned order dated 08.06.2023, the present 
Appeal has been filed.  
Digitally signed by
RAVI ARORA
Date: 2024.04.08
18:04:57 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
2. In the instant case, it appears that the police personnel when they 
were on patrolling duty had intercepted the vehicle in question on the 
basis of a secret information received by them. It was alleged that the 
driver of the said vehicle was carrying English Liquor (1240.200 litres) 
worth of rupees 7 lakhs in the said vehicle without any pass or permit. 
The said vehicle along with the liquor was seized and the aforestated 
FIR was registered against the accused Lakhabhai Khengarbhai (the 
son of the present appellant), and others on 29.04.2023 at the Police 
Station Pardi, Valasad.  
3. The respondent – State of Gujarat by filing the counter-affidavit has 
contented inter alia that Section 98 (2) of the Gujarat Prohibition Act 
1949 (hereinafter referred to as the said ‘Act’) forbids the release of 
such vehicle till the final judgment of the Court, where the quantity of 
seized liquor is exceeding the quantity prescribed by the Rules. In the 
instant case, the seized quantity of liquor was 1240 litres as against 
the prescribed quantity of 20 litres as per the Notification dated 
02.07.2019, and hence the said vehicle was liable for the confiscation 
and could not be released on bond or surety till the final judgment of 
the court. 
4. At the outset, it may be noted that Chapter XXXIV of  
Cr.P.C deals with the disposal of the property. Section 451 thereof 

3 
 
pertains to the order to be passed by the Criminal Court for custody 
and disposal of the property produced before the court pending an 
inquiry or trial, whereas Section 452 pertains to the order to be 
passed for the disposal or confiscation of the property at the 
conclusion of the trial. Section 451 reads as under: - 
“451. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial 
in certain cases. — 
When any property is produced before any Criminal Court during 
any inquiry or trial, the Court may make such order as it thinks fit 
for the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of 
the inquiry or trial, and, if the property is subject to speedy and 
natural decay, or if it is otherwise expedient so to do, the Court may, 
after recording such evidence as it thinks necessary, order it to be 
sold or otherwise disposed of. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “property” 
includes— 
(a) property of any kind or document which is produced before the 
Court or which is in its custody; 
(b) any property regarding which an offence appears to have been 
committed or which appears to have been used for the commission 
of any offence.” 
 
 
5. 
From the bare reading of the aforesaid provision, it clearly transpires 
that when any property is produced before any criminal court during 
the course of inquiry or trial, the Court is required to make such order 
as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such property pending the 
conclusion of the inquiry or the trial. If the property is subject to 
speedy and natural decay, or if it is otherwise expedient so to do, 
the Court may after recording such evidence as it thinks necessary, 
order it to be sold or otherwise disposed of. Thus, it is the criminal 

4 
 
court, before whom the property in question is sought to be 
produced, would have the jurisdiction and the power to pass 
appropriate orders for the proper custody of such property or for 
selling or disposing of such property, having regard to the nature of 
the property in question, after recording the evidence in that regard.  
6. 
In the instant case, the appellant without approaching the concerned 
court under Section 451, Cr.P.C, directly approached the High Court 
by filing Special Criminal Application under Article 226/227 of the 
Constitution of India, which could not be said to be the proper course 
of action for getting the custody of the property i.e. the vehicle in 
question in this case. When there is a specific statutory provision 
contained in the Cr.P.C. empowering the criminal court to pass 
appropriate order for the proper custody and disposal of the property 
pending the inquiry or trial, the appellant could not have invoked the 
extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India seeking release of his vehicle.  
7. The respondent State has also raised the contention that Section 
98(2) of the said Act puts an embargo against release of the vehicle 
till the final judgment of the court if the quantity of seized liquor is 
more than the prescribed quantity. Since, such contention is often 
raised, we deem it necessary to deal with the provisions contained in 
Section 98 of the Act also. Section 98 reads as under: - 

5 
 
“98. Things liable to confiscation- (1) Whenever any offence 
punishable under this Act has been committed, 
(a) any intoxicant, hemp, mhowra flowers, molasses, materials, 
still, utensil, implement or apparatus in respect of which the offence 
has been committed, 
(b) where, in the case of an offence involving illegal possession, the 
offender has in his lawful possession any intoxicant, hemp, mhowra 
flowers or molasses other than those in respect of which an offence 
under this Act has been committed, the entire stock of such 
intoxicant, hemp, mhowra flowers, or molasses, 
(c) where, in the case of an offence of illegal import, export or 
transport, the offender has attempted to import, export or transport 
any 
intoxicant, hemp, 
mhowra 
flowers 
or molasses, 
in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act, rule, regulation or order 
or in breach of a condition of a licence, permit, pass or 
authorization, the whole quantity of such intoxicant, hemp, mhowra 
flowers or molasses which he has attempted to import, export or 
transport, 
(d) where, in the case of an offence of illegal sale, the offender has 
in his lawful possession any intoxicant, hemp, mhowra flowers or 
molasses other than that in respect of which an offence has been 
committed, the whole of such other intoxicant, hemp, mhowra 
flowers or molasses, shall be confiscated by the order of the Court. 
(2) Any receptacle, package or covering in which any of the articles 
liable to confiscation under sub-section (1) is found and the other 
contents of such receptacle, package or covering and the animals, 
carts, vessels or other conveyances used in, carrying any such 
article shall like-wise be liable to confiscation by the order of the 
Court. [ but it shall not be released on bond or surety till the final 
judgement of the Court where the quantity of the seized liquor is 
exceeding the quantity as may be prescribed by the rules.]”  
 
8. Sub-section (1) of Section 98 deals with the articles liable to 
confiscation, whenever any offence punishable under the Act has 
been committed. However, sub-section (2) of Section 98 is in two 
parts. The first part upto the conjunctive word “but”, states about the 

6 
 
confiscation of the articles like receptacle, package or covering and 
about the confiscation of the animals, carts, vessels or any other 
conveyances used in carrying any such article, and the second part 
starting with the conjunctive word “but” is perceived to be an embargo 
against release of the conveyance used for carrying the article liable 
to be confiscated if the quantity of the seized liquor carried in such 
conveyance is more than the prescribed quantity, till the final 
judgment of the court. It may be noted that the second part of sub-
section (2) of Section 98 was incorporated by the Gujarat Act 29 of 
2011. However, in our opinion, this incorporation of the second part 
by amendment in 2011 is not very happily worded, and therefore, it 
is seen as an embargo.  
9. When the conjunction “but” is used in a provision, after the 
punctuation mark “comma”, it is deemed that such conjunction is 
used to carve out an exception or proviso to the main provision. 
Meaning thereby, when the entire provision is divided into two parts 
by using the punctuation mark “comma” followed by the conjunctive 
word “but”, the second part is required to be construed as an 
exception or proviso to the first part. However, so far as sub-section 
(2) of Section 98 is concerned though it is in two parts connected with 
the conjunctive word “but”, there is hardly any co-relation between 
the first part and the second part thereof. It is difficult to comprehend 

7 
 
the second part of sub-section (2) as an exception or proviso to the 
first part thereof. Since it is not happily worded, applying the doctrine 
of harmonious construction, we will have to harmonise the provisions 
contained therein with the other provisions of the Act and with the 
provisions contained in the Cr.P.C.  
10. It is pertinent to note that the words “confiscation” or “seizure” are not 
defined either in the said Act or in the Cr.P.C. As per the Black’s Law 
Dictionary in the 11th Edition, the word “confiscation” means seizure 
of property for the public treasury or seizure of property by actual or 
supposed authority, and the word “seizure” means an act or an 
instance of taking possession of a person or property by legal right or 
process. Having regard to the said meanings, it is clear that “seizure” 
would be a preliminary step that would lead to confiscation of an 
article seized. The power to seize an article may be exercised by the 
statutory authorities like police personnel, prohibition officers, 
revenue authorities etc. in accordance with the concerned Statutes, 
whereas the power of confiscation is normally exercised by the 
jurisdictional Courts in accordance with the provisions of the 
concerned Statutes. 
11. Coming back to the Gujarat Prohibition Act, provisions with regard to 
the articles liable to be confiscated and the powers of the court to 
confiscate such articles have been incorporated in Section 98, 

8 
 
whereas the powers of the authorised Prohibition Officer or police 
officer to arrest the offender and seize the contraband articles are 
contained in Section 123, followed by other provisions with regard to 
the procedure to be followed after the seizure of the articles as 
contained in Section 132 of the said act. 
12. Section 132 reads as under: - 
“132. Article seized - [When anything has been seized, under the 
provisions of this Act by a Prohibition Officer exercising powers 
under section 129 or by an Officer in-charge of a Police Station], or 
has been sent to him in accordance with the provisions of this Act, 
such officer, after such inquiry as may be deemed necessary, —  
(a) if it appears that such thing is required as evidence in the case 
of any person arrested, shall forward it to the Magistrate to whom 
such person is forwarded or for his appearance before whom bail 
has been taken,  
(b) if it appears that such thing is liable to confiscation but is not 
required as evidence as aforesaid, shall send it with a full report of 
the particulars of seizure to the Collector,  
(c) if no offence appears to have been committed shall return it to 
the person from whose possession it was taken.” 
 
13. As could be seen from the bare reading of Section 132, the 
authorised Prohibition Officer or the officer in charge of Police Station 
may after such inquiry as may be necessary either (a) forward the 
article seized to the jurisdictional Magistrate where the person 
arrested is forwarded, if it appears to him that such seized article is 
required as an evidence; or (b) send the seized article to the collector 
with the full report, if it appears to him that such seized article is liable 
to confiscation but is not required as an evidence; or (c) return such 

9 
 
seized article to the person from whose possession it was taken, if no 
offence appears to have been committed. 
14. Thus, on the conjoint reading of the provisions contained in Section 
98 and 132 of the said Act and of Section 451 Cr.PC, it is discernible 
that all these provisions operate in different fields. Section 98 deals 
with the Confiscation of the Articles whenever any offence punishable 
under the Act has been committed. The second part of sub-section 
(2) thereof would come into play when the Prohibition Officer or Police 
Officer sends the seized article liable to be confiscated but not 
required as an evidence, to the Collector as per Clause (b) of Section 
132. However, Section 451 of the Cr.P.C. would come into play when 
the article property seized during the course of inquiry or investigation 
is produced before the jurisdictional Court as per Clause (a) of 
Section 132 and the Court is called upon to pass appropriate orders 
for the proper custody of such article/property pending the conclusion 
of the inquiry or the trial.  
15. So far as the facts of this case are concerned, the vehicle in question 
appears to have been seized as it was allegedly carrying huge 
quantity of liquor exceeding the prescribed quantity. However, there 
is nothing on record to suggest as to whether the said vehicle was 
sought to be produced before the concerned court so as to invoke 
Section 451 of Cr.P.C or whether such vehicle was forwarded by the 

10 
 
police officer to the concerned Magistrate as contemplated in Clause 
(a) of Section 132 of the said Act. In absence of any such factual 
material placed on record, it is difficult to release the vehicle in 
question in favour of the appellant.  
16. It is true that when the property/vehicle is seized during the course of 
investigation and the same is produced before the concerned 
Criminal Court, it is incumbent on the part of the concerned Court to 
pass appropriate orders for keeping the vehicle in proper custody 
pending the trial. It is also true that as held by this Court in case of 
Sunderbhai Ambalal Desai vs. State of Gujarat1,  it is of no use to 
keep the seized vehicles at the police stations for a long period and 
it is for the magistrate to pass appropriate orders for the proper 
custody of the said such vehicles during the pendency of the trial. 
However, as observed earlier, the appellant without approaching the 
concerned criminal court under Section 451 of the Cr.P.C seeking 
custody of the vehicle in question, directly approached the High Court 
by filing Special Criminal Application under Article 226/227 of the 
Constitution of India, which was not the proper course as adopted by 
the appellant. 
 
1  (2002) 10 SCC 283 

11 
 
17. In that view of the matter, the present Appeal deserves to be 
dismissed and is hereby dismissed. It is however clarified that it shall 
be open for the Appellant to approach the concerned Court where the 
property/vehicle in question is sought to be produced during the 
course of inquiry or trial. 
18.  The Appeal stands dismissed accordingly.  
 
 
          …………………………………J.  
           [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 
   
 
 
            
             
 
         …………..……………………. J.     
                                                 
          [PANKAJ MITHAL] 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
  
08th APRIL, 2024.