2024 INSC 405
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  2225  OF  2011
SANT BHAGWAN BABA SHIKSHAN MANDAL & 
ORS.
.....
APPELLANTS
                                VERSUS
GUNWANT & ORS.
.....
RESPONDENTS
O R D E R
1.
The appellants are aggrieved by the judgment dated 17th November, 2009,
passed  by  the  High  Court  of  Judicature  at  Bombay,  Aurangabad  Bench,
whereunder a Writ Petition1 filed by the respondent no.1 praying  inter alia for
being appointed to the post of Shikshan Sevak in the appellant no.3-School was
allowed and the appellants were directed to ensure that he is appointed to the
subject post on or before 31st December, 2009, in accordance with law.
2.
We may briefly advert to the relevant sequence of events.  The respondent no.1
was appointed as a Peon in the appellant no.3-School, being run by the appellant
no.1-Society on 14th June, 1991.  His appointment to the subject post was
approved vide letter dated 29th January, 1998.  While working on the subject post,
in the year 2004, the respondent no.1 passed Bachelor of Arts examination from
the Yashwant Rao Chavan Open University, Nasik.  In the year 2005, he passed
the Bachelor of Physical Education Examination.  On 10th June, 2005, the
respondent no.2-State of Maharashtra issued a Government Resolution2 for
1 Writ Petition No. 1895 of 2007
2 For short the ‘GR’
1
Digitally signed by
KAVITA PAHUJA
Date: 2024.05.10
17:12:19 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

implementation of the revised Shikshan Sevak Yojana in aided Secondary and
Higher Secondary Schools/Colleges, D.Ed. Colleges and Sainik Schools in the
State.  The tenure of the Shikshan Sevak was fixed as three years and it was
clarified in paragraph 8 as follows:
“8.
Where the non-teaching employee in the secondary
school  and  Junior  college  acquires  educational  qualification
required  for  teachers  and  such  posts  are  available  in  the
secondary and higher secondary/school/colleges, then such non-
teaching member will have to be appointed as Shikshan Sevak
and he will be entitled for honourarium as applicable to Shikshan
Sevak and all other terms and conditions will be applicable to him.
However, service rendered by non-teaching staff will be taken into
consideration for pension”. 
3.
On 15th February, 2007, the respondent no.2-State of Maharashtra issued a fresh
GR in the background of the Central Government framing the Sarva Shiksha
Abhiyan (Education for All Campaign), which left it to the States to develop a
framework for appointment of teachers within the guidelines of the National
Council  of  Teachers  Education.   Keeping  in  mind  the  said  Scheme,  the
respondent  no.2-State  considered  it  imperative  to  implement  an  alternative
Scheme for appointing Shikshan Sevaks on vacant posts of teachers in all
Secondary/Higher Secondary Schools/Junior Colleges and College Education in
the  State.   For  the  purposes  of  implementing  the  said  Scheme,  several
Resolutions were passed from time to time, starting with the first GR dated 13 th
October, 2000, followed by GRs dated 26th July, 2001, 27th July, 2001, 18th
December, 2003, 28th May, 2004,  07th January, 2005, 10th January, 2005 and 26th
April, 2006.
4.
All the aforesaid GRs were clubbed and included in the original GR dated 13th
2

October, 2000, which was updated by virtue of GR dated 15th February, 2007.
After updating the original GR, the Maharashtra Employees of Private Schools
(Conditions of Service) Regulation Act3, 1977 was amended and the post of
Shikshan Sevak was included in the definition Clause, i.e., Section 2(24A) and
the consequential amendments were included by virtue of the Maharashtra Act
XIV of 2007.  Section 5 of the Act, 1977 that mandates the management to fill up
every permanent vacancy in a Private School by appointment of a person duly
qualified to fill such a vacancy was also amended in the following manner:
“5. (1) The Management shall, as soon as possible, fill in, in the
manner prescribed, every permanent vacancy in a private school
by the appointment of a person duly qualified to fill such vacancy:
[Provided that, unless such vacancy is to be filled in by promotion,
the Management shall, before proceeding to fill such vacancy,
ascertain from the Educational Inspector, Greater Bombay, [the
Education Officer, Zilla Parishad or, as the case may be, the
Director or the officer designated by the Director in respect of
schools imparting technical, vocational, art or special education,
whether there is any suitable person available on the list of surplus
persons maintained by him, for absorption in other schools; and in
the event of such person being available, the Management shall
appoint that person in such vacancy.]
(2) Every person appointed to fill a permanent vacancy [except
Shikshan sevak] shall be on probation for a period of two years.
Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4), he shall, on
completion of this probation period of two years, be deemed to
have been confirmed.
[Provided that, every person appointed as [Shikshan sevak)] shall
be on probation for a period of three years.]
[(2A)  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  sub-sections  (3)  and  (4),
shikshan sevak shall, on completion of the probation period of
three years, be deemed to have been appointed and confirmed as
a teacher.]
(3) If in the opinion of the Management, the work or behaviour of
any  probationer,  during  the  period  of  his  probation,  is  not
satisfactory, the Management may terminate his services at any
time during the said period after giving him one month’s notice [or
salary [or honorarium] of one month in lieu of notice].
3  For short the ‘Act of 1977’
3

(4) If the services of any probationer are terminated under sub-
section (3) and he is reappointed by the Management in the same
school or any other school belonging to it within a period of one
year from the date on which his services were terminated, then the
period of probation undergone by him previously shall be taken
into consideration in calculating the required period of probation for
the purposes of sub-section (2). 
[(4A) Nothing in sub-section (2), (3) or (4) shall apply to a person
appointed  to  fill  a  permanent  vacancy  by  promotion  or  by
absorption as provided under the proviso to sub-section (1).]
(5) The Management may fill in every temporary vacancy by
appointing a person duly qualified to fill such vacancy. The order of
appointment shall be drawn up in the form prescribed in that
behalf, and shall state the period of appointment of such person.”
5.
It is the case of the respondent no.1 that on acquiring requisite qualifications for
the post of Shikshan Sevak, he submitted several representations to the
appellant no.1 for being appointed to the said post, but the same were not
considered favourably. In the year 2006, one Mr. B.R. Dhakne, who was
working as a Physical Education teacher in the school, was to retire on
attaining the age of superannuation.  The appellant no.1 claims to have issued
an  advertisement  on  01st June,  2008,  published  in  the  daily  newspaper,
‘Lokmaan’ inviting application for appointment to the post of Shikshan Sevak.
The appellants claim that though the respondent no.1 was aware of the said
vacancy and the advertisement issued for filling up the vacancy for appointment
to the post of Shikshan Sevak, he did not submit his application.  Instead, after
the post was filled up by the appellants, he challenged the appointment of the
respondent  no.5  by  filing  a  Writ  Petition4 before  the  High  Court.   The
respondent no.1 separately filed an appeal5 before the School Tribunal, Latur,
which was dismissed for want of prosecution. On 31st January, 2007, the
4 Writ Petition No. 1895 of 2007
5 Appeal No. 131 of 2006
4

respondent no.1 approached the High Court by filing a Writ Petition, which has
been decided in his favour by virtue of the impugned judgment.
6.
Mr. Adarsh Kumar Pandey, learned counsel for the appellants submits that the
High Court has erred in allowing the Writ Petition filed by the respondent no.1
for  the  reason  that  it  failed  to  take  into  consideration  the  fact  that  the
respondent no.1 was given promotion from the post of a Peon (non-teaching
staff) to the post of Shikshan Sevak, which is a teaching post which is in
contravention of the provisions of the Act and the Rules.  In support of the said
submission, he seeks to place reliance on Clause 3 of the Schedule ‘F’ of the
Maharashtra Employees of Private School Rules, 1981, that lays down the
guidelines for fixation of seniority of non-teaching staff and casts an obligation
on the concerned school to maintain a common seniority list of the lower grade
staff on the basis of the date of their appointment and further mandates that if
any of the lower grade staff improves his qualification as prescribed for the post
of Laboratory Assistant or Clerk, then the said employee ought to be given
preference by filling up the said post as per his placement in the common list of
seniority.  It is submitted by learned counsel for the appellants that respondent
no.1 was working on the post of a Peon and at best, he could have been
promoted in accordance with the placement of his name in the seniority list, to
the position of a Laboratory Assistant or Clerk, but to no other post, including
the post of Shikshan Sevak, which was under the category of teaching staff.  It
is thus submitted that the respondent no.1 was not entitled for promotion to the
post of Shikshan Sevak, a post that is a part of the teaching cadre and a non-
5

promotional post.
7.
Per contra, Mr. Vivek C. Solshe, learned counsel for the respondent no.1
supports the impugned judgment and submits that the entire controversy has
been set at rest on amendment of the Maharashtra Employees of Private
Schools (Conditions of Service) Regulation Act, 1977, by including the post of
Shikshan Sevak under the Act and casting an obligation on the management of
Private Schools to fill up the said post by appointing a person suitable in the list
of surplus persons maintained by the office of Education Inspector, Greater
Bombay or the Education Officer, Zilla Parishad, as the case may be, for
absorption to the post.
8.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties, perused the records as also the
impugned  judgment.  In  our  opinion,  the  arguments  advanced  by learned
counsel for the appellants regarding non-entitlement of the respondent no.1 for
appointment from a non-teaching cadre to a teaching cadre has been duly
considered and turned down by the High Court for valid reasons.
9.
It is not in dispute that the respondent no.1 who was working on the post of
Peon, had taken permission from the appellants-Management for undergoing
further education and improving his qualifications.  It is also not in dispute that
in terms of the qualifications acquired by him in the course of his service, the
respondent no.1 qualified for being appointed to the post of Shikshan Sevak.
Thirdly, on completion of the requisite qualification, the respondent no.1 had
submitted a representation to the appellants-management for being appointed
6

to the subject post as and when a vacancy would arise. 
10. Despite the aforesaid position, when a vacancy to the subject post arose on Mr.
Dhakne superannuating in the year 2006, instead of approaching the Education
Inspector/Education Officer/Zilla Parishad, as the case may be, being the office
designated by the Director of Education for vacancies to be filled up by a
suitable person available on the list of surplus persons maintained in that office,
the appellants proceeded to issue an advertisement inviting applications from
the public at large for filling up the subject post, thereby completely ignoring the
claim of the respondent no.1 for being appointed to the subject post.   The High
Court has noticed in paragraph 14 of the impugned judgement that even the
aspect of issuing a public notice in the daily newspaper is doubtful, since the
appellants did not file the relevant page of the daily newspaper along with their
counter affidavit and what was filed, could not be treated as an authentic
newspaper.  Further, the application submitted by the respondent No.1 for
being appointed to the subject post has not been disputed by the appellants.
Their only plea is that the respondent no.1 did not qualify for being appointed
as a Shikshan Sevak and that the appellants were well entitled to fill up the post
in terms of the advertisement issued.
11. Once the respondent no.1 had acquired the requisite qualification in the course
of his service with the respondent no. 3-School, and the relevant GR which was
ultimately  incorporated in the Act of 1977, permitted appointment of a non-
teaching employee in a school as a Shikshan Sevak subject to the employee
acquiring the requisite educational qualifications and further, subject to such a
7

post  being  available,  the  appellants  cannot  be  heard  to  state  that  the
respondent no.1 being a part of the non-teaching staff, was not entitled for
being considered for appointment to the subject post.  In fact, the language
used in the regulation dated 10th June, 2005, itself makes it clear that the
employee was not required to take any steps by making a representation for
being appointed to the post of a Shikshan Sevak and an obligation was cast on
the appellants to ensure that on a permanent vacancy being available to the
post of Shikshan Sevak, a member of the non-teaching staff, who would have
acquired the educational qualification required for such a post, ought to be
appointed directly.
12. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we are of the opinion that the impugned
judgment is well reasoned and does not deserve any interference. 
13. Now coming to the aspect of molding the relief. Though the appellants have
duly impleaded the private respondents no. 4 and 5 in this appeal, being
necessary and proper parties, they have not entered appearance.  Respondent
No.5 was issued an appointment letter to the post of a Shikshan Sevak, in
terms of the letter dated 24th August, 2009, issued by the appellants.  He had
executed a consent/guarantee letter stating  inter alia that in the event the
respondent no.1 succeeds in his Writ Petition, he shall not claim any right to the
subject post. Additionally, a consent letter was also executed by the Secretary
of the appellant no.1 on behalf of the appellant no.1 and the appellant no.3-
School stating inter alia that in the event the judgement in the Writ Petition filed
by the respondent no.1 goes against the Society, then the entire responsibility
8

shall be that of the Society. The respondent no.3-Education Officer had also
approved the appointment of the respondent no.5 to the post of Shikshan
Sevak subject to the outcome of the Writ Petition filed by the respondent no.1. 
14. The records reveal that while issuing notice in the present appeal on 18th
December, 2009, operation of the impugned judgment was stayed.  As a result,
the  respondent  no.5  has  been  continuing  to  discharge  his  duties  in  the
respondent no.3-School as a Physical Education teacher, on the post of an
Assistant Teacher. As noticed above, the respondent no.5 was duly served in
the present appeal but he has elected not to appear or participate in the
proceedings. Now that the impugned judgement has been upheld by this Court
and the respondent no.1 has been held entitled to appointment to the post of
Shikshan Sevak w.e.f. 01st January, 2010 and on expiry of a period of three
years reckoned therefrom, to the post of Assistant Teacher, this Court is
required to consider balancing the equities.  We are informed that in all these
years, respondent no.1 has been serving on the post of Peon in the appellant
no.3-School. Though learned counsel for the respondent no.1 states that the
financial impact of depriving him for appointment to the post of Shikshan Sevak
in terms of the impugned judgment comes to ₹.21,00,000/- (Rupees Twenty
One Lakhs) approximately, we are of the opinion that ends of justice would be
met if the appellants are directed to pay a consolidated sum of ₹.10,00,000/-
(Rupees Ten Lakhs) to the respondent no.1 on account of the financial loss
incurred by him and for his non-appointment to the subject post.  Needful shall
be done within eight weeks.  For purposes of claiming seniority and retiral
9

benefits, the notional date of his appointment to the post of Shikshan Sevak
shall be reckoned as 01st January, 2010. Respondent no.3 shall issue a letter
indicating the pay scale of the respondent no.1 by notionally computing it on the
post of Shikshan Sevak w.e.f. 01st January, 2010 and to the post of Assistant
Teacher w.e.f. 01st January, 2013 and furnish a copy thereof to the appellants
within three months.
15. As for the respondent no.5, it is directed that in the event the post of a Physical
Education Teacher is vacant and available in any of the schools/colleges being
run by the appellant no.1-Society, he shall be duly accommodated on the post
of an Assistant Teacher there.  In the alternative, the respondent no.5 shall be
considered by the State authorities for appointment in terms of Regulation 5 of
the Act of 1977, as amended from time to time, on being declared as a surplus
teacher.  However, there shall not be any recovery of salary or emoluments
from the respondent no.5 for the period during which he has rendered services
with the appellant no.3 – School.
16. The appeal is disposed of on the above terms, while leaving the parties to bear
their own expenses.
.………………..………………........J.     
      [HIMA KOHLI]
.………………..………………........J.     
      [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH] 
NEW DELHI
APRIL 03, 2024
PS
10