2024 INSC 343
Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 1 of 14 
 
Reportable 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024 
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) Nos.3484-3488 of 2024) 
 
 
Shivani Tyagi    
 
 
               Appellant(s) 
 
Versus 
State of U.P. & Anr.  
                        Respondent(s) 
 
 
O R D E R 
 
 
 
Leave granted.  
1. 
In these quintuplet appeals the victim of an acid 
attack assails the suspension of sentence of life 
imprisonment of the convicted persons, the private 
respondents and their consequential enlargement on 
bail. 
2. 
Heard learned counsel appearing for the self-
same appellant-victim in the captioned appeal, learned 
counsel appearing for the common first respondent-
Digitally signed by Dr.
Naveen Rawal
Date: 2024.04.26
14:05:07 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 2 of 14 
 
State of Uttar Pradesh and learned counsel appearing 
for the private respondents.  
3. 
Section 389 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for 
short the “Cr.PC”) deals with the suspension of 
execution of sentence pending the appeal against 
conviction and release of appellant(s) on bail.  The said 
provision mandates for recording of reasons in writing 
leading to the conclusion that the convicts are entitled 
to get suspension of sentence and consequential 
release on bail.  The said requirement thus indicates the 
legislative intention that the appellate Court invoking 
the power under Section 389, Cr. PC, should assess the 
matter objectively and that such assessment should 
reflect in the order. 
4. 
We will briefly refer to some of the relevant 
decisions dealing with Section 389, Cr. PC.  In the case 
of short-term imprisonment for conviction of an offence, 
suspension of sentence is the normal rule and its 

Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 3 of 14 
 
rejection is the exception.  (See the decision in 
Bhagwan Rama Shinde Gosai & Ors. v. State of 
Gujarat1).  However, we are of the considered view that 
the position should be vice-versa in the case of 
conviction for serious offences when invocation of 
power under Section 389 is invited.  This Court, in the 
decision in Kishori Lal v. Rupa & Ors.2, held in 
paragraphs 4 and 5 thus:- 
 
“4. Section 389 of the Code deals with 
suspension of execution of sentence  pending the 
appeal and release of the appellant on bail.  
There is a distinction between bail and 
suspension of sentence.  One of the essential 
ingredients of Section 389 is the requirement for 
the appellate Court to record reasons in writing 
for ordering suspension of execution of the 
sentence or order appealed against.  If he is in 
confinement, the said Court can direct that he be 
released on bail or on his own bond.  The 
requirement of recording reasons in writing 
 
1 (1999) 4 SCC 421 
2 (2004) 7 SCC 638 

Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 4 of 14 
 
clearly indicates that there has to be careful 
consideration of the relevant aspects and the 
order directing suspension of sentence and grant 
of bail should not be passed as a matter of 
routine. 
5. The appellate Court is duty-bound to 
objectively assess the matter and to record 
reasons for the conclusion that the case warrants 
suspension of execution of sentence and grant of 
bail.  In the instant case, the only factor which 
seems to have weighed with the High Court 
for directing suspension of sentence and 
grant of bail is the absence of allegation of 
misuse of liberty during the earlier period 
when the accused-respondents were on 
bail.” 
 
5. 
In the decision in Anwari Begum v. Sher 
Mohammad & Anr.3  this Court in paragraphs 7 and 8 
held thus:- 
 
“7. Even on a cursory perusal the High Court’s 
order shows complete non-application of mind.  
Though a detailed examination of the evidence 
 
3 (2005) 7 SCC 326 

Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 5 of 14 
 
and elaborate documentation of the merits of the 
case is to be avoided by the Court while passing 
orders on bail applications, yet a Court dealing 
with the bail application should be satisfied as to 
whether there is a prima facie case, but 
exhaustive exploration of the merits of the case is 
not necessary.  The Court dealing with the 
application for bail is required to exercise its 
discretion in a judicious manner and not as a 
matter of course. 
 
8. There is a need to indicate in the order 
reasons for prima facie concluding why bail was 
being granted, particularly where an accused 
was charged of having committed a serious 
offence. It is necessary for the Courts dealing 
with application for bail to consider among other 
circumstances, the following factors also before 
granting bail, they are: 
1. The nature of accusation and the severity of 
punishment in case of conviction and the 
nature of supporting evidence; 
2. Reasonable apprehension of tampering with 
the witness or apprehension of threat to the 
complainant; 
3. Prima facie satisfaction of the Court in 

Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 6 of 14 
 
support of the charge. 
Any order dehors of such reasons suffers from 
non-application of mind as was noted by this 
Court in Ram Govind Upadhyay  v. Sudarshan 
Singh (2002) 3 SCC 598, Puran v. Rambilas 
 (2001) 6 SCC 338 and in Kalyan Chandra 
Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan (2004) 7 SCC 528.” 
 
 
6. 
After referring to the aforesaid paragraphs in the 
decisions in Kishori Las’s case (supra) and Anwari 
Begum’s case (supra), this Court in the decision in 
Khilari v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.4 interfered with 
an order suspending the sentence and granting bail for 
non-application of mind and non-consideration of the 
relevant aspects. 
7. 
Applying the principles and parameters for 
invocation of the power under Section 389. Cr. PC, 
revealed from the decisions, as above, we will have to 
consider the sustainability of the challenge against the 
impugned orders by the appellant victim.  In that 
 
4 (2009) 4 SCC 23 

Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 7 of 14 
 
regard a succinct narration of the facts involved in the 
case, 
strictly 
confining 
to 
the 
requirement 
for 
consideration of these appeals, is required.  The private 
respondents in the appeals, five in numbers, were 
convicted finding guilty of offences, including under 
Sections 307/149 and 326A/149, IPC.  The appellant-
victim was then aged about 31 years and, in the 
incident, she suffered attack with sulfuric acid and her 
body was burnt 30 to 40 percent.  PW-6, Dr. Uttam Jain 
with Ext.A5, would reveal that she suffered deep burn 
on the face, chest and both hands and injuries on her 
were grievous in nature. 
8. 
We may hasten to add that regarding the merits of 
the appeals by the party respondents against their 
conviction, we shall not be understood to have held or 
made any observation as it is a matter to be considered 
on its own merits in the pending appeals. 
9. 
We have already referred to the mandate under 

Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 8 of 14 
 
Section 389 Cr.PC that the order passed invoking the 
said provision should reflect the reason for coming to 
the conclusion that the convicts are entitled to get 
suspended their sentence and consequential release on 
bail.  In the decision in State of Haryana v. Hasmat5, 
this Court held that in an appeal against conviction 
involving serious offence like murder punishable under 
Section 302, IPC the prayer for suspension of sentence 
and grant of bail should be considered with reference 
to the relevant factors mentioned thereunder, though 
not exhaustively.   On its perusal, we are of the opinion 
that factors like nature of the offence held to have 
committed, the manner of their commission, the gravity 
of the offence, and also the desirability of releasing the 
convict on bail are to be considered objectively and 
such consideration should reflect in the consequential 
order passed under Section 389, Cr.PC.  It is also 
 
5 (2004) 6 SCC 175 

Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 9 of 14 
 
relevant to state that the mere factum of sufferance of 
incarceration for a particular period, in a case where 
life imprisonment is imposed, cannot be a reason for 
invocation of power under Section 389 Cr.PC without 
referring to the relevant factors.  We say so because 
there cannot be any doubt with respect to the position 
that disposal of appeals against conviction, (especially 
in cases where life imprisonment is imposed  for 
serious offences), within a short span of time may not be 
possible in view of the number of pending cases.  In 
such circumstances if it is said that disregarding the 
other relevant factors and parameters for the exercise 
of power under Section 389, Cr. PC, likelihood of delay 
and incarceration for a particular period can be taken 
as a ground for suspension of sentence and to enlarge a 
convict on bail, then, in almost every such case, 
favourable invocation of said power would become 
inevitable.  That certainly cannot be the legislative 

Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 10 of 14 
 
intention as can be seen from the phraseology in 
Section 389 Cr.PC.  Such an interpretation would also 
go against public interest and social security.  In such 
cases giving preference over appeals where sentence 
is suspended, in the matter of hearing or adopting such 
other methods making an early hearing possible could 
be resorted.  We shall not be understood to have held 
that irrespective of inordinate delay in consideration of 
appeal and long incarceration undergone the power 
under the said provision cannot be invoked.  In short, 
we are of the view that each case has to be examined on 
its own merits and based on the parameters, to find out 
whether the sentence imposed on the appellant(s) 
concerned should be suspended during the pendency 
of the appeal and the appellant(s) should be released 
on bail. 
10. Having observed and held as above, we are 
deeply peeved on perusing the impugned judgment, 

Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 11 of 14 
 
for the same reflects only non-application of mind and 
non-consideration of the relevant factors despite the 
fact that the case involved an acid attack on a young 
woman resulting into permanent disfiguration.  In the 
case on hand, a scanning of the impugned order would 
reveal that what mainly weighed with the Court is the 
offer made on behalf of the convicts that they would 
give a payment of Rs. 25 lakhs through demand drafts, 
taking into account the evidence that the victim had 
incurred an amount of Rs. 21 lakhs for her treatment.  
Paragraph 10 of the impugned order would reveal that 
taking note of the said offer besides the period of 
incarceration and also the delay likely to occur in the 
consideration of appeal, sentence 
imposed was 
suspended and the private respondents were enlarged 
on bail.  Paragraph 10 of the order would reveal this 
position and it reads thus:- 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 12 of 14 
 
“10. After hearing counsel for the parties and 
considering the voluntarily offer made by the 
appellants, which is without prejudice to the right 
of defence as well as right of the prosecution to 
be decided at the time of final adjudication and 
having no bearing on the merit of the case, over 
and above, the amount of compensation being 
paid by the District Legal Services Authority, 
Meerut, the appellants have offered to pay an 
amount of Rs. 25 lacs to the victim for her 
medical treatment and also in view of the long 
custody as well as the antecedents of the 
appellants and also considering the fact that the 
appeals pertain to the year 2021 and are not 
likely to be listed for final argument in near 
future, we deem it appropriate to grant 
suspension of sentence of the appellants.” 
 
11. We have no hesitation to hold that the impugned 
order is infected with non-application of mind and non-
consideration of the relevant factors required for 
invocation of power under Section 389 in the light of the 
settled position of law.  An acid attack may completely 
strip off the victim of her basic human right to live a 

Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 13 of 14 
 
decent human life owing to permanent disfiguration.   
We have no hesitation to hold that in appeals involving 
such serious offence(s), serious consideration of all 
parameters should be made.  Even a cursory glance of 
the impugned order would reveal the consideration 
thereunder was made ineptly.  The serious nature of the 
offence involved was not taken into account besides the 
other relevant parameters for the exercise of power 
under Section 389, Cr. PC.   
12. In such circumstances, the impugned judgment 
cannot be sustained.  The upshot of the discussion is 
that the order suspending the sentence of the private 
respondents and enlarging them on bail, invite 
interference.  Consequently, the impugned order is set 
aside and consequently the bail granted to the private 
respondent in all these appeals stands cancelled.  
Consequently, the appellants shall surrender before the 
trial Court for the purpose of their committal to judicial 

Criminal Appeal Nos.1957-1961 of 2024                               Page 14 of 14 
 
custody.  This shall be done within a period of four 
days.  In case of their failure to surrender as ordered, 
the private respondents who are convicts shall be re-
arrested and committed to custody. 
13. The Appeals are allowed as above. 
 
 
………..................J. 
                             (C.T. Ravikumar) 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
April 05, 2024 

Page 1 of 18 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1957-1961  OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) Nos. 3484-3488 of 2024) 
 
 
 
SHIVANI TYAGI  
 
 
            
       …  Appellant (s) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF U.P. & Anr. 
 
 
 
        … Respondent(s) 
 
O R D E R 
 
1. 
 
I have gone through the detailed reasons recorded by 
brother C.T. Ravikumar, J.  Elaborate discussion has been made on the 
aspect of suspension of sentence in heinous crimes as it is a case where 
the High Court had directed suspension of sentence of the respondents 
in an acid attack case, which will haunt the victim throughout her life. 
The disfigurement of the face of the victim, as is evident from the 
photographs placed on record, could not even be seen. 
2. 
 
It is a case in which after hearing the arguments raised by 
the appellant and going through the paper book our conscience was 
shocked.  By a short order we granted the leave in the matters and 

Page 2 of 18 
 
allowed the appeals, for the reasons to follow. The respondents were 
directed to surrender before the Trial Court on or before 09.04.2024.  
The same is extracted below: 
“Leave granted. 
Appeals are allowed.  Reasons to follow. 
The respondents-life convicts shall surrender on or 
before 9.4.2024 before the concerned Trial Court.  In case 
of their failure to surrender, they shall be taken into custody 
and produced before the Trial Court.” 
 
2.1.  
I fully subscribe to the views expressed, but wish to add 
some more reasons. 
3. 
 
The main ground on which the High Court ordered 
suspension of sentence of the respondents, who have been awarded 
life imprisonment is that the counsel for the accused submitted that in 
the evidence it had come on record that about ₹ 21 lakhs (Rupees 
Twenty-One Lakhs only) have been spent on her treatment as she 
suffered disfigurement of her face. It was further argued that the Trial 
Court in its judgment of conviction had directed that the victim be 
granted adequate compensation for her treatment under the Victim 
Compensation Scheme. Then, it was collectively argued by the learned 
counsel for the accused that without prejudice to their right of defence 
the accused collectively and voluntarily offered to pay a sum of ₹ 25 

Page 3 of 18 
 
lakhs (Rupees Twenty Five Lakhs only) which may be given to the 
victim for her medical treatment. It was objected to by the learned 
counsel for the State. Taking note of the offer made by the counsel for 
the private respondents, who are the convicts, the High Court accepted 
the offer made by them and directed that, over and above, the amount 
of compensation paid by the District Legal Services Authority to the 
victim, the private respondents have offered to pay a sum of ₹ 25 lakhs 
(Rupees Twenty-Five Lakhs only) for her treatment. The sentence 
awarded to them was suspended. It was further noticed that the hearing 
of appeal is likely to take some time. Relevant paragraph 10 of the 
impugned order is extracted below: 
“10. 
 
After hearing counsel for the parties and 
considering the voluntarily offer made by the appellants, 
which is without prejudice to the right of defence as well 
as right of the prosecution to be decided at the time of 
final adjudication and having no bearing on the merit of 
the case, over and above, the amount of compensation 
being paid by the District Legal Services Authority, 
Meerut, the appellants have offered to pay an amount of ₹ 
25 lakhs to the victim for her medical treatment and also 
in view of the long custody as well as the antecedents of 
the appellants and also considering the fact that the 
appeals pertain to the year 2021 and are not likely to be 
listed for final argument in near future, we deem it 

Page 4 of 18 
 
appropriate to grant suspension of sentence of the 
appellants.” 
 
4. 
 
As the victim may also be in shock and not interested in 
receiving the amount as offered by the private respondents, the 
respondents moved a Correction Application1 before the High Court. 
On the aforesaid application, the High Court, while noticing that offer 
made by the private respondents was not acceptable to the victim, 
directed the respondents to deposit the amount with the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, Meerut.  The relevant part of the order dated 21.02.2024 is 
reproduced hereinunder: 
“Correction in the order dated 12.12.2023, is sought 
to the extent that the applicants have already handed over 
the demand drafts in the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, 
Meerut, as the victim has not come forward to accept the 
drafts, the appellants, who are granted bail, are still 
languishing in judicial custody. 
It is further submitted that appellants have performed 
their part of liability by depositing the demand draft before 
the CJM, Meerut, thus they may be released on bail. 
In paragraph No. 11 of the order dated 12.12.2023, we 
modify to the extent that the appellants may be released on 
 
1 Criminal Misc. Correction Application No. 12 of 2024 

Page 5 of 18 
 
bail, even prior to handing over the demand drafts to the 
victims as ordered earlier. 
Notice of the application has been sent by registered 
post to Sri P.K. Rai, learned counsel for the respondent No. 
2 by Sri P.K. Mishra, learned counsel for the appellants on 
04.01.2024, but none appeared on behalf of respondent No. 
2. Learned AGA has no objection to the prayer made by 
counsel for the appellants. 
The bail order dated 12.12.2023 was passed in other 
connected Criminal Appeal No. 996 of 2021, Criminal 
Appeal No. 801 of 201, Criminal Appeal No. 1155 of 2021 
and Criminal Appeal No. 467 of 2021. 
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, 
it is undisputed that the demand drafts have been handed 
over to the CJM, Meerut, the appellants be released on bail 
subject to furnishing of surety bond. 
The appellants will tender an undertaking before the 
Court that in case the victim appears subsequently and 
applies for release of money and in the meantime if the 
validity of the drafts have lapsed, they will revalidate the 
draft and hand over the same to the Court of CJM, Meerut. 
With the aforesaid observations, the order dated 
12.12.2023 is modified accordingly.” 
 
5. 
 
Detailed discussions have been made in the opinion 
expressed by my brother C.T. Ravikumar, J. with reference to the 

Page 6 of 18 
 
suspension of sentence in case of heinous offences. I would like to touch 
upon the issue of offer of money to the victim for suspension of sentence 
in a heinous crime of acid attack, where the victim suffered burn 
injuries to the extent of 30 to 40% resulting in total disfigurement of her 
face. As is evident from the record, despite spending ₹ 21 lakhs 
(Rupees Twenty-One Lakhs only) on the treatment, she still has not 
been cured. 
6. 
 
One of the principles of sentencing in criminal law is 
proportionality. If the appropriate punishment is not awarded or if, 
after conviction for a heinous crime, the court directs the suspension of 
the sentence without valid reasons, the very purpose for which the 
criminal justice system exists will fail. 
7. 
 
After passing of the order dated 12.12.2023 vide which the 
High Court directed the suspension of the sentence of the private 
respondents on payment of ₹ 25 lakhs (Rupees Twenty-Five Lakhs only) 
to the victim, the amount was not accepted by the victim and the 
convicts could not be released from the jail. An application for 
correction2 of the impugned order was filed by the private 
respondents. The infirmity of the court is evident from the fact that 
despite this development, the High Court went on to modify the earlier 
 
2 Criminal Misc. Correction Application No. 12 of 2024 

Page 7 of 18 
 
order dated 12.12.2023 and noted that a Demand Draft having been 
handed over to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Meerut the private 
respondents be released on bail subject to Surety Bonds. It was 
recorded that, in case subsequently the victim appears in court for 
release of amount and the validity of the Demand Draft lapses, the 
private respondents shall get the same revalidated. 
8. 
 
From the facts it can safely be noticed that there is no 
question of acceptance of money by the victim as she has challenged 
the order of suspension of sentence of the private respondents. 
9. 
 
This court had been taking the offence of acid attacks, which 
are on increase, seriously.  It is even to the extent of regulating the sale 
of the acid with stringent action so that the same is not easily available 
to the people with perverse mind. Observations made by this court in 
paragraph 13 of Parivartan Kendra vs Union of India and Others3 
being appropriate is extracted below: 
“13.   
 
We have come across many instances of 
acid attacks across the country. These attacks have been 
rampant for the simple reason that there has been no proper 
implementation of the regulations or control for the supply 
and distribution of acid. There have been many cases where 
the victims of acid attack are made to sit at home owing to 
their difficulty to work. These instances unveil that the State 
 
3 (2016) 3 SCC 571: 2015 INSC 893 

Page 8 of 18 
 
has failed to check the distribution of acid falling into the 
wrong hands even after giving many directions by this 
Court in this regard. Henceforth, stringent action be taken 
against those erring persons supplying acid without proper 
authorisation and also the authorities concerned be made 
responsible for failure to keep a check on the distribution of 
the acid.” 
 
10.   
In Suresh Chandra Jana vs State of West Bengal and 
Others4, while rejecting the acquittal of an accused as ordered by the 
High Court in an acid attack case, this Court observed that the acid 
attack has transformed itself to a gender-based violence, which causes 
immense psychological trauma resulting in hurdle in overall 
development of the victim. Paragraph 30 thereof is extracted below: 
“30.   
At the outset, certain aspects on the acid attack 
need to be observed. Usually vitriolage or acid attack has 
transformed itself as a gender based violence. Acid attacks 
not only cause damage to the physical appearance of its 
victims but also cause immense psychological trauma 
thereby becoming a hurdle in their overall development. 
Although we have acknowledged the seriousness of the acid 
attack when we amended our laws in 2013 [ The Criminal 
Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 (13 of 2013).] , yet the number 
of acid attacks are on the rise. Moreover, this Court has 
been passing various orders to restrict the availability of 
 
4 (2017) 16 SCC 466 : 2017 INSC 1296 

Page 9 of 18 
 
corrosive substance in the market which is an effort to nip 
this social evil in the bud. [Parivartan Kendra v. Union of 
India, (2016) 3 SCC 571 : (2016) 2 SCC (Cri) 143] It must be 
recognised that having stringent laws and enforcement 
agencies may not be sufficient unless deep-rooted gender 
bias is removed from the society.” 
 
11. 
 
In another case reported as State of Himachal Pradesh 
and Another vs Vijay Kumar alias Pappu and Another5 regarding 
acid attack on a young girl of 19 years, in which this Court observed in 
paragraph 13 thereof, that the victim had suffered 16% burn injuries 
and that such a victim cannot be compensated by grant of any 
compensation. Paragraph 13 is thereof extracted below: 
“13.   
Indeed, it cannot be ruled out that in the present 
case the victim had suffered an uncivilised and heartless 
crime committed by the respondents and there is no room 
for leniency which can be conceived. A crime of this nature 
does not deserve any kind of clemency. This Court cannot 
be oblivious of the situation that the victim must have 
suffered 
an 
emotional 
distress 
which 
cannot 
be 
compensated either by sentencing the accused or by grant 
of any compensation.” 
 
 
5 (2019) 5 SCC 373 :  2019 INSC 377 

Page 10 of 18 
 
12. 
 
The circumstances under which a bail granted by the court 
below can be cancelled, having been summarised by this Court in 
Deepak Yadav vs State of Uttar Pradesh and Another6. Relevant 
paragraphs 31 to 35 are extracted below: 
“C.  Cancellation of bail 
31.   
This Court has reiterated in several instances 
that bail once granted, should not be cancelled in a 
mechanical manner without considering whether any 
supervening circumstances have rendered it no longer 
conducive to a fair trial to allow the accused to retain his 
freedom by enjoying the concession of bail during trial. 
Having said that, in case of cancellation of bail, very cogent 
and overwhelming circumstances are necessary for an 
order directing cancellation of bail (which was already 
granted). 
 
32.   
A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Dolat 
Ram v. State of Haryana [Dolat Ram v. State of Haryana, 
(1995) 1 SCC 349 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 237] laid down the 
grounds for cancellation of bail which are: 
(i) interference or attempt to interfere with the due 
course of administration of justice; 
(ii) evasion or attempt to evade the due course of 
justice; 
(iii) abuse of the concession granted to the accused in 
any manner; 
 
6 (2022) 8 SCC 559 :  2022 INSC 610 

Page 11 of 18 
 
(iv) possibility of the accused absconding; 
(v) likelihood of/actual misuse of bail; 
(vi) likelihood of the accused tampering with the 
evidence or threatening witnesses. 
 
33.   
It is no doubt true that cancellation of bail cannot 
be limited to the occurrence of supervening circumstances. 
This Court certainly has the inherent powers and discretion 
to cancel the bail of an accused even in the absence of 
supervening circumstances. Following are the illustrative 
circumstances where the bail can be cancelled: 
 
33.1.   
Where the court granting bail takes into account 
irrelevant material of substantial nature and not trivial 
nature while ignoring relevant material on record. 
 
33.2.   
Where the court granting bail overlooks the 
influential position of the accused in comparison to the 
victim of abuse or the witnesses especially when there is 
prima facie misuse of position and power over the victim. 
 
33.3.   
Where the past criminal record and conduct of 
the accused is completely ignored while granting bail. 
 
33.4.   
Where bail has been granted on untenable 
grounds. 
 
33.5.   
Where serious discrepancies are found in the 
order granting bail thereby causing prejudice to justice. 
 

Page 12 of 18 
 
33.6.   
Where the grant of bail was not appropriate in 
the first place given the very serious nature of the charges 
against the accused which disentitles him for bail and thus 
cannot be justified. 
 
33.7.   
When the order granting bail is apparently 
whimsical, capricious and perverse in the facts of the given 
case. 
 
34.   
In Neeru 
Yadav v. State 
of 
U.P. [Neeru 
Yadav v. State of U.P., (2014) 16 SCC 508 : (2015) 3 SCC (Cri) 
527] , the accused was granted bail by the High Court. In an 
appeal against the order [Mitthan Yadav v. State of U.P., 
2014 SCC OnLine All 16031] of the High Court, a two-Judge 
Bench of this Court examined the precedents on the 
principles that guide grant of bail and observed as under : 
(SCC p. 513, para 12) 
“12. … It is well settled in law that cancellation of bail 
after it is granted because the accused has 
misconducted himself or of some supervening 
circumstances warranting such cancellation have 
occurred is in a different compartment altogether 
than an order granting bail which is unjustified, 
illegal and perverse. If in a case, the relevant factors 
which should have been taken into consideration 
while dealing with the application for bail have not 
been taken note of or it is founded on irrelevant 
considerations, indisputably the superior court can 
set aside the order of such a grant of bail. Such a case 

Page 13 of 18 
 
belongs to a different category and is in a separate 
realm. While dealing with a case of second nature, 
the court does not dwell upon the violation of 
conditions by the accused or the supervening 
circumstances that have happened subsequently. It, 
on the contrary, delves into the justifiability and the 
soundness of the order passed by the court.” 
 
35.   
This Court in Mahipal [Mahipal v. Rajesh Kumar, 
(2020) 2 SCC 118 : (2020) 1 SCC (Cri) 558] held that : (SCC 
p. 126, para 17) 
“17. Where a court considering an application for 
bail fails to consider relevant factors, an appellate 
court may justifiably set aside the order granting bail. 
An appellate court is thus required to consider 
whether the order granting bail suffers from a non-
application of mind or is not borne out from a prima 
facie view of the evidence on record. It is thus 
necessary for this Court to assess whether, on the 
basis of the evidentiary record, there existed a prima 
facie or reasonable ground to believe that the 
accused had committed the crime, also taking into 
account the seriousness of the crime and the severity 
of the punishment.” 
 
13. 
 
The impugned order passed by the High Court is perused. 
Specifically the order dated 21.02.2024 passed in the Correction 
Application. The order does not suggest that there was any 

Page 14 of 18 
 
consideration of the parameters laid down by this court for grant of bail 
or suspension of sentence. Instead, the High Court had noticed and 
directed that the convicts have offered to pay compensation to the 
victim for grant of suspension of sentence, which when she refused to 
accept, was directed to be deposited in the court. It was in a way kind 
of “Blood Money” offered by the convicts to the victim for which there 
is no acceptability in our criminal justice system. 
14. 
 
This Court in Gian Singh vs State of Punjab and Another7 
while dealing with an issue regarding quashing of criminal 
proceedings on the ground of settlement between the offender and 
victim, observed that even if settlement or payment of compensation is 
pleaded in a heinous crime, still the same should not be quashed as the 
crimes are acts which have harmful effect on the public and in general 
the well-being of the society. It is not safe to leave the crime-doer on 
the plea of settlement with victim. Relevant paragraph 58 thereof is 
extracted below: 
“58.   
Where the High Court quashes a criminal 
proceeding having regard to the fact that the dispute 
between the offender and the victim has been settled 
although the offences are not compoundable, it does so as 
in its opinion, continuation of criminal proceedings will be 
 
7 (2012) 10 SCC 303 :  2012 INSC 419 

Page 15 of 18 
 
an exercise in futility and justice in the case demands that 
the dispute between the parties is put to an end and peace 
is restored; securing the ends of justice being the ultimate 
guiding factor. No doubt, crimes are acts which have 
harmful effect on the public and consist in wrongdoing that 
seriously endangers and threatens the well-being of the 
society and it is not safe to leave the crime-doer only 
because he and the victim have settled the dispute amicably 
or that the victim has been paid compensation, yet certain 
crimes have been made compoundable in law, with or 
without the permission of the court. In respect of serious 
offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc., or other offences 
of mental depravity under IPC or offences of moral turpitude 
under special statutes, like the Prevention of Corruption Act 
or the offences committed by public servants while working 
in that capacity, the settlement between the offender and the 
victim can have no legal sanction at all. However, certain 
offences which overwhelmingly and predominantly bear 
civil flavour having arisen out of civil, mercantile, 
commercial, financial, partnership or such like transactions 
or the offences arising out of matrimony, particularly 
relating to dowry, etc. or the family dispute, where the 
wrong is basically to the victim and the offender and the 
victim have settled all disputes between them amicably, 
irrespective of the fact that such offences have not been 
made compoundable, the High Court may within the 
framework of its inherent power, quash the criminal 
proceeding or criminal complaint or FIR if it is satisfied that 

Page 16 of 18 
 
on the face of such settlement, there is hardly any likelihood 
of the offender being convicted and by not quashing the 
criminal proceedings, justice shall be casualty and ends of 
justice shall be defeated. The above list is illustrative and 
not exhaustive. Each case will depend on its own facts and 
no hard-and-fast category can be prescribed.” 
 
15. 
 
In the State of Jharkhand vs. Md. Sufiyan8, the Jharkhand 
High Court directed the accused to deposit certain amount in court, as 
ad interim compensation to be paid to the victim as a condition for grant 
of anticipatory bail.  It was a case for various crimes committed under 
IPC, POCSO Act and I.T. Act.  The aforesaid direction of the High Court 
was deprecated by this Court. It was opined that the willingness of the 
accused to pay compensation to the victim cannot be a reason for grant 
of anticipatory bail.  Para 6, thereof is extracted below: 
“6.    
The factors on which anticipatory bail could be 
granted are very well crystallized in a catena of judgments 
of this Court.  Leave aside the discussion of such factors, not 
even a whisper as to on what grounds anticipatory bail was 
being allowed were considered by the High Court.  Merely 
because the accused is willing to pay some amount as an 
 
8 SLP (Crl) No. 1960 of 2022 decided on 16.01.2024 

Page 17 of 18 
 
interim compensation cannot be a ground for grant of 
anticipatory bail.” 
 
16. 
 
Similar view was expressed by this Court in Sahab Alam 
alias Guddu vs. State of Jharkhand and another9.  Paras 2 and 8 
thereof are extracted below: 
 
“2. 
 
We have a batch of petitions before us, arising 
from different nature of offences from dowry to Section 420 
IPC to Section 376, IPC and POCSO Act.  The common aspect 
in all these cases is that one particular learned Judge of the 
High Court has granted bail on condition on deposit of 
substantive sums of money without consideration of the 
requirements of bail dependent on the nature of offences.  It 
is trite to say that bail cannot per se be granted if a person 
can afford to deposit the money or his capacity to pay.  That 
is what seems to have happened.  Since there is no proper 
consideration, it is also difficult for us to analyse what 
weighed with the learned Judge while granting bail and it is 
certainly not the jurisdiction of this Court to be first or a 
second court of bail. 
 
8. 
 
We also clarify that in view of our judgment in 
Dharmesh v. State of Gujarat (2021) 7 SCC 198 there is no 
 
9 2022 SCC Online SC 1874 

Page 18 of 18 
 
question of victim compensation, as there cannot be such a 
criteria at the stage of grant of bail.” 
   
  
 
……………….……………..J. 
(RAJESH BINDAL) 
 
New Delhi 
April  5, 2024.