Reportable
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO.                of 2024 
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 29227 OF 2019)
AABID KHAN
        …APPELLANT
VERSUS
DINESH AND OTHERS 
               
…RESPONDENT(S)
 J U D G E M E N T
Aravind Kumar, J. 
1.
Leave granted.
2.
We have heard learned advocates appearing for the parties and
perused the records.
3.
Challenge is laid in this appeal to the order dated 21.01.2019
passed in MA No.1614 of 2018 by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh,
Bench at Indore whereunder the compensation awarded by the Motor
Accidents Claims Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as ‘tribunal’) by award
dated 04.12.2017 in a sum of Rs.87,700/- with interest @ 7% p.a. came to
1
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.04.09
18:38:54 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

be enhanced to Rs.1,27,700/- with same interest contending inter-alia that
compensation so awarded by the High Court is on the lower side and same
has to be enhanced. 
4.
The occurrence of the accident, injuries sustained by the appellant/
claimant in the road accident that took place on 23.04.2013, consequential
disability sustained, issuance of insurance policy to the offending vehicle
and policy being in force on the date of accident are all undisputed facts.
Hence, we do not propose to dwell into those aspects.
5.
The only question that would arise for our consideration is:
 “Whether  the  appellant/claimant  is  entitled  for
enhancement of compensation as urged? And if so, to what
amount?”
6.
Perusal of the award passed by the tribunal as modified by the
High Court, would reveal that claimant had sustained compound fracture in
the  left  acetabulum  and  left  rib.  Dr.  Alok  Mehta  (PW-5),  who  had
examined the claimant had deposed that whole body disability suffered by
the claimant was to the extent of 17% and this fact has been elicited in the
cross-examination.  However,  the  tribunal  computed  the  compensation
towards loss of future income by considering the whole body disability at
10%. On surmises and conjectures the percentage of disability has been
reduced. No reason whatsoever has been assigned by the tribunal for
2

substituting its opinion to that of the expert opinion namely, the doctor who
treated the claimant and examined as PW-5.
7.
This Court in the case of Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar and Another,
(2011) 1 SCC 343 has observed:
“16. The Tribunal should not be a silent spectator when
medical evidence is tendered in regard to the injuries and
their effect, in particular, the extent of permanent disability.
Sections 168 and 169 of the Act make it evident that the
Tribunal does not function as a neutral umpire as in a civil
suit, but as an active explorer and seeker of truth who is
required  to  "hold  an  enquiry  into  the  claim"  for
determining the "just compensation". The Tribunal should
therefore take an active role to ascertain the true and
correct  position  so  that  it  can  assess  the  "just
compensation". While dealing with personal injury cases,
the Tribunal should preferably equip itself with a medical
dictionary and a handbook for evaluation of permanent
physical impairment (for example, Manual for Evaluation
of  Permanent  Physical  Impairment  for  Orthopaedic
Surgeons, prepared by American Academy of Orthopaedic
Surgeons or its Indian equivalent or other authorised texts)
for understanding the medical evidence and assessing the
physical and functional disability. The Tribunal may also
keep  in  view  the  First  Schedule  to  the  Workmen's
Compensation  Act,  1923  which  gives  some  indication
about the extent of permanent disability in different types of
injuries, in the case of workmen.”
8.
In the case of Laxman Alias Laxman Mourya v. Divisional
Manager, Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. and Another, (2011) 10 SCC
756, this Court observed: 
“15. The ratio of the above-noted judgments is that if the
victim  of  an  accident  suffers  permanent  or  temporary
disability, then efforts should always be made to award
adequate compensation not only for the physical injury and
treatment,  but  also  for  the  pain,  suffering  and  trauma
caused due to the accident, loss of earning and the victim's
3

inability to lead a normal life and enjoy amenities, which
he would have enjoyed but for the disability caused due to
the accident.”
9.
Further,  in  the  matter  of  Sidram v.  Divisional  Manager,
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. and Another. [(2023) 3 SCC 439] it
was observed by this Court: 
“113. Before we close this matter, it needs to be underlined,
as  observed  in  Pappu  Deo  Yadav  (supra)  that  Courts
should  be  mindful  that  a  serious  injury  not  only
permanently imposes physical limitations and disabilities
but too often inflicts deep mental and emotional scars upon
the victim. The attendant trauma of the victim's having to
live in a world entirely different from the one she or he is
born into, as an invalid, and with degrees of dependence
on  others,  robbed  of  complete  personal  choice  or
autonomy, should forever be in the judge's mind, whenever
tasked to adjudge compensation claims. Severe limitations
inflicted due to such injuries undermine the dignity (which
is now recognized as an intrinsic component of the right to
life Under Article 21) of the individual, thus depriving the
person of the essence of the right to a wholesome life which
she or he had lived, hitherto. From the world of the able
bodied, the victim is thrust into the world of the disabled,
itself most discomfiting and unsettling. If courts nit-pick
and  award  niggardly  amounts  oblivious  of  these
circumstances  there  is  resultant  affront  to  the  injured
victim. [See: Pappu Deo Yadav (supra)]”
10.
In the light of the afore-stated position of law explained when the
medical  evidence tendered by the claimant is perused, we are of the
considered view that tribunal and the High Court committed a serious error
in not accepting the said medical evidence and in the absence of any contra
evidence available on record, neither the tribunal nor the High Court could
4

have substituted the disability to 10% as against the opinion of the doctor
(PW-5) certified at 17%. In that view of the matter the compensation
awarded under the head ‘loss of income’ towards permanent disability
deserves to be enhanced by construing the whole body disability at 17%. 
11.
The  monthly  income  of  the  claimant  has  been  construed  as
Rs.3,500/- which is on the lower side particularly in the background of the
fact that the accident in question having occurred on 23.04.2013 and the
evidence  on  record  disclosing  that  claimant  was  self-employed  as  a
mechanic and had work experience of over 30 years. Resultantly his
income has to be construed at Rs.6,500/- per month in substitution to
Rs.3,500/-  computed  by  the  Tribunal  and  the  High  Court.  Thus,  the
claimant/appellant  would  be  entitled  for  enhanced  compensation  of
Rs.92,820/- (Rs.6,500 X 12 X 7 X 17%) towards loss of future income.
12.
 We are also of the considered view that compensation awarded by
the Tribunal under the heads of Attendant charges, pain and suffering,
transportation together in a sum of Rs.9,000 being abysmally on the lower
side and same deserves to be enhanced and accordingly a lump sum
compensation of Rs.1,00,000/- is awarded under these three (3) heads.
13.
 In substitution to the award of Rs.1,27,700/- awarded by the High
Court we enhance the compensation as under:
Sr.No.
Particular
Amount
5

1.
Loss of future income
due  to  permanent
disability 
Rs.92,820/-
2.
Medical expenses 
Rs.49,300/-
3.

Transportation,

Attendant 
Charges, 

Pain and 
Suffering
Rs.1,00,000/-
Total
Rs.2,42,120/-
14.
We direct the Respondent No.3-Insurance Company to pay the
balance amount of compensation with interest @ 7% P.A. as awarded by
the Tribunal  by depositing the same  before  the jurisdictional  tribunal
within 6 weeks from the date of this order.
15.
In the result, the appeal is allowed as aforesaid with no order as to
costs.
…….………………….J.
 (Sanjay Karol)
…….………………….J.
 (Aravind Kumar)
New Delhi,
April 09, 2024
6