2024 INSC 287
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPEALATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8616 OF 2017 
KIZHAKKE VATTAKANDIYIL  
MADHAVAN (DEAD) THR. LRS. 
 
 
…APPELLANT(S) 
 
VS 
 
THIYYURKUNNATH MEETHAL 
JANAKI AND ORS  
 
 
 
     …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
ANIRUDDHA BOSE  
 
The present appeal arises out of a suit for partition instituted 
by one Thiyyer Kunnath Meethal Chandu (Chandu) claiming 8/20 
shares in the suit property described in the schedule to the plaint 
as “Kizhake vattakkandy enha Pattayathil perulla Asarikandy 
pasramba, 6 feetinu ki-pa 37, the-va 35”.  The appellants before 
us were the defendants in the said suit, and are successors-in-
interest of one Sankaran. The latter and Chandu are uterine 
brothers, both being the sons of one Chiruthey, who was married 
twice. Her first husband was Madhavan, within whose wedlock 
Sankaran was born. Madhavan passed away sometime before the 
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2024.04.09
16:25:13 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
year 1910, though the exact year of death has not been specified 
in the pleadings nor it has appeared in evidence. After Madhavan’s 
death, Chiruthey contracted second marriage with Neelakandan, 
who was the father of Chandu.  
2. 
The suit property is situated in survey no. 56/8 in the village 
Eravattur in the district of Kozhikode, State of Kerala. The parties 
belong to Malayakamala Sect. The succession law guiding their 
inheritance applicable before Hindu Succession Act, 1956 that 
became operational was the modified form of Mitakshara law 
applicable to the Makkathayees. But this factor is not of much 
relevance for adjudication of the present appeal. Though the suit 
was instituted in the year 1985, to trace the source of claim of the 
plaintiff, one has to trace the title of the property. In the last year 
of the 19th Century, (i.e. 1900) as it has transpired from evidence 
adduced in course of the trial, the owners of the property appear 
to be Madhavan and he, along with his mother Nangeli had 
executed a deed of mortgage (Ext. B1 in the suit) on 07.05.1900 in 
favour of one Nadumannil Anandhan Kaimal, son of Cheriya 
Amma Thamburatti in relation to the subject-property. As we find 
from the judgment of the High Court which is assailed in this 
appeal, the mortgage deed itself recorded that possession of the 

3 
 
property was not given to the mortgagee. The plaintiff claims his 
share to the suit property from his mother, described in the plaint 
as owner of the property, Chiruthey. We must point out here that 
the plaintiff also had passed away during the pendency of first 
appeal and before us are his successors-in-interest who are 
representing his claim of share as the respondents. Those 
impleaded as defendants in the suit which was registered as OS 
No. 157/1985 in the Court of Munsiff Magistrate, Perambra were 
successors in interests of said Sankaran.  
3. 
Apart from Exhibit B-1, three other deeds were considered by 
the respective fora before this appeal reached us. There is a deed 
marked Exhibit A-20, which is described as Kannan Kuzhikanam 
deed, executed on 14th July 1910 by Chiruthey, Nangeli (mother of 
Madhavan) and Sankaran (Chiruthey’s son) in favour of Cherupula 
Othayoth Cheriya Amma and her son, Achuthan. On behalf of 
Sankaran, who was a minor at that point of time, Chiruthey 
executed the deed. This was in the nature of a deed of lease. 
Achuthan was also a minor at that point of time, and the said deed 
records Cheriya Amma to whom the property was being leased, for 
herself and her minor son.   

4 
 
4. 
On the same day i.e. 14th July 1910, a Verumpattam 
Kuzhikkanam deed marked as Exhibit A-1 was executed by 
Cherupoola Cheriya Amma for herself and for and on behalf of her 
minor son Achuthan in respect of the same property in favour of 
Chiruthey and another individual named Kuttiperavan.  These 
appear to be back-to-back transactions. Both these deeds 
stipulated the term thereof to be twelve years and do not contain 
any renewal clause.  
5. 
In the year 1925, by another deed executed on 22nd July 
1925, described as “assignment deed” which was marked Exhibit 
A-2, Kuttiperavan surrendered his rights in favour of Chiruthey 
and Sankaran. In this deed, it has been inter-alia, recited that the 
executor thereof, being Kuttiperavan and Chiruthey had 
purchased verumpattam right over the subject-property from 
Cheriya Amma by fixing a rent of Rs.5/- in addition to revenue 
paid for the land. This deed further reads :-  
“I hereby assigning my right over this property to you for a 
consideration Rs. 50 which was fixed in the presence of 
mediators and my share in the decree amount obtained by 
Cherupula Othayoth Cheriyamma from Payyoli District 
Munsiff Court in OS 685/ 1921 for arrears of rent together 
with interest and cost. My share in the said amount was 
given to you for payment. So I hereby assigned all my right 
over this property and hereby hand overing the possession 
of the property and also hand overing all documents with 
regard to the property. Hereinafter I have no right over this 
property…” 

5 
 
 
6. 
Sankaran passed away in the year 1956 whereas Chiruthey 
died in the year 1966, as it appears from evidence led before the 
Trial Court. The foundation of the claim of the partition of the 
subject-property has been explained in the Trial Court’s judgment 
in the following manner:- 
“The plaintiffs claim over the plaint schedule property is as 
follows:- The property originally belonged to Chirutheyi and 
one 
Kuttiperavan 
as 
per 
a 
Verumpattam 
Deed 
No.2323/1910 
from 
one 
Cheriyamma. 
In 
1925 
Kuttiperavan assigned his one half share to Chiurtheyi and 
her son Sankaran. Thus Chirutheyi acquired 3/4 share and 
Sankaran acquired 1/4 share in the property. Sankaran 
died in 1956 and his 1 /4 share was inherited by the 
defendants and the mother Chirutheyi, thus Chirutheyi 
acquiring 16/12 shares and the defendants acquiring 4/20 
shares. Chirutheyi died in 1926 and half of her 16/20 
shares would go to the plaintiff and the only remaining son, 
and the remaining 8/20 shares would go to the defendants, 
being the heirs of the other son Sankaran. Thus the shares 
are fixed as follows: The plaintiff 8/20. The defendants 
3/20 shares each. The plaint alleges that the property never 
belonged to Madhavan ad alleged by the defendants in the 
notice.” 
 
7. 
The Trial Court sustained the claim for partition and decreed 
in favour of the plaintiff therein whose interest is now represented 
before us by the respondents. The First Appellate Court by a 
judgment delivered on 24th June 1996, set aside the decree and 
dismissed the suit. The main issue before the Court, which is 
before us as well, is as to whether Chiruthey had any title over the 
subject-property which the plaintiff claimed through the series of 
transactions, particulars of which we have narrated in the 

6 
 
preceding paragraphs. The plaintiff claimed title over the property 
through Chiruthey who was his mother, and he was born from her 
second husband. The foundation of Chiruthey’s title was claimed 
to be the registered lease deed bearing No. 2329/10 (Exhibit A-1). 
Kuttiperavan, who was the second lessee in “Exhibit A-1” had later 
released his right in the subject-property in favour of Chiruthey 
and Sankaran, the latter being the son of Chiruthey through her 
first marriage. That deed was executed on 22nd July 1925. The 
First Appellate Court relying on the mortgage deed dated 07th May 
1900 found that it was Madhavan and his mother Nangeli who 
were holders of jenm right and that they were in possession of the 
subject-property even after execution of the mortgage deed.  
8. 
The First Appellate Court disbelieved that the deed of 22nd 
July 1925 was in discharge of liability under the mortgage deed. It 
was also found by the First Appellate Court that Chiruthey had no 
authority to create a lease and such a transaction by which she 
sought to lease out the subject-property was not permissible in 
law. 
9. 
As regards Chiruthey’s right or title, it was held that she 
would not derive title to her deceased husband’s property when 
she got married again to Neelakandan. The First Appellate Court 

7 
 
has referred to Section 2 of the Hindu Widow’s Remarriage Act, 
1856 (“1856 Act”) which prevailed at the material point of time, 
when she contracted her second marriage. Section 2 of the 1856 
Act reads:- 
“2. Rights of widow in deceased husband's property to 
cease on remarriage:- 
 
All right and interest which any widow may have in her 
deceased husband’s property by way of maintenance, or by 
inheritance to her husband or to his lineal successors, or by 
virtue of any will or testamentary disposition conferring 
upon her, without express permission to remarry, only a 
limited interest in such property, with no power of alienating 
the same, shall upon her remarriage cease and determine 
as if she had then died: and the next heirs of her deceased 
husband , or other persons entitled to the property on her 
death, shall thereupon succeed to the same.” 
 
10. The First Appellate Court did not attribute much importance 
to Exhibit A-20 which is the first of the two deeds, which was 
executed in the year 1910 while referring to Section 2 of the 1856 
Act. The First Appellate Court has rightly come to a finding that 
Chiruthey had only a reversionary right over the suit property held 
by her first husband Madhavan and the plaintiff (Chandu) could 
not claim partition right on the strength of his being a uterine 
brother of Sankaran born to Chiruthey after she contracted her 
second marriage. She lost all her rights and interests in her 
deceased husband’s property on contracting second marriage with 

8 
 
Neelakandan. There is an authority on this position of law. 
Velamuri Venkata Sivaprasad (Dead) by lrs. -vs- Kothuri 
Venkateswarlu (dead) by lrs. And Others [(2000) 2 SCC 139], in 
which it has been held:- 
“17. Section 2 of the Act of 1856, therefore, has taken away 
the right of the widow in the event of remarriage and the 
statute is very specific to the effect that the widow on 
remarriage would be deemed to be otherwise dead. The 
words “as if she had then died” (emphasis supplied) are 
rather significant. The legislature intended therefore that in 
the event of a remarriage, one loses the rights of even the 
limited interest in such property and after remarriage the 
next heirs of her deceased husband shall thereupon 
succeed to the same. It is thus a statutory recognition of a 
well-reasoned pre-existing Shastric law.” 
 
11. The High Court in the second appeal formulated five 
questions of law as substantial ones, which are reproduced below:- 
“a) Was the court below justified in holding that Exts.A1 and 
A20 transactions are not genuine in the absence of any 
pleadings and evidence to arrive at such a finding? 
b) Was the interpretation placed by the court below on 
Exts.A1, A2, A20, and B1 correct and proper?  
c) Was the court below justified in relying on Exts.A1 and 
A20, which are not the original documents on the ground 
that Section 90 of  the Indian Evidence Act would apply? 
d) Are the defendants entitled to question the validity of the 
transactions covered by Exts.A1 and A20, without the same 
being challenged in a properly constituted suit? 
e) Was the court below justified in upholding the plea of 
ouster and adverse possession without any evidence on the 
side of the defendants to prove the same?” 
 
12. Thus, when Chiruthey contracted her second marriage by 
operation of Section 2 of the 1856 Act, she had lost title of her 

9 
 
share over the property of Madhavan. The High Court in the 
judgment under appeal, however, primarily relied on the deeds 
executed on 14th July 1910 to sustain the claim of Chandu (since 
deceased), represented by his successors-in-interest.  
13. The High Court proceeded on the basis of three documents, 
being Exhibit B-1 dated 7th May 1900 (mortgage deed), Exhibit A-
20 dated 14th July 1910 which is the deed by which Chiruthey, 
Nangeli and Sankaran (through Chiruthey as he was minor at that 
point of time) created lease-right in favour of Cherupula Othayoth 
Cheriya Amma and her son Achuthan and on the same date 
Exhibit A-1, a Verumpattam Kuzhikkanam deed was also executed 
in favour of Chiruthey and Kuttiperavan. Through the fourth deed, 
marked as Exhibit A-2, Kuttiperavan surrendered his rights in the 
property to Chiruthey and Sankaran. Questions were raised about 
admissibility of these documents before the High Court but as 
marking of these documents were not objected before the Trial 
Court, the High Court held that at the stage of second appeal, such 
objections could not be raised. We accept the High Court’s view on 
this point. 
14. The High Court also rejected the defendant’s contention that 
both the deeds dated 14th July 1910 were strange transactions as 

10 
 
the aforesaid exhibits were not challenged by them at any point of 
time in the course of trial. We also do not find any flaw in the High 
Court’s reasoning on this point also. 
15. Dealing with the appellant’s case that Chiruthey was divested 
of any right to her late first husband’s property by virtue of the 
1856 Act, the High Court observed:- 
“10. Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that on 
Madhavan's death, which was evidently before 1910, his 
rights devolved on Sankaran. Chirutheyi would not get any 
right on Madhavan's death as per the personal law 
applicable to the parties. The right of a widow to hold the 
property was recognised by the Hindu Women's Right to 
Property Act, 1937. It is submitted that before 1937, 
Chirutheyi had re-married Neelakantan and, therefore, her 
right, if any, had lost by Section 2 of the Hindu Widows Re-
marriage Act, 1856. The counsel relied on the decisions in 
Sivaprasad V. Venkateswaralu : 2000 (1) KLT SN 11(SC) 
and Dharmarajan V. Narayanan: 2000 (2) KLT 895. I do not 
think that the contention put forward by the learned counsel 
for the respondents deserves acceptance. This is not a case 
where the rights of parties are to be ascertained as if no 
document was executed and as if the property remained 
undivided. Exhibits A1 and A20 came into existence in 
1910, by which the predecessor in interest of the 
defendants, Sankaran, and his mother, who admittedly 
were having rights, lost possessory title. If Ext.A20 is a valid 
and binding document, the question as to the rights of a 
widow and the extinguishment of the rights of the widow on 
re-marriage do not arise for consideration. As stated earlier, 
the defendants are not entitled to challenge the validity of 
Ext.A1 and A20 in defence to the suit for partition. The 
question whether the plaintiff has right to get a share is to 
be determined with reference to the documents in existence, 
namely, Exts.A1, A2 and A20 and not with reference to 
what would have been the state of affairs had no document 
been executed.” 
   

11 
 
16. The High Court also rejected the contention made on behalf 
of the appellants that they had become the owners of the suit 
property on the basis of adverse possession but that aspect of the 
matter has not been argued before us and we do not want to 
disturb the finding of the High Court on that issue. 
17. Turning back to the three post 1900 deeds, we are not in 
agreement with the reasoning of the High Court in full. On 
remarriage of Chiruthey, after the death of Madhavan, her title or 
interest over the suit property stood lapsed in terms of Section 2 
of the 1856 Act. Thus, Chiruthey’s right to deal with property 
derived from Madhavan stood extinguished so far as the deed of 
14th July 1910 is concerned (Exhibit A-20).  But it was not 
Chiruthey alone who had executed that instrument, it was Nangeli 
and also Sankaran, (son of Chiruthey) who had executed it and 
remained valid legal heirs of Madhavan (since deceased).  There is 
no conflict at least on that point. We have no material before us 
that Madhavan had any other legal heir.  In such a situation, even 
if we discount Chiruthey’s title over the property forming subject 
of lease, it stood conveyed by its actual owners i.e., Nangeli and 
Sankaran. To that extent, we accept the validity of the lease deed, 
that was otherwise proved in the Trial Court. Once we find the 

12 
 
Exhibit A-20 to be valid conveyance, we do not think the corollary 
transaction 
which 
is 
marked 
as 
Exhibit 
A-1 
bearing 
No.2329/1910, by which the same property was leased back to 
Chiruthey and Kuttiperavan to be invalid. These back-to-back 
transactions may be unusual, but in absence of any evidence 
pointing to any illegality, we hold them to be valid.  The High Court 
on finding that these deeds are valid restored the Trial Court’s 
judgment and decree. The underlying reasoning of the High Court 
was that Chiruthey had legitimate right over the property. We 
however, find a flaw in this reasoning of the judgment of the High 
Court.  
18. The High Court as also the Trial Court have held that since 
the deeds were proved, implying that Cheruthey had the right to 
execute the lease deed on 14th July 1910 so far as the deed of re-
lease is concerned, the same might entitle her to be the beneficiary 
as a lessee thereof. But it would be trite to repeat that even if 
subsistence of a deed is proved in evidence, the title of the 
executing person (in this case Chiruthey) does not automatically 
stand confirmed.  If a document seeking to convey immovable 
property ex-facie reveals that the conveyer does not have the title 
over the same, specific declaration that the document is invalid 

13 
 
would not be necessary. The Court can examine the title in the 
event any party to the proceeding sets up this defence.  Chiruthey 
could not convey any property over which she did not have any 
right or title. Her right, if any, would stem from the second deed of 
lease (Exhibit A-1).  We are conscious of the fact that no claim was 
made before any forum for invalidating the deed dated 14th July 
1910 (Exhibit A-20). But in absence of proper title over the subject 
property, that lease deed even if she was its sole lessor would not 
have had been legally valid or enforceable. If right, title or interest  
in certain property is sought conveyed by a person by an 
instrument who herself does not possess any such form of 
entitlement on the subject being conveyed, even with a subsisting 
deed of conveyance on such property, the grantee on her 
successors-in-interest will not have legal right to enforce the right 
the latter may have derived from such an instrument. We, 
however, have not disturbed the transaction arising from Exhibit 
A-20 as the two legal heirs of Madhavan were also the lessors 
therein and to that extent, the document marked as Exhibit A-20 
would not have collapsed for want of conveyable title, right or 
interest. What she got back by way of the document marked as 
Exhibit A-1 was limited right as that of a lessee and not as a 

14 
 
successor of her first husband Madhavan (since deceased). 
Moreover, this lease (Exhibit A-1) was also for a period of twelve 
years and the re-lease deed made in the year 1925 which is Exhibit 
A-2 could not operate as by that time, the entitlement of 
Kuttiperavan over the subject property also stood lapsed as the 
document marked as Exhibit A-1 also had a duration of twelve 
years. No evidence has been shown before us as to how 
Kuttiperavan, in the capacity of a lessee could exercise his right 
after the term of lease granted to him was over.  
19. The plaintiff (now represented by his successors as 
respondents) sought to claim his share of suit property through 
Chiruthey. But as we have already explained, Chiruthey had lost 
her right over the subject property on her contracting second 
marriage. Secondly, her status over the said property, post-1910 if 
at all was that of lessee. There is no indication in any of the deeds 
that the said lease (Exhibit A-1) could travel beyond the stipulated 
term of twelve years.  The ownership of the suit property could not 
be said to have devolved in any manner whatsoever to the original 
plaintiff, who was born within the wedlock of Chiruthey and 
Neelakandan. Hence, we set aside the decision of the High Court 
and the decision of the First Appellate Court shall stand confirmed.  

15 
 
20. The appeal stands allowed in the above terms and interim 
order, if any, shall stand dissolved. Pending applications (if any) 
shall stand disposed of in the above terms.  
21. There shall be no order as to costs. 
...…………………………J. 
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE) 
 
 
 
……..………………………J. 
(SUDHANSHU DHULIA) 
New Delhi; 
April 09, 2024.