2024 INSC 322
      NON-REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.           OF 2024
[Arising out of SLP(Criminal) No. 8922 of 2022]
MANEESHA YADAV AND OTHERS            …APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH 
AND ANOTHER
    
               …RESPONDENT(S)
WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.   
 
       OF 2024
      [Arising out of SLP(Criminal) No. 3698 of 2023]
J U D G M E N T
B.R. GAVAI, J.
CRIMINAL APPEAL @ SLP(CRIMINAL) NO. 8922 OF 2022
1.
Leave granted.
2.
The present appeal challenges the order passed by the
learned  Single  Judge  of  the  High  Court  of  Judicature  at
Allahabad dated 23rd August 2022, rejecting the petition filed
by  the  present  appellants  for  quashing  of  the  First
Information Report (for short, ‘FIR’).
3.
The complainant had filed the complaint that the initial
permission  for  providing  admission  was  granted  to  Raj
1
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.04.25
12:18:06 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

School of Nursing and Paramedical College, Gorakhpur (for
short, ‘the said institute’) for sixty seats but subsequently the
permission was reduced to forty seats.  However, in spite of
reduction of number of seats, the said institute had admitted
sixty students.  When the result of twenty students was not
published, the said students came to know about the fact
that twenty students were illegally admitted and as such the
complaints came to be filed by some of those students.  One
of such complaints was filed by Respondent No.2 herein.  On
the basis of such complaints, an FIR bearing Case Crime
No.18 of 2015 came to be registered in Police Station Kotwali,
District Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh.
4.
The  averments  made  in  the  FIR  are  that  one  Dr.
Rajaram  Yadav  is  the  Manager  of  the  said  institute,  Dr.
Abhishek  Yadav  is  the  Director  and  Dr.  C.  Prasad  is  the
Principal of the said institute.  The averments are that sixty
seats were advertised in the newspapers and the complainant
was  given  allurement  that  her  admission  was  against  a
sanctioned strength and as such she was induced to pay a
huge  amount.  The  FIR  was  registered  for  the  offences
punishable under Sections 419, 420, 467, 468, 471, 406,
2

504 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘IPC’).
5.
Subsequently,  the  complainant  realized  that  her
admission was not against the sanctioned strength.  As such,
she  lodged  the  complaint  alleging  therein  that  she  was
induced  to  take  admission  in  the  college  by  giving  an
impression that her admission was against a sanctioned seat
and further induced her to pay a huge amount.  As such, it
was  averred  that  the  accused  persons  had  cheated  the
complainant.
6.
The three petitioners (appellants herein), invoking the
jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 482 of the Code
of  Criminal  Procedure,  1973  (for  short,  “Cr.P.C.”),  filed  a
petition for quashing of the said FIR on the ground that no
case was made out against them.  The High Court, while
referring to the various judgments of this Court, observed
that the defence of the accused cannot be considered at this
stage.  The High Court further observed that the petitioners
(appellants herein) had an alternative remedy to apply for
discharge under Section 239 or 227 or 245 of the Cr.P.C.
The High Court, therefore refused to entertain the petition
and rejected it in  limine.  This Court, vide order dated 30th
September  2022,  issued  interim  direction  restraining  the
3

respondents  from  taking  any  coercive  steps  against  the
appellants herein.
7.
We  have  heard  Shri  Prem  Prakash,  learned  counsel
appearing  for  the  appellants  and  Shri  Ravindra  Kumar
Raizada, learned Additional Advocate General for the State of
Uttar Pradesh.
8.
Shri Prem Prakash, learned counsel, submits that the
appellants  herein  are  not  at  all  involved  with  the  said
institute; they are neither the office bearers nor entrusted
with the duties of the day-to-day management of the said
institute.  It is therefore submitted that the High Court erred
in refusing to quash the proceedings against the appellants
herein.
9.
Shri  Raizada,  per  contra,  submits  that  one  of  the
appellants  is  the  wife  of  the  Director  and  the  second
appellant is the sister of the Director and daughter of the
Manager and the third appellant is an employee of the said
institute.  It is submitted that, as such the appellants herein
were not involved in the illegalities committed by the said
institute.  It is further submitted that in any case, since the
charge-sheet has already been filed, the appellants can very
well apply for discharge.
10.
No  doubt  that  at  the  stage  of  quashing  of  the
4

proceedings  under  Section  482  Cr.P.C.,  the  Court  is  not
required  to  take  into  consideration  the  defence  of  the
accused.  However, the FIR, even if taken at its face value,
should  disclose  the  material  which  would  be  sufficient  to
constitute the ingredients of the offences for which the FIR
was lodged.
11.
Taken at its face value, the averments made in the FIR
against the appellants herein are that Smt. Maneesha Yadav
is the wife of Dr. Abhishek Yadav.  Dr. Poonam Yadav is the
sister of Dr. Abhishek Yadav and daughter of Dr. Rajaram
Yadav.  Insofar as Shobhita Nandan Yadav i.e. appellant No.3
is concerned, the averment is that he is an employee of the
said institute.   Apart from that, there is not a single line in
the entire FIR, which would show as to how the aforesaid
appellants are concerned with the management of the said
institute.  No specific role of inducement by the complainant
is attributed to any of the appellants herein.  Merely because
the appellants are close relatives of the Manager or Director
of the said institute, cannot be a ground to involve them in
criminal proceedings.  Unless some material was placed on
record to show that the appellants herein were in-charge of
5

the affairs of the said institute or had any role to play in the
management of the institute or were involved in inducing the
complainant  and  other  students  to  give  them  admission
against the unrecognized seats; in our view, the continuation
of the criminal proceedings would be nothing else but an
abuse of process of law.  
12.
We may gainfully refer to the following observations of
this Court in the case of State of Haryana and Others v.
Bhajan Lal and Others1:
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the
various relevant provisions of the Code under Chap-
ter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by
this Court in a series of decisions relating to the ex-
ercise of the extraordinary power under Article 226
or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the
Code  which  we  have  extracted  and  reproduced
above, we give the following categories of cases by
way of illustration wherein such power could be ex-
ercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
court or otherwise  to  secure the  ends  of  justice,
though it may not be possible to lay down any pre-
cise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and
inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an
exhaustive  list  of  myriad  kinds  of  cases  wherein
such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first
information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and
accepted in their entirety do not prima fa-
1 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 : 1990 INSC 363
6

cie constitute any offence or make out a
case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first infor-
mation report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a
cognizable offence, justifying an investiga-
tion  by  police  officers  under  Section
156(1) of the Code except under an order
of a Magistrate within the purview of Sec-
tion 155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations
made in the FIR or complaint and the evi-
dence collected in support of the same do
not  disclose  the  commission  of  any  of-
fence and make out a case against the ac-
cused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do
not  constitute  a  cognizable  offence  but
constitute only a non-cognizable offence,
no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as
contemplated under Section 155(2) of the
Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR
or  complaint  are  so  absurd  and  inher-
ently improbable on the basis of which no
prudent person can ever reach a just con-
clusion that there is sufficient ground for
proceeding against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar
engrafted in any of the provisions of the
Code or the concerned Act (under which a
criminal proceeding is instituted) to the
institution and continuance of the pro-
ceedings and/or where there is a specific
provision in the Code or the concerned
7

Act, providing efficacious redress for the
grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is mani-
festly  attended  with  mala  fide  and/or
where the proceeding is maliciously insti-
tuted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance  on  the  accused  and  with  a
view to spite him due to private and per-
sonal grudge.
103. We also give a note of caution to the effect that
the power of quashing a criminal proceeding should
be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection
and that too in the rarest of rare cases; that the
court will not be justified in embarking upon an en-
quiry as to the reliability or genuineness or other-
wise of the allegations made in the FIR or the com-
plaint and that the extraordinary or inherent pow-
ers do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the
court to act according to its whim or caprice.”
13.
As has already been observed hereinabove, the Court
would not be justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to
the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the allegations
made in the FIR or the complaint at the stage of quashing of
the  proceedings  under  Section  482  Cr.P.C.   However,  the
allegations made in the FIR/complaint, if taken at its face
value, must disclose the commission of an offence and make
out a case against the accused.  At the cost of repetition, in
the present case, the allegations made in the FIR/complaint
even if taken at its face value, do not disclose the commission
8

of an offence or make out a case against the accused.  We are
of the considered view that the present case would fall under
Category-3 of the categories enumerated by this Court in the
case of Bhajan Lal and Others (supra).
14.
We may gainfully refer to the observations of this Court
in the case of Anand Kumar Mohatta and Another v. State
(NCT of Delhi), Department of Home and Another2:
“14. First, we would like to deal with the submis-
sion of the learned Senior Counsel for Respondent 2
that  once  the  charge-sheet  is  filed,  petition  for
quashing of FIR is untenable. We do not see any
merit in this submission, keeping in mind the posi-
tion of this Court in Joseph Salvaraj A. v. State of
Gujarat [Joseph  Salvaraj  A. v. State  of  Gujarat,
(2011) 7 SCC 59 : (2011) 3 SCC (Cri) 23] . In Joseph
Salvaraj  A. [Joseph  Salvaraj  A. v. State  of  Gujarat,
(2011) 7 SCC 59 : (2011) 3 SCC (Cri) 23] , this
Court while deciding the question whether the High
Court could entertain the Section 482 petition for
quashing of FIR, when the charge-sheet was filed by
the police during the pendency of the Section 482
petition, observed : (SCC p. 63, para 16)
“16. Thus, from the general conspectus of
the various sections under which the ap-
pellant is being charged and is to be pros-
ecuted would show that the same are not
made out even prima facie from the com-
plainant's FIR. Even if the charge-sheet
had been filed, the learned Single Judge
[Joesph  Saivaraj  A. v. State  of  Gujarat,
2007 SCC OnLine Guj 365] could have
still  examined  whether  the  offences  al-
2 (2019) 11 SCC 706 : 2018 INSC 1060
9

leged to have been committed by the ap-
pellant were prima facie made out from
the complainant's FIR, charge-sheet, doc-
uments, etc. or not.”
15. Even otherwise it must be remembered that the
provision invoked by the accused before the High
Court is Section 482 CrPC and that this Court is
hearing an appeal from an order under Section 482
CrPC. Section 482 CrPC reads as follows:
“482. Saving of inherent powers of the
High Court.—Nothing in this Code shall
be deemed to limit or affect the inherent
powers of the High Court to make such
orders as may be necessary to give effect
to any order under this Code, or to pre-
vent abuse of the process of any court or
otherwise to secure the ends of justice.”
16.  There is nothing in the words of this section
which  restricts  the  exercise  of  the  power  of  the
Court to prevent the abuse of process of court or
miscarriage of justice only to the stage of the FIR. It
is settled principle of law that the High Court can
exercise jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC even
when the discharge application is pending with the
trial court [G. Sagar Suri v. State of U.P., (2000) 2
SCC 636, para 7 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 513. Umesh Ku-
mar v. State of A.P., (2013) 10 SCC 591, para 20 :
(2014) 1 SCC (Cri) 338 : (2014) 2 SCC (L&S) 237] .
Indeed, it would be a travesty to hold that proceed-
ings  initiated  against  a  person  can  be  interfered
with at the stage of FIR but not if it has advanced
and the allegations have materialised into a charge-
sheet. On the contrary it could be said that the
abuse of process caused by FIR stands aggravated if
the FIR has taken the form of a charge-sheet after
investigation. The power is undoubtedly conferred to
prevent abuse of process of power of any court.”
10

15.
Insofar  as  the  reasoning  of  the  High  Court  that  the
appellants  herein  can  file  an  application  for  discharge  is
concerned, this Court, in a catena of decisions, has held that
merely because the charge-sheet is filed cannot be a ground
for the High Court to not invoke its jurisdiction under Section
482 of the Cr.P.C.  Continuation of the criminal proceedings
would not be in the interest of justice and would result only
in the harassment of the appellants herein when there is no
material against them.  In our view, this would be abdicating
the jurisdiction vested with the High Court.  
16.
We find that, in the present case, the High Court has
not even referred to the averments made in the FIR but has
mechanically dismissed the petition by observing that the
appellants herein can file an application for discharge.
17.
In that view of the matter, we find that continuation of
criminal  proceedings  against  the  appellants  herein  would
result  in  undue  harassment  when  there  is  no  material
against them and may result in the abuse of process of law.
18.
The appeal is therefore allowed. The impugned order of
the High Court is quashed and set aside and the FIR bearing
Case Crime No.18 of 2015 and consequential charge-sheet
filed against the appellants herein shall also stand quashed
11

and set aside.
19.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
CRIMINAL APPEAL @  SLP(CRIMINAL) NO. 3698 OF 2023
1.
Leave granted.
2.
For the reasons recorded while allowing the appeal
arising out of SLP(Criminal) No. 8922 of 2022, the present
appeal is also allowed.
3.
The impugned order dated 20th December 2022 passed
by the High Cout of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal
Misc. Writ Petition No. 17002 of 2022 is quashed and set
aside  and  the  pending  proceedings  qua  the  appellants
herein  filed  under  the  U.P.  Gangsters  and  Anti-Social
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986 are quashed and set aside.
4.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
..............................J.
(B.R. GAVAI)
..............................................J.  
(PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)  
NEW DELHI;
       
APRIL 09, 2024.
12