2024 INSC 298
 
 
                    Criminal Appeal No. 1186 of 2022 
 
Page 1 of 8 
 
NON REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1186 OF 2022 
 
 
ARUN SHANKAR  
 
        
           …APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH            …RESPONDENT 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
1) 
The Sessions Court has convicted the appellant/accused 
for the offences punishable under Sections 302 and 201 of the 
Indian Penal Code vide the judgment dated 13th March 1995. 
He has been sentenced to undergo life imprisonment. The 
decision of the Sessions Court has been confirmed by the High 
Court by the impugned judgment and order dated 5th 
December 2017. The case is based on circumstantial evidence.  
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
2) 
The case of the prosecution will have to be briefly stated. 
The appellant and deceased (Sushildhar Dubey) were related 
and were residents of village Amgoan. They used to go together 
to drink liquor. On 29th September 1993, in the evening, 
around 7.00, the appellant went to the house of the deceased 
and asked the deceased to accompany him to drink liquor. 
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.04.10
18:06:58 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
                    Criminal Appeal No. 1186 of 2022 
 
Page 2 of 8 
 
They both went to the house of PW-2 (Ramdas) in village 
Kohaka. They consumed liquor in PW-2’s house, and they left 
after consuming the liquor. Nobody saw the deceased alive 
thereafter, and his dead body was found on the morning of 30th 
September 1993 on the road leading to Village Bijholidhar 
Amgoan. The prosecution case is based on circumstantial 
evidence. The circumstances are: 
a) 
Recovery of the knife at the instance of the 
appellant, which is the instrument of assault on the 
deceased; 
b) 
Last seen together; 
c) 
Medical opinion on the injury sustained by the 
deceased and cause of death; and 
d) 
Habit of the deceased of drinking liquor with the 
appellant. 
SUBMISSIONS 
3) 
Learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant has 
taken us through the notes of evidence of material prosecution 
witnesses and other documents on record of the Trial Court. 
His submission is that last seen together is a very weak 
circumstance as there is evidence on record to show that the 
appellant and the deceased were related. Very often, they used 
to consume liquor together. He submitted that the recovery of 
the knife at the appellant's instance had not been proved. He 
submitted that even the existence of motive has not been 
pleaded and proved by the prosecution. He submitted that if 
the oral evidence of PW-7 (Virendradhar Dwivedi) and PW-15 
(Dr. Mahendra Kumar Ahirwal) is considered together, the 

 
 
                    Criminal Appeal No. 1186 of 2022 
 
Page 3 of 8 
 
theory that the death occurred due to an accident of motorcycle 
cannot be ruled out. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt must 
be extended to the appellant. He submitted that every 
circumstance constituting a chain of circumstances has not 
been established.  
4) 
The learned counsel appearing for the State supported 
the impugned judgment. She submitted that the dead body of 
the deceased was found within a few hours from the time at 
which the appellant and the deceased were last seen together. 
She submitted that recovery of the weapon used by the 
appellant to attack the deceased had been duly proved, and all 
circumstances forming part of the chain of circumstances have 
been established.  
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
5) 
This case is based on circumstantial evidence. The law 
governing cases involving circumstantial evidence is no longer 
res integra. Paragraph 153 of the decision of this Court in the 
case 
of 
Sharad 
Birdhichand 
Sarda 
v. 
State 
of 
Maharashtra1 
lays 
down 
the 
well-settled 
principles. 
Paragraph 153 reads thus: 
“153. A close analysis of this decision would 
show that the following conditions must be 
fulfilled before a case against an accused can 
be said to be fully established: 
(1) the circumstances from which the 
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should 
be fully established. 
It may be noted here that this Court indicated 
that the circumstances concerned “must or 
 
1 (1984) 4 SCC 116 

 
 
                    Criminal Appeal No. 1186 of 2022 
 
Page 4 of 8 
 
should” and not “may be” established. There 
is not only a grammatical but a legal 
distinction between “may be proved” and 
“must be or should be proved” as was held by 
this 
Court 
in Shivaji 
Sahabrao 
Bobade v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 
SCC 793 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 1033 : 1973 Crl LJ 
1783] where the observations were made: 
[SCC para 19, p. 807: SCC (Cri) p. 1047] 
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that 
the accused must be and not merely may be 
guilty before a court can convict and the 
mental distance between ‘may be’ and ‘must 
be’ is long and divides vague conjectures from 
sure conclusions.” 
(2) the facts so established should be 
consistent only with the hypothesis of the 
guilt of the accused, that is to say, they 
should not be explainable on any other 
hypothesis except that the accused is 
guilty, 
(3) the circumstances should be of a 
conclusive nature and tendency, 
(4) 
they 
should 
exclude 
every 
possible hypothesis except the one to be 
proved, and 
(5) there must be a chain of evidence 
so complete as not to leave any reasonable 
ground for the conclusion consistent with 
the innocence of the accused and must 
show that in all human probability the act 
must have been done by the accused.” 
          (emphasis supplied) 
 
6) 
We have carefully perused the evidence of PW-2, who 
deposed that on 29th September 1993 till 9.00 pm, the 

 
 
                    Criminal Appeal No. 1186 of 2022 
 
Page 5 of 8 
 
appellant and deceased consumed liquor in his house. He 
deposed that the appellant and deceased left his house after 
consuming liquor. He stated that the appellant and the 
deceased had gone towards Amgoan. The body of the deceased 
was recovered on the next day. In the cross-examination, the 
PW-2 stated that two to four times, the appellant and the 
deceased had come to his place to drink liquor. He stated that 
the deceased used to consume a lot of liquor. PW-6 (Smt. 
Anjana Devi) is the wife of the deceased, who deposed that the 
appellant came to her house and gave a currency note of Rs. 
50/- to the deceased and forcibly took him for drinking. After 
that, the deceased did not come back. She stated that she 
deputed her elder son to the appellant’s house, where the 
sister-in-law of the appellant informed the elder son of the 
deceased that the appellant was sleeping in the house. 
Thereafter, the appellant himself visited the house of PW-6 and 
enquired whether his brother-in-law (deceased) had come 
back. She deposed that at 12.00 noon, one Kotewar informed 
her that the dead body of her husband had been found. She 
admitted that her husband used to drink alcohol occasionally. 
Sometimes, he used to get drunk, and people used to bring him 
back home. She stated that when her husband went with the 
appellant, she knew that they were going to drink liquor.  
7) 
PW-7 stated that the deceased was his nephew. In the 
cross-examination, he accepted that the deceased and 
appellant always used to be together. Thus, this was not the 
first occasion when the deceased and the appellant went 
together to consume liquor. Apart from being closely related, 

 
 
                    Criminal Appeal No. 1186 of 2022 
 
Page 6 of 8 
 
they had a close contact, and they used to be together for 
drinking. The prosecution has not come out with a case that 
there was some motive on the part of the appellant for killing 
the deceased. Neither PW-2 nor PW-6 stated that on 29th 
September 1993, there was any dispute or altercation between 
the appellant and the deceased. Thus, the deceased being in 
company of the appellant on 29th September 1993 was not an 
unusual circumstance. This makes the case based on the 
theory of last seen together very weak in absence of motive.  
8) 
Now, we come to the evidence of recovery of the weapon 
of offence at the instance of the appellant. The first witness to 
the recovery memorandum under Section 27 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872, is PW-2. In the examination-in-chief, he 
said that he was not aware who told the police that the knife 
was lying in a particular place. He stated that the police had 
said they were trying to find out the place the accused was 
telling. He stated that soil and knife were recovered from 
different locations. He stated that he signed on papers on which 
something was written, which was not read over to him. He 
further stated that he was illiterate.  
9) 
PW-4 (Arjun) stated that the police personnel had taken 
them to the place where the knife was found. The witness said 
that he saw the knife first, and thereafter, the police picked it 
up. He stated that he was not aware who had told police that 
the knife would be found at that place. On plain reading of the 
evidence of these two witnesses, it is apparent that the recovery 
of the knife at the instance of the appellant has not been duly 
proved. They have not stated that the discovery was made from 

 
 
                    Criminal Appeal No. 1186 of 2022 
 
Page 7 of 8 
 
a place disclosed by the appellant in their presence. Moreover, 
memorandum recording the statement of the appellant has not 
been duly proved. So, one part of the chain of circumstances 
has not been established. 
10) 
PW-7 stated in the cross-examination that he had gone 
to the place of incident. He stated that there were pieces of glass 
lying there. He stated that the pieces of glass may be of the light 
of a motorcycle. He stated that he had informed the police that 
the deceased may have sustained injury due to an accident 
involving a motorcycle.  
11) 
PW-15 is the doctor who performed a postmortem of the 
body of the deceased. In the cross-examination, he admitted 
that if the glass pieces were small and sharp, the injury 
sustained by the deceased could have been caused by small 
pieces of glass.  
CONCLUSION 
12) 
Thus, the recovery of the weapon at the instance of the 
appellant has not been proved. Therefore, it cannot be said that 
all the circumstances forming part of the chain of 
circumstances have been duly proved. Moreover, the evidence 
of PW-7, who deposed that pieces of glass were found at the 
place of the incident, and the opinion of the doctor who 
performed postmortem creates a doubt about the prosecution 
story. There is no explanation by the prosecution for the 
presence of a large number of glass pieces at the place where 
the body of the deceased was found. The circumstance of last 
seen together is a very weak circumstance in the facts of the 
case. The circumstances brought on record are not conclusive 

 
 
                    Criminal Appeal No. 1186 of 2022 
 
Page 8 of 8 
 
in nature. The circumstances are not consistent only with the 
hypothesis of the guilt of the appellant.  
13) 
In the circumstances, the appellant's conviction cannot 
be sustained. We allow the appeal and set aside the impugned 
judgements, and the appellant is acquitted of the offences 
alleged against him. The appellant is on bail. His bail bonds are 
cancelled.  
 
……………………..J. 
(Abhay S. Oka) 
 
……………………..J. 
(Ujjal Bhuyan) 
New Delhi; 
April 10, 2024