2024 INSC 296
  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 1 of 48 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3821 OF 2024  
 
MAHAKALI SUJATHA 
 
 
 
 
     …APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE BRANCH MANAGER,  
FUTURE GENERALI INDIA LIFE INSURANCE  
COMPANY LIMITED  & ANOTHER  
 
…RESPONDENTS 
             
J U D G M E N T 
 
NAGARATHNA, J. 
1. 
The present civil appeal has been filed by the complainant, 
who is the daughter of the insured-deceased Sri Siriveri 
Venkateswarlu, who is also the nominee under the subject life 
insurance policies of her late father. The appellant is assailing the 
order dated 22.07.2019 passed by the National Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi (hereinafter referred to 
as “NCDRC”) in Revision Petition No.1268 of 2019.  
 
Digitally signed by
RADHA SHARMA
Date: 2024.04.10
17:32:49 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 2 of 48 
 
2. 
 By the impugned order, the NCDRC has allowed the revision 
petition filed by the respondent-opposite party, thereby setting 
aside the orders passed by the District Consumer Forum and the 
State Consumer Forum and sustaining the repudiation of the 
complainant’s claim by the opposite party insurer-company.  
 
3. 
The brief facts giving rise to the present appeal are as follows: 
 
3.1. For the sake of convenience, the parties shall be referred to 
as complainant and opposite party. 
 
3.2. Late Sri Siriveri Venkateswarlu, father of the complainant, 
obtained two insurance policies from the opposite party – one on 
05.05.2009, for a sum of Rs. 4,50,000/-, and the other on 
22.03.2010, for a sum of Rs. 4,80,000/-. Under the said two 
policies, in the event of death by accident, twice the sum assured 
was payable by the insurer. In the application form of the policy, 
the insured had been asked about the details of his existing life 
insurance policies with any other insurer, and the insured had 
answered the same in the negative. The complainant, being the 
daughter of the policy holder Late Sri Siriveri Venkateswarlu, was 
nominated to receive the proceeds under both the policies.  

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 3 of 48 
 
 
3.3. On 28.02.2011, the policy holder unfortunately lost his life in 
a train accident, leaving behind the complainant alone as his legal 
heir as well as nominee for death benefits. Immediately thereafter, 
the complainant approached the opposite party and informed 
about the death of her father and they advised the complainant to 
submit a claim form along with necessary documents which she 
did. However, by letter dated 31.12.2011, the complainant’s claims 
were repudiated by the opposite party.  
 
3.4. The claim of the complainant was repudiated on the ground 
that the policy holder had suppressed material facts in his 
application form with respect to existing life insurance policies 
from other insurers. Upon investigation by the opposite party, it 
was found that the insured had substantial life insurance cover 
with other insurance companies, even prior to the date of his 
application. After an evaluation of all facts and documents 
submitted and circumstances of the case, the opposite party came 
to the conclusion that the replies to the questions in the 
application form were incorrect, in as much as the opposite party 
held documentary proof in support of the same. They observed that 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 4 of 48 
 
had such information been disclosed, their underwriting decision 
would have materially changed. It was further remarked that the 
contract of insurance is based on the principle of utmost good faith 
and the company relies on the information provided by the life 
insured in the application for insurance. Thus, the claim was held 
to be not valid and the liability to pay under the policy was 
repudiated by the insurer.  
 
3.5. Being aggrieved by the repudiation of the claim, the 
complainant approached the concerned District Forum by way of 
a consumer complaint, bearing CC No.8 of 2014. The District 
Commission at Vijaywada, Krishna District, by order dated 
27.08.2014, allowed the consumer complaint, on the ground that 
no documentary evidence was available to show that the deceased-
insured had taken various insurance policies from various other 
companies. The Commission found deficiency of services on the 
part of the opposite party in repudiating the claim filed by the 
complainant and therefore directed the opposite parties to pay the 
insurance amount of Rs.7,50,000/- + Rs.9,60,000/- under two 
policies jointly and severally with interest at the rate of 6% per 
annum from 31.12.2011, i.e., the date of repudiation of the claim 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 5 of 48 
 
of the complainant, till realisation, along with costs of Rs. 2000/- 
to the complainant. 
 
3.6. Being aggrieved, the insured/opposite party filed an appeal 
bearing FA No.94 of 2015 before the concerned State Consumer 
Forum at Vijaywada. The State Commission observed that there 
was absolutely no material produced by the opposite party before 
the Forum to prove the allegation of suppression. The documents 
attempted to be produced were neither original nor certified nor 
authenticated. However, even assuming that there were existing 
policies, still the non-disclosure of pre-existing policies does not 
amount to suppression of material facts. Reliance for the same was 
placed on some previous judgments of the NCDRC. Hence, the 
claim could not have been said to be vitiated by fraud. The opposite 
parties were not right in repudiating the claim. The State 
Commission therefore, by its order dated 11.12.2018, dismissed 
the appeal of the opposite party and upheld the order of the District 
Commission.  
 
3.7. The opposite party thereafter approached the NCDRC 
through Revision Petition No.1268 of 2019, challenging the order 
passed by the State Commission in FA No.94 of 2015. The NCDRC, 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 6 of 48 
 
vide impugned judgment, agreed with the opposite party that the 
deceased-insured had withheld the information in respect of 
several insurance policies which he had taken from other insurers. 
The NCDRC observed that on the one hand, the opposite party had 
duly stated the details of the other policies in their affidavit, but 
on the other, the complainant, even in her affidavit filed by way of 
evidence, did not claim that the policies mentioned in the written 
version of the opposite party had not been taken by the deceased. 
Reliance was further placed by the NCDRC on the judgment of this 
Court in Reliance Life Insurance Co Ltd vs. Rekhaben 
Nareshbhai Rathod, (2019) 6 SCC 175, (“Rekhaben”) wherein 
the repudiation of the claim due to suppression of the fact of other 
existing insurance policies was upheld by the Supreme Court.  The 
NCDRC held that the Supreme Court’s judgment would prevail 
over the judgments of the NCDRC relied upon by the State 
Consumer forum and thus, the revision petition was allowed and 
the consumer complaint was dismissed.  
 
4. 
Hence, the complainant has preferred the present Special 
Leave Petition against the impugned judgment of the NCDRC.  
 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 7 of 48 
 
5. 
We have heard learned counsel for the Appellant, Sri 
Venkateswara Rao Anumolu and learned counsel for the 
Respondent, Sri Praveen Mahajan for the insurer. The controversy 
in the present case pertains to the factum of repudiation of the 
insurance claim of the Complainant on the ground of the material 
suppression of information regarding the previous policies 
allegedly held by the insured-deceased, while taking the life 
insurance policy from the Opposite Party.  
 
6. 
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the 
insurance company has not proved that appellant’s father had any 
other insurance policy while taking the insurance policy from the 
opposite party. Thus, there has been no material suppression of 
fact in the application form with respect to holding any previous 
policy by the insured-deceased or his family members.  
 
7. 
It was further submitted by the appellant that the NCDRC 
was incorrect in upholding the repudiation of claim in the absence 
of an iota of documentary evidence on record to support the 
contention that the insured-deceased had suppressed any fact 
under Clause 6 of the Proposal Form about the previous policies 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 8 of 48 
 
issued by other insurers. The respondent has merely alleged the 
fact of multiple insurance policies of the insured-deceased through 
their affidavit of evidence but had not discharged their burden of 
proof by leading any documentary evidence to support their 
allegation.  
 
8. 
Per Contra, learned counsel for the respondent has supported 
the judgment of the NCDRC and has further contended that the 
insured-deceased had taken fifteen other insurance policies worth 
Rs.71,27,702/- prior to the issuance of the subject policies by 
them. These policies were not disclosed in the proposal forms and 
had the respondent been aware about these other insurance 
policies with other insurance companies and the existing risk cover 
at the time of assessment of risk under the subject policies, they 
would have certainly not issued the subject policies to the insured-
deceased. Thus, the insured-deceased has suppressed the 
material fact and the claim has been rightly repudiated on this 
ground alone.  
 
9. 
Learned counsel for the respondent further submitted that 
the policy of life insurance is based upon the principle of 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 9 of 48 
 
“uberrimae fidei”, i.e., utmost good faith. When a specific fact is 
asked for in the proposal form, an assured is under a solemn 
obligation to make a true and full disclosure of the information on 
the subject which is within the best of his knowledge. In the 
present case as well, the insured-deceased was under the 
obligation to make complete and honest disclosure of all the facts 
and materials at the time of filling of the proposal form. The failure 
to do so shows the mala fide intention on the part of the insured-
deceased and renders the policy invalid, void ab-initio, inoperative 
and unenforceable.  
 
10.  Learned counsel for the respondent also relied upon the 
judgment of this court in the case of Rekhaben, which is 
contended to be similar in facts to the present case and where this 
Court allowed the repudiation of the insurance claim on the 
ground of material suppression of information about the 
previously taken insurance policies.  
 
11. Having heard the learned counsel for the respective parties, 
the point that arises for consideration before this Court in the 
present Civil Appeal, is, whether, the respondent herein was 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 10 of 48 
 
correct in repudiating the claim of the appellant on the ground of 
suppression of material information pertaining to the existing 
policies with other insurers.  
 
12. In order to answer the aforesaid question, it would be useful 
to recapitulate the relevant provisions of the law of insurance and 
evidence, vis-à-vis burden of proof and the method of discharging 
that burden of proof to prove an alleged fact, which is suppression 
of a material fact while seeking an insurance policy from an 
insurer.  
 
13. The repudiation of an insurance claim is largely governed by 
Section 45 of the Insurance Act, 1938. Section 45 is a special 
provision of law, which bars the calling in question of an insurance 
policy beyond expiry of the stipulated period, except in a few 
circumstances that have to be proved by the insurer. The relevant 
part of the said provision, as it stood at the material time, is 
reproduced as under: 
“45. Policy not be called in question on ground of mis-
statement after two years.- No policy of life insurance 
effected before the commencement of this Act shall after 
the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of 
this Act and no policy of life insurance effected after the 
coming into force of this Act shall after the expiry of two 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 11 of 48 
 
years from the date on which it was effected, be called in 
question by an insurer on the ground that  a statement 
made in the proposal for insurance or in any report of a 
medical officer, or referee, or friend of the insured, or in 
any other document leading to the issue of the policy, was 
inaccurate or false, unless the insurer shows that such 
statement was on a material matter or suppressed facts 
which it was material to disclose and that it was 
fraudulently made by the policy-holder and that the policy-
holder knew at the time of making it that the statement 
was false or that it suppressed facts which it was material 
to disclose:  
 
Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent the 
insurer from calling for proof of age at any time if he is 
entitled to do so, and no policy shall be deemed to be called 
in question merely because the terms of the policy are 
adjusted on subsequent proof that the age of the life 
insured was incorrectly stated in the proposal.” 
  
14. A three-judge bench of this court in Mithoolal Nayak vs. 
Life Insurance Corporation of India, AIR 1962 SC 814, 
explained the scope of the operating part of Section 45 as under: 
“7….It would be noticed that the operating part of S. 
45 states in effect (so far as is relevant for our purpose) 
that no policy of life insurance effected after the coming 
into force of the Act shall, after the expiry of two years from 
the date on which it was effected, be called in question by 
an insurer on the ground that a statement made in the 
proposal for insurance or in any report of a medical officer, 
or referee, or friend of the insured, or in any other 
document leading to the issue of the policy, was inaccurate 
or false; the second part of the section is in the nature of a 
proviso which creates an exception. It says in effect that if 
the insurer shows that such statement was on a material 
matter or suppressed facts which it was material to 
disclose and that it was fraudulently made by the 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 12 of 48 
 
policyholder and that the policy-holder knew at the time of 
making it that the statement was false or that it 
suppressed facts which it was material to disclose, then 
the insurer can call in question the policy effected as a 
result of such inaccurate or false statement.” 
 
15. The scope of Section 45 was dealt with by this Court in the 
case of Rekhaben as follows:  
“14. Section 45 stipulates restrictions upon the insurer 
calling into question a policy of life insurance after the 
expiry of two years from the date on which it was effected. 
After two years have elapsed the insurer cannot call it into 
question on the ground that: (i) a statement made in the 
proposal; or (ii) a statement made in any report of a 
medical officer, referee or friend of the insured; or (iii) a 
statement made in any other document leading to the 
issuance of the policy was inaccurate or false, unless 
certain conditions are fulfilled. Those conditions are that: 
(a) such a statement was on a material matter; or (b) the 
statement suppressed facts which were material to 
disclose and that (i) they were fraudulently made by the 
policy holder; and (ii) the policy-holder knew at the time of 
making it that the statements were false or suppressed 
facts which were material to disclose. The cumulative 
effect of Section 45 is to restrict the right of the insurer to 
repudiate a policy of life insurance after a period of two 
years of the date on which the policy was effected. Beyond 
two years, the burden lies on the insurer to establish the 
inaccuracy or falsity of a statement on a material matter 
or the suppression of material facts. Moreover, in addition 
to this requirement, the insurer has to establish that this 
non-disclosure or, as the case may be, the submission of 
inaccurate or false information was fraudulently made and 
that the policy-holder while making it knew of the falsity 
of the statement or of the suppression of facts which were 
material to disclose.” 
(emphasis by us) 
 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 13 of 48 
 
 
16. Since the present case deals with a policy and its repudiation 
before the 2014 amendment to Section 45 of the Insurance Act, 
the pre-amendment time period of two years would be applicable 
to the case. As per the aforesaid language and interpretation of 
Section 45, the insurer cannot question the policy after the expiry 
of the time period and if it does, then the burden rests on the 
insurer to establish materiality of the fact suppressed and the 
knowledge of the insured about such suppression, so that the 
repudiation of the claim could be justified by the insurer.  
 
 
17. In the present case, the onus was on the insurer to show that 
the insured had fraudulently given false information and the said 
information was related to a material fact. The second aspect of 
the controversy would be dealt with first.  
 
18. For a better appreciation of the controversy, it would be 
important to analyse the maxim of uberrimae fidei that governs the 
insurance contracts. It may also be observed that insurance 
contracts are special contracts based   on   the   general   principles   
of   full   disclosure   inasmuch   as   a person   seeking   insurance   
is   bound   to   disclose   all   material   facts relating to the risk 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 14 of 48 
 
involved. Law demands a higher standard of good faith in matters 
of insurance contracts which is expressed in the legal maxim 
uberrimae fidei. The plea of utmost good faith has also been taken 
by the respondent, for contending that the insured-deceased had 
a duty to disclose the details of the previous policies, as the same 
was sought in the application form. However, the insured failed in 
his duty to correctly answer the question about his previous 
policies. The law relating to the maxim uberrimae fidei was dealt 
with by this Court in the case of Manmohan Nanda vs. United 
India Insurance Co. Ltd., (2022) 4 SCC 582, (“Manmohan 
Nanda”). The same could be discussed at this stage with reference 
to legal authorities as well as relevant provisions of law. 
 
19. MacGillivray on Insurance Law, (12th Edn., Sweet & Maxwell, 
London, 2012 at p. 477) has summarised the duty of an insured 
to disclose as under:  
“... the assured must disclose to the insurer all facts 
material to an insurer's appraisal of the risk which are 
known or deemed to be known by the assured but neither 
known nor deemed to be known by the insurer. Breach of 
this duty by the assured entitles the insurer to avoid the 
contract of insurance so long as he can show that the 
non-disclosure induced the making of the contract on the 
relevant terms.” 
  

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 15 of 48 
 
20. Lord Mansfield in Carter vs. Boehm, (1766) 3 Burr 1905  
has summarised the principles necessitating disclosure by the 
assured in the following words: 
“Insurance is a contract of speculation.  
 
The special facts upon which   the   contingent   chance   
is   to   be   computed, lie   most commonly in the knowledge 
of the assured only; the under-writer trusts to his 
representation, and proceeds upon confidence that he 
does not keep back any circumstance in his knowledge, to 
mislead 
the 
under-writer 
into 
a 
belief 
that 
the 
circumstance does not exist …  
 
The keeping back such circumstance is a fraud, and 
therefore the policy is void. Although the suppression 
should happen through mistake, without any fraudulent 
intention; yet still the under-writer is deceived and the 
policy is void; because the risk run is really different from 
the risk understood and intended to be run, at the time of 
the agreement.  
 
The policy would   be   equally   void   against   the   
under-writer   if   he concealed; ... 
 
Good faith forbids either party, by concealing what he 
privately knows, to draw the other into a bargain from his 
ignorance of the fact, and his believing the contrary.” 
 
The aforesaid principles would apply having regard to the 
nature of policy under consideration, as what is necessary to be 
disclosed are “material facts” which phrase is not definable as 
such, as the same would depend upon the nature and extent of 
coverage of risk under a particular type of policy. In simple terms, 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 16 of 48 
 
it could be understood that any fact which has a bearing on the 
very foundation of the contract of insurance and the risk to be 
covered under the policy would be a “material fact”. 
 
21. Under 
the 
provisions 
of 
Insurance 
Regulatory 
and 
Development Authority (Protection of Policyholders’ Interests) 
Regulations, 2002 the explanation to Section 2 (d) defining 
“proposal form” throws light on what is the meaning and content 
of “material.” For an easy reference the definition of “proposal 
form” along with the explanation under the aforesaid Regulations 
has been extracted as under:  
“2.   Definitions.- In   these   regulations, unless   the   
context otherwise requires-  
 
x   x   x 
 
(d) "Proposal Form" means a form to be filled in by the 
proposer for insurance, for furnishing all material 
information required by the insurer in respect of a risk, in 
order to enable the insurer to decide whether to accept or 
decline, to undertake the risk, and in the event of 
acceptance of the risk, to determine the rates, terms and 
conditions of a cover to be granted. 
 
Explanation: 
"Material" 
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
these 
regulations shall mean   and   include   all   important, 
essential   and   relevant information in the context of 
underwriting the risk to be covered by the insurer.” 
 
 
 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 17 of 48 
 
 
Thus, the Regulation also defines the word "material" to 
mean and include all "important", "essential" and 
"relevant" information in the context of guiding the insurer 
in deciding whether to undertake the risk or not.”  
 
 
22. Just as the insured has a duty to disclose all material facts, 
the insurer must also inform the insured about the terms and 
conditions of the   policy that is going to be issued to him and  must  
strictly conform to the statements in the proposal form or 
prospectus, or those made through his agents. Thus, the principle 
of utmost good faith imposes meaningful reciprocal duties owed by 
the insured to the insurer   and vice   versa.   This   inherent duty   
of   disclosure   was   a common law duty of good faith originally 
founded in equity but has later been statutorily recognised as 
noted above. It is also open to the parties entering into a contract 
to extend the duty or restrict it by the terms of the contract.  
 
23. The duty of the insured to observe utmost good faith is 
enforced by requiring him to respond to a proposal form which is 
so framed to seek all relevant information to be incorporated in the 
policy and to make it the basis of a contract. The contractual duty 
so imposed is that any suppression or falsity in the statements in 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 18 of 48 
 
the proposal form would result in a breach of duty of good faith 
and would render the policy voidable and consequently repudiate 
it at the instance of the insurer. 
 
24. In relation to the duty of disclosure on the insured, any fact 
which would   influence   the   judgment   of   a  prudent   insurer  
and   not   a particular   insurer  is   a   material   fact.   The   test   
is, whether, the circumstances in question  would  influence the 
prudent insurer and not   whether   it  might  influence   him   vide  
Reynolds vs.  Phoenix Assurance Co. Ltd., (1978) 2 Lloyd’s 
Rep. 440. Hence, the test is to be of a prudent insurer while 
issuing a policy of insurance.  
 
25. The basic test hinges on whether the mind of a prudent 
insurer would be affected, either in deciding whether to take the 
risk at all or in fixing the premium, by knowledge of a particular 
fact if it had been disclosed. Therefore, the fact must be one 
affecting the risk. If it has no bearing on the risk it need not be 
disclosed and if it would do no more than cause insurers to make 
inquiries delaying issue of the insurance, it is not material if the 
result of the inquiries would have no effect on a prudent insurer. 
 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 19 of 48 
 
26. Whether a fact is material will depend on the circumstances, 
as proved by evidence, of the particular case.  It is for the court to 
rule as a matter of law, whether, a particular fact is capable of 
being material and to give directions as to the test to be applied.  
Rules of universal application are not therefore to be expected, but 
the propositions set out in the following paragraphs are well 
established: 
(a)  
Any fact is material which leads to the inference, in 
the circumstances of the particular case, that the 
subject matter of insurance is not an ordinary risk, 
but is exceptionally liable to be affected by the peril 
insured against. This is referred to as the “physical 
hazard”. 
 
(b)  
Any fact is material which leads to the inference that 
the particular proposer is a person, or one of a class 
of persons, whose proposal for insurance ought to 
be subjected at all or accepted at a normal rate.  This 
is usually referred to as the “moral hazard”.  
 
(c)   
The   materiality   of   a   particular   fact   is   
determined   by   the circumstances of each case and 
is a question of fact.  
 
 
27. If a fact, although material, is one which the proposer did not 
and could not in the particular circumstances have been expected 
to know, or   if   its   materiality   would   not   have   been   apparent   
to   a reasonable man, his failure to disclose it is not a breach of 
his duty.     

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 20 of 48 
 
 
 
28. Full disclosure must be made of all relevant facts and matters 
that have occurred up to the time at which there is a concluded 
contract.   It   follows   from   this   principle   that   the   materiality   
of   a particular fact is determined by the circumstances existing 
at the time when it ought to have been disclosed, and not by the 
events which may   subsequently   transpire.     The   duty   to   
make   full   disclosure continues to apply throughout negotiations 
for the contract but it comes to an end when the contract is 
concluded; therefore, material facts which come to the proposer’s 
knowledge subsequently need not be disclosed.  
 
29. Thus, a proposer is under a duty to disclose to the insurer all 
material facts as are within his knowledge.  The proposer is 
presumed to know all the facts and circumstances concerning the 
proposed insurance. Whilst the proposer can only disclose what is 
known to him, the proposer’s duty of disclosure is not confined to 
his actual knowledge, it also   extends   to   those   material   facts   
which, in   the ordinary course of business, he ought to know.  
However, the assured is not under a duty to disclose facts which 
he did not know and which he could not reasonably be expected to 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 21 of 48 
 
know at the material time. The second aspect of the duty of good 
faith arises   in relation to representations made during the course 
of negotiations, and for this purpose   all   statements   in   relation   
to   material   facts   made   by   the proposer during the course of 
negotiations for the contract constitute representations and must 
be made in good faith.  
 
30. The   basic   rules   to   be   observed   in   making   a   proposal   
for insurance may be summarized as follows: 
(a) A fair and reasonable construction must be put upon 
the language of the question which is asked, and the 
answer given will be similarly construed. This involves 
close attention to the language used in either case, as the 
question may be so framed that an unqualified answer 
amounts to an assertion by the proposer that he has 
knowledge of the facts and that the knowledge is being 
imparted. However, provided these canons are observed, 
accuracy in all matters of substance will suffice and 
misstatements or omissions in trifling and insubstantial 
respects will be ignored. 
 
(b) Carelessness   is   no   excuse, unless   the   error   is 
so obvious that no one could be regarded as misled. If the 
proposer puts ‘no’ when he means ‘yes’ it will not avail him 
to say it was a slip of the pen; the answer is plainly the 
reverse of the truth. 
 
(c) An   answer   which   is   literally   accurate,   so   far   
as   it extends, will not suffice if it is misleading by reason 
of what is not stated. It may be quite accurate for the 
proposer to state that he has made a claim previously on 
an insurance company, but the answer is untrue if in fact 
he has made more than one. 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 22 of 48 
 
  
(d) Where the space for an answer is left blank, leaving the   
question un-answered, the reasonable inference may be 
that there is nothing to enter as an answer.  If in fact there 
is something to enter as an answer, the insurers are misled 
in that their reasonable inference is belied. It will then be 
a matter of construction whether this is a mere 
non-disclosure, the proposer having made no positive 
statement at all, or whether in substance he is to be 
regarded as having asserted that there is in fact nothing to 
state. 
 
(e) Where an answer is unsatisfactory, as being on the face 
of it incomplete or inconsistent the insurers may, as 
reasonable men, be regarded as put on inquiry, so that if 
they issue a policy without any further enquiry they   are   
assumed   to   have   waived   any   further information. 
However, having regard to the inference mentioned in head 
(4) above, the mere leaving of a blank space will not 
normally be regarded as sufficient to put the insurers on 
inquiry. 
 
(f) A proposer may find it convenient to bracket together 
two or more questions and give a composite answer. There 
is no objection to his doing so, provided the insurers are 
given adequate and accurate information on all points 
covered by the questions. 
 
(g) Any answer given, however accurate and honest at the 
time it was written down, must be corrected if, up to the 
time of acceptance of the proposal, any event or 
circumstance   supervenes   to   make   it   inaccurate   or 
misleading. 
 
[Source : Halsbury’s Laws of England, Fourth Edition, Para 375, 
Vol.25 : Insurance] 
 
 
 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 23 of 48 
 
31. Sometimes the standard of duty of disclosure imposed on the 
insured could make the insured vulnerable as the statements in 
the proposal form could be held against the insured. Conversely, 
certain clauses in the policy of insurance could be interpreted in 
light of the contra proferentem rule as against the insurer. In order 
to seek specific information from the insured, the proposal form 
must have specific questions so as to obtain clarity as to the 
underlying risks in the policy, which are greater than the normal 
risks. 
 
32. From the aforementioned discussion, it is clear that the 
principle of utmost good faith puts reciprocal duties of disclosure 
on both parties to the contract of insurance. These reciprocal 
duties mandate that both the parties make complete disclosure to 
each other, so that the parties can take an informed decision and 
a fair contract of insurance exists between them. No material facts 
should be suppressed, which may have a bearing on the risk being 
insured and the decision of the party to undertake that risk. 
However, not every question can be said to be material fact and the 
materiality of a fact has to be adjudged as per the rules stated in 
the aforementioned judgment.  

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 24 of 48 
 
 
33. Whether the information with regard to previous policies from 
other insurers is a material fact or not has already been dealt with 
by this Court in the judgment of Rekhaben. The facts of the said 
case were that the insured therein had taken a policy of life 
insurance from Max New York Life Insurance Co. Ltd. on 
10.07.2009 for a sum of Rs. 11 lakhs. Barely two months 
thereafter, on 16.09.2009, the insured submitted a proposal for a 
life insurance term plan policy of Reliance Life Insurance Co Ltd 
for an insurance cover of Rs. 10 lakhs. One of the questions that 
the proposer was required to answer in the proposal form was 
whether he was currently insured or had previously applied for life 
insurance cover, critical illness cover or accident benefit cover. 
This query was answered in the negative. In substance, the 
information regarding life insurance policy earlier taken had to be 
mentioned. The query was answered as “NA” or “not applicable” 
response. The appellant company therein issued a policy of life 
insurance to the spouse of the respondent on 22.09.2009. The 
respondent spouse died on 08.02.2010. A claim for payment of 
Rs.10 lakhs was submitted. On coming to know that the spouse of 
the respondent therein had been insured with another private 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 25 of 48 
 
insurance company for a sum of Rs.11 lakhs and that the claim 
had been settled, the appellant company repudiated the claim 
stating that there was suppression of material fact inasmuch as 
there was glaring omission in the mentioning of details of the life 
insurance policy held by the life assured with other company. 
Being aggrieved by the repudiation, the respondent in the said case 
filed a consumer complaint which was dismissed on the ground 
that there was non-disclosure of the fact that the insured had held 
a previous policy in the proposal form filled up by the proposer. 
The appeal filed by the respondent was, however, allowed based on 
a decision of the NCDRC in Sahara India Life Insurance Co. Ltd. 
vs. Rayani Ramanjaneyulu, 2014 SCC OnLine NCDRC 525 : 
(2014) 3 CPJ 582 (“Sahara India”). The decision of the State 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission was affirmed by 
NCDRC for the reason that the omission of the insured to disclose 
a previous policy of insurance would not influence the mind of a 
prudent insurer, as held in Sahara India. 
 
34. The question before this Court in the aforesaid case was, 
whether, the repudiation could be sustained on the grounds of 
suppression of information about other insurance policies. It is 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 26 of 48 
 
pertinent to note that the insured therein had admitted the non-
disclosure of the earlier cover for life insurance held by him, but 
argued that the non-disclosure of such information was not a 
material fact whose suppression would allow for repudiation of the 
claim under Section 45. Therefore, the Court ruled in favour of the 
insurance company and held that such suppression was indeed a 
material suppression of information, as it had a bearing on the 
decision of the insurer to enter into the contract of insurance or 
not. The court thereunder held as follows:  
“32. In the present case, the insurer had sought 
information with respect to previous insurance policies 
obtained by the assured. The duty of full disclosure 
required that no information of substance or of interest to 
the insurer be omitted or concealed. Whether or not the 
insurer would have issued a life insurance cover despite 
the earlier cover of insurance is a decision which was 
required to be taken by the insurer after duly considering 
all relevant facts and circumstances. The disclosure of the 
earlier cover was material to an assessment of the risk 
which was being undertaken by the insurer. Prior to 
undertaking the risk, this information could potentially 
allow the insurer to question as to why the insured had in 
such a short span of time obtained two different life 
insurance policies. Such a fact is sufficient to put the 
insurer to enquiry.  
 
33. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the insurer 
submitted that where a warranty has been furnished by 
the proposer in terms of a declaration in the proposal form, 
the requirement of the information being material should 
not be insisted upon and the insurer would be at liberty to 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 27 of 48 
 
avoid its liability irrespective of whether the information 
which is sought is material or otherwise. For the purposes 
of the present case, it is sufficient for this Court to hold in 
the present facts that the information which was sought by 
the insurer was indeed material to its decision as to 
whether or not to undertake a risk. The proposer was 
aware of the fact, while making a declaration, that if any 
statements were untrue or inaccurate or if any matter 
material to the proposal was not disclosed, the insurer may 
cancel the contract and forfeit the premium. MacGillivray 
on Insurance Law formulates the principle thus:  
 
“…In more recent cases it has been held that all-
important element in such a declaration is the 
phrase which makes the declaration the “basis of 
contract”. These words alone show that the 
proposer 
is 
warranting 
the 
truth 
of 
his 
statements, so that in the event of a breach this 
warranty, the insurer can repudiate the liability 
on the policy irrespective of issues of materiality.” 
 
34. We are not impressed with the submission that the 
proposer was unaware of the contents of the form that he 
was required to fill up or that in assigning such a response 
to a third party, he was absolved of the consequence of 
appending his signatures to the proposal. The proposer 
duly appended his signature to the proposal form and the 
grant of the insurance cover was on the basis of the 
statements contained in the proposal form. Barely two 
months before the contract of insurance was entered into 
with the appellant, the insured had obtained another 
insurance cover for his life in the sum of Rs 11 lakhs. We 
are of the view that the failure of the insured to disclose 
the policy of insurance obtained earlier in the proposal 
form entitled the insurer to repudiate the claim under the 
policy.” 
 
 
 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 28 of 48 
 
35. However, the aforesaid judgment is distinguishable from the 
present case, insofar as there is no admission by the appellant 
herein of any previous policies taken by the insured. In that case, 
after the admission by the policy holder, the Court was tasked only 
with the question of whether the fact about previous polices 
qualified to be a “material fact” that was suppressed. However, in 
the present case, in light of Section 45 of the Insurance Act, 1938, 
the burden rests on the insurer to prove before the Court that the 
insured had suppressed the information about the previous 
policies. This burden of proof has to be duly discharged by the 
insurer in accordance with the law of evidence.  
36. In the instant case, NCDRC has extracted from the letter 
dated 31.12.2011, by which the claim of the appellant was 
repudiated, and has relied upon the reply filed by respondent 
company before the District Forum wherein details of as many as 
fifteen insurance policies taken from various insurers, other than 
the policy taken from the respondent company, have been given as 
under: 
 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 29 of 48 
 
  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Insurers 
Policy No. 
Issue Date 
RCD 
Sum 
assured 
Date of 
birth 
declared 
1.  
Kotak 
1839610 
11.01.2010 11.01.2010 5,00,000/- 
14.7.1960 
2.  
Bharti 
Axa Life 
5003353827 Not known 
28.3.2009 
7,50,000/- 
12.9.1960 
3.  
Aviva  
ASP2610613 Not known 
09.6.2009 
10,00,000/- 
12.7.1960 
4.  
Reliance 
Life 
Insurance 
13231705 
Not known 
17.12.2008 2,00,000/- 
6.7.1959 
5.  
Reliance 
Life 
Insurance 
13741094 
Not known 
11.2.2009 
5,00,000/- 
14.7.1960 
6.  
HDFC 
Standard 
Life 
13061074 
Not known 
29.8.2009 
4,80,000/- 
NA 
7.  
HDFC 
Standard 
Life 
12695703 
Not known 
21.3.2009 
4,80,000/- 
NA 
8.  
Max New 
York Life 
809471329 
Not known 
27.1.2009 
5,75,289/- 
14.7.1960 
9.  
Max New 
York Life 
388825572 
Not known 
30.9.2009 
4,24,711/- 
14.7.1960 
10.  Birla 
2489174 
Not known 
28.1.2009 
1,33,461/- 
14.7.1960 
11.  Birla 
2490595 
Not known 
28.1.2009 
2,60,241/- 
14.7.1960 
12.  Birla 
3121574 
Not known 
3.8.2009 
5,00,000/- 
14.7.1960 
13.  Birla 
3956699 
Not known 
17.3.2010 
3,24,000/- 
14.7.1960 
14.  IDBI 
Not given 
Not known 
20.4.2010 
5,00,000/- 
14.7.1960 
15.  IDBI 
Not given 
Not known 
28.04….. 
5,00,000/- 
14.7.1960 
 
 
 
 
Total 
71,27,702/-  
Total: Seventy-one lac twenty-seven thousand seven hundred and two only 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 30 of 48 
 
 
37. A mere perusal of the aforesaid table would indicate that the 
date of birth declared are different and the date of issuance has 
not been stated except in respect of one policy. It is also not known 
from the table to whom the said policies were issued. However, the 
NCDRC has observed that the appellant-complainant had not 
alleged in her complaint that no other insurance policy had been 
taken by the deceased. In the affidavit of the complainant, the fact 
that insurance policies were taken from other insurers was not 
denied. The respondent insurance company had given details of 
the aforesaid policies by way of an affidavit. Therefore, NCDRC 
concluded that deceased insured had withheld information in 
respect of several insurance policies which he had taken from 
other insurers. 
 
38. Placing reliance on Rekhaben, the NCDRC observed that 
Sahara India had been overruled in Rekhaben and therefore 
consumer complaint was dismissed. We find that the approach of 
the NCDRC is erroneous for the following reasons: 
 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 31 of 48 
 
i)  
Firstly, the NCDRC has failed to note that the details 
of the policies extracted in the table above do not state as 
in whose name the said policies were issued. On perusal 
of the dates of birth declared in the policies, it is not clear 
as to whose dates of birth are stated therein. 
ii)  
Secondly, the dates of issuance of policies have not 
been mentioned. More significantly, by merely mentioning 
the details as above stated would not establish the case of 
the insurance company. There was no corroboration of the 
said fact either by producing copies of the aforesaid 
policies or by examining the officers of the various 
insurance companies which had issued the policies so as 
to establish the fact that the said policies had indeed been 
issued to the insured in order to prove material 
suppression of the fact of other policies obtained by the 
insurer in the proposal form. In the absence of any 
corroboration of the aforesaid details by letting in proper 
evidence, the mere mentioning of the half baked details in 
the affidavit would not amount to proof of the said fact. 
The NCDRC has thus failed to take note of the fact that the 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 32 of 48 
 
aforesaid details have not been supported by other 
corroborative evidence. The mere mentioning of certain 
details in an affidavit of evidence is not proof of the facts 
unless that is supported either by other documentary 
and/or oral evidence.  
iii) 
Further, the NCDRC was also not right in finding 
fault with the complainant not mentioning in her affidavit 
the evidence that the insured had taken policies from other 
insurance companies and that the details given in the 
version of the respondent company were not true. 
39. Next, we also find that the declaration form asked the 
following queries which were accordingly answered in the negative. 
The queries are extracted as under: 
“6.1 Details of applications submitted to & existing life 
insurance policies with future Generali and with any 
insurer. (In case of housewife, major student or minor life 
to be Assured please give details of husbands and parents 
insurance also) 
6.2 Whether any proposal for life cover or critical illness 
Rider or Accident and Disability Benefit Rider, application 
for revival of any Policy has been made to any life insurer, 
declined/postponed/dropped/accepted 
or 
revived 
at 
modified rates” 
 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 33 of 48 
 
On a reading of Query 6.1, what was sought was details of 
applications submitted to and existing life insurance policies with 
Future Generali (respondent company) and with any (other) 
insurer. Further details sought were in case of housewife, major 
student or minor life to be assured and to give details of husband’s 
and parents’ insurance also. It is not clear as to whether Query 6.1 
referred to details of insurance policy of the proposer with Future 
Generali and with any other insurer, as what was also sought was 
details of wife, major student or a minor life to be assured and to 
give details of the husband’s and parents’ insurance. Therefore, it 
is not clear from reading of Query 6.1 as to whether details of 
insurance policy of the insured with Future Generali and with 
other insurer were sought or the query related to the details of 
husband and parents’ insurance policy being disclosed in case the 
insured was a housewife, major student or a minor life when the 
insured was a housewife or a minor child. The insured in the 
instant case did not belong to either the two categories. Query 6.2 
was, whether any proposal for life cover or critical illness rider or 
accident and disability benefit rider, application for revival of any 
policy 
had 
been 
made 
to 
any 
life 
insurer, 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 34 of 48 
 
declined/postponed/dropped/accepted or revived at modified 
rates. The answer to the said queries were given by the insured in 
the negative. 
Considering Query 6.2, firstly, it is noted that the deceased 
proposer had stated in the negative with regard to making of any 
application for revival of any policy. There is no evidence 
whatsoever let in by the respondent insurance company that there 
was an application made for revival of any policy of the insured 
which had either been declined/postponed/dropped/accepted or 
revived at modified rates. Therefore, the answer in the negative 
given to Query 6.2 cannot be held as against the appellant herein. 
In the circumstances, the NCDRC could not have concluded that 
when the answer “NO” was written to Query 6.2, there was any 
suppression of material fact.  
 
40. Insofar as the Query 6.1 is concerned, it is noted that the 
same is not clear and it is not known in what context the details 
of the insured were sought with regard to any existing life 
insurance policy. On a reading of Query 6.1 holistically, it is also 
not clear regarding the nature of information that was sought by 
the respondent insurance company as discussed above. The 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 35 of 48 
 
answer given by the insured to the Query 6.1 was thus in the 
negative. In this backdrop, can it be said that there was a 
suppression of material fact by the insured in the proposal form. 
In this context, it is necessary to place reliance on the contra 
proferentem rule. This Court in the case of Manmohan Nanda, 
discussed the rule of contra proferentem as under: 
“45. The contra proferentem rule has an ancient genesis. 
When words are to be construed, resulting in two 
alternative interpretations then, the interpretation which 
is against the person using or drafting the words or 
expressions which have given rise to the difficulty in 
construction, applies. This rule is often invoked while 
interpreting standard form contracts. Such contracts 
heavily comprise of forms with printed terms which are 
invariably used for the same kind of contracts. Also, such 
contracts are harshly worded against individuals and not 
read and understood most often, resulting in grave legal 
implications. 
When 
such 
standard 
form 
contracts 
ordinarily contain exception clauses, they are invariably 
construed contra proferentem rule against the person who 
has drafted the same. 
 
46. Some of the judgments which have considered 
the contra proferentem rule are referred to as under: 
 
46.1. In General Assurance Society Ltd. v. Chandumull 
Jain, AIR 1966 SC 1644, it was held that where there is an 
ambiguity in the contract of insurance or doubt, it has to 
be construed contra proferentem against the insurance 
company. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 36 of 48 
 
 
 
46.2. In DDA v.  
Durga 
Chand 
Kaushish, 
AIR 1973 SC 2609, it was observed:  
 
“In construing document one must have regard, 
not to the presumed intention of the parties, but 
to the meaning of the words they have used. If two 
interpretations of the document are possible, the 
one which would give effect and meaning to all its 
parts should be adopted and for the purpose, the 
words creating uncertainty in the document can 
be ignored.” 
 
46.3. Further, in Central Bank of India Ltd. v. Hartford 
Fire Insurance Co. Ltd., AIR 1965 SC 1288, it was held: 
 
“11. … what is called the contra proferentem rule 
should be applied and as the policy was in a 
standard form contract prepared by the insurer 
alone, it should be interpreted in a way that would 
be favourable to the assured.” 
 
46.4. In Sahebzada Mohammad Kamgarh Shah v. Jagdish 
Chandra Deo Dhabal Deb, AIR 1960 SC 953, it was 
observed that where there is an ambiguity it is the duty of 
the court to look at all the parts of the document to 
ascertain what was really intended by the parties. But even 
here the rule has to be borne in mind that the document 
being the grantor's document it has to be interpreted 
strictly against him and in favour of the grantee. 
 
46.5. In United 
India 
Insurance 
Co. 
Ltd. v. Orient 
Treasures (P) Ltd., (2016) 3 SCC 49 , this Court 
quoted Halsbury's Laws of England (5th Edn. Vol. 60, Para 
105) on the contra proferentem rule as under: 
 
“37. … Contra proferentem rule.—Where there is 
ambiguity in the policy the court will apply 
the contra proferentem rule. Where a policy is 
produced by the insurers, it is their business to 
see that precision and clarity are attained and, if 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 37 of 48 
 
they fail to do so, the ambiguity will be resolved by 
adopting the construction favourable to the 
insured. Similarly, as regards language which 
emanates from the insured, such as the language 
used in answer to questions in the proposal or in 
a slip, a construction favourable to the insurers 
will prevail if the insured has created any 
ambiguity. This rule, however, only becomes 
operative where the words are truly ambiguous; it 
is a rule for resolving ambiguity and it cannot be 
invoked with a view to creating a doubt. Therefore, 
where the words used are free from ambiguity in 
the sense that, fairly and reasonably construed, 
they admit of only one meaning, the rule has no 
application.” 
 
46.6. The learned counsel for the appellant have relied 
upon Sushilaben 
Indravadan 
Gandhi v. New 
India 
Assurance Co. Ltd., (2021) 7 SCC 151, wherein it was 
observed that any exemption of liability clause in an 
insurance contract must be construed, in case of 
ambiguity, contra proferentem against the insurer. In the 
said case reliance was placed on Export Credit Guarantee 
Corpn. (India) Ltd. v. Garg Sons International, (2014) 
1 SCC 686, wherein this Court held as under :  
 
“39. … 11. The insured cannot claim anything 
more than what is covered by the insurance 
policy. “The terms of the contract have to be 
construed strictly, without altering the nature of 
the contract as the same may affect the interests 
of the parties adversely.” The clauses of an 
insurance policy have to be read as they are. 
Consequently, the terms of the insurance policy, 
that fix the responsibility of the Insurance 
Company must also be read strictly. The contract 
must be read as a whole and every attempt should 
be made to harmonise the terms thereof, keeping 
in mind that the rule of contra proferentem does 
not apply in case of commercial contract, for the 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 38 of 48 
 
reason that a clause in a commercial contract is 
bilateral and has mutually been agreed upon.” 
 
 
Having regard to the aforesaid discussion on contra 
proferentem rule, it is noted that the Queries 6.1 and 6.2 are not 
clear in themselves as we have discussed the same above. 
Therefore, the answer given by the deceased cannot be taken in a 
manner so as to negate the benefit of the policy by repudiation of 
the same on the demise of the insured. 
41. At this stage, we may also dilate on the aspect of burden of 
proof. Though the proceedings before the Consumer Fora are in 
the nature of a summary proceeding. Yet the elementary principles 
of burden of proof and onus of proof would apply. This is relevant 
for the reason that no corroborative evidence to what has been 
deposed in the affidavit is let in by the insurance company in order 
to establish a valid repudiation of the claim in the instant case. 
Section 101 of the Evidence Act, 1872 states that whoever desires 
any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or liability 
dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove 
that those facts exist. When a person is bound to prove the 
existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of proof lies on that 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 39 of 48 
 
person. This Section clearly states that the burden of proving a fact 
rests on the party who substantially asserts the affirmative of the 
issue and not upon the party who denies it; for a negative is 
usually incapable of proof. Simply put, it is easier to prove an 
affirmative than a negative. In other words, the burden of proving 
a fact always lies upon the person who asserts the same. Until 
such burden is discharged, the other party is not required to be 
called upon to prove his case. The court has to examine as to 
whether the person upon whom burden lies has been able to 
discharge his burden. Further, things which are admitted need not 
be proved. Whether the burden of proof has been discharged by a 
party to the lis or not would depend upon the facts and 
circumstances of the case. The party on whom the burden lies has 
to stand on his own and he cannot take advantage of the weakness 
or omissions of the opposite party. Thus, the burden of proving a 
claim or defence is on the party who asserts it. 
 
42. Section 102 of the Evidence Act, 1872 provides a test 
regarding on whom the burden of proof would lie, namely, that the 
burden lies on the person who would fail if no evidence were given 
on either side. Whenever the law places a burden of proof upon a 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 40 of 48 
 
party, a presumption operates against it. Hence, burden of proof 
and presumptions have to be considered together. There are 
however exceptions to the general rule as to the burden of proof as 
enunciated in Sections 101 and 102 of the Evidence Act, 1872, i.e., 
in the context of the burden of adducing evidence: (i) when a 
rebuttable presumption of law exists in favour of a party, the onus 
is on the other side to rebut it; (ii) when any fact is especially within 
the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving it is on him 
(Section 106). In some cases, the burden of proof is cast by statute 
on particular parties (Sections 103 and 105). 
 
43. There is an essential distinction between burden of proof and 
onus of proof; burden of proof lies upon a person who has to prove 
the fact and which never shifts but onus of proof shifts. Such a 
shifting of onus is a continuous process in the evaluation of 
evidence. For instance, in a suit for possession based on the title, 
once the plaintiff has been able to create a high degree of 
probability so as to shift the onus on the defendant, it is for the 
defendant to discharge his onus and in the absence thereof, the 
burden of proof lying on the plaintiff shall be held to have been 
discharged so as to amount to proof of the plaintiff’s title vide RVE 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 41 of 48 
 
Venkatachala Gounder vs. Arulmigu Viswesaraswami and VP 
Temple, (2003) 8 SCC 752.  
 
44. In a claim against the insurance company for compensation, 
where the appellants in the said case had discharged the initial 
burden regarding destruction, damage of the showroom and the 
stocks therein by fire and riot in support of the claim under the 
insurance policy, it was for the insurance company to disprove 
such claim with evidence, if any, vide Shobika Attire vs. New 
India Assurance Co. Ltd., (2006) 8 SCC 35. 
 
45. Section 103 of the Evidence Act, 1872 states that the burden 
of proof as to any particular fact lies on that person who wishes 
the Court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any 
law that the proof of that fact shall lie on any particular person. 
This Section enlarges the scope of the general rule in Section 101 
that the burden of proof lies on the person who asserts the 
affirmative of the issue. Further, Section 104 of the said Act states 
that the burden of proving any fact necessary to be proved in order 
to enable any person to give evidence of any other fact is on the 
person who wishes to give such evidence. The import of this 
Section is that the person who is legally entitled to give evidence 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 42 of 48 
 
has the burden to render such evidence. In other words, it is 
incumbent on each party to discharge the burden of proof, which 
rests upon him. In the context of insurance contracts, the burden 
is on the insurer to prove the allegation of non-disclosure of a 
material fact and that the non-disclosure was fraudulent. Thus, 
the burden of proving the fact, which excludes the liability of the 
insurer to pay compensation, lies on the insurer alone and no one 
else. 
 
46. Section 106 of the Evidence Act, 1872 states that when any 
fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden 
of proving that fact is upon him. This Section applies only to 
parties to the suit or proceeding. It cannot apply when the fact is 
such as to be capable of being known also by persons other than 
the parties. (Source: Sarkar, Law of Evidence, 20th Edition, Volume-2, 
LexisNexis) 
 
47. In light of the aforesaid discussion on burden of proof, it has 
to be analysed if the respondent in the present case has adequately 
discharged his burden of proof about the fact of suppression of 
previous life insurance policies of the insured.  
 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 43 of 48 
 
48. The respondent insurance company has produced no 
documentary evidence whatsoever before the District Forum to 
prove its allegation that the insured had taken multiple insurance 
policies from different companies and had suppressed the same. 
The District Forum had therefore concluded that there was no 
documentary evidence to show that the deceased-life insured had 
taken various insurance policies except an averment and on that 
basis the repudiation was held to be wrong. Before the State 
Commission, the respondent had provided a tabulation of the 15 
different policies taken by the insured-deceased, amounting to 
Rs.71,27,702/-. The same has been extracted above. However, the 
said tabulation was not supported by any other documentary 
evidence, like the policy documents of these other policies, or 
pleadings in courts, or such other corroborative evidence. The 
respondent sought to mark a bunch of documents before the State 
Commission, which related to the policy papers of the insured with 
another insurer, i.e., Kotak Life Insurance. However, the 
respondent was not granted permission by the State Commission, 
as the said documents were neither original, nor certified, nor 
authenticated. Apart from this, there was no effort made by the 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 44 of 48 
 
respondent to bring any authenticated material on record. Thus, 
in the absence of any evidence to prove that the insured-deceased 
possessed some insurance policies from other insurance 
companies, the State Commission upheld the decision of the 
District Forum in setting aside the repudiation of the claim by the 
respondent.  
 
49. Before the NCDRC, the respondent again provided the 
aforesaid tabulation of policies of the insured-deceased. The 
respondents in their affidavit stated that the insured-deceased had 
taken multiple insurance policies before taking the policy from 
them. The NCDRC however accepted the averment of the 
respondents, without demanding corroborative documentary 
evidence in support of the said fact. The NCDRC, on the contrary, 
also held that the fact about multiple policies was not dealt with 
by the appellant in her complaint or evidence affidavit and this 
therefore proved that the insured had indeed taken the policies 
from multiple companies as claimed by the respondents.  
  
50. The aforesaid approach adopted by the NCDRC is, in our 
view, not correct. The cardinal principle of burden of proof in the 
law of evidence is that “he who asserts must prove”, which means 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 45 of 48 
 
that if the respondents herein had asserted that the insured had 
already taken fifteen more policies, then it was incumbent on them 
to prove this fact by leading necessary evidence. The onus cannot 
be shifted on the appellant to deal with issues that have merely 
been alleged by the respondents, without producing any evidence 
to support that allegation. The respondents have merely provided 
a tabulation of information about the other policies held by the 
insured-deceased. 
The 
said 
tabulation 
also 
has 
missing 
information with respect to policy numbers and issuing dates and 
bears different dates of births. Further, this information hasn’t 
been supported with any other documents to prove the averment 
in accordance with law. No officer of any other insurance company 
was examined to corroborate the table of policies said to have been 
taken by the deceased policy holder, father of the appellant herein. 
Moreover, the table produced is incomplete and contradictory as 
far as the date of birth of the insured is concerned. Therefore, in 
our view, the NCDRC could not have relied upon the said 
tabulation and put the onus on the appellant to deal with that 
issue in her complaint and thereby considered the said averment 
as proved or proceeded to prove the stance of the opposite party. A 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 46 of 48 
 
fact has to be duly proved as per the Evidence Act, 1872 and the 
burden to prove a fact rests upon the person asserting such a fact. 
Without adequate evidence to prove the fact of previous policies, it 
was incorrect to expect the appellant to deal with the said fact 
herself in the complaint or the evidence affidavit, since as per the 
appellant, there did not exist any previous policy and thus, the 
onus couldn’t have been put on the appellant to prove what was 
non-existent according to the appellant.  
 
51. The respondents, vide their counter affidavit before this 
court, have sought to produce some documents to substantiate 
their claim of other existing insurance policies of the insured-
deceased, but the same cannot be permitted to be exhibited at this 
stage, that too, in an appeal filed by the complainant who is the 
beneficiary under the policies in question. Any documentary 
evidence sought to be relied upon by the respondent ought to have 
been led before the District Forum but the same was not done. It 
was before the District Forum that the evidence was led and 
examined and at that stage, the respondent did not take adequate 
steps to lead any oral or documentary evidence to prove their 
assertion. Their attempt to annex documents in support of their 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 47 of 48 
 
claim before the State Commission was also declined due to the 
presentation of unauthenticated documents. Therefore, it can be 
safely concluded that the respondents have failed to adequately 
prove the fact that the insured-deceased had fraudulently 
suppressed the information about the existing policies with other 
insurance companies while entering into the insurance contracts 
with the respondents herein in the present case. Therefore, the 
repudiation of the policy was without any basis or justification. 
 
52. Moreover, we have also held on the facts of this case having 
regard to the nature of queries in Query Nos.6.1 and 6.2, there was 
no suppression of any material fact as per our earlier discussion 
based on the contra proferentem rule. 
 
53. In light of the above discussion, the impugned order dated 
22.07.2019 passed by the NCDRC in Revision Petition No.1268 of 
2019 is set aside. The respondent company is directed to make the 
payment of the insurance claim under both the policies to the 
appellant, amounting to Rs. 7,50,000/- and Rs. 9,60,000/-, with 
interest at the rate of 7% per annum from the date of filing the 
complaint, till the actual realisation.  
 

  Civil Appeal No.3821 of 2024                                                                                                  Page 48 of 48 
 
 
54. The appeal stands allowed in the aforesaid terms.  
 
55. Parties to bear their respective costs.  
 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . J.  
                             [B.V. NAGARATHNA] 
 
 
  
. . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . J.  
                                            [AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH] 
 
 
New Delhi;  
April 10, 2024