2024 INSC 293
 
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9642 OF 2010 
  
 
MANISHA MAHENDRA GALA & ORS.               …APPELLANT(S) 
  
 
VERSUS 
 
 
 
SHALINI BHAGWAN AVATRAMANI & ORS.     …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9643 OF 2010 
 
MANISHA MAHENDRA GALA & ORS.               …APPELLANT(S) 
  
 
VERSUS 
 
 
 
SHALINI BHAGWAN AVATRAMANI & ORS.     …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
The dispute in the above two appeals is in connection with 
easementary rights over 20ft. wide road situated over land 
Survey No.57 Hissa No.13A/1 which is presently owned by the 
respondents herein (hereinafter the ‘Ramani’s’). 
Digitally signed by
RAVI ARORA
Date: 2024.04.10
19:08:36 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
2 
 
2. 
In Suit No.14 of 1994 instituted by Joki Woler Ruzer, the 
descendants of the subsequent purchaser Mahendra Gala 
were added as plaintiff Nos.2-4 (hereinafter the ‘Gala’s’). The 
suit was for declaration of their easementary rights over the 
20ft. wide road situate in the property of the Ramani’s and for 
permanent injunction in respect thereof. The suit was decreed 
by the court of first instance vide judgment and order dated 
06.02.2003. However, the aforesaid judgment and decree was 
set aside in appeal by the Ad-hoc District Judge-2, Raigad, vide 
judgment and order dated 12.03.2009 and the suit was 
dismissed. The High Court vide impugned judgment and order 
dated 01.10.2009 upheld the aforesaid judgment and order of 
the appellate court in Second Appeal No.305 of 2009.  
3. 
Apart from the above suit, Suit No.7 of 1996 came to be filed 
by the Ramani’s for declaring that the Gala’s or their 
predecessor-in-interest have no right, title and interest in the 
property and they do not have any right of way through the 
above land. The aforesaid suit was dismissed vide judgment 
and order dated 06.02.2003 by the court of first instance i.e. 
Civil Judge, Junior Division, Murud. On the appeal being 

 
3 
 
preferred, the judgment and order passed by the court of first 
instance was set aside and the suit was decreed holding that 
the Gala’s have no right of way either by easement of 
prescription or of necessity on the suit land/road. The Gala’s 
were restrained from disturbing the possession of Ramani’s 
over the suit land and from doing any overt act over it.  
4. 
Aggrieved by the dismissal of their Suit No.14 of 1994 and the 
decreeing of the Suit No.7 of 1996 of the Ramani’s, these two 
appeals have been preferred by the Gala’s. Their predecessor-
in-interest Joki Woler Ruzer has not joined and has not 
preferred any separate appeal. Meaning thereby, that the 
original plaintiff has accepted the verdict of the High Court. 
5. 
It would be necessary and beneficial to recapitulate certain 
background before considering the submissions of the 
respective parties to arrive at any conclusion with regard to 
their rights over the suit land, more particularly on the road in 
question. 
6. 
There is no dispute that one Ramchandra Borkar was the 
owner of the vast land situate in Mouje Korlai, Taluka Murud, 
District Raigad, Maharashtra i.e. Survey No.48 Hissa No.15 

 
4 
 
and Survey No.57 Hissa No.13. The aforesaid Ramchandra 
Borkar fell into arrears of government dues recoverable as 
arrears of land revenue and, therefore, his aforesaid properties 
were acquired by the government. Subsequently, a part of the 
aforesaid property i.e. land Survey No.48 Hissa No.15 was sold 
out by the government on 25.04.1969 through public auction 
in favour of one Woler Francis who was also put in possession 
thereof on 08.07.1969. Thus, Woler Francis became the 
exclusive owner in possession of land Survey No.48 Hissa 
No.15 admeasuring 1 hectare and 76 acres situated at Mouje 
Korlai Taluka, Murud, District Raigad. 
7. 
The remaining land which was initially possessed by 
Ramchandra Borkar and which was acquired by the 
government, was subsequently re-acquired by one Vasant 
Ramchandra Borkar, of the family of original owner 
Ramchandra Borkar. The said Vasant Ramchandra Borkar 
sold out a piece of the said land on 09.07.1988 to one 
Dharmadhikari being land Survey No.57 Hissa No.13A/2. The 
balance land which was essentially a part of Survey No.57 was 
sold to the family of Ramani’s by a registered Sale Deed dated 

 
5 
 
11.09.1989 and was numbered as Survey No. 57 Hissa No. 
13A/1. 
8. 
In this way, the entire property of the Borkar family comprising 
of Survey No.48 Hissa No.15 and Survey No.57 Hissa No.13 
which was acquired by the government came into the hands of 
Woler Francis (Survey No.48 Hissa No.15); the family of 
Ramani’s (Survey No.57 Hissa No.13A/1); and the family of 
Dharmadhikari (Survey No.57 Hissa No.13A/2). 
9. 
The road in dispute on which easementary rights are claimed 
by the Gala’s forms part of Survey No.57 Hissa No.13A/1 
which is under the ownership of the Ramani’s. 
10. Sometime in 1994, Woler Francis died and he was succeeded 
by his heir and legal representative Joki Woler Ruzer. When 
his use of the above 20ft. wide road was objected to by the 
Ramani’s, he filed Suit No.14 of 1994 for declaration of his 
easementary rights over the said land and for a decree of 
permanent injunction. During the pendency of the said suit, 
the aforesaid Joki Woler Ruzer transferred and assigned his 
rights of the entire land i.e. Survey No.48 Hissa No.15 in favour 
of one Mahendra Gala, the predecessor-in-interest of the 

 
6 
 
Gala’s. The aforesaid Mahendra Gala was impleaded as 
plaintiff in the aforesaid suit on 28.07.1998 and subsequently 
on his death, the present Gala’s were substituted as his heir 
and legal representative. 
11. The suit was contested by the Ramani’s by filing a written 
statement. They resisted the claim of the Gala’s regarding 
easementary rights over the disputed rasta. They contended 
that they have purchased the property Survey No.57 Hissa 
No.13A/1 and categorically denied use of the said rasta 
uninterruptedly by the Gala’s. 
12. In the said suit, oral and documentary evidence were adduced 
by the parties. The Gala’s produced Navneet Liladhar Hariya, 
their Power of Attorney holder and the Manager of the property 
as PW-1, Bhalchandra Nathura Choradhekar, Sarpanch of the 
village as PW-2, Dattatray Shankar Sawant, one of their 
neighbours as PW-3 and Bhalchandra Dattaram Tandel, 
Surveyor as PW-4, in order to prove their easementary right of 
way over the disputed rasta. 
13. The Gala’s also relied upon the sale deed by which Joki Woler 
Ruzer had transferred and assigned his rights in land Survey 

 
7 
 
No.48 Hissa No.15 in favour of Mahendra Gala, the 
predecessor of the Gala’s. 
14. The Ramani’s examined Sanjay Borkar as DW-1 and filed 
certified copy of the deposition of one Arjun Ramani. 
Additionally, they brought on record purshis Exh.165 and 
Exh.170. 
15. On the basis of the pleadings of the parties and the evidence 
adduced, the trial court framed several issues but the primary 
issue was whether the Gala’s have any easementary right of 
way over the land of the Ramani’s i.e., the disputed rasta.  
16. We had heard Shri Huzefa Ahmadi, learned senior counsel for 
the appellants and Shri Devansh Anoop Mohta, learned 
counsel for the respondents.  
17. The main thrust of the argument of Shri Huzefa Ahmadi, 
learned senior counsel for the Gala’s (appellants in both the 
civil appeals) is that Gala’s are undisputedly the owners in 
possession of the land Survey No.48 Hissa No.15 and since 
they have no alternative way of access to the said land except 
the rasta in dispute, the only option to them is to have egress 
and ingress through the said rasta for use of their land. They 

 
8 
 
have acquired easementary right by prescription and that of 
necessity over the said rasta and more particularly through an 
agreement i.e. the Sale Deed dated 17.09.1994 which records 
their right of way through the said rasta. He further submits 
that once the suit was decreed by the court of first instance 
and findings were recorded in favour of the Gala’s, the 
appellate court ought not to have overturned those findings. It 
ought to have exercised restrain in interfering with the 
aforesaid decision. 
18. The above submissions were stoutly opposed on behalf of the 
Ramani’s by their counsel. 
19. ‘Easement’ is defined under Section 4 of the Indian Easements 
Act, 18821 to mean a right which the owner or occupier of a 
land possesses for the beneficial enjoyment of his land on the 
other land which is not owned by him, to do and continue to 
do something or to prevent and continue to prevent something 
being done on the said land. It may be pertinent to mention 
here that the land which is to be enjoyed by the beneficiary is 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as “The Act”, for short 

 
9 
 
called ‘Dominant Heritage’ and the land on which the easement 
is claimed is called ‘Servient Heritage’. The easementary right, 
therefore, is essentially a right claimed by the owner of a land 
upon another land owned by someone else so that he may 
enjoy his property in the most beneficial manner. 
20. Now, we first proceed to examine if the Gala’s have acquired 
any easementary right over the rasta in dispute existing on the 
servient heritage.  
21. In the case at hand, the Gala’s are admittedly the owners of 
Survey No. 48 Hissa No.15 whereas the Ramani’s are the 
owners of Survey No.57 Hissa No.13A/1 on which it is alleged, 
exists the rasta in dispute. The Gala’s claim that the use of the 
aforesaid rasta is for the beneficial enjoyment of their land as 
they have no other way of access to their land and that they 
have been enjoying the said easementary right for the “last 
many years”. 
22. Section 15 of the Act categorically provides that for acquiring 
any easementary right by prescription, the said right must 
have been peaceably enjoyed in respect of the servient heritage 
without any interruption for over 20 years. In the plaint, 

 
10 
 
neither the original plaintiff Joki Woler Ruzer nor the Gala’s 
have specifically claimed that they or their predecessor-in-
interest were enjoying easementary right of use of the said 
rasta for over 20 years. They simply alleged that they have been 
using and managing the same since “last many years”. The use 
of the term “last many years” is not sufficient to mean that they 
have been enjoying the same for the last 20 years. Last many 
years would indicate use of the said rasta for more than a year 
prior to the suit or for some years but certainly would not mean 
a period of 20 or more years. Therefore, their pleadings fall 
short of meeting out the legal requirement of acquiring 
easementary right through prescription. 
23. In this connection Shri Ahmadi, learned counsel for the 
appellants, relying upon “Ram Sarup Gupta (Dead) By Lrs.  
vs.  Bishun Narain Inter College & Ors”2 submitted that the 
pleadings must be construed liberally and it is not necessary 
that the precise language or expression used in the statute 
should be used. The aforesaid decision lays down that 
 
2 (1987) 2 SCC 555 

 
11 
 
pleadings should be liberally construed and need not contain 
the exact language used in the statutory provision but it does 
not mean that the pleadings even if fails to plead the essential 
legal requirement for establishing a right, the same be so 
construed so as to impliedly include what actually has not 
been pleaded more particularly when it happens to be an 
essential ingredient for establishing a right. Thus, the 
aforesaid pleadings cannot be treated to be of sufficient 
compliance of the statutory requirement. It is settled in law 
that a fact which is not specifically pleaded cannot be proved 
by evidence as evidence cannot travel beyond the pleadings.  
24. The plaint was filed and verified by Joki Woler Ruzer who has 
not entered the witness box to substantiate the pleadings as to 
for how long he or his predecessor had been using the said 
rasta for egress and ingress to their land before the institution 
of the suit or to say that the easementary right, if any, attached 
to the said land, was also transferred or purchased by his 
predecessor. 
25. On the contrary, the deposition of Sanjay Borkar (DW-1) who 
is from the family of the original owners of the land has 

 
12 
 
categorically stated that the original plaintiff Joki Woler Ruzer 
was not having any right of way on his land and so also the 
Gala’s (plaintiff Nos.2-4), the subsequent holders of the land, 
rather they possess an alternative way to approach their land. 
26. Navneet Liladhar Hariya (PW-1), the Power of Attorney holder 
of the Gala’s, stated that the road of 20ft. in width exists on 
Survey No.57 Hissa No.13A/1 which is being used as an 
approach road to Survey No.48 Hissa No.15. The said rasta 
was being used by predecessor-in-interest of the Gala’s but 
now the Ramani’s have started raising objection. Since they 
have no other way of access to their land, they are being denied 
connectivity or approach to their land. As a result, access to 
the Dominant Heritage stands completely blocked. In cross-
examination, he states that Dharmadhikari has 
also 
purchased some land from Vasant Ramchandra Borkar and 
that the said Dharmadhikari is having right of way through the 
disputed rasta. PW-2, the then Sarpanch simply deposes that 
he has knowledge of the existence of disputed rasta since his 
childhood. The neighbour (PW-3) also repeated the same thing 
and stated that there is a road from Salav-Murud road which 

 
13 
 
passes through the land of the Ramani’s up to his land i.e. 
Survey No.43. The said road is in existence since long and is 
being used by the agriculturist. Nobody has ever raised 
objection to its use. The Surveyor (PW-4) is alleged to have 
surveyed the land on 26.12.1998. He had shown the existence 
of the road in dispute in the sketch map prepared by him. 
27. The aforesaid evidence simply proves that there exists a road 
on Survey No.57 Hissa No.13A/1 for long but that by itself is 
not sufficient to prove that the Gala’s have acquired any 
easementary right over the same. There is no evidence to prove 
that the Gala’s are in use of the said land for the last over 20 
years uninterruptedly. The Gala’s have entered the scene only 
on purchasing the said land on 17.09.1994 after the suit had 
been filed and as such, they could not and have not deposed 
anything about the pre-existing right or the easementary right 
attached with the Dominant Heritage. The said right has to be 
proved as existing prior to the institution of the suit. Neither 
the Gala’s nor their predecessor-in-interest Joki Woler Ruzer 
have dared to come in the witness box. They have only relied 

 
14 
 
upon the deposition of their Power of Attorney holder/the 
Manager. 
28. 
The law as understood earlier was that a General Power of 
Attorney holder though can appear, plead and act on behalf of 
a party he represents but he cannot become a witness on 
behalf of the party represented by him as no one can delegate 
his power to appear in the witness box to another party. 
However, subsequently in Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani vs. 
IndusInd Bank Ltd.3, this Court held that the Power of 
Attorney holder can maintain a plaint on behalf of the person 
he represents provided he has personal knowledge of the 
transaction in question. It was opined that the Power of 
Attorney holder or the legal representative should have 
knowledge about the transaction in question so as to bring on 
record the truth in relation to the grievance or the offence. 
However, to resolve the controversy with regard to the powers 
of the General Power of Attorney holder to depose on behalf of 
the person he represents, this Court upon consideration of all 
 
3 (2005) 2 SCC 217 

 
15 
 
previous relevant decisions on the aspect including that of 
Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani (supra) in A.C Narayan vs. State 
of Maharashtra4 concluded by upholding the principle of law 
laid down in Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani (supra) and clarified 
that Power of Attorney holder can depose and verify on oath 
before the court but he must have witnessed the transaction 
as an agent and must have due knowledge about it. The Power 
of Attorney holder who has no knowledge regarding the 
transaction cannot be examined as a witness. The functions of 
the General Power of Attorney holder cannot be delegated to 
any other person without there being a specific clause 
permitting such delegation in the Power of Attorney; meaning 
thereby ordinarily there cannot be any sub-delegation. 
29. It is, therefore, settled in law that Power of Attorney holder can 
only depose about the facts within his personal knowledge and 
not about those facts which are not within his knowledge or 
are within the personal knowledge of the person who he 
represents or about the facts that may have transpired much 
 
4 (2014) 11 SCC 790  

 
16 
 
before he entered the scene. The aforesaid Power of Attorney 
holder PW-1 had clearly deposed that he is giving evidence on 
behalf of plaintiff Nos. 2 to 4 i.e. the Gala’s. He was not having 
any authority to act as the Power of Attorney of the Gala’s at 
the time his statement was recorded. He was granted Power of 
Attorney subsequently as submitted and accepted by the 
parties. Therefore, his evidence is completely meaningless to 
establish that Gala’s have acquired or perfected any 
easementary right over the disputed rasta in 1994 when the 
suit was instituted.   
30. The only proper and valuable evidence in this regard could 
have been that of Joki Woler Ruzer who had instituted the suit 
but he failed to depose before the court. His pleadings are also 
vague and do not specifically state that he had been in use of 
the rasta in dispute for over 20 years or that he had acquired 
and perfected easementary right over the said rasta by 
prescription or necessity.  
31. In the absence of any evidence or material to show that Joki 
Woler Ruzer had actually acquired any easementary right over 

 
17 
 
the rasta in dispute before the institution of the suit, he could 
not have transferred any such right in favour of the Gala’s. 
32. The easementary right by necessity could be acquired only in 
accordance with Section 13 of the Act which provides that such 
easementary right would arise if it is necessary for enjoying the 
Dominant Heritage. In the instant case, findings have been 
returned not only by the appellate courts but even by the trial 
court that there is an alternative way to access the Dominant 
Heritage, which may be a little far away or longer which 
demolishes the easement of necessity. There is no justification 
to go into those findings of fact returned by the courts below. 
33. In the light of the aforesaid findings, the Gala’s are not entitled 
to any easementary right by necessity upon the disputed rasta.  
34. The next contention is that the Gala’s have acquired 
easementary right under the Sale Deed dated 17.09.1994 and 
that it would not stand extinguished even if the necessity has 
ceased to exist. To buttress the above submission reliance has 
been placed upon Dr. S. Kumar & Ors.  vs.  S. Ramalingam5. 
 
5 (2020) 16 SCC 553 

 
18 
 
In the above case, the right of easement claimed was expressly 
granted under the sale deed to the buyer and therefore it was 
held that the right so granted cannot be defeated or 
extinguished merely for the reason that easement of necessity 
has come to an end. 
35. The situation in the present case is quite different. The 
property owned and possessed by the Gala’s was originally the 
property of Ramchandra Borkar which was acquired by the 
government. It was purchased by Woler Francis in public 
auction from the government on 25.04.1969. Thereafter, it 
devolved upon his legal heir Joki Woler Ruzer who sold it to 
the predecessor-in-interest of the Gala’s vide Sale Deed dated 
17.09.1994. There is no evidence whatsoever on record to 
establish 
that 
the 
government 
ever 
transferred 
any 
easementary right over the rasta in question to Francis Woler 
or that his legal heir Joki Woler Rozer ever acquired or 
perfected any easementary right over it. Therefore, the right 
which was not possessed by them could not have been 
transferred to the Gala’s under the Sale Deed dated 
17.09.1994. 

 
19 
 
36. The said Sale Deed dated 17.09.1994 in original has not been 
produced in evidence. It was only the photocopy of the same 
which was brought on record. The photocopy of a document is 
inadmissible in evidence. Moreover, the said sale deed was 
executed by predecessor-in-interest i.e. Joki Woler Ruzer in 
favour of predecessor-in-interest of the present Gala’s. The 
said sale deed would not bind the third parties who are not 
signatories or parties to the said sale deed. No evidence has 
been adduced to prove that Joki Woler Ruzer, predecessor-in-
interest of the Gala’s, had perfected easementary rights over 
the disputed rasta and thus was legally entitled to transfer the 
same. He himself has not come before the Court that he had 
actually acquired any easementary right in the disputed rasta. 
It is not the case of Gala’s that their predecessor-in-interest 
had acquired or purchased the said property from government 
auction with any easementary right over the rasta in dispute. 
Thus, the Gala’s have failed to prove that they have acquired 
any easementary right under the sale deed. In view of the above 
discussion, reliance upon Dr. S. Kumar & Ors. (supra) is 

 
20 
 
completely misplaced and the submission in this regard has 
no merit.  
37. Lastly, 
a 
frail 
submission 
was 
advanced 
that 
one 
Dharmadhikari, owner of Survey No. 57 House No. 13A/2 is 
enjoying easementary right over the said rasta and, therefore, 
Gala’s cannot be denied the same benefit. The submission has 
been noted to be rejected for the simple reason that in the Sale 
Deed Exh. 163, the original owner Vasant Ramchandra Borkar 
while transferring land to Dharmadhikari has specifically 
assigned right to use the said rasta to Dharmadhikari and not 
to anyone else. The predecessor-in-interest of the Gala’s i.e., 
Joki Woler Ruzer or Francis Woler never acquired any such 
right under their sale deed so as to legally transfer it to the 
Gala’s. DW-1, Sanjay Vasant Borkar, grandson of the original 
owner of the entire property, clearly deposed that the disputed 
rasta was only for use by Dharmadhikari as per the sale deed 
but no such right was sold/assigned to the predecessor-in-
interest of the Gala’s. Therefore, the Gala’s cannot acquire 
easementary right as is enjoyed by Dharmadhikari whose case 
stand on a totally different footing. 

 
21 
 
38. It would not be fair on our part if we do not deal with yet one 
another submission of Shri Ahmadi regarding the powers of 
the appellate court in disturbing the findings recorded by the 
court of first instance. The submission made in this context is 
quite elementary in nature as Section 107 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, in unequivocal terms, lays down the powers of the 
appellate court vis-à-vis to determine the case finally; to 
remand the case; to frame issues and refer them for trial; and 
to take additional evidence or to require such evidence to be 
taken and shall have the same powers to perform duties as 
nearly as may be that are conferred by the code to the courts 
of original jurisdiction. 
39. Therefore, on the simple reading of the above provision, it is 
evident that the first appellate court is empowered to exercise 
powers and to perform nearly the same duties as of the courts 
of original jurisdiction. Therefore, the first appellate court has 
the power to return findings of fact and law both and in so 
returning the finding, it can impliedly overturn the findings of 
the court of first instance if it is against the evidence on record 
or is otherwise based upon incorrect interpretation of any 

 
22 
 
document or misconstruction of any evidence adduced before 
the court of first instance. 
40. In view of the facts and circumstances of the case and the 
above discussions, we find that none of the contentions raised 
by Shri Ahmadi, learned senior counsel for the appellants 
(Gala’s), are of any substance. We do not find any basis to 
record that the Gala’s have acquired easementary right over 
the disputed rasta in any manner much less by prescription, 
necessity or under an agreement. Therefore, the appellate 
courts and the High Court have not committed any error of law 
in dismissing Suit No.14 of 1994 of the plaintiffs/appellants 
and 
in 
decreeing 
Suit 
No.7 
of 
1996 
of 
the 
defendants/respondents. 
41. The appeals lack merit and are accordingly dismissed. 
 
 
 
……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL) 
 
 
 
……………………………….. J. 
(PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
APRIL 10, 2024.