2024 INSC 299
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 3869 OF 2023 
 
 
RAVISHANKAR TANDON 
 
          ...APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
STATE OF CHHATTISGARH  
       ...RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2740 OF 2023 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.           OF 2024 
[Arising out of SLP (Criminal) No. 837 of 2024] 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.           OF 2024 
[Arising out of SLP (Criminal) No. 1174 of 2024] 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
1. 
Leave granted in SLP (Criminal) Nos. 837 and 1174 of 
2024. 
2. 
These appeals challenge the judgment and order dated 
2nd January, 2023 passed by the Division Bench of the High 
Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in Criminal Appeal Nos. 
194, 232 and 277 of 2013 wherein the Division Bench 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.04.10
17:51:37 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
dismissed the criminal appeals preferred by the appellants, 
namely Ravishankar Tandon (accused No.1), Umend Prasad 
Dhrutlahre (accused No.2), Dinesh Chandrakar (accused 
No.3) and Satyendra Kumar Patre (accused No.4) and upheld 
the order of conviction and sentence dated 5th February, 2013 
as recorded by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Mungeli 
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘trial court’) in Sessions Trial No. 
10 of 2012. 
3. 
Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeals 
are as under:- 
3.1 On 2nd December 2011, Ramavtar (PW-1) lodged a 
missing person report being Missing Person Serial No. 10/11 
at Police Station Kunda after his son Dharmendra Satnami 
(deceased) went missing. While an extensive search was being 
conducted, on the basis of suspicion, the police interrogated 
the appellants. During the interrogation, the appellants 
disclosed that they had strangulated the deceased to death on 
the Bhatgaon Canal Road and had thereafter thrown his body 
into a pond at Village Bhatgaon. Thereafter, on 3rd December 
2011, the police recorded the memorandum statements of 
accused Nos.1 to 3 at about 10:00 am, 10:30 am and 11:00 

3 
 
am, respectively, whereas the memorandum statement of 
accused No.4 came to be recorded on 6th December 2011 at 
07:00 pm. On the basis of the aforesaid memorandum 
statements, the police recovered the dead body of the deceased 
from the pond at Bhatgaon on 3rd December 2011 at about 
04:05 pm and the dead body was identified. Thereafter, on the 
very same day, a First Information Report (‘FIR’ for short) being 
No. 402 of 2011 was registered at Police Station Mungeli, 
District Bilaspur wherein it is recorded that the aforesaid 
offences were committed between the days of 30th November 
2011 and 3rd December 2011. According to the Post-Mortem 
Report (Ext. P-22), the cause of death of the deceased was 
asphyxia due to strangulation and the nature of death was 
homicidal. 
3.2 The prosecution case stems from the memorandum 
statements of the appellants wherein the appellants had 
admitted that Dinesh Chandrakar (accused No.3) had 
instructed Ravishankar Tandon (accused No.1) and Satyendra 
Kumar Patre (accused No.4) to murder the deceased in 
exchange for Rs.90,000/-, which was to be paid upon the 
execution of the said murder. Upon receiving the aforesaid 

4 
 
instruction, 
Ravishankar 
Tandon 
(accused 
No.1) 
and 
Satyendra Kumar Patre (accused No.4) along with Umend 
Prasad Dhritalhare (accused No.2) hatched a criminal 
conspiracy to kill the deceased and worked out a plan to 
execute the same. Accordingly, the aforesaid three accused 
persons called the deceased to Mungeli on 30th November 2011 
under the ruse of purchasing silver. While Umend Prasad 
Dhritalhare (accused No. 2) and Satyendra Kumar Patre 
(accused No.4) reached Datgaon which fell within the ambit of 
Police Station Mungeli, on a motorcycle belonging to a relative 
of Satyendra Kumar Patre (accused No.4), Ravishankar 
Tandon (accused No.1) and the deceased reached Datgaon by 
a bus. Thereafter, the three accused persons along with the 
deceased went to visit the house of the brother-in-law of 
Satyendra Kumar Patre (accused No.4), namely, Sunil. On that 
same night, after taking the dinner, they left Sunil’s house on 
the pretext of returning to their homes. However, when they 
reached near Bhatgaon, Ravishankar Tandon (accused No.1), 
Umend Prasad Dhritalhare (accused No.2) and Satyendra 
Kumar Patre (accused No.4) strangulated the deceased to 
death and in order to screen themselves from the said act of 

5 
 
murder, the accused persons tied the dead body of the 
deceased with his own clothes and stuffed it into a jute sack 
which had been procured from Sunil’s house. Thereafter, the 
appellants transported the dead body of the deceased to a 
pond at Village Bhatgaon, on the motorcycle of Satyendra 
Kumar Patre (accused No.4), and threw the dead body into the 
said pond, wherefrom it was subsequently recovered.  
3.3 Upon the conclusion of the investigation, a charge-sheet 
came to be filed before the Court of the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, Mungeli, Chhattisgarh, wherein accused Nos. 1, 2 
and 4 had been charged for the offences punishable under 
Sections 302 read with 34, Sections 120B and 201 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (‘IPC’ for short) whereas accused No.3 
had been charged for the offences punishable under Sections 
302 read with 34 and 120B of the IPC.  Since the case was 
exclusively triable by the Sessions Court, the same came to be 
committed to the Sessions Court. 
3.4 Charges came to be framed by the trial court for the 
aforesaid offences. The accused/appellants pleaded not guilty 
and claimed to be tried. 

6 
 
3.5 The prosecution examined 18 witnesses and exhibited 37 
documents to bring home the guilt of the accused/appellants. 
The defence, on the other hand, did not examine any witness 
or exhibit any document. 
3.6 At the conclusion of the trial, the trial Court found that 
the prosecution had proved the case against the appellants 
beyond reasonable doubt and accordingly convicted accused 
Nos. 1, 2 and 3 for the offences punishable under Sections 302 
read with 34, Sections 120B and 201 of the IPC and convicted 
accused No. 4 for the offences punishable under Sections 302 
read with 34 and 120B of the IPC and sentenced all of them to 
undergo imprisonment for life along with fine. 
3.7 Being aggrieved thereby, the appellants preferred three 
Criminal Appeals before the High Court. The High Court vide 
the impugned judgment dismissed the Criminal Appeals and 
affirmed the order of conviction and sentence awarded by the 
trial Court. 
4. 
Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeals. 
5. 
We have heard Shri Manish Kumar Saran, learned 
counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant in Criminal 
Appeal No. 3869 of 2023, Shri Chandrika Prasad Mishra, 

7 
 
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants in 
Criminal Appeal No. 2740 of 2023, appeals arising out of SLP 
(Criminal) Nos. 837 and 1174 of 2024, and Shri Praneet 
Pranav, learned Deputy Advocate General (‘Dy. AG’ for short) 
appearing on behalf of the respondent-State at length. 
6. 
Shri Saran and Shri Mishra, learned counsel appearing 
on behalf of the appellants, submitted that the present case 
rests on circumstantial evidence.  It is submitted that the 
prosecution has failed to prove any of the incriminating 
circumstances beyond reasonable doubt. It is submitted that, 
in any case, the prosecution has failed to establish the chain 
of proven circumstances which leads to no other conclusion 
than the guilt of the accused persons.  They therefore 
submitted that the appeals deserve to be allowed and the 
judgments and orders of conviction need to be quashed and 
set aside.   
7. 
Shri Pranav, learned Dy. AG appearing on behalf of the 
respondent-State, on the contrary, submitted that both the 
High Court and the trial court have concurrently held that the 
prosecution has proved the case beyond reasonable doubt.  He 
submitted that the findings of the trial court and the High 

8 
 
Court are based upon cogent appreciation of evidence and as 
such, no interference is warranted.  
8. 
Undoubtedly, 
the 
prosecution 
case 
rests 
on 
circumstantial evidence. The law with regard to conviction on 
the basis of circumstantial evidence has very well been 
crystalized in the judgment of this Court in the case of Sharad 
Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra1, wherein this 
Court held thus:  
“152. Before discussing the cases relied upon by the 
High Court we would like to cite a few decisions on 
the nature, character and essential proof required in 
a criminal case which rests on circumstantial 
evidence alone. The most fundamental and basic 
decision of this Court is Hanumant v. State of 
Madhya Pradesh [(1952) 2 SCC 71 : AIR 1952 SC 343 
: 1952 SCR 1091 : 1953 Cri LJ 129]. This case has 
been uniformly followed and applied by this Court in 
a large number of later decisions up-to-date, for 
instance, the cases of Tufail (Alias) Simmi v. State of 
Uttar Pradesh [(1969) 3 SCC 198 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 55] 
and Ramgopal v. State of Maharashtra [(1972) 4 SCC 
625 : AIR 1972 SC 656]. It may be useful to extract 
what Mahajan, J. has laid down in Hanumant case 
[(1952) 2 SCC 71 : AIR 1952 SC 343 : 1952 SCR 1091 
: 1953 Cri LJ 129] :  
“It is well to remember that in cases where 
the evidence is of a circumstantial nature, 
the 
circumstances 
from 
which 
the 
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should 
in the first instance be fully established, 
and all the facts so established should be 
consistent only with the hypothesis of the 
 
1 (1984) 4 SCC 116 : 1984 INSC 121 

9 
 
guilt 
of 
the 
accused. 
Again, 
the 
circumstances should be of a conclusive 
nature and tendency and they should be 
such as to exclude every hypothesis but 
the one proposed to be proved. In other 
words, there must be a chain of evidence 
so far complete as not to leave any 
reasonable 
ground 
for 
a 
conclusion 
consistent with the innocence of the 
accused and it must be such as to show 
that within all human probability the act 
must have been done by the accused.”  
153. A close analysis of this decision would show 
that the following conditions must be fulfilled before 
a case against an accused can be said to be fully 
established:  
(1) the circumstances from which the 
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should 
be fully established.  
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that 
the circumstances concerned “must or should” and 
not “may be” established. There is not only a 
grammatical but a legal distinction between “may be 
proved” and “must be or should be proved” as was 
held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade v. 
State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 793 : 1973 SCC 
(Cri) 1033 : 1973 Crl LJ 1783] where the observations 
were made: [SCC para 19, p. 807: SCC (Cri) p. 1047]  
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that 
the accused must be and not merely may 
be guilty before a court can convict and 
the mental distance between ‘may be’ and 
‘must be’ is long and divides vague 
conjectures from sure conclusions.”  
(2) the facts so established should be 
consistent only with the hypothesis of the 
guilt of the accused, that is to say, they 
should not be explainable on any other 
hypothesis except that the accused is 
guilty,  

10 
 
(3) the circumstances should be of a 
conclusive nature and tendency,  
(4) they should exclude every possible 
hypothesis except the one to be proved, 
and  
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so 
complete as not to leave any reasonable 
ground for the conclusion consistent with 
the innocence of the accused and must 
show that in all human probability the act 
must have been done by the accused.  
154. These five golden principles, if we may say so, 
constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case based 
on circumstantial evidence.”  
 
9. 
It can thus clearly be seen that it is necessary for the 
prosecution 
that 
the 
circumstances 
from 
which 
the 
conclusion of the guilt is to be drawn should be fully 
established. The Court held that it is a primary principle that 
the accused ‘must be’ and not merely ‘may be’ proved guilty 
before a court can convict the accused. It has been held that 
there is not only a grammatical but a legal distinction between 
‘may be proved’ and ‘must be or should be proved’. It has been 
held that the facts so established should be consistent only 
with the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they should not 
be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the 
accused is guilty. It has further been held that the 
circumstances should be such that they exclude every 

11 
 
possible hypothesis except the one to be proved. It has been 
held that there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not 
to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent 
with the innocence of the accused and must show that in all 
human probabilities the act must have been done by the 
accused.  
10. It is settled law that suspicion, however strong it may be, 
cannot take the place of proof beyond reasonable doubt. An 
accused cannot be convicted on the ground of suspicion, no 
matter how strong it is. An accused is presumed to be 
innocent unless proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.  
11. In the light of these guiding principles, we will have to 
examine the present case. 
12. The 
prosecution 
case 
basically 
relies 
on 
the 
circumstance of the memorandum of the accused under 
Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (for short 
“Evidence Act”) and the subsequent recovery of the dead body 
from the pond at Bhatgaon.  The learned Judges of the High 
Court have relied on the judgment of this Court in the case of 

12 
 
State (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu alias Afsan Guru2.  
The High Court has relied on the following observations of the 
said judgment:  
“121. The first requisite condition for utilising 
Section 27 in support of the prosecution case is that 
the investigating police officer should depose that he 
discovered a fact in consequence of the information 
received from an accused person in police custody. 
Thus, there must be a discovery of fact not within the 
knowledge of police officer as a consequence of 
information received. Of course, it is axiomatic that 
the information or disclosure should be free from any 
element of compulsion. The next component of 
Section 27 relates to the nature and extent of 
information that can be proved. It is only so much of 
the information as relates distinctly to the fact 
thereby discovered that can be proved and nothing 
more. It is explicitly clarified in the section that there 
is no taboo against receiving such information in 
evidence merely because it amounts to a confession. 
At the same time, the last clause makes it clear that 
it is not the confessional part that is admissible but 
it is only such information or part of it, which relates 
distinctly to the fact discovered by means of the 
information 
furnished. 
Thus, 
the 
information 
conveyed in the statement to the police ought to be 
dissected if necessary so as to admit only the 
information of the nature mentioned in the section. 
The rationale behind this provision is that, if a fact is 
actually 
discovered 
in 
consequence 
of 
the 
information supplied, it affords some guarantee that 
the information is true and can therefore be safely 
allowed 
to 
be 
admitted 
in 
evidence 
as 
an 
incriminating factor against the accused. As pointed 
out by the Privy Council in Kottaya case [AIR 1947 
PC 67 : 48 Cri LJ 533 : 74 IA 65] : (AIR p. 70, para 
10) 
 
2 (2005) 11 SCC 600 : 2005 INSC 333 

13 
 
“clearly the extent of the information 
admissible must depend on the exact 
nature of the fact discovered” 
and the information must distinctly relate to that 
fact. 
Elucidating the scope of this section, the Privy 
Council speaking through Sir John Beaumont said: 
(AIR p. 70, para 10) 
“Normally the section is brought into 
operation when a person in police custody 
produces from some place of concealment 
some object, such as a dead body, a 
weapon, 
or 
ornaments, 
said 
to 
be 
connected with the crime of which the 
informant is accused.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
We have emphasised the word “normally” because 
the illustrations given by the learned Judge are not 
exhaustive. The next point to be noted is that the 
Privy Council rejected the argument of the counsel 
appearing for the Crown that the fact discovered is 
the physical object produced and that any and every 
information which relates distinctly to that object can 
be proved. Upon this view, the information given by 
a person that the weapon produced is the one used 
by him in the commission of the murder will be 
admissible in its entirety. Such contention of the 
Crown's counsel was emphatically rejected with the 
following words: (AIR p. 70, para 10) 
“If this be the effect of Section 27, little 
substance would remain in the ban 
imposed by the two preceding sections on 
confessions made to the police, or by 
persons in police custody. That ban was 
presumably inspired by the fear of the 
legislature that a person under police 
influence might be induced to confess by 
the exercise of undue pressure. But if all 
that is required to lift the ban be the 
inclusion in the confession of information 

14 
 
relating 
to 
an 
object 
subsequently 
produced, it seems reasonable to suppose 
that the persuasive powers of the police 
will prove equal to the occasion, and that 
in practice the ban will lose its effect.” 
Then, Their Lordships proceeded to give a lucid 
exposition of the expression “fact discovered” in the 
following passage, which is quoted time and again by 
this Court: (AIR p. 70, para 10) 
“In Their Lordships' view it is fallacious to 
treat the ‘fact discovered’ within the 
section as equivalent to the object 
produced; the fact discovered embraces 
the place from which the object is 
produced and the knowledge of the 
accused as to this, and the information 
given must relate distinctly to this fact. 
Information as to past user, or the past 
history, of the object produced is not 
related to its discovery in the setting in 
which 
it 
is 
discovered. 
Information 
supplied by a person in custody that ‘I will 
produce a knife concealed in the roof of my 
house’ does not lead to the discovery of a 
knife; knives were discovered many years 
ago. It leads to the discovery of the fact that 
a knife is concealed in the house of the 
informant to his knowledge, and if the 
knife is proved to have been used in the 
commission of the offence, the fact 
discovered is very relevant. But if to the 
statement the words be added ‘with which 
I stabbed A’ these words are inadmissible 
since they do not relate to the discovery of 
the knife in the house of the informant.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
128. So also in Udai Bhan v. State of U.P. [1962 
Supp (2) SCR 830 : AIR 1962 SC 1116 : (1962) 2 Cri 
LJ 251] J.L. Kapur, J. after referring to Kottaya 
case [AIR 1947 PC 67 : 48 Cri LJ 533 : 74 IA 65] 
stated the legal position as follows: (SCR p. 837) 

15 
 
“A discovery of a fact includes the object 
found, the place from which it is produced 
and the knowledge of the accused as to its 
existence.” 
The above statement of law does not run counter to 
the contention of Mr. Ram Jethmalani, that the 
factum of discovery combines both the physical 
object as well as the mental consciousness of the 
informant accused in relation thereto. However, what 
would be the position if the physical object was not 
recovered at the instance of the accused was not 
discussed in any of these cases.” 
 
13. As such, for bringing the case under Section 27 of the 
Evidence Act, it will be necessary for the prosecution to 
establish that, based on the information given by the accused 
while in police custody, it had led to the discovery of the fact, 
which was distinctly within the knowledge of the maker of the 
said statement. It is only so much of the information as 
relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered would be 
admissible.  It has been held that the rationale behind this 
provision is that, if a fact is actually discovered in consequence 
of the information supplied, it affords some guarantee that the 
information is true and it can therefore be safely allowed to be 
admitted in evidence as an incriminating factor against the 
accused. 
14. We will have to therefore examine as to whether the 

16 
 
prosecution has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the 
recovery of the dead body was on the basis of the information 
given by the accused persons in the statement recorded under 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act.  The prosecution will have to 
establish that, before the information given by the accused 
persons on the basis of which the dead body was recovered, 
nobody had the knowledge about the existence of the dead 
body at the place from where it was recovered. 
15. The prosecution, insofar as the memorandum under 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act is concerned, has relied on the 
depositions of Ramkumar (PW-5) and Ajab Singh (PW-18).  
According to the prosecution, the statement of Ravishankar 
Tandon (accused No. 1) was recorded on 3rd December 2011 at 
10:00 am.  On the same day, the statement of Umend Prasad 
Dhritalhare (accused No. 2) was recorded at 10:30 am, and 
that of Dinesh Chandrakar (accused No. 3) at 11:00 am.  
Whereas the statement of Satyendra Kumar Patre (accused No. 
4) was recorded on 6th December 2011 at 07:00 pm.  It will be 
relevant to refer to the relevant part of the evidence of 
Ramkumar (PW-5), which reads thus:  
“2. In front of me, accused Ravishankar have told to 

17 
 
the police that at the behest of accused Dinesh, they 
have killed Dharmender for Rs. 90,000 and made a 
plan and Ravishankar called Dharmender called him 
to buy silver and killed him in Bhatgaon stuffed his 
dead body in a sack and threw it in the pond. On 
being shown the memorandum statement of Exhibit 
P- l0 have told to be his signature on Part A to A.  
3. Umed had also told the police in front of me that 
Sattu 
along 
with 
Ravi 
Shankar 
had 
killed 
Dharmendra and threw him in Bhatagaon's lake on 
the advice of Dinesh. Witness Memo statement is 
Exhibit P-11 and accepts his signature on part A to 
A.  
4. Dinesh had told in front of me that 6 months back 
he had made a deal with Ravishankar and sattu to 
kill Dharmender for 90 thousand rupees. Dinesh also 
told that Shankar had said that the work is done, give 
him the money. On being shown Exhibit P-12, 
accepted to have his signature on Part A to A. 
Witness states that it was seized from the pond in 
front of me. 
5. Village Kunda is 16 km away from my village. It is 
correct that Dharmendra had come to know about 
the murder on 3rd. Witness states that it was 
informed by the police. On that other morning, at 
about 7 -8 o'clock in the morning, it is correct that 
on my arrival in village Kunda, my brother-in-law 
and nephew Narendra had told me about the murder 
which was done by the accused. By that time we did 
not reach the spot that's why whether it was 
Dharmender's body or not I cannot.” 
6. I went from Kunda to Bhatgaon on 2nd with the 
police, then he says that at that time it was about two 
and a half o'clock in the evening. It is correct that 
when I reached Bhatgaon there were many people of 
the village. It is correct that because of dead body 
there were many people there. It is correct to say that 
police have brought the dead body to Mungeli police 
station where PM was done.  
7. It is correct that accused were brought to Mungeli 

18 
 
police station. It is incorrect that I had taken the 
signature of accused at Mungeli police station. 
Accused have given the statement at Kunda police 
station, in front of me. Apart from the accused we 
were 5-6 other family members in the Police station 
Kunda. The police took the statement at around 12 
o'clock. 
………….. 
14. We have reached Bhatgaon at 4.30-5. And 
reached Mungeli before sunset. It is incorrect to· say 
that the police have taken my signature Witness itself 
states that I have signed in Bhatgaon. It is incorrect 
to say that I did not read the papers before signing 
them. Witness says that the I have read the main 
part. It is incorrect to say that I am seeing accused 
for the first time today. It is incorrect to say that I 
know accused by name only, witness states that I 
know him by face also. It is incorrect to say that the 
name of the accused was revealed by my brother-
in-:law and Narendra it was told by the police.” 
 
16. It is to be noted that Ramkumar (PW-5) is the brother-in-
law of the deceased. A perusal of his evidence would reveal 
that he has admitted that, on his arrival in village Kunda, he 
was informed by his brother-in-law and nephew Narendra 
Kumar (PW-2) about the murder of the deceased which was 
done by the accused persons.  He stated that, by that time they 
had not reached the spot and that is why they were not aware 
as to whether it was the body of Dharmendra or not.  He 
further admitted that when they reached Bhatgaon, many 
people of the village were there.  He has also admitted that 

19 
 
because of the dead body, many people were there.  He has 
further admitted that the accused persons had given their 
statements at Kunda police station. He has further admitted 
that they had reached Bhatgaon at around 04:30 pm to 05:00 
pm and had reached Mungeli before sunset. He has also stated 
that he had signed the panchnama at Bhatgaon.   
17. It could thus be seen that, according to this witness (PW-
5), though the statement was taken at Kunda, it was signed at 
Bhatgaon. 
18. Ajab Singh (PW-18) is another witness on the 
memorandum recorded under Section 27 of the Evidence Act 
and the subsequent recovery of the dead body. He states that 
Ravishankar informed the police that Dharmendra had been 
killed and thrown into the pond.  However, he states in 
examination-in-chief that Umend and Dinesh did not tell 
anything to the police in front of him.  It will be relevant to 
refer to his cross-examination, which reads thus: 
“4. It is true that I used to work as Kotwari. It is true 
that I did not have read the paper. It is true that I 
had signed 3-4 papers on the instructions of the 
police. It is true that due to being Kotwar had to visit 
police station regularly. It is true that I signed on 
documents on the instructions of the police. It is 
wrong to say that I signed in police station, Kunda. 

20 
 
Witnesses say that it was signed in Dandaon.” 
 
 
19. It could thus be seen that Ajab Singh (PW-18) has clearly 
admitted that he did not read the papers before putting his 
signature on them.  He has admitted that he had signed 3-4 
papers on the instructions of the police.  He has also stated 
that he had signed the statement at Dandaon. 
20. Narendra Kumar (PW-2) is the brother of the deceased.  
He has stated that, after his brother went missing; on the next 
day at around 08:00 o’clock in the morning, the police came 
to his place and informed that his brother Dharmendra had 
been killed by Ravishankar, Satnami, Umend and Satyendra.  
After that, they went to Bhatgaon with the police. The extract 
of the evidence of Narendra Kumar (PW-2) is as under: 
“3. At around 8 in morning the police came to my 
place and informed that my brother Dharmendra was 
killed by Ravishankar, Satnami, Umend and 
Satyendra. After that we went to Bhatgaon with the 
police. Ramkumar, Krishna, Banshee had gone with 
me.” 
 
21. A perusal of the evidence of Narendra Kumar (PW-2) read 
with that of Ramkumar (PW-5) would clearly reveal that the 
police as well as these witnesses knew about the death of 
Dharmendra Satnami occurring and the dead body being 

21 
 
found at Bhatgaon prior to the statements of the accused 
persons being recorded under Section 27 of the Evidence Act.  
All the statements are recorded after 10:00 am whereas 
Ramkumar (PW-2) stated that at around 08:00 am, police 
informed him about the accused persons killing the deceased 
and thereafter they going to Bhatgaon.  Ramkumar (PW-5) also 
admitted that he arrived at village Kunda and on his arrival, 
he was informed by his brother-in-law and nephew about the 
murder which was done by the accused persons. 
22. We therefore find that the prosecution has utterly failed 
to prove that the discovery of the dead body of the deceased 
from the pond at Bhatgaon was only on the basis of the 
disclosure statement made by the accused persons under 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act and that nobody knew about 
the same before that.  It is further to be noted that Ajab Singh 
(PW-18) has clearly admitted that he had signed the papers 
without reading them and that too on the instructions of the 
police. 
23. The evidence of Ramkumar (PW-5) would show that 
though his statement was taken at Kunda police station, it was 
signed at Bhatgaon. As such, the possibility of these 

22 
 
documents being created to rope in the accused persons 
cannot be ruled out.  In any case, insofar as the statement of 
Dinesh Chandrakar (accused No. 3) is concerned, even the 
statement recorded under Section 27 of the Evidence Act is not 
at all related to the discovery of the dead body of the deceased.  
As a matter of fact, nothing in his statement recorded under 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act has led to discovery of any 
incriminating fact. 
24. Another aspect that needs to be noted is that, the only 
evidence with regard to recording of the memorandum of 
accused persons under Section 27 of the Evidence Act is 
concerned, is that of B.R. Singh, the then Investigating Officer 
(IO) (PW-16).  The relevant part thereof reads thus: 
“1. ….I wrote the statement of accused Ravi Shankar 
as per memorandum Ex. P-10 after taking him into 
custody in which my signature is on part B to B. I 
wrote the statement of accused· Um end as per his 
memorandum Ex. P-11 and accused Dinesh as per 
his memorandum Ex. P-12 in which my signature is 
on part B to B.” 
 
 
25. It could thus be seen that the IO (PW-16) has failed to 
state as to what information was given by the accused persons 
which led to the discovery of the dead body.  The evidence is 

23 
 
also totally silent as to how the dead body was discovered and 
subsequently recovered. We find that therefore, the evidence 
of the IO (PW-16) would also not bring the case at hand under 
the purview of Section 27 of the Evidence Act. Reliance in this 
respect could be placed on the judgments of this Court in the 
cases of Asar Mohammad and Others v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh3 and Boby v. State of Kerala4. 
26. We therefore find that the prosecution has utterly failed 
to prove any of the incriminating circumstances against the 
appellants herein.  In any case, the chain of circumstances 
must be so complete that it leads to no other conclusion than 
the guilt of the accused persons, which is not so in the present 
case. 
27. In the result, we pass the following order: 
(i) 
The appeals are allowed; 
(ii) 
The judgment dated 2nd January 2023 passed by the 
High Court and the judgment dated 5th February 2013 
passed by the trial court are quashed and set aside; 
and 
 
3 (2019) 12 SCC 253 : 2018 INSC 985 
4 2023 SCC OnLine SC 50 : 2023 INSC 23 

24 
 
(iii) The appellants are directed to be acquitted of all the 
charges charged with and are directed to be released 
forthwith, if not required in any other case.  
28. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
…….........................J.        
[B.R. GAVAI] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   …….........................J.        
                                                    [SANDEEP MEHTA] 
NEW DELHI; 
APRIL 10, 2024.