2024 INSC 303
              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 1 of 20 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4963 OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 8333 of 2023) 
 
 
MEHER FATIMA HUSSAIN                          …APPELLANT 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
JAMIA MILIA ISLAMIA & ORS.  
      …RESPONDENTS 
 
 
WITH 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4964 OF 2024 @ SLP(C) NO. 8416 of 2023  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4965 OF 2024 @ SLP(C) NO. 8775 of 2023   
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
1. 
Leave granted.  
2. 
By the impugned judgment dated 11th April 2023, Letters 
Patent Appeals preferred by the appellants herein were 
dismissed. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
CASE OF SABIHA HUSSAIN 
3. 
A few factual details must be stated to appreciate the 
controversy. The appellant (Sabiha Hussain), in a Civil Appeal 
arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 8416 of 2023, was 
initially appointed as a Reader on probation on an ad-hoc basis 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.04.15
18:26:36 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 2 of 20 
 
by Jamia Milia Islamia, a University constituted under an Act 
of Parliament (for short, ‘the University’). The 1st and 2nd 
respondents represent the University. On 6th August 2008, she 
was appointed to a sanctioned post of Reader in the programme 
for the Study of Social Exclusion and Inclusive Policy in Dr. 
K.R. Narayanan Centre for Dalit and Minority Studies. The 
appointment was made pursuant to the advertisement dated 
1st May 2008. According to the appellant's case, her 
appointment was made through a properly constituted 
Selection Committee. The said appellant was later appointed as 
an Associate Professor. She was appointed a professor under 
the Career Advancement Schemes of 2010 of the University 
Grants Commission (for short, ‘UGC’), effective 6th August 
2014. The 1st respondent vide order dated 23rd February 2016 
gave her additional charge of the post of Director in Sarojini 
Naidu Centre for Women Studies (for short, ‘Sarojini Naidu 
Centre’). 
4. 
The University published an advertisement on 12th July 
2016, inviting applications to the post of Professor/Director 
and other academic posts in the Sarojini Naidu Centre 
established by the 1st respondent. Some of the posts advertised 
were tenure posts till the XII plan of the UGC.  Some of the 
posts were non-plan posts. She applied pursuant to the 
advertisement. By a letter of appointment dated 8th December 
2016, she was appointed as the Professor/Director. The 
Executive Council of the 1st respondent confirmed her 
appointment in a meeting held on 10th March 2017.  

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 3 of 20 
 
5. 
The University addressed a letter to the UGC stating that 
the sanctioned posts at the Sarojini Naidu Centre were 
advertised and have been duly filled in by following the regular 
selection process. A prayer was made in the said letter by the 
University to the UGC to merge Sarojini Naidu Centre into the 
regular 
establishment 
of 
the 
University. 
One 
more 
representation was made by the Registrar of the University to 
UGC, making a similar request. The UGC responded to the 
letters mentioned above by informing the University that if the 
appointments of the teachers have been made by way of a 
regular selection process, the same can be regularised. In a 
letter dated 07th June 2019, even the Teacher’s Association of 
the University sought clarification from UGC. The clarification 
was whether the incumbents' services, including the appellants 
herein, would be confirmed or terminated. In a letter dated 
25th June 2019, the UGC clarified that the teachers appointed 
through the proper selection procedure and who are duly 
qualified shall stand merged under the regular establishment 
budget of the University.  
6. 
By a letter dated 26th June 2019, the appellant sought 
confirmation of service by addressing a letter to the University. 
After that, the first respondent issued a show cause notice to 
her for misconduct. On 1st July 2019 the appellant was 
replaced by another professor as the Director of Sarojini Naidu 
Centre. The appellant replied to the show cause notice. The 
appellant filed a Writ Petition challenging her abrupt removal 
from the post of Director and the decision not to regularise her 
appointment. On 21st August 2019, the learned Single Judge 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 4 of 20 
 
of the High Court directed the reinstatement of the appellant to 
the post of Professor/Director of Sarojini Naidu Centre. This 
was done by way of an interim order. On 1st April 2020, the 
University stopped the functioning of the Sarojini Naidu 
Centre. After that, the first respondent advertised the post held 
by the appellant. In the Writ Petition, the UGC filed an affidavit 
stating that it had given “in-principle approval” to the 
University to regularise the appointees of Sarojini Naidu 
Centre, including the appellant. However, by judgment and 
order dated 18th August 2021, the learned Single Judge 
dismissed the Writ Petition on the ground that the appointment 
of the appellant was purely temporary. Being aggrieved by the 
said order, the appellant preferred a Letters Patent Appeal. In 
the Letters Patent Appeal, the High Court granted an interim 
order of stay of the advertisement. Several interim orders were 
passed in the appeal. On 11th April 2023, the High Court 
passed the impugned judgment, dismissing the appeal 
preferred by the appellant.  
CASE OF MEHER FATIMA HUSSAIN 
7. 
Now, coming to the facts of the Civil Appeal arising out of 
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 8333 of 2023, the appellant 
(Meher Fatima Hussain) was appointed to the post of Lecturer 
on probation in the said University with effect from 6th August 
2008. Subsequently, by the order dated 29th April 2010, the 
University converted the post from a probationary post to a 
temporary post. As in the case of the other appellant (Sabiha 
Hussain), the initial appointment of the appellant was in Dr. 
K.R. Narayanan Centre for Dalit and Minority Studies. The 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 5 of 20 
 
appellant received the upgradation benefit of the Career 
Advancement Scheme of the UGC. According to the 
advertisement published on 10th August 2016 for filling in 
academic posts in Sarojini Naidu Centre, the appellant applied 
for the post of Associate Professor. On 5th December 2016, the 
University issued a letter offering an appointment to the 
appellant. She was offered the post of Associate Professor 
(tenure Post till XII plan period or till the scheme lasts) in the 
Sarojini Naidu Centre. The appellant was appointed with effect 
from 8th December 2016. The steps taken by the University to 
seek approval from the UGC for the merger of the posts in 
Sarojini Naidu Centre into regular establishment have already 
been set out earlier. On 28th June 2019, a show cause notice 
was served upon the appellant. As stated earlier, an 
advertisement 
was 
issued 
by 
the 
University 
inviting 
applications. Therefore, a Writ Petition was filed by the 
appellant. During the pendency of the petition, the UGC issued 
a public notice continuing the UGC Women Studies Scheme till 
31st March 2021. The learned Single Judge dismissed the Writ 
Petition on 18th August 2021. Being aggrieved by the judgment 
of the Single Judge, the appellant preferred Letters Patent 
Appeal before the Division Bench, which has been dismissed 
by the impugned judgment.  
CASE OF SURAIYA TABASSUM 
8. 
Now, coming to the facts of the civil appeal arising out of 
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 8775 of 2023, the appellant 
(Suraiya Tabassum) was appointed as the Assistant Professor 
(tenure post till XII Plan period or till the scheme lasts) in the 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 6 of 20 
 
Sarojini Naidu Centre pursuant to the advertisement dated 
12th July 2016. The letter of appointment was issued on 8th 
December 2016. The facts are more or less similar to those of 
the civil appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 
8333 of 2023.  
SUBMISSIONS 
9. 
Detailed submissions were made by the learned counsel 
appearing for the parties. Firstly, we will refer to the 
submissions made in the Civil Appeal arising from Special 
Leave Petition (C) No. 8416 of 2023. At the outset, the learned 
senior counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the 
Division Bench had taken an erroneous view of the matter by 
applying the law laid down by this Court in the case of State 
of Karnataka v. Uma Devi1. The submission of the learned 
counsel is that the High Court proceeded on an erroneous 
footing that the appellant's appointment was irregular. The 
submission is that in the present case, the University had 
conducted the appointment process as per the provisions of the 
relevant University Statute. Learned counsel relied upon 
various decisions which explain the earlier decision in the case 
of Uma Devi1. He relied upon decisions in the cases of State 
of Rajasthan & Ors v. Daya Lal & Ors.2 and Asma Shaw v. 
Islamia College of Science & Commerce, Srinagar 
Kashmir & Ors.3 Learned counsel pointed out that the 
appellant has been a regular teaching staff member since 2008, 
 
1 (2006) 4 SCC 1 
2 (2011) 2 SCC 429 
3 2023 SCC OnLine SC 943 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 7 of 20 
 
when she joined as an Associate Professor. Thereafter, she was 
promoted to the post of Professor and appointed Honorary 
Director of Sarojini Naidu Centre in February 2016. In 
addition, she held the post of Director at the Centre for Social 
Exclusion and Inclusive Policy (CSEIP). Based on the 
advertisement dated 12th July 2016, the appellant applied for 
the post of Professor/Director in Sarojini Naidu Centre. After 
applying Statute 25, framed under the Jamia Milia Act, 1988, 
the entire selection process was completed, and the appellant 
met the necessary criteria. She was shortlisted for an interview 
by the Selection Committee. Learned counsel pointed out that 
though she was a member of the Selection Committee by virtue 
of being the Honorary Director at Sarojini Naidu Centre, she 
did not participate in the meeting. The University issued a letter 
of appointment on 8th December 2016 to the appellant, 
appointing her as Professor/Director of Sarojini Naidu Centre. 
The submission of the learned counsel is that she was 
appointed after following the due process. 
10. 
Inviting our attention to a letter dated 18th April 2019 
sent by the UGC, learned counsel submitted that the UGC was 
of the view that if the appointments have been made by way of 
a regular selection process, the same shall be regularized. 
Learned counsel submitted that it is an admitted position that 
the appellant has been working on a sanctioned post and was 
selected after following due process of law. He, therefore, urged 
that the view taken by the High Court is completely erroneous.  
11. 
The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant in 
the civil appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 8 of 20 
 
8775 of 2023 urged that after following due process of law, the 
appellant was appointed as an Assistant Professor on 8th 
December 2016 in the Sarojini Naidu Centre. Learned counsel 
submitted that as per the advice of the UGC, as the 
appointment of the appellant was made after following a 
regular process, after the merger of the posts in the regular 
establishment, the appointment of the appellant ought to have 
been continued. 
12. 
Learned counsel appearing for the appellant placed heavy 
reliance on a decision of this Court in the case of Somesh 
Thapliyal and Anr. v. Vice Chancellor, H.N.B. Garhwal 
University and Anr.4 and, in particular, what is held in 
paragraph 49. 
13. 
The submissions of the learned senior counsel appearing 
for the appellant in the Civil Appeal arising out of Special Leave 
Petition (C) No. 8333 of 2023 are similar to those made in other 
cases.     
14. 
Learned Additional Solicitor General representing the 
University pointed out that the appointment of the three 
appellants with Sarojini Naidu Centre was not permanent, and 
as mentioned in the letters of appointment, the appointments 
were made on tenure post till the XII plan period or till the 
scheme lasts. Therefore, after UGC permitted the merger of the 
posts in the Sarojini Naidu Centre with the regular 
establishment, a fresh procedure for selection had to be carried 
out. The learned counsel submitted that the reliance placed by 
 
4 (2021) 10 SCC 116 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 9 of 20 
 
appellants on the decision of this Court in the case of Asma 
Shaw3 is misplaced as the appellants were appointed on a 
tenure post specifically till the age of superannuation. He 
submitted that the appellants' cases are of backdoor entry, and 
hence, they cannot be regularised in service. Learned counsel 
also pointed out that show cause notice of misconduct was also 
issued to them, and a three-member committee headed by a 
retired Judge of the High Court found that there was prima 
facie evidence of misconduct against the appellants and 
recommended that a regular Disciplinary Committee may be 
set up to hold an enquiry. He pointed out that the same 
committee recommended that after the merger, a fresh 
procedure of the appointment process needs to be conducted. 
Our attention was invited to a decision of the Executive Council 
of the University, which accepted the recommendation of the 
three-member committee on both aspects.  
15. 
Learned counsel submitted that the resolution of the 
Executive Council dated September 15, 2020, has not been 
challenged before the High Court. The learned Counsel 
submitted that the UGC had not issued any direction that the 
teachers appointed through the earlier process should be 
continued. The UGC has only allowed the merger of the 
teaching staff with the regular establishment.  
16. 
The learned counsel appearing for UGC has reiterated the 
stand taken before the High Court that persons appointed 
through a proper selection process who were fulfilling 
qualifications as prescribed by the UGC regulations can be 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 10 of 20 
 
continued after the merger with the regular establishment of 
the University. 
OUR VIEW 
17. 
For convenience, we are referring to the appellants by 
their first names, Meher, Sabiha, and Suraiya. As far as Meher 
is concerned, after following regular procedure, by a letter of 
appointment dated 6th August 2008, she was appointed to the 
post of Lecturer in Dr. K.R. Narayanan Centre for Dalit and 
Minority Studies of the said University. She was appointed on 
probation. The appointment letter clarifies that though she was 
appointed on probation, it will confer no title on her to continue 
on a long-term basis. On the same day, Sabiha was appointed 
as the Reader on probation with a similar clause that said that 
appointment on probation would not confer any title on her to 
continue on a long-term basis. She was also appointed in Dr. 
K.R. Narayanan Centre for Dalit and Minority Studies. As far 
as Suraiya is concerned, she was not appointed in 2008. We 
may note that in the case of Meher and Sabiha, by a resolution 
of the Executive Council dated 29th April 2010, their 
probationary appointment was converted into a temporary 
appointment. As far as Sabiha is concerned, by order dated 15th 
December 2015, her promotion was approved by the University 
under UGC-CAS-1998 and 2010. All three were appointed in 
December 2016 in the posts mentioned earlier based on the 
advertisement dated 12th July 2016. 
18. 
The University published an advertisement on 12th July 
2016 inviting applications for various posts. The present 
appellants applied for different posts under the said 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 11 of 20 
 
advertisement. Meher was appointed by appointment order 
dated 8th December 2016 as an Associate Professor. Sabiha 
was 
appointed 
on 
the 
same 
day 
to 
the 
post 
of 
Professor/Director. Suraiya was appointed as an Associate 
Professor on the same day. All three appointment letters 
mentioned that they were appointed on tenure post till the XII 
Plan period or till the scheme lasted. They were appointed in 
the Sarojini Naidu Centre. We may note here that the 
appointment of all three was pursuant to the process of 
appointment initiated based on the advertisement dated 12th 
July 2016. They were selected by a regular selection committee, 
which recommended their appointments on 30th November 
2016. The Executive Council of the University approved the 
appointments.  
19. 
As far as Sabiha is concerned, there is one fact which is 
peculiar to her. On 23rd February 2016, the University's Vice 
Chancellor appointed her as the Honorary Director of Sarojini 
Naidu Centre until further orders. The office order dated 23rd 
February 2016 clarifies that her assignment as the Honorary 
Director of Sarojini Naidu Centre will be an additional 
assignment in addition to her duties as a professor in Dr. K.R. 
Narayanan Centre for Dalit and Minority Studies. One of the 
grounds that the High Court held against her is that she was a 
member of the Selection Committee in her capacity as the 
Director of Sarojini Naidu Centre, and therefore, her 
appointment made on 08th December 2016 is illegal. However, 
the perusal of the minutes of the relevant meeting shows that 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 12 of 20 
 
she never participated in the relevant Selection Committee 
meetings concerning her appointment.  
20. 
Thus, it can be concluded that the appellants' 
appointments in December 2016 were made according to a 
regular 
selection 
process 
commenced 
based 
on 
an 
advertisement dated 12th July 2016. The selection committee 
conducted a regular selection process. There is no dispute that 
the appellants hold qualifications prescribed by the UGC for 
the posts on which they were appointed in December 2016. 
21. 
On 27th April 2017, the 2nd respondent – Registrar of the 
University, addressed a letter to UGC. The contents of the said 
letters are material, which reads thus: 
“…………………………………………………………… 
Sub: Transferring the faculty positions under 
the various Plan schemes to Non-plan 
(maintenance grant) of Jamia Millia 
Islamia – reg. 
 
Dear Sir/Madam, 
 
 
With reference to the UGC letter F No. 
71/2012(WS) dated 25th March 2012 conveying 
the approval for continuation of financial 
assistance under the scheme ‘Development of 
Women Studies in India Universities and 
Colleges – Continuation of Women’s Studies 
Centres in the XII Plan’ (copy enclosed) and to 
inform that all the teaching as well as non-
teaching plan positions (except three posts of 
Research Associate) sanctioned for the Sarojini 
Naidu Centre for Women’s Studies, J.M.1 has 
been filled by the University through proper 
Selection Committees.  

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 13 of 20 
 
 
In view of the above, it is requested that the 
expenditure to be incurred on the salary of 
faculty positions sanctioned under the aforesaid 
scheme may be merged into the Non-plan 
(maintenance grant) of Jamia Millia Islamia.  
 Thanking you.  
Yours sincerely 
Sd/- 
(A.P. Siddiqui) IPS 
Registrar” 
                               (underline supplied) 
 
In the Annexure to the said letter, the names of the three 
appellants were mentioned as persons working in the teaching 
positions at Sarojini Naidu Centre. Thus, the University 
admitted that the appellants were appointed to the respective 
posts by the University through a proper selection process. The 
present appellants were appointed to the teaching posts in 
Sarojini Naidu Centre. The appellants, along with other 
teachers, also made a representation to the Vice Chancellor for 
their continuation after the merger.  
22. 
On 18th April 2019, the UGC informed the University that 
the merger of all teaching positions into the regular 
establishment of the University has been approved. The 
material part of the said letter reads thus: 
“The Registrar. 
Jamia Millia Islamia 
Maulana Mohammed Ali Jauhar Marg, 
New Delhi-110025 
 
Subject: Merger of Teaching posts sanctioned 
by UGC under Centre for Women’s Studies 
into regular establishment of the University 
budget.  

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 14 of 20 
 
 
Sir,  
 
 
 
With reference to your letter No. Ref. 
No.PDB/S-202Vol.III/2018/DRNO.56 
dated 
31.07.2018 on the subject mentioned above, the 
undersigned is directed to convey the approval of 
UGC to merge the all teaching positions into 
regular establishment of the University which 
were sanctioned by UGC under Centre for 
Women’s Studies. 
…………………………………………………………… 
…………………………….……………………………” 
                      (underline supplied) 
 
Thus, the UGC permitted the University to merge the teaching 
posts in Sarojini Naidu Centre into its regular establishment.  
23. 
On 2nd May 2019, the Executive Council of the University 
passed a resolution approving the merger of teaching posts of 
Sarojini Naidu Centre into the regular establishment of the 
University. It was resolved that these posts be filled in through 
a 
proper 
selection 
committee 
after 
publishing 
an 
advertisement. Against the said decision to conduct a fresh 
process of appointment, the teachers made a representation to 
the University as well as to the UGC. By letter dated 25th June 
2019, the UGC communicated to the Registrar of the University 
as under: 
“..………………………………………………………… 
25th June, 2019 
The Registrar 
Jamia Millia Islamia 
Maulana Mohammed Ali Jauhar Marg 
New Delhi-110025 
 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 15 of 20 
 
Sub: Merger of teaching posts sanctioned by 
UGC under Centre for Women’s studies into 
regular 
establishment 
budget 
of 
the 
University-regarding. 
 
Sir, 
 
This is in continuation to this office letter 
number F.7-65/2012(WS) dated 18th April, 2019 
(copy enclosed), on the subject mentioned above, 
it is clarified that the persons appointed through 
proper selection procedure/Committee and who 
are 
fulfilling 
all 
educational 
and 
other 
qualifications as prescribed in UGC Regulations 
at that time and whose appointments were 
approved by the statutory bodies, the incumbent 
teaching staff may be merged under the regular 
establishment budget of the Jamia Millia Islamia. 
……………………………………..…………………….” 
(underline supplied) 
 
Thus, UGC specifically informed the University that the 
teachers appointed through a proper selection process, who 
fulfilled the educational and other qualifications prescribed by 
UGC and whose appointments were approved by the Statutory 
bodies, can be merged with the regular establishment of the 
University. Thus, in so many words UGC permitted the 
University to treat the appellants and similarly situated 
employees as regularly appointed and merge their posts with 
the regular establishment budget of the University. The 
University is capitalising on the word “may” used in the said 
letter to contend that it was not mandatory for the University 
to continue the appellants and similarly situated teachers.  
24. 
In the counter filed by the UGC before the High Court, 
the UGC reiterated what was stated in its letters dated 18th 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 16 of 20 
 
April 2019 and 25th June 2019, which we have quoted above. 
Even in the written submissions filed before this Court, the 
UGC has reiterated its stand in the letter dated 25th June 2019. 
In paragraph 5 of the written submissions, UGC stated thus: 
“5. It is submitted that Central University 
Bureau 
of 
UGC 
vide 
letter 
No.F.24-
1/2015(CU) dated 25.06.2019 has clarified 
that the persons appointed through proper 
selection procedure/committee and who 
are fulfilling all educational and other 
qualifications 
as 
prescribed 
in 
UGC 
Regulations at that time and whose 
appointments 
were 
approved 
by 
the 
Statutory bodies, the incumbent teaching 
staff 
may 
be 
merged 
under 
regular 
establishment budget of the Jamia Millia 
Islamia.”  
(emphasis added) 
 
25. 
As far as the role of the UGC is concerned, in paragraph 
27 of the decision of this Court in the case of Kalyani 
Mathivanan v. K.V. Jeyaraj and others,5 this Court held 
thus: 
“27. From the aforesaid provisions, we find that 
the University Grants Commission has been 
established for the determination of standard of 
universities, promotion and coordination of 
university education, for the determination and 
maintenance 
of 
standards 
of 
teaching, 
examination and research in universities, for 
defining 
the 
qualifications 
regarding 
the 
 
5 (2015) 6 SCC 363 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 17 of 20 
 
teaching staff of the university, maintenance of 
standards, etc. For the purpose of performing 
its functions under the UGC Act (see Section 12) 
like defining the qualifications and standard 
that should ordinarily be required of any person 
to be appointed in the universities [see Sections 
26(1)(e) & (g)] UGC is empowered to frame 
regulations. It is only when both the Houses of 
Parliament approve the regulation, the same 
can be given effect to. Thus, we hold that the 
UGC 
Regulations 
though 
a 
subordinate 
legislation has binding effect on the universities 
to which it applies; and consequence of failure 
of 
the 
university 
to 
comply 
with 
the 
recommendations of the Commission, UGC 
may withhold the grants to the university made 
out of the fund of the Commission (see Section 
14).” 
 
26. 
This Court has highlighted the importance of the position 
of UGC.  It is true that the letter dated 25th June 2019 
addressed by the UGC has used the word ‘may’. However, 
considering the statutory position of the UGC, there was no 
reason for the University not to follow what the UGC stated. 
Much capital was made of the fact that the letters of 
appointment mentioned that the posts were tenure posts till 
the XII Plan period or till the scheme lasted. We may note that 
nothing has been placed on record showing that the scheme 
expired. Moreover, the appellants should have been continued 
after the merger, as suggested by the UGC.  
27. 
At this stage, we may also refer to the case of Somesh 
Thapliyal4. This Court was dealing with a case of appointment 
of teachers (Associate Professors/Assistant Professors). They 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 18 of 20 
 
were appointed after going through the process of selection 
provided under the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973. 
In paragraphs 49 and 50, this Court held thus: 
“49. In our considered view, once the 
appellants have gone through the process of 
selection provided under the scheme of the 
1973 Act regardless of the fact whether the 
post is temporary or permanent in nature, at 
least their appointment is substantive in 
character and could be made permanent as 
and 
when 
the 
post 
is 
permanently 
sanctioned by the competent authority. 
50. In the instant case, after the teaching posts 
in the Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences 
have been duly sanctioned and approved by the 
University Grants Commission of which a 
detailed reference has been made, supported by 
the letter sent to the University Grants 
Commission dated 14-8-2020 indicating the 
fact that the present appellants are working 
against 
the 
teaching 
posts 
of 
Associate 
Professor/Assistant Professor sanctioned in 
compliance of the norms of the AICTE/PCI and 
are 
appointed 
as 
per 
the 
requirements, 
qualifications 
and 
selection 
procedure 
in 
accordance with the 1973 Act and proposed by 
the University, such incumbents shall be 
treated to be appointed against the sanctioned 
posts for all practical purposes.” 
(emphasis added) 
28. 
Thus, considering that appellants were appointed after 
undergoing a regular selection process and they possess 
relevant qualifications as per the norms of UGC, they should 
have been continued on the posts merged with the regular 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 19 of 20 
 
establishment of the University instead of adopting the fresh 
selection procedure. In the facts of this case, the University's 
action of not continuing them and starting a fresh selection 
process is unjust, arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the 
Constitution of India. Therefore, the employment of the 
appellants will have to be continued after merger. 
29. 
 A committee appointed by the University headed by the 
retired High Court Judge has recommended initiating a 
Disciplinary Enquiry against the appellants. Notwithstanding 
this judgment, it will always be open for the University to 
proceed with the Disciplinary Enquiry subject to all just 
objections by the appellants.  
30. 
While issuing notice on 24th April 2023, this Court passed 
the following order: 
“Issue notice, returnable on 17.05.2023. 
If the petitioners continue to be in service as 
of today, their appointment shall not be 
disturbed till they are replaced by the 
regularly appointed candidates under the 
selection process which is already adopted. 
Even if the petitioners are replaced by the 
regularly 
appointed 
candidates, 
the 
appointment letter of the regularly appointed 
candidates will state that their appointment 
is subject to the orders passed in the Special 
Leave Petition.” 
 
In view of this order, the appointments, if any, made by the 
University under the subsequent advertisement dated 18th 
September 2020 on the posts held by the appellants were 
explicitly made subject to the outcome of these petitions and 

              Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 8333 of 2023 
 
 Page 20 of 20 
 
therefore, the appointees, if any, on the relevant posts cannot 
claim any equity.   
31. 
Therefore, by setting aside the impugned judgments, we 
direct the 1st and 2nd respondents to reinstate the appellants in 
their respective posts based on their selection in December 
2016. They shall be reinstated within three months from today. 
Though the appellants shall be entitled to continuity in service 
and other consequential benefits, they will not be entitled to 
pay and allowances for the period for which they have not 
worked.  
32. The appeals are accordingly allowed on the above terms 
with no orders as to costs. If any teachers have been appointed 
in the posts held by the appellants, the University shall 
consider whether they can be accommodated in the vacant 
posts, if any, in accordance with the law.  
 
……………………..J. 
(Abhay S. Oka) 
 
 
……………………..J. 
(Pankaj Mithal) 
New Delhi; 
April 15, 2024.