2024 INSC 333
 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 
 
Page 1 of 11 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF 2024 
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.8488 OF 2024)  
 
 
ARCADIA SHIPPING LTD. 
.....  
APPELLANT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
  
 
TATA STEEL LIMITED AND OTHERS 
.....  
RESPONDENTS 
 
 
O R D E R  
 
SANJIV KHANNA, J. 
Leave granted.  
 
2. 
This order gives reasons and decides a question of territorial jurisdiction under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 19081. 
 
3. 
We begin by briefly referring to the facts of the case and pleadings in the plaint 
- Suit No. 458/2000: 
 
o The original plaintiff is Bhushan Steel & Strips Ltd2. Bhushan Steel has 
merged with Tata Steel Limited (respondent no. 1 before this Court). 
o The defendant nos. 1-4 are, TYO Trading Enterprises3 (respondent no. 
2 before this Court), Commercial Bank of Ethiopia4 (respondent no. 3 
before this Court), Arcadia Shipping Limited5 (appellant before this 
 
1 For short, “Code.” 
2 For short, “Bhushan Steel”. 
3 For short, “TYO Trading”. 
4 For short, “Bank of Ethiopia”. 
5 For short, “Arcadia”. 
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
Date: 2024.04.24
15:20:45 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 
 
Page 2 of 11 
 
Court) and M.G. Trading Worldwide Pvt Ltd6 (respondent no. 4 before 
this Court). 
o Bhushan Steel was, inter alia, a manufacturer of galvanized steel 
corrugated sheets. 
o TYO Trading was a company based in Ethiopia that had instructed its 
agent, M.G. Trading, to place certain supply orders for galvanized steel 
corrugated sheets with Bhushan Steel.  
o Accordingly, M.G. Trading placed orders with Bhushan Steel, at Delhi, 
for the supply of 400 MT of galvanized steel corrugated sheets. 
o TYO Trading had initially opened the Letter of Credit in favour of its 
agent M.G. Trading.  
o Subsequently, the Letter of Credit was transferred in the name of 
Bhushan Steel, pursuant to which, the material was dispatched by 
Bhushan Steel, as per the supply orders.  
o The material was loaded by the shippers, Arcadia, in their vessel - 
Winco Pioneer, from a port in Mumbai, India to a port in Djibouti, 
Ethiopia.  
o Arcadia undertook the shipment vide two bills of lading7 -(i) Bill of Lading 
No. DJB-06 for 200 MT of galvanized steel corrugated sheets and (ii) 
Bill of Lading No. DJB-07 for 198 MT of galvanized steel corrugated 
sheets. 
o The freight charges for shipping were prepaid by Bhushan Steel to 
Arcadia.  
o Arcadia was directed to deliver the goods to the order of the Bank of 
 
6 For short, “M.G. Trading”. 
 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 
 
Page 3 of 11 
 
Ethiopia, to whom documents had been submitted by Bhushan Steel 
through their bankers, Punjab National Bank8. The documents were to 
be negotiated under the Letter of Credit.  
o PNB had sent the said documents to the Bank of Ethiopia for making 
the payments. All formalities for encashing the Letter of Credit had been 
completed by Bhushan Steel.   
o However, Bank of Ethiopia refused to encash the Letter of Credit on the 
grounds of discrepancies.  
o Vide fax message dated 25.08.1999, Bhushan Steel was informed by 
Arcadia that both the shipments had been released to the consignee, 
TYO Trading, as they had duly presented a Bill of Lading, endorsed by 
Bank of Ethiopia.  
o Vide letter dated 07.09.1998, TYO Trading informed Bhushan Steel, 
through M.G. Trading, that they had made the payment, which would be 
released by the Bank of Ethiopia. 
o The payment was not received by Bhushan Steel. The material was 
delivered and could not be shipped back to Bhushan Steel. 
o Thus, the defendants had taken a contradictory stand. While TYO 
Trading had stated that they had paid for the goods, the Bank of Ethiopia 
had refused to honour the Letter of Credit. Arcadia had stated that the 
material had been released to TYO Trading upon presentation of the 
Bill of Lading which was duly endorsed by the Bank of Ethiopia. Further, 
PNB had returned the original documents, including the Bill of Ladings 
to Bhushan Steel stating that they had received them without any 
 
8 For short, “PNB”. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 
 
Page 4 of 11 
 
encashment of the Letter of Credit by the Bank of Ethiopia.  
o Paragraphs 22 and 29 of the plaint read as under: 
“22. That thus the fact remains that the payment of the said 
bill of lading has not been paid to the plaintiff and is still 
liable to be paid to the plaintiff and the plaintiff is fully 
entitled for an amount of US$ 2,76,510 which is the liability 
of defendant no.l and 2 in the event of goods rightly being 
released by defendant no. 3 after obtaining duly endorsed 
bill of lading from defendant no. 2, but in case the goods 
had been released without obtaining the endorsement then 
it is the liability of defendant nos. 1, 2 and 3 jointly and 
severally towards plaintiff for making payment thereof as 
defendant no. 2 cannot escape its liability under any 
circumstances as if the irrevocable Letter of Credit would 
not have been issued by defendant no.2 duly transferred in 
favour of plaintiff, the plaintiff would not have supplied the 
said goods and since despite the fact that all the conditions 
of supply was fulfilled by plaintiff of the irrevocable Letter of 
Credit, the defendant no.2 have not released the payment, 
therefore the liability of defendant no.2  remains in al1 
eventuality and the liability of defendant no.3 arises if they 
had delivered the goods without obtaining endorsement 
from defendant no.2 and as such in order to escape their 
liability defendant no. 3 to establish and prove that they hold 
with them the original Bill- of Lading duly endorsed by 
defendant no.2 to release the said goods in favour of 
defendant no.l, otherwise defendant no.3 cannot escape its 
liability for payment. This is so the original documents have 
been returned back unpaid to the plaintiff by their bankers 
Punjab National Bank and as such it is surprising as to how 
the goods had been released by defendant no. 3 as 
confirmed by them in favour of defendant no. 1 vide their 
fax dated 29th August, 1999.  
xxx  
 
 
   xxx  
 
  
  xxx 
29. That the cause of action arose for the first time when 
defendant no.4 assigned the said order placed by 
defendant no.l in favour of plaintiff; again arose on 23rd 
June, 1998 when the goods were supplied to defendant 
no.l 
and 
was sent to defendant no. 3; again arose on 7th 
September, 1998, when defendant no. 1 confirmed 
having made the payment to defendant no.2 and assure 
the early release of the payment; again arose when the 
documents were returned to the plaintiff on 23rd August, 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 
 
Page 5 of 11 
 
1999 when the plaintiff enquired about the status of the 
goods; again arose on 25th August, 1999 when defendant  
no.3 confirmed having delivered the goods to defendant 
no.l and the authority of defendant no.2 and finally arose 
on 29th November, 1999 when despite the legal notice 
the defendants failed to release the payment and is a 
continuing one.” 
 
In this manner, it was pleaded that if an endorsement on the Bill of 
Lading was made by the Bank of Ethiopia, they would be liable. Arcadia 
would be liable if they were not able to establish and prove that the 
original Bill of Lading was duly endorsed by the Bank of Ethiopia.  
o Accordingly, the defendants were jointly and severally liable.  
o Paragraph 30 of the plaint relating to the territorial jurisdiction reads as 
under: 
“That the cause of action arose at Delhi as the  order 
was placed at Delhi and the payment was to be 
released at Delhi, therefore this Hon'ble Court has got 
the Jurisdiction to try and adjudicate upon the present 
suit.” 
 Bhushan Steel had thus pleaded that the High Court at Delhi 
possessed territorial jurisdiction to decide the Suit. 
 
4. 
Vide judgement/order dated 20.12.2017, the Single Judge of the High Court at 
Delhi recording the following findings:   
o Bank of Ethiopia had refused to honour the Letter of Credit on account 
of discrepancies as the goods were shipped late and the documents 
were presented after the course of negotiation.  
o Goods were released and in spite of efforts of Bhushan Steel to call 
back the shipment, the goods could not be retrieved.  
o TYO Trading Enterprises was untraceable and were proceeded ex-
parte.  

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 
 
Page 6 of 11 
 
o Arcadia had loaded and shipped the goods, however, they failed to 
divulge the actual recipient in Ethiopia. Arcadia failed to inform 
Bhushan Steel about their due compliance. Acadia had taken 
conflicting and inconsistent stands regarding the person to whom the 
goods were released. The original documents, including the Bills of 
Lading were returned to Bhushan Steel and were in their possession. 
Thus, the goods could not have been released by Arcadia without the 
production of the original Bill of Ladings which were with Bhushan 
Steel.  
o Therefore, the goods were released by Arcadia unauthorisedly and 
have not been accounted for by them. Accordingly, Arcadia is liable 
to Bhushan Steel for the loss suffered.9 Arcadia should pay Bhushan 
Steel the value of the goods, without any interest.  
   
Despite these findings, the Single Judge directed the return of the plaint on the 
question of territorial jurisdiction, as reproduced below: 
 “Issue No. 1 
27. This Court agrees with defendant No.3's 
contention that this Court lacks territorial junsdiction 
to entertain and decide the  present suit. Apparently, 
no cause of action arose against defendant No.3 
within the jurisdiction of the Court to grant the relief 
prayed for. Defendant No. 3 carries on its business at 
Mumbai. It is not at controversy that the goods in 
question were shipped / loaded at Mumbai, the freight 
charges were paid there. The goods were to be 
delivered at Djibouti Port, Ethiopia Apparently, no 
cause of action whatsoever qua defendant No. 3 
arose at Delhi to attract the teritorial jurisdiction of this 
Court. This Court has no jurisdiction to entertain and 
 
9 The judgment records that Arcadia had not disclosed who was the ‘Principal’, who was an undisclosed 
foreign party. Arcadia had not produced document to show if the freight charges were received on 
behalf of the ‘Principal’ etc.   

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 
 
Page 7 of 11 
 
decide the present suit qua the defendant No. 3. This 
issue is decided in favour of the defendant No.3 and 
against the plaintiff.  
Relief  
28. Since this Court has no territorial jurisdiction to 
entertain and decide the present suit qua defendant 
No. 3, the relief claimed by the plaintiff against 
defendant No. 3 cannot be granted. 
 
29. Plaint be returned to the plaintiff to be presented 
before the Court of Competent Jurisdiction, as per 
law.”  
 
5. 
A Division Bench of the High Court at Delhi, vide judgment/order 09.01.2024, 
allowed an appeal against the judgement/order passed by the Single Judge 
dated 20.12.2017, in an appeal preferred by Tata Steel Limited. 
 
6. 
The present appeal has been preferred by the appellant – Arcadia against the 
judgment/order of the Division Bench of the High Court at Delhi, dated 
08.01.2024.  
 
7. 
Arcadia submits that two distinct transactions occurred: first, the sale of goods 
and second, a shipment of goods from Mumbai to Djibouti. Arcadia 
emphasizes that their involvement was restricted to the second transaction. 
Notably, the supply orders, integral to the first transaction, were placed in Delhi. 
Thus, Arcadia submits that a suit cannot be brought against them in Delhi, as 
they were not a part of the first transaction and their businesses were located 
out of Mumbai. 
 
8. 
In our opinion, the contention raised by Arcadia has no merit. The transactions 
are intrinsically intertwined and cannot be compartmentalized into watertight 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 
 
Page 8 of 11 
 
silos. The shipment of goods was linked and connected with the sale of goods 
by Bhushan Steel through, inter alia, the Bill of Lading. A Bill of Lading 
essentially serves a tri-fold purpose: (a) it is receipt of the goods shipped and 
the terms on which they have been received; (b) it is evidence for the contract 
of carriage of goods; and (c) it is a document of title for the goods specified 
therein. Consequently, the release of goods by the shipper, Arcadia, hinged 
upon the presentation of the Bill of Lading by the receiver, TYO Trading at the 
point of receipt. However, the Bill of Lading necessitated proper endorsement 
by the Bank of Ethiopia since they were the issuers of the Letter of Credit. 
Bhushan Steel remained the owner of the goods. In this manner, the actions 
of Arcadia and the transactions were interconnected with each other. Upon 
reading paragraphs 22, 29 and 30 of the plaint referred to above and after 
perusing the facts of the case, it is clear to us that a part of the cause of action 
had arisen in Delhi.  
 
9. 
It would be opportune to refer to the provisions of the Code. 
 
10. 
Section 20(c) of the Code accords dominus litis to the plaintiff to institute a suit 
within local limits of whose jurisdiction the cause of action, wholly or in part 
arises.10 Every suit is based upon the cause of action, and the situs of the 
cause of action, even in part, will confer territorial jurisdiction on the court. The 
expression ‘cause of action’ can be given either a restrictive or wide meaning. 
 
10 “20. Other suits to be instituted where defendants reside or cause of action arises.—Subject to the 
limitations aforesaid, every suit shall be instituted in a Court within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction— 
xxx 
 
 
 
 
 
xxx 
 
 
 
 
 
xxx 
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 
 
Page 9 of 11 
 
However, it is judicially read to mean - every fact that the plaintiff should prove 
to support their right to the judgment.  
 
11. 
Order I Rule 3 of the Code states that the plaintiff may join as a defendant in 
one suit, all persons against whom, the plaintiff claims the right to relief in 
respect of, or arising out of, the same act or transaction or series of 
transactions.11 The claim viz. the defendants can be joint, several or in the 
alternative. Thus, it is permissible to file one civil suit, even when, separate 
suits can be brought against such persons, when common questions of law 
and fact arise.  
 
12. 
Order I Rule 7 of the Code permits a plaintiff who is in doubt as to the person 
from whom they are entitled to obtain redress, to join two or more defendants 
in order that the question as to which of the defendants is liable, and to what 
extent, can be decided in one suit.12  
 
13. 
The supply order was placed in Delhi and the payment was to be released in 
Delhi. Accordingly, the cause of action arose in part at Delhi, in terms of 
Section 20(c) of the Code.  As per Order I Rules 3 and 7 of the Code, it was 
permissible for Bhushan Steel to enjoin in a single suit all the defendants, 
including Arcadia. Their claim of right to relief lies against all such defendants. 
 
11 “3. Who may be joined as defendants.—All persons may be joined in one suit as defendants 
where— 
(a) any right to relief in respect of, or arising out of, the same act or transaction or series of acts or 
transactions is alleged to exist against such persons, whether jointly, severally or in the alternative; 
and 
(b) if separate suits were brought against such persons, any common question of law or fact would 
arise.” 
12 “7. When plaintiff in doubt from whom redress is to be sought.— Where the plaintiff is in doubt as to 
the person from whom he is entitled to obtain redress, he may join two or more defendants in order 
that the question as to which of the defendants is liable, and to what extent, may be determined as 
between all parties.” 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 
 
Page 10 of 11 
 
Further, the relief claimed was in respect of or arising out of a series of 
transactions, the sale of goods and then their shipment, which transactions 
were connected and synchronized with the relief claimed. The cause of action 
could not have been adjudicated without impleading all the defendants as 
parties. Thus, in terms of Order I Rule 3, the relief claimed by Bhushan Steel 
lies against all the defendants, albeit to different extents and was ‘in respect of 
and arises out of a series of transactions’. Thus, Bhushan Steel was within its 
rights to enjoin all the defendants under a single suit as per Order I Rule 7 of 
the Code such that the extent of liability of each defendant could be decided in 
the same suit.   
 
14. 
Therefore, the Division Bench of the High Court was right in setting aside the 
finding recorded by the Single Judge viz issue no. 1 – territorial jurisdiction. 
 
15. 
However, we must also record that a question of territorial jurisdiction should 
ordinarily be decided at the outset rather than being deferred till all matters are 
resolved. In the judgment dated 20.09.2017, the Single Judge held that no 
liability can be fastened to TYO Trading and Bank of Ethiopia. However, it held 
that liability could be fastened to Arcadia. In the context of the dispute in 
question, the different and divergent stands of the defendants, the remedy was 
to file a civil suit against the defendants, which in the facts was maintainable in   
Delhi, a part of the cause of action having arisen in Delhi.  
 
16. 
Hence, the Single Judge erred in upholding Arcadia’s contention regarding 
lack of territorial jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court and absence of any cause 
of action arising against them in Delhi, based on their businesses being located 
in Mumbai. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 
 
Page 11 of 11 
 
 
17. 
For the aforesaid reasons, the present civil appeal is dismissed. 
 
18. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.  
 
 
......................................J. 
(SANJIV KHANNA) 
 
 
......................................J. 
(DIPANKAR DATTA) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
APRIL 16, 2024.