2024 INSC 308
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 1258 OF 2010 
 
 
 
RAMVIR @ SAKET SINGH 
                       .…APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
 
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH 
     ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
 
1. 
The instant appeal is directed against the judgment dated 
27th July, 2007 passed by Division Bench of High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh at Gwalior whereby Criminal Appeal No. 607 of 1998 filed 
by the appellant was dismissed and the judgment and order dated 
9th November, 1998 passed by the Vth Upper Sessions Judge, 
Bhind, Madhya Pradesh(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘trial 
Court’) in Session Case No. 70 of 1987 was upheld.   
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.04.16
16:28:33 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
2. 
Vide judgment and order dated 9th November, 1998, the 
learned trial Court convicted and sentenced the appellant as 
below: - 
(i) 
Under Section 302 of Indian Penal Code, 
1860(hereinafter being referred to as ‘IPC’): Life 
imprisonment and fine of Rs. 2000/- in default two 
months rigorous imprisonment (for the murder of 
Kaptan Singh).  
(ii) 
Under Section 307 IPC: five years rigorous 
imprisonment and fine of Rs.1000/- in default one 
month rigorous imprisonment [for the attempted 
murder of Indal Singh (PW-12)]  
3. 
The details of evidence and relevant facts are narrated in the 
judgments dated 9th November, 1998 and 27th July, 2007 passed 
by the trial Court and the High Court respectively and hence, need 
not be repeated. 
4. 
The appellant herein was tried for the murders of Kaptan 
Singh and Kalyan Singh which took place in two separate incidents 
and for the attempted murder of Indal Singh(PW-12) in the incident 
in which Kaptan Singh was killed.  Both these incidents took place 

3 
 
in village Bhajai, District Bhind, Madhya Pradesh on 10th 
November, 1985. 
5. 
Upon conclusion of the trial, the learned trial Court vide 
judgment dated 9th November, 1998 acquitted the accused 
appellant from the charge of murder of Kalyan Singh holding that 
the two eyewitnesses who deposed against the appellant for the 
said incident, namely, Surajbeti(PW-5) and Hiraman(PW-6) were 
not reliable witnesses as they had not named the accused 
appellant in the statements made before the Investigating Officer 
(PW-18) being Exhibit D-5 and Exhibit D-6.  However, placing 
reliance on the testimony of Raj Kumari(PW-7), Indal Singh(PW-
12)(injured eyewitness) and Ramraj Singh(PW-14), the learned trial 
Court proceeded to convict and sentence the appellant as above 
for the commission of murder of Kaptan Singh and attempted 
murder of Indal Singh(PW-12). 
6. 
It may be noted here that the appellant herein is reported to 
have suffered more than 14 years of substantive imprisonment and 
nearly 22 years imprisonment with remission.  However, his prayer 
for grant of premature release/remission is not being considered 
on account of pendency of appeal. 

4 
 
7. 
Shri P.H. Parekh, learned senior counsel representing the 
appellant vehemently and fervently contended that the entire 
prosecution case is false and fabricated.  In the very same incident 
in which Kaptan Singh (deceased) was killed and Indal Singh(PW-
12) received injuries by fire arm, two persons from the side of 
accused appellant, namely, Chutallu @ Ram Mohan and Shiv 
Singh received gun shot injuries and expired.  As per Shri Parekh, 
the prosecution witnesses failed to offer any explanation for the 
fatal injuries caused to Chutallu @ Ram Mohan and Shiv Singh 
and thus, the evidence of the prosecution witnesses is not 
trustworthy and reliable. 
8. 
Learned senior counsel further contended that a cross case 
was registered against six persons from the complainant side 
including Indal Singh(PW-12) and Ramraj Singh(PW-14) and they 
were convicted by the trial Court for the offence punishable under 
Section 396 IPC and thus, it is established beyond all manner of 
doubt that the members of the complainant party were the 
aggressors.  Thus, learned counsel submitted that the case of 
prosecution is fit to be discarded on two counts; (i) that the fatal 
injuries caused to two members of the accused side namely, 
Chutallu @ Ram Mohan and Shiv Singh were not explained by the 

5 
 
prosecution witnesses and; (ii) members of the complainant party 
having been convicted in the cross case, it is trite they were the 
aggressors and thus, the accused appellant deserves to be 
acquitted by giving him the benefit of doubt as well as by giving 
him the benefit of right of private defence. 
9. 
It was further contended that in an incident involving 
extensive cross firing, the accused appellant did not receive a 
single injury and thus it is clear that the prosecution witnesses 
have not come out with the true version of the incident and their 
evidence is tainted and unworthy of reliance. 
10. Learned senior counsel further submitted that the evidence 
of Ramraj Singh(PW-14) was not relied upon by the High Court. 
11. It was further submitted that Raj Kumari(PW-7) and Indal 
Singh(PW-12) are interested partisan witnesses and are closely 
related to the deceased Kaptan Singh and hence, their evidence 
should not be accepted in absence of corroboration. On these 
grounds, he implored the Court to accept the appeal, set aside the 
impugned judgment and acquit the accused appellant of the 
charges. 

6 
 
12. Per contra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State 
vehemently opposed the submissions advanced by learned counsel 
for the appellant. 
13. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced by learned counsel representing the parties 
and have gone through the impugned judgment and also 
scrutinized the evidence available on record. 
14. We may, at the outset, note that insofar as the Sessions Case 
No. 68 of 1986 wherein six persons from the complainant side were 
convicted by the trial Court is concerned, it is stricto senso not a 
cross case because the charge against those who stood trial in the 
aforesaid case was for the offence punishable under Section 396 
IPC registered with the allegation of snatching the gun from 
Chutallu @ Ram Mohan. Thereafter, Ramraj Singh(PW-14) fired 
gun shots at Chutallu @ Ram Mohan causing him fatal injuries. At 
that time, Govind Singh and Udai Singh had also fired gun shots 
at Shiv Singh, who was standing on the platform of the house of 
Chhutkan Singh.  Shiv Singh fell down on the spot and died as a 
result thereof. These six persons were convicted by the trial Court 
for commission of offence under Section 396 IPC vide its judgment 
dated 9th November, 1998. 

7 
 
15. It is further noteworthy that the Criminal Appeal No. 582 of 
1998 preferred by six persons including Indal Singh(PW-12) and 
Ramraj Singh(PW-14) was allowed by the High Court vide 
judgment dated 27th July, 2007 and all of them were acquitted of 
the charge while setting aside the judgment dated 9th November, 
1998 rendered by the learned trial Court. 
16. On a threadbare reappreciation of the evidence available on 
record, we find that there is no dispute on the aspect that the 
incident wherein Kaptan Singh was killed took place in front of the 
house of Kaptan Singh.   
17. There is also no dispute that Chutallu @ Ram Mohan and 
Shiv Singh received injuries in the very same incident which 
resulted in their death.  The defence case is that the gun held by 
Chutallu @ Ram Mohan was snatched by the members of the 
complainant party and thereafter, Ramraj Singh(PW-14) fired a 
gun shot at Chutallu @ Ram Mohan injuring him in stomach and 
back. 
18. The prosecution has come up with a clear case that when 
Indal Singh(PW-12) saw the assailants, i.e., the appellant herein 
and his two companions(Chutallu @ Ram Mohan and Shiv Singh) 
firing towards deceased Kaptan Singh, Ramraj Singh(PW-14) and 

8 
 
his camel, Indal Singh(PW-12) used his licensed weapons to fire at 
the assailants in self-defence and in defence of Ramraj Singh(PW-
14) and Kaptan Singh.  The gun shots fired by Ramraj Singh(PW-
14) and Indal Singh(PW-12) resulted into the death of Chutallu @ 
Ram Mohan and Shiv Singh. 
19. The evidence of Indal Singh(PW-12) and Raj Kumari(PW-7) is 
categoric on the aspect that the gun shots fired by accused 
appellant herein struck deceased Kaptan Singh on his stomach 
and chest, etc. 
20. Indal Singh(PW-12) has come out with a clear case in his 
examination-in-chief explaining the manner in which Chutallu @ 
Ram Mohan and Shiv Singh received fatal gun shot injuries.  His 
testimony could not be impeached despite extensive cross-
examination.  The allegation made by Indal Singh (PW-12) 
regarding the accused appellant having fired gun shots at Kaptan 
Singh is duly corroborated by presence of gun shot injuries on his 
body as deposed by the Medical Jurist Dr. Rakesh Sharma(PW-
11). 
21. The trial Court as well as the High Court, after thorough 
appreciation of evidence available on record, discarded the 
prosecution case regarding the charge of murder of Kalyan Singh 

9 
 
attributed to the appellant by holding that the testimonies of two 
eyewitnesses Surajbeti(PW-5) and Hiraman(PW-6) were not 
reliable.   
22. However, the learned trial Court placed reliance on the 
evidence of three eyewitnesses i.e. Raj Kumari(PW-7), Indal 
Singh(PW-12) and Ramraj Singh(PW-14) so as to hold the accused 
appellant guilty of the charge of murder of Kaptan Singh and the 
attempted murder of Indal Singh(PW-12).  The High Court, 
however, concluded that the trial Court had disbelieved the 
evidence of witness Ramraj Singh(PW-14).  Though, this finding is 
erroneous but the High Court discarded the evidence of Ramraj 
Singh(PW-14) holding it to be not trustworthy based on the 
reasoning that he did not state as to what had caused injuries to 
Chutallu @ Ram Mohan and Shiv Singh.  Furthermore, even 
though this witness claimed to have received gun shot injuries at 
the hands of the accused appellant but he was not medically 
examined.  Therefore, the evidence of Ramraj Singh(PW-14) was 
rightly discarded by the High Court.  
23. The presence of the other two eyewitnesses i.e. Raj 
Kumari(PW-7) and Indal Singh(PW-12) at house of Kaptan Singh 

10 
 
at the time of his murder was not disputed by the learned counsel 
for the appellant. 
24. Having gone through the evidence of both the witnesses i.e. , 
Raj Kumari(PW-7) and Indal Singh(PW-12), we also find that 
nothing could be elicited in their cross-examination which creates 
a doubt in the mind of the Court regarding presence of these 
witnesses at the crime scene. 
25. The contention advanced by learned counsel for the appellant 
that these witnesses are partisan witnesses as being closely related 
to the deceased and hence their evidence should be discarded, 
does not for a moment, convince us because in a case involving 
gruesome broad daylight double murder by repeated gun firing, it 
is unlikely that any of the persons from the neighbourhood, would 
have the courage to step forward as witnesses.  Even otherwise, 
Indal Singh(PW-12) himself received injuries in the same incident.  
He has truthfully accepted his role in the incident stating that he 
fired the gun shots which hit two assailants namely, Chutallu @ 
Ram Mohan and Shiv Singh leading to their death.  Hence, clearly 
the prosecution has given thorough explanation for the injuries 
received by persons from the side of the accused. 

11 
 
26. The High Court vide judgment dated 27th July, 2007, in the 
cross case, which was registered against six persons from the 
complainant party including Indal Singh(PW-12) and Ramraj 
Singh(PW-14), acquitted these six persons holding that the 
members of the accused party of the present case were the 
aggressors and that the injuries which resulted into death of 
Chutallu @ Ram Mohan and Shiv Singh were caused by Indal 
Singh(PW-12) and his companions in exercise of their right of 
private defence.  The said finding has not been challenged and has 
thus attained finality. 
27. The trivial contradictions sought to be highlighted by learned 
senior counsel for the appellant regarding absence of empty 
cartridges etc. at the place of incident and the plea of alibi is not 
tenable because we find that these contradictions are far too trivial 
so as to discard the entire prosecution case which is based on 
reliable and trustworthy set of eye witnesses whose evidence is 
corroborated by the evidence of the Medical Jurist and other 
attending circumstances. 
28. The impugned judgments do not suffer from any infirmity 
warranting interference.  Resultantly, the appeal lacks merit and 
is dismissed as such. 

12 
 
29. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
April 16, 2024