2024 INSC 2
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  1  OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 12230 of 2023) 
 
Vashist Narayan Kumar                
 
… Appellant (s) 
 
Versus 
  
The State of Bihar & Ors.  
 
 
... Respondent(s) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
K.V. Viswanathan, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
Vashist Narayan Kumar (the appellant) hails from a 
small village named Dheodha in Bihar.  He belongs to the 
downtrodden segment of the society.  He aspired to become a 
Police Constable and had applied for the said post under the 
reserved category.  Having possessed the eligibility criteria of 
being an intermediate (10+2 pass), he also cleared the written 
examination and the Physical Eligibility Test. 
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2024.01.04
14:03:50 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
3. 
The 
appellant 
submitted 
his 
educational 
certificates/mark sheet as well as his caste certificate for 
document verification.  On 11.06.2018, the final results 
reflected him as having failed.  The only reason was that, while 
in the application form uploaded online, his date of birth was 
shown as 08.12.1997, in the school mark sheet, his date of 
birth was reflected as 18.12.1997.   
4. 
Distraught, the appellant represented and thereafter 
having failed to receive any response, filed a writ petition 
before the High Court.  His explanation was simple and 
straight forward.  He stated in his writ petition that, after 
noticing the advertisement issued by the Central Selection 
Board on 29.07.2017, he from his remote village went to the 
Cyber café at Pakribarawan - a nearby town.  With the 
assistance of a person running the Cyber café, he filled in his 
form and uploaded it online and he received application No. 
7236126 indicating thereby that the online application had 
been duly filled.  His case was that, while filling up the form, 

3 
 
by an inadvertent error, the date of birth had got recorded as 
“08.12.1997” instead of “18.12.1997”.  He derived no benefit 
from it as either way he fulfilled the eligibility criteria and the 
age requirement.  He prayed for the relief in the nature of a 
mandamus to the respondents to consider his claim for 
selection and direct them to issue an appointment letter 
treating the date of birth as 18.12.1997, as reflected in his 
educational certificates.   
5. 
The respondents vehemently opposed the writ petition.  
It was their stand that the advertisement had clearly stipulated 
that candidates should correctly mention their date of birth 
according to their 10th board certificate; that if any discrepancy 
was found while matching the information, the candidature 
would be cancelled; that the candidate should read the 
instructions carefully and if any information is found false or 
wrong, then the application form would be cancelled and legal 
action will also be taken. It was further averred that the 

4 
 
advertisement also mentioned the method of making 
corrections and that the appellant never availed that facility.   
6. 
They contended that out of 9900 vacancies advertised, 
9839 candidates were declared successful.  They submitted 
that 61 vacancies remained unfilled due to non-availability of 
suitable Gorkha candidates.  They prayed for the dismissal of 
the writ petition.   
7. 
The learned Single Judge, after referring to the clauses 
in the advertisement, including the clause providing for 
correction, held that since incorrect information was provided, 
no relief could be given.  The appellant filed a Letters Patent 
Appeal to the Division Bench, which has been dismissed by 
the impugned order.   The Division Bench, while affirming the 
order of the learned Single Judge, additionally recorded a 
finding that the appellant had not sought for quashing of the 
result, as declared on 11.06.2018, on the website. 
8. 
Being aggrieved, the appellant is before us in this 
Appeal.  

5 
 
9. 
We have heard Ms. Shaswati Parhi, learned counsel for 
the appellant and Mr. Azmat Hayat Amanullah, learned 
counsel for the State.  Learned counsels have reiterated their 
respective contentions as advanced in the Courts below.  They 
have also relied on the judgments of this Court and of some 
High Courts, in support of their respective propositions.  
Learned counsels have also filed comprehensive written 
submissions. 
Question for Consideration   
10. The question that arises for consideration is whether the 
error committed in the application form, which was uploaded 
is a material error or a trivial error and was the State justified 
in declaring the appellant as having failed on account of the 
same? 
Discussion 
11. Admittedly, the appellant derived no advantage as even 
if either of the dates were taken, he was eligible; the error also 
had no bearing on the selection and the appellant himself being 

6 
 
oblivious of the error produced the educational certificates 
which reflected his correct date of birth.   
12. The facts are undisputed.  The appellant’s application 
uploaded from the cyber café did mention the date of birth as 
08.12.1997 while his date of birth as recorded in the 
educational certificate was 18.12.1997.  It is also undisputed 
that it is the appellant who produced the educational 
certificates.  He was oblivious of the error that had crept into 
his application form.  It is also undisputed that the 
advertisement had all the clauses setting out that in case the 
information given by the candidates is wrong or misleading,  
the application form was to be rejected and necessary criminal 
action was also to be taken.  It also had a clause that the 
candidates had to fill the correct date of birth, according to 
their 10th board certificate.  The clause further stated that 
candidates will fill their name, father’s name, address etc. 
correctly in the application form.  It states that any 
discrepancy, if found, while checking the documents, the 

7 
 
candidature of the candidate will stand cancelled.  There was 
also a clause providing for correction of wrong/erroneously 
filled application forms, which stated that the errors can be 
corrected once by re-depositing the application fee and filling 
a new application. It also provided that those filling the 
application on the last date could correct the application till the 
following day. 
13. Equally undisputed is the fact that after filling out the 
application, the appellant cleared the written examination and 
the Physical Eligibility Test.  It was also stated in the counter 
affidavit that there were 61 unfilled vacancies though it was 
submitted that it was meant for the Gorkha candidates.    
14. We are not impressed with the argument of the State that 
the error was so grave as to constitute wrong or mis-leading 
information.  We say on the peculiar facts and circumstances 
of this case.   Even the State has not chosen to resort to any 
criminal action, clearly implying that even they did not 

8 
 
consider this error as having fallen foul of the following clause 
in the advertisement:- 
“Instructions to fill online application form are available 
on the website. It is recommended to all the candidates to 
carefully read the instructions before filling the online      
application form and kindly fill the appropriate response in 
the following tabs. In case, the information given by the 
candidates found wrong or misleading, the application 
form will get rejected and necessary criminal actions will 
also be taken against the candidate.” 
  
15. Recently this Bench in Divya vs. Union of India & Ors., 
2023:INSC:900 = 2023 (13) Scale 730, while declining relief 
to candidates who acquired eligibility after the date mentioned 
in the notification carved out a narrow exception.  There, the 
judgment in Ajay Kumar Mishra vs. Union of India & Ors., 
[2016] SCC OnLine Del 6563, a case very similar to the facts 
of the present case, was noted.  In Ajai Kumar Mishra (supra), 
Indira Banerjee, J. (as Her Ladyship then was) speaking for the 
Division Bench of the Delhi High Court in para 9 stated as 
under:- 
9. It is true that whenever any material discrepancy is 
noticed in the application form and/or when any 
suppression and/ or mis-representation is detected, 

9 
 
the candidature might be cancelled even after the 
application has been processed and the candidate has 
been allowed to participate in the selection process. 
However, after a candidate has participated in the 
selection process and cleared all the stages 
successfully, his candidature can only be cancelled, 
after careful scrutiny of the gravity of the lapse, and 
not for trivial omissions or errors.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (emphasis supplied) 
The exception for trivial errors or omissions is for the reason 
that law does not concern itself with trifles.  This principle is 
recognized in the legal maxim - De minimis non curat lex.  
16. Learned counsel for the appellant, in her written 
submissions, cited the following judgments in support of her 
proposition that inadvertent error in filling up the date of birth 
when no advantage is derived will not constitute a wilful mis-
representation and contended that in all those cases reliefs 
were given to the candidates: 
i) 
Arkshit Kapoor vs. Union of India, 2017 SCC OnLine 
Del 10154 [para 20] 

10 
 
ii) 
K. Sangeetha vs. Tamil Nadu Public Service 
Commission (2018) SCC OnLine Mad 5075 [Paras 9 & 
11] 
iii) 
Anuj Pratap Singh vs. Union Public Service 
Commission, 2018 SCC OnLine Del 10982 [Paras 15,16 
& 21] 
iv) 
Shubham Tushir vs. Union of India, 2019 SCC OnLine 
Del 9831 [Paras 4 & 10] 
v) 
Staff Selection Commission & Anr. Vs. Shubham 
Tushir LPA No. 237 of 2020 before the Delhi High 
Court 
vi) 
Poonam Pal vs. M.P. Gramin Bank, (2022) SCC 
OnLine MP 2921 [Paras 9-12] 
17. In fact, in Anuj Pratap Singh (supra), as is clear from para 
14 of the said judgment, the candidate unable to correct the 
error at the first point was forced to repeat it while submitting 
the application for sitting in the main exam since he had no 
other option. The Court accepted the explanation and 

11 
 
condoned the error in the filling up of the column pertaining 
to the date of birth.   
18. The learned counsel for the State drew attention to the 
verification by the appellant, of the details in a printed form 
furnished by the selection board.  He contended that the 
appellant signed the form which carried the date of birth.  First 
of all, the form was a printed form which reflected the date of 
birth as given by the appellant and the appellant signed the 
printed form on 10.03.2018.  We are inclined to accept the 
explanation of the appellant that since the appellant was 
unaware of his own mistake he had mechanically signed the 
printed form. It is only later, on 11.06.2018, on the publication 
of the result that the appellant realized the error.  We do not 
think that the appellant could be penalised for this insignificant 
error which made no difference to the ultimate result.  Errors 
of this kind, as noticed in the present case, which are 
inadvertent do not constitute misrepresentation or wilful 
suppression.    

12 
 
19. In this case, the appellant has participated in the selection 
process and cleared all the stages successfully.  The error in 
the application is trivial which did not play any part in the 
selection process.  The State was not justified in making a 
mountain out of this molehill.  Perhaps the rarefied atmosphere 
of the cybercafe, got the better of the appellant.  He omitted to 
notice the error and even failed to avail the corrective 
mechanism offered.  In the instant case, we cannot turn a 
Nelson’s eye to the ground realities that existed.   In the order 
dated 22.11.2021 in C.A. No. 6983 of 2021 [Prince Jaibir 
Singh vs. Union of India & Ors.], this Court rightly observed 
that though technology is a great enabler, there is at the same 
time, a digital divide.    
20. In one of the cases cited as a precedent in the counter 
affidavit, before the High Court, Pankaj Paswan vs. State of 
Bihar Anr., 2015 SCC On Line Patna 8739, the State had 
taken a defence that many candidates applied in more than one 
place and hence there could be deliberate tweaking in the date 

13 
 
of birth to take advantage of the selection process in more than 
one district or region.  It is very important to notice that there 
is no such plea taken in the present case.  If any such device or 
trick had been adopted, the State would have easily detected 
the same and placed the same before the Court.  The fact that 
the same has not been done shows that there was no trick or 
device resorted to by the appellant.  It is a trivial error which 
appears to be a genuine and bona fide mistake.  It will be unjust 
to penalise the appellant for the same.  
21. Learned counsel for the State, in the written submissions, 
stated that the instructions clearly stipulated that if two or more 
candidates obtain the same marks in the Physical Eligibility 
Test, their relative rank in the final merit list could be 
determined on the basis of their date of birth.  The implication 
in the submission is that the date of birth is a significant aspect.  
On that basis, he submits that the cancellation ought to be 
upheld.  We do not find merit in the submission.  The original 
date of birth, as available is 18.12.1997, in the educational 

14 
 
certificates.  There is no dispute that the appellant’s date of 
birth was, in fact, 18.12.1997.  In view of that, we do not see 
the said clause in the instructions as an impediment for the 
selection of the appellant. 
22. Learned counsel for the State has also, in the written 
submissions, cited the judgment of this Court in Yogesh 
Kumar and Others vs. Govt. of NCT, Delhi and Others, 
(2003) 3 SCC 548.  The said judgment is clearly 
distinguishable.  There the issue was about allowing entry of 
ineligible persons into the selection.  While the eligibility 
prescribed was Teacher’s Training Certificate from a 
recognized institute or intermediate or equivalent from a 
recognized Board/University with an elective subject in the 
required language at the matric level, candidates with B.Ed. 
degree sought appointment as Assistant Teacher.  Negating 
their claim, this Court held that the B.Ed. qualification cannot 
be treated as a qualification higher than the Teacher’s Training 
Certificate,  because the nature of the training imparted for 

15 
 
grant of certificate and for grant of degree was totally different.  
In that context, this Court held that deviating from the rules 
and allowing entry to ineligible persons would deprive many 
others who could have competed for the post.  Yogesh Kumar 
(supra) has no application to the facts of the present case.  
Equally distinguishable are the judgments of the Delhi High 
Court in Rohit Kumar and Another vs. Union of India and 
Others, 2022 SCC OnLine Del 1219 and Pradeep Kumar vs. 
Union of India and Others, 2022 SCC OnLine Del 239. 
23. In the case of Rohit Kumar (supra), the undisputed facts, 
as is clear from para 10 of the judgment, was that the candidate 
was declared unsuccessful on two counts, namely, that the 
OBC certificate uploaded by the candidate was not as per the 
format as mentioned in the advertisement and additionally on 
the ground that the date of issuance of the certificate was 
wrongly mentioned in the online application.  
24. In Pradeep Kumar (supra), the identity proof (Aadhaar 
Card) was not uploaded and instead the self photograph of the 

16 
 
candidate has been uploaded.  We find that the said two 
judgments are distinguishable on facts for the reasons set out 
above.  
25. On the peculiar facts of this case, considering the 
background in which the error occurred, we are inclined to set 
aside the cancellation.  We are not impressed with the finding 
of the Division Bench that there was no prayer seeking 
quashment of the results declared over the web.  A reading of 
the prayer clause in the writ petition indicates that the 
appellant did pray for a mandamus directing the respondents 
to consider the candidature treating his date of birth as 
18.12.1997 and also sought for a direction for issuance of an 
appointment letter.  A Writ Court has the power to mould the 
relief.  Justice cannot be forsaken on the altar of technicalities. 
Conclusion 
26. For the reasons stated above, we set aside the judgment 
of the Division Bench of the Patna High Court in LPA No. 
1271 of 2019 dated 22.08.2022 and direct the respondent-State 

17 
 
to treat the appellant as a candidate who has “passed”, in the 
selection process held under the advertisement No. 1 of 2017 
issued 
by 
the 
Central 
Selection 
Board 
(Constable 
Recruitment), Patna with the date of birth as 18.12.1997.  We 
further direct that if the appellant is otherwise not disqualified, 
the case of the appellant be considered and necessary 
appointment letter issued.  We further direct that, in the event 
of there being no vacancy, appointment letter will still have to 
be issued on the special facts of this case.  We make the said 
direction, in exercise of powers under Article 142 of the 
Constitution of India.  We further direct that the State will be 
at liberty in that event to adjust the vacancy in the next 
recruitment that they may resort to in the coming years.  We 
notice from the written submissions of the State that 21,391 
vacancies have been notified in Advertisement No.1 of 2023 
and it is stated that the procedure for selection is ongoing. We 
place the said statement on record.  We direct compliance to 

18 
 
be made of the aforesaid direction within a period of four 
weeks from today.   
27. The appeal is allowed in the above terms. No order as to 
costs. 
 
 
 
 
 
…..…………………J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(J.K. Maheshwari) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
…..…………………J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(K.V. Viswanathan) 
New Delhi; 
January 02, 2024.