2024 INSC 310
 
1
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.           OF 2024 
[Arising out of SLP (C) No. 6937 of 2021] 
 
 
THE STATE OF TELANGANA & ORS. 
 
 
 … APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
MOHD. ABDUL QASIM (DIED) PER LRS. 
        … RESPONDENT(S)
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
M. M. Sundresh, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The statement made by the Tribal Chief Seattle, way back in the year 1854, in 
his letter to the offer of George Washington, the former First President of the 
United States of America, to buy their land, is a pearl of wisdom not 
understood by the ignorant, educated modern mind. 
“Every part of the earth is sacred to my people. Every shining pine needle, 
every sandy shore, every mist in the dark woods, every meadow, every 
humming insect. All are holy in the memory and experience of my people. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
This we know: the earth does not belong to man; man belongs to the earth. 
All things are connected like the blood that unites us all. Man did not weave 
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2024.04.18
14:29:09 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
2
the web of life; he is merely a strand in it. Whatever he does to the web, he 
does to himself.” 
 
3. 
A well merited judgment, passed in A.S. No. 145 of 1994 by the High Court 
of Judicature at Hyderabad for the State of Telangana and the State of Andhra 
Pradesh, decided on a conscious consideration of the issues raised before it, 
confirming the one rendered by the Trial Court, was reviewed like an 
Appellate Court, based upon the materials that emanated after its filing, at the 
instance of a party defendant in whose favour a decree was granted and that 
too by acting without the requisite jurisdiction, is under challenge in this 
appeal. 
4. 
We are dealing with a case where an instrumentality of the State, despite a 
categorical finding of the suit property being a forest land, took different 
stands, but finally rectified by way of an affidavit before this Court. This act 
of taking different stands resulted in facilitating the impugned order being 
passed in favour of the respondents, setting aside the concurrent judgments 
rendered by two courts below, on appreciation of fact and law. 
5. 
Heard Learned Additional Solicitor General Ms. Aishwarya Bhati for 
Appellants and Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Mr. L 
Narsimha Reddy for Respondents, perused the entire record, including the 
affidavits filed.  
 

 
3
 
THE ANDHRA PRADESH FOREST ACT, 1967 
6. 
The Andhra Pradesh Forest Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as “the A.P. 
Forest Act”) has been enacted with a laudable objective of conserving, 
protecting and extending the forest cover, with a sound mechanism to deal 
with all the disputes arising thereunder while declaring land as reserved forest. 
“As this Act is only a Consolidating Act, it is necessary that the 
objects and reasons of the Madras Act are incorporated so that the objects 
and reasons for this Act can as well be known. The Objects and Reasons of 
the Madras Act were published in Fort St. George Gazette Extraordinary, 
dated 06th July 1882 at page 17 as follows: 
Statement of Objects and Reasons: This Act is designed to supply 
the want which had long been felt of legislative enactment to enable 
Government to carry out effectually the conservancy of forests of the 
Presidency, and to systematic and regulate the action of the Forest 
Department. 
The first necessity is to provide for the constitution of the more 
important forests as State Reserves, and either to clear them under 
arrangement for due compensation of private rights which mitigate 
against forest conservancy, or to ascertain and define such rights so that 
future extension of them and fresh encroachments shall be impossible. 
To this end, the Act enables Government to empower officers to be 
called Forest Settlement officers to enquire into and to commit on 
record all private rights in areas to be elected for constitution as 
reserved forests. From the decisions of the officers appeal will lie, in the 
case of claims involving proprietary rights, to the District Courts, in the 
case of rights of way, and of rights to pasture to forest produce, or to 
the use of water to the Collector or other Revenue Officer of not less 
than such standing. When the enquiry is completed and all claims 
disposed of and settled, the forest will be declared by the Government 
to be reserved, and thereafter no fresh rights can accrue therein. The 
Bill also contains such provisions as are necessary for the protection of 
forests declared reserved…” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
 

 
4
Section 2 of the A.P. Forest Act 
“2. Definitions:- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires- 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
(f) ‘forest officer’ means any person appointed by the Government or by any 
officer empowered by the government in this behalf,- 
[(i) to be the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Special Principal Chief 
Conservator of Forests, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, 
Chief Conservator of Forests, Conservator, Deputy Conservator, Assistant 
Conservator, Divisional Forest Officer, Sub-Divisional Forest Officer, 
Ranger, Deputy Ranger, Forester or Forest Section Officer, Forest Guard or 
Forest Beat Officer, Assistant Beat Officer, Thanadar, Checking Officer or 
Plantation Watcher or any other person or authority as may be notified;] 
(ii) to perform any function of a forest officer under this Act or any rule or 
order made thereunder; 
but does not include a Forest Settlement Officer appointed under Clause (c) 
of sub-section (1) of Section 4;” 
Section 4 of the A.P. Forest Act 
“4. 
Notification by Government:- (1) Whenever it is proposed to 
constitute any land as a reserved forest, the Government shall publish a 
notification in the Andhra Pradesh Gazette and in the District Gazette 
concerned in any; 
(a) specifying, as nearly as possible, the situation and limits of such land; 
(b) declaring that it is proposed to constitute such land as reserved forest; 
(c)  appointing a Forest Settlement Officer to consider the objections, if any, 
against the declaration under Clause (b) and to enquire into and determine 
the existence, nature and extent of any rights claimed by, or alleged to exist 
in favour of, any person in or over any land comprised within such limits, or 
to any forest produce of such land, and to deal with the same as provided in 
this Chapter. 
Explanation:- (1) For the purpose of Clause (a), it shall be sufficient to 
describe the limits of the land by any well-known or readily intelligible 
boundaries, such as roads, rivers, bridges and the like. 
(2) A person appointed to be a Forest Settlement Officer under Clause (c) of 
sub-section (1) shall be an officer of the Revenue Department not below the 
rank of a Revenue Divisional Officer. 

 
5
(3) Any forest officer may represent the Forest Department at the inquiry 
conducted under this Chapter.” 
Section 7 of the A.P. Forest Act 
“7. Bar of accrual of fresh rights and prohibition of clearings:- (1) During 
the interval between the publication of a notification in the Andhra Pradesh 
Gazette under Section 4 and the date fixed by the notification under Section 
15- 
(a) no right shall be acquired by any person in or over the land included 
in the notification under Sec. 4 except by succession or under a grant or 
contract in writing made or entered into by or on behalf of the 
Government or any person in whom such right was vested before the 
publication of the notification under Section 4; 
(b) no new house shall be built or plantation formed, no fresh clearing 
for cultivation or for any other purpose shall be made, on such land and 
no tress shall be cut from such land for the purpose of trade or 
manufacture; 
Provided that nothing shall prohibit the doing of any act specified in this 
clause with the permission in writing of the Forest Settlement Officer; 
and  
(c) no person shall set fire or kindle or leave burning any fire in such 
manner as to endanger or damage such land or forest produce. 
(2) No patta in such land shall be granted by or on behalf of the 
Government.” 
Section 8 of the A.P. Forest Act 
“8. Inquiry by Forest Settlement Officer:- (1) The Forest Settlement 
Officer shall consider every objection and inquire into every claim made 
under Section 6, after recording in writing the statements made or evidence 
given in pursuance of the proclamation published or notice served under that 
section.  He shall record any representation which the forest officer, if any, 
representing the Forest Department under sub-section (3) of Section 4, may 
make in respect of any such objection or claim.  
(2) The evidence under sub-section (1) shall be recorded in the manner 
provided by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in appealable cases.” 
 
 
 

 
6
Section 9 of the A.P. Forest Act 
“9. Powers of Forest Settlement Officer:- For the purpose of an inquiry 
under Section 8, the Forest Settlement Officer may exercise the following 
powers, namely: 
(a) power to enter by himself or to authorise any officer to enter upon any 
land and to survey, demarcate and make a map of the land; and 
(b) the powers conferred on a Civil Court by the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, for summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath and requiring the production of any document or 
other article.” 
Section 10 of the A.P. Forest Act 
“10. Claims to certain rights:- (1) Where the claims relate to a right in or 
over any land other than the following rights:- 
(a) a right of way; 
(b) a right to water-course, or to use of water; 
(c) a right of pasture; or 
(d) a right to forest produce; 
the Forest Settlement Officer shall, after considering the particulars of such 
claim, and the objections of the forest officer, if any, pass, an order, admitting 
or rejecting the same wholly or in part after recording the reasons therefor. 
 (2)(a) If any claim is admitted wholly or in part under sub-section (1), the 
Forest Settlement Officer may:- 
(i) accept the voluntary surrender of the right by the claimant or 
determine the amount of compensation payable for the surrender of 
the right of the claimant, as the case may be; or  
(ii) direct the exclusion of the land from the limits of the proposed 
forest: or  
(iii) acquire such land in the manner provided by the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter in this sub-section referred to as 
the said Act). 
(b) For the purpose of acquiring such land:- 
(i) the acquisition shall be deemed to be for a public purpose; and the 
notification under Section 4 shall be deemed to be a notification 
under sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the said Act; 

 
7
(ii) the Forest Settlement Officer shall be deemed to be a Collector 
under the said Act, and the claimant shall be deemed to be a person 
interested and appearing before him in pursuance of a notice given 
under Section 9 of the said Act; 
(iii) the provisions of Sections 5-A, 6,7 and 8 of the said Act shall 
not be applicable; and  
(iv) the Forest Settlement Officer with the consent of the claimant, 
or the Court as defined in the said Act-with the consent of the 
claimant and of the Government may, instead of money 
compensation, award compensation by the grant of any other land in 
exchange, by the grant of any right in or over land or partly by the 
grant of any land of any right therein and partly by the payment of 
money.” 
Section 13 of the A.P. Forest Act 
“13. Appeals from the orders of Forest Settlement Officer:- (1) Where a 
claim is rejected wholly or in part, the claimant may, within ninety days from 
the date of the order under sub-section (1) of Section 10 and within sixty 
days from the date of the order under sub-section (1) of Section 11, prefer an 
appeal to the District Court having jurisdiction in respect of such rejection 
only. 
(2) Where a claim is admitted under Section 10 or Section 11 in the first 
instance wholly or in part and where such claim does not relate to the 
acquisition of any land under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, a like appeal, 
subject to the same period of limitation and subject to the same conditions, 
may be preferred to the District Court having jurisdiction on behalf of the 
Government by the forest officer or other person, generally or specially 
empowered by the Government in this behalf. 
(3)  Every order passed on appeal under this section shall be final. 
(4) Where the District Court, on appeal, decides that the claim or such part 
thereof as has been rejected should be admitted, the Forest Settlement 
Officer shall proceed to deal with it in like manner as if it has been in the 
first instance admitted by himself.” 
 
 
 
 

 
8
Section 15 of the A.P. Forest Act 
“15. Notification declaring Forest reserved:- (1) Upon the occurrence of 
the following events namely:- 
(a) the period fixed under Section 6 for preferring of an objection or 
a claim had elapsed, and every objection or claim made under that 
section was disposed of by the Forest Settlement Officer; and 
(b) in any such claim was made, the period limited by Section 13 for 
preferring an appeal from the order passed on such claim had 
elapsed, and every appeal presented within such period was disposed 
of by the appellate authority; and 
(c) all proceedings mentioned in Section 10 were taken and all lands, 
if any, to be included in the proposed forest, which the Forest 
Settlement Officer had, under Section 10, elected to acquire under 
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, had become vested in the 
Government under Section 16 of that Act; 
the Government may publish a notification specifying definitely according 
to the boundary marks erected or otherwise, the limits of the forest which it 
is intended to reserve and declaring the same to be reserved from a date to 
be fixed by such notification and from the date so fixed, such forest shall be 
deemed to be a reserved forest. 
(2) Copies of the notification shall also be published in the District Gazette, 
if any, and in the manner provided for the proclamation under Section 6.” 
Section 16 of the A.P. Forest Act 
“16. Extinction of rights not claimed:- Rights in respect of which no claim 
was preferred under Section 6 within the period fixed under that section shall 
stand extinguished on the publication of the notification under Section 15 
unless, before the publication of such notification the person claiming them 
has convinced the Forest Settlement Officer that he had sufficient cause for 
not preferring such claim within that period in which case the Forest 
Settlement Officer shall proceed to dispose of the claim in the manner herein 
before provided.” 
 
7.  Section 2 of the A.P. Forest Act, defines a “Forest Officer”, to mean a vast 
category of officers.  Such a forest officer is appointed to perform any function 
of a forest officer under the A.P. Forest Act, or any rule or order made 

 
9
thereunder. Clause (f) of Section 2 clarifies that such Forest Officer does not 
include a Forest Settlement Officer appointed under Clause (c) of sub-section 
(1) of Section 4, thus, making a distinction between a Forest Officer and a 
Forest Settlement Officer.  
8. Under Section 4(2) of the A.P. Forest Act, a Forest Settlement Officer shall be 
an officer of the Revenue Department not below the rank of a Revenue 
Divisional Officer. Wide powers have been conferred upon the State 
Government to declare any land as a reserved forest, subject to due compliance 
of the other provisions. This has to be done by a notification published in 
Andhra Pradesh Gazette and District Gazette under Section 4(1), by declaring 
its intention through a proposal. 
9. The legislature consciously did not confer any role on an officer working under 
the forest department, by specifically naming an officer of the revenue 
department with his designation for determining qualification, as Forest 
Settlement Officer. Such an officer has to exercise quasi-judicial power.  
10. After the commencement of proceedings under Section 4 of the A.P. Forest 
Act, even the Government is restrained from issuing any patta to any 
individual, for the reason that all disputes would have to be adjudicated under 
the Act, be it one of title under Section 10 or any other limited right as 
prescribed under Section 11 of the A.P. Forest Act. Under Sections 8 and 9 of 

 
10
the A.P. Forest Act, the Forest Settlement Officer has been conferred with 
powers of the civil court, as available under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(hereinafter referred to as “the CPC 1908”), for the aforesaid purpose. While 
exercising power, the Forest Settlement Officer may even admit the claim 
wholly or in part under Section 10(2) by excluding any extent of land which is 
in dispute. 
11. As per Section 13 of the A.P. Forest Act, an appeal lies before the District Court 
having territorial jurisdiction, which is to be filed within a period of 90 days 
from the date of the order passed under Section 10 by the Forest Settlement 
Officer. Thus, anyone who claims a right of ownership under Section 10 or any 
other limited right as illustrated under Section 11, has to seek an adjudication 
of his claim before the Forest Settlement Officer. If aggrieved, the remedy lies 
before the jurisdictional District Court, subject to the limitation as prescribed 
under Section 13. 
12. After completion of the said exercise, the State Government would declare the 
proposed land as a reserved forest by issuing a notification under Section 15 of 
the A.P. Forest Act. Thereafter, the vesting of the land takes place by way of a 
deeming fiction i.e., giving the land the status of a reserved forest. Any right 
not claimed with respect to the land, shall stand extinguished after the 

 
11
publication under Section 15 as declared expressly under Section 16, by way 
of a reinforcement. 
13. From the abovementioned provisions and their interpretation, it is very clear 
that the completion of the process as prescribed under Section 15 of the A.P. 
Forest Act would result in changing the character of land, including a forest 
land into a reserved forest.  Thereafter, there shall be no question of raising 
any dispute on its character. The period of limitation mentioned under Section 
13 of the A.P. Forest Act cannot be breached, though one might raise an 
objection with respect to its commencement. 
SCOPE OF REVIEW 
14. We shall start our discussion with the statement of law rendered by Justice V.R. 
Krishna Iyer. 
Northern India Caterers (India) Ltd. v. Lt. Governor of Delhi, (1980) 2 
SCC 167, 
“14. A plea for review, unless the first judicial view is manifestly distorted, 
is like asking for the moon. A forensic defeat cannot be avenged by an 
invitation to have a second look, hopeful of discovery of flaws and reversal 
of result…”  
 
15. The legislature, in its wisdom, has chosen to restrict the scope of review from 
time to time. To indicate this legislative shift, Section 376 and 378 of the Code 
of Civil Procedure 1859 (hereinafter referred to as “the CPC 1859”), Section 

 
12
623 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1877 (hereinafter referred to as “the CPC 
1877”), Section 114 and Order XLVII Rule 1 of  the CPC 1908 are 
reproduced herein below, 
Section 376 of the CPC 1859 
“376 - Review of Judgement on discovery of new evidence: Any person 
considering himself aggrieved by a decree of a Court of original jurisdiction, 
from which no appeal shall have been preferred to a Superior Court - or by 
a decree of a District Court in appeal from which no special appeal shall have 
been admitted by the Sudder Court - or by a decree of the Sudder Court from 
which either no appeal may have been preferred to Her Majesty in Council, 
or an appeal having been preferred no proceedings in the suit have been 
transmitted to Her Majesty in Council - and who from the discovery of new 
matter or evidence which was not within his knowledge, or could not be 
adduced by him at the time when such decree was passed, or from any 
other good and sufficient reason, may be desirous of obtaining a review of 
the judgement passed against him – may apply for a review of judgement by 
the Court which passed the decree.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Section 378 of the CPC 1859 
“378 - The order of the Court for granting or refusing the review is final: 
If the Court shall be of opinion that there are not any sufficient grounds for 
a review, it shall reject the application, but if it shall be of opinion that the 
review desired is necessary to correct an evident error or omission or is 
otherwise requisite for the ends of justice, the Court shall grant the review, 
and its order in either case, whether for rejecting the application or granting 
the review, shall be final. Provided that no review of judgement shall be 
granted without previous notice to the opposite party to enable him to appear 
and be heard in support of the decree of which a review is solicited.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 

 
13
16. Section 376 of the CPC 1859 provided a larger playing field to the court while 
dealing with an application to review. However, under Section 378 of the CPC 
1859, a finality was sought to be given to the order of the court. 
Section 623 of the CPC 1877 
“623. Application for review of judgement: Any person considering 
himself aggrieved 
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is hereby allowed, but from 
which no appeal has been preferred; 
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is hereby allowed; or 
(c) by a judgement on a reference from a Court of Small Causes, 
And who from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence 
which, after the exercise of due diligence, was not within his knowledge 
or could not be produced by him at the time when the decree was passed 
or order made, or on account of some mistake or error apparent on the 
face of the record, or for any other sufficient reason, desires to obtain a 
review of the decree passed or order made against him,  
may apply for a review of judgement to the Court which passed the decree 
or made the order, or to the Court, if any, to which the business of the former 
Court has been transferred.  
A party who is not appealing from a decree may apply for a review of 
judgement notwithstanding the pendency of an appeal by some other party, 
except when the ground of such appeal is common to the applicant and the 
appellant, or when, being a respondent, he can present to the appellate Court 
the case on which he applies for the review.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
17. Thus, taking note of the existence of a larger power to review, the legislature 
brought forth a change by adding the words “after the exercise of due 
diligence”. Additionally, the words “on account of some mistake or error 

 
14
apparent on the face of the record” were also added. This conscious inclusion 
clearly restricts the power of review.  
Section 114 of the CPC 1908 
“114. Review.—Subject as aforesaid, any person considering himself 
aggrieved,— 
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed by this Code, but 
from which no appeal has been preferred, 
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed by this Code, or 
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes, may apply for 
a review of judgment to the Court which passed the decree or made the order, 
and the Court may make such order thereon as it thinks fit.” 
 
Order XLVII Rule 1 of the CPC 1908 
“1. Application for review of judgment.—(1) Any person considering 
himself aggrieved— 
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed, but from 
which no appeal has been preferred, 
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed, or 
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes, 
and who, from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence 
which, after the exercise of due diligence was not within his knowledge 
or could not be produced by him at the time when the decree was passed 
or order made, or on account of some mistake or error apparent on the 
face of the record, or for any other sufficient reason, desires to obtain a 
review of the decree passed or order made against him, may apply for a 
review of judgment of the Court which passed the decree or made the order. 

 
15
(2) A party who is not appealing from a decree or order may apply for a 
review of judgment notwithstanding the pendency of an appeal by some 
other party except where the ground of such appeal is common to the 
applicant and the appellant, or when, being respondent, he can present to the 
Appellate Court the case on which he applies for the review. 
[Explanation.—The fact that the decision on a question of law on which the 
judgment of the Court is based has been reversed or modified by the 
subsequent decision of a Superior Court in any other case, shall not be a 
ground for the review of such judgment.]” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
18. Section 114 read with Order XLVII Rule 1 of the CPC 1908 is verbatim 
similar to Section 623 of the CPC 1877, except for the Explanation to Order 
XLVII Rule 1 which was added by way of an Amendment in the year 1976. 
Section 114 of the CPC 1908 speaks of the circumstances, instances and 
situations under which a review can be filed. The words “as it thinks fit” 
cannot be interpreted to mean anything beyond what is conferred under Order 
XLVII Rule 1.  In other words, Section 114 has to be read along with Order 
XLVII Rule 1.  While they are to be read together, Section 114 is more 
procedural, whereas Order XLVII Rule 1 is substantially substantive. 
19. The words “due diligence”, though one of fact, places onus heavily on the one 
who seeks a review. It has to be seen from the point of view of a reasonable 
and prudent man. Though an element of flexibility is given to any evidence or 
matter on its discovery, it has to be one which was not available to the court 

 
16
earlier.  It could not have been produced despite due diligence, meaning 
thereby that it should have been available and, therefore, in existence at least 
at the time of passing the decree. 
20. Mistake or error apparent on the face of record would debar the court from 
acting as an appellate court in disguise, by indulging in a re-hearing.  A 
decision, however erroneous, can never be a factor for review, but can only 
be corrected in appeal. Such a mistake or error should be self-evident on the 
face of record. The error should be grave enough to be identified on a mere 
cursory look, and an omission so glaring that it requires interference in the 
form of a review. Being a creature of the statute, there is absolutely no room 
for a fresh hearing. The court has got no role to involve itself in the process 
of adjudication for a second time. Instead, it has to merely examine the 
existence of an apparent mistake or error. Even when two views are possible, 
the court shall not indulge itself by going into the merits. 
21. The material produced, at this stage, should be of such pristine quality which, 
if taken into consideration, would have the logical effect of reversing the 
judgment. Order XLVII Rule 1 of the CPC, 1908 indicates that power of 
review can be exercised by courts, in three different situations, but these 
occasions ought to be read in an analogous manner. In other words, they 
should be read in a manner to mean that a restrictive power has been conferred 

 
17
upon the court. As stated, the words “for any other sufficient reason” ought to 
be read in conjunction with the earlier two categories reiterating the scope. 
Being a judicial discretion, it has to be exercised with circumspection and on 
rare occasions. It is a power to be exercised by way of an exception, subject 
to the rigours of the provision. 
22. A subsequent event per se cannot form the basis of a review. Sub-clause (c) 
of Order XLVII Rule 1 of the CPC 1908, clearly specifies that the important 
matter or evidence produced must have been available at the time when the 
decree was passed. This is a matter of rule. On a very rare occasion, an 
exception can be carved out. Such an exception can only be exercised when 
the said matter or evidence is of unimpeachable quality. It is not only a new 
matter or evidence that should be taken into consideration, but it should also 
be an important one. 
23. While exercising the said power, the court has to first check the evidentiary 
value of such discovery, including the circumstances under which it 
emanated, particularly when it inherently lacks jurisdiction or the evidence 
cannot be made admissible in law and therefore, is not relevant. In such a 
circumstance, there is no question of proceeding further in deciding the review 
application. 
 

 
18
PRECEDENTS 
24. Now, we shall place on record decisions rendered by this Court on the above 
principle of law discussed by us, 
Power of Review is not to be confused with Powers of Appellate Court in 
Appeal Jurisdiction. 
 Aribam Tuleshwar Sharma v. Aribam Pishak Sharma and others, 
(1979) 4 SCC 389 
“3. The Judicial Commissioner gave two reasons for reviewing his 
predecessor's order. The first was that his predecessor had overlooked two 
important documents Exs. A/1 and A/3 which showed that the respondents 
were in possession of the sites even in the year 1948-49 and that the grants 
must have been made even by then. The second was that there was a patent 
illegality in permitting the appellant to question, in a single writ petition, 
settlement made in favour of different respondents. We are afraid that neither 
of the reasons mentioned by the learned Judicial Commissioner constitutes 
a ground for review. It is true as observed by this Court in Shivdeo 
Singh v. State of Punjab [AIR 1963 SC 1909] there is nothing in Article 226 
of the Constitution to preclude a High Court from exercising the power of 
review which inheres in every court of plenary jurisdiction to prevent 
miscarriage of justice or to correct grave and palpable errors committed by 
it. But, there are definitive limits to the exercise of the power of review. 
The power of review may be exercised on the discovery of new and 
important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence 
was not within the knowledge of the person seeking the review or could 
not be produced by him at the time when the order was made; it may be 
exercised where some mistake or error apparent on the face of the 
record is found; it may also be exercised on any analogous ground. But, 
it may not be exercised on the ground that the decision was erroneous 
on merits. That would be the province of a court of appeal. A power of 
review is not to be confused with appellate powers which may enable an 
appellate Court to correct all manner of errors committed by the 
subordinate Court.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 

 
19
 
Error Apparent on the Face of Record 
 Northern India Caterers (India) Ltd. v. Lt. Governor of Delhi, (1980) 2 
SCC 167  
“8. It is well-settled that a party is not entitled to seek a review of a 
judgment delivered by this Court merely for the purpose of a rehearing 
and a fresh decision of the case. The normal principle is that a judgment 
pronounced by the Court is final, and departure from that principle is 
justified only when circumstances of a substantial and compelling 
character make it necessary to do so: Sajjan Singh v. State of 
Rajasthan [AIR 1965 SC 845 : (1965) 1 SCR 933, 948 : (1965) 1 SCJ 377] 
. For instance, if the attention of the Court is not drawn to a material statutory 
provision during the original hearing, the Court will review its 
judgment: G.L. Gupta v. D.N. Mehta [(1971) 3 SCC 189 : 1971 SCC (Cri) 
279 : (1971) 3 SCR 748, 750] . The Court may also reopen its judgment if a 
manifest wrong has been done and it is necessary to pass an order to do full 
and effective justice: O.N. Mohindroo v. Distt. Judge, Delhi [(1971) 3 SCC 
5 : (1971) 2 SCR 11, 27] . Power to review its judgments has been conferred 
on the Supreme Court by Article 137 of the Constitution, and that power is 
subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament or the rules made 
under Article 145. In a civil proceeding, an application for review is 
entertained only on a ground mentioned in Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, and in a criminal proceeding on the ground of an error 
apparent on the face of the record (Order XL Rule 1, Supreme Court Rules, 
1966). But whatever the nature of the proceeding, it is beyond dispute 
that a review proceeding cannot be equated with the original hearing of 
the case, and the finality of the judgment delivered by the Court will not 
be reconsidered except “where a glaring omission or patent mistake or 
like grave error has crept in earlier by judicial fallibility”: Sow Chandra 
Kante v. Sheikh Habib [(1975) 1 SCC 674 : 1975 SCC (Tax) 200 : (1975) 
3 SCR 933] . 
9. Now, besides the fact that most of the legal material so assiduously 
collected and placed before us by the learned Additional Solicitor - General, 
who has now been entrusted to appear for the respondent, was never brought 
to our attention when the appeals were heard, we may also examine whether 
the judgment suffers from an error apparent on the face of the record. Such 
an error exists if of two or more views canvassed on the point it is 
possible to hold that the controversy can be said to admit of only one of 
them. If the view adopted by the Court in the original judgment is a 

 
20
possible view having regard to what the record states, it is difficult to 
hold that there is an error apparent on the face of the record.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 Parsion Devi v. Sumitri Devi, (1997) 8 SCC 715  
“9. Under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC a judgment may be open to review inter 
alia if there is a mistake or an error apparent on the face of the record. 
An error which is not self-evident and has to be detected by a process of 
reasoning, can hardly be said to be an error apparent on the face of the 
record justifying the court to exercise its power of review under Order 
47 Rule 1 CPC. In exercise of the jurisdiction under Order 47 Rule 1 
CPC it is not permissible for an erroneous decision to be “reheard and 
corrected”. A review petition, it must be remembered has a limited 
purpose and cannot be allowed to be “an appeal in disguise”. 
 
10. Considered in the light of this settled position we find that Sharma, J. 
clearly overstepped the jurisdiction vested in the Court under Order 47 Rule 
1 CPC. The observations of Sharma, J. that “accordingly, the order in 
question is reviewed and it is held that the decree in question was of 
composite nature wherein both mandatory and prohibitory injunctions were 
provided” and as such the case was covered by Article 182 and not Article 
181 cannot be said to fall within the scope of Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. There 
is a clear distinction between an erroneous decision and an error 
apparent on the face of the record. While the first can be corrected by the 
higher forum, the latter only can be corrected by exercise of the review 
jurisdiction. While passing the impugned order, Sharma, J. found the order 
in Civil Revision dated 25-4-1989 as an erroneous decision, though without 
saying so in so many words. Indeed, while passing the impugned order 
Sharma, J. did record that there was a mistake or an error apparent on the 
face of the record which was not of such a nature, “which had to be detected 
by a long-drawn process of reasons” and proceeded to set at naught the order 
of Gupta, J. However, mechanical use of statutorily sanctified phrases cannot 
detract from the real import of the order passed in exercise of the review 
jurisdiction. Recourse to review petition in the facts and circumstances of 
the case was not permissible. The aggrieved judgment-debtors could have 
approached the higher forum through appropriate proceedings to assail the 
order of Gupta, J. and get it set aside but it was not open to them to seek a 
“review” of the order of Gupta, J. on the grounds detailed in the review 
petition. In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the impugned 

 
21
order of Sharma, J. cannot be sustained and we accordingly accept this 
appeal and set aside the impugned order dated 6-3-1997.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
Meaning of the Words ‘for any other sufficient reason’ in Order XLVII 
Rule 1 of the CPC 1908 
 Chhajju Ram v. Neki, 1922 SCC OnLine PC 11  
“…It will be observed that the question with which their Lordships have 
to deal is one concerned not with appeal to a Court of Appeal, but with 
review by the Court which had already disposed of the case. In England 
it is only under strictly limited circumstances that an application for 
such a review can be entertained. In India, however, provision has for 
long past been made by legislation for review in addition to appeal. But 
as the right is the creation of Indian statue law, it is necessary to see what 
such statutory law really allows. The law applicable to the present case 
is laid down by O. 47, R. 1, of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. This 
Rule is enacted in the following terms:— 
“Any person considering himself aggrieved, (a) by a decree or order 
from which an appeal is allowed, but from which no appeal has, been 
preferred (b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is hereby allowed, 
or (c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes, and who, 
from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the 
exercise of due diligence, was not within his knowledge or could not be 
produced by him at the time when the decree was passed or order made, or 
on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record, or 
for any other sufficient reason, desires to obtain a review of the decree 
passed or order made against him, may apply for a review of judgment to the 
Court which passed the decree or made the order.” 
xxx  
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
If their Lordships felt themselves at liberty to construe the language of 
O. 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 without reference to its 
history and to the decisions upon it, their task would not appear to be a 
difficult one. For it is obvious that the Code contemplates procedure by 
way of review by the Court which has already given judgment as being 
different from that by way of appeal to a Court of Appeal. The three 
cases in which alone mere review is permitted are those of new material 
overlooked by excusable misfortune, mistake or error apparent on the 

 
22
face of the record, or “any other sufficient reason.” The first two 
alternatives do not apply in the present case, and the expression 
“sufficient,” if this were all, would naturally be read as meaning 
sufficiency of a kind analogous to the two already specified, that is to 
say, to excusable failure to bring to the notice of the Court new and 
important matters, or error on the face of the record. But before adopting 
this restricted construction of the expression “sufficient,” it is necessary to 
have in mind, in the first place, that the provision as to review was not 
introduced into the Code for the first time in 1908, but appears there as a 
modification of previous provision made in earlier legislation : and, in the 
second place, that the extent of the power of a Court in India to review its 
own decree under successive forms of legislative provision has been the 
subject of a good deal of judicial interpretation, not, however, in all cases 
harmonious. That the power given by the Indian Code is different from the 
very restricted power which exists in England appears plain from the 
decision in Charles Bright and Co. v. Seller [[1904] 1 K.B. 6.] , where the 
Court of Appeal discussed the history of the procedure in England and 
explained its limits. 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
Their Lordships have examined numerous authorities, and they have 
found much conflict of judicial opinion on the point referred to. There 
is plainly no such preponderance of view in either direction as to render 
it clear that there is any settled course of decision which they are under 
obligation to follow. Some of the decisions in the earlier cases may have 
been influenced by the wider form of expression then in force, and these 
decisions may have had weight with the learned Judges who, in cases 
turning on the subsequent Code, had regarded the intention of the 
legislature as remaining unaltered. But their Lordships are unable to 
assume that the language used in the Codes of 1877 and 1908 is intended 
to leave open the questions which were raised on the language used in 
the earlier legislation. They think that R. 1 of O. 47 must be read as in 
itself definitive of the limits within which review is to-day permitted, and 
that reference to practice under former and different statutes is 
misleading. So construing it they interpret the words “any other 
sufficient reason” as meaning a reason sufficient on grounds at least 
analogous to those specified immediately previously. Such an 
interpretation excludes from the power of review conferred the course taken 
by the second and third Division Bench, composed of Wilberforce, J., and 
Scott Smith, J., and by Wilberforce, J., and LeRossignol, J., respectively. 
The result is that the judgments given by these two Division Benches ought 

 
23
to be set aside, and that of the Bench of the Chief Court composed of Scott 
Smith, J., and Leslie Jones, J., restored, so that the suit will stand dismissed. 
The respondent-plaintiffs must pay the costs here and in the Courts below.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Discovery of New Matter or Evidence 
 State of W.B. v. Kamal Sengupta, (2008) 8 SCC 612  
“21. At this stage it is apposite to observe that where a review is sought on 
the ground of discovery of new matter or evidence, such matter or evidence 
must be relevant and must be of such a character that if the same had been 
produced, it might have altered the judgment. In other words, mere discovery 
of new or important matter or evidence is not sufficient ground for review ex 
debito justitiae. Not only this, the party seeking review has also to show that 
such additional matter or evidence was not within its knowledge and even 
after the exercise of due diligence, the same could not be produced before 
the court earlier. 
22. The term “mistake or error apparent” by its very connotation signifies an 
error which is evident per se from the record of the case and does not require 
detailed examination, scrutiny and elucidation either of the facts or the legal 
position. If an error is not self-evident and detection thereof requires long 
debate and process of reasoning, it cannot be treated as an error apparent on 
the face of the record for the purpose of Order 47 Rule 1 CPC or Section 
22(3)(f) of the Act. To put it differently an order or decision or judgment 
cannot be corrected merely because it is erroneous in law or on the ground 
that a different view could have been taken by the court/tribunal on a point 
of fact or law. In any case, while exercising the power of review, the 
court/tribunal concerned cannot sit in appeal over its judgment/decision.” 
 
An Order can be reviewed only on the prescribed grounds mentioned in 
Order XLVII Rule 1 of the CPC 1908 
 Shri Ram Sahu v. Vinod Kumar Rawat, (2021) 13 SCC 1  
“10. To appreciate the scope of review, it would be proper for this Court to 
discuss the object and ambit of Section 114CPC as the same is a substantive 
provision for review when a person considering himself aggrieved either by 

 
24
a decree or by an order of court from which appeal is allowed but no appeal 
is preferred or where there is no provision for appeal against an order and 
decree, may apply for review of the decree or order as the case may be in the 
court, which may order or pass the decree. From the bare reading of 
Section 114CPC, it appears that the said substantive power of review 
under Section 114CPC has not laid down any condition as the condition 
precedent in exercise of power of review nor the said section imposed 
any prohibition on the court for exercising its power to review its 
decision. However, an order can be reviewed by a court only on the 
prescribed grounds mentioned in Order 47 Rule 1CPC, which has been 
elaborately discussed hereinabove. An application for review is more 
restricted than that of an appeal and the court of review has limited 
jurisdiction as to the definite limit mentioned in Order 47 Rule 1CPC 
itself. The powers of review cannot be exercised as an inherent power 
nor can an appellate power be exercised in the guise of power of review.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Evidence cannot be Reappreciated in Review 
 Kerala SEB v. Hitech Electrothermics & Hydropower Ltd., (2005) 6 
SCC 651  
“10. This Court has referred to several documents on record and also 
considered the documentary evidence brought on record. This Court on a 
consideration of the evidence on record concluded that the respondent had 
been denied power supply by the Board in appropriate time which prevented 
the respondent from starting the commercial production by 31-12-1996. This 
is a finding of fact recorded by this Court on the basis of the appreciation of 
evidence produced before the Court. In a review petition it is not open to 
this Court to reappreciate the evidence and reach a different conclusion, 
even if that is possible. Learned counsel for the Board at best sought to 
impress us that the correspondence exchanged between the parties did not 
support the conclusion reached by this Court. We are afraid such a 
submission cannot be permitted to be advanced in a review petition. The 
appreciation of evidence on record is fully within the domain of the 
appellate court. If on appreciation of the evidence produced, the court 
records a finding of fact and reaches a conclusion, that conclusion 
cannot be assailed in a review petition unless it is shown that there is an 
error apparent on the face of the record or for some reason akin thereto. 
It has not been contended before us that there is any error apparent on the 

 
25
face of the record. To permit the review petitioner to argue on a question 
of appreciation of evidence would amount to converting a review 
petition into an appeal in disguise.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
UNDERSTANDING OF THE FOREST: A CONSTITUTIONAL 
PERSPECTIVE 
 
25. Article 48A of the Constitution of India, 1950 imposes a clear mandate upon 
the State as a Directive Principle of State Policy, while Article 51A(g) 
correspondingly casts a duty upon a citizen to protect and improve the natural 
environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and to have 
compassion for fellow living creatures. These two provisions qua a forest 
ought to be understood in light of Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution 
of India, 1950. We say so, as they represent the collective conscience of the 
Constitution. If the continued existence and protection of forests is in the 
interest of humanity, various species and nature, then there can be no other 
interpretation than to read the constitutional ethos into these provisions.  
26. Part III and Part IV of the Constitution are like two wheels of a chariot, 
complementing each other in their commitment to a social change and 
development.  They form the core of nation building and a progressive 
society.  
 

 
26
PRECEDENTS 
Relevance of Directive Principles of State Policy 
 Sachidanand Pandey v. State of W.B., (1987) 2 SCC 295 
“4. In India, as elsewhere in the world, uncontrolled growth and the 
consequent environmental deterioration are fast assuming menacing 
proportions and all Indian cities are afflicted with this problem. The once 
Imperial City of Calcutta is no exception. The question raised in the present 
case is whether the Government of West Bengal has shown such lack of 
awareness of the problem of environment in making an allotment of land for 
the construction of a Five Star Hotel at the expense of the zoological garden 
that it warrants interference by this Court? Obviously, if the government is 
alive to the various considerations requiring thought and deliberation and has 
arrived at a conscious decision after taking them into account, it may not be 
for this Court to interfere in the absence of mala fides. On the other hand, if 
relevant considerations are not borne in mind and irrelevant considerations 
influence the decision, the court may interfere in order to prevent a likelihood 
of prejudice to the public. Whenever a problem of ecology is brought 
before the court, the court is bound to bear in mind Article 48-A of the 
Constitution, the Directive Principle which enjoins that “the State shall 
endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the 
forests and wild life of the country”, and Article 51-A(g) which 
proclaims it to be the fundamental duty of every citizen of India “to 
protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, 
rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures”. When 
the court is called upon to give effect to the Directive Principle and the 
fundamental duty, the court is not to shrug its shoulders and say that 
priorities are a matter of policy and so it is a matter for the policy-
making authority. The least that the court may do is to examine whether 
appropriate considerations are borne in mind and irrelevancies 
excluded. In appropriate cases, the court may go further, but how much 
further must depend on the circumstances of the case. The court may 
always give necessary directions. However the court will not attempt to 
nicely balance relevant considerations. When the question involves the 
nice balancing of relevant considerations, the court may feel justified in 
resigning itself to acceptance of the decision of the concerned authority. 
We may now proceed to examine the facts of the present case.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 

 
27
Article 48A and 51A To Be Considered in Light of Article 21 of the 
Constitution of India, 1950 
 M.C. Mehta v. Kamal Nath, (2000) 6 SCC 213  
“8. Apart from the above statutes and the rules made thereunder, Article 48-
A of the Constitution provides that the State shall endeavour to protect and 
improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wildlife of the 
country. One of the fundamental duties of every citizen as set out in Article 
51-A(g) is to protect and improve the natural environment, including forests, 
lakes, rivers and wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures. These 
two articles have to be considered in the light of Article 21 of the 
Constitution which provides that no person shall be deprived of his life 
and liberty except in accordance with the procedure established by law. 
Any disturbance of the basic environment elements, namely air, water 
and soil, which are necessary for “life”, would be hazardous to “life” 
within the meaning of Article 21 of the Constitution. 
9. In the matter of enforcement of rights under Article 21 of the 
Constitution, this Court, besides enforcing the provisions of the Acts 
referred to above, has also given effect to fundamental rights under 
Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution and has held that if those rights 
are violated by disturbing the environment, it can award damages not 
only for the restoration of the ecological balance, but also for the victims 
who have suffered due to that disturbance. In order to protect “life”, in 
order to protect “environment” and in order to protect “air, water and 
soil” from pollution, this Court, through its various judgments has given 
effect to the rights available, to the citizens and persons alike, under 
Article 21 of the Constitution. The judgment for removal of hazardous and 
obnoxious industries from the residential areas, the directions for closure of 
certain hazardous industries, the directions for closure of slaughterhouse and 
its relocation, the various directions issued for the protection of the Ridge 
area in Delhi, the directions for setting up effluent treatment plants to the 
industries located in Delhi, the directions to tanneries etc., are all judgments 
which seek to protect the environment.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Article 48A And 51A Must guide the Interpretation of Laws 
 Pradeep Krishen v. Union of India, (1996) 8 SCC 599  
“15. Now as pointed out earlier, since Parliament had no power to make laws 
for the States except as provided by Articles 249 and 250 of the Constitution, 

 
28
the States were required to pass resolutions under Article 252(1) to enable 
Parliament to enact the law. After as many as 11 States passed resolutions to 
that effect, the Act came to be enacted to provide for the protection of wild 
animals and birds and for matters connected therewith or ancillary or 
incidental thereto. Even Articles 48-A and 51-A(g) inserted in the 
Constitution by the 42nd Amendment oblige the State and the citizen, 
respectively, to protect and improve the natural environment and to 
safeguard the forest and wildlife of the country. The statutory as well as 
the constitutional message is therefore loud and clear and it is this 
message which we must constantly keep in focus while dealing with 
issues and matters concerning the environment and the forest area as 
well as wildlife within those forests. This objective must guide us in 
interpreting the laws dealing with these matters and our interpretation 
must, unless the expression or the context conveys otherwise, subserve 
and advance the aforementioned constitutional objectives. With this 
approach in mind we may now proceed to deal with the contentions urged 
by parties.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
ENVIRONMENT 
Section 2 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
“2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) ‘environment’ includes water, air and land and the inter-relationship 
which exists among and between water, air and land, and human beings, 
other living creatures, plants, micro-organism and property;” 
27. The word “environment” shall not be understood from a narrow perspective.  
Albert Einstein once observed “environment is everything that is not me”. In 
our considered view, the environment would include both animate and 
inanimate. One cannot segregate these two segments, which are broadly 
differentiated only for the ease of human understanding.   
 

 
29
WHY WE NEED FORESTS ? 
“Man is the most insane species. He worships an invisible God 
and destroys a visible Nature, unaware that this Nature he’s 
destroying is this God he’s worshiping.”  
Hubert Reeves. 
Canadian astrophysicist 
 
 
28. Human beings indulge themselves in selective amnesia when it comes to 
fathom the significance of forests.  It is the forests which give life to the Earth 
by replacing carbon dioxide with oxygen, thereby providing a hospitable 
environment for the steady growth of diverse life forms.  It’s the spirit of the 
forest that moves the Earth.  History shall not be understood from the 
jaundiced eyes of humans but through the prism of the environment, the forest 
in particular. 
29. Forests not only provide for and facilitate the sustenance of life, but they also 
continue to protect and foster it. They continue to tackle the ever-increasing 
carbon dioxide emissions produced by humans in the name of development, 
while striving to sustain all species.  Despite the unblemished, selfless and  
motherly service rendered by forests, man in his folly continues with their 
destruction, unmindful of the fact that he is inadvertently destroying himself.  
30. Consequent to the advent of agriculture, man has destroyed a significant 
portion of forests at his own peril. Forests serve the Earth in a myriad of ways 
ranging from regulating carbon emissions, aiding in soil conservation and 

 
30
regulating the water cycle. Water being a life source, its availability for all life 
forms is heavily dependent upon the aquifers created by forests. Forests also 
play a pivotal role in controlling pollution, which significantly affects the 
underprivileged, violating their right to equality under Article 14 of the 
Constitution of India, 1950. It is the vulnerable sections of the society who 
would be most affected by the depletion of forests, considering the fact that 
the more affluent sections of society have better access to resources as 
compared to them. Therefore, the protection of forests is in the interest of 
mankind, even assuming that the other factors can be ignored.  
Municipal Corpn. of Greater Mumbai v. Ankita Sinha, (2022) 13 SCC 
401 
“XI. Environmental Justice and Environmental Equity 
75. The conceptual frameworks of environmental justice and equity should 
merit consideration vis-à-vis NGT's domain and how its functioning and 
decisions can have wide implications in socio-economic dimensions of 
people at large. The concept of environmental justice is a trifecta of 
distributive justice, procedural justice and justice as recognition. [ 
Schlosberg D., Defining Environmental Justice : Theories, Movements, 
and Nature (Oxford University Press 2009).] Environmental equity as a 
developing concept has focused on the disproportionate implications of 
environmental harms on the economically or socially marginalised 
groups. The concerns of human rights and environmental degradation 
overlap under this umbrella term, to highlight the human element, apart 
from economic and environmental ramifications. Environmental equity 
thus stands to ensure a balanced distribution of environmental risks as 
well as protections, including application of sustainable development 
principles. 
76. Voicing concerns about the disproportionate harm for the poor segments, 
Lois J. Schiffer [then Assistant Attorney General, Environment and Natural 
Resources Division (“ENRD”), US Department of Justice] and Timothy J. 
Dowling (then Attorney at ENRD) in their Reflections on the Role of the 

 
31
Courts in Environmental Law, wrote the following evocative passage on the 
concept of environmental justice: 
“Environmental justice, which focuses on whether minorities and low-
income people bear a disproportionate burden of exposure to 
environmental harms and any resulting health effects. In the past ten to 
fifteen years, this issue has crystallized a grass-roots movement that 
combines civil rights issues with environmental issues, with a goal of 
achieving “environmental justice” or “environmental equity”, which is 
understood to mean the fair distribution of environmental risks and 
protection from environmental harms.” [ Schiffer, L.J. & Dowling, T.J. 
(1997), “Reflections on the Role of the Courts in Environmental Law”, 
27(2) Environmental Law 327-342.] 
77. There is also a need to focus on the interconnection between principles 
of procedural justice and distributive justice. The concern is to create a 
system which is affirmative enough to balance the disproportionate wielding 
of power between polluters and affected people: 
“Environmental justice starts with distributive justice, or more accurately, 
distributive injustice. The rich and powerful derive the most benefit while 
suffering the least harm from environmentally harmful activities; conversely, 
the poor and minorities derive the least benefit but suffer the most harm. 
Further, those who benefit cause harm to the places where people “live, 
work, play, and go to school”, whereas the people who reside there do little 
or nothing to harm their community.” [ Jeff Todd, “A ‘Sense of Equity’ in 
Environmental Justice Litigation”, 44 Harv Envtl L Rev 169, 193 (2020).] 
78. When substantive justice is elusive for a large segment, disengaging with 
substantive rights at the very altar, for a perceived procedural lacuna, would 
surely bring in a process, which furthers inequality, both economic and 
social. An “equal footing” conception may not therefore be feasible to 
adequately address the asymmetrical relationship between the polluters and 
those affected by their actions. Instead, a recognition of the historical 
experience of marginalised classes of persons while accessing and 
effectively using the legal system, will allow for necessary appreciation of 
social realities and balancing the arm of justice. 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
80. In the backdrop of the above weighty concerns, this Court should 
advert to what Schiffer and Dowling have stated on the “Blindfold of 
Lady Justice”, which symbolises “the ideal of administering equal justice 
to everyone who comes to our courts, regardless of race, creed, or 
economic class”. [ Schiffer, L.J. & Dowling, T.J. (1997), “Reflections on 
the Role of the Courts in Environmental Law”, 27(2) Environmental 

 
32
Law 327-342.] The relevance of this concept is particularly apposite 
when we consider the inability of most marginalised communities, to 
access the legal machinery.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
NEED FOR A CHANGE: FROM ANTHROPOCENTRIC TO 
ECOCENTRIC 
 
31. There is a crying need for a change in our approach. Man being an enlightened 
species, is expected to act as a trustee of the Earth. It is his duty to ensure the 
preservation of the ecosystem and to continuously endeavour towards the 
protection of air, water and land.  It is not his right to destroy the habitat of 
other species but his duty to protect them from further peril.  A right to enjoy 
cannot be restricted to any specific group, and so also to human beings.  The 
time has come for mankind to live sustainably and respect the rights of rivers, 
lakes, beaches, estuaries, ridges, trees, mountains, seas and air. It is imperative 
to do so as there is always a constant threat to forests due to the ever-
increasing population.  Man is bound by nature’s law.  Therefore, the need 
of the hour is to transform from an anthropocentric approach to ecocentric 
approach which will encompass a wider perspective in the interest of the 
environment. Dr. Susana Borras in her paper titled “New Transitions from 
Human Rights to the Environment to the Rights of Nature” published in 

 
33
Transnational Environmental Law, Volume 5, Issue 1, April 2016 has 
reflected on the rights of nature (p. 114), 
“A new approach is emerging, however: the recognition of the rights of 
nature, which implies a holistic approach to all life and all ecosystems. In 
recent years, a series of normative precedents have surfaced, which 
recognize that nature has certain rights as a legal subject and holder of 
rights. These precedents potentially contribute not merely a greater 
sensitivity to the environment, but a thorough reorientation about how 
to protect the Earth as the centre of life.  
From this perspective, known as ‘biocentrism’, nature is not an object 
of protection but a subject with fundamental rights, such as the rights 
to exist, to survive, and to persist and regenerate vital cycles. The 
implication of this recognition is that human beings have the legal authority 
and responsibility to enforce these rights on behalf of nature in that rights of 
nature become an essential element for the sustainability and the 
survivability of human societies. This concept is based on the recognition 
that humans, as but one part of life on earth, must live within their ecological 
limits rather than see themselves as the purpose of environmental protection, 
as the ‘anthropocentric’ approach proposes. Humans are trustees of the 
Earth rather than being mere stewards. The idea is based on the 
proposition that ecosystems of air, water, land, and atmosphere are a 
public trust and should be preserved and protected as habitat for all 
natural beings and natural communities.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, (2012) 3 SCC 277 
“17. Environmental justice could be achieved only if we drift away from the 
principle of anthropocentric to ecocentric. Many of our principles like 
sustainable development, polluter-pays principle, intergenerational equity 
have their roots in anthropocentric principles. Anthropocentrism is always 
human interest focussed and that non-human has only instrumental value to 
humans. In other words, humans take precedence and human responsibilities 
to non-human based benefits to humans. Ecocentrism is nature-centred 
where humans are part of nature and non-humans have intrinsic value. In 
other words, human interest does not take automatic precedence and humans 
have obligations to non-humans independently of human interest. 
Ecocentrism is therefore life-centred, nature-centred where nature includes 
both humans and non-humans. The National Wildlife Action Plan 2002-2012 

 
34
and the Centrally Sponsored Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats 
Scheme, 2009 are centred on the principle of ecocentrism.” 
The concept of natural rights theory is being evolved, which encapsulates 
recognizing and acknowledging the rights of nature. As stated, such a right is 
meant for the benefit of nature, inclusive of all species, both present and 
future. The concept of trusteeship and inter-generational equity ought to be 
understood from this perspective, as any deviation would cause not only 
degradation of the environment but also serious inequality between different 
species as well as amongst them. The idea is to recognize the importance of 
forests qua the society as their significance has to be seen in the light of their 
effect on the Earth.  
Christopher D. Stone: Should Trees Have Standing? – Toward Legal 
Rights For Natural Objects, Southern California Law Review, 45 (1972) 
(pp. 464, 473, 474, 476), 
“It is not inevitable, nor is it wise, that natural objects should have no rights 
to seek redress on their own behalf. It is no answer to say that streams and 
forests cannot have standing because streams and forests cannot speak. 
Corporations cannot speak either; nor can states, estates, infants, 
incompetents, municipalities or universities… 
…If the environment is not to get lost in the shuffle, we would do well, I 
think, to adopt the guardianship approach as an additional safeguard, 
conceptualizing major natural objects as holders of their own rights, raisable 
by the court-appointed guardian. 
…There is also a good case to be made for taking into account harm to the 
environment-in its own right. As indicated above, the traditional way of 
deciding whether to issue injunctions in lawsuits affecting the environment, 
at least where communal property is involved, has been to strike some sort 
of balance regarding the economic hardships on human beings…. 

 
35
…Why should the environment be of importance only indirectly, as lost 
profits to someone else? Why not throw into the balance the cost to the 
environment? 
…the lost environmental "values" of which we are now speaking are by 
definition over and above those that the market is prepared to bid for: they 
are priceless.  
 
One possible measure of damages, suggested earlier, would be the cost of 
making the environment whole, just as, when a man is injured in an 
automobile accident, we impose upon the responsible party the injured man's 
medical expenses…” 
 
32. Similarly, the concept of sustainable development is to be understood from an 
ecocentric approach. First and foremost, it is the environment that needs to be 
sustained, while the anthropogenic development must follow later. T.N. 
Godavarman Thirumulpad (87) v. Union of India, (2006) 1 SCC 1   
“38. Forest sustainability is an integral part of forest management and 
policy that also has a unique dominating feature and calls for forest 
owners and society to make a long-term (50 years or longer) 
commitment to manage forests for future generations. One of the 
viewpoints for sustaining forest is a naturally functioning forest 
ecosystem. This viewpoint takes the man and nature relationship to the 
point of endorsing, to the extent possible, the notion of letting the forest 
develop and process without significant human intervention. A strong 
adoption of the naturalistic value system that whatever nature does is 
better than what humans do, this is almost the “nature dominates man” 
perspective. Parks and natural reserve creations; non-intervention in insect, 
disease and fire process; and reduction of human activities are typical policy 
situations. This viewpoint has been endorsed by the 1988 Forest Policy of 
the Government of India.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
 

 
36
ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS 
33. Wealth of a country has to be seen not only from the perspective of mere 
revenue, augmented through its industries and business activities. Rather, it 
has to be seen by giving due importance to its natural wealth which actually 
contributes much more than the other factors. As discussed, forests play a 
pivotal role in reducing carbon emissions in the atmosphere created by human 
activities.  A substantial value needs to be attached to the contribution of 
forests.  
34. Professor Wahlen in her paper titled “Opportunities for making the invisible 
visible: Towards an improved understanding of the economic contributions of 
NTFPs”, published in the Journal of Forest Policy and Economics, Volume 
84, November 2017, has considered the implications on forest governance 
management and policy arguing that Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
offer an opportunity to increase attention on the non-cash contributions of 
forests and turn this invisible contribution into a visible one. These “invisible 
services” rendered by forests ought to be given due credit. Depletion and 
disappearance of forests would ultimately lead to a massive extinction of 
organisms. Appreciation of this fact shall come from the point of view of a 
species rather than through the prism of a State or a nation. Regulation of 
temperature and prevention of water depletion is the primary role of forests. 

 
37
Destroying forests would lead to the depletion and destruction of our life 
source.  It would lead to extreme droughts, rainfall would become scarce and 
even if it pours, there would not be any means for its natural storage.  The 
concept of forests acting as a major sink of carbon dioxide has to be 
appreciated and encouraged.  Destruction of forests also affects pollination 
and would ultimately impact the food chain.  
35. A difference of one and half degree Celsius in temperature saves the global 
economy tens of trillions of dollars. We must realise that carbon emissions 
not only come from industrial activities but also agriculture.  Such functions 
are to be valued for assessing forest wealth.  The concept of carbon credit in 
carbon market is indeed a reality.  With the need for imposing restrictions 
towards carbon emissions, the concept of carbon markets has come into being. 
Emissions of carbon dioxide worldwide, need to be seen holistically, as 
emissions from each nation ultimately disperses into the atmosphere.  Thus, 
a country with excess forest cover would be in a position to sell its excess 
carbon credit to the one in deficit. This in turn underlines the significance of 
forests in contributing to the financial wealth of a country. From the economic 
perspective we wish to quote the report of the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests, Government of India titled “India’s Forest and Tree Cover: 

 
38
Contribution as a Carbon Sink” (August 2009), as an aid to assess the 
valuation of forests in the Indian context, 
“Over the last two decades, progressive national forestry legislations and 
policies in India aimed at conservation and sustainable management of 
forests have reversed deforestation and have transformed India’s forests into 
a significant net sink of CO2 . From 1995 to 2005, the carbon stocks stored 
in our forests and trees have increased from 6,245 million tonnes (mt) to 
6,662 mt, registering an annual increment of 38 mt of carbon or 138 mt 
of CO2 equivalent.  
 
Mitigation Service by India’s Forest and Tree Cover  
India’s forests serve as a major sink of CO2 . Our estimates show that the 
annual CO2 removals by India’s forest and tree cover is enough to neutralize 
11.25 % of India’s total GHG emissions (CO2 equivalent) at 1994 levels, the 
most recent year for which comparable data is available for developing 
countries based on their respective National Communications (NATCOMs) 
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) . This is equivalent to offsetting 100% emissions from all energy 
in residential and transport sectors; or 40% of total emissions from the 
agriculture sector. Clearly, India’s forest and tree cover is serving as a 
major mode of carbon mitigation for India and the world.  
 
Value of Mitigation  
Putting a conservative value of US$ 5 per tonne of CO2 locked in our 
forests, this huge sink of about 24,000 mt of CO2 is worth US$ 120b, or 
Rs 6,00,000 crores. Incremental carbon under scenario three will add a 
value of around US$ 1.2b, or Rs 6,000 crores every year to India’s 
treasury of forest sink, assuming a value of US$ 7 per tonne.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
A recent report of the Reserve Bank of India presents a very disturbing 
scenario. The report clearly suggests the enormous potential impact of climate 
change on the society, leading to serious job losses in every sector. Therefore, 
the adverse effect will be on the future of the nation as a whole, as against an 
identifiable group.  

 
39
“Report on Currency and Finance; Towards a Greener Cleaner India”, 
published by the Reserve Bank of India, (2022-2023), (pp. 45, 47), 
“4. Macroeconomic Impact of Climate Change in India 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
II.32 India, along with countries such as Brazil and Mexico, face high risk 
of reduction in economic growth, if global warming raises temperature by 2 
degree Celsius as against 1.5 degree Celsius (IPCC, 2018). Climate change 
manifested through rising temperature and changing patterns of 
monsoon rainfall in India could cost the economy 2.8 per cent of its GDP 
and depress the living standards of nearly half of its population by 2050 
(Mani et al., 2018). India could lose anywhere around 3 per cent to 10 
per cent of its GDP annually by 2100 due to climate change (Kompas et 
al., 2018; Picciariello et al., 2021) in the absence of adequate mitigation 
policies. Furthermore, Indian agriculture (along with construction 
activity) as well as industry are particularly vulnerable to labour 
productivity losses caused by heat related stress (Somnathan et al., 
2021). India could account for 34 million of the projected 80 million 
global job losses from heat stress associated productivity decline by 2030 
(World Bank, 2022). Further, up to 4.5 per cent of India’s GDP could be 
at risk by 2030 owing to lost labour hours from extreme heat and 
humidity conditions. Moreover, heatwaves could also last 25 times longer, 
i.e., rise in severity, by 2036-2065 if current rate of carbon emissions is not 
contained (CMCC, 2021). These estimates, thus, underscore the importance 
of timely adoption and faster implementation of climate mitigation policies 
to reduce the adverse impact on the Indian economy.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
One way of dealing with this situation is preserving the existing forests, while 
making an endeavour to enhance its cover. An understanding from the 
economic and social perspective would be the best approach. 
36. The concept of “Green Accounting” in evaluating a nation’s wealth, including 
its natural assets, would extend enormous benefits which are both tangible and 

 
40
intangible. There are numerous resources that are being tapped from the 
forests. Therefore, what is required is a comprehensive approach.  
37. We shall conclude our discussion with a quote from the book “Top Soil and 
Civilization” by Tom Dale and Vernon Gill Carter, published by the 
University of Oklahoma Press, (1955) 
“Man, whether civilised or savage, is a child of nature — he is not the master 
of nature. He must conform his actions to certain natural laws if he is to 
maintain his dominance over his environment. When he tries to circumvent 
the laws of nature, he usually destroys the natural environment that sustains 
him. And when his environment deteriorates rapidly, his civilisation 
declines...” 
 
APPROACH OF THE COURT 
38. This Court has repeatedly reiterated the approach required to be adopted by 
the courts where the onus is on the violator to prove that there is no 
environmental degradation.  There is a constitutional duty enjoined upon 
every court to protect and preserve the environment.  Courts will have to 
apply the principle of parens patriae in light of the constitutional mandate 
enshrined in Articles 48A, 51A, 21, 14 and 19 of the Constitution of India, 
1950. Therefore, the burden of proof lies on a developer or industrialist and 
also on the State in a given case to prove that there is no such degradation.   
39. Not being an adversarial litigation, the court shall utilise all possible 
resources, including scientific inventions, in its endeavour to preserve the 
environment.  While adopting an ecocentric approach, the concept of inter-

 
41
related existence has to be kept in mind. A narrow or pedantic approach should 
be avoided.  While considering the economic benefits, the invisible value and 
benefits provided by the forests shall also be factored into.  There has to be 
an inclusive approach, which should be society centric, meaning thereby that 
all species should co-exist with minimum collateral damage.  The effort is to 
minimise the damage to the environment, even in a case where the need for 
human development is indispensable.  While having a pragmatic and 
practical approach, courts will have to weigh in the relevant factors and thus, 
perform a balancing act.  
PRECEDENTS 
Uncertainty of Science and Burden of Proof 
 A.P. Pollution Control Board v. Prof. M.V. Nayudu, (1999) 2 SCC 718  
“36. We shall next elaborate the new concept of burden of proof referred 
to in the Vellore case [(1996) 5 SCC 647] at p. 658. In that case, Kuldip 
Singh, J. stated as follows: (SCC p. 658, para 11) 
“(iii) The ‘onus of proof’ is on the actor or the developer/industrialist 
to show that his action is environmentally benign.” 
37. It is to be noticed that while the inadequacies of science have led to 
the “precautionary principle”, the said “precautionary principle” in its 
turn, has led to the special principle of burden of proof in environmental 
cases where burden as to the absence of injurious effect of the actions 
proposed, — is placed on those who want to change the status quo 
[Wynne, Uncertainty and Environmental Learning, 2 Global Envtl. 
Change 111 (1992) at p. 123]. This is often termed as a reversal of the 

 
42
burden of proof, because otherwise in environmental cases, those 
opposing the change would be compelled to shoulder the evidentiary 
burden, a procedure which is not fair. Therefore, it is necessary that the 
party attempting to preserve the status quo by maintaining a less 
polluted state should not carry the burden of proof and the party who 
wants to alter it, must bear this burden. [See James M. Olson: “Shifting 
the Burden of Proof”, 20 Envtl. Law, p. 891 at p. 898 (1990).] [Quoted in 
Vol. 22 (1998), Harv. Env. Law Review, p. 509 at pp. 519, 550.] 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 39. It is also explained that if the environmental risks being run by regulatory 
inaction are in some way “uncertain but non-negligible”, then regulatory action 
is justified. This will lead to the question as to what is the “non-negligible risk”. 
In such a situation, the burden of proof is to be placed on those attempting 
to alter the status quo. They are to discharge this burden by showing the 
absence of a “reasonable ecological or medical concern”. That is the 
required standard of proof. The result would be that if insufficient evidence 
is presented by them to alleviate concern about the level of uncertainty, 
then the presumption should operate in favour of environmental 
protection. Such a presumption has been applied in Ashburton 
Acclimatisation Society v. Federated Farmers of New Zealand [(1988) 1 
NZLR 78] . The required standard now is that the risk of harm to the 
environment or to human health is to be decided in public interest, 
according to a “reasonable persons” test. [See Charmian Barton: 
Precautionary Principle in Australia (Vol. 22) (1998) Harv. Env. L. Rev., p. 
509 at p. 549.]” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Approach of the Court: High Degree of Judicial Scrutiny on Any Action 
of Government 
 Intellectuals Forum v. State of A.P., (2006) 3 SCC 549  
“Public trust doctrine 
76. The Supreme Court of California, in National Audubon Society v. 
Superior Court of Alpine Country [33 Cali 419] also known as Mono Lake 
case [33 Cali 419] summed up the substance of the doctrine. The Court said: 

 
43
“Thus the public trust is more than an affirmation of State power to use 
public property for public purposes. It is an affirmation of the duty of 
the State to protect the people's common heritage of streams, lakes, 
marshlands and tidelands, surrendering the right only in those rare cases 
when the abandonment of the right is consistent with the purposes of 
the trust.” 
This is an articulation of the doctrine from the angle of the affirmative duties 
of the State with regard to public trust. Formulated from a negatory angle, 
the doctrine does not exactly prohibit the alienation of the property held as a 
public trust. However, when the State holds a resource that is freely 
available for the use of the public, it provides for a high degree of judicial 
scrutiny on any action of the Government, no matter how consistent 
with the existing legislations, that attempts to restrict such free use. To 
properly scrutinise such actions of the Government, the courts must 
make a distinction between the Government's general obligation to act 
for the public benefit, and the special, more demanding obligation which 
it may have as a trustee of certain public resources [Joseph L. Sax “The 
Public Trust Doctrine in Natural Resource Law: Effective Judicial 
Intervention”, Michigan Law Review, Vol. 68, No. 3 (Jan. 1970) pp. 471-
566]. According to Prof. Sax, whose article on this subject is considered to 
be an authority, three types of restrictions on governmental authority are 
often thought to be imposed by the public trust doctrine [ibid]: 
1. the property subject to the trust must not only be used for a public 
purpose, but it must be held available for use by the general public; 
2. the property may not be sold, even for fair cash equivalent; 
3. the property must be maintained for particular types of use (i) either 
traditional uses, or (ii) some uses particular to that form of resources.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 Narinder Singh and Ors. v. Divesh Bhutani and Ors., 2022 SCC OnLine 
SC 899 
“THE APPROACH OF THE COURT IN INTERPRETING THE 
LAWS RELATING TO FORESTS AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
25. While interpreting the laws relating to forests, the Courts will be 
guided by the following considerations: 

 
44
i. Under Clause (a) Article 48A forming a part of Chapter IV 
containing the Directive Principles of State Policy, it is the 
obligation of the State to protect and improve the environment 
and to safeguard the forests; 
ii. Under Clause (g) of Article 51A of the Constitution, it is a 
fundamental duty of every citizen to protect and preserve the 
natural environment, including forests, rivers, lakes and 
wildlife etc.; 
iii. Article 21 of the Constitution confers a fundamental right on 
the individuals to live in a pollution-free environment. Forests 
are, in a sense, lungs which generate oxygen for the survival of 
human beings. The forests play a very important role in our 
ecosystem to prevent pollution. The presence of forests is 
necessary for enabling the citizens to enjoy their right to live in 
a pollution-free environment; 
iv. It is well settled that the Public Trust Doctrine is a part of our 
jurisprudence. Under the said doctrine, the State is a trustee of 
natural resources, such as sea shores, running waters, forests 
etc. The public at large is the beneficiary of these natural 
resources. The State being a trustee of natural resources is 
under a legal duty to protect the natural resources. The public 
trust doctrine is a tool for exerting long-established public 
rights over short-term public rights and private gains; 
v. Precautionary principle has been accepted as a part of the law 
of the land. A conjoint reading of Articles 21, 48A and 51-A(g) 
of the Constitution of India will show that the State is under a 
mandate to protect and improve the environment and 
safeguard the forests. The precautionary principle requires the 
Government to anticipate, prevent and remedy or eradicate the 
causes of environmental degradation including to act sternly 
against the violators; 
vi. While interpreting and applying the laws relating to the 
environment, the principle of sustainable development must be 
borne in mind. In the case of Rajeev Suri v. Delhi Development 
Authority and Ors. [(2022) 11 SCC 1], a Bench of this Court to 
which one of us is a party (A.M. Khanwilkar, J.) has very succinctly 
dealt with the concept of sustainable development. Paragraphs 507 
and 508 of the said decision reads thus: 
“507. The principle of sustainable development and 
precautionary principle need to be understood in a proper 

 
45
context. The expression “sustainable development” 
incorporates a wide meaning within its fold. It 
contemplates that development ought to be sustainable 
with the idea of preservation of natural environment for 
present and future generations. It would not be without 
significance to note that sustainable development is 
indeed a principle of development - it posits controlled 
development. The primary requirement underlying this 
principle is to ensure that every development work is 
sustainable; and this requirement of sustainability 
demands that the first attempt of every agency enforcing 
environmental Rule of law in the country ought to be to 
alleviate environmental concerns by proper mitigating 
measures. The future generations have an equal stake in 
the environment and development. They are as much 
entitled to a developed society as they are to an 
environmentally secure society. By Declaration on the 
Right to Development, 1986, the United Nations has given 
express recognition to a right to development. Article 1 of 
the Declaration defines this right as: 
“1. The right to development is an inalienable 
human right by virtue of which every human 
person and all peoples are entitled to participate in, 
contribute to, and enjoy economic, social, cultural 
and political development, in which all human 
rights and fundamental freedoms can be fully 
realized.” 
508. The right to development, thus, is intrinsically 
connected to the preservance of a dignified life. It is not 
limited to the idea of infrastructural development, rather, 
it entails human development as the basis of all 
development. The jurisprudence in environmental matters 
must acknowledge that there is immense interdependence 
between right to development and right to natural 
environment. In International Law and Sustainable 
Development, 
Arjun 
Sengupta 
in 
the 
chapter 
“Implementing the Right to Development” notes thus: 
“… Two rights are interdependent if the level of 
enjoyment of one is dependent on the level of 
enjoyment of the other…” 

 
46
vii. Even ‘environmental rule of law’ has a role to play. This Court 
in the case of Citizens for Green Doon v. Union of India and 
Ors. 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1243 has dealt with another 
important issue of lack of consistent and uniform standards for 
analysing the impact of development projects. This Court 
observed that the principle of sustainable development may 
create differing and arbitrary metrics depending on the nature 
of individual projects. Therefore, this Court advocated and 
accepted the need to apply and adopt the standard of 
‘environmental Rule of law’. Paragraph 40 of the said decision 
reads thus: 
“40. A cogent remedy to this problem is to adopt the 
standard of the ‘environmental Rule of law’ to test 
governance decisions under which developmental 
projects are approved. In its 2015 Issue Brief titled 
“Environmental Rule of Law : Critical to Sustainable 
Development”, 
the 
United 
Nations 
Environment 
Programme has recommended the adoption of such an 
approach in the following terms: 
“Environmental rule of law integrates the critical 
environmental needs with the essential elements of 
the rule of law, and provides the basis for 
reforming environmental governance. It prioritizes 
environmental sustainability by connecting it with 
fundamental rights and obligations. It implicitly 
reflects universal moral values and ethical norms 
of behaviour, and it provides a foundation for 
environmental rights and obligations. Without 
environmental rule of law and the enforcement of 
legal rights and obligations, environmental 
governance may be arbitrary, that is, discretionary, 
subjective, and unpredictable.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Forest Constitute A National Asset  
 Amarnath Shrine, In re, (2013) 3 SCC 247  
“19. Where it is the bounden duty of the State to protect the above rights of 
the citizen in discharge of its constitutional obligation in the larger public 
interest, there the law also casts a duty upon the State to ensure due 

 
47
protection to the forests and environment of the country. Forests in India 
are an important part of the environment. They constitute a national 
asset. We may, at this stage, refer to the concept of inter-generational 
equity, which has been treated to be an integral part of Article 21 of the 
Constitution of India. The courts have applied this doctrine of 
sustainable development and precautionary principle to the cases where 
development is necessary, but certainly not at the cost of environment. 
The courts are expected to drive a balance between the two. In other 
words, the onerous duty lies upon the State to ensure protection of 
environment and forests on the one hand as well as to undertake 
necessary development with due regard to the fundamental rights and 
values.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Environmental Rule of Law 
 H.P. Bus-Stand Management & Development Authority v. Central 
Empowered Committee, (2021) 4 SCC 309  
“I.1. Environmental rule of law 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
“49. The environmental rule of law, at a certain level, is a facet of the concept 
of the rule of law. But it includes specific features that are unique to 
environmental governance, features which are sui generis. The 
environmental rule of law seeks to create essential tools — conceptual, 
procedural and institutional to bring structure to the discourse on 
environmental protection. It does so to enhance our understanding of 
environmental challenges — of how they have been shaped by humanity's 
interface with nature in the past, how they continue to be affected by its 
engagement with nature in the present and the prospects for the future, if we 
were not to radically alter the course of destruction which humanity's actions 
have charted. The environmental rule of law seeks to facilitate a multi-
disciplinary analysis of the nature and consequences of carbon footprints and 
in doing so it brings a shared understanding between science, regulatory 
decisions and policy perspectives in the field of environmental protection. It 
recognises that the “law” element in the environmental rule of law does not 
make the concept peculiarly the preserve of lawyers and Judges. On the 
contrary, it seeks to draw within the fold all stakeholders in formulating 
strategies to deal with current challenges posed by environmental 
degradation, climate change and the destruction of habitats. The 
environmental rule of law seeks a unified understanding of these concepts. 
There are significant linkages between concepts such as sustainable 

 
48
development, the polluter pays principle and the trust doctrine. The universe 
of nature is indivisible and integrated. The state of the environment in one 
part of the earth affects and is fundamentally affected by what occurs in 
another part. Every element of the environment shares a symbiotic 
relationship with the others. It is this inseparable bond and connect which 
the environmental rule of law seeks to explore and understand in order to 
find solutions to the pressing problems which threaten the existence of 
humanity. The environmental rule of law is founded on the need to 
understand the consequences of our actions going beyond local, State and 
national boundaries. The rise in the oceans threatens not just maritime 
communities. The rise in temperatures, dilution of glaciers and growing 
desertification have consequences which go beyond the communities and 
creatures whose habitats are threatened. They affect the future survival of the 
entire eco-system. The environmental rule of law attempts to weave an 
understanding of the connections in the natural environment which make the 
issue of survival a unified challenge which confronts human societies 
everywhere. It seeks to build on experiential learnings of the past to 
formulate principles which must become the building pillars of 
environmental regulation in the present and future. The environmental rule 
of law recognises the overlap between and seeks to amalgamate scientific 
learning, legal principle and policy intervention. Significantly, it brings 
attention to the rules, processes and norms followed by institutions which 
provide regulatory governance on the environment. In doing so, it fosters a 
regime of open, accountable and transparent decision making on concerns of 
the environment. It fosters the importance of participatory governance — of 
the value in giving a voice to those who are most affected by environmental 
policies and public projects. The structural design of the environmental rule 
of law composes of substantive, procedural and institutional elements. The 
tools of analysis go beyond legal concepts. The result of the framework is 
more than just the sum total of its parts. Together, the elements which it 
embodies aspire to safeguard the bounties of nature against existential 
threats. For it is founded on the universal recognition that the future of 
human existence depends on how we conserve, protect and regenerate the 
environment today. 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
54. In an article in Georgetown Environmental Law Review (2020), Arnold 
Kreilhuber and Angela Kariuki explain the manner in which the 
environmental rule of law seeks to resolve this imbroglio [ Arnold 
Kreilhuber and Angela Kariuki, “Environmental Rule of Law in the Context 
of Sustainable Development”, 32 Georgetown Environmental Law Review 
591 (2020).] : 

 
49
“One of the main distinctions between environmental rule of law and 
other areas of law is the need to make decisions to protect human health 
and the environment in the face of uncertainty and data gaps. Instead of 
being paralyzed into inaction, careful documentation of the state of 
knowledge and uncertainties allows the regulated community, 
stakeholders, and other institutions to more fully understand why certain 
decisions were made.” 
The point, therefore, is simply this — the environmental rule of law calls 
on us, as Judges, to marshal the knowledge emerging from the record, 
limited though it may sometimes be, to respond in a stern and decisive 
fashion to violations of environmental law. We cannot be stupefied into 
inaction by not having access to complete details about the manner in 
which an environmental law violation has occurred or its full 
implications. Instead, the framework, acknowledging the imperfect 
world that we inhabit, provides a roadmap to deal with environmental 
law violations, an absence of clear evidence of consequences 
notwithstanding.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
Role of Courts 
 H.P. Bus-Stand Management & Development Authority (Supra) 
“I.2. Role of courts in ensuring environmental protection 
56. In a recent decision of this Court in BDA v. Sudhakar Hegde [(2020) 
15 SCC 63] , this Court, speaking through one of us (D.Y. Chandrachud, J.) 
held : (SCC pp. 112-13, paras 94-95) 
 
“94. The adversarial system is, by its nature, rights based. In the 
quest for justice, it is not uncommon to postulate a winning side 
and a losing side. In matters of the environment and 
development however, there is no trade-off between the two. The 
protection of the environment is an inherent component of 
development and growth. … 
Professor Corker draws attention to the idea that the 
environmental protection goes beyond lawsuits. Where the State 
and statutory bodies fail in their duty to comply with the 
regulatory framework for the protection of the environment, the 
courts, acting on actions brought by public-spirited individuals 
are called to invalidate such actions. … 

 
50
95. The protection of the environment is premised not only on 
the active role of courts, but also on robust institutional 
frameworks within which every stakeholder complies with its 
duty to ensure sustainable development. A framework of 
environmental governance committed to the rule of law requires 
a regime which has effective, accountable and transparent 
institutions. Equally important is responsive, inclusive, 
participatory 
and 
representative 
decision-making. 
Environmental governance is founded on the rule of law and 
emerges from the values of our Constitution. Where the health 
of the environment is key to preserving the right to life as a 
constitutionally recognised value under Article 21 of the 
Constitution, proper structures for environmental decision-
making find expression in the guarantee against arbitrary action 
and the affirmative duty of fair treatment under Article 14 of the 
Constitution. Sustainable development is premised not merely 
on the redressal of the failure of democratic institutions in the 
protection of the environment, but ensuring that such failures do 
not take place.” 
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
58. The UNEP Report (supra) also goes on to note [ UNEP, “Environmental 
Rule of Law First Global Report” (January 2019), p. 213.] : 
 
“Courts and tribunals must be able to grant meaningful legal 
remedies in order to resolve disputes and enforce environmental 
laws. As shown in Figure 5.12, legal remedies are the actions, such 
as fines, jail time, and injunctions, that courts and tribunals are 
empowered to order. For environmental laws to have their desired 
effect and for there to be adequate incentives for compliance with 
environmental laws, the remedies must both redress the past 
environmental harm and deter future harm.” 
 
59. In its Global Judicial Handbook on Environmental Constitutionalism, 
the UNEP has further noted [UNEP, Global Judicial Handbook on 
Environmental Constitutionalism (3rd Edn., 2019), p. 7.] : 
 
“Courts matter. They are essential to the rule of law. Without courts, 
laws can be disregarded, executive officials left unchecked, and 
people left without recourse. And the environment and the human 
connection to it can suffer. Judges stand in the breach.” 
 

 
51
60. The above discussion puts into perspective our decision in the present 
appeals, through which we shall confirm the directions given by NGT in its 
impugned judgment [T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, 2016 
SCC OnLine NGT 1196] . The role of courts and tribunals cannot be 
overstated in ensuring that the “shield” of the “rule of law” can be used 
as a facilitative instrument in ensuring compliance with environmental 
regulations.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
FACTUAL BACKGROUND 
40. Between the years 1950-1959, a revision of survey and settlement of village 
Kompally took place. It was concluded on 17.11.1960. An application was 
stated to have been filed by Respondent No. 1 (Original Plaintiff), invoking 
Section 87 of the Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Land Revenue Act, 1317 
F. (hereinafter referred to as “A.P. Land Revenue Act, 1317 F.”), seeking 
rectification of survey error. It was so filed on the premise that the Plaintiff 
actually owned the suit land. The suit land consists of 106.34 Acres and the 
Schedule reads thus – Village Kompally, District Warangal, Survey Number 
171/3 to 171/7 admeasuring 106.34 Acres. This application did not surface for 
nearly a decade and a half, for the reasons known to the Plaintiff. 
41. A notification being Gazette No. 85-B was published in the Andhra Pradesh 
Gazette on 11.11.1971 by the State Government, under Section 15 of the A.P. 
Forest Act, declaring the land, which was part of the earlier proceedings of 

 
52
the revenue department dated 17.11.1960, as reserved forest. It was done on 
the premise that the lands were forest lands and, therefore, they were 
accordingly declared as reserved forest.  
42. Rather strangely, the application so filed by the Plaintiff was rejected by the 
Revenue Authority only on 10.01.1975.  The revision filed by him was 
allowed by remitting the matter to the Joint Collector.  Suffice it is to state 
that despite the findings rendered, neither the Forest Department nor the 
Forest Settlement Officer was arrayed as a party to these proceedings before 
the revenue department.  It is also seen that the order of the Revenue 
Authority and the Revisional Authority were passed much after the 
declaration under Section 15 of the A.P. Forest Act, vesting the lands in the 
State by giving them the status of a reserved forest. 
43. On 07.07.1981, the Joint Collector, Warangal allowed the application of the 
Plaintiff.  Realising that the said order will not give the Plaintiff benefit of 
any sort, he filed an application before the Government seeking denotification 
of the land declared as reserved forest', which was rightly dismissed on 
01.09.1984. 
44. A suit was filed by the Plaintiff on 23.04.1985 in OS No. 56 of 1985 on the 
file of I Additional Sub-Judge, Warangal seeking a declaration of title and 
permanent injunction.  In the said suit the Defendant no. 1 was the District 

 
53
Collector representing the Revenue Department with the Defendant no. 2, 
Forest Officer representing the Forest Department.  Quite surprisingly, 
neither the Forest Settlement Officer nor the State of Andhra Pradesh, Forest 
Department was made a party defendant.  The trial court while granting title 
to the plaintiff declined the incidental relief of injunction. 
45. On appeal, the High Court, by giving adequate reasons reversed the said 
finding of the trial court qua the declaration, and confirmed the findings on 
injunction by dismissing the suit in toto.  Ultimately, it was held that the suit 
property is forest land.  The proceedings concluded under the A.P. Forest 
Act, though not specifically challenged, and that too without the proper and 
necessary parties, were found to be just and proper. 
46. The trial court and the High Court in first appeal have given factual findings 
against the plaintiff.  Only two witnesses were examined, one on each side.  
The trial court took note of the fact that there is material evidence to show that 
the suit land is a part of the reserved forest.  The plaintiff was not at all in 
possession of the suit land.  The suit was also held as barred under Section 5 
of the A.P. Forest Act. 
47. The High Court, being the final court of fact and law, went ahead and held 
that the plaintiff had miserably failed to show his title to the suit property.  
The Plaintiff did not have any personal knowledge about the manner of his 

 
54
succession to the suit property.  Even as per his own evidence, he is not the 
absolute owner of the suit property, being a co-owner. The documents relied 
on by him, more particularly the decision of the revenue authorities, do not 
establish both title and possession.  A detailed discussion was made on the 
effect of Section 15 and 16 of the A.P. Forest Act, along with the documents 
marked on behalf of defendants.  It took note of the fact that though a portion 
of the property was sold as per the evidence of the Plaintiff, there is no proof.  
48. Immediately after the judgment of the High Court dated 20.07.2018, a review 
was filed on behalf of the plaintiff on 18.11.2018.  Shockingly, Defendant 
No. 1, who filed a common written statement along with the Defendant No. 2 
and, thus, took a stand that the suit property is a forest land which becomes 
part of a reserved forest area, in line with the stand taken by the Defendant 
No. 3, who was impleaded pending the first appeal, constituted a committee 
on 12.07.2019 on an application said to have been filed by the Plaintiff in the 
year 2017, which was obviously pending the first appeal.   
49. More surprisingly, the District Forest Officer did not appear before the 
Committee and based upon a report submitted, it was held that the suit 
property is required to be excluded in favour of the plaintiff.  This was done 
despite the fact that the District Collector, who was a party to the suit, took a 
specific stand, and in view of the judgment which attained finality, that the 

 
55
suit land is forest land, the District Collector has got no jurisdiction at all to 
deal with it in any manner especially in the light of Section 15 and 16 of the 
A.P. Forest Act.  We do not wish to say anything more on this, though 
wisdom has dawned upon defendants again, as could be seen from the 
affidavit filed by the State before this Court reiterating the original stand.  
50. The aforesaid decision was taken by the District Collector after the judgment 
of the First Appellate Court.  It was accordingly marked as a court exhibit in 
the review.  Thereafter, it was taken up for hearing and disposed of on 
19.03.2021.  The Learned Judge who delivered an elaborate judgment in the 
first appeal was transferred to Andhra Pradesh on establishment of the High 
Court at Amravati. The review came to be filed before another Learned Judge.  
The impugned order was passed in the purported exercise of the power of 
review, by virtually reversing all the findings rendered in the appeal, while 
placing reliance upon evidence which on the face of it was inadmissible and, 
therefore, void from its inception, rendered by an authority which had 
absolutely no jurisdiction at all. 
51. While doing so, the High Court in review jurisdiction once again reconsidered 
the evidence produced by the Defendants.  In the process, the High Court 
fixed a heavy onus on the Defendants ignoring the fact that on the earlier 
occasion the Plaintiff had miserably failed to prove his title.  Incidentally, it 

 
56
was held that Section 5 of the A.P. Forest Act which speaks about the bar of 
a suit can only be applied during the pendency of proceedings under the A.P. 
Forest Act and not thereafter.  Despite no challenge either to the proceedings 
under the A.P. Forest Act and that too in the absence of proper and necessary 
parties, an adverse inference was drawn by taking note of the statement made 
by DW-1 who was only a Forest Officer and, therefore, not having any direct 
connection with the action taken.  Various admissions made by the plaintiff 
in his deposition were conveniently ignored.  The High Court went on to 
criticize the conflicting stand taken by two wings of the State while ignoring 
the fact that Defendant No. 1 had absolutely no say. 
SUBMISSIONS OF THE APPELLANTS 
52. Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, Learned Additional Solicitor General, appearing for the 
appellants, submitted that the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 defines a forest 
which is inclusive of all types of forests.  The extensive inclusion would take 
in its sweep even the private forests.  Revenue records do not confer title.  
The High Court clearly exceeded its jurisdiction in review by entertaining a 
re-hearing and virtually acted as an appellate court.  The Respondents did not 
satisfy the court on the title, which finding has not been touched. 
 
 

 
57
SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENTS 
53. Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 
respondents, vehemently contended that the proceedings before the Forest 
Settlement Officer have become final.  Even the trial court has held that the 
plaintiff had title.  Once title is proved, possession has to follow.  As there 
is an error apparent on the face of record, the power of review has been 
exercised correctly.  The finding that Section 5 of the A.P. Forest Act, has 
got no application is correct, as there is no attempt to interdict the proceedings. 
As there is no apparent perversity, this Court need not interfere with the 
impugned order. 
DISCUSSION 
54. We have already recorded the facts in detail.  It is a classic case where the 
officials of the State who are expected to protect and preserve the forests in 
discharge of their public duties clearly abdicated their role.  We are at a loss 
to understand as to how the High Court could interfere by placing reliance 
upon evidence produced after the decree, at the instance of a party which 
succeeded along with the contesting defendant, particularly in the light of the 
finding that the land is forest land which has become part of reserved forest.   
55. There is a distinct lack of jurisdiction on two counts – one is with respect to 
an attempt made to circumvent the decree and, the second is in acting without 

 
58
jurisdiction.  The land belongs to the Forest Department and therefore, 
Defendant No. 1 had absolutely no role in dealing with it in any manner.  
Proceeding under the A.P. Land Revenue Act, 1317 F. has got no relevancy 
or connection with a concluded proceeding under the A. P. Forest Act. The 
proceeding under the A. P. Forest Act was concluded on 11.11.1971.  
Thereafter, without any jurisdiction, an order was passed under Section 87 of 
the A.P. Land Revenue Act, 1317 F.  
56. The High Court on the earlier occasion had given a clear finding that even at 
the time of declaration under the A.P. Land Revenue Act, 1317 F, these lands 
were not shown as private lands by the defendant, among other factual 
findings.  It is indeed very strange that the High Court which is expected to 
act within the statutory limitation went beyond and graciously gifted the forest 
land to a private person who could not prove his title.  While disposing of the 
first appeal, the High Court exercised its power under Order XLI Rule 22 of 
the CPC 1908 for partly reversing the trial court decree.  Even otherwise, 
there were concurrent findings in so far as dismissal of the suit for injunction 
is concerned.  In our considered view, the High Court showed utmost interest 
and benevolence in allowing the review by setting aside the well merited 
judgment in the appeal by replacing its views in all material aspects. 

 
59
57. Let us alternatively examine the question of maintainability of a suit for the 
relief of declaration. The suit filed is not maintainable as the plaintiff has not 
challenged the proceedings under Section 15 of A. P. Forest Act. These have 
become final and conclusive in view of the express declaration provided under 
the statute in Section 16 of A. P. Forest Act. Rather, the plaintiff filed an 
application for denotification before the Government which was rejected.  
Neither the State Government, which rejected the said application, nor the 
Forest Settlement Officer has been made as party defendants in the suit, with 
the State arrayed as respondent represented by the Principal Secretary, Forest 
Department, at a later stage in the appeal.  Though, the Forest Officer of the 
Forest Department may be an interested party, the authority who otherwise 
could answer is the Forest Settlement Officer.  He is the one who concluded 
the proceedings.  In any case, the said exercise is irrelevant as the Plaintiff 
could not prove his title nor does there lie any relevance to the action taken 
under the A.P. Land Revenue Act, 1317 F.  Furthermore, there is no specific 
challenge to the concluded proceedings under the A. P. Forest Act.  The 
Plaintiff has merely asked for declaration of title and permanent injunction 
restraining the Defendants from interfering with possession.  
58. We, thus, conclude that the impugned judgment does not stand the legal 
scrutiny as it is ridden with both factual and legal errors. 

 
60
59. Accordingly, the appeal stands allowed.  The impugned judgment stands set 
aside by restoring the judgement rendered in A.S. No. 145 of 1994. We 
consider it appropriate to impose cost of Rs. 5,00,000/- each on appellants and 
respondents to be paid to the National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) 
within a period of two months from the date of this judgment.  The appellant 
State is free to enquire into the lapses committed by the officers in filing 
collusive affidavits before the competent court, and recover the same from 
those officers who are responsible for facilitating and filing incorrect 
affidavits in the ongoing proceedings. The Contempt Case No. 624 of 2021 
pending before the High Court is directed to be closed. I.A. No.65196/2021 is 
dismissed. All other pending applications stand closed.  
 
..………………………..J.              
(M. M. SUNDRESH ) 
 
 
 
…………………………..J.              
(S. V. N. BHATTI)  
New Delhi,  
April 18, 2024