2024 INSC 313
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
 
  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).             OF 2024 
 
      (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No(s). 7880 of 2023) 
 
 
THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL 
 
 
….APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
JAYEETA DAS  
 
 
 
 
     ..RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the 
material available on record. 
3. 
The State of West Bengal has approached this Court by way 
of this appeal for assailing the legality and validity of the judgment 
dated 11th May, 2023 passed by the High Court of Calcutta in 
C.R.R. No. 3180 of 2022. 
Brief Facts:-  
4. 
Based on written complaint dated 1st January, 2022 filed by 
the SI Raju Debnath, STF Police Station, Kolkata on 28th 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2024.04.18
17:08:38 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
December, 2021 informing about recovery of an unclaimed black 
coloured bagpack lying abandoned at Sahid Minar containing 
some written posters of CPI(Maoist) and some incriminating 
articles about the activities of CPI(Maoist), FIR No. 01 of 2022 came 
to be registered at STF Police Station, Kolkata for the offences 
punishable under Sections 121A, 122, 123, 124A, 120B of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860(hereinafter being referred to as ‘IPC’).    
5. 
The respondent herein was apprehended on 29th March, 2022 
and was produced before the learned Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate, Calcutta on 30th March, 2022.  The Investigating 
Officer conducted preliminary investigation and thereafter filed an 
application in the Court of learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate 
praying for addition of offences punishable under Sections 16, 18, 
18B, 20, 38 and 39 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 
(hereinafter being referred to as ‘UAPA’). 
6. 
Learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, in turn, forwarded the 
matter 
to 
learned 
Chief 
Judge, 
City 
Sessions 
Court, 
Calcutta(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘Chief Judge’) for 
considering the said application, vide order dated 5th April, 2022. 
7. 
Learned Chief Judge, vide order dated 7th April, 2022 
permitted addition of offences under Sections 16, 18, 18B, 20, 38, 

3 
 
39 of UAPA in the case and allowed the same to be investigated 
along with the existing offences for which the FIR had been 
registered.  The Investigating Officer was directed to take the 
necessary steps before the learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.   
8. 
The respondent filed a petition under Section 482 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being referred to as ‘CrPC’) 
before the High Court of Calcutta on 25th August, 2022 with a 
prayer to quash the order dated 7th April, 2022 passed by learned 
Chief Judge, Calcutta and all subsequent orders passed by the 
learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Calcutta.  While the 
aforesaid petition was pending, the learned Chief Judge, Calcutta 
passed an order dated 22nd September, 2022 extending the period 
of detention of accused upto 180 days under Section 43D(2)(b) of 
UAPA and permitted the investigating agency to file charge sheet 
beyond the period of 90 days but within 180 days. 
9. 
The High Court proceeded to accept the petition vide order 
dated 11th May, 2023 and quashed the proceedings of the case 
registered against the respondent to the extent of the offences 
punishable under the provisions of UAPA, holding that only a 
Special Court constituted by the Central Government or the State 
Government as per the National Investigation Agency Act, 

4 
 
2008(hereinafter being referred to as ‘NIA Act’) had the exclusive 
jurisdiction to try the offences under UAPA.  It was further held 
that as per Section 16 of the NIA Act, the Sessions Court was 
precluded from taking cognizance of the offences under UAPA and 
thus the order dated 7th April, 2022 and all subsequent 
proceedings taken thereunder were without jurisdiction. 
10. The aforesaid order dated 11th May, 2023 allowing the petition 
filed by the respondent is under challenge at the instance of the 
State of West Bengal in this appeal by special leave. 
 
Submissions on behalf of appellant:- 
 
11. Shri Siddhartha Dave, learned senior counsel appearing for 
the 
appellant 
contended 
that 
the 
instant 
case 
involves 
investigation and prosecution by the state police and not by the 
Central Agency, i.e., National Investigation Agency.  He urged that 
the proceedings would be governed by Section 22 of NIA Act and 
hence the High Court fell in grave error of law in quashing the 
proceedings by relying upon the provisions contained under 
Section 16 of NIA Act. 

5 
 
12. Learned senior counsel further urged that as the case was 
investigated by the State police and since no Special Court had 
been constituted by the State Government under Section 22(1) of 
NIA Act, the Sessions Court having jurisdiction over the division in 
which the offence was committed, was seized of the exclusive 
jurisdiction to try the offences as per Section 22(3) of NIA Act. 
13. He further urged that since no Special Court was constituted, 
the jurisdictional Magistrate, who would be the Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate in this case, has the jurisdiction to deal with the 
remand of the accused.  Nonetheless, Shri Dave candidly conceded 
that the power to extend the period of detention beyond 90 days is 
exclusively vested with the ‘Court’ as defined under Section 2(1)(d) 
of UAPA which would be the jurisdictional Sessions Court in the 
present set of facts and circumstances.   
14. Without prejudice to the above, the contention of the learned 
senior counsel was that since the accused never filed an 
application seeking default bail, after the expiry of 90 days and 
before filing of the charge sheet, the irregularity, if any, in the 
matter of granting remand stood cured and hence, the accused has 
lost the right to claim release on default bail.  He thus implored the 
Court to accept the appeal and set aside the impugned judgment 

6 
 
and permit the Sessions Court to proceed with the trial of the 
accused for the offences charged including those under UAPA. 
 
Submission on behalf of Respondent:- 
 
15. Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the respondent, 
vehemently and fervently urged that the view taken by the High 
Court while interfering with the order dated 7th April, 2022 is the 
only permissible and legal view in the extant facts and 
circumstances.  He referred to the Gazette Notification dated 29th 
April, 2011 and urged that a Special Court has already been 
notified by the Central Government for the State of West Bengal 
and as such, all orders passed and actions taken by the Chief 
Judge and the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate pertaining to the 
offences under the UAPA are illegal and without jurisdiction.  
16. As a consequence, the High Court was justified in exercising 
jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC in quashing the patently 
illegal order dated 7th April, 2022 and all subsequent proceedings 
sought to be taken in furtherance thereof. He urged that the 
impugned order dated 11th May, 2023 is just and legal and does 
not warrant any interference.  However, on the aspect of the grant 

7 
 
of default bail to the accused, learned counsel candidly conceded 
that no prayer was ever made on behalf of the accused either in 
the Sessions Court or the High Court seeking default bail.  The 
plank contention advanced on behalf of the respondent was that 
the proceedings before the Chief Judge and the Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate are vitiated because both the Courts did not have the 
jurisdiction to proceed under the provisions of NIA Act and UAPA 
in light of the fact that Special Court had already been constituted 
for the State of West Bengal by the Central Government vide 
Gazette Notification dated 29th April, 2011 which was functioning. 
17. Learned counsel implored the Court to reject the instant 
appeal. 
 
Discussion and Conclusion:  
 
18. For the sake of convenience, we would like to advert to the 
issues for determination formulated by the learned Single Judge of 
the High Court in the quashing petition:- 
“i. Whether the court of sessions was entitled to entertain an 
application for extension of the period of remand in terms of the 
proviso to Section 43D (5) of the UAPA when no special court had 
been notified by the State of West Bengal under Section 22(1) of the 
National Investigating Agency Act, 2008. 

8 
 
ii. Whether the petitioner could have been remanded by the learned 
Magistrate after offences under UAPA had been added.” 
 
19. Since the validity of the order dated 7th April, 2022 is the main 
issue requiring adjudication in the case, we would like to reproduce 
the said order for ready reference:- 
“IN THE COURT OF CHIEF JUDGE, CITY SESSIONS COURT, 
CALCUTTA 
STF PS Case No. 01 dt. 01.01.2022  
GR(S ) 08 of 2022 
Present: Siddhartha Kanjilal 
Chief Judge, City Sessions Court, Calcutta. JO Code 
WB01057 
 
Order No. 02 dated 07.04.2022 
Today is fixed for production of the accused person and passing 
order with regard to adding sections 16/18/18B/20/38/39 of 
the 
UA(P) 
Act 
to 
the 
initial 
charges 
u/s 
120B/121/121A/122/123/ 124A of IPC. 
Ld. PP in charge is present 
Ld. Advocate for the accused files a fresh vakalatnama. 
Seen the same. Let it be kept with the record. 
IO is present along with CD. 
Accused person namely, Joyeeta Das is produced from police 
custody. 
Today one remand application was filed by the Assistant 
Commissioner of Police. STF, Kolkata and prayed for further 
police custody for further development of the investigation. 
This Court finds that for effective investigation, the accused be 
remanded to police custody till 11.04.2022. 
The investigation Agency is directed to maintain all the 
formalities as per guidelines of Supreme Court while keeping 
the accused in the custody in remand. 
The accused is at liberty to report before the Ld. Court of CMM, 
Calcutta on the next date whether she has been physically or 
mentally tortured by the Investigation Agency while she was in 
custody. 

9 
 
Now 
the 
application 
for 
adding 
the 
sections 
16/18/18B/20/38/39 of the UA(P) Act is taken up for hearing. 
Perused the record and application as well as case diary. 
It is revealed from the CD that several incriminating documents, 
literatures, posters etc. related to the organizational agenda of 
the banned organization, CPI (Maoist) propagating for armed 
revolution in India to overawe the established democratically 
elected Government in the Country were recovered from the 
accused person relating to Terrorists Act against the 
Government. 
As per the judgment passed by Hon'ble Justice Dr. Dhananjaya 
Y Chandrachud (Supreme Court) in connection with Criminal 
Appeal No. 1165 of 2021 the CJM Court of Sessions Court is 
the trial Court for the offences punishable under section UA(P) 
Act when no special Court has been notified by the State 
Government as per Section 27 of the NIA Act. 
If that be the so then, any offence where UA(P) Act is involved, 
the CMM, Calcutta, herein is the remand Court and the Chief 
Judge, City Sessions Court, Calcutta is the Trial Court as no 
special court has been notified by the State Government for the 
jurisdiction of Calcutta as per Section 27 of the NIA Act. 
Any accused being arrested by the State Police, having UA(P) 
Act be produced before the Court of Ld. CMM, Calcutta unless 
and until charge sheet is submitted and once the charge sheet 
is submitted, the Ld. CMM. Calcutta is duty bound to place the 
case record along with the accused person before this Court. 
If an accused is arrested in other sections and during 
investigation if the Investigation Agency wants to add the 
sections of UA(P) Act, only permission is required from the 
Sessions Court and after obtaining permission, the CMM, 
Calcutta or the CJM of any district has the power to allow the 
Investigation Agency for adding sections of UA(P) Act. 
If the Investigation Agency prays for extension of time for filing 
charge sheet beyond statutory period of 90 days, where UA(P) 
Act has either been added or initiated, permission is required 
from the Sessions Court. 
In case of taking the accused in remand, the remand Court i.e. 
the Ld. Court of CMM, Calcutta or CJM of any district has 
enough jurisdiction to pass such order. 
In the present case. Investigation Agency prays for adding 
sections 16/18/18B/20/38/39 of the UA(P) Act. 

10 
 
This Court finds that (here is sufficient ground for allowing the 
Investigation Agency to add the sections of the UA(P) Act in this 
particular Case. 
Thus, the petition filed by the Investigation Agency dt. 
05.04.2022 
seeking 
permission 
for 
adding 
sections 
16/18/18B/20/38/39 of the UA(P) Act is allowed. 
Investigation agency is directed to take necessary steps before 
the Ld. Court of CMM, Calcutta for the same. 
To 11.04.2022 for production of the accused before the Ld. 
CMM, Calcutta. 
CD be returned. 
Let a copy of this order be given to the IO of this Case. 
Office is directed to send the case record to the Ld. CMM, 
Calcutta along with copy of order sheet after keeping the 
skeleton record.” 
 
20. After considering the entirety of the material available on 
record, the learned Single Judge proceeded to hold as below:- 
(i) 
That the special Court constituted by the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, 
under the NIA Act has the exclusive jurisdiction to try 
offences under UAPA. 
 
(ii) 
In view of Section 16 of the said Act, the special Court 
cannot take cognizance of the offence under the UAPA 
directly without the case being committed to it. 
 
(iii) 
In terms of the proviso to sub-Section(2) of Section 43(D) 
of the UAPA, the Court is empowered to extend the period 
of detention pending investigation. On a report of the 
Public Prosecutor indicating progress of investigation and 
specific reason for detention of the accused beyond 90 
days but not more than 180 days. 
 
(iv) 
Sub-Section (3) of Section 22 of the NIA Act states that 
until a special Court is designated by the State 
Government under sub-Section (1), the jurisdiction 
conferred by the Act on a special Court notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code, shall be exercised by the 

11 
 
Court of Sessions in which the scheduled offence is 
committed and it shall have powers to follow the procedure 
provided under Chapter IV of the Act. 
 
(v) 
Reliance was also placed on the judgment of this Court in 
the case of Bikramjit Singh v. State of Punjab (2020) 10 
SCC 616 wherein it has been held that for all offences 
under the UAPA, the special Court alone has the exclusive 
jurisdiction to try such offences. 
21. After making the aforesaid discussion, the learned Single 
Judge proceeded to refer to the Division Bench judgment of the 
Calcutta High Court in CRM(DB) No. 3590 of 2022 dated 1st 
December, 2022 wherein it was held that once the offences under 
UAPA are added to a case, the Magistrate is denuded of the power 
to remand in terms of Section 167 CrPC (as amended in UAPA) 
beyond a period of 30 days.  Observing so, the learned Single Judge 
proceeded to hold that the order dated 7th April, 2022 passed by 
the learned Chief Judge, City Sessions Court, Calcutta and all 
subsequent orders passed by the learned Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate were illegal and inoperative and hence the same were 
quashed. 
22. The frontal issue which falls for our consideration is as to 
whether the Chief Judge, City Sessions Court, Calcutta had the 
jurisdiction to pass the order dated 7th April, 2022. 

12 
 
23. We would like to refer to sub-section (1) and sub-section (3) of 
Section 22 of the NIA Act which is germane to the controversy and 
is being reproduced hereinbelow:- 
“22. 
Power of State Government to designate Court of 
Session as Special Courts- 
(1) The State Government may [designate one or more Courts of 
Session as] Special Courts for the trial of offences under any or all 
the enactments specified in the Schedule. 
(2)…. 
(3) The jurisdiction conferred by this Act on a Special Court shall, 
until a Special Court is [designated] by the State Government 
under sub-section (1) in the case of any offence punishable under 
this Act, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, be 
exercised by the Court of Session of the division in which such 
offence has been committed and it shall have all the powers and 
follow the procedure provided under this Chapter. 
(4)….” 
24. A bare perusal of sub-section (3) of Section 22 of NIA Act 
would make it clear that until a Special Court is constituted by the 
State Government under sub-Section (1) of Section 22, in case of 
registration of any offence punishable under UAPA, the Court of 
Sessions of the division, in which the offence has been committed, 
would have the jurisdiction as conferred by the Act on a Special 
Court and a fortiori, it would have all the powers to follow the 
procedure provided under Chapter IV of the NIA Act.  
25. Admittedly, the present case involves investigation by the 
State police, and therefore, the provisions of Section 22 would be 

13 
 
applicable insofar as the issue of jurisdiction of the Court to try the 
offences is concerned. 
26. Learned counsel for the respondent relied upon Gazette 
Notification dated 29th April, 2011 in order to canvass that the 
Special Court had already been constituted for trial of UAPA 
offences within the State of West Bengal. 
27. A bare perusal of the said notification would make it clear that 
the Special Court was constituted by the “Central Government” in 
exercise of the power conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 11 of 
the NIA Act. 
28. The State Government has been given exclusive power 
delegated by virtue of Section 22(1) of the Act (reproduced supra) 
to constitute one or more Special Courts for trial of offences under 
any or all the enactments specified in the Schedule. 
29. It is not in dispute that the State of West Bengal has so far 
not exercised the power conferred upon it by Section 22 of the NIA 
Act for constituting a Special Court for trial of offences set out in 
the Schedule to the NIA Act and hence, the Sessions Court within 
whose jurisdiction, the offence took place which would be the Chief 
Judge cum City Sessions Court in the case at hand, had the power 

14 
 
and jurisdiction to deal with the case by virtue of the sub-section 
(3) of Section 22 of the NIA Act. 
30. Hence, the order dated 7th April, 2022, whereby the learned 
Chief Judge cum City Sessions Court permitted the addition of the 
offences under UAPA to the case does not suffer from any illegality 
or infirmity. 
31. Now, coming to the second argument advanced by learned 
counsel representing the parties. 
32. Section 43D of UAPA provides a modified scheme for the 
application of Section 167 CrPC which reads as below:- 
“43-D. Modified application of certain provisions of the 
Code.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or any 
other law, every offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed 
to be a cognizable offence within the meaning of clause (c) of 
Section 2 of the Code, and “cognizable case” as defined in that 
clause shall be construed accordingly. 
(2) Section 167 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case 
involving an offence punishable under this Act subject to the 
modification that in sub-section (2),— 
(a) the references to “fifteen days”, “ninety days” and 
“sixty days”, wherever they occur, shall be construed as 
references to “thirty days”, “ninety days” and “ninety 
days” respectively; and 
(b) after the proviso, the following provisos shall 
be inserted, namely:— 
Provided further that if it is not possible to complete the 
investigation within the said period of ninety days, the Court may 
if it is satisfied with the report of the Public Prosecutor indicating 
the progress of the investigation and the specific reasons for the 

15 
 
detention of the accused beyond the said period of ninety days, 
extend the said period up to one hundred and eighty days: 
Provided also that if the police officer making the investigation 
under this Act, requests, for the purposes of investigation, for 
police custody from judicial custody of any person in judicial 
custody, he shall file an affidavit stating the reasons for doing so 
and shall also explain the delay, if any, for requesting such police 
custody.”. 
(3) Section 268 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case 
involving an offence punishable under this Act subject to the 
modification that— 
(a) the reference in sub-section (1) thereof— 
(i) to “the State Government” shall be construed as a 
reference to “the Central Government or the State 
Government”; 
(ii) to “order of the State Government” shall be 
construed as a reference to “order of the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may 
be”; and 
(b) the reference in sub-section (2) thereof, to “the State 
Government” shall be construed as a reference to “the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be”. 
(4) Nothing in Section 438 of the Code shall apply in relation to 
any case involving the arrest of any person accused of having 
committed an offence punishable under this Act. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person 
accused of an offence punishable under Chapters IV and VI of this 
Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond 
unless the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity of 
being heard on the application for such release: 
Provided that such accused person shall not be released on bail 
or on his own bond if the Court, on a perusal of the case diary or 
the report made under Section 173 of the Code is of the opinion 
that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the 
accusation against such person is prima facie true. 
(6) The restrictions on granting of bail specified in sub-section (5) 
is in addition to the restrictions under the Code or any other law 
for the time being in force on granting of bail. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (5) and 
(6), no bail shall be granted to a person accused of an offence 
punishable under this Act, if he is not an Indian citizen and has 
entered the country unauthorisedly or illegally except in very 

16 
 
exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in 
writing.” 
33. Under the proviso to Section 43D(2), the Court has been given 
the power to extend and authorise detention of the accused beyond 
a period of 90 days as provided under Section 167(2) CrPC. 
34. Section 2(1)(d) of UAPA provides the definition of ‘Court’ under 
the Act and it reads as below:- 
“2. Definitions.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(d) “court” means a criminal court having jurisdiction, under the 
Code, to try offences under this Act [and includes a Special Court 
constituted under Section 11 or under [Section 22] of the National 
Investigation Agency Act, 2008.” 
35. A plain reading of the provision would clearly indicate that the 
same admits to the jurisdiction of a normal criminal Court and also 
includes a Special Court constituted under Section 11 or Section 
22 of the NIA Act. 
36. Hence, the Chief Judge cum City Sessions Court had the 
jurisdiction to pass the order dated 7th April, 2022.  In view of the 
definition of the ‘Court’ provided under Section 2(1)(d) of UAPA, the 
jurisdictional Magistrate would also be clothed with the jurisdiction 
to deal with the remand of the accused albeit for a period of 90 days 
only because an express order of the Sessions Court or the Special 
Court, as the case may be, authorising remand beyond such period 

17 
 
would be required by virtue of Section 43D(2) of UAPA(reproduced 
supra). 
37. Hence, to the extent the learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate 
extended the remand of the accused beyond the period of 90 days, 
the proceedings were grossly illegal.  Nonetheless, the fact remains 
that the charge sheet came to be filed beyond the period of 90 days 
and as a matter of fact, even beyond a period of 180 days, but the 
accused never claimed default bail on the ground that the charge 
sheet had not been filed within the extended period as per Section 
43D of the UAPA.  Hence, the only academic question left for the 
Court to examine in such circumstances would be the effect of 
evidence collected, if any, during this period of so called illegal 
remand, after 90 days had lapsed from the date of initial remand 
of the accused and the right of the accused to seek any other legal 
remedy against such illegal remand.  Such issues would have to be 
raised in appropriate proceedings, i.e. before the trial court at the 
proper stage. 
38. As a consequence of the above discussion, the impugned 
judgment dated 11th May, 2023 passed by learned Single Judge of 
the Calcutta High Court cannot be sustained and is hereby 
reversed and set aside. 

18 
 
39. The appeal is allowed accordingly. 
40. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.…………………………J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
April 18, 2024