2024 INSC 320
1 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     REPORTABLE 
 
 
 
  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 985 OF 2010 
 
 
BABU SAHEBAGOUDA RUDRAGOUDAR  
AND OTHERS  
 
 
 
              ...APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF KARNATAKA  
                    ...RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
Mehta, J. 
 
 
1. 
The 
appellants 
herein, 
namely, 
Babu 
Sahebagouda 
Rudragoudar(A-1), Alagond Sahebagouda Rudragoudar(A-2) and 
Mudakappa 
@ 
Gadegappa 
Rudragoudar(A-3) 
along 
with 
Sahebagouda Gadageppa Rudragoudar(A-4), Basappa Avvanna @ 
Huvanna Giradi @ Chigari (A-5) and Basappa Dundappa @ 
Dondiba Hanjagi (A-6) were subjected to trial  in Sessions Case No. 
28 of 2002 in the Court of the learned Fast Track Court I, Bijapur 
for charges pertaining to offences punishable under Sections 143, 
147, 148, 506(2) and Section 302 read with Section 149 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter being referred to as ‘IPC’). 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.04.19
14:43:10 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
2. 
For the sake of convenience, the appellants shall hereinafter 
be referred to as A-1, A-2 and A-3.  
3. 
The learned trial Court proceeded to discard the prosecution 
story and acquitted the accused appellants(A-1, A-2 and A-3) along 
with A-4, A-5 and A-6 vide judgment dated 23rd July, 2005.  
4. 
The State of Karnataka challenged the said judgment 
recording acquittal of A-1 to A-6 by filing Criminal Appeal No. 
2215/2005 before the High Court of Karnataka.  The Division 
Bench of High Court vide its judgment dated 14th September, 2009 
proceeded to allow the appeal; reversed the acquittal of A-1, A-2 
and A-3 and convicted these accused for the offence punishable 
under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC and sentenced them 
to undergo imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs. 50,000/- 
each within a period of six months and in default, to further 
undergo imprisonment for two years.   The appeal as against A-5 
and A-6 was dismissed, while appeal qua A-4 stood abated on 
account of his death.  Out of the fine amount to be realised, a sum 
of Rs. 10,000/- was ordered to be paid to the State Government 
and the balance amount of Rs. 1,40,000/- was ordered to be paid 
to the complainant(PW-1).   

3 
 
5. 
The judgment dated 14th September, 2009 rendered by the 
learned Division Bench of the High Court reversing the acquittal of 
the accused appellants and convicting and sentencing them as 
above is assailed in the present appeal. 
Brief facts: - 
6. 
The complainant, Chanagouda(PW-1) owns agricultural 
lands and a house in village Babanagar, Bijapur, Karnataka.  It is 
alleged by the prosecution that in the morning of 19th September, 
2001, the deceased Malagounda, son of complainant, along with 
labourers/servants 
Revappa(PW-2), 
Siddappa(PW-3), 
Hiragappa(PW-4) and Suresh(PW-5) had gone to put up a bund 
(check dam) in their land. At about 12 o’ clock in the afternoon, 
the complainant(PW-1) packed lunch for these five persons and 
proceeded to the field where the farming operations were being 
undertaken.  The work continued till 3.30 p.m. and thereafter, the 
four servants(PW-2, PW-3, PW-4 and PW-5), along with the 
deceased Malagounda and the complainant(PW-1) proceeded to 
the village. They had reached near the land of one Ummakka 
Kulkarni at about 4.00 pm, where A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 suddenly 
came around and exhorted that the way the complainant party had 
murdered Sangound, they would take revenge upon the members 

4 
 
of the complainant party in the same manner.  A-1 holding a 
jambai, A-2 holding an axe, A-3 holding a sickle and A-4 holding 
an axe, belaboured Malagounda, as a result of which he fell down.  
The assailants thereafter threatened the complainant(PW-1) that if 
he tried to intervene, he too would meet the same fate as his son.  
Fearing for his own life, the complainant(PW-1) ran away and hid 
behind the bushes in order to avoid being beaten by the accused. 
7. 
After sunset, the complainant(PW-1) returned to the village 
and narrated about the incident to his family members.  A written 
complaint of this incident came to be submitted by the 
complainant(PW-1) at Tikota Police Station on 20th September, 
2001 at 4.00 am in the morning whereupon FIR(Exhibit P-10) was 
registered and investigation commenced.  After conclusion of 
investigation, a charge sheet came to be filed against the 
appellants(A-1, A-2, A-3) and other accused(A-4, A-5 and A-6) for 
the offences punishable under Sections 143, 147, 148, 506(2) and 
Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC in the Court of jurisdictional 
Magistrate.  The case being exclusively sessions triable was 
committed to the Court of Sessions Judge, Bijapur where charges 
were framed against the accused for the above offences.  The 
accused persons pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.  The 

5 
 
prosecution examined as many as 27 witnesses, exhibited 24 
documents and 17 material objects to prove its case.  The accused, 
upon being questioned under Section 313 of Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being referred to as ‘CrPC’) claimed 
that they were innocent and had been falsely implicated in the 
case.  However, no evidence was led in defence. For the sake of 
convenience, the details of the prosecution witnesses are enlisted 
below: - 
PW-1 
Chanagouda (complainant)(eye witness) 
PW-2 
Revappa (eye witness) 
PW-3 
Siddappa (eye witness) (hostile) 
PW-4 
Hiragappa (eye witness) 
PW-5 
Suresh (eye witness) (hostile) 
PW-6 
Basagonda (eye witness) 
PW-7 
Appasaheb (last seen witness) 
PW-8 
Sabu (panch witness) 
PW-9 
Basu (panch witness) 
PW-10 
Ramu (panch witness) 
PW-11 
Bhimanna (panch witness) 
PW-12 
Sangond (panch witness) 
PW-13 
Shantinath (panch witness) 
PW-14 
Sakrubai (mother of the deceased) (hearsay 
witness) 
PW-15 
Shankargouda (eye witness) 
PW-16 
Siddappa (hearsay witness) 
PW-17 
Dr. Anilkumar (Medical Jurist) 
PW-18 
Shetteppa 
(Retd. 
ASI) 
(registered 
the 
FIR) 
(Poujadar) 
PW-19 
Veerbhadrayya (Carrier Constable) 
PW-20 
Dayanand (Photographer) 
PW-21 
Raju (Scribe of Sketch Map) 
PW-22 
Shrishail (Carrier Constable) 
PW-23 
Ratansing (Assistant Sub-Inspector) 
PW-24 
Chandrashekhar (Investigating Officer) 
PW-25 
Jaganath (PSI) 
PW-26 
Mohammadsharif (Assistant Sub-Inspector) 

6 
 
PW-27 
Basanagouda (Police Inspector, State Intelligence, 
Bangalore) (2nd Investigating Officer) 
 
8. 
Upon hearing the arguments advanced by the prosecution 
and the defence counsel and after thoroughly appreciating the 
evidence available on record, the trial Court proceeded to hold that 
the prosecution could not prove the charges levelled against the 
accused beyond all manner of doubt and acquitted all the six 
accused vide judgment dated 23rd July, 2005 with the following 
pertinent findings: - 
(i) 
That in the charge sheet, the prosecution had involved 
A-5 and A-6.  However, none of the witnesses examined by the 
prosecution spoke a single word incriminating A-5 and A-6 
either individually or vicariously and this circumstance casted 
serious doubts in the mind of the Court with regard to the 
conduct of the witnesses to implicate A-1 to A-4 while 
exonerating A-5 and A-6. 
(ii) 
That PW-1, PW-2, PW-3, PW-4, PW-5 and PW-6 gave 
contradictory versions regarding exact identities/names of the 
assailants. 
(iii) 
PW-4 who was a coolie and had worked along with the 
deceased Malagounda did not implicate A-4 in the crime. 

7 
 
(iv) 
Basagonda(PW-6), projected to be an eye witness gave 
evidence contradicting the evidence of PW-2 and PW-4.   
(v) 
Rudrappa, son of PW-6 was one of the accused in the 
murder of Sangound, son of A-4 and thus, the said witness 
had a motive to speak against A-1 to A-4. 
(vi) 
Likewise, 
another 
projected 
eyewitness, 
namely, 
Shankargouda(PW-15), did not state about the presence of A-
4 at the time of incident. 
(vii) 
The trial Court further found that it was admitted by the 
eye witnesses(PW-6 and PW-15) that it had rained in the 
village continuously for three days prior to the incident and 
thus, the theory put forth by the complainant that the 
deceased and the four labourers(PW-2 to PW-5) had gone to 
the field for raising a bund was improbable as during the spell 
of incessant rainfall, it would not have been possible to carry 
out such an operation and for that matter, any other farming 
activity. 
9. 
At para 15 of the judgment, the trial Court concluded as 
below: - 
“…In view of conflicting nature of evidence of these eye witnesses, 
it is clear that their evidence is not consistent with the prosecution 
case and it has a different version with reference to each witness.  

8 
 
Hence a serious doubt arises as to the truthfulness of the 
prosecution.” 
10. The trial Court discussed evidence of ASI, Tikota Police 
Station(PW-18), wherein he admitted that police visited the place 
of incident in the night only. It was also noted that 
complainant(PW-1) admitted that the complaint was made after 
the police had visited the place of incident.  
11. PW-2 stated in his cross examination that the police came to 
the village at about 10 or 11 am and recorded his statement at the 
police station at that time only i.e. at 12 o’ clock. Taking this into 
consideration, the trial Court recorded a categoric finding that 
complaint(Exhibit P-1) was a post-investigation document and as 
such, it was hit by Section 162 CrPC and did not have any 
evidentiary worth. This conclusion was recorded in Para 17 of the 
judgment which is extracted hereinbelow for the sake of ready 
reference: - 
“According to the cross – examination of P.W.2, the police came to 
the village at about 10 or 11 a.m. He called by the police and they 
went to the place and the police inspected the dead body. P.W.2 
is very much specific that they went to the place along with the 
police at 11p.m. and thereafter went to the police station at 12 O’ 
clock in the night. According to P.W.2, the police have recorded 
his statement in the police station at that time only i.e., at 12 O 
clock. This goes to show that the police were aware of the offence 
at 11.00 p.m. on 19.09.2001. P.W.6., who claims to be an eye 
witness, returned to the house at about 5-00 or 6-00 p.m. and 
informed the incident to the children of his uncle viz., he informed 
Pargouda, Shankargouda and Chanagouda. But, however, P.W.1 

9 
 
was hiding near the bushes at his land and if what P.W.6 says is 
true, then in that case, P.W.1 was in the house at 5-00 or 6-00 
pm only. Nothing prevented P.W.1 to rush immediately to the 
police station which was 10 Kms away and to file the complaint. 
Even P.W.6 further admits that he told the incident to these 
persons and they had told him that they will go to the police 
station and it was 6-00 or 7-00 p.m., at the time. Even if that is 
the case, P.W.1 has to offer explanation as to why he filed the 
complaint at 4.00 a.m. When the admissions of this witness are 
taken into account, the police were aware of the murder at about 
11 p.m. in the night and they had even visited the place of offence. 
Nothing prevented the police who visited the place of offence to 
record the statement of P.W.1 at his house and the delay for six 
hours as per the evidence of P.W.1 or as to the evidence of P.W.6, 
the delay of eight hours is not explained by the prosecution. If 
already the statements of the witnesses were recorded at the 
village only after seeing the dead body, then in that case Ex.P1 
which is the complaint, is hit by Section 162 of CrPC and cannot 
have evidentiary value.” 
           
12. The trial Court also concluded that the opinion of the Medical 
Officer regarding time of death of the deceased totally contradicted 
the case set up by the prosecution witnesses in their evidence 
regarding the time of incident. 
13. Regarding the seizure of weapons/articles, the trial Court 
noted at para 19 that the complainant(PW-1) admitted in his cross-
examination that the police had shown him the weapons of offence 
on the date of incident itself.  However, as per the Investigating 
Officer(PW-27), the weapons were shown to have been recovered 
on 1st October, 2001 and, therefore, evidence of complainant(PW-
1) totally contradicted the claim of the Investigating Officer(PW-27) 

10 
 
that he had seized the weapons in furtherance of the disclosure 
statements of the accused. 
14. Taking note of these inherent lacunae, infirmities and 
contradictions in the prosecution evidence, the trial Court 
proceeded to hold that the prosecution case was full of 
inconsistencies and infirmities and that it had failed to prove the 
charges against the accused beyond all manner of doubt.  
Accordingly, the accused appellants(A-1, A-2 and A-3) and other 
three accused(A-4, A-5 and A-6) were acquitted of the charges. 
15. The State preferred an appeal under Section 378(1) read with 
378(3) CrPC challenging the acquittal of the accused.  The learned 
Division Bench of High Court of Karnataka partly allowed the said 
appeal vide judgment dated 14th September, 2009 and while 
reversing the acquittal of the accused A-1, A-2 and A-3 as recorded 
by the trial Court, convicted and sentenced them as above.  The 
appeal against A-4 stood abated on account of his death.  The 
appeal against A-5 and A-6 was dismissed upholding their 
acquittal.  
16. The instant appeal has been instituted at the instance of the 
accused appellants(A-1, A-2 and A-3) for assailing the judgment 
dated 14th September, 2009 rendered by the learned Division 

11 
 
Bench of the High Court of Karnataka, Circuit Bench, Gulbarga 
whereby the acquittal of the appellants has been reversed and they 
have been convicted and sentenced to suffer life imprisonment.  
Submissions on behalf of the appellants: - 
17. Learned counsel representing the appellants urged that the 
view taken by the High Court in reversing the acquittal of the 
appellants recorded by the trial Court by a well-reasoned judgment 
is totally contrary to the settled principles laid down by this Court 
regarding scope of interference in an appeal against acquittal. 
18. Learned counsel urged that the appellate Court should be 
very slow to intervene with the acquittal of an accused as recorded 
by the trial Court.  Acquittal can be reversed only if the findings 
recorded by the trial Court are found to be patently illegal or 
perverse or if the only view possible on the basis of the evidence 
available on record points towards the guilt of the accused. If two 
views are possible, the acquittal recorded by the trial Court should 
not be interfered with unless perversity or misreading of evidence 
is reflected from the judgment recording acquittal. 
19. Learned counsel further urged that the learned Division 
Bench of the High Court, while rendering the judgment reversing 

12 
 
acquittal of the appellant barely referred to the findings on the 
basis of which the trial Court had acquitted the accused by 
extending them the benefit of doubt.  Rather, the High Court went 
on to record its own fresh conclusions after re-appreciation of the 
evidence.  Such an approach is de hors the well-settled principles 
governing consideration of an appeal against acquittal and hence, 
the impugned judgment deserves to be set aside. 
20. They advanced pertinent submissions assailing the judgment 
of the High Court seeking acquittal of the accused appellants. 
21. It was urged that the complainant(PW-1), father of the 
deceased Malagounda and the four labourers(PW-2, PW-3, PW-4 
and PW-5) abandoned the deceased victim whom they claimed to 
have seen being belaboured with their own eyes. They neither 
made any efforts to take stock of the victim’s condition nor was the 
matter reported to the police promptly which makes it clear that 
the so called eye witnesses actually never saw the incident 
happening with their own eyes and a case of blind murder has 
been foisted upon the appellants on account of prior enmity. 
22. The attention of this Court was drawn to the following 
excerpts from the evidence of complainant, Chanagouda(PW-1):- 

13 
 
“….Again I returned back and went near my land and entered 
the bushes to hide myself. I sat at that place up to 6 or 7 PM 
in the evening. After the sun-set I returned to my village. I 
told the incident to my family members. In the night myself 
and my brothers and relatives went to the place and saw the 
dead body. Thereafter we informed to the police. The cousins 
informed about the incident to the police. At that time the 
police came to our house and took me to the police station. 
The police enquired me and I informed them about the 
incident and they made a writing. It was about 2 or 3 AM in 
the morning. In the morning hours the police came to the place. 
I now see the complaint at ex.P.1, and it bears my signature at 
Ex.p.1(a)…. 
 ….The police recorded what I have stated to them in the police 
station. Thereafter I signed to that writing. On the next day the 
police have taken my statement. The Poujadar recorded my 
statement. The inspector also questioned me. It is not correct to 
suggest that the inspector has not recorded my statement….. 
….My relatives did not made a telephone call and personally 
went to the police station and brought the police. At that time 
initially the police came and thereafter the Poujadar came. 
They came to our house. The poujadar questioned me what 
has happened. I told the Poujadar what I was knowing. The 
poujadar made a writing about it. The writing was made after 
the police visited the place of incident….. 
…..Myself and my relatives went to see the dead body in the 
night and at that time it was 10 to 11 PM. When we returned 
to house it was 10 or 11 PM. Phone facilities are available in 
our village. I did not made any telephone call to the police. I 
also did not tell-to my relatives to make a telephone call to 
the police station. Shivanagouda and Banagouda are my other 
two sons. Both of them are educated. They were present in 
the house when I returned from the land. When I told my son 
about the incident, they went on motor-cycle to the police 
station but did not made any telephone call to the police 
station. My son Shivanagouda and Sangond went on the 
motor-cycle to the police station. They went to the police  
station at about 12 o’clock in the night. The distance between 
Tikota Police Station and my village is 10 KMS….. 
….On the day of incident only the police showed the weapon 
of offence..”                                                 (emphasis supplied) 
 
23. In this very context, the attention of the Court was drawn to 
the evidence of ASI Tikota Police Station(PW-18), who recorded the 

14 
 
FIR(Exhibit P-10) wherein he admitted that he did not know 
whether prior to 4.00 am on that day, the information of the 
murder was already provided at the police station. 
24. Learned counsel thus urged that the police had already been 
informed about the incident by none other than the sons of the 
complainant(PW-1) around 12 o’ clock in the night and hence, 
there was no reason as to why the FIR was not registered 
immediately on receiving such information. 
25. Learned counsel contended that the complainant(PW-1) 
admitted in cross examination that the Poujadar scribed a 
complaint and he was made to append his signatures thereupon.  
It was submitted that the said complaint was not produced on 
record.  Hence, there is a genuine doubt regarding the FIR(Exhibit 
P-10) being a subsequently created post investigation document. 
26. He then referred to the statement of Revappa(PW-2) who 
admitted in cross-examination that the police came to the village 
at about 10 or 11 pm and he was sleeping in his house when the 
call came from the police.  A police officer from Tikota Police 
Station came to call him.  He along with the police officer went to 
the place of incident where the dead body was lying.  The time was 

15 
 
about 11.00 pm.  They went to the police station at 12 o’ clock in 
the night where his statement was recorded. 
27. The 
Court 
was 
taken 
through 
the 
statement 
of 
Hiragappa(PW-4) who also stated that police came to their village 
at 8.00 or 9.00 pm in the night.  They inquired from him and he 
divulged as to how the incident had happened.  He and the other 
witnesses were questioned and their statements were noted 
whereafter they proceeded to the crime scene.  They all went to the 
police station at about 11.00 pm in the night.  He travelled in the 
police jeep.  His statement was again recorded at the Police Station 
around 12’o clock or 1.00 am. 
28. Learned 
counsel 
also 
referred 
to 
the 
statement 
of 
Basagonda(PW-6) who claimed to be an eye witness of the incident 
and urged that the witness stated about the presence of only two 
servants with the deceased Malagounda while he was allegedly 
being assaulted by the accused.  Most significantly, he did not 
state about the presence of the complainant(PW-1) at the crime 
scene. PW-6 admitted in his cross-examination that he returned 
to his house at about 5 to 6 pm and informed about the incident 
to the children of his uncle and Paragouda, Shankargouda and 
Chanagouda(PW-1).  Many people had gathered when he spoke 

16 
 
about the incident.  It was submitted that this version of PW-6 
completely belies and eclipses the claim of the complainant(PW-1) 
that he had seen the incident with his own eyes because, if the 
complainant(PW-1) had himself witnessed the occurrence, there 
was no occasion for PW-6 to collect all the family members 
including the complainant(PW-1) and inform them about the 
incident. 
29. The evidence of PW-15, another alleged eye witnesses was 
criticised and it was submitted that the conduct of this witness 
who happens to be a cousin of PW-1, in casually going away to his 
farmland despite witnessing the brutal assault and not taking any 
steps to inform the police or the close relatives clearly shows that 
he is a cooked up witness and was not present at the crime scene. 
30. The statement of Dr. Anil Kumar(PW-17) was referred to and 
it was submitted that the Medical Jurist conducted autopsy upon 
the dead body at about 9.00 am on 20th September, 2001 and gave 
pertinent opinion that the time of death of the victim was 18 to 24 
hours before the autopsy being carried out.  In cross-examination, 
he admitted that decomposition had set in the dead body and that 
the time of death was more than 24 hours prior to the examination.  
Thus, it was submitted that the time of incident as portrayed in 

17 
 
the evidence given by the so called eye witnesses is totally 
contradicted by the opinion of the Medical Jurist. 
31. It was also contended that the Investigating Officer(PW-27) 
has given false evidence regarding the disclosure statements made 
by the accused and the recoveries of the weapons effected in 
furtherance thereof, because the complainant(PW-1) clearly 
admitted in his evidence that the police had showed him the 
weapons on the very day of the incident. 
32. It was also contended that neither the disclosure statements 
nor the recovery memos bear the signatures/thumb impressions 
of the accused and hence, the recoveries cannot be read in 
evidence or attributed to the accused appellants. 
33. Learned counsel for the appellants vehemently urged that the 
learned Division Bench of the High Court was not justified in 
causing interference into the well-reasoned judgment of acquittal 
rendered by the learned trial Court and reversing the acquittal of 
the accused appellants and that too, without recording any finding 
that the trial Court’s judgment was perverse or that no view except 
the one warranting conviction of the accused was possible upon 
appreciation of evidence as available on record. On these grounds, 

18 
 
he implored the court to set aside the impugned judgment and 
restore the acquittal of the appellants.  
Submissions on behalf of Respondent-State: - 
34. Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the respondent 
State vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions advanced 
by learned counsel for the appellants.  He urged that learned 
Division Bench of the High Court, while considering the appeal 
against acquittal,  thoroughly reappreciated the evidence available 
on record and arrived at an independent and well considered 
conclusion that the depositions of the eye witnesses PW-1, PW-2, 
PW-4, PW-6 and PW-15 were convincing and did not suffer from 
any significant contradictions or infirmities so as to justify the 
decision of the trial Court in discarding their evidence and 
acquitting the accused of the charges.  The FIR(Exhibit P-10) was 
promptly lodged at 4.00 am in the morning of 20th September, 
2001.  There was no such delay in lodging the report which could 
cast a doubt on the truthfulness of the prosecution story.  The so 
called contradictions and discrepancies highlighted by the trial 
Court in the evidence of the eyewitnesses for doubting their 
evidentiary worth are trivial and insignificant and acquittal of 
accused as recorded by the learned trial Court disregarding the 

19 
 
testimony of the eyewitnesses is based on perverse and 
unacceptable reasoning.  Learned counsel thus urged that the 
High Court was perfectly justified in reversing the acquittal of the 
accused appellants by the impugned judgment which does not 
require interference in this appeal. 
35. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions made at bar and have gone through the judgments of 
the trial Court and High Court as well as the evidence available on 
record. 
Discussion and Conclusion: - 
36. First of all, we would like to reiterate the principles laid down 
by this Court governing the scope of interference by the High Court 
in an appeal filed by the State for challenging acquittal of the 
accused recorded by the trial Court.  
37. This Court in the case of Rajesh Prasad v. State of Bihar 
and Another1 encapsulated the legal position covering the field 
after considering various earlier judgments and held as below: - 
 “29. After referring to a catena of judgments, this Court culled 
out the following general principles regarding the powers of the 
appellate court while dealing with an appeal against an order of 
 
1 (2022) 3 SCC 471 

20 
 
acquittal 
in 
the 
following 
words: 
(Chandrappa 
case [Chandrappa v. State of Karnataka, (2007) 4 SCC 415] 
 
“42. From the above decisions, in our considered view, 
the following general principles regarding powers of the 
appellate court while dealing with an appeal against an 
order of acquittal emerge: 
 
(1) An appellate court has full power to review, 
reappreciate and reconsider the evidence 
upon which the order of acquittal is founded. 
 
(2) The Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 puts 
no limitation, restriction or condition on 
exercise of such power and an appellate court 
on the evidence before it may reach its own 
conclusion, both on questions of fact and of 
law. 
 
(3) Various expressions, such as, “substantial 
and compelling reasons”, “good and sufficient 
grounds”, 
“very 
strong 
circumstances”, 
“distorted conclusions”, “glaring mistakes”, 
etc. are not intended to curtail extensive 
powers of an appellate court in an appeal 
against acquittal. Such phraseologies are 
more in the nature of “flourishes of language” 
to emphasise the reluctance of an appellate 
court to interfere with acquittal than to curtail 
the power of the court to review the evidence 
and to come to its own conclusion. 
 
(4) An appellate court, however, must bear in 
mind that in case of acquittal, there is double 
presumption in favour of the accused. Firstly, 
the presumption of innocence is available to 
him under the fundamental principle of 
criminal jurisprudence that every person shall 
be presumed to be innocent unless he is 
proved guilty by a competent court of 
law. Secondly, the accused having secured his 
acquittal, the presumption of his innocence is 
further 
reinforced, 
reaffirmed 
and 
strengthened by the trial court. 
 
(5) If two reasonable conclusions are possible 
on the basis of the evidence on record, the 

21 
 
appellate court should not disturb the finding 
of acquittal recorded by the trial court.” 
 
38. Further, in the case of H.D. Sundara & Ors. v. State of 
Karnataka2 this Court summarized the principles governing the 
exercise of appellate jurisdiction while dealing with an appeal 
against acquittal under Section 378 of CrPC as follows: - 
“8.1. The acquittal of the accused further strengthens the 
presumption of innocence; 
8.2. The appellate court, while hearing an appeal against 
acquittal, is entitled to reappreciate the oral and documentary 
evidence; 
8.3. The appellate court, while deciding an appeal against 
acquittal, after reappreciating the evidence, is required to 
consider whether the view taken by the trial court is a possible 
view which could have been taken on the basis of the evidence 
on record; 
8.4. If the view taken is a possible view, the appellate court 
cannot overturn the order of acquittal on the ground that 
another view was also possible; and 
8.5. The appellate court can interfere with the order of acquittal 
only if it comes to a finding that the only conclusion which can 
be recorded on the basis of the evidence on record was that the 
guilt of the accused was proved beyond a reasonable doubt and 
no other conclusion was possible.” 
 
39. Thus, it is beyond the pale of doubt that the scope of 
interference by an appellate Court for reversing the judgment of 
acquittal recorded by the trial Court in favour of the accused has 
to be exercised within the four corners of the following principles:- 
 
2 (2023) 9 SCC 581 

22 
 
(a) 
That the judgment of acquittal suffers from patent 
perversity; 
(b) 
That the same is based on a misreading/omission 
to consider material evidence on record; 
(c) 
That no two reasonable views are possible and 
only the view consistent with the guilt of the accused is 
possible from the evidence available on record. 
40. The appellate Court, in order to interfere with the judgment 
of acquittal would have to record pertinent findings on the above 
factors if it is inclined to reverse the judgment of acquittal rendered 
by the trial Court. 
41. In light of the above legal principles, if we go through the 
impugned judgment, we find that none of these essential mandates 
governing an appeal against acquittal were adverted to by learned 
Division Bench of the High Court which proceeded to virtually 
decide the appeal as a first Court on independent appreciation of 
evidence and recorded its own findings to hold the accused 
appellants(A-1, A-2 and A-3) guilty of the charge under Section 302 
read with Section 34 IPC and sentenced them to imprisonment for 
life. 

23 
 
42. Thus, on the face of record, the judgment of the High Court 
causing interference with the acquittal of the accused appellants 
as recorded by the trial Court is contrary to the principles 
established by law.  
43. Keeping the above scenario in mind, we now proceed to 
analyse the evidence and shall assign our reasons regarding the 
impugned judgment being flawed, with reference to the material 
infirmities and lacunae in the prosecution case. 
44. The place of occurrence is admittedly at a distance of 10 kms 
from Police Station Tikota.  The complainant(PW-1), father of the 
deceased Malagounda claiming to be an eye witness of the incident 
deposed that he lodged a complaint(Exhibit P-1) at the police 
station at 4 am, which resulted into registration of FIR(Exhibit P-
10). It was alleged in the report that the complainant along with 
PW-2, PW-3, PW-4 and PW-5(servants, who had accompanied the 
deceased Malagounda to erect a bund in their land) witnessed the 
incident wherein, the assailants including the appellants herein, 
assaulted and killed the deceased by inflicting injuries with sharp 
weapons.  It may be noted that even though the complainant(PW-
1), the deceased and the labourers were all going together and the 

24 
 
assailants were six in number, none other than the deceased 
Malagounda received a single injury in the incident. 
45. Relevant portions from the evidence of complainant(PW-1) 
have been extracted and highlighted above and on going through 
the same, we find that his testimony suffers from patent 
infirmities, contradictions and inherent loopholes which brings 
him within the category of wholly unreliable witness. 
46. The complainant(PW-1) stated in his evidence that he saw the 
brutal assault launched by the appellants and A-4(Sahebagouda) 
on his son Malagounda which took place at 4.00 pm or 5.00 pm in 
the evening of 19th September, 2001. While the incident was going 
on, he hid amongst the bushes so as to avoid being harmed by the 
assailants. The complainant did not state anything about the 
accused going away from the crime scene after the incident.  
However, he claimed that he returned back to his house just after 
sunset.  The incident took place in the month of September and 
thus, it can be presumed that sunset must have occurred around 
6:15 to 6.30 pm.  The complainant stated that on reaching home, 
he divulged about the incident to his family members and soon 
thereafter, he and his cousins (as per his version in examination-
in-chief) and his sons Shivanagouda and Banagouda(as per cross-

25 
 
examination) went to the Police Station Tikota and informed the 
police about the incident.  
47. Apparently, thus, the close relatives of the deceased had gone 
to the police station in the late hours of 19th September itself. If 
this version was true then, in natural course, these persons were 
bound to divulge about the incident to the police and their 
statement/s which would presumably be about an incident of the 
homicidal death would have mandatorily been entered in the Daily 
Dairy of the police station if not treated to be the FIR.  However, 
the Daily Diary or the Roznamcha entry of the police station 
corresponding to the so called visit by the relatives of the deceased 
to the police station was not brought on record which creates a 
grave doubt on the genuineness of the FIR(Exhibit P-10).  The 
complainant(PW-1) admitted in cross examination that the 
Poujadar came to his house and he narrated the incident to the 
officer who scribed the same and thereafter, the complainant 
appended his signatures on the writing made by the Poujadar.  
However, ASI Tikota Police Station(PW-18) testified on oath that 
complainant(PW-1) came to the police station and submitted a 
written report which was taken as the complaint of the incident.  
He did not state anything about any complaint being recorded at 

26 
 
the house of the complainant prior to lodging of the report.  Thus, 
there is a grave contradiction on this important aspect as to 
whether the report was submitted by the complainant(PW-1) in the 
form of a written complaint or whether the oral statement of 
complainant(PW-1) was recorded by the police officials at his home 
leading to the registration of FIR(Exhibit P-10). The non-
production of the Daily Dairy maintained at the police station 
assumes great significance in the backdrop of these facts. 
Apparently thus, the FIR(Exhibit P-10) is a post investigation 
document and does not inspire confidence. 
48. Shivanagouda and Banagouda, the educated sons of the 
complainant(PW-1), who were the first persons to approach the 
police station(as stated by PW-1 in cross-examination) were not 
examined by the prosecution.  The complainant(PW-1) also stated 
that his relatives personally went to the police station and brought 
the police to the village.  The factum of the police having arrived at 
the village at about 10.00 pm or 11.00 pm was also stated by PW-
2 and PW-4.  
49. A very important fact which is evident from the evidence of 
Basagonda(PW-6) who claimed to be an eye witness of the incident 
is that he did not state about the presence of the complainant(PW-

27 
 
1) at the place of incident while the victim was being assaulted.  
PW-6 stated that he returned to his house at about 5.00 pm or 
6.00 pm and then he informed the family members, i.e., 
Paragouda, Shankargouda and Chanagouda(PW-1). Thus, the case 
set up by prosecution that complainant, Chanagouda(PW-1) was 
an eye-witness to the incident, is totally contradicted by evidence 
of PW-6 who categorically stated that it was he who had informed 
the family members, the informant Chanagouda (PW-1) being one 
of them, about the incident at 6.00 or 7.00 pm and that they 
responded saying that they would be going to the police station for 
filing a report. 
50. Thus, the claim of complainant(PW-1) that he was an eye 
witness to the incident is totally contradicted by the statement of 
PW-6.  The conduct of the family members of the deceased and the 
other villagers in not taking any steps to protect the dead body for 
the whole night and instead, casually going back to their houses 
without giving a second thought as to what may happen to the 
mortal remains of the deceased, lying exposed to the elements is 
another circumstance which creates a grave doubt in the mind of 
the Court that no one had actually seen the incident and it was a 
case of blind murder which came to light much later. As a matter 

28 
 
of fact, if at all the sequence of events as emanating from the 
evidence of the prosecution witnesses was having even a grain of 
truth, then it cannot be believed that the dead body would be 
abandoned in this manner or that even the police officials would 
not put a guard at the crime scene.  
51. Added to that, the version of Medical Jurist(PW-17) who 
stated in his cross-examination that the dead body of the deceased 
Malagounda was in a stage of decomposition and that the time of 
death was more than 24 hours prior to the autopsy done at 9.00 
a.m. on 20th September, 2001 creates further doubt in the mind of 
the Court on the theory of the so called eye witnesses that the 
incident happened at 4.00 pm on 19th September, 2001. 
52. The 
witnesses 
Revappa(PW-2), 
Basagonda(PW-6) 
and 
Shankargouda(PW-15) admitted that it had been raining 
incessantly in the village for almost three days.  In such 
circumstances, the reason assigned by the complainant(PW-1) for 
the deceased Malagounda and the four servants(PW-2, PW-3, PW-
4 and PW-5) to have gone to the agricultural land, i.e., for putting 
up a bund is totally unacceptable.  Since it was raining 
incessantly, there could not be any possibility for these people to 
have made an attempt to put up a bund on the land.  

29 
 
53. Thus, there is no logical explanation for the presence of the 
deceased and the servants in their field on the date and time of the 
incident.  It seems that not only did the complainant party create 
eye witnesses of the incident but has also suppressed the true 
genesis of the occurrence. 
54. PW-1 and PW-6 admitted that Sangound, son of the accused 
A-4 had been murdered in front of their house and that the 
accused party was carrying a grudge that deceased Malagounda 
had murdered the boy.  PW-6 also admitted that deceased 
Malagounda, 
his 
father[(complainant)(PW-1)] 
and 
two 
brothers(Shivanagouda and Banagouda) were arraigned as 
accused for the murder of Sangound(son of A-4). The incident of 
murder of Sangound happened two years prior which is far too 
remote in point of time so as to impute motive to the appellants 
that in order to seek revenge, they had murdered the deceased 
Malagounda. 
55. It has been laid down by this Court in a catena of decisions 
that motive acts as a double-edged sword.  Hence, the very fact 
that members of the prosecution party were arraigned as accused 
in the murder of Sangound, son of A-4, this could also have been 

30 
 
the motive for the prosecution witness to rope in the accused 
appellants for the murder of Malagounda. 
56. The High Court heavily relied upon the circumstance of 
recoveries of weapons made at the instance of the accused as 
incriminating evidence.  However, as was rightly pointed out by 
learned counsel representing the accused appellants, the 
complainant(PW-1) admitted in his cross-examination that he was 
shown the weapons of the offence by the police on the date of 
incident itself. 
57. At this stage, we would like to note that the Investigating 
Officer(PW-27) who investigated the matter, claims to have effected 
the recoveries in furtherance of the disclosure statements of the 
accused and testified as below to prove the procedure of disclosure 
and the discoveries: - 
“On 1.10.2001 PSI Tikota produced accused Babusaheb 
Sahebgouda Biradar and Alagond Sahebgouda Biradar who were 
interrogated and recorded vol. statement of both accused persons. 
I now see the vol. statement or Alagond which is at Ex.P.15. It 
bears my signature and the LTM of Alagond. I now see the vol. 
statement of Babu and it is marked as Ex.P.16 and it bears my 
signature and the LTM of Babu Biradar. I recorded vol. statement 
of Babu Sahebgouda Pudragoudar and Alagond Sahebgouda 
Biradar. And accordingly conducted seizure panchanama and 
seized two axes and one koyta produced by Pudragoudar i.e. Babu 
Sahebgouda Pudragoudar, in the field of Anasari. And accordingly 
also seized one Jambiya produced by Alagond Biradar. I recorded 
the statements of Krishnaji Govindappa Kulkarni. On 2.10.2001 
produced both the accused before the Hon’ble Court. On 3.10.01 
I 
arrested 
accused 
Mudakappa 
Gadigoppa@Sahebgouda 

31 
 
Pudragoudar and the interrogated to him and also recorded his 
voluntary statement. As per the vol. st. conducted seizure 
panchanama and seized two sickles, 0 pen shirt which was blood 
stained, bush-shirt which was blood stained which were 
belonging to accd. Gradi and one plastic carry bag.Which articles 
are kept in land of Basappa Gradi.”  
 
58. We would now discuss about the requirement under law so 
as to prove a disclosure statement recorded under Section 27 of 
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872(hereinafter being referred to as 
‘Evidence Act’) and the discoveries made in furtherance thereof. 
59. The statement of an accused recorded by a police officer 
under Section 27 of the Evidence Act is basically a memorandum 
of confession of the accused recorded by the Investigating Officer 
during interrogation which has been taken down in writing. The 
confessional part of such statement is inadmissible and only the 
part which distinctly leads to discovery of fact is admissible in 
evidence as laid down by this Court in the case of State of Uttar 
Pradesh v. Deoman Upadhyaya3. 
60. Thus, when the Investigating Officer steps into the witness 
box for proving such disclosure statement, he would be required 
to narrate what the accused stated to him. The Investigating 
Officer essentially testifies about the conversation held between 
 
3 AIR 1960 SC 1125 

32 
 
himself and the accused which has been taken down into writing 
leading to the discovery of incriminating fact(s). 
61. As per Section 60 of the Evidence Act, oral evidence in all 
cases must be direct. The section leaves no ambiguity and 
mandates that no secondary/hearsay evidence can be given in 
case of oral evidence, except for the circumstances enumerated in 
the section. In case of a person who asserts to have heard a fact, 
only his evidence must be given in respect of the same.  
62. The manner of proving the disclosure statement under 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act has been the subject matter of 
consideration by this Court in various judgments, some of which 
are being referred to below. 
63. In the case of Mohd. Abdul Hafeez v. State of Andhra 
Pradesh4, it was held by this Court as follows: - 
“5. ….If evidence otherwise confessional in character is 
admissible under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, it is 
obligatory upon the Investigating Officer to state and record 
who gave the information; when he is dealing with more than 
one accused, what words were used by him so that a recovery 
pursuant to the information received may be connected to the 
person giving the information so as to provide incriminating 
evidence against that person.” 
 
 
4 (1983) 1 SCC 143 

33 
 
64. Further, in the case of Subramanya v. State of 
Karnataka5, it was held as under: - 
“82. Keeping in mind the aforesaid evidence, we proceed to 
consider whether the prosecution has been able to prove and 
establish the discoveries in accordance with law. Section 27 of the 
Evidence Act reads thus: 
“27. How much of information received from accused 
may be proved. — 
Provided that, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in 
consequence of information received from a person accused 
of any offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much of 
such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, 
as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be 
proved.” 
83. The first and the basic infirmity in the evidence of all the 
aforesaid prosecution witnesses is that none of them have deposed 
the exact statement said to have been made by the appellant herein 
which ultimately led to the discovery of a fact relevant under 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act. 
84. If, it is say of the investigating officer that the accused appellant 
while in custody on his own free will and volition made a statement 
that he would lead to the place where he had hidden the weapon of 
offence, the site of burial of the dead body, clothes etc., then the 
first thing that the investigating officer should have done was to 
call for two independent witnesses at the police station itself. Once 
the two independent witnesses would arrive at the police station 
thereafter in their presence the accused should be asked to make 
an appropriate statement as he may desire in regard to pointing 
out the place where he is said to have hidden the weapon of offence 
etc. When the accused while in custody makes such statement 
before the two independent witnesses (panch-witnesses) the exact 
statement or rather the exact words uttered by the accused should 
be incorporated in the first part of the panchnama that the 
investigating officer may draw in accordance with law. This first 
part of the panchnama for the purpose of Section 27 of the 
Evidence Act is always drawn at the police station in the presence 
of the independent witnesses so as to lend credence that a 
particular statement was made by the accused expressing his 
willingness on his own free will and volition to point out the place 
 
5 2022 SCC Online SC 1400 

34 
 
where the weapon of offence or any other article used in the 
commission of the offence had been hidden. Once the first part of 
the panchnama is completed thereafter the police party along with 
the accused and the two independent witnesses (panch-witnesses) 
would proceed to the particular place as may be led by the accused. 
If from that particular place anything like the weapon of offence or 
blood stained clothes or any other article is discovered then that 
part of the entire process would form the second part of the 
panchnama. This is how the law expects the investigating officer to 
draw the discovery panchnama as contemplated under Section 27 
of the Evidence Act. If we read the entire oral evidence of the 
investigating officer then it is clear that the same is deficient in all 
the aforesaid relevant aspects of the matter.”    (emphasis supplied) 
 
65. Similar view was taken by this Court in the case of 
Ramanand @ Nandlal Bharti v. State of Uttar Pradesh6, 
wherein this Court held that mere exhibiting of memorandum 
prepared by the Investigating Officer during investigation cannot 
tantamount to proof of its contents.  While testifying on oath, the 
Investigating Officer would be required to narrate the sequence of 
events which transpired leading to the recording of the disclosure 
statement. 
66. If we peruse the extracted part of the evidence of the 
Investigating Officer(PW-27)(reproduced supra), in the backdrop of 
the above exposition of law laid down by this Court, the 
interrogation memos of the accused A-2(Exhibit P-15) and A-1 
(Exhibit P-16), it is clear that the Investigating Officer(PW-27) gave 
 
6 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1396 

35 
 
no description at all of the conversation which had transpired 
between himself and the accused which was recorded in the 
disclosure statements.  Thus, these disclosure statements cannot 
be read in evidence and the recoveries made in furtherance thereof 
are non est in the eyes of law. 
67. The Investigating Officer(PW-27) also stated that in 
furtherance of the voluntary statements of accused(A-1 and A-2), 
he recovered and seized two axes and one koyta produced by A-1 
in the field of Ansari and one jambiya produced by A-2.  The 
Investigating Officer(PW-27) nowhere stated in his deposition that 
the disclosure statement of the accused resulted into the discovery 
of these weapons pursuant to being pointed out by the accused. 
68. The Investigating Officer(PW-27) further stated that he 
arrested accused A-3, recorded his voluntary statement and seized 
two sickles.  However, neither the so called voluntary statement 
nor the seizure memo were proved by the Investigating Officer(PW-
27) in his evidence.  
69. Thus, we are of the firm opinion that neither the disclosure 
memos were proved in accordance with law nor the recovery of the 
weapons from open spaces inspire confidence and were wrongly 

36 
 
relied upon by the High Court as incriminating material so as to 
reverse the finding of the acquittal recorded by the trial Court. 
70. The evidence of seizure of weapons of the offence is not 
trustworthy and was rightly discarded by the trial Court. 
71. In addition thereto, we may note that admittedly, the 
prosecution did not procure any serological opinion to establish 
blood group, if any, on the weapons so recovered. Thus, the 
recoveries are otherwise also meaningless and an exercise in 
futility.   
72. Thus, neither the evidence of the eye witness is trustworthy 
nor did the prosecution provide any corroboration to the vacillating 
evidence of the so called eye witnesses.  We have already held that 
the FIR(Exhibit P-10) was a post investigation document.  Thus, 
the entire prosecution case comes under the shadow of doubt. 
73. Resultantly, we are of the firm opinion that the view taken by 
the trial Court in the judgment dated 23rd July, 2005 recording 
acquittal of accused is a plausible and justifiable view emanating 
from the discussion of the evidence available on record.  The trial 
Court’s judgment does not suffer from any infirmity or perversity.  
Hence, the High Court was not justified in reversing the well-

37 
 
reasoned judgment of the trial Court thereby turning the acquittal 
of the accused appellants into conviction.  
74. The impugned judgment dated 14th September, 2009 
rendered by the High Court cannot be sustained and is hereby 
reversed.  The accused appellants are acquitted of all the charges.  
They are on bail and need not surrender.  Their bail bonds are 
discharged. 
75. The appeal stands allowed accordingly. 
76. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
…………………………J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
…...……………………J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SANDEEP MEHTA)   
New Delhi; 
April 19, 2024