2024 INSC 355
1 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
TRANSFER PETITION (C) NO(S). 2043/2023 
DOLLY RANI               
 
 
 
      PETITIONER(s) 
                         VERSUS 
MANISH KUMAR CHANCHAL 
 
      
 
      RESPONDENT(s)  
O R D E R  
The present transfer petition is filed under Section 25 of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short, “CPC”) by the 
petitioner-wife seeking the following reliefs: 
a. “To transfer the divorce petition under Section 
13(l)(ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 bearing 
Matrimonial Case No. 82/2023 titled "Manish Kumar 
v/s Doly Singh" pending before the Court of 
Principal Judge, Family Court, Muzaffarpur, Bihar 
to the Court of Principal Judge, Family Court, 
Ranchi Jharkhand; and 
 
b. Pass such other and further orders and/ or 
directions as 1s deemed just and proper by this 
Hon'ble Court in the facts and circumstances of 
the case.” 
 
During the pendency of this petition the parties have 
decided to resolve that dispute by filing a joint application 
under Article 142 of the Constitution of India seeking certain 
reliefs as referred to later.  
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the petitioner 
and the respondent are trained commercial pilots. The parties 
Digitally signed by
RADHA SHARMA
Date: 2024.04.30
16:59:27 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
were engaged to be married on 07.03.2021. The petitioner and 
respondent claimed to have ‘solemnized’ their marriage on 
07.07.2021. They obtained a “marriage certificate” from Vadik 
Jankalyan Samiti (Regd.). Based on this certificate, they 
obtained a “Certificate of Registration of Marriage” under the 
Uttar Pradesh Marriage Registration Rules, 2017. The respective 
families of the parties fixed the date for performing the 
marriage ceremony as per Hindu rites and customs on 25.10.2022. 
Meanwhile, the petitioner and respondent lived separately but 
nevertheless, differences ignited between them. According to 
the petitioner, there was demand for dowry made by respondent’s 
family.  
 
On 17.11.2022, the petitioner filed an FIR under Sections 
498A, 420, 506, 509, 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for 
short, “IPC”) and Sections 3,4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 
1961 (for short, “DP Act”) against the respondent and his family 
members alleging harassment.  
 
Thereafter on 13.03.2023, the respondent approached the 
Court of Principal Judge, Family Court, Muzaffarpur, Bihar by 
filing a petition for divorce under Section 13(1)(ia) of the 
Act in Matrimonial Case No.82/2023. Being aggrieved by this fact 
as the petitioner-wife is currently residing in Ranchi, 
Jharkhand with her parents, she filed the present transfer 

3 
petition seeking to transfer the divorce petition under Section 
13(l)(ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred 
to as “the Act”) bearing Matrimonial Case No. 82/2023 titled 
"Manish Kumar v/s Doly Singh" pending before the Court of 
Principal Judge, Family Court, Muzaffarpur, Bihar to the Court 
of Principal Judge, Family Court, Ranchi Jharkhand.  
 
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the 
respondent has filed a Matrimonial Case No.82/2023 under Section 
13(1)(ia) of the Act seeking a decree of divorce as against the 
petitioner herein whereas there being no marriage between the 
parties in the eyes of the law,  the respondent could not have 
sought for by the said decree.  
 
Learned counsel for the respondent also submitted that 
indeed there was no marriage in accordance with Section 7 of 
the Act inasmuch as the requisites of a valid Hindu marriage 
insofar as ceremonies are concerned, were not complied with but 
having no other recourse, the respondent was constrained to file 
M.C. No.82/2023 as the “marriage” between the parties was 
registered before the Registrar of Marriages.  
 
Learned counsel for the respective parties further 
submitted that during the pendency of this transfer petition, 
the parties have discussed the matter and they have agreed to 
file a joint application under Article 142 of the Constitution 

4 
of India seeking the following prayers: 
“(i) Grant a decree of declaration that the marriage 
dated 07.07.2021 between the parties is not valid in 
the eye of law by exercising its jurisdiction under 
Article 142 of the Constitution of India. 
 
(ii) Consequently, grant a decree of declaration that 
the certificate dated 07.07.2021 issued by under the 
Uttar Pradesh Registration Rule, 2017, and certificate 
dated 07.07.2021 issued by the Vadik Jankalyan Samiti 
(Regd.) are null and void. 
 
(iii) Take on record the terms and conditions of 
settlement 
as 
stated 
in 
paragraph 
5 
of 
this 
application. 
 
(iv) Pass any other order/direction that this Court 
may deem fit and necessary in the facts and 
circumstances of the case.” 
 
 
They submitted that since there was no valid marriage in 
the eye of the law, the parties seek a declaration to the effect 
that the so-called marriage dated 07.07.2021 was not valid in 
the law and therefore, a declaration may be granted to that 
effect. Consequently, the Certificate dated 07.07.2021 issued 
under the Uttar Pradesh Registration Rules, 2017 and another 
certificate dated 07.07.2021 issued by the Vadik Jankalyan 
Samiti (Regd.) are also null and void and would pale into 
insignificance in view of there being no valid Hindu marriage 
and, therefore, the same may also be declared null and void.  
 
They submitted that the joint application filed by the 
parties herein may be taken on record and the prayers sought by 
them may be granted.   

5 
 
The parties are present before the Court. They have been 
identified by their respective counsel. When queried by this 
Court, they indeed stated that there was no “marriage” 
solemnized by them inasmuch as no customs, rites and rituals 
performed. However, due to certain exigencies and pressures, 
they were constrained to obtain the certificate dated 07.07.2021 
from Vadik Jankalyan Samiti (Regd.) and on the basis of that 
certificate they sought registration under the Uttar Pradesh 
Registration Rule, 2017 and a “Certificate of Marriage” was 
issued by the Registrar of Marriages on 07.07.2021. That when 
there was no Hindu marriage which took place between them, the 
issuance of the said certificate is of no consequence. They 
further stated in unison that this court may allow the prayers 
sought for by them and declare that no marriage took place 
between the parties and thereby permit them to lead their 
independent lives.  
They further stated that the joint application has been 
filed under Article 142 of the Constitution of India on their 
own free volition without there being any coercion or undue 
influence from any side and that they would abide by the terms 
and conditions of the joint application and hence, this Court 
may grant the reliefs to them.  
 
In the above backdrop, we have taken on record the joint 

6 
application filed by the parties under Article 142 of the 
Constitution of India and we have perused the same. In the said 
joint application, the petitioner has sought for quashing of 
Maintenance Case No.326/2023 filed by her and the Criminal Case 
instituted vide FIR No.463/2022 before Police Station-Sukhdev 
Nagar, Ranchi and the proceedings thereunder against the 
respondent and his parents herein which may also be quashed.   
 
We have perused the other terms and conditions mentioned 
in the joint application.  We find the same to be lawful and we 
do not find any legal impediment in accepting the terms and 
conditions of the joint application. But before granting the 
reliefs sought for by the parties we wish to make certain 
observations.  
Section 7 of the Act reads as under: 
“7. Ceremonies for a Hindu marriage.—(1) A Hindu 
marriage may be solemnized in accordance with the 
customary rites and ceremonies of either party 
thereto. (2) Where such rites and ceremonies include 
the Saptapadi (that is, the taking of seven steps by 
the bridegroom and the bride jointly before the sacred 
fire), the marriage becomes complete and binding when 
the seventh step is taken.” 
 
Section 7 of the Act speaks about ceremonies of a Hindu 
marriage. Sub-section (1) uses the word “solemnised”. The word 
“solemnised” means to perform the marriage with ceremonies in 
proper form. Unless and until the marriage is performed with 
appropriate ceremonies and in due form, it cannot be said to be 

7 
“solemnised”. Further, sub-section (2) of Section 7 states that 
where such rites and ceremonies include the saptapadi, i.e., 
the taking of seven steps by the bridegroom and the bride jointly 
before the sacred fire, the marriage becomes complete and 
binding when the seventh step is taken. Therefore, requisite 
ceremonies for the solemnisation of the Hindu marriage must be 
in accordance with the applicable customs or usage and where 
saptapadi has been adopted, the marriage becomes complete and 
binding when the seventh step is taken. Where a Hindu marriage 
is not performed in accordance with the applicable rites or 
ceremonies such as saptapadi when included, the marriage will 
not be construed as a Hindu marriage. In other words, for a 
valid marriage under the Act, the requisite ceremonies have to 
be performed and there must be proof of performance of the said 
ceremony when an issue/controversy arise. Unless the parties 
have undergone such ceremony, there would be no Hindu marriage 
according to Section 7 of the Act and a mere issuance of a 
certificate by an entity in the absence of the requisite 
ceremonies having been performed, would neither confirm any 
marital status to the parties nor establish a marriage under 
Hindu law. 
 
A perusal of the marriage certificate produced in the 
instant case along with the application filed under Article 142 

8 
of the Constitution of India states that the ‘marriage’ between 
the parties has been solemnised according to Hindu Vedic rites 
and customs.  The certificate issued by Vadik Jankalyan Samiti 
(Regd.) in the absence of any indication as to the rites and 
customs that were performed and as to whether the requirements 
under Section 7 of the Act was complied with would not be a 
certificate evidencing a Hindu marriage in accordance with 
Section 7 of the Act. In the absence of any ceremony being 
performed such a certificate could not have been issued. It is 
on the basis of the said certificate that the Marriage 
Registration Officer has issued under the Uttar Pradesh Marriage 
Registration Rule, 2017 a certificate stating that the parties 
had presented before the office on 07.07.2021 and had declared 
that their marriage was solemnised on the said date at Vadik 
Jankalyan Samiti (Regd.), Ghaziabad and on the basis of the said 
certificate issued by the said entity, the Marriage Registration 
Officer registered the marriage which is under Section 8 of the 
Act.  
Section 8 of the Act reads as under: 
“8. Registration of Hindu marriages.—(1) For the 
purpose of facilitating the proof of Hindu marriages, 
the State Government may make rules providing that the 
parties to any such marriage may have the particulars 
relating to their marriage entered in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed in a 
Hindu Marriage Register kept for the purpose.  
 

9 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(1), the State Government may, if it is of opinion 
that it is necessary or expedient so to do, provide 
that the entering of the particulars referred to in 
sub-section (1) shall be compulsory in the State or 
in any part thereof, whether in all cases or in such 
cases as may be specified, and where any such direction 
has been issued, any person contravening any rule made 
in this behalf shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to twenty-five rupees. 
 
(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid 
before the State Legislature, as soon as may be, after 
they are made. 
 
(4) The Hindu Marriage Register shall at all 
reasonable times be open for inspection, and shall be 
admissible as evidence of the statements therein 
contained and certified extracts therefrom shall, on 
application, be given by the Registrar on payment to 
him of the prescribed fee. 
 
(5) 
Notwithstanding 
anything 
contained 
in 
this 
section, the validity of any Hindu marriage shall in 
no way be affected by the omission to make the entry.” 
 
 
Under Section 8 of the Act, it is open for two Hindus 
married under the provisions of the Act to have their marriage 
registered provided they fulfil the conditions laid down therein 
regarding performance of requisite ceremonies. It is only when 
the marriage is solemnised in accordance with Section 7, there 
can be a marriage registered under Section 8. The State 
Governments have the power to make rules relating to the 
registration of marriages between two Hindus solemnised by way 
of requisite ceremonies. The advantage of registration is that 
it facilitates proof of factum of marriage in a disputed case. 

10 
But if there has been no marriage in accordance with Section 7, 
the registration would not confer legitimacy to the marriage. 
We find that the registration of Hindu marriages under the said 
provision is only to facilitate the proof of a Hindu marriage 
but for that, there has to be a Hindu marriage in accordance 
with Section 7 of the Act inasmuch as there must be a marriage 
ceremony which has taken place between the parties in accordance 
with the said provision. Although the parties may have complied 
with the requisite conditions for a valid Hindu marriage as per 
Section 5 of the Act in the absence of there being a “Hindu 
marriage” in accordance with Section 7 of the Act, i.e., 
solemnization of such a marriage, there would be no Hindu 
marriage in the eye of law. In the absence of there being a 
valid Hindu marriage, the Marriage Registration Officer cannot 
register such a marriage under the provisions of Section 8 of 
the Act. Therefore, if a certificate is issued stating that the 
couple had undergone marriage and if the marriage ceremony had 
not been performed in accordance with Section 7 of the Act, then 
the registration of such marriage under Section 8 would not 
confer any legitimacy to such a marriage. The registration of a 
marriage under Section 8 of the Act is only to confirm that the 
parties have undergone a valid marriage ceremony in accordance 
with Section 7 of the Act. In other words, a certificate of 

11 
marriage is a proof of validity of Hindu marriage only when such 
a marriage has taken place and not in a case where there is no 
marriage ceremony performed at all.   
We further observe that a Hindu marriage is a sacrament and 
has a sacred character. In the context of saptapadi in a Hindu 
marriage, according to Rig Veda, after completing the seventh 
step (saptapadi) the bridegroom says to his bride, “With seven 
steps we have become friends (sakha). May I attain to friendship 
with thee; may I not be separated from thy friendship”. A wife 
is considered to be half of oneself (ardhangini) but to be 
accepted with an identity of her own and to be a co-equal partner 
in the marriage. There is nothing like a “better-half” in a 
marriage but the spouses are equal halves in a marriage. In 
Hindu Law, as already noted, marriage is a sacrament or a 
samskara. It is the foundation for a new family.  
With the passage of centuries and the enactment of the Act, 
monogamy is the only legally approved form of relationship 
between a husband and a wife. The Act has categorically 
discarded polyandry and polygamy and all other such types of 
relationships. The intent of the Parliament is also that there 
should be only one form of marriage having varied rites and 
customs and rituals. Thus, when the Act  came into force on 
18.05.1955, it has amended and codified the law relating to 

12 
marriage among Hindus. The Act encompasses not only Hindus as 
such but Lingayats, Brahmos, Aryasamajists, Buddhists, Jains 
and Sikhs also who can enter into a valid Hindu marriage coming 
within the expansive connotation of the word Hindu. 
Section 4 of the Act is important and it gives an overriding 
effect to the Act and it repeals all existing laws whether in 
the shape of enactments, custom or usage inconsistent with the 
Act. Of course, the said Section also saves anything otherwise 
expressly provided under the Act. For immediate reference, 
Section 4 of the Act is extracted as under: 
“4. Overriding effect of the Act.- Save as otherwise 
expressly provided in this Act,- 
(a) 
any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu law or 
any custom or usage as part of that law in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall 
cease to have effect with respect to any matte for 
which provision is made in this Act; 
(b) 
any other law in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect 
insofar as it is inconsistent with any of the 
provisions contained in this Act.” 
 
In effect a union of two persons under the provisions of 
the Act, by way of a Hindu marriage gives them the status and 
character of being a husband and wife in society. The said 
status is of significance inasmuch as a man and a woman cannot 
be treated as a husband and a wife unless a marriage is performed 
or celebrated with proper and due ceremonies and in the 
prescribed form. In the absence of any solemnisation of a 

13 
marriage as per the provisions of the Act, a man and a woman 
cannot acquire the status of being a husband and a wife to each 
other. In the above context, we deprecate the practice of young 
men and women seeking to acquire the status of being a husband 
and a wife to each other and therefore purportedly being 
married, in the absence of a valid marriage ceremony under the 
provisions of the Act such as in the instant case where the 
marriage between the parties was to take place later. 
No doubt, under the Special Marriage Act, 1954, a man and 
a woman can acquire the status of being a husband and a wife as 
per the provisions of the said Act. The Special Marriage Act, 
1954 is not restricted to Hindus. Any man and woman irrespective 
of their race, caste or creed can acquire the status of being a 
husband and a wife under the provisions of the Special Marriage 
Act, 1954 but under the provisions of the Act (Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955), there should not only be compliance of the 
conditions as prescribed under Section 5 of the said Act but 
also the couple must solemnise a marriage in accordance with 
Section 7 of the Act. In the absence of there being any such 
marriage in accordance with Section 7 of the Act, a certificate 
issued in that regard by any entity is of no legal consequence. 
Further, any registration of a marriage which has not at all 
taken place under Section 8 of the Act and as per the rules made 

14 
by the State Government would not be evidence of a Hindu marriage 
and also does not confer the status of a husband and a wife to 
a couple. 
In recent years, we have come across several instances 
where for “practical purposes”, a man and a woman with the 
intention of solemnisation of their marriage at a future date 
seek to register their marriage under Section 8 of the Act on 
the basis of a document which may have been issued as proof of 
‘solemnisation of their marriage’ such as in the instant case. 
As we have already noted, any such registration of a marriage 
before the Registrar of Marriages and a certificate being issued 
thereafter would not confirm that the parties have ‘solemnised’ 
a Hindu marriage. We note that parents of young couples agree 
for registration of a marriage in order to apply for Visa for 
emigration to foreign countries where either of the parties may 
be working “in order to save time” and pending formalising a 
marriage ceremony. Such practices have to be deprecated. What 
would be the consequence, if no such marriage is solemnised at 
all at a future date? What would be the status of the parties 
then? Are they husband and wife in law and do they acquire such 
status in society? 
As already noted, a Hindu marriage is a samskara and a 
sacrament which has to be accorded its status as an institution 

15 
of great value in Indian society. Children born out of a valid 
Hindu marriage are legitimate and therefore they have full 
rights in law. This is not an occasion for us to discuss about 
the vulnerability of illegitimate children born outside wedlock 
who yearn for status equal to legitimate children in society. 
Therefore, we urge young men and women to think deeply about 
the institution of marriage even before they enter upon it and 
as to how sacred the said institution is, in Indian society. A 
marriage is not an event for ‘song and dance’ and ‘wining and 
dining’ or an occasion to demand and exchange dowry and gifts 
by undue pressure leading to possible initiation of criminal 
proceedings thereafter. A marriage is not a commercial 
transaction. It is a solemn foundational event celebrated so as 
to establish a relationship between a man and a woman who acquire 
the status of a husband and wife for an evolving family in 
future which is a basic unit of Indian society. A Hindu marriage 
facilitates procreation, consolidates the unit of family and 
solidifies the spirit of fraternity within various communities. 
After all, a marriage is sacred for it provides a lifelong, 
dignity-affirming, equal, consensual and healthy union of two 
individuals. It is considered to be an event that confers 
salvation upon the individual especially when the rites and 

16 
ceremonies are conducted1. The customary ceremonies, with all 
its attendant geographical and cultural variations is said to 
purify and transform the spiritual being of an individual. 
The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 solemnly acknowledges both the 
material and spiritual aspects of this event in the married 
couple’s lives. Besides providing a mechanism for registration 
of marriages in order to confer the status of a married couple 
and acknowledge rights in personam and rights in rem, a special 
place is given to rites and ceremonies in the Act. It follows 
that the critical conditions for the solemnizing of a Hindu 
marriage should be assiduously, strictly and religiously 
followed. This is for the reason that the genesis of a sacred 
process cannot be a trivial affair.  The sincere conduct of and 
participation in the customary rites and ceremonies under 
Section 7 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 ought to be ensured 
by all married couples and priests who preside over the 
ceremony.  
The promises made to each by the parties to a Hindu marriage 
and the oath taken by them to remain friends forever lay the 
foundation for a life-long commitment between the spouses which 
should be realized by them. If such commitment to each other is 
 
1 HARMAN, WILLIAM. “THE HINDU MARRIAGE AS SOTERIOLOGICAL EVENT.” 
 International Journal of Sociology of the Family, vol. 17, no.2, 1987,  
 pp.169-82. 

17 
adhered to by the couple, then there would be far fewer cases 
of breakdown of marriages leading to divorce or separation.  
 
But in the instant case, the above parameters have not been 
followed by the parties herein. In the circumstances, we declare 
that the ‘marriage’ dated 07.07.2021 between the parties is not 
a ‘Hindu marriage’ having regard to the provisions of Section 7 
of the Act. Consequently, the certificate issued by the Vadik 
Jankalyan Samiti (Regd.) dated 07.07.2021 is declared null and 
void. In view of the above the Certificate issued under the 
Uttar Pradesh Registration Rules, 2017 dated 07.07.2021 is also 
declared null and void.  
 
In view of the aforesaid declaration, it is further 
declared that the petitioner and the respondent were not married 
in accordance with the provisions of the Act and therefore, they 
have never acquired the status of husband and wife.   
 
Consequently, the three cases filed by the parties against 
each other stand quashed, namely,- 
 
 “(a) The divorce petition Matrimonial Case No.82/2023 
filed by the respondent/Manish Chanchal, which is 
pending before the Family Court at Muzaffarpur, Bihar; 
 
 (b) The Maintenance Case No.326/2023 filed by 
petitioner/Doly Rani at Ranchi, Jharkhand;  
 
(c) The criminal case FIR No.463/2022 initiated at PS 
Sukhdev Nagar, Ranchi by the petitioner/Doly Rani and 
proceedings thereunder, against the respondent/Manish 
Chanchal and his parents.” 

18 
In view of the above, the application filed under 
Article 142 of the Constitution is allowed. 
 Consequently, the Transfer Petition stands disposed. 
 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
. . . . . . . . . ,J 
[ B.V. NAGARATHNA ] 
 
 
 
. . . . . . . . . . . . .,J 
[ AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH ]   
NEW DELHI; 
APRIL 19, 2024.