2024 INSC 318
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).               OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No(s). 4626 of 2024) 
 
 
HANSRAJ                                                 …APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
STATE OF M.P. 
                                  ...RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
This appeal is directed against the judgment dated 21st 
December, 2022 passed by the learned Single Judge of the 
Madhya Pradesh High Court Bench at Indore in Criminal Appeal 
No. 1427 of 1999 whereby, the appeal preferred by the appellant 
under Section 374 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
was dismissed. By way of the said appeal, the appellant had 
challenged the judgment dated 20th October, 1999 passed by the 
learned First Additional Sessions Judge, Mandsaur, M.P. in S.T. 
No. 34 of 1999 whereby, the appellant was convicted for the 
offences punishable under Sections 394 read with Section 397 of 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.04.19
14:43:09 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
2 
 
the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter being referred to as 
‘IPC’) and sentenced to undergo seven years rigorous 
imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 1,000/- and, in default of 
payment of fine, to undergo further rigorous imprisonment of 
three months. 
3. 
The substratum of the prosecution story is that on 12th 
December, 1998 at about 10:30 am, while the complainant 
Bhagu Bai was proceeding to her field, a person came from 
behind, closed her eyes, assaulted her with a knife and snatched 
away the silver anklet, a silver necklace and a silver bracelet 
which were worn by her. After committing the crime and injuring 
the complainant in the process, the assailant ran away from the 
spot. The complainant stated in the First Information Report 
(FIR) that she was not able to see or identify the assailant. 
4. 
Be that as it may, the appellant was arrested on 14th 
December, 1998 on the basis of suspicion. It is alleged that upon 
being interrogated by the police, the accused appellant made a 
confession/disclosure 
statement 
which 
was 
recorded 
as 
Memorandum (Exhibit P-11). It is further stated that acting on 
the said disclosure statement, the Investigating Officer(PW-12) 
recovered the silver articles allegedly looted by the accused after 

 
3 
 
assaulting the complainant. These articles were seized vide 
panchnama (Exhibit P-12). The prosecution further claimed that 
the articles so seized at the instance of the accused were got 
identified at the hands of the complainant before an Executive 
Magistrate.   
5. 
Charge sheet was filed against the accused appellant for the 
above offences and the case was committed to the Sessions Court 
for trial. The accused was charged and tried for the offences 
mentioned above. 
6. 
At the conclusion of trial, the trial Court proceeded to 
convict and sentence the appellant as above. The High Court, 
affirmed the conviction and sentence of the accused as recorded 
by the trial Court and rejected the appeal filed by the accused 
vide judgment dated 21st December, 2022 which is assailed in 
this appeal. 
7. 
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced by learned counsel for the appellant and 
learned Deputy Advocate General appearing for the State.  
8. 
The learned trial Court convicted the appellant by recording 
the following finding: - 
 
“According to the analysis done by above, it is proved that 
on the information of the accused, the jewellery looted from 

 
4 
 
complainant was seized, which was seized immediately two 
days after the incident. Therefore, there is no possibility at all 
that these ornaments could have come into the possession of 
the accused in any other way. As a result, it is proved that it 
was the accused who took away these ornaments from the 
complainant while assaulting her and robbed of.” 
 
9. 
It is relevant to mention here that the complainant Bhagu 
Bai (PW-3) during the course of sworn testimony tried to improve 
upon her case by identifying the accused in the Court, but the 
fact remains that such evidence of identification of the accused 
was not relied upon by the learned trial Court and the High Court 
and the case was found proved only on the basis of recovery of 
ornaments. 
10. The complainant Bhagu Bai (PW-3) claimed to have 
identified the ornaments recovered at the instance of the accused 
in 
test 
identification 
proceedings. 
However, 
in 
cross-
examination, she candidly admitted that the police officers had 
identified her jewellery and thereupon, she recognized it. 
Relevant extract from the cross-examination of Bhagu Bai (PW-
3) is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
 
“At the time of identifying my jewelry in Mandsaur, there 
were two police officers. The police officers had identified our 
jewelry, and I had recognized it. Our jewelry did not have a 
paper note; it was wrapped in cloth. The other jewelry was also 
placed on top of the cloth. The police officers had called me for 
identification. I came with my husband and the police officers. 
I don’t know if my jewelry was with the police at the time of 
identification or not. I don’t know where they came from during 
the identification. 

 
5 
 
 
 
I did not mention the clip snatched in my report because I 
was not paying attention. At the time of identification, the police 
pointed it out; I had not mentioned it before. I later said that I 
informed the police at the hospital. It was recorded after writing 
the report.” 
 
 
11. It is also important to note that the Investigating Officer 
(PW-12) who recorded the disclosure statement of the accused 
and effected the recovery did not prove the disclosure memo as 
required by law. The relevant part from the evidence of the 
Investigating Officer (PW-12) is reproduced hereinbelow for the 
sake of convenience: - 
 
“ I arrested the accused Hansraj and prepared the arrest memo, 
marked as ‘Exh P9’. My signature is on the memo, marked as 
‘CC’ to ‘CC.’ I interrogated the accused Hansraj, and he 
confessed to hiding the stolen jewelry near the Tummad River 
in Gram Jhirkan as per his statement. I prepared a memo of 
this confession, which was marked as ‘Exh. P10’. My signature 
is on the memo, marked as ‘CC to ‘CC.’ After that, I took 
accused with me to Beed, where the accused had recovered 
silver plates, earrings, a ring, and a silver chain from the 
ground near his hut and handed them over. The accused also 
retrieved a piece of glass from a bottle and handed it over. I 
prepared a s seizure memo for these items, marked as ‘Exh. 
P12.’ My signature is on the memo, marked as ‘CC’ to ‘CC.’ 
 
 
  I also seized the jewelry before the accused’s arrest and 
prepared a memo, marked as ‘Exh P11.”   
 
12. A bare perusal of the extracted portion of the deposition of 
the Investigating Officer would reveal that he did not narrate the 
exact words spoken by the accused at the time of making the 
disclosure statement. He also did not state that the accused led 

 
6 
 
him to the place where the articles were hidden and rather stated 
that he took the accused to the Beed and got recovered the silver 
ornaments.  
13. This Court in the case of Ramanand alias Nandlal Bharti 
v. State of Uttar Pradesh1 has postulated that for proving a 
disclosure memo recorded under Section 27 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 at the instance of the accused, the 
Investigating Officer would be required to state about the 
contents of the disclosure memo and in absence thereof, the 
disclosure memo and the discovery of facts made in pursuance 
thereto would not be considered as admissible for want of proper 
proof.  
14. As a consequence of the above discussion, we have no 
hesitation in holding that the prosecution miserably failed to 
prove the factum of disclosure made by the accused to the 
Investigating Officer (PW-12) leading to the recovery of the silver 
articles allegedly looted by the accused from the complainant.  It 
is also important to note that the prosecution did not lead any 
evidence to show that the recovered articles were sealed at the 
time of recovery or that they were kept secure in the malkhana 
 
1 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1396 

 
7 
 
of the Police Station till the same were subjected to identification 
before the Executive Magistrate.  In addition thereto, it is also 
relevant that the Executive Magistrate was not examined in 
evidence.  The complainant Bhagu Bai (PW-3) made a categorical 
admission in her cross examination that she could recognize the 
silver articles in the test identification proceedings upon being 
pointed out by the police officials.  Thus, the recovery of the 
ornaments at the instance of the accused and the identification 
thereof has no sanctity in the eyes of law and cannot be relied 
upon.  No other evidence was led by the prosecution to connect 
the accused appellant with the crime.          
15. Consequently, there is no tangible or reliable evidence 
available on the record so as to affirm the guilt of the accused 
appellant as recorded by the learned trial Court and upheld by 
the High Court. 
16. As a result, the appeal deserves to be and is hereby allowed. 
The impugned judgments dated 20th October, 1999 and 21st 
December, 2022 passed by the learned trial Court and the High 
Court respectively are hereby quashed and set aside. 

 
8 
 
17. The accused appellant is acquitted of the charges. He is in 
jail and shall be released from custody forthwith, if not wanted 
in any other case.  
18. Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     ………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
             (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
April 19, 2024