2024 INSC 319
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.3851 OF 2023 
 
INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY BOARD 
OF INDIA  
 
 
 
 
 
    ...APPELLANT (S) 
  
VERSUS 
SATYANARAYAN BANKATLAL MALU  
& ORS. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ...RESPONDENT (S) 
 
INDEX 
I. 
FACTUAL BACKGROUND 
Paras 1 to 2  
II. 
SUBMISSIONS 
Paras 3 to 17 
III. 
CONSIDERATION OF STATUTORY PROVISIONS 
Paras 18 to 25 
IV. 
CONSIDERATION OF PRECEDENTS 
Paras 26 to 40 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Paras 41 to 49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
I. 
FACTUAL BACKGROUND 
1. 
This appeal challenges the judgement and order dated 14th 
February 2022, passed by the learned Single Judge of the High 
Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition No.2592 of 2021, 
thereby allowing the petition filed by Satyanarayan Bankatlal 
Malu and Ramesh Satyanarayan Malu, the Ex-Directors of M/s. 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.04.19
14:43:10 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
SBM Paper Mills Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as ‘the 
Respondents’) challenging the order dated 17th March 2021 
passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, 58th Court in 
Special Case No.853 of 2020 (‘learned Sessions Judge’ for short). 
The learned Sessions Judge had directed issuance of process 
against the Respondents on account of a Complaint filed by the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (hereinafter referred 
to as ‘the Appellant-Board’) under Section 236 of the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as “the 
Code”) read with Sections 190, 193 and 200 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (“Cr.P.C.) for the offences punishable 
under Section 73(a) and Section 235A of the Code. 
2. 
The facts in brief, giving rise to the present appeal are as 
under: 
2.1 M/s. SBM Paper Mills Private Limited (hereinafter referred 
to as “the Corporate Debtor”) filed a petition on 4th September 
2017 under Section 10 of the Code for initiation of the Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process (hereinafter referred to as “CIRP”) 
of 
itself 
vide 
CP/1362/I&BC/NCLT/MB/MAH/2017. 
The 

3 
 
National Company Law Tribunal, Mumbai Bench (hereinafter 
referred to as “the NCLT”) vide order dated 17th October 2017, 
admitted the Petition and directed the moratorium to commence 
as prescribed under Section 14 of the Code and directed certain 
statutory steps to be taken as a consequence thereof. Vide the 
said order, the NCLT also appointed Mr. Amit Poddar as the 
Interim Resolution Professional (hereinafter referred to as “RP”) 
to carry out the functions as prescribed under the provisions of 
the Code. 
2.2 In the meanwhile, Mr. Satyanarayan Malu, i.e., the 
Respondent/Ex-Director of the Corporate Debtor filed an 
application being M.A. No. 1396/2018 before the NCLT under 
Section 12A of the Code for the withdrawal of the aforesaid 
petition under Section 10 in light of a One Time Settlement 
(“OTS” for short) entered into with the sole Financial Creditor, 
i.e., Allahabad Bank. On the other hand, the RP had also filed an 
application being M.A. No. 827/2018 for the approval of the 
Resolution Plan. The NCLT vide order dated 20th December 2018 
allowed the M.A. No. 1396/2018 filed by the Respondent while 

4 
 
observing the consent for withdrawal of the petition by the sole 
Financial Creditor vide letter dated 27th November 2018.  
2.3 However, on account of non-compliance of the terms of the 
OTS by the Respondents, the NCLT issued a Show-Cause Notice 
against them vide order dated 11th March 2019. The NCLT further 
found it to be a fit case to propose the prosecution of the 
Respondents vide order dated 20th August 2019 while hearing an 
application filed by the sole Financial Creditor being M.A. 494 
and 495 of 2019 thereby seeking prosecution of the Respondents. 
2.4 Thereafter, on 22nd September 2020, the Appellant-Board 
filed a Complaint against the Respondents before the Sessions 
Judge in Special Case No. 853/2020 under the aforementioned 
provisions and for offences punishable under Section 73(a) and 
235A of the Code for the non-compliance of the terms of the OTS 
and for not having filed the M.A. 1396/2018 under Section 12A 
of the Code through the RP. The Sessions Judge vide Order dated 
17th March 2021 directed issuance of process against the 
Respondents and further directed them to be summoned on the 
next date of hearing.  

5 
 
2.5 Being aggrieved thereby, the Respondents filed a Writ 
Petition No. 2592 of 2021 before the High Court of Judicature at 
Bombay, praying for the quashing and setting aside of the order 
dated 17th March 2021 passed by the Sessions Judge for the want 
of jurisdiction. The High Court vide impugned judgement and 
order dated 14th February 2022 allowed the Writ Petition No. 
2592 of 2021 filed by the Respondents. 
2.6 Hence, this Appeal.  
II. 
SUBMISSIONS 
3. 
We have heard Shri S.V. Raju, learned Additional Solicitor 
General of India (“ASG” for short) appearing for the Appellant-
Board and Shri Amir Arsiwala, Advocate on Record, appearing for 
the Respondents/Ex-Directors of the Corporate Debtor. 
4. 
Shri S.V. Raju, learned ASG submitted that the learned 
Single Judge of the High Court has grossly erred in quashing the 
proceedings.  Shri Raju submitted that the learned Single Judge 
of the High Court has grossly erred in holding that, in view of the 
Companies (Amendment) Act, 2017 (which came into effect from 
7th May 2018), only the offences committed under the Companies 

6 
 
Act can be tried by Special Court consisting of Sessions Judge or 
Additional Sessions Judge.  He submitted that the reasoning 
given by the learned Single Judge that the offences other than 
the Companies Act cannot be tried by the Special Court 
consisting of Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge is 
totally in ignorance of the provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 
236 of the Code.   
5. 
Learned ASG submitted that sub-section (1) of Section 236 
of the Code provides that the offences under the Code shall be 
tried by the Special Court established under Chapter XXVIII of 
the Companies Act, 2013.  He submits that the legislative intent 
is clear.  There is no general reference to the provisions of the 
Companies Act.  He submits that what has been done by sub-
section (1) of Section 236 of the Code is that the offences 
punishable under the Code are required to be tried by the Special 
Court established under Chapter XXVIII of the Companies Act, 
2013.   
6. 
Shri Raju further submitted that the legislative intent is 
clear.  A specific provision of the Companies Act, 2013 has been 

7 
 
incorporated in sub-section (1) of Section 236 of the Code.  It is 
submitted that, if the legislative intent was that of legislation by 
reference, then a general reference could have been made in sub-
section (1) of Section 236 of the Code to Chapter XXVIII of the 
Companies Act.  Learned ASG therefore submitted that, if the 
reference made to the Special Court established under Chapter 
XXVIII of the Companies Act, 2013 is held to be legislation by 
incorporation, then the subsequent amendments to the 
Companies Act, 2013 would not be applicable to the Code.  He 
submitted that since the Code has come into effect on 28th May, 
2016, the provisions of Section 435, as it existed in Chapter 
XXVIII of the Companies Act, 2013 then, would only be 
applicable.  Learned ASG in this respect refers to the judgments 
of this Court in the cases of Bolani Ores Ltd. vs State of Orissa1 
and Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. vs Union of India and 
another2.   
 
1 (1974) 2 SCC 777 
2 (1979) 2 SCC 529 

8 
 
7. 
Learned ASG further submits that the Code has been held 
to be a complete Code in itself in a catena of judgments of this 
Court.  In this respect, he relied on the judgments of this Court 
in the cases of Ebix Singapore Private Limited vs Committee 
of Creditors of Educomp Solutions Limited and another3,  
Embassy Property Developments Private Limited vs State of 
Karnataka and others4, and Bharti Airtel Ltd. and another 
vs Vijaykumar V. Iyer and others5. 
8. 
Learned ASG submits that, if a statute is a complete Code 
in itself, then normally a reference to the provisions of the prior 
statute referred to in a subsequent statute would only have a 
restrictive operation. In such a case, it would be a ‘legislation by 
incorporation’ and not a ‘legislation by reference’.  In this respect, 
he relied on the judgments of this Court in the case of Girnar 
Traders (3) vs. State of Maharashtra and others6.  
9. 
Learned ASG further submits that the Statement of Objects 
and Reasons (SOR) to the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2017, 
 
3 (2022) 2 SCC 401 
4 (2020) 13 SCC 308 
5 2024 SCC OnLine SC 4 
6 (2011) 3 SCC 1 

9 
 
amending the Companies Act, 2013 clearly shows that the 
amendment is for the purposes of restricting only to the 
Companies Act and not for any other purpose.  He therefore 
submits that the finding of the learned Single Judge of the High 
Court that in view of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2017, the 
Special Court consisting of Sessions Judge or Additional 
Sessions Judge will not have the jurisdiction to entertain the 
complaint in question is totally erroneous.   
10. Learned ASG submits that, in any event, the learned Single 
Judge of the High Court has erred in quashing the complaint.  It 
is submitted that, in the event the learned Single Judge found 
that the Special Court consisting of Sessions Judge or Additional 
Sessions Judge did not have jurisdiction and it is the Special 
Court of Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate First 
Class which has jurisdiction, then it should have returned the 
complaint for presentation of the same before the competent 
court having jurisdiction.   
11. Shri Amir Arsiwala, learned Advocate on Record appearing 
for the Respondents raises a preliminary objection.  He submits 

10 
 
that the point with regard to ‘legislation by incorporation’ was not 
argued before the learned Single Judge of the High Court and 
therefore the said contention cannot be permitted to be raised for 
the first time in this Court.   
12. Shri Arsiwala submits that the judgment of this Court in 
the case of Bolani Ores Ltd. (supra) would not be applicable in 
the facts of the present case inasmuch as, in the said case what 
was incorporated in the subsequent statute was a definition of 
‘motor vehicles’ as found in the earlier statute i.e. Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1939.  It is therefore submitted that, the definition cannot 
be in a state of flux subject to the mercy of amendments to the 
Central Act.   
13. Similarly, he submits that the judgment of this Court in the 
case of Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. (supra) would not be 
applicable to the facts of the present case inasmuch as, in the 
said case what was referred in Section 55 of the Monopolies and 
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 was a right to file an appeal 
on any of the grounds mentioned in Section 100 of the Code of 
Civil procedure, 1908 (“CPC” for short).  He submitted that in the 

11 
 
said case, this Court was considering a provision which provided 
a substantive right to file an appeal.  As such, a reference to 
Section 100 of the CPC was held amounting to be an 
‘incorporation’ as the substantive right of appeal could not be left 
at the mercy of subsequent amendments to the CPC.   
14. Insofar as the judgment of this Court in the case of Girnar 
Traders (supra) is concerned, learned counsel submits that 
rather than the said judgment supporting the case of the 
Appellant-Board, if the test laid down in the said case is applied 
to the facts of the present case, it will lead to a conclusion that 
the present case is that of ‘legislation by reference’.   
15. Relying on the judgments of this Court in the cases of 
Collector of Customs, Madras vs Nathella Sampathu Chetty 
and Anr.7, New Central Jute Mills Co. Ltd. vs. Assistant 
Collector of Central Excise, Allahabad & Ors.8, and Ujagar 
Prints and others vs Union of India and others9, he submits 
that what has to be taken into consideration is the plain language 
 
7 (1962) 3 SCR 786 
8 (1970) 2 SCC 820 
9 (1989) 3 SCC 488 

12 
 
used by the legislation in the statute to which a reference is made 
by the subsequent statute.  Learned counsel submits that in the 
present case, a general reference is made to Chapter XXVIII of 
the Companies Act.  It is therefore submitted that, since a general 
reference is made, the present case would not be a case of 
‘legislation by incorporation’ but would be a case of ‘legislation 
by reference’.   
16. Learned counsel submits that in any case, the Respondents 
Nos.1 and 2 have a good case on merits.  He submits that the 
learned Single Judge of the High Court has not considered the 
merits of the matter and in the event this Court holds that the 
learned Single Judge was not justified in quashing the 
proceedings, the matter be remitted to the learned Single Judge 
of the High Court for deciding it afresh on merits.   
17. Shri Vikas Mehta, learned Advocate on Record for the 
Appellant-Board, in rejoinder, reiterated the submissions made 
by Shri S.V. Raju, learned ASG.  He submits that the legislative 
intent is clear.  If the legislature wanted to take out the offences 
punishable under the Code from the ambit of Chapter XXVIII of 

13 
 
the Companies Act, 2013, nothing prevented it from making an 
amendment to the Code itself.   
III. CONSIDERATION OF STATUTORY PROVISIONS 
18. For considering the rival submissions, it will be necessary 
to refer to Section 236(1) of the Code, which reads thus: 
236. Trial of offences by Special 
Court.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974), offences under of this Code shall be 
tried by the Special Court established 
under Chapter XXVIII of the Companies 
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013). 
 
19. It can thus be seen that Section 236(1) of the Code begins 
with a non-obstante clause.  It provides that the offences under 
the Code shall be tried by the Special Court established under 
Chapter XXVIII of the Companies Act, 2013. Chapter XXVIII of 
the Companies Act, 2013 deals with ‘Special Courts’. 
20. For appreciating the rival submissions, it will also be 
necessary to refer to Section 435 of the Companies Act, 2013, as 
it was originally enacted; Section 435 after the amendment in 
2015 by the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2015, which came into 
effect from 29th May 2015 (hereinafter referred to as “the 2015 

14 
 
Amendment”); and Section 435 as it existed after the amendment 
by the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2017 with effect from 7th 
May 2018 (hereinafter referred to as “the 2018 Amendment”), 
which reads thus: 
Section 435 (originally enacted) 
“435. Establishment of Special Courts.—(1) 
The Central Government may, for the purpose 
of providing speedy trial of offences punishable 
under this Act, by notification, establish or 
designate as many Special Courts as may be 
necessary. 
(2) A Special Court shall consist of a Single 
Judge who shall be appointed by the Central 
Government with the concurrence of the Chief 
Justice of the High Court within whose 
jurisdiction the judge to be appointed is working. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for 
appointment as a Judge of a Special Court unless 
he is, immediately before such appointment, 
holding office of a Sessions Judge or an 
Additional Sessions Judge.” 
 
Section 435 (after the 2015 Amendment) 
“435. Establishment of Special Courts.—(1) 
The Central Government may, for the purpose 
of providing speedy trial of offences punishable 
under this Act with imprisonment of two years 
or more, by notification, establish or designate 
as many Special Courts as may be necessary. 

15 
 
Provided that all other offences shall be tried, 
as the case may be, by a Metropolitan 
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First 
Class having jurisdiction to try any offence 
under this Act or under any previous company 
law. 
(2) A Special Court shall consist of a Single 
Judge who shall be appointed by the Central 
Government with the concurrence of the Chief 
Justice of the High Court within whose 
jurisdiction the judge to be appointed is 
working. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for 
appointment as a Judge of a Special Court 
unless 
he 
is, 
immediately 
before 
such 
appointment, holding office of a Sessions Judge 
or an Additional Sessions Judge.” 
Section 435 (after the 2018 Amendment) 
“435. Establishment of Special Courts.—(1) 
The Central Government may, for the purpose 
of providing speedy trial of offences under this 
Act, except under section 452, by notification, 
establish or designate as many Special Courts 
as may be necessary. 
(2) A Special Court shall consist of— 
(a) a single judge holding office as Session 
Judge or Additional Session Judge, in 
case of offences punishable under this 
Act with imprisonment of two years or 
more; and 
(b) a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial 
Magistrate of the First Class, in the case 
of 
other 
offences, 
who 
shall 
be 
appointed by the Central Government 

16 
 
with the concurrence of the Chief 
Justice of the High Court within whose 
jurisdiction the judge to be appointed is 
working.” 
 
21. It could thus be seen that as per Section 435(3) of the 
Companies Act, 2013, as it existed on the date on which the Code 
came into effect (i.e. after the 2015 Amendment), a person to be 
qualified for appointment as a Judge of a Special Court was 
required to hold office of a Sessions Judge or an Additional 
Sessions Judge immediately before his appointment as a Judge 
of a Special Court.   
22. After Section 435 of the Companies Act, 2013 suffered an 
amendment in the year 2015 by the 2015 Amendment (Act No. 
21 of 2015), with effect from 29th May, 2015, sub-section (1) 
thereof provided that the Central Government may, for the 
purpose of providing speedy trial of offences punishable under 
the said Act with imprisonment of two years or more, by 
notification, establish or designate as many Special Courts as 
may be necessary.  It further provided that all other offences shall 
be tried either by a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial 

17 
 
Magistrate of the First Class having jurisdiction to try any offence 
under the said Act or under any previous company law; meaning 
thereby, the offences under the Companies Act punishable with 
imprisonment of two years or more were to be tried by Special 
Courts comprising of Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions 
Judge, whereas all other offences punishable with imprisonment 
of less than two years, were to be tried by the Courts of 
Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate First Class having 
jurisdiction to try such offences.  Insofar as sub-sections (2) and 
(3) are concerned, there was no change and as such, for being a 
person to be eligible for appointment as a Judge of a Special 
Court it was necessary that he occupied the office of a Sessions 
Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge prior to his appointment.   
23. Another amendment to Section 435 of the Companies Act, 
2013 was effected by the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2017 (i.e. 
Act No. 1 of 2018), with effect from 7th May, 2018.  Vide the said 
amendment, two classes of Special Courts were constituted.  
Firstly, a Special Court presided by a single judge holding office 
as Session Judge or Additional Session Judge, in case of offences 

18 
 
punishable with imprisonment of two years or more under the 
Companies Act, 2013; and the second being presided by a 
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First 
Class in the case of other offences, i.e., offences punishable with 
imprisonment of less than two years.   
24. It is thus clear that Section 435 of the Companies Act, 2013 
as it originally existed, provided for only one class of Special 
Courts i.e. a person holding office of a Sessions Judge or an 
Additional Sessions Judge and all offences under the Companies 
Act, 2013 were required to be tried by such Special Courts.  The 
2015 Amendment to Section 435 also provided for only one class 
of Special Courts i.e. a person holding the rank of a Sessions 
Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge.  The change that was 
brought out was that, only offences punishable under the 
Companies Act, 2013 with imprisonment of two years or more 
were to be tried by the Special Courts, whereas all other offences 
i.e. offences punishable with imprisonment of less than two years 
were to be tried by the jurisdictional Metropolitan Magistrate or 
the Judicial Magistrate of the First Class.  By the 2018 

19 
 
Amendment, two classes of Special Courts were established.  The 
first class of Special Courts comprised of an officer holding the 
office as Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge, whereas 
the second class of Special Courts comprised of Metropolitan 
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class. The 
offences 
punishable 
under 
the 
Companies 
Act 
with 
imprisonment of two years or more were required to be tried by a 
Special Court comprising of Sessions Judge or Additional 
Sessions Judge, whereas all other offences i.e. the offences 
punishable with imprisonment of less than two years were to be 
tried by a Special Court comprising of Metropolitan Magistrate or 
the Judicial Magistrate of the First Class.   
25. The question that requires to be considered is, as to whether 
the Special Court under the Code would be as provided under 
Section 435 of the Companies Act as it existed at the time when 
the Code came into effect, or it would be as provided under 
Section 435 of the Companies Act after the 2018 Amendment.  
The answer to that question would depend upon as to whether 
the reference to ‘Special Court established under Chapter XXVIII 

20 
 
of the Companies Act, 2013’ in Section 236(1) of the Code is a 
‘legislation by incorporation’ or a ‘legislation by reference’. If it is 
held that it is a ‘legislation by incorporation’, then the subsequent 
amendments would not have any effect on the Code and the 
Special Court would continue to be as provided under Section 
435 of the Companies Act, as it existed when the Code came into 
effect.  Per contra, if it is held that it is a ‘legislation by reference’ 
then the subsequent amendments would also be applicable to 
the Code and the Special Courts would be as provided under 
Section 435 of the Companies Act after its amendment by the 
2018 Amendment.   
IV. CONSIDERATION OF PRECEDENTS 
26. A Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of Collector 
of Customs, Madras vs Nathella Sampathu Chetty and Anr. 
(supra) has considered the distinction between ‘legislation by 
reference’ and ‘legislation by incorporation’.  It will be apposite to 
refer to the following observations of this Court in the said case:  
“………To consider that the decision of the Privy 
Council has any relevance to the construction 
of the legal effect of the terms of Section 23-A of 

21 
 
the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act is to 
ignore the distinction between a mere reference 
to or a citation of one statute in another and an 
incorporation which in effect means the bodily 
lifting of the provisions of one enactment and 
making it part of another so much so that the 
repeal of the former leaves the latter wholly 
untouched. In the case, however, of a reference 
or a citation of one enactment by another 
without incorporation, the effect of a repeal of 
the one “referred to” is that set out in Section 
8(1) of the General clauses Act: 
“8. (1) Where this Act, or any Central Act 
or Regulation made after the commencement 
of this Act, repeals and re-enacts, with or 
without modification, any provision of a 
former enactment, then references in any 
other enactment or in any instrument to the 
provision so repealed shall, unless a different 
intention 
appears: 
be 
construed 
as 
references to the provision so re-enacted.” 
 
On the other hand, the effect of incorporation 
is 
as 
stated 
by 
Brett, 
L.J. 
in Clarke v. Bradlaugh [1881 8 QBD 63] : 
“Where a statute is incorporated, by 
reference, into a second statute the repeal of 
the first statute by a third does not affect the 
second.” 
This is analogous to, though not identical with 
the principle embodied in Section 6-A of the 
General Clauses Act enacted to define the effect 
of repeals effected by repealing and amending 
Acts which runs in these terms: 

22 
 
“6-A. Where any Central Act or Regulation 
made after the commencement of this Act 
repeals any enactment by which the text of 
any Central Act or Regulation was amended 
by the express omission, insertion or 
substitution of any matter, then, unless a 
different intention appears, the repeal shall 
not affect the continuance of any such 
amendment made by the enactment so 
repealed and in operation at the time of such 
repeal.” 
We say “not identical” because in the class of 
cases contemplated by Section 6-A of the 
General clauses Act, the function of the 
incorporating legislation is almost wholly to 
effect the incorporation and when that is 
accomplished, they die as it were a natural 
death which is formally effected by their repeal. 
In cases, however, dealt with by Brett, L.J. the 
legislation from which provisions are absorbed 
continue to retain their efficacy and usefulness 
and their independent operation even after the 
incorporation is effected.” 
 
27. It could thus be seen that the effect of incorporation means 
the bodily lifting of the provisions of one enactment and making 
it part of another so much so that the repeal of the former leaves 
the latter wholly untouched.  However, in the case of a reference 
or a citation of the provisions of one enactment into another 
without incorporation, the amendment or repeal of the provisions 

23 
 
of the said Act referred to in a subsequent Act will also bear the 
effect of the amendment or repeal of the said provisions.   
28. In the case of Bolani Ores Ltd. (supra), this Court was 
considering the question as to what would be the effect of 
amendment of the definition of ‘motor vehicles’ for the purposes 
of Bihar and Orissa Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1930 (for short 
“the Orissa Taxation Act”).  The Orissa Taxation Act had adopted 
the definition of ‘motor vehicles’ as provided in the Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1939 for the purposes of taxation.  The definition at the time 
of adoption brought the motor vehicle under the ambit of the said 
definition.  It excluded the ‘motor vehicles’ used solely upon the 
premises of the owner.   However, the said enactment suffered an 
amendment in the year 1956 and specifically excluded vehicles 
of special type adapted for use only in a factory or in any other 
enclosed premises.  It was sought to be urged on behalf of the 
State of Orissa that the definition of ‘motor vehicles’ as adopted 
in Section 2(c) of the Orissa Taxation Act was not the definition 
by ‘incorporation’ but a definition by ‘reference’ and therefore 

24 
 
amendment to the said definition would also be applicable for the 
purposes of taxation under the Orissa Taxation Act.   
29. Rejecting the said contention and referring to various earlier 
judgments, this Court observed thus: 
“29. The question then remains as to 
whether these vehicles though registrable 
under the Act are motor vehicles for the 
purpose of the Taxation Act. It has 
already been pointed out that before 
the amendment vehicles used solely 
upon the premises of the owner, though 
they may be mechanically propelled 
vehicles adapted for use upon roads 
were excluded from the definition of 
‘motor vehicle’. If this definition which 
excludes them is the one which is 
incorporated 
by 
reference 
under 
Section 2(c) of the Taxation Act, then 
no tax is leviable on these vehicles 
under the Taxation Act. Shri Tarkunde 
for the State of Orissa contends that the 
definition of ‘motor vehicle’ in Section 2(c) 
of the Taxation Act is not a definition by 
incorporation but only a definition by 
reference, and as such the meaning of 
‘motor vehicle’ for the purpose of Section 
2(c) of the Taxation Act would be the same 
as defined from time to time under Section 
2(18) of the Act. In ascertaining the 
intention of the legislature in adopting the 
method of merely referring to the definition 

25 
 
of ‘motor vehicle’ under the Act for the 
purpose of the Taxation Act, we have to 
keep in mind its purpose and intendment 
as also that of the Motor Vehicles Act. We 
have already stated what these purposes 
are and having regard to them the 
registration of a motor vehicle does not 
automatically make it liable for taxation 
under the Taxation Act. The Taxation Act 
is 
a 
regulatory 
measure 
imposing 
compensatory taxes for the purpose of 
raising revenue to meet the expenditure 
for making roads, maintaining them and 
for 
facilitating 
the 
movement 
and 
regulation of traffic. The validity of the 
taxing power under Entry 57 List II of the 
Seventh Schedule read with Article 301 of 
the 
Constitution 
depends 
upon 
the 
regulatory and compensatory nature of 
the taxes. It is not the purpose of the 
Taxation Act to levy taxes on vehicles 
which do not use the roads or in any way 
form part of flow of traffic on the roads 
which is required to be regulated. The 
regulations under the Motor Vehicles Act 
for registration and prohibition of certain 
categories of vehicles being driven by 
persons who have no driving licence, even 
though those vehicles are not plying on the 
roads, are designed to ensure the safety of 
passengers and goods etc. etc. and for that 
purpose it is enacted to keep control and 
check on the vehicles. Legislative power 
under Entry 35 of List III (Concurrent List) 
does not bar such a provision. But Entry 

26 
 
57 of List II is subject to the limitations 
referred to above, namely, that the power 
of taxation thereunder cannot exceed the 
compensatory nature which must have 
some nexus with the vehicles using the 
roads viz. public roads. If the vehicles do 
not use the roads, notwithstanding that 
they are registered under the Act, they 
cannot be taxed. This very concept is 
embodied in the provisions of Section 7 of 
the Taxation Act as also the relevant 
sections in the Taxation Acts of other 
States, namely, that where a motor vehicle 
is not using the roads and it is declared 
that it will not use the roads for any 
quarter or quarters of a year or for any 
particular year or years, no tax is leviable 
thereon and if any tax has been paid for 
any quarter during which it is not 
proposed to use the motor vehicle on the 
road, 
the 
tax 
for 
that 
quarter 
is 
refundable. If this be the purpose and 
object of the Taxation Act, when the motor 
vehicle is defined under Section 2(c) of the 
Taxation Act as having the same meaning 
as in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, then 
the intention of the Legislature could not 
have been anything but to incorporate 
only the definition in the Motor Vehicles 
Act as then existing, namely, in 1943, as if 
that definition was bodily written into 
Section 2(c) of the Taxation Act. If the 
subsequent 
Orissa 
Motor 
Vehicles 
Taxation 
(Amendment) 
Act, 
1943, 
incorporating the definition of ‘motor 

27 
 
vehicle’ referred to the definition of 
‘motor vehicle’ under the Act as then 
existing, the effect of this legislative 
method would, in our view, amount to 
an incorporation by reference of the 
provisions of Section 2(18) of the Act in 
Section 2(c) of the Taxation Act. Any 
subsequent amendment in the Act or a 
total repeal of the Act under a fresh 
legislation on that topic would not 
affect the definition of ‘motor vehicle’ 
in Section 2(c) of the Taxation Act. This 
is a well-accepted interpretation both 
in this country as well as in England 
which has to a large extent influenced 
our law. This view is further reinforced by 
the use of the word ‘has’ in the expression 
“has the same meaning as in the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1939” in Section 2(c) of the 
Taxation 
Act, 
which 
would 
perhaps 
further justify the assumption that the 
Legislature had intended to incorporate 
the definition under the Act as it then 
existed and not as it may exist from time 
to time. This method of drafting which 
adopts incorporation by reference to 
another Act whatever may have been its 
historical justification in England in this 
country does not exhibit an activists 
draftsmanship which would have adopted 
the method of providing its own definition. 
Where two Acts are complimentary or 
interconnected, legislation by reference 
may be an easier method because a 
definition given in the one Act may be 

28 
 
made to do as the definition in the other 
Act both of which being enacted by the 
same Legislature. At any rate, Lord Esher, 
M.R. 
dealing 
with 
legislation 
by 
incorporation, 
in In 
re. 
Wood's 
Estate [(1886) 31 Ch D 607] said at p. 615: 
“If a subsequent Act brings into itself 
by reference some of the clauses of a 
former Act, the legal effect of that, as 
has often been held, is to write those 
sections into the new Act just as if they 
had been actually written in it with the 
pen, or printed in it, and, the moment 
you have these clauses in the later Act, 
you have no occasion to refer to the 
former Act at all.” 
The 
observations 
in Clarke v. Bradlaugh [(1881) 8 QBD 63 
607] are also to the same effect. Brett, L.J. 
in that case had said at p. 69: 
“… there is a rule of construction 
that, where a statute is incorporated by 
reference into a second statute, the 
repeal of the first statute by a third 
statute does not affect the second.” 
 
30. In Secretary of State for India in 
Council v. Hindusthan 
Cooperative 
Insurance Society Ltd. [AIR 1931 PC 149 : 
132 IC 748 : LR 58 IA 259] the Privy 
Council was considering a case where the 
incorporation effected in the statute viz. 
the Calcutta Improvement Trust Act, 1911 
— referred to by their Lordships as the 

29 
 
“Local Act” — was in express terms and in 
the form illustrated by 54 and 55 Vict., Ch. 
19. The “Local Act” in dealing with the 
acquisition of land for the purposes 
designated by it, made provision for the 
acquisition under the Land Acquisition 
Act, and the provisions of the Land 
Acquisition 
Act 
were 
subjected 
to 
numerous modifications which were set 
out in the Schedule, so that in effect the 
“Local Act” was held to be the enactment 
of a Special Law for the acquisition of land 
for the special purpose. It was in the 
context 
of 
these 
and 
several 
other 
provisions which pointed to the absorption 
of certain of the provisions of the Land 
Acquisition Act into the “Local Act” with 
vital modifications that Privy Council 
observed at p. 266: 
“But Their Lordships think that there 
are other and perhaps more cogent 
objections to this contention of the 
Secretary of State, and their Lordships 
are not prepared to hold that the sub-
section in question, which was not 
enacted till 1921, can be regarded as 
incorporated in the Local Act of 1911. It 
was not part of the Land Acquisition Act 
when the Local Act was passed, nor in 
adopting the provisions of the Land 
Acquisition Act is there anything to 
suggest that the Bengal Legislature 
intended to bind themselves to any 
future additions which might be made 

30 
 
to that Act. It is at least conceivable that 
new provisions might have been added 
to the Land Acquisition Act which 
would be wholly unsuitable to the local 
code. Nor again, does Act 19 of 1921 
contain 
any 
provision 
that 
the 
amendments enacted by it are to be 
treated as in any way retrospective, or 
are to be regarded as affecting any other 
enactment than the Land Acquisition 
Act itself. Their Lordships regard the 
Local Act as doing nothing more than 
incorporating certain provisions from 
an existing Act, and for convenience of 
drafting doing so by reference to that 
Act, instead of setting out for itself at 
length the provisions which it was 
desired to adopt.” 
It was further observed at p. 267: 
“In this country it is accepted that 
where a statute is incorporated by 
reference into a second statute, the 
repeal of the first statute does not affect 
the second: see the cases collected 
in Craies on Statute Law, 3rd Edn. pp. 
349-50. This doctrine finds expression 
in 
a 
common-form 
section 
which 
regularly appears in the amending and 
repealing Acts which are passed from 
time 
to 
time 
in 
India 
…. 
The 
independent existence of the two Acts is 
therefore recognized; despite the death 
of the parent Act, its off-spring survives 
in the incorporating Act. Though no 

31 
 
such saving clause appears in the 
General Clauses Act, their Lordships 
think that the principle involved is as 
applicable in India as it is in this 
country. 
It seems to be no less logical to hold 
that where certain provisions from an 
existing Act have been incorporated into 
a subsequent Act, no addition to the 
former Act, which is not expressly made 
applicable to the subsequent Act, can 
be deemed to be incorporated in it, at all 
events 
if 
it 
is 
possible 
for 
the 
subsequent Act to function effectually 
without the addition.” 
This Court in the Collector of Customs, 
Madras v. Nathella SampathuChetty [AIR 
1962 SC 316 : (1962) 3 SCR 786, 830-833 
: (1962) 1 Cr LJ 364] considered the Privy 
Council 
decision 
in 
the Hindustan 
Cooperative Insurance Society Ltd. and 
distinguished that case and held the 
principle inapplicable to the facts of that 
case. 
 
31. In State of Bihar v. S.K. Roy [AIR 1966 
SC 1995 : 1966 Supp SCR 259 : (1966) 2 
LLJ 759] this Court was considering the 
definition of “employer” in Section 2(e) of 
the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus 
Schemes Act, 1948, where that expression 
was defined to mean “the owner of a coal 
mine as defined in clause (g) of Section 3 
of the Indian Mines Act, 1923”. The Indian 

32 
 
Mines Act, 1923, had been repealed and 
substituted by the Mines Act, 1952 (Act 35 
of 1952). In the latter Act the word “owner” 
had been defined in clause (1) of Section 2. 
The question was whether by virtue of 
Section 8 of the General Clauses Act, the 
definition of the word “employer” in clause 
(e) of Section 2 of the Coal Mines Provident 
Fund and Bonus Schemes Act should be 
construed with reference to the definition 
of the word, “owner” in clause (1) of 
Section 2 of Act 35 of 1952, which repealed 
the earlier Act and re-enacted it. It may be 
mentioned that according to Section 2(1) 
of Act 35 of 1952 the word “owner”, when 
used in relation to a mine, means “any 
person who is the immediate proprietor or 
lessee or occupier of the mine or of any 
part thereof and in the case of a mine the 
business whereof is being carried on by a 
liquidator or receiver, such liquidator or 
receiver….” The expression “coal mine” is 
separately defined in clause (b) of Section 
2 of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and 
Bonus Schemes Act, 1948. Ramaswami, 
J. speaking for the Court observed at p. 
261: 
“As a matter of construction it must 
be held that all works, machinery, 
tramways and sidings, whether above 
or below ground, in or adjacent to a coal 
mine will come within the scope and 
ambit of the definition only when they 
belong to the coal mine. In other words, 

33 
 
the word or occurring before the 
expression ‘belonging to a coal mine’ in 
the main definition has to be read to 
mean ‘and’.” 
This case, as well as the decision in New 
Central Jute Mills Co. Ltd. v. Assistant 
Collector 
of 
Central 
Excise, 
Allahabad [(1970) 2 SCC 820 : (1971) 2 
SCR 92] are distinguishable on the facts 
and legislation which this Court was 
considering. In the New Central Jute Mills 
Co. Ltd. case, the Privy Council decision in 
the Hindusthan 
Cooperative 
Insurance 
Society Ltd. case was referred to and 
distinguished. It is, however, contended by 
the learned Solicitor General that both 
in Nathella Sampathu Chetty case as well 
as the New Central Jute Mills Co. Ltd. 
case this Court was considering the effects 
of the two Acts which were made by 
Parliament by Central legislation and it is, 
therefore, 
not 
strictly 
a 
case 
of 
incorporation 
because 
the 
Central 
Legislature is deemed to have, while 
making the latter enactment, kept in view 
the provisions of the former Act. In our 
view this may not be conclusive. 
 
32. In Ram Sarup v. Munshi [AIR 1963 SC 
553 : (1963) 3 SCR 858] a judgment of the 
Bench of five Judges of this Court held 
that the repeal of the Punjab Alienation of 
Land Act, 1900, had no effect on the 
continued operation of the Punjab Pre-

34 
 
emption 
Act, 
1913, 
and 
that 
the 
expression “agricultural land” in the later 
Act had to be read as if the definition of the 
Alienation of Land Act had been bodily 
transposed into it. After referring to the 
observations of Brett, L.J. in Clarke case, 
Rajagopala Ayyangar, J. speaking for the 
Court observed at pp. 868-69: 
“Where the provisions of an Act are 
incorporated by reference in a later Act 
the repeal of the earlier Act has, in 
general, no effect upon the construction 
or effect of the Act in which its 
provisions have been incorporated. 
* * * 
In the circumstances, therefore, the 
repeal of the Punjab Alienation of Land 
Act of 1900 has no effect on the 
continued operation of the Pre-emption 
Act and the expression ‘agricultural 
land’ in the later Act has to be read as if 
the definition in the Alienation of Land 
Act had been bodily transposed into it.” 
The above decision of this Court is more in 
point and supports our conclusion. In our 
view, the intention of Parliament for 
modifying the Motor Vehicles Act has no 
relevance in determining the intention of 
the Orissa Legislature in enacting the 
Taxation Act.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 

35 
 
30. It is thus clear that this Court found that, if the vehicles do 
not use the roads, notwithstanding that they are registered under 
the Motor Vehicles Act, they cannot be taxed under the Orissa 
Taxation Act.   This Court held that the intention of the 
Legislature could not have been anything but to incorporate only 
the definition in the Motor Vehicles Act, as it existed in 1943, as 
if that definition was bodily written into Section 2(c) of the Orissa 
Taxation Act.  It further held that, if the subsequent Orissa Motor 
Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1943, incorporating the 
definition of ‘motor vehicle’ referred to the definition of ‘motor 
vehicle’ under the Motor Vehicles Act, as it existed at the time of 
enactment of the subsequent Act; the effect of this legislative 
method would amount to an incorporation by reference to the 
provisions of Section 2(18) of the Motor Vehicles Act in Section 
2(c) of the Orissa Taxation Act.  It was further held that, any 
subsequent amendment in the Motor Vehicles Act or a total 
repeal of the Motor Vehicles Act under a fresh legislation on that 
topic would also not affect the definition of ‘motor vehicle’ in 
Section 2(c) of the Orissa Taxation Act.  

36 
 
31. This Court unequivocally held that the intention of 
Parliament for modifying the Motor Vehicles Act had no relevance 
in determining the intention of the Orissa Legislature in enacting 
the Orissa Taxation Act.   This Court held that the dumpers and 
rockers, which were used by the miners in their premises though 
registrable under the Motor Vehicles Act were not taxable under 
the Orissa Taxation Act as long as they were working solely 
within the premises of the respective owners.   
32. In the case of Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. (supra), 
Section 55 of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 
1969 (“MRTP Act, 1969” for short) provided that any person 
aggrieved by an order made by the Commission under Section 13 
may prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court on ‘one or more of 
the grounds specified in Section 100 of the CPC’. Section 100 of 
the CPC at the time of the incorporation of the MRTP Act specified 
three grounds on which a second appeal could be brought to the 
High Court and one of the grounds was that the decision 
appealed against was contrary to law.  However, by the Code of 
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976 with effect from February 

37 
 
1, 1977, it was provided that a second appeal shall lie to the High 
Court only if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a 
substantial question of law.  It was sought to be argued that 
substitution of the new Section 100 amounted to repeal and re-
enactment of the former Section 100 and therefore the reference 
in Section 55 of the MRTP Act, 1969 to Section 100 of CPC must 
be construed as reference to the new Section 100 and the appeal 
would be tenable only on ground specified in the new Section 100 
of CPC i.e., on a substantial question of law.   
33. Rejecting the said contention, this Court observed thus: 
“8. The first question that arises for 
consideration on the preliminary objection 
of the respondents is as to what is the true 
scope and ambit of an appeal under 
Section 55. That section provides inter alia 
that any person aggrieved by an order 
made by the Commission under Section 
13 may prefer an appeal to this Court on 
“one or more of the grounds specified in 
Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908”. Now at the date when Section 55 
was enacted, namely, December 27, 1969, 
being the date of coming into force of the 
Act, Section 100 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure specified three grounds on 
which a second appeal could be brought to 
the High Court and one of these grounds 
was that the decision appealed against 

38 
 
was contrary to law. It was sufficient 
under Section 100 as it stood then that 
there should be a question of law in order 
to attract the jurisdiction of the High Court 
in second appeal and, therefore, if the 
reference in Section 55 were to the 
grounds set out in the then existing 
Section 100, there can be no doubt that an 
appeal would lie to this Court under 
Section 55 on a question of law. But 
subsequent to the enactment of Section 
55, Section 100 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure was substituted by a new 
section by Section 37 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976 with 
effect from February 1, 1977 and the new 
Section 100 provided that a second appeal 
shall lie to the High Court only if the High 
Court is satisfied that the case involves a 
substantial question of law. The three 
grounds on which a second appeal could 
lie under the former Section 100 were 
abrogated and in their place only one 
ground was substituted which was a 
highly stringent ground, namely, that 
there should be a substantial question of 
law. This was the new Section 100 which 
was in force on the date when the present 
appeal was preferred by the appellant and 
the argument of the respondents was that 
the maintainability of the appeal was, 
therefore, required to be judged by 
reference to the ground specified in the 
new Section 100 and the appeal could be 
entertained only if there was a substantial 
question of law. The respondents leaned 
heavily on Section 8(1) of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897 which provides: 

39 
 
 
“Where this Act or any Central Act or 
Regulation 
made 
after 
the 
commencement of this Act, repeals and 
re-enacts, with or without modification, 
any provision of a former enactment, 
then references in any other enactment 
or in any instrument to the provision so 
repealed 
shall, 
unless 
a 
different 
intention appears, be construed as 
references to the provision so re-
enacted.” 
 
and contended that the substitution of the 
new Section 100 amounted to repeal and 
re-enactment of the former Section 100 
and, therefore, on an application of the 
rule of interpretation enacted in Section 
8(1), the reference in Section 55 to Section 
100 must be construed as reference to the 
new Section 100 and the appeal could be 
maintained only on ground specified in the 
new Section 100, that is, on a substantial 
question of law. We do not think this 
contention is well founded. It ignores the 
distinction between a mere reference to 
or citation of one statute in another 
and an incorporation which in effect 
means bodily lifting a provision of one 
enactment and making it a part of 
another. Where there is mere reference 
to or citation of one enactment in 
another without incorporation. Section 
8(1) applies and the repeal and re-
enactment of the provision referred to 
or cited has the effect set out in that 
section and the reference to the 

40 
 
provision repealed is required to be 
construed as reference to the provision 
as re-enacted. Such was the case 
in Collector 
of 
Customs v. Nathella 
Sampathu Chetty [AIR 1962 SC 316 : 
(1962) 3 SCR 786] and New Central Jute 
Mills Co. Ltd. v. Assistant Collector of 
Central Excise [(1970) 2 SCC 820 : AIR 
1971 SC 454 : (1971) 2 SCR 92]. But 
where a provision of one statute is 
incorporated in another, the repeal or 
amendment of the former does not 
affect 
the 
latter. 
The 
effect 
of 
incorporation is as if the provision 
incorporated were written out in the 
incorporating statute and were a part 
of it. Legislation by incorporation is a 
common legislative device employed by the 
legislature, where the legislature for 
convenience 
of 
drafting 
incorporates 
provisions from an existing statute by 
reference to that statute instead of setting 
out for itself at length the provisions which 
it 
desires 
to 
adopt. 
Once 
the 
incorporation is made, the provision 
incorporated becomes an integral part 
of the statute in which it is transposed 
and thereafter there is no need to refer 
to 
the 
statute 
from 
which 
the 
incorporation 
is 
made 
and 
any 
subsequent amendment made in it has 
no effect on the incorporation statute. 
Lord Esher, M.R., while dealing with 
legislation in incorporation in In re Wood's 
Estate [(1886) 31 Ch D 607] pointed out at 
p. 615: 
 

41 
 
“If a subsequent Act brings into itself 
by reference some of the clauses of a 
former Act, the legal effect of that, as 
has often been held, is to write those 
sections into the new Act just as if they 
had been actually written in it with the 
pen, or printed in it, and, the moment 
you have those clauses in the later Act, 
you have no occasion to refer to the 
former Act at all.” 
 
Lord Justice Brett, also observed to the 
same effect in Clarke v. Bradlough [(1881) 
8 QBD 63, 69] : 
 
“.… there is a rule of construction 
that, where a statute is incorporated by 
reference into a second statute, the 
repeal of the first statute by a third 
statute does not affect the second.” 
 
This was the rule applied by the Judicial 
Committee 
of 
the 
Privy 
Council 
in Secretary 
of 
State 
for 
India 
in 
Council v. Hindustan 
Cooperative 
Insurance Society Ltd. [58 IA 259] The 
Judicial Committee pointed out in this 
case that the provisions of the Land 
Acquisition 
Act, 
1894 
having 
been 
incorporated in the Calcutta Improvement 
Act, 1911 and become an integral part of 
it, the subsequent amendment of the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 by the addition of 
sub-section (2) in Section 26 had no effect 
on the Calcutta Improvement Act, 1911 
and could not be read into it. Sir George 

42 
 
Lowndes delivering the opinion of the 
Judicial Committee observed at p. 267: 
 
“In this country it is accepted that 
where a statute is incorporated by 
reference into a second statute, the 
repeal of the first statute does not affect 
the second: see the cases collected in 
Craies on Statute Law, 3rd Edn. pp. 
349, 350 ... The independent existence 
of the two Acts is, therefore, recognised; 
despite the death of the parent Act, its 
offspring survives in the incorporating 
Act. 
 
It seems to be no less logical to hold 
that where certain provisions from an 
existing Act have been incorporated into 
a subsequent Act, no addition to the 
former Act, which is not expressly made 
applicable to the subsequent Act, can 
be deemed to be incorporated in it, at all 
events 
if 
it 
is 
possible 
for 
the 
subsequent Act to function effectually 
without the addition.” 
 
So also in Ram Sarup v. Munshi [AIR 1963 
SC 553 : (1963) 3 SCR 858] it was held by 
this Court that since the definition of 
“agricultural 
land” 
in 
the 
Punjab 
Alienation of Land Act, 1900 was bodily 
incorporated in the Punjab Pre-emption 
Act, 1913, the repeal of the former Act had 
no effect on the continued operation of the 
latter. Rajagopala Ayyangar, J., speaking 
for the Court observed at p. 868-69 of the 
Report: 

43 
 
 
“Where the provisions of an Act are 
incorporated by reference in a later Act 
the repeal of the earlier Act has, in 
general, no effect upon the construction 
or effect of the Act in which its 
provisions have been incorporated. 
 
In the circumstances, therefore, the 
repeal of the Punjab Alienation of Land 
Act of 1900 has no effect on the 
continued operation of the Pre-emption 
Act and the expression ‘agricultural 
land’ in the later Act has to be read as if 
the definition in the Alienation of Land 
Act, 1900, had been bodily transposed 
into it.” 
 
The decision of this Court in Bolani Ores 
Ltd. v. State of Orissa [(1974) 2 SCC 777 : 
AIR 1975 SC 17 : (1975) 2 SCR 138] also 
proceeded on the same principle. There 
the question arose in regard to the 
interpretation of Section 2(c) of the Bihar 
and Orissa Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 
1930 (hereinafter referred to as “the 
Taxation Act”). This section when enacted 
adopted the definition of “motor vehicle” 
contained in Section 2(18) of the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1939. Subsequently, Section 
2(18) was amended by Act 100 of 1956 but 
no corresponding amendment was made 
in the definition contained in Section 2(c) 
of the Taxation Act. The argument 
advanced before the Court was that the 
definition in Section 2(c) of the Taxation 

44 
 
Act was not a definition by incorporation 
but only a definition by reference and the 
meaning of “motor vehicle” in Section 2(c) 
must, therefore, be taken to be the same 
as defined from time to time in Section 
2(18) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. This 
argument was negatived by the Court and 
it was held that this was a case of 
incorporation and not reference and the 
definition in Section 2(18) of the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1939 as then existing was 
incorporated 
in 
Section 
2(c) of 
the 
Taxation Act and neither repeal of the 
Motor 
Vehicles 
Act, 
1939 
nor 
any 
amendment 
in 
it 
would 
affect 
the 
definition of “motor vehicle” in Section 2(c) 
of the Taxation Act. It is, therefore, clear 
that if there is mere reference to a 
provision of one statute in another 
without incorporation, then, unless a 
different intention clearly appears, 
Section 8(1) would apply and the 
reference would be construed as a 
reference to the provision as may be in 
force from time to time in the former 
statute. But if a provision of one 
statute is incorporated in another, any 
subsequent amendment in the former 
statute or even its total repeal would 
not 
affect 
the 
provision 
as 
incorporated in the latter statute. The 
question is to which category the 
present case belongs.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 

45 
 
34. This Court therefore held that if there was mere reference 
to a provision of one statute in another without incorporation, 
then, unless a different intention clearly appears, Section 8(1) of 
the General Clauses Act would apply and the reference would be 
construed as a reference to the provision in the former statute, 
as may be in force from time to time.  However, if a provision of 
one statute was incorporated in another statute, then any 
subsequent amendment in the former statute or even its total 
repeal would not affect the provision as incorporated in the latter 
statute.  
35. In the case of Girnar Traders (3) (supra), this Court was 
considering the question, as to whether the provisions of the 
Land Acquisition Act, 1894, with particular reference to Section 
11-A, can be read into and treated as part of the Maharashtra 
Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 (“MRTP Act, 1966” for 
short) on the principle of either ‘legislation by reference’ or 
‘legislation by incorporation’? 
36. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of 
this Court in the said case: 

46 
 
“86. At the very outset, we may notice that 
in the preceding paragraphs of the 
judgment, we have specifically held that 
the MRTP Act is a self-contained code. 
Once such finding is recorded, application 
of either of the doctrines i.e. “legislation by 
reference” 
or 
“legislation 
by 
incorporation”, 
would 
lose 
their 
significance particularly when the two 
Acts can coexist and operate without 
conflict. 
 
87. However, since this aspect was argued 
by the learned counsel appearing for the 
parties at great length, we will proceed to 
discuss the merit or otherwise of this 
contention without prejudice to the above 
findings and as an alternative plea. These 
principles have been applied by the courts 
for a considerable period now. When 
there is general reference in the Act in 
question to some earlier Act but there 
is no specific mention of the provisions 
of the former Act, then it is clearly 
considered as legislation by reference. 
In the case of legislation by reference, 
the amending laws of the former Act 
would normally become applicable to 
the later Act; but, when the provisions 
of an Act are specifically referred and 
incorporated in the later statute, then 
those provisions alone are applicable 
and the amending provisions of the 
former Act would not become part of 

47 
 
the 
later 
Act. 
This 
principle 
is 
generally 
called 
legislation 
by 
incorporation. 
General 
reference, 
ordinarily, will imply exclusion of specific 
reference and this is precisely the fine line 
of distinction between these two doctrines. 
Both are referential legislations, one 
merely by way of reference and the other 
by incorporation. It, normally, will depend 
on the language used in the later law and 
other relevant considerations. While the 
principle of legislation by incorporation 
has well-defined exceptions, the law 
enunciated as of now provides for no 
exceptions to the principle of legislation by 
reference. Furthermore, despite strict 
application of doctrine of incorporation, it 
may still not operate in certain legislations 
and such legislation may fall within one of 
the stated exceptions. 
 
xxx xxx xxx 
 
121. These are the few examples and 
principles stated by this Court dealing 
with both the doctrines of legislation by 
incorporation as well as by reference. 
Normally, when it is by reference or 
citation, the amendment to the earlier law 
is accepted to be applicable to the later law 
while in the case of incorporation, the 
subsequent amendments to the earlier law 
are irrelevant for application to the 
subsequent law unless it falls in the 

48 
 
exceptions stated by this Court in M.V. 
Narasimhan case [State of M.P. v. M.V. 
Narasimhan, (1975) 2 SCC 377 : 1975 SCC 
(Cri) 589] . It could well be said that even 
where there is legislation by reference, the 
Court needs to apply its mind as to what 
effect the subsequent amendments to the 
earlier law would have on the application 
of the later law. The objective of all these 
principles of interpretation and their 
application is to ensure that both the Acts 
operate in harmony and the object of the 
principal statute is not defeated by such 
incorporation. Courts have made attempts 
to clarify this distinction by reference to 
various established canons. But still there 
are certain grey areas which may require 
the court to consider other angles of 
interpretation. 
 
122. In Maharashtra SRTC [(2003) 4 SCC 
200] the Court was considering the 
provisions of the MRTP Act as well as the 
provisions of the Land Acquisition Act. The 
Court finally took the view by adopting the 
principle stated in U.P. Avas Evam Vikas 
Parishad [(1998) 2 SCC 467] and held that 
there is nothing in the MRTP Act which 
precludes the adoption of the construction 
that the provisions of the Land Acquisition 
Act as amended by Central Act 68 of 1984, 
relating to award of compensation would 
apply with full vigour to the acquisition of 
land under the MRTP Act, as otherwise it 

49 
 
would be hit by invidious discrimination 
and 
palpable 
arbitrariness 
and 
consequently invite the wrath of Article 14 
of the Constitution. While referring to the 
principle 
stated 
in Hindusthan 
Coop. 
Insurance Society Ltd. [(1930-31) 58 IA 
259 : AIR 1931 PC 149] and clarifying the 
distinction between the two doctrines, the 
Court declined to apply any specific 
doctrine and primarily based its view on 
the plea of discrimination but still 
observed: (Maharashtra SRTC case [(2003) 
4 SCC 200] , SCC p. 208, para 11) 
“11. … The fact that no clear-cut 
guidelines or distinguishing features 
have been spelt out to ascertain 
whether it belongs to one or the other 
category 
makes 
the 
task 
of 
identification difficult. The semantics 
associated with interpretation play their 
role to a limited extent. Ultimately, it is 
a matter of probe into legislative 
intention and/or taking an insight into 
the working of the enactment if one or 
the 
other 
view 
is 
adopted. 
The 
doctrinaire 
approach 
to 
ascertain 
whether 
the 
legislation 
is 
by 
incorporation 
or 
reference 
is, 
on 
ultimate analysis, directed towards that 
end. The distinction often pales into 
insignificance 
with 
the 
exceptions 
enveloping the main rule.” 
 

50 
 
123. In the case in hand, it is clear 
that both these Acts are self-contained 
codes within themselves. The State 
Legislature while enacting the MRTP 
Act has referred to the specific sections 
of the Land Acquisition Act in the 
provisions of the State Act. None of the 
sections require application of the 
provisions of the Land Acquisition Act 
generally or mutatis mutandis. On the 
contrary, there is a specific reference 
to 
certain 
sections 
and/or 
content/language of the section of the 
Land Acquisition Act in the provisions 
of the MRTP Act.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
   
37. This Court has held that once a finding is recorded that an 
Act is a self-contained code, then the application of either of the 
doctrines i.e. “legislation by reference” or “legislation by 
incorporation” would lose their significance particularly when the 
two Acts can coexist and operate without conflict.  
38. This Court further held that, in case of general reference in 
the Act in question to an earlier Act but there being no specific 
mention of the provisions of the former Act, then it would clearly 
be considered as ‘legislation by reference’.  In such a case, the 
amending laws of the former Act would become applicable to the 

51 
 
later Act.  However, when the provisions of an Act are specifically 
referred and incorporated in the later statute, then those 
provisions alone are applicable and the amending provisions of 
the former Act would not become part of the later Act.  
39. This Court in the case of Girnar Traders (supra) held that, 
if the legislature intended to apply the provisions of the Land 
Acquisition Act generally and wanted to make a general 
reference, it could have said that the provisions of the Land 
Acquisition Act would be applicable to the MRTP Act, 1966. This 
Court observed that such expression was conspicuous by its very 
absence.  This Court held that both these Acts i.e. Land 
Acquisition Act and the MRTP Act, 1966 are self-contained codes 
within themselves. This Court observed that the State Legislature 
while enacting the MRTP Act, 1966 has referred to the specific 
sections of the Land Acquisition Act in the provisions of the State 
Act.  This Court further observed that none of the sections require 
application of the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act generally 
or mutatis mutandis. On the contrary, there was a specific 
reference to certain sections and/or content/language of the 

52 
 
section of the Land Acquisition Act in the provisions of the MRTP 
Act, 1966. 
40. It will also be relevant to note that this Court in a catena of 
cases has held that the Code is a self-contained Code. Reference 
in this respect could be made to the following judgments of this 
Cout: 
(i) 
Innoventive Industries Limited vs ICICI Bank and 
another10;  
(ii) 
Principal Commissioner of Income Tax vs Monnet 
Ispat and Energy Limited11; 
(iii) 
E.S. Krishnamurthy and others vs Bharath Hi-Tech 
Builders Private Limited12; 
(iv) 
Pratap Technocrats Private Limited and others vs 
Monitoring Committee of Reliance Infratel Limited 
and another13; 
 
10 (2018) 1 SCC 407 
11 (2018) 18 SCC 786 
12 (2022) 3 SCC 161 
13 (2021) 10 SCC 623 

53 
 
(v) 
V. Nagarajan vs. SKS Ispat and Power Limited and 
others14;  
(vi) 
Embassy Property Developments Private Limited vs 
State of Karnataka and others (supra); and  
(vii) Bharti Airtel Ltd. and another vs Vijaykumar V. Iyer 
and others (supra). 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
41. Applying these legal principles, we will have to analyze the 
provisions of Section 236(1) of the Code.  Under Section 236(1) of 
the Code, reference is “offences under this Code shall be tried by 
the Special Court established under Chapter XXVIII of the 
Companies Act, 2013”. 
42. It can thus be seen that the reference is not general but 
specific.  The reference is only to the fact that the offences under 
the Code shall be tried by the Special Court established under 
Chapter XXVIII of the Companies Act.   
43. Applying the principle as laid down by this Court in various 
judgments, since the reference is specific and not general, it will 
 
14 (2022) 2 SCC 244 

54 
 
have to be held that the present case is a case of ‘legislation by 
incorporation’ and not a case of ‘legislation by reference’.  The 
effect would be that the provision with regard to Special Court 
has been bodily lifted from Section 435 of the Companies Act, 
2013 and incorporated in Section 236(1) of the Code.  In other 
words, the provision of Section 435 of the Companies Act, 2013 
with regard to Special Court would become a part of Section 
236(1) of the Code as on the date of its enactment. If that be so, 
any amendment to Section 435 of the Companies Act, 2013, after 
the date on which the Code came into effect would not have any 
effect on the provisions of Section 236(1) of the Code.  The Special 
Court at that point of time only consists of a person who was 
qualified to be a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge.   
44. It is further to be noted that the Code has also suffered two 
subsequent amendments i.e. the 2015 Amendment and the 2018 
Amendment.  If the legislative intent was to give effect to the 
subsequent amendments in the Companies Act to Section 236(1) 
of the Code, nothing prevented the legislature from amending 
Section 236(1) of the Code.  The legislature having not done that, 

55 
 
the provision with regard to the reference in Section 236(1) of the 
Code pertaining to Special Court as mentioned in Section 435 of 
the Companies Act, 2013 stood frozen as on the date of 
enactment of the Code.   As such, the learned Judge of the High 
Court has erred in holding that in view of the subsequent 
amendment, the offences under the Code shall be tried only by a 
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First 
Class.   
45. We further find that the reasoning of the learned single 
judge of the High Court that in view of the 2018 Amendment only 
the offences under the Companies Act would be tried by a Special 
Court of Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge and all 
other offences including under the Code shall be tried by a 
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First 
Class is untenable.  For a moment, even if it is held that the 
reference in Section 236(1) of the Code is a ‘legislation by 
reference’ and not ‘legislation by incorporation’, still the offences 
punishable under the Code having imprisonment of two years or 
more will have to be tried by a Special Court presided by a 

56 
 
Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge.  Whereas the 
offences having punishment of less than two years will have to 
be tried by a Special Court presided by a Metropolitan Magistrate 
or a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class.   
46. In any case, the learned single Judge of the High Court has 
grossly erred in quashing the complaint only on the ground that 
it was filed before a Special Court presided by a Sessions Judges.  
At the most, the learned single judge of the High Court could have 
directed the complaint to be withdrawn and presented before the 
appropriate court having jurisdiction.    
47. Shri Amir Arsiwala, learned Advocate-on-record for the 
respondent Nos.1 and 2, had submitted that in the event this 
Court holds that the Special Courts presided by a Sessions Judge 
or an Additional Sessions Judge will have jurisdiction to try the 
complaint under the Code, this Court should remand the matter 
to the High Court for deciding the matter afresh on merits. It is 
submitted that the respondents have a good case on merits and 
there has been no adjudication on merits of the matter.  

57 
 
48. In the result, we allow the appeal.  The impugned judgment 
and order dated 14th February 2022, passed by the learned Single 
Judge of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition 
No.2592 of 2021 is quashed and set aside.  It is held that the 
Special Court presided by a Sessions Judge or an Additional 
Sessions Judge will have jurisdiction to try the complaint under 
the Code. However, since the learned single judge of the High 
Court has not considered the merits of the matter, the matter is 
remitted to the learned single judge of the High Court for 
considering the petition of the respondents afresh on merits.   
49. We place on record our deep appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered by Shri S.V. Raju, learned ASG as well as 
Shri Amir Arsiwala and Shri Vikas Mehta, learned counsel for the 
appearing parties. 
 
 
 
 
 
…….........................J.        
[B.R. GAVAI] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
…….........................J.        
[SANDEEP MEHTA] 
NEW DELHI; 
APRIL 19, 2024