2024 INSC 337
 
 
1 
 
Non-reportable 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL   APPEAL    NO._________ OF  2024 
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) No. 21401 of 2022) 
 
 
SHRIRAM MANOHAR BANDE 
 
       …APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
 
UKTRANTI MANDAL & ORS. 
           …RESPONDENTS 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Aravind Kumar, J. 
 
1. 
Heard. 
 
2. 
Leave granted. 
 
 
3. 
The appellant being aggrieved by the judgment dated 
02.05.2022 passed in Writ Petition No.1976 of 2019, whereby the 
writ petition filed by the respondent Nos.1 and 2 challenging the 
Order dated 25.01.2019 passed by the Ld. School Tribunal 
Digitally signed by Dr.
Naveen Rawal
Date: 2024.04.25
14:06:01 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
2 
 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘Tribunal’), Amravati whereunder 
termination of respondent No.1 (appellant herein) had been set 
aside and directed the reinstatement with 50% back wages and 
other consequential benefits came to be set aside has challenged 
the same. Parties are referred to as per their rank/status in writ 
court. 
 
Facts in Brief: 
 
4. 
Respondent No.1 is an educational society that runs 
Respondent No.2 i.e., Vasantrao Naik High School which runs on 
a grant-in-aid basis. The appellant came to be appointed as an 
Assistant Teacher and was discharging his duties accordingly. The 
appellant tendered his resignation from the said post on 
10.10.2017. However, vide letter dated 25.10.2017, he withdrew 
his resignation by posting said letter on 03.11.2017. The appellant 
claimed that on 23.11.2017, he went to the school to resume his 
service, which is when he was denied signing on the muster roll 
by the Headmaster of Respondent No.2 and on 27.11.2017, the 
appellant received a letter stating that he was relieved from his 
service.  
 

 
 
3 
 
5. 
Against his termination, the appellant approached the 
Tribunal constituted under Section 8 of the Maharashtra 
Employees of Private Schools (Conditions of Service) Regulation 
Act, 1977, and Rules framed thereunder (hereinafter referred to as 
MEPS Act and Rules) by filing an appeal under Section 9 of the 
MEPS Act contending inter alia that the communication issued 
by the respondents relieving him from service was illegal and all 
connected documents therewith were fabricated and merely an 
afterthought. It was also contended that he had withdrawn his 
resignation, and as such respondents could not have prevented 
him from joining to his duties. Appellant also contended that he 
had not received any formal communication from respondents of 
the acceptance of his resignation. Hence, he prayed for the order 
of termination of service to be set aside.  
 
6. 
Respondents in their written statement contended that the 
School Committee had received the resignation letter of the 
appellant and pursuant to the same Respondent No.1 – 
management had passed a resolution of accepting the resignation. 
It was the case of the respondents that acceptance of the 
resignation was communicated to the appellant. On the contrary, 

 
 
4 
 
appellant contended that the resolutions passed by the School 
Committee were back-dated and it was fabricated only to show 
compliance with due process.  
 
7. 
The Tribunal upon perusal of the pleadings and documents 
on record concluded that the appellant had indeed withdrawn his 
resignation lawfully and the respondents with a mala fide intent 
had fabricated the documents i.e., the resolutions of the 
Committee wherein the resignation was accepted. Accordingly, 
the Tribunal vide judgment and order dated 25th January 2019, set 
aside the termination of the appellant, declaring it to be 
unlawfully done.  
 
8. 
Being aggrieved by said judgment and order of the 
Tribunal dated 25th January 2019, the Respondents approached 
the Nagpur Bench of the High Court of Bombay in Writ Petition 
No.1976 of 2019 contending that Tribunal had erroneously 
discarded the resolution dated 13.10.2017 passed by the School 
Management. They further contended that Tribunal had 
committed an error by holding that resolution was an afterthought 
of the management; it was also contended that Tribunal discarded 

 
 
5 
 
the vital document filed on record, leading to a mistake that needs 
to be corrected in the extraordinary writ jurisdiction. The 
Respondents also contended that appellant was granted 50% back 
wages by the Tribunal without pleading or proof of his 
employment during the period he was out of service. Lastly, it 
was contended that Tribunal had not given a single reason for its 
assessment of back wages without any pleading or proof. 
 
9. 
The High Court concluded that there was material on 
record to show that the resignation tendered by the appellant was 
indeed accepted as per the resolution passed by Respondent No.2 
and there was statutory compliance with the requirements under 
the MEPS Act and Rules. The plea of the appellant that 
acceptance of his resignation was never communicated to him 
and thereby termination was illegal, was not accepted by the High 
Court by observing that non-communication would not make the 
resolution inoperative. The High Court observed that the MEPS 
Act and Rules do not stipulate the resignation would come into 
effect only after its acceptance is communicated to an employee. 
The High Court also ruled that conclusion arrived at by the 
Tribunal regarding the documents being fabricated had no basis 

 
 
6 
 
and was without any evidence to that effect and resultantly, High 
Court set aside the findings of the Tribunal and found the 
judgment of the Tribunal to be unsustainable and as such allowed 
the writ petition as prayed for. Being aggrieved by the Order of 
the High Court, appellant is before us.  
Contentions of the parties: 
 
10. 
We have heard Ms. Sweta Rani, learned counsel appearing 
for the appellant, and Mr. Sunil Murarka, learned counsel 
appearing for the respondents.  
 
10.1 
It is the contention of Ms. Sweta Rani, learned counsel 
appearing for the appellant that High Court committed an error in 
setting aside the well-reasoned order of the Tribunal by not 
appreciating the fact that only the management committee could 
have taken a decision and the school committee had no power to 
consider the same under the MEPS Act and Rules made 
thereunder. She would further contend that High Court erred in 
not considering the inconsistent plea put forward by the 
management with reference to the approval of the resignation 
namely in one breath it was contended that the school committee 

 
 
7 
 
approved the resignation and, in another breath, it was contended 
that management committee approved the resignation.  It is also 
contended that High Court erred in not appreciating that the 
resolution dated 13.10.2017 is a manufactured document as 
rightly noticed by the Tribunal. She would further elaborate her 
submissions by contending that the resignation letter dated 
10.10.2017 had been undisputedly withdrawn by communication 
dated 25.10.2017 and non-considering of this vital aspect has 
resulted in the miscarriage in the administration of justice. 
 
10.2 
Per contra, Shri Sunil Murarka, learned counsel appearing 
for Respondent Nos.1 and 2 by supporting the impugned order 
and praying for dismissal of the appeal has contended that 
Tribunal had erred in drawing adverse inferences vis-à-vis with 
reference to copies of the resolutions of the management and the 
school committee as not having been filed along with written 
statement, though those documents were indeed placed before the 
Tribunal at the stage of recording the evidence and this fact was 
taken note off by the High Court. He would contend that mandate 
of Section 7 of the MEPS Act read with Rule 40 of the Rules was 
fully satisfied and contrary attempt by the employee that 

 
 
8 
 
resignation letter had been withdrawn would not be immune to 
his benefit in the backdrop of the said resignation having already 
been accepted by the management. 
 
10.3 
He further contended that written statement filed by the 
respondent would clearly show that the resignation of the 
appellant was firstly accepted by the management committee by 
resolution dated 13.10.2017 and only thereafter by the school 
committee on 14.10.2017 which was evidenced from records. He 
emphasized that Paragraph 10 of the written statement makes a 
mention of the resolution dated 13.10.2017, therefore, it cannot 
be said that the resolution dated 13.10.2017 is an afterthought 
merely because it was not annexed along with the written 
statement and only produced during the course of the evidence. 
He also contended that resignation was voluntary and the same 
came to be accepted by the management committee and school 
committee respectively which was communicated to the appellant 
on 16.10.2017, and therefore appellant was estopped by his own 
conduct from claiming that the resignation tendered was 
withdrawn before its acceptance. Hence, he prayed for dismissal 
of the appeal. 

 
 
9 
 
 Discussion and Analysis:  
 
11 
 Against the backdrop of the aforesaid submissions, and 
contentions raised by the learned counsel, we now proceed to 
examine the findings of the courts below in contrast to the 
relevant provisions of the MEPS Act and Rules. The appellant’s 
case, in brief, is that there was non-compliance with the 
provisions of the MEPS Act and Rules made thereunder which 
provides for proper acceptance of a resignation. The appellant has 
strenuously contended that resolution dated 13.10.2017 passed by 
the management committee was a manufactured/fabricated 
document. On the contrary, the respondents submit that there is 
no strict rule which prescribes that resignation has to be accepted 
by the management committee only, and the same should not be 
considered by the school committee. It was also submitted that 
the MEPS Act and Rules do not lay down any strict rules with 
regard to the communication of acceptance of resignation.  
 
12 
 Upon careful consideration of the factual background, the 
findings of the Tribunal, and the reasoning of the High Court for 

 
 
10 
 
reversing the findings of the Tribunal, we have identified two 
questions for consideration before us:   
I. 
Whether the appellant is justified in claiming that 
the resolution dated 13.10.2017 is a ‘manufactured’ 
document by the respondent?   
II. 
Whether there is any non-compliance with the 
provisions under the MEPS Act and Rules in 
acceptance of the resignation letter of the appellant?  
Answer: Both the questions are in the negative for following 
reasons: 
 
RE: Issue No.1  
 
13 
 It would be necessary for us to examine the issue of 
whether 
the 
resolution 
dated 
13.10.2017 
is 
a 
manufactured/fabricated document as claimed by the appellant, as 
the Tribunal had set aside the termination order on the basis that 
resolution dated 13.10.2017 was an afterthought and was created 
by the respondents only to show compliance with the provisions 
of MEPS Act and Rules. The Tribunal’s conclusion for holding 
the resolutions to be fabricated document was based on the 
pleadings of the respondents in the written statement filed before 

 
 
11 
 
the Tribunal, wherein at Paragraph 6 of the written statement, the 
respondent had stated that the school committee decided on the 
resignation which was thereafter approved by the management 
and it had failed to place on record the resolution along with its 
written statement. However, it is to be noted that the Tribunal had 
completely overlooked and ignored the additional information in 
Paragraph 10 namely in the subsequent part of the written 
statement, whereunder the detailed steps taken by the respondents 
after receiving the resignation letter have been enumerated. It 
would be apposite to reproduce the relevant paragraph of the 
written statement of the respondents.  
“10. 
Additional information: - The appellant is trying 
to take undue advantage of communications made by the 
respondent no.2. It is submitted that as soon as the 
appellant tended his resignation before the respondent no.2, 
it was placed before the executive committee of the society, 
in turn the society has resolved to accept the resignation 
and in the same it was decided that the same resolution is to 
be passed in school committee. Accordingly, the directions 
of the management were compiled by passing a resolution 
in the school committee. It is obvious that acceptance of 
resignation firstly was made by the management and the 
said decision is accepted by the school committee later on. 
Therefore, nothing is wrong in it.”  
 
 
14 
A bare perusal of the pleadings in Paragraph 10 of the 
written statement would make it abundantly clear that the school 

 
 
12 
 
committee upon receipt of the resignation letter had placed it 
before the executive committee, which in turn had resolved by 
resolution dated 13.10.2017 to accept the resignation and in the 
same resolution it was also resolved to be passed by the school 
committee, and accordingly the school committee had passed the 
resolution dated 14.10.2017. This plea received in the written 
statement reflects that respondents had specifically pleaded that 
the management committee was the first one to accept the 
resolution and only thereafter the school committee had passed its 
resolution dated 14.10.2017. Further, it is important to note that 
the document in question was placed before the Tribunal at the 
stage of evidence, which is an admitted fact. Hence, it was wholly 
erroneous for the Tribunal to conclude that merely because the 
document and records were in possession of the management, 
they would have prepared or fabricated such record. The 
circumstances analyzed by the Tribunal for arriving at this 
finding and the reasons arrived thereunder is in complete 
ignorance of plea raised in Paragraph 10 of the respondent's 
written statement and hence it is an apparent error on the face of 
record. The High Court has thus rightly appreciated the pleadings 

 
 
13 
 
and documents on record to conclude that Tribunal committed an 
error by holding that documents were manufactured without any 
appropriate reasons or sufficient evidence to the said effect, more 
so when there was an explicit mention of the resolution passed by 
the management in Paragraph 10 of the written statement. 
Accordingly, Issue No.1 is decided against the appellant, thereby 
holding that the resolution dated 13.10.2017 is not a 
‘manufactured’ document and upholding the findings of the High 
Court on this aspect.  
 
RE: Issue No.2  
 
15. 
The resolution dated 13.10.2017 having been accepted as 
a valid document to determine the case at hand, it is now 
necessary to see whether there has been any non-compliance with 
the provisions of the MEPS Act and Rules while accepting the 
resignation of the appellant and thereby terminating his services. 
One of the main grounds for challenging the impugned judgment 
by the appellant was that only management could have accepted 
the resignation and taken a decision on the resignation letter dated 
10.10.2017, and the school committee lacked the power to 

 
 
14 
 
consider the same, and hence it was in violation of the provisions 
of the MEPS Act and Rules. It would be pertinent to note that 
High Court has rightly rejected said contention by discussing in 
detail the functions to be performed by the school committee as 
laid out under Schedule ‘A’ to the MEPS Act and Rules. The 
functions to be performed by the school committee are as 
prescribed under Clause 3, which include the appointment of 
employees, other than head of the school. It is worthy to note, 
that appellant himself had addressed his resignation letter to the 
school committee, however, the school committee placed it 
before the management, upon which the management committee 
passed a resolution dated 13.10.2017, accepting the resignation. It 
is only after the acceptance of the resignation by the 
management, the school committee on 14.10.2017 passed the 
resolution accepting the resignation letter. It is equally important 
to note that School Committee consists of four representatives of 
the management, including the President of the Governing Body 
and one member from amongst permanent teachers, with the head 
of the school being ex-officio secretary of the committee. 
Therefore, it is evident that management was indeed involved in 

 
 
15 
 
the process of considering and accepting the resignation letter. 
Appellant has failed to convince this Court that there was any 
error in the findings of the High Court on this ground.  
 
16. 
It would be apposite for us to look into the provisions 
under the MEPS Act and Rules which enumerate the procedure 
for resignation by an employee of a private school. The relevant 
provisions i.e., Section 7 of the MEPS Act which is reproduced 
below for reference: 
“7. Procedure for resignation by employees of private 
schools: If any employee intends to resign from his post in 
any private school, at any time after the appointed date, he 
shall draw up a letter of resignation in duplicate and sign 
both copies of that letter and put the date thereon. He may 
then forward one copy to the Management by registered 
post and keep the other copy with him.” 
 
A bare perusal of Section 7 of the MEPS Act, the three-fold 
requirements while tendering a resignation are stipulated for the 
employee's advantage. It addresses the prescribed protocol for 
submitting a letter of resignation. The purpose of this provision is 
to protect employees from unethical practices, such as 
management calling them in, pressurising or coercing them, or 
offering them any form of inducement or incentive to sign blank 
documents that may be used to draft resignation letters at a later 

 
 
16 
 
date or to terminate employees through deceptive means. 
Therefore, it is imperative that an employee strictly adhere to the 
favour of Section 7 it while submitting their resignation. The 
employee forfeits the protections stipulated therein if he fails to 
adhere to the prescribed procedure or acknowledge executing a 
typewritten or printed letter of resignation and subsequently 
admits to personally delivering or tendering the resignation to 
management or doing so through a third party. Section 7 of the 
MEPS Act is not applicable in such circumstance, and the 
employee cannot invoke its protection to proclaim an unlawful 
and involuntary resignation in violation of the provision. In the 
present case, it is an admitted position that the employee 
voluntarily tendered his resignation. Hence, we need not delve 
into this aspect in depth. 
 
17. 
The relevant Rule 40 of the MEPS Rules, also needs to be 
considered, and is reproduced below:  
RULE 40 OF THE MAHARASHTRA EMPLOYEES OF 
PRIVATE SCHOOLS (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) 
RULES, 1981 
40. Resignation.- 
(1) A permanent employee may leave service after giving three 
calendar months’ notice and a non-permanent employee may 
leave service after giving one calendar month’s notice. The 
Management may, however, allow an employee to leave service 

 
 
17 
 
earlier on payment of pay (excluding allowances) for three 
months, or as the case may be, one month in lieu of notice by the 
employee. The amount in lieu of notice shall be restricted to the 
pay for the period by which the notice period falls short. 
(2) If any Management allows an employee to leave service 
earlier either without due notice or without making payment of 
pay in lieu of notice as specified in sub-rule (1), a proportionate 
amount of pay in lieu of notice shall be deducted from the grant 
due to the school concerned. 
(3) An employee entitled to vacation shall not give notice of 
resignation during the vacation or so as to cover any part of the 
vacation. The notice of resignation shall not be given within a 
month after the beginning of the first term of the year.  
  
18. 
 It is important to note that in Section 7 of MEPS Act, the 
three-fold requirement to be fulfilled while tendering a 
resignation is to protect the interest of the employee, whereas 
Rule 40 of the Rules was introduced to safeguard the interests of 
the Management, i.e., to enable the management to make 
necessary arrangements to replace the existing employee. The 
first part of Rule 40 (1) imposes a condition only upon the 
employee while tendering a resignation, i.e., notice to the 
Management. A permanent employee is required to give three-
calendar months’ notice, whereas a non-permanent employee has 
to give a month’s notice. However, the second part of Rule 40 (1) 
permits the Management to relieve an employee from his service 
before the duration of the notice period by paying the employee 
for the remaining duration of the notice period. On a holistic 

 
 
18 
 
reading of Rule 40, it can be concluded that Management is given 
the authority to accept the resignation tendered prior to the 
completion of the notice period and terminate the services of the 
employee with payment in lieu of the remaining period. Further, 
it is observed that Rule 40 has not prescribed any requirement or 
obligation to be fulfilled by the management relating to 
communication of acceptance of resignation to the employee, nor 
the Rule would indicate that acceptance of resignation and 
consequent termination of services of the employee would be 
improper if such acceptance of resignation is not communicated 
to the employee. In light of the intent and interpretation of the 
relevant Section 7 of MEPS and Rule 40 of the Rules, we 
conclude that the High Court was right in holding that mere non-
communication of acceptance of resignation to the employee 
would not render the termination invalid. We answer the Issue in 
the negative, thereby upholding the findings of the High Court.  
 
19. 
In fact, there is no ground before us, which was not 
already dealt with by the High Court in its reasoning and finding, 
however, we have gone into the facts in detail and reviewed the 
judgments of the courts below in quite detail only to satisfy our 

 
 
19 
 
conscience that no injustice has been meted out to appellant. We 
now proceed to detail out the specific findings of the High Court 
which dealt with all grounds raised by the appellant, which have 
been reagitated before us. 
 
 
20. 
It is to be noted that appellant was undergoing certain 
marital disputes and has admitted to this effect that owing to his 
difficulties in performing his duties, he tendered his resignation 
on 10.10.2017. Before the Tribunal, appellant tried to take a stand 
that he was pressurized into tendering his resignation, however, 
the Tribunal specifically observed that the appellant never took 
this stand in his resignation letter, and this plea was raised for the 
first time before the Education Officer vide letter dated 
13.12.2017. Appellant did not take this plea in any of the earlier 
communications, and accordingly, Tribunal observed that 
resignation was voluntary, and the submissions of pressurization 
were vague. Appellant also stated that he had filed a leave 
application on 10.10.2017, the same date as his resignation letter, 
seeking leave from 01.11.2017 to 30.11.2017. However, the 
Tribunal had brushed aside said contention of the appellant on the 

 
 
20 
 
ground that he never submitted any proof to show his bona fides 
of having communicated the leave application, and Tribunal held 
that Appellant had acted upon his resignation till his subsequent 
communication. These observations of the Tribunal would go to 
show the conduct of the appellant, and the attempts made by the 
appellant to undo the voluntary decision to resign only post 
acceptance of his resignation letter. Appellant himself has 
admitted that he sought withdrawal of his resignation letter on 
03.11.2017 only upon realizing his mistake. Tribunal and the 
High Court have confirmed the fact that resignation was 
voluntarily tendered by the appellant. The appellant has also 
strenuously submitted that the acceptance of the resignation was 
not communicated to him, and he submitted his letter seeking 
withdrawal of resignation before the communication of 
acceptance of the resignation. Hence, he contended that the 
termination was invalid.  
 
21. 
At this juncture, it becomes necessary to point out that as 
per service jurisprudence, the employment is terminated from the 
date on which the letter of resignation is accepted by the 
appropriate authority. The appellant, in this case, tendered his 

 
 
21 
 
resignation letter on 10.10.2017 and this resignation letter came 
be accepted on 14.10.2017, hence the date of termination of the 
services of the appellant for the purpose of adjudication would be 
14.10.2017.  
 
 
22. 
This Court in North Zone Cultural Centre and another 
vs. Vedpathi Dinesh Kumar reported in (2003) 5 SCC 455 has 
held that resignation would be effective on its acceptance, even if 
the acceptance is not communicated as long as rules or guidelines 
governing the resignation do not mandate such acceptance of 
resignation is to be communicated. In the North Zone (supra) 
case, the employee who was a temporary Accountant tendered his 
resignation from the post held by him on 18.11.1988. With effect 
from the said date, the resignation was accepted by the Director 
on the very same day with the endorsement "Accepted, hand over 
charge". The employee vide Telegram on 21.11.1988 withdrew 
his resignation stating that the same was obtained by pressure. He 
was communicated vide letter dated 18.11.1988 regarding 
acceptance of his resignation. The High Court allowed the writ 
petition on two grounds; (i) the acceptance of resignation was not 

 
 
22 
 
communicated till the withdrawal and (ii) the employee was 
permitted to attend the duty even after acceptance of resignation. 
Setting aside the judgment of the High Court, this Court held that 
non-communication of the acceptance does not make the 
resignation inoperative provided, there is, in fact, an acceptance 
before the withdrawal. It is also held that it is not open to the 
public servant to withdraw his resignation after it is accepted by 
the appropriate authority 
 
23. 
As noticed by us above, Section 7 of the MEPS Act and 
Rule 40 of the Rules does not impose any guidelines for 
acceptance of the resignation upon the management. Hence, the 
position of law laid down by this Court in North Zone (supra) 
squarely applies to the facts of the present case. Therefore, the 
contention raised by the appellant about withdrawal of 
resignation before communication of its acceptance does not hold 
water. 
 
24. 
 We find no infirmity with the impugned judgment and it 
does not merit any interference. In light of both the points 
formulated having been answered in the negative, we affirm the 

 
 
23 
 
findings of the High Court and consequently dismiss the present 
appeal with no order as to costs.  
 
…...........….………………….J. 
 (Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha) 
 
 
…...........….………………….J. 
 (Aravind Kumar) 
 
New Delhi, 
April 25, 2024