2024 INSC 341
 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 1 of 38 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
EXTRA-ORDINARY ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 434 OF 2023 
 
ASSOCIATION FOR DEMOCRATIC REFORMS 
....  
PETITIONER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
  
 
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA  
AND ANOTHER 
 
....  
 
RESPONDENTS 
 
W I T H 
 
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 184 OF 2024 
 
A N D 
 
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.   
OF 2024 
(DIARY NO. 35782 OF 2023) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
SANJIV KHANNA, J. 
 
Delay in refiling is condoned. 
 
2. 
At the outset, we take on record that the counsel for the petitioners, in 
unison, have stated that the petitioners do not attribute any motive or 
malice to the Election Commission of India1, or for that matter contend 
that the Electronic Voting Machines2 have been tutored or configured to 
favour or disfavour a candidate or political party. However, due to 
 
1 For short, ‘ECI’. 
2 For short, ‘EVMs’ 
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
Date: 2024.05.24
14:38:15 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 2 of 38 
 
possibility of manipulating the EVMs there is suspicion and, therefore, 
this Court should step in to instil confidence in the voters3 and the people. 
Voters have the right to know that the franchise exercised by them has 
been correctly recorded and counted. 
 
3. 
On a pointed question put by the Court, it was argued, without prejudice 
and in the alternative, on behalf of the petitioner – Association for 
Democratic Reforms, that the Court should direct:  
a)  return to the paper ballot system; or 
b) that the printed slip from the Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail 
machine4 be given to the voter to verify, and put in the ballot box, 
for counting; and/or  
c) that there should be 100% counting of the VVPAT slips in addition 
to electronic counting by the control unit. 
 
4. 
Other arguments raised relate to — the alleged modification of the 
VVPAT in the year 2017, whereby the glass window on the VVPAT was 
made translucent/tinted instead of transparent, depriving the voter from 
knowing whether the vote cast by him was actually registered and 
counted; Rule 49MA of the Conduct of Election Rules, 19615 is 
draconian, arbitrary, and contrary to law as reference to Section 177 of 
the Indian Penal Code, 18606 in the written declaration under Rule 49MA 
 
3 ‘Voters’ and ‘Electors’ is used interchangeably.  
4 For short, ‘VVPAT’. 
5 For short, ‘1961 Rules’. 
6 For short, ‘IPC’. 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 3 of 38 
 
is wrong and misconceived; and lastly, the voters’ right to know that the 
vote as cast is duly registered, being a paramount and indelible 
fundamental right, any administrative reason and ground raised by the 
ECI objecting to 100% counting of the VVPAT paper trail should be 
rejected. 
 
5. 
Paper ballots were the norm, till EVMs were projected as a viable 
alternative in 1980s. EVMs were first used in an assembly bye-election              
in Kerala in 1982. All through the 1980s and early 1990s, the use of 
EVMs for elections was discussed and debated by politicians and 
experts in the domain of technology and electoral process, and after due 
deliberations and review, the EVMs were accepted and embraced. In 
view of the legal challenge7 regarding use of EVMs without legislative 
approval, the Parliament vide Act 1 of 1989 amended the Representation 
of the People Act, 19518 allowing the use of EVMs. They were used in 
the General Elections in 2004 and have been used in each and every 
General and other election thereafter. 
 
6. 
ECI maintains that the EVMs have been a huge success in ensuring free, 
fair and transparent elections across the nation in all elections. They 
restrict human intervention, checkmate electoral fraud and malpractices 
like stuffing and smudging of votes, and deter the errors and mischiefs 
faced in manual counting of ballot papers. While earlier it was 
 
7 See A.C. Jose v. Sivan Pillai and others, (1984) 2 SCC 656. 
8 For short, ‘RP Act’. 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 4 of 38 
 
apprehended that the introduction of EVMs will lead to hardship and 
disenfranchisement, independent studies showcase that EVMs have led 
to increase in voter participation.9 Yet, it is also true that time and again 
use of EVMs has been objected to and questioned, not by one but by all 
political parties and others. There have been several litigations in this 
Court and the High Courts, albeit the challenge to the use of EVMs has 
been rejected recording good grounds and reasons.  
 
7. 
We deem it appropriate to begin this decision by referring to some of the 
earlier case laws and judgments of this Court on the efficacy and use of 
EVMs in the elections in this country. 
 
8. 
This Court in Subramanian Swamy v. Election Commission of 
India,10 held that a paper trail was an indispensable requirement of free 
and fair elections. The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced 
below:  
“28. From the materials placed by both the sides, we are satisfied 
that the ‘paper trail’ is an indispensable requirement of free and 
fair elections. The confidence of the voters in the EVMs can be 
achieved only with the introduction of the “paper trail”. EVMs 
with Vvpat system ensure the accuracy of the voting system. 
With an intent to have fullest transparency in the system and to 
restore the confidence of the voters, it is necessary to set up 
EVMs with Vvpat system because vote is nothing but an act of 
expression which has immense importance in a democratic 
system. 
 
29. In the light of the above discussion and taking notice of the 
pragmatic and reasonable approach of ECI and considering the 
fact that in general elections all over India, ECI has to handle one 
million 
(ten 
lakh) 
polling 
booths, 
we 
permit 
ECI 
to 
introduce Vvpat in gradual stages or geographical-wise in the 
 
9 Legal History of EVMs and VVPATs, Edition 1, January 2024, p.654. 
10 (2013) 10 SCC 500.  

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 5 of 38 
 
ensuing general elections. The area, State or actual booth(s) are 
to be decided by ECI and ECI is free to implement the same in a 
phased manner. We appreciate the efforts and good gesture 
made by ECI in introducing the same. For implementation of such 
a system (Vvpat) in a phased manner, the Government of India 
is directed to provide required financial assistance for 
procurement of units of Vvpat.” 
 
Accordingly, to ensure full transparency and confidence of voters, 
this Court recommended that EVMs be set up with VVPATs. Amendment 
to the 1961 Rules was notified on 14.08.2013 to introduce the VVPAT 
mechanism. 
 
9. 
In N. Chandrababu Naidu and Others v. Union of India and 
Another,11 the petitioners prayed that 50% randomised VVPAT slip 
verification be conducted in every General and Bye Elections instead of 
one EVM per assembly constituency or assembly segment in a 
parliamentary constituency. This Court held as under:  
“9. At the very outset the Court would like to observe that neither 
the satisfaction of the Election Commission nor the system in 
vogue today, as stated above, is being doubted by the Court 
insofar as fairness and integrity is concerned. It is possible and 
we are certain that the system ensures accurate electoral results. 
But that is not all. If the number of machines which are subjected 
to verification of paper trail can be increased to a reasonable 
number, it would lead to greater satisfaction amongst not only the 
political parties but the entire electorate of the country. This is 
what the Court should endeavour and the exercise, therefore, 
should be to find a viable number of machines that should be 
subjected to the verification of Vvpat paper trails keeping in mind 
the infrastructure and the manpower difficulties pointed out by 
the Deputy Election Commissioner. In this regard, the proximity 
to the election schedule announced by the ECI must be kept in 
mind. 
 
10. Having considered the matter, we are of the view that if the 
number of EVMs in respect of which Vvpat paper slips is to be 
subjected to physical scrutiny is increased from 1 to 5, the 
additional manpower that would be required would not be difficult 
 
11(2019) 15 SCC 377. 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 6 of 38 
 
for the ECI to provide nor would the declaration of the result be 
substantially delayed. In fact, if the said number is increased to 
5, the process of verification can be done by the same team of 
polling staff and supervisors/officials. It is, therefore, our 
considered view that having regard to the totality of the facts of 
the case and need to generate the greatest degree of satisfaction 
in all with regard to the full accuracy of the election results, the 
number of EVMs that would now be subjected to verification so 
far as Vvpat paper trail is concerned would be 5 per Assembly 
Constituency or Assembly Segments in a Parliamentary 
Constituency instead of what is provided by Guideline No. 16.6, 
namely, one machine per Assembly Constituency or Assembly 
Segment in a Parliamentary Constituency. We also direct that the 
random selection of the machines that would be subjected to the 
process of Vvpat paper trail verification as explained to us by Mr 
Jain, Deputy Commissioner of the Election Commission, in terms 
of the guidelines in force, shall apply to the Vvpat paper trail 
verification of the 5 EVMs covered by the present order.” 
 
Accordingly, instead of one EVM per assembly constituency or 
assembly segment in a parliamentary constituency, as stipulated under 
the erstwhile Guideline 16.6 of the Manual on EVM and VVPAT, it was 
held that five EVMs per assembly constituency or assembly segment in 
a parliamentary constituency would be subject to VVPAT verification. 
 
10. 
This Court vide order dated 22.11.2018 dismissed Writ Petition (Civil) 
No. 1332/2018 titled Nyaya Bhoomi and Another v. Election 
Commission of India, seeking return to the ballot paper system instead 
of EVMs. 
 
11. 
This Court vide order dated 21.05.2019 dismissed Writ Petition (Civil) 
No. 692/2019 titled Tech for All v. Election Commission of India, 
seeking 100% verification of VVPATs against the EVM outcomes, as the 
issue had already been decided in N. Chandrababu Naidu (supra). 
 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 7 of 38 
 
12. 
Even earlier, this Court vide order dated 30.10.2017 in Prakash Joshi 
v. Election Commission of India12, had rejected a similar prayer with 
regard to modification of the procedure for counting of votes by use of 
EVMs, leaving it to the discretion of the ECI. It was observed that this 
Court was not inclined to enter into the said arena. 
 
13. 
This Court vide order dated 30.09.2022 dismissed Special Leave 
Petition (Civil) No. 16870/2022 titled Madhya Pradesh Jan Vikash 
Party v. Election Commission of India regarding use of EVMs with 
costs. This Court observed that:  
“The election process under the representation of the People Act, 
1951 is monitored by a Constitutional Authority like Election 
Commission. Electronic Voting Machines (EVM) process has 
been utilized in our Country for decades now but periodically 
issues are sought to be raised. This is one such endeavor in the 
abstract.” 
 
 
14. 
Recently, this Court vide order dated 22.09.2023 dismissed Writ Petition 
(Civil) No. 826/2023 titled Sunil Ahya v. Election Commission of India 
seeking independent audit of the source code of EVMs. This Court 
observed that:  
“The Election Commission is a constitutional entity entrusted 
under Article 324 of the Constitution with superintendence and 
control over the conduct of the elections.  The petitioner has 
placed no actionable material on the record of the Court to 
indicate that the Election Commission has acted in breach of its 
constitutional mandate. Ultimately, the manner in which the 
source code should be audited and the way the audit should be 
dealt with bears on sensitive issues pertaining to the integrity of 
the elections which are conducted under the superintendence of 
the Election Commission.  On such a policy issue, we are not 
inclined to issue a direction as sought by the petitioner.  There is 
no material before this Court, at this stage, to indicate that the 
 
12 2017 SCC OnLine SC 1734. 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 8 of 38 
 
Election Commission is not taking suitable steps to fulfill its 
mandate.” 
 
 
15. 
This Court in Kamal Nath v. Election Commission of India and 
Others13, observed that it was without doubt that over the last several 
decades ECI has built the reputation of an impartial body and a 
constitutional authority which strives to hold fair election in which the 
people of this country participate with great trust and faith. The challenge 
to the EVMs and prayer for conducting VVPAT verification on random 
basis for 10% of the votes was rejected. 
 
16. 
We could have dismissed the present writ petitions by merely relying 
upon the past precedents and decisions of this Court which, in our 
opinion, are clear and lucid, and as repeated challenges based on 
suspicion and doubt, without any cogent material and data, are 
execrable and undesirable. However, we would like to put on record the 
procedure and safeguards adopted by the ECI to ensure free and fair 
elections and the integrity of the electoral process. For this purpose, we 
shall refer to and take on record the features of EVMs.14 Lastly, we would 
give two directions, and take on record suggestion(s) for consideration 
of the ECI.   
 
17. 
The EVM consists of three units, namely, the ballot unit, the control unit, 
and the VVPAT. The ballot unit acts as a keyboard or a keypad. The 
 
13 (2019) 2 SCC 260. 
14 In view of the issue raised, we are not dealing with the post counting handling of EVMs. 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 9 of 38 
 
ballot unit consists of 16 keys/buttons one of which the voter has to press 
when he exercises his choice to vote for any candidate. The keys are 
political party and candidate agnostic. The serial numbers, names of the 
candidates and the symbols of the political parties/candidates are 
physically pasted on the ballot unit so as to enable the voter to identify 
the corresponding key/button against the respective candidate and the 
symbol. The control unit, which is also called the master unit, remains 
with the polling/presiding officer. Before the ballot unit can be used by a 
voter, the polling/presiding officer is required to press the ‘BALLOT’ 
button on the control unit, thereby enabling the voter to cast his vote on 
the ballot unit. As soon as the voter presses the ‘blue button’ and casts 
his/her vote on the ballot unit, an LED against the candidate button glows 
red and the control unit sends the command to the VVPAT. The VVPAT 
then prints the VVPAT slip comprising of the serial number, candidate 
name and the symbol. The VVPAT slip, after being printed, is displayed 
through the glass window which is illuminated for 7 seconds to enable 
the voter to know and verify the serial number, the candidate and the 
symbol for whom they have voted. The VVPAT slip then gets cut from 
the roll and falls into the box/compartment attached to the VVPAT. The 
fall sensor in the VVPAT then sends a confirmation to the control unit. 
The control unit records the vote.  
 
18. 
The control unit, as explained below in some detail, has burnt memory, 
which is agnostic and does not have the names of the candidates and 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 10 of 38 
 
symbols allotted to the candidates or political parties. As noted earlier, 
the polling/presiding officer has to activate the EVM by pressing the 
‘BALLOT’ button on the control unit. The data stored in the control unit, 
upon the vote being cast, records and counts the button or the key 
pressed on the ballot unit. The data, therefore, records the total number 
of votes as cast by the voters, and the key or the button number on the 
ballot unit pressed by the voters for casting their vote. After the vote is 
cast and the control unit has recorded the vote, a loud beep sound 
confirms the registration of the vote.  
 
19. 
The EVMs are manufactured and supplied to the ECI by two public 
sector undertakings, namely, Bharat Electronics Limited15 (which 
functions under the Ministry of Defence), and Electronic Corporation of 
India Limited16 (which functions under the Department of Atomic 
Energy).17 The EVMs in use after 2013 are referred to as ‘M3’ EVMs. The 
EVM setup is designed in a rudimentary fashion and the EVM units are 
standalone and non-networked, that is, they are unconnectable to any 
other third-party machine or input source. In case any unauthorised 
attempt is made to access the microcontroller or memory of the EVM, 
the Unauthorised Access Detection Mechanism (UADM) disables it 
permanently. The advanced encryption techniques and strong mutual 
authentication or reception capability rules out the deciphering of 
 
15 For short, ‘BEL’. 
16 For short, ‘ECIL’. 
17 Collectively referred to as the ‘manufacturers’. 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 11 of 38 
 
communication between the EVM units and any unauthorised interaction 
with the EVM.  
 
20. 
The programme loaded in the EVM18 is key hashed and burnt into a One 
Time Programmable microcontroller chip at the time of manufacturing, 
thus dispelling any possibility of tampering. It is pertinent to note that all 
the three units of the EVM – ballot unit, control unit and VVPAT, have 
microcontrollers in which the respective firmware is burnt. The burnt 
programme/code is unalterable and cannot be modified after the EVM is 
delivered/supplied by the manufacturer to ECI. Every key press of the 
control unit is dynamically coded, thus making it impossible to decode 
the signal flowing among the units of the EVM inter se. Further, each key 
press is recorded with date and time stamp on a real time basis.  
 
21. 
As mentioned earlier, the firmware of the control unit is agnostic to any 
candidate name or political party symbol. The control unit only 
recognises the button/key pressed on the ballot unit. The control unit has 
a capacity to store up to 2000 vote entries. 
 
22. 
Apart from the burnt one-time programmable memory, the VVPAT has a 
flash memory of 4 megabytes. The flash memory of the VVPAT is 
designed to solely store and recognise a bitmap format file. The VVPAT 
can store a maximum of 1024 bitmap files containing the symbol, the 
serial number and name of the candidate. One candidate's name, 
 
18 EVM here refers to the ballot unit, the control unit and the VVPAT unit. 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 12 of 38 
 
symbol, and serial number is packed into a single bitmap file of 4 
kilobytes. The VVPAT does not store or read any other software or 
firmware.19 
 
23. 
The VVPAT flash memory is empty and does not contain any symbol or 
name related details at the time of supply/delivery to the ECI. VVPATs 
in this form/state are stored in warehouses. The control units and ballot 
units are also stored and secured in the warehouses. 
 
24. 
Five to six months before national or state elections are to be held, the 
required quantity of the EVMs are taken out from the warehouses and 
stored in the designated strong rooms. The EVMs, after they are put in 
the strong room, are subjected to First Level Check20 by engineers of the 
manufacturers in the presence of the representatives of the recognised 
political parties. The FLC is carried out at the district level under the 
supervision of the District Election Officer. 
 
25. 
During the FLC, 100% or all machines are checked by casting of vote in 
each of the 16 buttons on the ballot unit 6 times. Further, 5% of the 
machines are randomly selected by the representatives of the 
recognised political parties for a higher mock poll by them. Out of the 5% 
 
19 It is apposite to note the difference between firmware and software. Firmware is a form of microcode 
or instructions embedded into hardware devices to help them operate effectively. Firmware size is 
usually small and ranges in size of a few kilobytes. Software on the other hand, is installed onto a 
device and used for interaction, such as browsing the internet, computing, word processing and many 
more complex tasks. Software usually runs on the top of operating systems and are usually large in 
size between few hundred kilobytes to gigabytes. Software is upgradable or updatable, and its memory 
is usually accessible and designed for user interactions. The ECI submits that the VVPATs do not have 
software as they only have firmware. 
20 For short, ‘FLC’. 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 13 of 38 
 
EVMs; 1200 votes are cast in 1% EVMs, 1000 votes are cast in 2% 
EVMs and 500 votes are cast in 2% EVMs. The voting result indicated 
in the control unit is tallied with the VVPAT slip count. A list of ‘FLC OK’ 
EVMs is prepared and shared with all the recognised political parties. 
 
26. 
After check and verification that the EVM is working properly, the control 
unit of each EVM is sealed with a pink paper seal which is signed by the 
representatives of the political parties. Thereafter, the plastic cabinet of 
the EVMs cannot be opened. There is no access to any of the EVM 
components. Till this stage the VVPAT flash memory is empty and it does 
not have any data or symbols.  
 
27. 
10% of the ‘FLC OK’ EVMs are taken out for training and awareness 
purpose in the presence of the recognised political parties. The list of the 
training and awareness units is also shared with the political parties. 
These training and awareness units are stored separately in a 
designated warehouse. EVM demonstration centres are set up at the 
District Election Office, and at the Returning Officer Headquarter/ 
Revenue Sub-Division Offices. Mobile demonstration vans are also 
deployed to cover all polling locations. The EVMs used for training and 
awareness are thereafter not mingled and are taken back to the 
designated warehouse.  
 
28. 
To dispel any scenario of bias or prior knowledge, the verified EVMs 
undergo a two-stage randomization process. It is submitted that not even 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 14 of 38 
 
the manufacturer of the EVMs would be able to know the allotment of a 
particular machine for a particular state or constituency. The 
randomization process is conducted without any human intervention by 
the EVM Management System software application. The first 
randomization is conducted to allocate the EVMs Assembly 
constituency/segment-wise. The second randomization is conducted to 
allocate the machines polling station wise and for the reserve pool. The 
randomization process is done in the presence of the representatives of 
the political parties/candidates and the Central Observers deputed by 
the ECI. The list of EVMs containing serial number as randomly allocated 
constituency wise and then to a particular polling station are provided to 
the representatives of the political parties/candidates.  
 
29. 
It is important to reiterate that till this stage, particulars of the candidates 
or the political parties are not loaded or stored in the VVPAT. The flash 
memory of the VVPAT is blank/empty. The control unit being agnostic to 
any political party or candidate, only recognises the push button on the 
ballot unit. It is programmed to compute the number of times all and a 
particular button/key has been pressed. 
 
30. 
About 10 to 15 days prior to the date of polling, the symbol loading 
process is undertaken by using the symbol loading units. The symbols 
are loaded in the flash memory of the VVPATs in the form of a bitmap 
file, comprising the symbol of the political party/candidate, serial number 
and name of the candidate. A laptop/PC with the symbol loading 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 15 of 38 
 
application is used to create a bitmap file comprising the serial number, 
the candidate name and the symbol. This file is loaded on VVPAT units 
by using the symbol loading units. Authorised engineers of the 
manufacturers and the District Election Officer are involved in the symbol 
loading process. The whole process takes place in the presence of the 
candidates or their representatives and a monitor/TV screen displays the 
symbol loading process.  
 
31. 
It is at this stage that the specific button/key on the ballot unit is allocated 
to each candidate. The sequence/location of button/key allocated to a 
candidate of a political party is done in alphabetical order on the basis of 
the name of the candidate, first for the National and State recognised 
political parties, followed by other State registered parties, and then for 
independent candidates. Thus, the sequence/location of the button/key 
on the ballot unit and the consequent allotment for the purposes of the 
VVPAT varies from constituency to constituency. For example, 
candidate or political party ‘A’ may be allocated button ‘1’ in one 
parliamentary constituency, whereas button ‘1’ may be allocated to 
political party ‘B’ in another constituency. 
 
32. 
There are 16 buttons/keys on each ballot unit. In case there are more 
than 15 candidates (one button is for NOTA), more than one ballot units 
are attached to the control unit. A total of 24 ballot units can be connected 
to a control unit to make a single EVM set. Therefore, a maximum of 384 
candidates (including NOTA) can be catered by the EVM.  

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 16 of 38 
 
 
33. 
The advantages of the EVM-VVPAT mechanism are noted below: 
• It runs on battery/power-packs and does not require any external 
power supply. 
• Voting is done by pressing a button thereby negating a scenario 
of invalid vote akin to an invalid paper ballot. 
• It does not permit more than 4 votes per minute, thereby deterring 
and disincentivising booth capturing.  
• After the pressing of ‘CLOSE’ button on the control unit, there is 
no possibility of voting. 
• It ensures quick, error-free and mischief-free counting of votes. 
• Voter is instantly able to verify the recording of their vote through 
the beep sound. Further, the VVPAT slip helps verify that the vote 
casted is recorded correctly. 
• By pressing the ‘TOTAL’ button on the control unit at any time, the 
total number of votes polled up to the time of pressing the button 
is displayed, without indicating the candidate-wise result of votes. 
• The original program, which is political party and candidate 
agnostic, is ported on to the microcontroller of the EVM21 during 
the manufacturing at the factory. This process is done way before 
the elections and it is impossible to know the serial number of any 
 
21 The EVM, as earlier observed and we clarify here, means the ballot unit, the control unit and the 
VVPAT unit. 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 17 of 38 
 
candidate in advance. Thus, it is not possible to pre-program the 
EVM in a spurious manner.  
 
34. 
After the symbol loading process is completed, all or 100% of the EVMs, 
including the VVPATs, are checked by casting one vote by pressing each 
candidate button, including NOTA. A higher mock poll is also conducted 
in 5% randomly selected units wherein 1000 votes are cast, and the 
electronic result is tallied with the VVPAT slip count. The candidates or 
their representatives are also allowed to choose the 5% EVMs and 
conduct a mock poll. Once the symbol loading process or the candidate 
setting is completed, and the mock polls are conducted, the ballot unit of 
the EVM is also sealed with the thread or plain paper seals. The symbol 
loaded VVPATs are sealed with address tags. The paper seals and 
address tags bear the signatures of the representatives of the political 
parties/candidates. 
 
35. 
Thus, it is clear that till the symbol loading into the VVPAT is done by 
using the symbol loading unit, the EVM is blank and has no 
data/particulars of political parties or candidates. One cannot ascertain 
and know which button/key in the ballot unit will be allocated to a 
particular candidate or a political party.  
 
36. 
It has been highlighted before us by the ECI that the symbol loading 
process conducted by using symbol loading unit in the VVPAT cannot 
be equated with the uploading of the software. A bitmap file comprising 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 18 of 38 
 
of the serial number, name of the candidate and the symbol allocated to 
the particular candidate is uploaded in the symbol loading process. The 
symbol loading process undertaken by using the symbol loading unit 
cannot alter or modify the programme/firmware in the VVPAT which has 
been burnt/loaded in the memory. The control unit and the ballot unit are 
not subjected to the symbol loading process and not touched. The 
burnt/loaded firmware in the control unit and the ballot unit is and 
remains candidate and political party agnostic. The control unit acts and 
functions as the calculator, computing the total votes cast on the basis 
of the number of times the key/button on the ballot unit are pressed, and 
the number of times a specific key/button on the ballot unit is pressed.    
 
37. 
On the polling date, one and a half hours before the start of polling, the 
presiding officer/polling officer takes out the EVMs and conducts a mock 
poll of 50 votes. The votes are counted electronically. The VVPAT paper 
slips are also counted and tallied with electronic votes. Each EVM unit is 
thereupon again sealed with a paper seal of a different colour. Paper 
seals are also signed by the candidates or their representatives. 
 
38. 
The paper seals used from time to time at different stages have a serial 
number. They also have security features and cannot be replicated. As 
paper seals are used at different stages, they are given different colours. 
 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 19 of 38 
 
39. 
The polled EVM22 units are sealed and stored in the strong room in the 
presence of the candidates or their representatives. The candidates or 
their representatives are also allowed to put their seals on the lock of the 
strong room. The strong room is guarded by minimum one platoon of 
armed security and has CCTV coverage. The candidates or their 
representatives are allowed to stay and watch the strong room and in 
case where the entrance to the strong room is not visible, CCTV display 
facility is provided. 
 
40. 
The VVPAT paper slips are in a roll form of 1500 slips. The control unit 
can store up to 2000 votes. In view of the restriction on the number of 
VVPAT paper slips, each EVM can be used for casting of up to 1500 
votes and not more. The control unit is configured in a way that each 
vote would take about 15 seconds. Thus, in one minute only four votes 
can be cast. This prevents and checks bogus voting. 
 
41. 
As explained earlier and to recapitulate, after each vote is cast by 
pressing the button on the ballot unit, the VVPAT glass window 
illuminates and the name, serial number, and symbol of the candidate 
voted is displayed for 7 seconds to the voter. The display of VVPAT slip 
informs and assures the voter that the vote as cast has been recorded. 
Thereafter, the VVPAT printer cuts the slip from the roll and the VVPAT 
slip drops in the box compartment of the VVPAT. The fall sensor in the 
 
22 The EVM, as earlier observed and we clarify here, means the ballot unit, the control unit and the 
VVPAT unit. 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 20 of 38 
 
VVPAT printer drop box senses and chronicles the fall of the slip in the 
drop box, and thereupon the control unit records the button/key pressed 
on the ballot unit. The burnt memory, as noticed above, which records 
this data is agnostic to the candidates/political parties. The control unit 
records the serial number of the button/key pressed on the ballot unit by 
each voter. The presiding officer by pressing the ‘TOTAL’ key on the 
control unit can ascertain the total number of votes recorded in the 
control unit. However, the breakup of votes cast in favour of each 
candidate is not known. On the counting day, in the presence of the 
candidates/their representatives, the ‘RESULT’ key on the control unit is 
pressed. The control unit displays the number of times each button/key 
was pressed in the ballot unit on the polling day, thus depicting the result. 
EVMs are standalone machines which cannot be connected to internet. 
The EVMs do not have any ports so as to enable a person to have 
access to the burnt memory.  
 
42. 
It flows from the above discussion that the possibility to hack or tamper 
with the agnostic firmware in the burnt memory to tutor/favour results is 
unfounded. Accordingly, the suspicion that the EVMs can be 
configured/manipulated for repeated or wrong recording of vote(s) to 
favour a particular candidate should be rejected. At this stage we would 
refer to other checks and protocols to ensure and ascertain the 
legitimacy and integrity of the EVMs and the election process. 
 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 21 of 38 
 
43. 
Part IV, Chapter II of the 1961 Rules, which relates to voting by EVMs, 
lays down details of preparation of the voting machine by the returning 
officer, arrangements at the polling station, admission to the polling 
stations, and preparation of voting machine for poll. The three units of 
the EVM have to bear the serial number of the unit, name of the 
constituency, serial number and name of the polling station(s), and the 
date of poll. Before the commencement of the poll, the presiding officer 
has to demonstrate to the polling agent and other persons present that 
no vote has already been recorded in the control unit, the three units 
bear the label as prescribed and the drop box of the VVPAT printer is 
empty. Paper seal is thereupon used for securing the control unit. The 
presiding officer affixes his own signature on the paper seal and also 
obtains the signatures of the polling agents who are desirous of affixing 
the same. The VVPAT and the ballot unit are put in the voting 
compartment and are connected with the control unit in the manner 
directed.  
 
44. 
Before permitting any elector to vote, the polling officer is required to 
record the electoral roll number of the elector as mentioned in the 
electoral rolls, signature or thumb impression of the elector, name of the 
elector and the document produced by the elector in proof of their 
identification. These particulars are recorded in Form 17A prescribed 
under Rule 49L of the 1961 Rules. The format prescribed in terms of 
Form 17A is as under: 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 22 of 38 
 
Sl.No. 
Sl.No. of 
elector in the 
electoral roll 
Details of the document 
produced by the elector 
in proof of his/her 
identification 
Signature/Thumb 
impression of 
elector 
Remarks 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
1. 
 
 
 
 
2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Form 17A is required to be signed by the presiding officer. 
 
45. 
Every elector is permitted to vote in secrecy in the voting compartment 
of the polling station. They are required to press the blue button or key 
on the ballot unit against the name and symbol of the candidate/political 
party they intend to vote. In terms of the proviso to Rule 49M(3), the 
elector is entitled to view through the transparent window of the printer 
of VVPAT, kept along with the ballot unit inside the voting compartment, 
the printed paper slip showing the serial number, the name and the 
symbol of the candidate for whom he has voted. Thereupon, the paper 
slip gets cut and drops into the drop box attached to the VVPAT. No 
elector is permitted to enter the voting compartment when another voter 
is inside.  
 
46. 
Rule 49O deals with the scenario where an elector, even after entering 
her/his details in Form 17A and having put signature or thumb 
impression thereon, does not vote. The presiding officer is then required 
to make a remark in Form 17A and take the signature or thumb 
impression of the elector against such remark.  
 
47. 
Rule 49M(6) deals with the scenario where the elector who has been 
permitted to vote under Rule 49L or Rule 49P refuses, even after the 
warning by the presiding officer, to observe the procedure of voting laid 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 23 of 38 
 
down in Rule 49(M)(3). In such a case, the presiding officer, or the polling 
officer under the direction of the presiding officer, shall not allow such 
elector to vote. Rule 49M(7) lays down that in such a scenario, a remark 
to that effect shall be made against the elector’s name in Form 17A by 
the presiding officer under his signature. 
 
48. 
As per instructions issued by the ECI, the presiding officer is periodically 
required to check the total number of votes cast as recorded in the 
control unit with the data as recorded in Form 17A.  
 
49. 
As per Rule 49S, at the close of the poll, the presiding officer is required 
to prepare an account of votes recorded in Form 17C. This is a detailed 
form, which in Part I, requires the presiding officer to mention the total 
number of electors assigned to the polling station, the total number of 
voters as entered in the register for voters, that is, Form 17A, the total 
number of voters who had decided not to vote even after recording their 
details in Form 17A (Rule 49O scenario), and the total number of voters 
not allowed to vote (Rule 49M scenario). The form also requires to give 
details of the total number of votes recorded per voting machine. This 
total number recorded in the voting machine should tally with the total 
number of voters entered in Form 17A minus the number of voters 
deciding not to vote and the number of voters not allowed to vote. The 
details of the paper seals supplied for use, paper seals used, unused 
paper seals returned to the returning officer etc. are also recorded and 
entered after the close of the poll. 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 24 of 38 
 
 
50. 
Under Rule 49S of the 1961 Rules, at the time of close of the poll, the 
presiding officer furnishes attested true copy of the account of votes 
recorded in Part I of Form 17C to the polling agents of the candidates. 
He also retains a receipt of the same from the polling agent.  
 
51. 
Before start of counting of votes, the serial number of the EVMs and the 
paper seals affixed on the EVMs are verified with details mentioned in 
Form 17C and are shown to the counting agents. The total votes 
displayed by pressing the ‘TOTAL’ button on the control unit is also 
tallied with the total votes polled as per Form 17C.  
 
52. 
The counting is done in the presence of the polling agents/candidates by 
pressing the ‘RESULT’ button on the control unit. The total votes polled 
and the total votes polled by each candidate is thereupon displayed on 
the display panel.  
 
53. 
In terms of the directions issued by this Court in N. Chandrababu Naidu 
(supra), the VVPAT slips of five polling stations per assembly 
constituency/assembly segment of the parliamentary constituency, are 
randomly selected and counted. The results are then tallied with the 
electronic results of the control unit. 
 
54. 
It may be relevant here to also refer to Rule 56D of the 1961 Rules, which 
reads as under: 
“56-D. Scrutiny of paper trail.—(1) Where printer for paper trail is 
used, after the entries made in the result sheet are announced, 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 25 of 38 
 
any candidate, or in his absence, his election agent or any of his 
counting agents may apply in writing to the returning officer to 
count the printed paper slips in the drop box of the printer in 
respect of any polling station or polling stations. 
 
(2) On such application being made, the returning officer shall, 
subject to such general or special guidelines, as may be issued 
by the Election Commission, decide the matter and may allow 
the application in whole or in part or may reject in whole, if it 
appears to him to be frivolous or unreasonable. 
 
(3) Every decision of the returning officer under sub-rule (2) shall 
be in writing and shall contain the reasons therefor. 
 
(4) If the returning officer decides under sub-rule (2) to allow 
counting of the paper slips either wholly or in part or parts, he 
shall— 
(a) do the counting in the manner as may be directed by the 
Election Commission; 
(b) if there is discrepancy between the votes displayed on 
the control unit and the counting of the paper slips, amend 
the result sheet in Form 20 as per the paper slips count; 
(c) announce the amendments so made by him; and 
(d) complete and sign the result sheet.” 
 
 
55. 
Any candidate, or in his absence an election agent or counting agent, as 
per the said Rule, can apply in writing to the returning officer to count the 
printed paper slips in the drop box in respect of any polling station(s). 
The returning officer, subject to any general or special guidelines issued 
by the ECI, has to decide the matter and can allow the application in 
whole or in part, or may reject the application in full if it appears to be 
frivolous or unreasonable. Every decision of the returning officer is to be 
in writing and has to contain reasons. If the returning officer decides to 
allow counting of paper slips, either wholly or in part, he has to do so in 
the manner prescribed in sub-rule (4) to Rule 56D of the 1961 Rules. 
 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 26 of 38 
 
56. 
As per the ECI guidelines, in case there is any mismatch between the 
total number of votes recorded in the control unit and Form 17C on 
account of non-clearance of mock poll data or VVPAT slips, in terms of 
Rule 56D(4)(b) of the 1961 Rules etc., the printed VVPAT slips of the 
respective polling stations are counted and considered if the winning 
margin is equal to or less than total votes polled in such polling stations. 
 
57. 
At this stage, we would refer to the data on the performance of the EVMs. 
More than 118 crore electors have cast their votes since EVMs have 
been introduced. In 2019, about 61.4 crore voters had cast their votes in 
10.35 lakh polling stations. 23.3 lakh ballot units, 16.35 lakh control units 
and 17.40 lakhs VVPAT units were used in the 2019 General Elections. 
For the purpose of the 2024 General Elections, 10.48 lakh polling 
stations have been established to enable 97 crore registered voters to 
cast their votes. 21.60 lakh ballot units, 16.80 lakh control units and 17.7 
lakh VVPAT units have been made ready for being used. 
 
58. 
ECI has conducted random VVPAT verification of 5 polling booths per 
assembly segment/constituency for 41,629 EVMs-VVPATs. Further, 
more than 4 crore VVPAT slips have been tallied with the electronic 
counts of their control units. Not even a single case of mismatch, (except 
one which we will refer to subsequently), or wrong recording of votes has 
been detected. Returning officers have allowed VVPAT slip recounting 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 27 of 38 
 
under Rule 56D in 100 cases since 2017. The VVPAT slip count matched 
with the electronic count recorded in the control unit in all cases.23 
 
59. 
In the 2019 Lok Sabha Elections, 20,687 VVPAT slips were physically 
counted, and except in one case, no discrepancy or mismatch was 
noticed. 
 
60. 
The discrepancy during mandatory verification of VVPAT slips happened 
in polling station No. 63, Mydukur Assembly Constituency, Andhra 
Pradesh during the 2019 Lok Sabha Elections. On verification, it was 
found that the discrepancy had arisen on account of failure of the 
presiding officer to delete the mock poll data.24 While it is not possible to 
rule out human errors, paragraph 14.5 of Chapter 14 of the Manual on 
EVM and VVPATs deals with such situations and lays down the protocol 
which is to be followed.  
 
61. 
During the course of hearing, our attention was drawn to Rule 49MA 
which permits an elector to raise a complaint regarding the mismatch 
between the name and symbol of the candidate shown on paper slip 
generated by the VVPAT and the vote cast on the ballot unit. Such 
elector is required to make a written declaration to the presiding officer. 
There have been 26 such cases in which the electors have complained 
 
23 The above figures are updated on the basis of the response given by the ECI to the queries raised 
by the Court on 16.04.2024. The figures given in the counter affidavit filed by the ECI are as follows: 
38,156 randomly selected VVPATs have been physically counted and they have tallied with the 
electronic count of their control unit. Not even a single case of mismatch or transfer of vote meant for 
candidate A to candidate B has been detected. Counting of VVPAT slips under Rule 56D has been 
allowed in 61 cases but there is not even a single case of mismatch.  
24 The said discrepancy was duly rectified in terms of the protocol laid down in the Manual on EVM and 
VVPAT. 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 28 of 38 
 
under Rule 49MA. There is not even a single case in which any mismatch 
or defect was found. 
 
62. 
The EVMs have been subjected to test by technical experts committee 
from time to time. These committees have approved and did not find any 
fault with the EVMs. The M3 EVMs currently in use are designed by 
engineers of BHEL and ECIL. These designs are vetted by the technical 
experts committee. 
 
63. 
Our attention was drawn to the query of the Parliamentary Committee on 
Government Assurances regarding the data on discrepancy between the 
EVM and VVPAT counts in 2019 Lok Sabha Elections. Reliance is 
placed on a news report published in The Wire to submit that the ECI 
failed to submit the requisite information and revert back to the 
parliamentary committee despite multiple reminders. The ECI has 
explained that a reply regarding the said query was sent to the 
Parliamentary Committee on 05.07.2019. 
 
64. 
Reliance was placed on a news report of The Quint to contend that there 
were discrepancies in 2019 Lok Sabha Elections, viz. the electronic 
votes recorded in the control unit and the total votes polled/voter turnout. 
The ECI has explained that the report referred to in the Quint is with 
reference to the live voter turnout data uploaded on the website of the 
ECI during 2019 Lok Sabha Elections. The voter turnout data is dynamic 
in nature and is uploaded by the ECI on real time approximation by taking 
inputs from the presiding officers of the polling stations. Inaccuracies 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 29 of 38 
 
were found in the real-time inputs given by the presiding officers. 
However, there was no mismatch of the data of votes recorded in the 
EVMs and the data of total votes recorded in Form 17C. The data in the 
EVM and Form 17C matched and accordingly the results were declared 
in Form 20.  
 
65. 
On a question being put by the Court, it was stated that a minimum of 
50% of the polling stations are equipped with CCTV cameras. Data from 
the CCTV cameras is stored and retained at least for a period of 45 days 
from the date of announcement of the polling results. Similarly, the EVMs 
are retained in the strong room along with seals etc. as affixed after 
counting of the votes. The candidates have the right to challenge the poll 
result by filing an election petition within 45 days from the date of election 
of the returned candidate. The ECI guidelines/protocol stipulate that 
confirmation regarding the filing status of election petitions must be 
obtained from the relevant High Courts. If challenge is made, the EVMs 
are retained in the strong room along with the seals etc. for a longer 
period. In cases where no election petitions are filed, the strongrooms 
are opened and the EVMs are shifted to the warehouse. 
 
66. 
The ECI has also in its counter affidavit stated that the EVMs have been 
continuously used in different elections since the year 2000. The 
electoral outcome had been divergent, favouring or disfavouring different 
political parties. Details of the political parties with maximum number of 
seats since 2004 is tabulated as under: 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 30 of 38 
 
 
PARTY WITH MAXIMUM NUMBER OF SEATS IN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY ELECTION SINCE 2004 
Andhra Pradesh 
2004 
INC 
2009 
INC 
2014 
TDP 
2019 
YSRCP 
 
 
Meghalaya 
2008 
INC 
2013 
INC 
2018 
INC 
2023 
NPEP 
Arunachal Pradesh 
2004 
INC 
2009 
INC 
2014 
INC 
2019 
BJP 
Mizoram 
2008 
INC 
2013 
INC 
2018 
MNF 
2023 
ZPM 
Assam 
2006 
INC 
2011 
INC 
2016 
BJP 
2021 
BJP 
Nagaland 
2008 
NPF 
2013 
NPF 
2018 
NPF 
2023 
NDPP 
Bihar 
2005 
RJD 
2010 
JD(U) 
2015 
RJD 
2020 
RJD 
Odisha 
2004 
BJD 
2009 
BJD 
2014 
BJD 
2019 
BJD 
Chhattisgarh 
2008 
BJP 
2013 
BJP 
2018 
INC 
2023 
BJP 
Punjab 
2007 
SAD 
2012 
SAD 
2017 
INC 
2022 
AAP 
Goa 
2007 
INC 
2012 
BJP 
2017 
INC 
2022 
BJP 
Rajasthan 
2008 
INC 
2013 
BJP 
2018 
INC 
2023 
BJP 
Gujarat 
2007 
BJP 
2012 
BJP 
2017 
BJP 
2022 
BJP 
Sikkim 
2004 
SDF 
2009 
SDF 
2014 
SDF 
2019 
SKM 
Haryana 
2005 
INC 
2009 
INC 
2014 
BJP 
2019 
BJP 
Tamil Nadu 
2006 
DMK 
2011 
AIADMK 
2016 
AIADMK 
2021 
DMK 
Himachal Pradesh 
2007 
BJP 
2012 
INC 
2017 
BJP 
2022 
INC 
Telangana 
2014 
TRS 
2018 
TRS 
2023 
INC 
 
Jammu & Kashmir 
2008 
JKNC 
2014 
JKPDP 
 
Tripura 
2008 
CIP(M) 
2013 
CIP(M) 
2018 
BJP 
2023 
BJP 
Jharkhand 
2005 
BJP 
2009 
BJP & 
JMM 
2014 
BJP 
2019 
JMM 
Uttarakhand 
2007 
BJP 
2012 
INC 
2017 
BJP 
2022 
BJP 
Karnataka 
2004 
BJP 
2008 
BJP 
2013 
INC 
2018 
BJP 
2023 
INC 
 
 
Uttar Pradesh 
2007 
BSP 
2012 
SP 
2017 
BJP 
2022 
BJP 
Kerala 
2006 
CPI(M) 
2011 
CPI(M) 
2016 
CPI(M) 
2021 
CPI(M) 
 
West  
Bengal 
2006 
CPI(M) 
2011 
TMC 
2016 
TMC 
2021 
TMC 
Madhya Pradesh 
2008 
BJP 
2013 
BJP 
2018 
INC 
2023 
BJP 
 
NCT of Delhi 
2008 
INC 
2013 
BJP 
2015 
AAP 
2020 
AAP 
Maharashtra 
2004 
NCP 
2009 
INC 
2014 
BJP 
2019 
BJP 
 
Puducherry 
2006 
INC 
2011 
AINRC 
2016 
INC 
2021 
AINRC 
Manipur 
2007 
INC 
2012 
INC 
2017 
INC 
2022 
BJP 
 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 31 of 38 
 
67. 
We have referred to the data, after elucidating the mechanics and the 
safeguards embedded in the EVMs to check and obviate wrongdoing, 
and to evaluate the efficacy and performance of the EVMs. We 
acknowledge the right of voters to question the working of EVMs, which 
are but an electronic device that has a direct impact on election 
results.  However, it is also necessary to exercise care and caution when 
we raise aspersions on the integrity of the electoral process. Repeated 
and persistent doubts and despair, even without supporting evidence, 
can have the contrarian impact of creating distrust. This can reduce 
citizen participation and confidence in elections, essential for a healthy 
and robust democracy. Unfounded challenges may actually reveal 
perceptions and predispositions, whereas this Court, as an arbiter and 
adjudicator of disputes and challenges, must render decisions on facts 
based on evidence and data. This is the reason why we had re-listed the 
matters for directions and clarifications on 24.04.2024, when specific 
points/questions raised were answered by the ECI. The petitioners were 
also heard. 
 
68. 
The counsel for the petitioners, on 24.04.2024, drew our attention to a 
Wikipedia article which states that firmware is a software which provides 
low-level control of computing device hardware etc. It also states that 
programmable firmware memory can be reprogrammed via a procedure 
sometimes called flashing. This is stoutly denied by the officer of the ECI, 
who states that this would require the EVMs to be re-engineered by the 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 32 of 38 
 
manufacturers. It is submitted that the microcontroller used in the EVM 
has one-time programable memory, that is, it is unalterable once burned. 
It is only the VVPAT which has a flash memory component for the 
purpose of storing the bitmap file. To us, it is apparent that a number of 
safeguards and protocols with stringent checks have been put in place. 
Data and figures do not indicate artifice and deceit. Reprogramming by 
flashing, even if we assume is remotely possible, is inhibited by the strict 
control and checks put in place and noticed above. Imagination and 
suppositions should not lead us to hypothesize a wrong doing without 
any basis or facts. The credibility of the ECI and integrity of the electoral 
process earned over years cannot be chaffed and over-ridden by 
baroque contemplations and speculations. 
 
69. 
The test for determining the scope of unenumerated rights is based on 
tracing them to specific provision of Part III of the Constitution or to the 
core values which the Constitution espouses. While we acknowledge the 
fundamental right of voters to ensure their vote is accurately recorded 
and counted, the same cannot be equated with the right to 100% 
counting of VVPAT slips, or a right to physical access to the VVPAT slips, 
which the voter should be permitted to put in the drop box.  These are 
two separate aspects – the former is the right itself and the latter is a 
plea to protect or how to secure the right. The voters’ right can be 
protected and safeguarded by adopting several measures. This Court in 
Subramanian Swamy (supra) had directed gradual introduction              

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 33 of 38 
 
of VVPATs to guarantee utmost transparency and integrity in the system. 
This direction was made to safeguard the right of the voters to know that 
the vote has been correctly recorded in the EVM. The direction has been 
implemented. The voter can see the VVPAT slip through the glass 
window and this assures the voter that his vote as cast has been 
recorded and will be counted. In N. Chandrababu Naidu (supra), the 
direction for counting the VVPAT paper trail in 5 EVMs per assembly 
constituency or assembly segment in a parliamentary constituency was 
issued, primarily as a precautionary measure rather than a justification 
or necessity. This decision was aimed at ensuring the highest level of 
confidence in the accuracy of election results. Giving physical access to 
VVPAT slips to voters is problematic and impractical. It will lead to 
misuse, malpractices and disputes. This is not a case where 
fundamental right to franchise exists only as a parchment, rather, the 
entire electoral process protocol, and the checks as well as empirical 
data, ensure its meaningful exercise. 
 
70. 
VVPAT slip is made of a 9.9 cm x 5.6 cm thermal paper coated with 
chemical to ensure print retention for about 5 years. It is very soft and 
sticky, which makes the counting process tedious and slow. The 
counting process is undertaken through the following steps: the 
verification of unique ID of the VVPAT, opening of the VVPAT drop box, 
taking out the paper slips, counting the total number of slips, matching 
the number of slips with the total votes polled as per Form 17C, 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 34 of 38 
 
segregation of candidate-wise VVPAT slips, making candidate-wise 
bundles of 25 slips and counting of bundles and leftover slips. There are 
instances of recounting and reverification of the slips till the candidate-
wise tallying is done. Thus, the counting process, it is stated, takes about 
five hours. The counting is done by a team of three officers under CCTV 
coverage and under direct supervision of the supervising officer and the 
ECI observer of the constituency. Candidates/agents can remain 
present. We are not inclined to modify the aforesaid directions to 
increase the number of VVPAT undergoing slip count for several 
reasons. First, it will increase the time for counting and delay declaration 
of results. The manpower required would have to be doubled. Manual 
counting is prone to human errors and may lead to deliberate mischief. 
Manual intervention in counting can also create multiple charges of 
manipulation of results. Further, the data and the results do not indicate 
any need to increase the number of VVPAT units subjected to manual 
counting. 
 
71. 
During the course of hearing, it was suggested that instead of physically 
counting the VVPAT slips, they can be counted by a counting machine. 
This suggestion, including the suggestion that barcoding of the symbols 
loaded in the VVPATs may be helpful in machine counting, may be 
examined by the ECI. These are technical aspects, which will require 
evaluation and study, and hence we would refrain from making any 
comment either way.  

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 35 of 38 
 
 
72. 
We must reject as foible and unsound the submission to return to the 
ballot paper system. The weakness of the ballot paper system is well 
known and documented. In the Indian context, keeping in view the vast 
size of the Indian electorate of nearly 97 crore, the number of candidates 
who contest the elections, the number of polling booths where voting is 
held, and the problems faced with ballot papers, we would be undoing 
the electoral reforms by directing reintroduction of the ballot papers. 
EVMs offer significant advantages. They have effectively eliminated 
booth capturing by restricting the rate of vote casting to 4 votes per 
minute, thereby prolonging the time needed and thus check insertion of 
bogus votes. EVMs have eliminated invalid votes, which were a major 
issue with paper ballots and had often sparked disputes during the 
counting process. Furthermore, EVMs reduce paper usage and alleviate 
logistical challenges. Finally, they provide administrative convenience by 
expediting the counting process and minimizing errors. 
 
73. 
ECI has been categoric that the glass window on the VVPAT has not 
undergone any change. The term used in Rule 49M is ‘transparent 
window’. The tinted glass used on the VVPAT printer is to maintain 
secrecy and prevent anyone else from viewing the VVPAT slips. The 
voter in the voting compartment who is viewing the glass from the top 
can have clear view of the slip for 7 seconds.  Marginal tint on the VVPAT 
glass window, or the fact that the cutting and dropping of the slip from 
the roll in to the drop box of the printer is not visible, does not violate 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 36 of 38 
 
Rule 49M. The words ‘before such slips get cut’ in the proviso to Rule 
49M(3) indicate and require that the slip should be cut from the roll after 
the elector has seen the print through the glass window. Use of glass 
window prevents damage, smudging, attempt to deface or physically 
access the VVPAT slip. The rule ensures that the voter is able to see the 
slip along with the serial number with name of the candidate and the 
symbol for whom they have voted.  
 
74. 
Similarly, we would reject the submission that any elector should be 
liberally permitted as a routine to ask for verification of vote. Rule 49MA 
permits the elector to raise a complaint if she/he is of the view that the 
VVPAT paper slip did not depict the correct candidate/political party 
she/he voted. However, whenever a challenge is made, the voting 
process must be halted. An overly liberal approach could cause 
confusion and delay – hindering the election process and dissuading 
others from casting their votes.25 ECI has stated that only 26 such 
requests in terms of Rule 49MA were received, and in all cases, the 
allegation was found to be incorrect. 
 
75. 
We have conducted an in-detail review of the administrative and 
technical safeguards of the EVM mechanism. Our discussion aims to 
address the uncertainties and provide assurance regarding the integrity 
of the electoral process. A voting mechanism must uphold and adhere to 
 
25 However, we refrain from making any comments on the application of Section 177 of the Indian 
Penal Code, 1860. 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 37 of 38 
 
the principles of security, accountability, and accuracy. An overcomplex 
voting system may engender doubt and uncertainty, thereby easing the 
chances of manipulation. In our considered opinion, the EVMs are 
simple, secure and user-friendly. The voters, candidates and their 
representatives, and the officials of the ECI are aware of the nitty-gritty 
of the EVM system. They also check and ensure righteousness and 
integrity. Moreover, the incorporation of the VVPAT system fortifies the 
principle of vote verifiability, thereby enhancing the overall accountability 
of the electoral process. 
 
76. 
Nevertheless, not because we have any doubt, but to only further 
strengthen the integrity of the election process, we are inclined to issue 
the following directions: 
(a)  
On completion of the symbol loading process in the VVPATs 
undertaken on or after 01.05.2024, the symbol loading units shall be 
sealed and secured in a container. The candidates or their 
representatives shall sign the seal. The sealed containers, containing the 
symbol loading units, shall be kept in the strong room along with the 
EVMs at least for a period of 45 days post the declaration of results. They 
shall be opened, examined and dealt with as in the case of EVMs. 
(b) 
The burnt memory/microcontroller in 5% of the EVMs, that is, the 
control 
unit, 
ballot 
unit 
and 
the 
VVPAT, 
per 
assembly 
constituency/assembly segment of a parliamentary constituency shall be 
checked and verified by the team of engineers from the manufacturers 

 
Writ Petition (C) No. 434 of 2023 & Ors. 
 
Page 38 of 38 
 
of the EVMs, post the announcement of the results, for any tampering or 
modification, on a written request made by candidates who are at SI.No.2 
or Sl.No.3, behind the highest polled candidate. Such candidates or their 
representatives shall identify the EVMs by the polling station or serial 
number. All the candidates and their representatives shall have an option 
to remain present at the time of verification. Such a request should be 
made within a period of 7 days from the date of declaration of the result. 
The District Election Officer, in consultation with the team of engineers, 
shall certify the authenticity/intactness of the burnt memory/ 
microcontroller after the verification process is conducted. The actual 
cost or expenses for the said verification will be notified by the ECI, and 
the candidate making the said request will pay for such expenses. The 
expenses will be refunded, in case the EVM is found to be tampered.   
 
77. 
The writ petitions and all pending applications, including the applications 
for intervention, are disposed of in the above terms. 
 
 
 
......................................J. 
(SANJIV KHANNA) 
 
 
 
......................................J. 
(DIPANKAR DATTA) 
NEW DELHI; 
APRIL 26, 2024. 

 
Page 1 of 18 
        corrected 
        REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 434/2023 
                                    
ASSOCIATION FOR DEMOCRATIC REFORMS 
          …PETITIONER 
 
VERSUS 
 
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA & ANOTHER                  …RESPONDENTS 
                                                      With 
WRIT PETITION (C) …………………/2024 (@ DIARY NO. 35782/2023) 
WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 184/2024 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J. 
1. 
I have had the privilege of reading the opinion authored by brother 
Hon’ble Khanna, J. His Lordship, in my opinion, has dealt with the legal and 
techno-legal issues arising in connection with the challenge to the process 

 
Page 2 of 18 
of polling of votes through Electronic Voting Machines1 mounted by the writ 
petitioners and the several intervenors with unmatchable finesse and 
admirable clarity. I do not recollect any previous decision of this Court 
having explained the working of the EVMs in such great detail with lucidity 
and dexterity. The reasons assigned by His Lordship for negating the 
challenge, without doubt, are cogent and valid. The twin directions in the 
penultimate paragraph, notwithstanding that the electoral process for 
constituting the 18th Lok Sabha is in full swing, are in the nature of forward-
looking measures to strengthen the electoral system by bringing in more 
transparency. Such directions do not have the effect of retarding, 
interrupting, protracting or stalling the counting of votes, and is a course of 
action that seems to be perfectly permissible in the light of the Constitution 
Bench decision of this Court in Election Commission of India v Ashok 
Kumar2. 
2. 
Though His Lordship’s opinion has my whole-hearted concurrence, I 
have thought of penning a few words to express my own views, keeping in 
mind the customary challenges that are laid before this Court whenever an 
election is reasonably imminent, by way of emphasis. Hon’ble Khanna, J. 
and I are speaking through different judgments, but our voices are not too 
different.  
3. 
I have heard senior counsel/counsel for the three petitioners 
suspect, without however attributing any malice to the Election Commission 
 
1 EVMs 
2 (2000) 8 SCC 216 

 
Page 3 of 18 
of India3 (in which vests the superintendence, direction and control of 
elections per Article 324 of the Constitution of India4), the efficacy of 
exercise of the right of franchise through the EVMs which, according to 
them, are not entirely reliable and open to manipulation, and that 
completely tallying the Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail5 slips with the 
votes cast on the ballot unit is the plausible solution to ensure a taint-free 
election. I have also heard counsel for the petitioning association in the lead 
matter rely on certain reports to persuade the Court hold that casting of 
votes through EVMs is not fool-proof and that voting through electronic 
means has been discontinued by a European nation in compliance with a 
judicial verdict. He was also heard to suggest, when called upon by the 
Court regarding the nature of relief the petitioning association seeks, that 
the electoral process in India should return to the “paper ballot system” 
upon discontinuance of voting through the EVMs.  
4. 
I place on record that although such a suggestion was subsequently 
withdrawn by counsel in course of the proceedings that ensued following 
listing of the writ petitions “For Directions” on 24 April, 2024 to seek 
clarifications from the ECI on certain points, nothing much turns on it. The 
withdrawal was more of an attempt to erase the impression we, the Judges 
forming the Bench, were urged to form by senior counsel for the ECI while 
arguing that the petitioning association’s utter lack of bona fides (in 
invoking this Court’s writ jurisdiction under Article 32 of the Constitution) is 
 
3 ECI 
4 Constitution 
5 VVPAT 

 
Page 4 of 18 
completely exposed thereby. I have no hesitation to accept the submission 
of senior counsel for the ECI that reverting to the “paper ballot system” of 
the bygone era, as suggested, reveals the real intention of the petitioning 
association to discredit the system of voting through the EVMs and thereby 
derail the electoral process that is underway, by creating unnecessary 
doubts in the minds of the electorate.  
5. 
It is of immediate relevance to note that in recent years, a trend has 
been fast developing of certain vested interest groups endeavouring to 
undermine the achievements and accomplishments of the nation, earned 
through the hard work and dedication of its sincere workforce. There seems 
to be a concerted effort to discredit, diminish, and weaken the progress of 
this great nation on every possible frontier. Any such effort, or rather 
attempt, has to be nipped in the bud. No Constitutional court, far less this 
Court, would allow such attempt to succeed as long as it (the court) has a 
say in the matter. I have serious doubt as regards the bona fides of the 
petitioning association when it seeks a reversion to the old order. 
Irrespective of the fact that in the past efforts of the petitioning association 
in bringing about electoral reforms have borne fruit, the suggestion put 
forth appeared inexplicable. Question of reverting to the “paper ballot 
system”, on facts and in the circumstances, does not and cannot arise. It is 
only improvements in the EVMs or even a better system that people would 
look forward to in the ensuing years.   
6. 
At the same time, one cannot be oblivious that in a society pledged 
to uphold the rule of law, none - howsoever high or low – is above the law. 
Everyone is subject to the law fully and completely, and authorities within 

 
Page 5 of 18 
the meaning of State in Article 12 of the Constitution are no exception. 
Concepts of unfettered discretion or unaccountable action has no place in 
the matter of governance; hence, neither can the ECI nor can any other 
authority claim to possess arbitrary power over the interests of an individual 
voter and seek cover from the sunlight of judicial scrutiny if, indeed, a valid 
cause is set up for interference. After all, “let right be done” is also the 
motto of our nation like any other civilised State. That the sanctity of the 
electoral process has to be secured at any cost has never been in doubt. 
7. 
Conducting elections in India is a difficult task, is an understatement; 
rather, it is a humongous task and presents a novel challenge, not seen 
elsewhere in the world. India is home to more than 140 crore people and 
there are 97 crore eligible voters for the 2024 General Elections, which is 
more than 10% of the world population. These voters represent the largest 
electorate in the world. The Representation of the People Act, 19516 which, 
to my mind, amidst the vast legislative landscape of the nation is the most 
important enactment after the Constitution of India, is also the most 
effective instrument to uphold democratic and republican ideals, which are 
the hallmarks of our preambular promise. The RoP Act, which has 
established the legal framework for conducting elections, ensures that each 
and every citizen has a fair and equal opportunity to exercise his/her right 
of vote and to participate in the democratic process for electing his/her 
governor. The duties, functions and obligations to be performed/discharged 
by the ECI are ordained by the RoP Act, which are paramount and non-
 
6 RoP Act 

 
Page 6 of 18 
negotiable. Being a complete code in itself, the RoP Act reinforces the rule 
of law and upholds the principles of justice, fairness and transparency. The 
larger the electorate, greater are the challenges associated with the 
elections. As it is, the ECI has an onerous responsibility to shoulder and 
there is absolutely no margin for error. Periodical challenges to electoral 
processes, which gain momentum particularly when General Elections are 
imminent, require the ECI as of necessity to raise robust, valid and effective 
defence to spurn such challenges failing which any adverse judgment by a 
court is bound to undermine the authority and prestige of the ECI and bring 
disrepute to it. 
8. 
The 2024 General Elections, which are proposed to be conducted in 
7 (seven) phases and presently underway, will entail an estimated 
expenditure of around Rs. 10,00,00,00,00,000 (Rupees One lakh crore); 
more than 10 lakh polling booths are required to be setup to facilitate the 
voting process. The EVMs are carried to the remotest areas of this country, 
occasionally on the backs of horses and other animals; voting booths have 
been set up in far-off villages at the foothills of the Himalayan mountains 
as well as the delta of the Sundarbans which are only accessible through 
boats. These challenges are unique to India, and the election process has 
to be considered in this context. 
9. 
Taking an example, West Bengal is the 13th largest state in terms of 
area, spread over 88,752 sq. km. The density of population of the state is 
1028 persons/sq. km. Even a small state like West Bengal is more densely 
populated than most European nations. This being the scenario, any 
comparison of the nature which was sought to be drawn on behalf of the 

 
Page 7 of 18 
petitioning association with a particular European nation, may not be 
adequately representative since the demographic and logistical challenges 
in the conduct of elections in each country are unique to it. Also, it was not 
demonstrated before the Court that the machines put to use in the electoral 
system of such nation are similar and what was said by its court applies ex 
proprio vigore to India.  
10. 
Electronic voting is not something which is prevalent only in India. 
Multiple countries use electronic voting in varying degrees in their national 
elections. However, use of EVMs in elections in India are not without its 
checks and balances. Reasonable measures to ensure transparency, such 
as tallying VVPAT paper trail in 5 EVMs per assembly constituency or 
assembly segment in a parliamentary constituency, are already in place 
after the decision of this Court in N. Chandrababu Naidu v. Union of 
India7. This measure, as has been noticed by Hon’ble Khanna, J., was 
undertaken out of abundant caution and not as an admission of a flaw in 
the process. 
11. 
The aforesaid exercise of tallying VVPAT paper trail in 5 EVMs with 
votes cast by the electors has not, till date, resulted in any mismatch. This 
assertion of the ECI has not been proved to be incorrect by the petitioners 
by referring to any credible material or data. So long no mismatch is 
detected even after such an exercise, as directed in N. Chandrababu 
Naidu (supra), it would defy the sense of logic and reason of a prudent 
man to issue a Mandamus to the ECI to arrange for tallying 100% VVPAT 
 
7 (2019) 15 SCC 377 

 
Page 8 of 18 
slips on the specious ground of the petitioners’ apprehension that the EVMs 
could be manipulated.  
12. 
 The petitioning association has relied on the Report titled ‘An inquiry 
into India’s Election System: Is the Indian EVM and VVPAT system fit for 
democratic elections?’ submitted by the Citizens’ Commission on Elections8, 
to emphasize the vulnerabilities of the current electronic voting system. The 
CCE Report, on a bare reading, appears to be the culmination of inputs 
given by domain experts. For whatever such report is worth and though 
counsel claimed that the efficacy of the voting system through EVMs has 
been doubted, the CCE Report itself concludes, inter alia, that no hacking 
of any EVM has been detected; what it observes is that there is no 
guarantee that the EVMs cannot be hacked. This, in essence captures the 
underlying weakness in the petitioning association’s entire case, inasmuch 
as the only grounds for the reliefs sought lie in the realm of apprehension 
and suspicion. In arguendo, even if the CCE Report is taken on face value 
and it is believed that the EVM-VVPAT system can be hacked, can it be said 
that there is absence of a redressal mechanism for the same? Should there 
be hacking, resulting in violation of a right of an elector in any manner, and 
if there be proof adequate enough to upturn an election result, the law 
already has in place a remedy, i.e., an election petition under section 80 of 
the RoP Act. Such an election petition can be filed not just by an aggrieved 
candidate, but also by a voter, within 45 (forty-five) days from the date of 
declaration of the result of election. Since there is already a remedy in law 
 
8 CCE Report 

 
Page 9 of 18 
to allay the fears that have been expressed by the petitioners, if and when 
a discrepancy in the results arises, the Courts are not powerless to uphold 
the sanctity of the democratic process by appropriate intervention.  
13. 
The petitioning association has also attempted to highlight a public 
trust deficit with respect to the current voting system by relying on a survey 
conducted by the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies – Lokniti, 
which concluded that a majority of the Indian population did not trust the 
EVMs. It is a private report and I find little reason to trust such a report. 
Over the years, more and more voters have participated in the election 
process. Had the voters any doubt regarding the efficacy of the EVMs, I 
wonder whether the voting percentage would have seen such increase. 
EVMs have stood the test of time and the increased voting percentage is 
sufficient reason for us to hold that the voters have reposed faith in the 
current system and that the report to the contrary, which has been relied 
on, merits outright rejection. 
14. 
Next, the petitioners submit that their right to be informed under 
Article 19(1)(a) vis-à-vis the electoral process have two facets. First, a voter 
has a right to know that the vote is recorded as cast; and, secondly that 
the vote as cast is counted. These facets need to be dealt with separately. 
15. 
 A citizen’s right ‘to freedom of speech and expression’ under Article 
19(1) is not absolute; the State by virtue of Article 19(2) can place 
reasonable restrictions on these rights. There can be no doubt that the 
electorate has a right to be informed if the votes, as cast, are accurately 
recorded. The dispute, in the present writ proceedings, centres around the 

 
Page 10 of 18 
modality of delivering the information. The petitioners have characterised 
the present procedure, wherein the voter after pressing the ‘blue button’ 
and casting his/her vote can see his VVPAT slip for 7 seconds through an 
illuminated glass window, as inadequate for the voter to verify if his/her 
vote, as cast, is recorded. 
16. 
 To buttress their submission, the petitioners have relied on the 
proviso to Rule 49M (3) of the Conduct of Election Rules, 19619. The 
petitioners urge that the ECI is not following the statutory mandate 
provided in the Election Rules. I am ad idem with the interpretation of the 
relevant rule placed by Hon’ble Khanna, J. The ordainment of Rule 49M (3) 
is that the VVPAT slip should be momentarily visible to the voter; and it is 
not the requirement of the rule that the VVPAT slip or its copy has to be 
handed over to the voter. Recording of the vote cast signifying the choice 
of the voter and its projection on the VVPAT slip, albeit for 7 (seven) 
seconds, is fulfilment of the voter’s right of being informed that his/her vote 
has been duly recorded. In my considered view, as long as there is no 
allegation of statutory breach, there can be no substitution of the Court’s 
view for the view of the ECI that the light in the VVPAT would be on for 7 
(seven) seconds and not more.  
17. 
We now address the second facet of the argument based on the right 
guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a) – the voter’s right to know that his/her vote, 
as recorded, has been counted. To deal with this contention, a question 
comes to my mind – did this right not exist when the “paper ballot system”, 
 
9 Election Rules 

 
Page 11 of 18 
which the petitioning association wishes to be reverted to, was in vogue? 
Then, voters would simply drop their paper ballots into a box, for it to be 
safely ferried away to the counting stations, whereafter the same were 
counted by election officials far away from the voter’s scrutiny, with no way 
of knowing whether the vote cast by the voter was indeed counted or had 
not fallen victim to human error and missed from being counted. In the 
present far more technologically advanced system of the EVM – VVPAT, 
every voter who enters the polling booth has his/her name recorded, along 
with an affixation of signature in the Register of Voters maintained by the 
Presiding Officer, as provided by Form 17A of the Election Rules. Thereafter, 
the voter presses the desired button on the ballot unit to cast his/her vote, 
sees a visual confirmation of the same on the transparent VVPAT screen 
and hears a loud beep. At the end of the voting process, the Presiding 
Officer is required to record in Form 17C, not just the total number of voters 
as per the Register of Voters, but also the total number of votes recorded 
per voting machine as well as those staying away from the voting process 
despite affixing signature on the register. The total votes polled as per Form 
17C is then again tallied with the total votes recorded by the control unit. 
Rule 56D(4) also provides that if there is any mismatch between these two 
totals, the printed VVPAT slips of the polling station would be counted. 
Furthermore, if a voter is aggrieved by a mismatch in the candidate voted 
for in the ballot unit vis-a-vis that recorded in the VVAPT, Rule 49M allows 
the voter to approach the Presiding Officer. Upon the conclusion of polling, 
there exists yet another remedy under Rule 56-D, for a candidate to apply 
for a count of the VVPAT slips, should any discrepancy be suspected. Thus, 

 
Page 12 of 18 
it is manifest that there is in place a stringent system of checks and 
balances, to prevent any possibility of a miscount of votes, and for the voter 
to know that his/her vote has been counted. There can be no doubt that 
such a system, which is distinctly more satisfactory compared to the system 
of the yester-years, suitably satisfies the voter’s right under Article 19(1)(a) 
to know that his/her vote has been counted as recorded. 
18. 
The Republic has prided itself in conducting free and fair elections 
for the past 70 years, the credit wherefor can largely be attributed to the 
ECI and the trust reposed in it by the public. While rational scepticism of 
the status quo is desirable in a healthy democracy, this Court cannot allow 
the entire process of the underway General Elections to be called into 
question and upended on mere apprehension and speculation of the 
petitioners. The petitioners have neither been able to demonstrate how the 
use of EVMs in elections violates the principle of free and fair elections; nor 
have they been able to establish a fundamental right to 100% VVPAT slips 
tallying with the votes cast. 
19. 
In view of the foregoing discussion, the petitioners’ apprehensions 
are misplaced. Reverting to the paper ballot system, rejecting inevitable 
march of technological advancement, and burdening the ECI with the 
onerous task of 100% VVPAT slips tallying would be a folly when the 
challenges faced in conducting the elections are of such gargantuan scale.   
20. 
There are two other ancillary issues, to add to the issues already 
covered in detail by Hon’ble Khanna, J.  

 
Page 13 of 18 
21. 
The first is the very issue of maintainability of writ petitions of the 
nature presented before us. Should mere suspicion of infringement of a 
right be considered adequate ground to invoke the writ jurisdiction? In my 
opinion, the answer should be ‘NO’.  
22. 
A writ petition ought not to be entertained if the plea is based on the 
mere suspicion that a right could be infringed. Suspicion that a right could 
be infringed and a real threat of infringement of a right are distinct and 
different.  
23. 
To succeed in a claim under Article 32 or 226, one must demonstrate 
either mala fide, or arbitrariness, or breach of a law in the impugned State 
action. Though a writ of right, it is not a writ of course. The writ jurisdiction 
under Article 32/226 of the Constitution of India being special and 
extraordinary, it should not be exercised casually or lightly on the mere 
asking of a litigant based on suspicions and conjectures, unless there is 
credible/trustworthy material on record to suggest that adverse action 
affecting a right is reasonably imminent or there is a real threat to the rule 
of law being abrogated. It must be shown, at least prima facie, that there 
is a real potential threat to a right, which is guaranteed by law to the person 
concerned.  
24. 
I am not oblivious of two decisions rendered by this Court on the 
aforesaid issue.  

 
Page 14 of 18 
25. 
A Constitution Bench of this Court in D.A.V. College, Bhatinda v. 
State of Punjab10 held thus: 
“5. […] a petition under Article 32 in which petitioners make out a 
prima facie case that their fundamental rights are either 
threatened or violated will be entertained by this Court and that it 
is not necessary for any person who considers himself to be 
aggrieved to wait till the actual threat has taken place.” 
 
26. 
In Adi Saiva Sivachariyargal Nala Sangam v. State of Tamil 
Nadu11 a Bench of two Hon’ble Judges of this Court held: 
“12. […] The institution of a writ proceeding need not await actual 
prejudice and adverse effect and consequence. An apprehension 
of such harm, if the same is well founded, can furnish a cause of 
action for moving the Court.” 
 
27. 
While a writ petition may be instituted, if there is a genuine and 
looming threat of a right being trampled upon, what is, however, clear from 
the aforesaid decisions is that such threat or apprehension has to be well 
founded and cannot be based merely on assumptions and presumptions as 
is found in the present set of writ petitions.  
28. 
The mere suspicion that there may be a mismatch in votes cast 
through EVMs, thereby giving rise to a demand for a 100% VVPAT slips 
verification, is not a sufficient ground for the present set of writ petitions to 
be considered maintainable. To maintain these writ petitions, it ought to 
have been shown that there exists a tangible threat of infringement; 
however, that has also not been substantiated. Thus, without any evidence 
of malice, arbitrariness, breach of law, or a genuine threat to invasion of 
 
10 (1971) 2 SCC 261 
11 (2016) 2 SCC 725 

 
Page 15 of 18 
rights, the writ petitions could have been dismissed as not maintainable. 
But, considering the seriousness of the concerns that the Court suo motu 
had expressed to which responses were received from the official of the ECI 
as well as its senior counsel, the necessity was felt to issue the twin 
directions in the greater public interest and to sub-serve the demands of 
justice.  
29. 
Finally, I wish to touch upon one other issue of importance.  
30. 
It is pertinent to reiterate that the doctrine of res judicata is 
applicable to writ petitions under Article 32 and Article 226 as well. The 
inclusion of the term “public right” in Explanation VI of Section 11 of the 
Civil Procedure Code, 1908 aims to avoid redundant legal disputes 
concerning public rights. Given this clarification, there is no room for debate 
regarding the application of Section 11 to matters of public interest litigation 
presented through writ petitions. 
31. 
In Daryao and others v. State of U.P. and others12, a 
Constitution Bench of this Court emphasized that the rule of res judicata is 
founded on significant public policy considerations rather than being a mere 
technicality. It was clarified that petitioners seeking to challenge a decision 
must present new grounds distinct from those previously raised in order to 
escape the bar of res judicata. The Bench articulated this as follows: 
“31. […] We are satisfied that a change in the form of attack against 
the impugned statute would make no difference to the true legal 
position that the writ petition in the High Court and the present writ 
petition are directed against the same statute and the grounds raised 
by the petitioner in that behalf are substantially the same.” 
 
12 (1962) 1 SCR 574 

 
Page 16 of 18 
 
32. 
Another Constitution Bench of this Court in Direct Recruit Class II 
Engineering Officers' Association. v. State of Maharashtra and 
others13 followed the aforesaid dictum to hold that the principles of res 
judicata are not foreign to writ petitions. A reference may be made to the 
following paragraph: 
35. […] It is well established that the principles of res judicata are 
applicable to writ petitions. The relief prayed for on behalf of the 
petitioner in the present case is the same as he would have, in the 
event of his success, obtained in the earlier writ petition before the High 
Court. The petitioner in reply contended that since the special leave 
petition before this Court was dismissed in limine without giving any 
reason, the order cannot be relied upon for a plea of res judicata. The 
answer is that it is not the order of this Court dismissing the special 
leave petition which is being relied upon; the plea of res judicata has 
been pressed on the basis of the High Court's judgment which became 
final after the dismissal of the special leave petition. In similar situation 
a Constitution Bench of this Court in Daryao v. State of U.P. [(1962) 1 
SCR 574 : AIR 1961 SC 1457] held that where the High Court dismisses 
a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution after hearing the 
matter on the merits, a subsequent petition in the Supreme Court under 
Article 32 on the same facts and for the same reliefs filed by the same 
parties will be barred by the general principle of res judicata. The 
binding character of judgments of courts of competent jurisdiction is in 
essence a part of the rule of law on which the administration of justice, 
so much emphasised by the Constitution, is founded and a judgment of 
the High Court under Article 226 passed after a hearing on the merits 
must bind the parties till set aside in appeal as provided by the 
Constitution and cannot be permitted to be circumvented by a petition 
under Article 32. An attempted change in the form of the petition or the 
grounds cannot be allowed to defeat the plea […]”. 
 
33. 
 No doubt, res judicata bars parties from re-litigating issues that 
have been conclusively settled. It is true that this principle is not rigid in 
cases of substantial public interest and Constitutional Courts are 
 
13 (1990) 2 SCC 715 

 
Page 17 of 18 
empowered to adopt a flexible approach in such cases, acknowledging their 
far-reaching public interest ramifications.  
34. 
However, this standard is applicable only when substantial evidence 
is presented to validate the irreversible harm or detriment to the public 
good resulting from the action impugned. The Court must come to the 
conclusion that the petition is not just an old wine in a new bottle, but rather 
raises substantial grounds not previously addressed in litigation. Only under 
these circumstances may it consider such a petition; otherwise, it is within 
its authority to dismiss it at the threshold. 
35. 
This issue at hand of doubting the efficacy of the EVMs has been 
previously raised before this Court and it is imperative that such issue is 
concluded definitively now. Going forward, unless substantial evidence is 
presented against the EVMs, the current system will have to persist with 
enhancements. Regressive measures to revert to paper ballots or any 
alternative to the EVMs that does not adequately safeguard the interests of 
Indian citizens have to be eschewed. 
36. 
I also wish to observe that while maintaining a balanced perspective 
is crucial in evaluating systems or institutions, blindly distrusting any aspect 
of the system can breed unwarranted scepticism and impede progress. 
Instead, a critical yet constructive approach, guided by evidence and 
reason, should be followed to make room for meaningful improvements and 
to ensure the system's credibility and effectiveness. 
37. 
Be it the citizens, the judiciary, the elected representatives, or even 
the electoral machinery, democracy is all about striving to build harmony 

 
Page 18 of 18 
and trust between all its pillars through open dialogue, transparency in 
processes, and continuous improvement of the system by active 
participation in democratic practices. Our approach should be guided by 
evidence and reason to allow space for meaningful improvements. By 
nurturing a culture of trust and collaboration, we can strengthen the 
foundations of our democracy and ensure that the voices and choices of all 
citizens are valued and respected. With each pillar fortified, our democracy 
stands robust and resilient.  
38. 
I conclude with the hope and trust that the system in vogue shall 
not fail the electorate and the mandate of the voting public shall be truly 
reflected in the votes cast and counted. 
 
 
       
      ………………………………J   
  
 
                         (DIPANKAR DATTA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
26th April, 2024.