2024 INSC 31
Non­Reportable
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3798 OF 2019
Container Corporation of India Ltd.
      … Appellant
Versus
Ajay Khera & Ors.
         … Respondents
J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.
The first respondent, a former Executive Director of the
Central Warehousing Corporation, approached the National
Green   Tribunal   (for   short,   ‘the   NGT’)   by   filing   an   original
application.  The first respondent filed the original application
under Section 14, read with Section 15 and Section 18(1) of
the   National   Green   Tribunal   Act,   2010   and   raised   an
important   issue   of   the   pollution   created   by   the   Inland
Container Depot (for short, ‘the said ICD’) at Tughlakabad. It
is alleged in the application that the said ICD is used by the
             Civil Appeal no.3798 of 2019 
Page 1 of 13
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.01.11
16:44:14 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

trucks/trailers   not   destined   for   Delhi   and   is   used   for
delivery/pick up to  and from locations outside  Delhi.   He
pointed   out   that   due   to   the   inflow   of   a   large   number   of
trucks/trailers to the said ICD, the air pollution in Delhi NCR
has   substantially   increased   due   to   the   emission   from
trucks/trailers.     He   contended   that   there   are   other   ICDs
around Delhi, and therefore, it is quite possible to divert the
inflow of trucks/trailers to the other ICDs around Delhi NCR.
The   first   respondent,   thus,   prayed   for   a   direction   to   the
appellant the Container Corporation of India Ltd. (for short,
‘the Container Corporation’) and the Railway Board to shift
the operations of the said ICD at Tughlakabad which are not
bound for Delhi to other locations outside Delhi. The second
direction was to prohibit entry of containers/trailers at the
said ICD, Tughlakabad, which are not bound for Delhi and
only to utilise CNG run/battery operated Fork Lifts/empty
Handlers and small vehicles, as also run electric trains rather
than diesel locomotives in and out of the said ICD. 
2.
The appellant (The Container Corporation) contested the
said application.   It was pointed out that the movement of
cargo destined for consumption in Delhi is made by railway
lines which terminate inside the premises of the said ICD.  If
the use of the said ICD is diverted, it would mean that there
would  be more  movement  of  cargo  on  roads  from  various
ports   in   India   to   Delhi,   which   will   increase   the   distance
covered by the cargo trucks.  This movement of cargo on the
roads will lead to more pollution.   A contention was raised
             Civil Appeal no.3798 of 2019 
Page 2 of 13

that the said ICD is ideally located to cater for the needs of
the   population   of   Delhi   without   disturbing   the   residential
areas of Delhi. 
3.
The NGT passed interim orders on the application filed
by the first respondent from time to time.  By the impugned
order   dated   8th  March   2019,   the   NGT   passed   an   order
directing the appellant to ensure that, in a phased manner,
diesel   vehicles   stop   visiting   the   ICD   and   shift   to   electric,
hybrid   and   CNG   vehicles.   The   Tribunal   observed   that   the
other alternative was to limit the entry of diesel vehicles only
to the satellite terminals (ICDs) at Dadri, Rewari, Ballabhgarh,
Khatuawas   or   any   other   ICD   around   Delhi.   The   Tribunal
observed that this will ensure that diesel vehicles do not enter
Delhi NCR. An outer limit of six months was fixed under the
impugned order by the NGT to comply with the directions
above.   An   action   plan   was   ordered   to   be  filed   within   one
month.  
4.           On 22nd  April 2019, this Court issued notice on the
present appeal and directed that no coercive action shall be
taken against the appellant based on the impugned order.  On
10th February 2020, when this Court noticed that no solution
was forthcoming, a direction was issued to the Environment
Pollution (Prevention and Control) Authority (‘EPCA’) to look
into   the   issues   raised   in   the   appeal   and   to   file   a   report
containing   its   recommendations.     We   may   note   here   that
EPCA  has   been   set  up  under   the   orders   of   this   Court   to
             Civil Appeal no.3798 of 2019 
Page 3 of 13

protect and improve the quality of the environment in Delhi
NCR.
5.
Under   the   aforesaid   direction   of   this   Court,   EPCA
submitted a report way back on 30th June 2020.  A response
is   filed   by   the   first   respondent   to   the   recommendations
contained in the said report.   An affidavit has been filed by
the   Ministry   of   Railways,   putting   on   record   its   stand
concerning   the   recommendations   contained   in   the   report.
Written   submissions   have   been   filed   by   the   appellant
containing its response to the recommendations of EPCA and
setting out the steps taken by the appellant pursuant to the
recommendations.     The   hearing   before   this   Court   was
confined to the recommendations made by the EPCA.   We
have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties on
the said report.
6.
The   issue   of   pollution,   particularly   air   pollution,   has
been   a   cause   of   concern   for   the   last   few   decades.     Air
pollution directly affects the fundamental rights of the citizens
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.  The
right to life guaranteed under Article 21 includes the right to
live in a pollution­free environment.  The issue of air pollution
is of a great deal of importance to every citizen. Air pollution
affects citizens' quality of life. It adversely affects health. This
issue   is   more   significant   in   the   context   of   the   severe   air
pollution faced by Delhi NCT and Delhi NCR areas during the
last few years.  For the last few months, the air quality index
             Civil Appeal no.3798 of 2019 
Page 4 of 13

in the said areas has been in the category of very unhealthy
or hazardous. 
7.
Now, we turn to the report submitted by EPCA.  By way
of   illustration,   the   report   contains   the   figures   of   vehicles
entering the said ICD in January 2020.   The report records
that 22,082 vehicles entered the said ICD, out of which 75%
of the vehicles (16,562) were bigger vehicles using diesel, with
an average capacity of 19 metric tons.  Only 25% were CNG
vehicles,   having   an   average   capacity   of   6   metric   tons.   It
records that the number of diesel vehicles entering the said
ICD daily was 534.  These figures must be appreciated in light
of the pollution inventory done by the IIT, Kanpur, in 2016.
The   inventory   revealed   that   the   trucks   entering   Delhi
contribute roughly half of the total pollution caused by the
vehicles in the city.   That is why this Court has repeatedly
issued directions for preventing air pollution in Delhi NCR.
8.
A positive feature recorded in the EPCA report is that
the total quantity of goods transiting through the said ICD
from 2014­15 has gradually decreased. In the financial year
2014­15,   the   total   quantity   of   goods   entering   ICD   was
4,26,144   TEUs,   which   was   reduced   to   3,10,399   in   the
financial   year   2019­2020.     One   TEU   is   equivalent   to   the
carrying capacity of a 20­foot­long container.  The submission
made across the Bar is that the downward trend continues.
9.
Broadly, the EPCA considered three issues:
             Civil Appeal no.3798 of 2019 
Page 5 of 13

a. The   feasibility   of   shifting   to   CNG/electric/hybrid
vehicles as directed by the NGT by the impugned
order;
b. The issue of restricting and reducing the entry of
non­destined diesel vehicles at the said ICD and the
issue   of   diverting   non­destined   diesel   vehicles   to
nearby ICDs; and 
c. The   problem   created   by   congestion   and   lack   of
adequate parking facilities at ICDs.
10.
Before we deal with the recommendations and the stand
taken   by   the   parties,   it   is   necessary   to   understand   the
significance of an ICD or a dry port in the transportation and
logistics chain.  An ICD is a facility created in an inland part
which   serves   as   a   containerised   cargo   handling   hub   for
imports and exports of the region. It is an intermodal terminal
that provides direct connectivity to a seaport. The customs
department recognises it as an extended part of the seaports.
It serves as a facility that offers services for handling and
temporarily   storing   import/export­laden   containers.   It   is
connected to ports via railway transport. All facilities, such as
obtaining custom clearances, cargo aggregation, cargo storage
and other storage identical to a marine port, are available at
these   dry   ports.     In   short,   ICDs   enable   access   to   cargo
handling facilities of a port at the doorstep of the importers
and exporters. It also allows the consolidation of the cargo
closer to its origin or destination to reduce the fragmented
             Civil Appeal no.3798 of 2019 
Page 6 of 13

movement and multiple handling of the cargo.  As is brought
on   record,   there   are   two   establishments   of   the   Customs
Department in the said ICD, and there is a connection of
railway lines available in the ICD itself.  
11.
Now,   coming   to   the   recommendations   of   the   EPCA,
while accepting the need to shift vehicles to cleaner fuels like
CNG/Hybrid/Electric,   the   EPCA   observed   that   there   are
limitations in the technology.  It is noted that no alternative
fuel   technology   is   available   for   the   category   of   heavy­duty
vehicles used for transporting containers.  It is observed that
the   availability   of   alternative   fuel   in   long­distance   travel
across   India   is   often   a   constraint.     Therefore,   the   EPCA
recommended using BS­VI heavy­duty diesel vehicles as they
are   substantially   cleaner   than   BS­IV   heavy­duty   vehicles.
Therefore,   a   suggestion   was   made   that   the   Ministry   of
Transport and Highways should come out with an effective
and   robust   policy   for   the   scrappage   of   heavy­duty   diesel
vehicles and their replacement with BS­VI vehicles.   In his
response,   the   first   respondent   stated   that   the   above
recommendation must be accepted with a rider that exploring
other   fuel   sources,   including   CNG/Hybrid/Electric,   should
continue.   Indeed, technology is ever­improving.   Therefore,
while adopting the aforesaid recommendation, we must clarify
that a constant endeavour  needs to be made to  ascertain
whether better fuel sources can be successfully utilised for
the heavy­duty vehicles which enter the said ICD.
             Civil Appeal no.3798 of 2019 
Page 7 of 13

12.
On the second issue, the EPCA noted in the report that
seven such facilities, including the said ICD, are near Delhi.
Based on the figures incorporated in the report, it is noted
that   only   the   said   ICD   and   the   ICD   at   Rewari   are   being
utilised to the extent of 60% or more of their capacity, while
the   others   remain   underutilised.  
  Therefore,   EPCA
recommended that the appellant should formulate a plan for
optimal utilisation of ICDs around Delhi, which will eventually
reduce the use of said ICD.
13.
We   may   note   another   reason   why   the   said   ICD   is
preferred.   It is brought on record that some of the central
laboratories, drug controller offices, etc., are located in Delhi,
where the lab testing of the imported goods is done before
clearance from customs. Therefore, a recommendation was
made to direct the appellant to work with certified agencies
and laboratories to extend their services to the ICDs outside
Delhi so that the infrastructure in other ICDs around Delhi
does not remain underutilised by exporters/importers. 
14.
Regarding parking for the trucks and trailers, the report
records   that   the   facility   for   parking   940   trucks/trailers   is
available, but parking is still haphazardly made, leading to
congestion and pollution.
15.
In   the   first   respondent's   response   to   the
recommendations, it is pointed out that the initial capacity of
the said ICD was only 1,26,000 TEUs.  However, the said ICD
has operated with 4,50,000 TEUs.   Reliance was placed on
             Civil Appeal no.3798 of 2019 
Page 8 of 13

the provisions of the Handling of Cargo in Areas Regulation,
2009, which provide that safe, secure and spacious premises
for loading, unloading, handling and storing of the cargo for
the projected capacity has to be set up by the user agency to
the satisfaction of the Commissioner of Customs.  A grievance
has been made that data showing the implementation of the
said Regulations has not been placed on record.
16.
The   recommendations   made   by   EPCA   have   been
summarised on pages 14 and 15 of the report, which reads
thus: 
“On
 
the
 
issue
 
of
 
shift
 
to
CNG/Hybrid/Electric
3.1
 May   consider   that   shift   to
CNG/Hybrid/Electric,   however   desirable,
is not feasible in this segment of vehicles.
May instead direct the Ministry of Road
Transport   and   Highways   (MoRTH)   to
present an effective and robust policy for
scrappage   of   heavy­duty   diesel   vehicles
and   replacement   with   BS   VI   vehicles,
which are substantially cleaner and will
greatly   reduce   pollution   in   the   entire
airshed.
On   the   issue   of   restricting   growth   of
heavy­duty vehicles at ICD/TKD
3.2  May   consider   directing   CONCOR   to
give a plan for the optimal utilisation of
the   inland   container   depots   garlanding
Delhi and what will be proposed increase
in   throughput   in   these   depots   in   the
coming years and consequently how the
reduction in throughput in ICD/TKD will
be operationalised. 
             Civil Appeal no.3798 of 2019 
Page 9 of 13

3.3  May   direct   CONCOR   to   work   with
certifying   agencies   and   laboratories   to
work out the necessary extension of their
services   to   the   inland   container   depots
outside Delhi so that business can utilise
this infrastructure with convenience. 
On the issue of parking
3.4  May   consider   directing   CONCOR   to
provide a time­bound plan for upgrading
the parking/holding area by optimizing on
the space it has inside the depot and to
work   with   agencies   to   provide   adequate
holding space outside the depot.”
17.
We   may   mention   here   that   the   appellant,   the   first
respondent   and   Ministry   of   Railways   have,   in   principle,
agreed that the recommendations of EPCA need acceptance.
After perusing the pleadings, affidavits, and documents on
record, we are of the view that the recommendations must be
accepted and implemented in terms of the directions that we
propose to issue.
18.
However,   timelines   will   have   to   be   fixed.   As   regards
recommendation   3.1,   we   propose   to   grant   the   Ministry   of
Road Transport and Highways six months to come out with a
policy on the replacement of heavy­duty diesel vehicles with
BS­VI vehicles.   While we do so, we make it clear that with
ever­advancing technology, constant endeavour to explore the
availability   of   other   fuel   resources   that   could   be   used   for
heavy­duty vehicles should always continue.
             Civil Appeal no.3798 of 2019 
Page 10 of 13

19.
Regarding recommendation 3.2, we propose to direct the
appellant   to   formulate   a   comprehensive   plan   within   six
months   from   today.   Regarding   recommendation   3.3,   the
appellant   will   have   to   approach   various   authorities   which
have provided laboratories in Delhi to set up similar facilities
near the other ICDs around Delhi NCR.
20. 
Regarding   recommendation   3.4,   in   the   written
submissions, the appellant has brought on record that the
appellant had appointed an expert agency, KPMG, to make
recommendations on the problem of congestion and parking
inside the said ICD.   A copy of KPMG's report is placed on
record with an assurance that the appellant is undertaking
measures   to   implement   the   recommendations   made   by
KPMG.
21.
Before   we   part   with   the   judgment,   we   must   say
something   about   an   option   mentioned   by   the   NGT   in
paragraph 7 of the impugned order. The NGT has  inter alia
observed that there is an option to restrict the entry of diesel
vehicles in the said ICDs at Tughlakabad by diverting these
vehicles   to   the   ICDs   at   Dadri,   Rewari,   Ballabhgarh,
Khatuawas or any other ICD around Delhi so as to control the
pollution in Delhi NCR, as if only the people living in Delhi
NCR alone are entitled to pollution free atmosphere and not
those living in other parts of the country. Such an observation
by the NGT is in complete ignorance of the fact that citizens
living in other parts of the country other than Delhi NCR also
             Civil Appeal no.3798 of 2019 
Page 11 of 13

have a fundamental right to a pollution free environment as
guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Such a
fundamental right is equally enforceable by all and is not
confined   to   the   people   of   Delhi   NCR.   The   NGT   while
protecting/safeguarding the above fundamental right of the
people of Delhi NCR cannot allow infringement of the same
fundamental right of the citizens living outside Delhi NCR.
The   observation   of   the   NGT   is   totally   unjustified   and
unwarranted. 
22.
Hence, we dispose of the appeal by passing the following
directions in substitution of the directions in the impugned
order:
a. After examining recommendation 3.1, the Union of India
shall formulate a policy of phasing out heavy­duty diesel
vehicles and replacing them with BS­VI vehicles. The
Union of India shall formulate appropriate policy on this
behalf within six months from today;
b. Though   the   Union   of   India   is   a   party   through   the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
the Ministry   of  Road  Transport  and Highways is not
formally made a party. We, therefore, direct the Registry
to forward a copy of this order to the Secretary of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.  
c. The process of exploring the possibility of finding better
sources, including CNG/Hybrid/Electric, for the use of
heavy­duty vehicles shall continue;
             Civil Appeal no.3798 of 2019 
Page 12 of 13

d. The plan for optimal utilisation of ICDs around Delhi, in
terms of recommendation no. 3.2 shall be formulated by
the  appellant  within  six  months  from  today.    In   the
meanwhile,  the  appellant  will   coordinate  with   all  the
official   agencies   to   enable   the   setting   up   of   central
laboratories near ICDs around Delhi NCR;
e. We   direct   the   appellant   to   implement   the
recommendations made by KPMG in February 2021 for
improving the parking management of vehicles in the
said ICD.  We grant time of six months to the appellant
to implement the recommendations of the KPMG;
23.
The appeal is disposed of on the above terms.
24.    Though we are disposing of the appeal with the above
directions, we make it clear that this Court will monitor the
implementation of the above directions.  Therefore, we direct
that this appeal be listed on 31st July 2024 for reporting
compliance by the appellant and the Ministry of Transport
and Highways.
….…………………….J.
    (Abhay S. Oka)
…..…………………...J.
     (Pankaj Mithal)
New Delhi;
January 11, 2024.
             Civil Appeal no.3798 of 2019 
Page 13 of 13