2024 INSC 353
 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 1 of 26 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
AJAY ISHWAR GHUTE & ORS.                 …APPELLANT(S) 
  
VERSUS 
 
MEHER K. PATEL & ORS.                      …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
1. 
The main issue that arises in this case is whether the 
High Court was justified in passing a drastic order in the 
exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India permitting the 1st and 2nd 
respondents (writ petitioners) to construct a compound 
wall under police protection. The order passed by a 
Division Bench of the High Court on 16th March 2022 is in 
terms of the “Minutes of Order” tendered to the Court by 
the advocates representing the parties duly signed by 
them. The practice of passing orders based on “Minutes of 
Order” submitted by the advocates representing the 
parties prevails perhaps only in the High Court of 
Judicature at Bombay (for short, ‘the Bombay High 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.04.30
16:11:41 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 2 of 26 
 
Court’). The present appellants applied for a review of the 
order dated 16th March 2022, which has been rejected by 
the impugned order dated 20th July 2023. Even the order 
dated 16th March 2022 is under challenge in this appeal.  
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
2. 
A few factual aspects will have to be noted. 
Arbitration Petitions were filed under Section 9 of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short, 
‘Arbitration Act’) before a Single Judge of the Bombay High 
Court. One petition was filed by the 1st respondent against 
one Urvaksh Naval Hoyvoy and others. Taz Naval Nariman 
and another filed the other petition. Consent terms were 
filed in the Arbitration Petition preferred by the 1st 
respondent. It appears that during the pendency of the 
proceeding of the Arbitration Petition, Urvaksh Naval 
Hoyvoy was arrested by police based on a First Information 
Report. In terms of the consent terms dated 28th April 
2018, the learned Single Judge passed an order dated 30th 
April 2018. Further, order dated 10th May 2018 passed by 
the learned Single Judge records that the process of 
handing over possession of the suit property by the 
respondents to the 1st respondent has commenced. The 
dispute in the Arbitration Petitions related to the lands of 
Parsi Dairy Farm. 
3. 
The 7th respondent in Arbitration Petition No. 451 of 
2018 filed an interim application in the disposed of 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 3 of 26 
 
Arbitration Petitions more than two years after filing 
consent terms. It records that the High Court had directed 
the police to give police protection to the parties for 
completing the process of handing over possession. A 
compound wall was to be constructed in terms of the 
consent terms. The occasion for filing the application arose 
as, according to the 7th respondent in the Arbitration 
Petition, local persons obstructed the work of the 
construction of the compound wall. The learned Single 
Judge of the Bombay High Court disposed of the interim 
application by his order dated 12th February 2021. The 
relevant portion of the said order reads thus: 
“2………………………………………………… 
In the application it is stated that in order 
to safeguard the suit property, the parties 
tried to build a wall on the suit property 
and which is in their possession. On 
commencement of the work of building 
the wall, the parties have faced several 
difficulties and which are enumerated 
in paragraphs 5(a) to 5(d) of the 
application. It is stated that local 
persons have time and again obstructed 
building of the wall and despite several 
requests made to the Talasari Police 
Station, nothing has been done. It is 
stated that a wall is being built on the suit 
property in order to secure the same and 
though assistance of the police was 
sought on several occasions, the local 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 4 of 26 
 
villagers time and again interfered with 
the building of the said wall and the police 
have rendered no assistance in that 
regard. 
…………………………………………………… 
 
3.………………………………………………… 
4. 
In these circumstances, it is 
directed that the police/Tahasildar/ 
Collector/ Gram Panchayat office and 
all 
other 
concerned 
Government 
Authorities shall offer all assistance to 
the applicant and the other interested 
respondents (respondent Nos.2 to 8) to 
construct a wall to safeguard the suit 
property. It is further directed that the 
local Police Station shall ensure that 
these directions are strictly complied 
with and no person is allowed to 
interfere with the construction of the 
wall on the suit property.” 
(emphasis added)  
4. 
It must be noted here that the persons who had 
admittedly obstructed the construction of the wall were not 
parties to the proceedings of either the Arbitration Petition 
or the interim application.  
5. 
It appears that an application was filed to the Deputy 
Superintendent of Land Records at Talasari by the 1st 
respondent and five others for measuring the lands subject 
matter of the Arbitration Petition situated at village-
Varvada, taluka-Talasari, district-Palghar. The Deputy 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 5 of 26 
 
Superintendent of Land Records, in his letter dated 21st 
November 2021, informed the 1st respondent that several 
persons named in the letter had objected to carrying out a 
survey. The letter records that as objections in writing have 
been submitted, conducting the hearing and holding an 
enquiry was necessary. We may note that in the letter, the 
names of some of the appellants are mentioned in the list 
of persons who objected to the survey.  
6. 
A very curious step was taken by the 1st and 2nd 
respondents thereafter. They filed a Writ Petition under 
Article 226 of the Constitution of India, being Writ Petition 
No. 2584 of 2022. The grievance in the said Writ Petition 
was regarding non-compliance with the orders in the 
aforesaid 
Arbitration 
Petition 
by 
the 
government 
authorities regarding carrying out the survey and 
construction of the compound wall. The persons who 
raised objections to the survey were not impleaded in the 
Writ Petition. In the Writ Petition, a Division Bench 
directed 
the 
District 
Collector 
Palghar 
and 
the 
Superintendent of Police, district Palghar, to remain 
present before the Court through video conference. On 9th 
March 2022, the Division Bench passed an order. 
Paragraph 3 of the said order reads thus: 
“3. 
From the annexures to the Writ 
Petition it appears that this is a clear case 
of political pressure being exerted on the 
Government officials like the Collector and 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 6 of 26 
 
the Superintendent of Police [see pages 
252 read with 259D annexed to the Writ 
Petition]. However, orders of the Court 
cannot be breached by any individual or 
organization by creating unrest and the 
authorities cannot be heard to say that 
they 
are 
unable 
to 
tackle 
such 
lawlessness. We therefore request the 
Advocate General to go through the Writ 
Petition and assist the Court. Stand over 
to 14th March, 2022, when the Collector 
and the Superintendent of Police shall 
remain present.” 
 
7. 
Mr 
Dattartraya 
Tulshidas 
Shinde, 
the 
Superintendent of Police of Palghar district, filed an 
affidavit dated 14th March 2022 before the High Court. The 
affidavit notes that when the work of construction of the 
compound wall in terms of the order in the Arbitration 
Petition commenced, the local tribals gathered an 
impression that it was an attempt to illegally dispossess 
some of them who were declared owners of certain lands. 
He stated that the tribals insisted that the lands be 
demarcated before constructing the compound wall. The 
Superintendent of Police has referred to his meeting held 
on 11th March 2022 with the learned Advocate-General of 
the State, the Collector of the District and the 
Superintendent of Land Records of the District. The 
affidavit further records that the Deputy Superintendent 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 7 of 26 
 
of Land Records agreed to provide staff for carrying out 
demarcation. In paragraphs 9 and 10 of his affidavit, the 
Superintendent of Police stated thus: 
“9. 
If while constructing the aforesaid 
wall 
if 
appropriate 
and 
adequate 
provision for access is made, enabling 
those agriculturists who own and 
possess various parcels of lands that 
are likely to get land locked because of 
the erection of the compound wall, to 
reach 
their 
respective 
agricultural 
lands owned and possessed by them, 
one of the important for obstructions 
to the compound wall, at hand of the 
tribals, will get resolved. 
10. If an assurance is given to the tribals 
who legally own and possess various 
parcels of land that are likely to get 
covered by the proposed erection of the 
compound wall that they are not going to 
dispossessed 
or 
ousted, 
much 
less 
illegally by the erection of the compound 
wall itself, in any view, major reason for 
obstruction 
to 
the 
erection 
of 
the 
compound wall, by the tribals, will 
disappear.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
8. 
On 14th March 2022, Mr Mahesh Ingale, the District 
Superintendent of Land Records, who is a survey officer 
under the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966 (for 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 8 of 26 
 
short, ‘the MLR Code’), filed an affidavit. In paragraph 9 of 
his affidavit, he stated thus: 
“9. 
I say that after the measurement, 
as aforesaid, was carried out and the 
original records maintained by my 
office were verified in that context it 
appears that, there are various lands 
situate within survey number 173 in 
respect of which, as a result of 
proceedings initiated in the Bombay 
Tenants and Agricultural Lands Act, 
various persons have become owners of 
the lands of various pockets that have 
been marked in red colour, in the map, 
which 
has 
been 
produced 
on 
14.03.2022 before this Hon’ble Court. 
There are also certain persons to whom 
the petitioner and others have sold 
small portions of the lands and thus 
these persons have become owners and 
are 
in 
possession 
thereof. 
If 
a 
compound 
wall 
is 
constructed 
as 
desired by the petitioner, the aforesaid 
pieces of land owned by the third 
parties and lawfully possessed by them 
are likely to get land locked. Therefore, 
in my submission, while constructing the 
aforesaid compound wall, appropriate 
arrangements will have to be made to 
provide due access to these lawful owners 
and occupiers of various parcels of lands 
that is likely to be get land-locked on 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 9 of 26 
 
account of the construction of the 
proposed wall.” 
(emphasis added)  
It is pertinent to note that the land bearing survey no. 173 
is a part of the property which is the subject matter of 
Arbitration Petition in which consent terms were filed.  
9. 
The Division Bench did not notice the specific 
contentions raised by both the Government officers and 
did not direct the 1st and 2nd respondents to implead the 
affected tribals as parties. Instead of either directing 
impleadment of the affected parties or dismissing the Writ 
Petition for non-joinder of necessary parties, the Division 
Bench passed an order in terms of the “Minutes of Order” 
dated 16th March 2022 signed by the advocate for 1st and 
2nd respondents and Panel-B counsel representing all 
Government officers including the Superintendent of 
Police, the Collector and Superintendent of Land Records. 
One Sambhaji Kharatmol purported to sign as an advocate 
for interveners. The relevant part of the “Minutes of Order” 
makes interesting reading. Paragraph 2 reads thus: 
“2. 
Mr. 
Kumbhakoni, 
the 
Learned 
Advocate 
General 
for 
the 
State 
of 
Maharashtra, has tendered the plan 
showing the land of Mrs. Meher Khushru 
Patel and Others (Parsi Dairy Farm) S No. 
173/1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,10,15,16,18, S. No. 
55, 61, 200 and 202 Situated at Village – 
Varwada, Taluka – Talasari, Dist. – 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 10 of 26 
 
Palghar. The same is taken on record and 
marked as ‘X’ are stated to belong to third 
parties. However, the survey numbers 
mentioned against serial no. 1. 5. 8 and 
10 to 12 in the legend in the plan marked 
‘X’ are now confirmed by the Petitioners to 
belong to the Petitioners’ firm – Parsi 
Dairy Farm.” 
 
Paragraph 4 notes both the affidavits dated 14th March 
2022, which we have referred to above and records that 
the statements of the said officers were accepted. The 
“Minutes of Order” provides for issuing a direction to the 
survey authorities to carry out the demarcation of the 
boundary and a direction to the police to provide 
protection for carrying out the measurement and 
construction of the compound wall. Clause (iii) of 
paragraph 6 of the “Minutes of Order” reads thus: 
“6.……………………………………………….. 
(i)………………………………………….. 
  
(ii)…………………………………………. 
  
(iii) The 
Construction 
of 
the 
boundary wall as per the order dated 12th 
February 2021 by the Learned Single 
Judge in the Arbitration Petition no. 451 
of 2018, shall be carried out by the 
Petitioners 
simultaneously 
with 
the 
aforesaid 
work 
of 
demarcation 
and 
marking of points. The Petitioners shall 
ensure 
that 
sufficient 
access 
is 
provided for the other owners of land 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 11 of 26 
 
whose 
property 
falls 
within 
the 
confines of the boundary wall in such a 
manner that the dame do not become 
land 
locked 
by 
virtue 
of 
the 
construction of the boundary wall.”  
(emphasis added) 
 
Thus, the fact that the third parties would be affected by 
the construction of the compound wall is noted in the 
“Minutes of Order”. The Writ Petition was disposed of on 
16th March 2022 by a cryptic order directing that the Writ 
Petition stands disposed of in terms of the “Minutes of 
Order” taken on record and marked “X” for identification. 
Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the said order read thus: 
“2. 
The Minutes of the Order are signed 
by the learned Advocate appearing for the 
Petitioners, the Learned AGP appearing 
for Respondent Nos. 1 to 6 and 10 to 12 
along with the Advocate General as well as 
the learned Advocate appearing for the 
Interveners 
/ 
farmers 
– 
Shankar 
Kharpade, 
Raghu 
Kharpade, 
Ganu 
Kharpade, Sadu Kharpade, Sonu Paadvi, 
Pradeep Savji Urade, Ajay Kharpade, 
Suresh Kharvade and Sarita Kharvade 
carrying farming activities on land bearing 
Survey No. 390 (part). 
3. 
The above Writ Petition is disposed 
of in terms of the Minutes of the Order 
dated 16th March, 2022.” 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 12 of 26 
 
Reasons were not recorded for passing an order in terms of 
the ‘Minutes of Order’. A Government counsel signed the 
“Minutes of Order” notwithstanding a clear stand taken in 
the affidavits dated 14th March 2022 filed by the senior 
Government officers who had emphasized that tribals were 
likely to be affected by the construction of the compound 
wall. The Government pleader, as an officer of the Court, 
owed a duty to the Court to point out the requirement of 
impleading necessary parties who were tribals. Even the 
bench did not take note of the admitted fact that third 
parties would have been affected by the construction of the 
compound wall that was permitted to be constructed under 
police protection. The Court ignored the fundamental 
principle that the issue of whether the third parties' 
properties would be landlocked due to the construction of 
the wall could be decided only after hearing the concerned 
parties.  The least the Court could have done was to direct 
that a notice of survey should be issued to the affected 
tribals. Even that was not done.  
10. The present appellants sought a review of this order. 
The contentions raised by them can be briefly stated as 
follows: 
a) Out of 30 review petitioners, review petitioner nos. 
7 to 18 were purportedly shown as interveners in 
the “Minutes of Order”, though they had not 
engaged any advocate; 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 13 of 26 
 
b) The said interveners never met the advocate who 
is shown to have signed the “Minutes of Order” on 
their behalf; 
c) The appellants had rights in respect of the several 
properties which were likely to be adversely 
affected by the construction of the compound wall; 
and 
d) The elementary principles of natural justice were 
not followed before permitting the construction of 
a compound wall under police protection. 
A Division Bench dismissed the review petition by the 
impugned order. The Court held that if, according to the 
appellants, 
any 
illegality 
has 
been 
committed, 
notwithstanding the observations made in the order dated 
16th March 2022, the appellants can raise an appropriate 
grievance before the appropriate forum.  
11. The order dated 9th February 2024 passed by this 
Court on the present appeal reads thus: 
“We direct the State Government to 
comply with the earlier order of filing the 
affidavit. The said affidavit to be filed 
within a period of two weeks from today.  
The minutes of the order on page 63 of the 
Petition record the statement of the 
owners, which reads thus:  

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 14 of 26 
 
“iii...The Petitioners shall ensure 
that sufficient access is provided for 
the other owners of land whose 
property falls within the confines of 
the boundary wall in such a manner 
that the same do not become land 
locked by virtue of the construction 
of the boundary wall.”  
We direct the petitioners before the 
High Court who are parties here to file an 
affidavit stating the names of the owners 
who are referred to in Clause iii of the 
minutes of the order. The said affidavit to 
be filed within a period of two weeks. 
 The learned counsel appearing for 
the petitioners will take instructions 
whether the petitioners want to stand by 
the allegations made by him against the 
sitting Judges of the High Court, the 
members of the Bar and the learned 
Advocate General.  
List on 11th March, 2024.” 
 
A further order dated 11th March 2024 was passed, which 
reads thus: 
“ 
Notwithstanding the order dated 9th 
February, 2024, the petitioners before the 
High Court have chosen not to disclose 
the names of the parties who are referred 
in the Minutes of the Order. 
  
The 
learned 
senior 
counsel 
appearing for the petitioners before the 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 15 of 26 
 
High Court and the learned counsel 
appearing for the State assure the Court 
that within two weeks from today, they 
will place on record the names and other 
details of the parties who are referred in 
clause (3) of the Minutes of the order 
dated 16th March, 2022. The learned 
senior 
counsel 
appearing 
for 
the 
petitioners before the High Court seeks 
time to file a proper affidavit in terms of 
the order dated 9th February, 2024.  
List on 5th April, 2024.” 
 
An affidavit dated 24th March 2024 was filed by the 1st and 
2nd respondents in compliance with the orders dated 9th 
February 2024 and 11th March 2024. They stated that a 
boundary wall was constructed between March 2022 and 
June 2022 after the survey was carried out. They stated 
that the compound wall had been built in such a manner 
that no person was landlocked or in any manner 
inconvenienced. In the affidavit, they have given details of 
the land owned by the Parsi Dairy Farm (the land subject 
matter of Arbitration Petitions) and the names of several 
persons who are owners of the lands adjacent to the land 
of the Parsi Dairy Farm. It is claimed in the affidavit that 
notwithstanding the construction of the compound wall, 
the owners of the adjacent lands continue to enjoy 
unhindered and unfettered access to their respective land.  
 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 16 of 26 
 
SUBMISSIONS IN BRIEF 
12. The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that 
the impugned order passed based on the “Minutes of 
Order” is completely illegal and vitiated by the non-joinder 
of necessary parties. The learned senior counsel for the 1st 
and 2nd respondents and the learned counsel for the State 
defended the impugned order by submitting that no one 
has been prejudiced due to the construction of the 
compound wall.  
13. During the earlier hearings, we had repeatedly 
suggested to the learned senior counsel appearing for the 
1st and 2nd respondents that the only proper course would 
be to remand the Writ Petition with a direction to implead 
persons claiming to be affected by the construction of the 
compound wall, as it seems to be an admitted position that 
several persons are likely to be affected by the construction 
of the compound wall in terms of the orders passed in the 
Writ Petition. However, the 1st and 2nd respondents did not 
accept the suggestion. Hence, we are called upon to decide 
this appeal on merits.  
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
14. We 
have 
already 
quoted 
what 
the 
Deputy 
Superintendent of Police and the Superintendent of Land 
Records stated in their respective affidavits filed on 14th 
March 2022. In so many words, both of them stated on 
oath that the tribals who own and possess various parcels 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 17 of 26 
 
of adjacent lands were likely to be affected by the 
construction of the compound wall. In fact, in paragraph 
9 of his affidavit, the District Superintendent of Land 
Records, who is the survey officer of the district under the 
MLR Code in categorical terms stated that if the compound 
wall is constructed as desired by the petitioners in the Writ 
Petition (1st and 2nd respondents herein), pieces of lands 
owned and lawfully possessed by third parties are likely to 
get landlocked.  
15. Now, we come to the “Minutes of the Order”. 
According to the latest affidavit of the 1st and 2nd 
respondents, several tribals claim to be owners of the 
lands adjacent to those claimed by the 1st and 2nd 
respondents. The “Minutes of the Order” refers to the 
officers' affidavits. Sub-clause (iii) of clause 6, which we 
have quoted above, records that the writ petitioners shall 
ensure that sufficient access is provided for the other 
owners of the land whose property falls within the confines 
of the boundary wall in such a manner that their lands do 
not become landlocked. Even assuming that advocate 
Sambhaji Kharatmol was authorized by nine interveners 
to sign, the fact remains that several other owners or 
occupants of the lands likely to be affected by the 
compound wall were not impleaded as parties to the 
petition.  Without even adverting to the factual aspects 
brought on record by two responsible Government officers 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 18 of 26 
 
in their affidavit dated 14th March 2022, the Division 
Bench mechanically passed an order in terms of the 
“Minutes of the Order” and disposed of the Writ Petition. 
Now we have a scenario where, under police protection, 
survey work and construction of the compound wall have 
been carried out by 1st and 2nd respondents. An illegality 
has been allowed to be perpetrated under the protection of 
the police. As noted earlier, even the Government counsel 
did not perform his duty by submitting before the Court as 
an officer of the Court about the failure to implead the 
necessary parties.  
PRACTICE OF PASSING ORDERS IN TERMS OF 
“MINUTES OF ORDER” FILED BY THE ADVOCATES 
16. Now, we deal with the concept of “Minutes of Order”, 
which is peculiar only to the Bombay High Court. This 
Court, in the case of Speed Ways Picture Pvt. Ltd. and 
Anr. v. Union of India and Anr.1 had an occasion to 
consider the practice of passing orders in terms of 
“Minutes of Order”. Paragraphs 5 and 6 of the said decision 
reads thus: 
“5. The basis upon which the review 
petition was decided is, in our view, not 
correct. Counsel for the appellants and 
the respondents put it in writing that a 
judgment of this Court and a Full Bench 
judgment of the High Court covered the 
 
1   (1996) 6 SCC 705 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 19 of 26 
 
matter. The writ petition in that High 
Court could, therefore, not succeed. This 
could have been orally stated and 
recorded by the Court. As a courtesy to 
the Court, the practice of long standing 
is to put statements such as these in 
writing in the form of “minutes of 
order” which are tendered and on the 
basis of which the Court passes the 
order: “Order in terms of minutes”. The 
signatures of counsel upon “minutes of 
order” are intended for identification 
so as to make the order binding upon 
the parties' counsel represented. An 
order in terms of minutes is an order in 
invitum, not a consent order. It is 
appealable and may be reviewed. 
6. It would be a different matter if the 
order of the court was passed on “Consent 
Terms”, i.e., on a statement above the 
signatures of counsel which expressly 
stated it was “by consent”. The order of the 
court in such event would read: “Order in 
terms of consent terms.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
17. As the order passed in terms of the “Minutes of 
Order” is an order in invitum, when a document styled as 
"Minutes of Order” signed by the advocates for the parties 
is tendered on record, the Court must first examine 
whether it will be lawful to pass an order in terms of the 
“Minutes of Order”. The Court must consider whether all 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 20 of 26 
 
necessary parties have been impleaded to the proceedings 
in which the “Minutes of Order” have been filed. The Court 
must consider whether third parties will be affected by the 
order sought in terms of the “Minutes of Order”. If the 
Court is of the view that necessary parties were not 
impleaded, the Court ought to allow the petitioner to 
implead them. On the failure of the petitioner to implead 
them, the Court must decline to pass an order of disposing 
of the petition in terms of the “Minutes of Order”. The 
reason is that an order of the Court passed without 
hearing the necessary parties would be illegal. The Court 
must remember that though the parties may say that they 
have agreed to what is recorded in the “Minutes of Order”, 
the order passed by the Court based on the “Minutes of 
Order” is not a consent order. It is an order in invitum. 
Only if the Court is satisfied that an order in terms of the 
“Minutes of the Order” would be legal, the Court can pass 
an order in terms of the “Minutes of Order”. While passing 
an order in terms of the “Minutes of Order”, the Court must 
record brief reasons indicating the application of mind. 
18.  For the convenience of the Court and as a matter of 
courtesy, the advocates draft “Minutes of Order” 
containing what could be incorporated by the Court in its 
order. Perhaps this practice was evolved to save the time 
of the Court. The advocates who sign and tender the 
“Minutes of Order” have greater responsibility. Before they 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 21 of 26 
 
sign the “Minutes of the order”, the advocates have an 
important duty to perform as officers of the Court to 
consider whether the order they were proposing will be 
lawful.  They cannot mechanically sign the same. After all, 
they are the officers of the Court first and the mouthpieces 
of their respective clients after that.   
19. Even if parties file consent terms, while accepting the 
consent terms in terms of Rule 3 of Order XXIII of the Code 
of Civil Procedure Code, 1908, the Court is duty-bound to 
look into the legality of the compromise. The Court has the 
jurisdiction to decline to pass a consent order if the same 
is tainted with illegality. However, an order passed by the 
Court in terms of compromise recorded in the consent 
terms is a consent order which will not bind the persons 
who were not parties to the consent terms unless they were 
claiming through any of the parties to the consent terms.  
20. We summarise our conclusions regarding the 
concept of the “Minutes of Order” as follows: 
a) The practice of filing “Minutes of Order” prevails in 
the Bombay High Court. As a courtesy to the Court, 
the advocates appearing for the parties to the 
proceedings tender “Minutes of Order” containing 
what could be recorded by the Court in its order. The 
object is to assist the Court; 
b) An order passed in terms of the “Minutes of Order” 
tendered on record by the advocates representing the 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 22 of 26 
 
parties to the proceedings is not a consent order. It is 
an order in invitum for all purposes; 
c) Before tendering the “Minutes of Order” to the Court, 
the advocates must consider whether an order, if 
passed by the Court in terms of the “Minutes of 
Order,” would be lawful. After “Minutes of Order” is 
tendered before the Court, it is the duty of the Court 
to decide whether an order passed in terms of the 
“Minutes of Order” would be lawful. The Court must 
apply its mind whether the parties who are likely to 
be affected by an order in terms of the “Minutes of 
Order” have been impleaded to the proceedings; 
d) If the Court is of the view that an order made in terms 
of the “Minutes of Order” tendered by the advocates 
will not be lawful, the Court should decline to pass 
an order in terms of the “Minutes of Order”; and 
e) If the Court finds that all the parties likely to be 
affected by an order in terms of the “Minutes of 
Order” are not parties to the proceedings, the Court 
will be well advised to defer passing of the order till 
all the necessary parties are impleaded to the 
proceedings. 
FINDINGS ON FACTS OF THE CASE 
21. In the facts of the case, the senior district-level 
officials of the State had stated on oath that the 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 23 of 26 
 
construction of the compound wall, in respect of which 
relief was sought in the Writ Petition, would affect the 
rights of several third parties. However, the Court 
completely ignored the same. Even in clause 6 (iii) of the 
“Minutes of Order”, there was enough indication that the 
compound wall, if not appropriately constructed, would 
affect the rights of owners of the other lands. Therefore, it 
was the duty of the Court to have called upon the 1st and 
2nd respondents to implead the persons who were likely to 
be affected. The 1st and 2nd respondents could not have 
pleaded ignorance about the names of the concerned 
parties as they have referred to the owners of the other 
lands in the “Minutes of Order". However, the Division 
Bench of the High Court has failed to make even an 
elementary enquiry whether third parties will be affected 
by the construction of the compound wall under police 
protection. Hence, the order dated 16th March 2022 passed 
in the Writ Petition in terms of the “Minutes of Order” is 
entirely illegal and must be set aside. The Writ Petition will 
have to be remanded to the High Court to decide the same 
in accordance with the law.  
22. The construction of the compound wall is complete; 
therefore, while remanding the Writ Petition to the High 
Court, we must clarify that the construction will be subject 
to the final decision in the Writ Petition. After remand, the 
High Court will have to call upon the 1st and 2nd 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 24 of 26 
 
respondents to implead necessary parties to the petition. 
If required, the Court must decide who the necessary 
parties to the petition are. It will always be open for the 
appellants to apply for impleadment. While determining 
who the necessary and proper parties are, the appellants' 
application will have to be considered by the High Court. 
It follows that on the failure of the 1st and 2nd respondents 
herein to implead the necessary parties, the High Court 
will be well within its power to dismiss the Writ Petition 
and pass an order of restoration of status quo ante by 
directing demolition of the compound wall. 
23. Hence, we pass the following order: 
a) We set aside the order dated 16th March 2022 in 
Writ Petition No. 2584 of 2022 and the order dated 
20th July 2023 in the Review Petition and restore 
Writ Petition No. 2584 of 2022 to the file of the 
High Court;  
b) We direct the Registrar (Judicial) of the Bombay 
High Court to list the restored Writ Petition before 
the roster Bench on the first day of re-opening of 
the Court after the ensuing summer vacation. The 
parties to the appeal shall appear before the Court 
on that day as they will not be entitled to any 
further notice of the Writ Petition; 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 25 of 26 
 
c) It will be open for the appellants to apply for 
impleadment in the Writ Petition on all available 
grounds;  
d) After the remand, the High Court will decide 
whether all the necessary parties likely to be 
affected by the construction of the compound wall 
in terms of the “Minutes of Order” were impleaded 
as party respondents. While doing so, the case of 
the petitioners shall also be considered; 
e) If the Court concludes that the 1st and 2nd 
respondents had not impleaded necessary parties 
to the Writ Petition and within a reasonable time if 
the 1st and 2nd respondents fail to implead the 
necessary parties, the High Court will be free to 
follow the logical course of dismissing the Writ 
Petition. While doing so, the High Court will have 
to order the restoration of the status quo ante by 
directing the demolition of the compound wall; and  
f) After the 1st and 2nd respondents implead all the 
necessary parties to the Writ Petition, the same 
shall be decided finally in accordance with law. We 
clarify that construction of the compound wall 
made by the 1st and 2nd respondents shall be 
subject to the final outcome of the restored 
petition. Therefore, if the construction is found to 
be illegal or if it is found that it adversely affects 

 
  
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4786 OF 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
     Page 26 of 26 
 
the rights of the third parties, the High Court may 
pass an order of demolition of the compound wall 
or a part thereof. 
24. The appeal is partly allowed on the above terms.  
25. A copy of this judgment will be immediately 
forwarded to the Registrar (Judicial) of the Bombay High 
Court. 
26. We record the assurance of the learned counsel 
appearing for the appellants that they will not press 
complaints filed by them against the sitting or former 
Judges of the Bombay High Court, members of the Bar and 
the learned Advocate-General. We clarify that if the 
appellants have commenced any proceedings based on the 
complaints, the same shall stand disposed of.  
 
 
……………………..J. 
(Abhay S. Oka) 
 
 
 
……………………..J. 
(Ujjal Bhuyan) 
New Delhi; 
April 30, 2024.