2024 INSC 354
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1121 OF 2016 
 
COMMISSIONER OF CENTRAL EXCISE  
BELAPUR  
 
 
 
 
 
     APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
JINDAL DRUGS LTD. 
 
 
           RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 788-790 OF 2022  
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
UJJAL BHUYAN, J. 
 
 
 
Heard learned counsel for the parties.  
2. 
 
Issue raised in the present batch of appeals is identical. 
Therefore, the civil appeals were heard together and are being 
disposed by this common judgment and order.  
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.04.30
16:11:41 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
 
 
3. 
 
However, Civil Appeal No. 1121 of 2016 was argued as 
the lead appeal. Therefore, for the sake of convenience, we would 
refer to the facts of this appeal. 
4. 
 
This is an appeal by the revenue under Section 35L 
(1)(b) of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (referred to hereinafter as 
‘the Central Excise Act’) against the order dated 16.04.2015 
passed by the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate 
Tribunal, West Zonal Bench at Mumbai (briefly ‘CESTAT’ 
hereinafter) in Appeal No. E/86389/13-Mum. (Jindal Drugs 
Limited Vs. Commissioner of Central Excise, Belapur). 
4.1.  
By the impugned order dated 16.04.2015, CESTAT has 
allowed the appeal filed by the respondent holding that as per Note 
3 to Chapter 18 of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (referred to 
hereinafter as ‘the Central Excise Tariff Act’), the activity of 
labelling amounted to manufacture and hence the activity of the 
respondent fell within the ambit of the definition of manufacture 
as per the said Note. Therefore, the respondent was eligible for 
availing the cenvat credit of the duty paid by its Jammu unit and 
was also eligible for rebate on the duty paid by it while exporting 
its goods. CESTAT further held that there was no suppression by 

3 
 
 
 
the respondent and, therefore, the extended period of limitation 
was not available to the department (revenue). 
5. 
 
Though facts lie within a narrow compass, nonetheless 
it is necessary to make a brief reference to the relevant facts for a 
proper perspective.  
5.1.  
Respondent is engaged in the business of exporting 
cocoa butter and cocoa powder. Its factory at Jammu 
manufactures cocoa butter and cocoa powder. Respondent has 
another unit located at Taloja in the State of Maharashtra. Cocoa 
butter and cocoa powder manufactured at Jammu are received by 
the respondent’s unit at Taloja. In the Taloja unit, respondent 
affixed two labels on two sides of the packages of the said goods 
received from its Jammu factory and cleared the same for export 
on payment of duty and claimed rebate of the duty paid on the 
exported goods. Further, respondent availed cenvat credit of the 
duty paid on those two goods at the time of clearance from 
Jammu. Respondent also imported cocoa butter and cocoa 
powder from China and Malaysia, receiving the same in its factory 
at Taloja. 
5.2.  
The factory of the respondent at Taloja was visited by 
officials of the appellant and it was found that the respondent was 

4 
 
 
 
only putting labels on the goods brought from Jammu as well as 
on the imported goods. As the labels were already fixed on the 
boxes containing the two goods, additional labels affixed by the 
respondent did not amount to manufacture since affixing of 
additional label did not enhance the marketability of the goods 
which were already marketable. 
5.3.  
In such circumstances, appellant issued show cause 
cum demand notice dated 09.10.2012 to the respondent to show 
cause as to why the activity of labelling undertaken by the 
respondent on the product cocoa butter received from the Jammu 
unit and also on the imported goods should not be held as 
activities not amounting to manufacture in terms of Note 3 to 
Chapter 18 of the Central Excise Tariff Act. It was alleged that 
respondent had wrongly availed cenvat credit amounting to Rs. 
23,02,53,752.00 for the period from June, 2008 to July, 2012 
which should not be demanded and recovered under Rule 14 of 
the Cenvat Credit Rules read with Section 11A(1) of the Central 
Excise Act (since renumbered as Section 11A (4) of the Central 
Excise Act with effect from 08.04.2011). It was further alleged that 
rebate claims amounting to Rs. 13,22,30,368.00 for the period 
from June, 2008 to July, 2011, were erroneously sanctioned and 

5 
 
 
 
utilised by the respondent which should not be demanded and 
recovered under Section 11A(1) of the Central Excise Act (since 
renumbered as Section 11A(4) of the Central Excise Act with effect 
from 08.04.2011). Respondent was also called upon to show 
cause as to why interest at the appropriate rate on the cenvat 
credit wrongly availed of and utilised as determined and 
demanded should not be recovered from it under the provisions 
of Rule 14 of the Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004 read with Section 
11AB of the Central Excise Act (now Section 11AA of the said Act 
with effect from 08.04.2011). 
5.4.  
Respondent submitted written reply dated 08.02.2013 
denying all the allegations made in the show cause notice. 
5.5.  
 Following adjudication, the appellant vide the order in 
original dated 25.02.2013 held that cocoa butter received by the 
respondent at its Taloja unit from its unit at Jammu as well as 
the imported cocoa butter were already packed in corrugated 
boxes of 25Kg each. The exported cocoa butter was also in 
corrugated boxes of 25Kg each. Hence no repackaging activity was 
undertaken either on the goods received from the Jammu unit or 
on the imported cocoa butter. Appellant further held that the 
goods received from the Jammu unit already contained a label. 

6 
 
 
 
On receipt of the goods at Taloja, two more labels on two sides of 
the carton were affixed. Appellant concluded that it was a case of 
additional labelling and not relabelling. Therefore, such labelling 
at Taloja did not amount to manufacture. After holding that Rule 
3 of the Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the 
Cenvat Credit Rules’) allows cenvat credit only in a case where the 
process undertaken amounts to manufacture, respondent held 
that the process of labelling undertaken by the respondent in its 
unit at Taloja did not amount to manufacture. Therefore, the 
cenvat credit availed of by the respondent was contrary to Rule 3 
of the Cenvat Credit Rules. Hence, the credit of Rs. 
23,02,53,752.00 availed of by it was irregular which was liable to 
be recovered under Rule 14 of the Cenvat Credit Rules read with 
Section 11A(1) of the Central Excise Act. Further, appellant held 
that the respondent had already utilised part of the irregular 
credit availed of and claimed rebate of Rs. 13,22,30,368.00 during 
the period from June, 2008 to July, 2012. As the credit availed of 
was irregular, the rebate sanctioned was erroneous since the 
respondent was not entitled to take the credit and to utilize the 
same. Therefore, it was held that the erroneous refund of Rs. 
13,22,60,368.00 was liable to be recovered on which the 

7 
 
 
 
respondent was also liable to pay interest under Section 
11AB/Section 11AA of the Central Excise Act. Proceeding further, 
appellant held that respondent had suppressed the information 
from the department that it was only undertaking labelling 
activity at its Taloja unit which did not amount to manufacture. 
Thus, with the intention to avail irregular credit, respondent had 
suppressed the information and claimed that the process 
undertaken by its unit at Taloja amounted to manufacture. 
Therefore, there was suppression of material fact with the intent 
to avail irregular credit. Hence, the respondent was held liable to 
pay penalty equivalent to the irregular credit availed of under Rule 
15(2) of the Cenvat Credit Rules read with Section 11AC of the 
Central Excise Act. Thereafter, appellant passed the following 
order: 
1. credit of Rs. 23,02,53,752.00 (Rupees twenty 
three crores two lakhs fifty three thousand seven 
hundred fifty two only) was wrongly availed and 
therefore demanded under provisions of Rule 14 
of Cenvat Credit Rules read with Section 11A(4) 
(erstwhile Section 11A(1) of the Central Excise 
Act. 
2. rebate of Rs. 13,22,30,368.00 (Rupees thirteen 
crores twenty two lakhs thirty thousand three 

8 
 
 
 
hundred sixty eight only) sanctioned during the 
period from June 2008 to July 2012 was 
erroneous as the duty on the exported goods were 
paid by utilizing the regularly availed credit 
which was not eligible to the assessee. Hence, the 
same 
was 
demanded 
under 
Section 
11A(1)/Section 11A(4) of Central Excise Act. 
3. interest at the appropriate rate under Rule 14 of 
the Cenvat Credit Rules read with Section 11AA 
(erstwhile Section 11AB) of the Central Excise 
Act, was demanded on the irregular credit 
availed/erroneous rebate sanctioned. 
4. penalty of Rs. 23,02,53,752.00 (Rupees twenty 
three crores two lakhs fifty three thousand seven 
hundred fifty two only) under the provisions of 
Rule 15(2) of Cenvat Credit Rules read with 
Section 11AC(1)(a) of the Central Excise Act was 
imposed. However, the penalty would be reduced 
to 25% of the above amount if the assessee paid 
the duty determined along with interest within 30 
days of receipt of the order. The reduced penalty 
of 25% of the amount of duty so determined 
would be available to the assessee only if the 25% 
of the penalty was also paid within the period of 
thirty days of receipt of the order. Otherwise, the 
penalty imposed under Section 11AC(1)(a) equal 
to the duty amount would remain. 

9 
 
 
 
5.6.  
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order in original passed by 
the appellant, respondent preferred appeal before the CESTAT. 
After hearing the matter, both Judicial Member and Technical 
Member passed separate orders on 05.01.2015.  
5.7.  
In his order, the Judicial Member recorded that the 
respondent after clearing the goods in its Jammu unit, received 
the same in its factory at Taloja and claimed the benefit of 
notification No. 56/2002-CE(NT) dated 14.11.2002. As per the 
said notification, the Jammu unit was entitled to refund of the 
duty paid whereas the Taloja unit was also entitled to avail cenvat 
credit of the duty paid by the Jammu unit. Judicial Member noted 
that after receiving the goods at Taloja, respondent affixed two 
labels on the packages on two different sides and thereafter 
exported the goods. After referring to the show cause cum demand 
notice, the Judicial Member opined that the only issue for 
consideration was whether the labelling/re-labelling or putting 
additional labels on the containers in the Taloja unit amounted to 
manufacture in terms of Note 3 to Chapter 18 of the Central 
Excise Tariff Act. As per Note 3, in relation to products of Chapter 
18, labelling or re-labelling of containers or repacking from bulk 
packs to retail packs or the adoption of any other treatment to 

10 
 
 
 
render a product marketable to the consumer shall amount to 
manufacture. Judicial Member opined that all the three activities 
are independent and separate. Note 3 to Chapter 18 is a deeming 
provision whereby the processes mentioned therein, if carried out, 
would amount to manufacture though there may not be any 
actual manufacture. In the above context, the Judicial Member 
held that activities of labelling or re-labelling of containers without 
enhancing marketability amounted to manufacture. A reading of 
Note 3 would clearly indicate that the activity of labelling or re-
labelling of the containers amounted to manufacture. Thereafter, 
it was held that both the Jammu unit and the Taloja unit of the 
respondent are separate units. Therefore, it could not be said that 
respondent was availing double benefit. The Taloja unit had 
rightly availed the cenvat credit of the duty paid at Jammu as well 
as the countervailing duty paid for the imported goods. 
Consequently, the rebate claim was correctly sanctioned to the 
respondent. Therefore, the respondent had rightly availed of the 
cenvat credit. Since the issue, whether the activity of labelling or 
re-labelling amounted to manufacture as per Note 3 to Chapter 
18 of the Central Excise Tariff Act was related to interpretation of 
a 
statutory 
provision, 
question 
of 
any 
suppression 
or 

11 
 
 
 
misrepresentation of fact by the respondent did not arise. Hence, 
question of getting the benefit of any extended period of limitation 
by the appellant for issuing show cause cum demand notice and 
thereafter passing adjudication order did not arise. In the above 
background, the Judicial Member set aside the order in original 
dated 25.02.2013. 
5.8.  
However, the Technical Member did not agree with the 
view taken by the Judicial Member. He held that no manufacture 
had taken place in the Taloja unit of the respondent both in 
respect of the goods manufactured at Jammu as well as the 
imported goods. He further held that the activity of the respondent 
in bringing the goods from Jammu to Taloja and thereafter to affix 
labels so as to avail the benefit of Note 3 to Chapter 18 was not 
known to the department. Therefore, it was a case of 
misrepresentation of facts with the intent to avail rebate 
fraudulently. Consequently, the extended period of limitation was 
available to the department. That being the position, the Technical 
Member was of the view that the order in original was justified on 
all counts and dismissed the appeal. 
5.9.  
In view of the difference of opinion between the Judicial 
Member and the Technical Member, the matter was placed before 

12 
 
 
 
the President of CESTAT to nominate a third member to resolve 
the same. 
5.10.  
Thereafter, pursuant to the order passed by the 
President, the matter was placed before the third member to 
resolve the difference of opinion between the Judicial Member and 
the Technical Member.    
5.11.  
After hearing the matter, the third member passed the 
order dated 16.04.2015. Referring to Note 3 to Chapter 18, both 
prior to 01.03.2008 and post 01.03.2008, the third member noted 
that Parliament has consciously substituted the word ‘or’ in place 
of ‘and’ appearing between the words ‘labelling or re-labelling of 
containers’ and ‘repacking from bulk packs to retail packs’ to 
widen the scope of Note 3. According to the third member, any one 
of the three activities referred to in Note 3 i.e. (i) labelling or re-
labelling, (ii) packing or repacking from bulk and retail packing 
and (iii) adoption of any other treatment to render a product 
marketable would be deemed to be manufacture. He held that the 
activity undertaken by the respondent at its Taloja unit i.e. 
labelling amounted to manufacture. He negated the stand of the 
revenue 
that 
labelling 
or 
re-labelling 
should 
enhance 
marketability of the goods as contrary to the plain reading of Note 

13 
 
 
 
3. He, therefore, agreed with the Judicial Member that the activity 
of labelling undertaken by the respondent is covered by Note 3 to 
Chapter 18 of the Central Excise Tariff Act which amounts to 
manufacture. Further, he also recorded a finding of fact based on 
the evidence on record that respondent had repacked the 
imported cocoa butter in new cartons and exported them after 
labelling. He thus fully concurred with the view expressed by the 
Judicial Member that the activity of labelling undertaken by the 
respondent amounted to manufacture in terms of Note 3 to 
Chapter 18 of the Central Excise Tariff Act. He also concurred with 
the view expressed by the Judicial Member that there was no 
suppression or misrepresentation of material fact by the 
respondent. Therefore, the extended period was not available to 
the revenue. He further held that the respondent is entitled to the 
credit of the duty paid on the goods received from the Jammu unit 
as well as credit of the countervailing duty paid on the imported 
goods. That being the position, he held that the credit and the 
rebate were rightly availed of by the respondent. Question of 
refund of the same did not arise. Further, no penalty can be 
imposed on the respondent. 

14 
 
 
 
5.12.  
Following the opinion rendered by the third member, 
the matter was placed before the two-member Bench of CESTAT. 
In view of the majority decision, the appeal filed by the respondent 
was allowed vide the order dated 16.04.2015. 
6. 
 
This Court by the order dated 08.02.2016 had issued 
notice. Thereafter, the appeal was admitted on 18.11.2019. 
7. 
 
Respondent has filed counter affidavit supporting the 
order of CESTAT and has sought for dismissal  of the appeal. In 
response thereto, appellant has filed rejoinder affidavit reiterating 
the grounds urged in the appeal. 
8. 
 
Learned counsel for the appellant has laid great 
emphasis on the fact that the activity undertaken by the 
respondent at its Taloja unit i.e. putting labels on the two sides of 
the cartons which were already labelled at Jammu, cannot be said 
to be a manufacturing activity. Note 3 to Chapter 18 of the Central 
Excise and Tariff Act cannot be read in a manner to hold that the 
activity of labelling amounted to manufacture. Learned counsel, 
therefore, contended that appellant was fully justified in passing 
the order in original. CESTAT was divided in its opinion as to 
whether such an activity could be termed as manufacture. The 
Technical Member had given good reasons as to why such an 

15 
 
 
 
activity cannot be called manufacture while differing from the view 
taken by the Judicial Member. The third member has erred in 
concurring with the view taken by the Judicial Member. He, 
therefore, submits that the order passed by the CESTAT by way 
of majority should be interfered with and order in original should 
be restored. 
9. 
 
Mr. V. Sridharan, learned senior counsel in his brief 
submission referred to Note 3 to Chapter 18 of the Central Excise 
Tariff Act, both prior to its amendment with effect from 
01.03.2008 and post amendment. According to him, Parliament 
has consciously replaced the word ‘and’ by the word ‘or’ and post 
amendment, it is clear that the activity of labelling or re-labelling 
amounted to manufacture. He, therefore, supports the decision of 
the CESTAT and seeks dismissal of the appeal. 
10.  
Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties 
have received the due consideration of the Court. 
11.  
The core issue to be considered is whether the activity 
of labelling carried out by the respondent amounts to 
manufacture? While contention of the appellant is that the same 
does not amount to manufacture, on the other hand according to 

16 
 
 
 
the respondent, as per Note 3 to Chapter 18 of the Central Excise 
Tariff Act, the above activity amounts to manufacture. 
12.  
The Central Excise Act which has since got subsumed 
in the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 was enacted to 
provide for levy of central duties of excise on goods manufactured 
or produced in India and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
12.1.  
Section 2 is the definition clause. ‘Manufacture’ is 
defined in Section 2(f) which reads as follows: 
“manufacture” includes any process,- 
(i) 
incidental or ancillary to the completion of a 
manufactured product; 
(ii) 
which is specified in relation to any goods in the 
Section or Chapter notes of the First Schedule to 
the Central Excise Tariff Act (5 of 1986) as 
amounting to manufacture; or 
(iii) which, in relation to the goods specified in the 
Third Schedule, involves packing or repacking of 
such goods in a unit container or labelling or re-
labelling of containers including the declaration 
or alteration of retail sale price on it or adoption 
of any other treatment on the goods to render the 
product marketable to the consumer, 

17 
 
 
 
and the word “manufacturer” shall be construed 
accordingly and shall include not only a person who 
employs hired labour in the production or manufacture 
of excisable goods, but also any person who engages in 
their production or manufacture on his own account; 
 
12.2.  
Therefore, the word ‘manufacture’ includes any process 
which is incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufacture 
product; any process which is specified in relation to any goods in 
the Section or Chapter notes of the First Schedule to the Central 
Excise Tariff Act as amounting to manufacture; or any process 
which in relation to the goods specified in the Third Schedule 
involves packing or repacking of such goods in a unit container or 
labelling or re-labelling of containers including the declaration or 
alteration of retail sale price on it or adoption of any other 
treatment on the goods to render the product marketable to the 
consumer. 
13.  
Chapter 18 of the Central Excise Tariff Act deals with 
cocoa and cocoa preparations. Note 3 to Chapter 18 has 
undergone amendment with effect from 01.03.2008. Prior to the 
amendment, Note 3 to Chapter 18 read as under: 
In relation to products of this Chapter, labelling 
or re-labelling of containers and repacking from 

18 
 
 
 
bulk packs to retail packs or the adoption of 
any other treatment to render the product 
marketable to the consumer, shall amount to 
‘manufacture’. 
 
13.1.  
Post 01.03.2008, Note 3 now reads as follows: 
In relation to products of this Chapter, labelling 
or re-labelling of containers or repacking from 
bulk packs to retail packs or the adoption of 
any other treatment to render the product 
marketable to the consumer, shall amount to 
‘manufacture’. 
 
13.2.  
Thus by way of the amendment, the word ‘and’ has 
been replaced by the word ‘or’ between the expressions ‘labelling 
or re-labelling of containers’ and ‘repacking from bulk packs to 
retail packs’. Prior to 01.03.2008, the legislative intent was quite 
clear. The process to constitute manufacture should either be 
labelling or re-labelling of containers and repacking from bulk 
packs to retail packs. This process was construed to be one whole. 
In other words, the activity should not only include labelling or re-
labelling of containers but the same should relate to repacking 
from bulk packs to retail packs. This was one activity. The other 
activity was adoption of any other treatment to render the product 
marketable to the consumer. Therefore, the legislature was quite 

19 
 
 
 
clear that if either of the two processes were followed, the same 
would amount to manufacture. 
13.3.  
However, after the amendment i.e. post 01.03.2008, 
Note 3 has undergone a change as indicated above. Now because 
of substitution of the word ‘or’ in place of the word ‘and’ between 
the two expressions ‘labelling or re-labelling of containers’ and 
‘repacking from bulk packs to retail packs’, the earlier composite 
process of labelling or re-labelling of containers and repacking 
from bulk packs to retail packs has been split up into two 
independent processes. Labelling or re-labelling of containers is 
one process and repacking from bulk packs to retail packs has 
now become another process. Therefore, instead of two activities, 
Note 3 now contemplates three activities. As pointed out above, 
the composite activity of labelling or re-labelling of containers and 
repacking from bulk packs to retail packs has been split up into 
two activities i.e. labelling or re-labelling of containers is one and 
the other is repacking from bulk packs to retail packs. The other 
activity of adopting any other treatment to render the product 
marketable to the consumers remains the same. Therefore, Note 
3, post amendment, as it exists today contemplates three different 

20 
 
 
 
processes; if either of the three processes are satisfied, the same 
would amount to manufacture. The three processes are: 
(i)  labelling or re-labelling of containers; or 
(ii)  repacking from bulk packs to retail packs; or 
(iii) the adoption of any other treatment to render the    
product marketable to the consumer. 
 
 
13.4.  
As already observed above, if any one of the above three 
processes is satisfied then the same would amount to 
manufacture. 
14.  
We have already noticed the definition of ‘manufacture’ 
in the Central Excise Act. Any one of the processes indicated in 
Note 3 to Chapter 18 of the Central Excise Tariff Act would come 
within the ambit of the definition of ‘manufacture’ under Section 
2(f)(ii) of the Central Excise Act. 
15.  
There is no factual dispute as to the activity carried out 
by the respondent at its Taloja unit. Whether the goods are 
brought from the Jammu unit or are imported, those are 
relabelled on both sides of the packs containing the goods at the 
Taloja unit of the respondent and thereafter, introduced in the 
market or sent for export. In terms of Note 3 to Chapter 18, this 
process of re-labelling amounts to ‘manufacture’. 

21 
 
 
 
16.  
That being the position, we are of the considered 
opinion that the view taken by CESTAT is the correct one and no 
case for interference is made out. This is because all the other 
aspects are related and hinges upon the core issue. Resultantly, 
the impugned order of CESTAT dated 16.04.2015 is affirmed and 
the appeal by the revenue is dismissed. 
17.  
In view of the above decision, Civil Appeal Nos. 788-790 
of 2022 would also stand dismissed. 
18.  
However, there shall be no order as to costs. 
                                            
………………………………J    
[ABHAY S. OKA] 
 
 
 
.……………………………J. 
   [UJJAL BHUYAN] 
 
NEW DELHI;  
APRIL 30, 2024.