2024 INSC 349
NON-REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.493 OF 2022
JASOBANTA SAHU
  ...APPELLANT (S)
 
VERSUS
STATE OF ORISSA
     ...RESPONDENT (S)
J U D G M E N T
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.
The  present  criminal  appeal  challenges  the  final
judgment and  order dated  17th July, 2014, passed by the
Orissa High Court, Cuttack (“High Court” for short), in Jail
Criminal  Appeal  No.  213  of  2000.  Vide  the  impugned
judgment, the High Court affirmed the judgment dated 26th
August,  2000,  passed  by  the  Sessions  Judge,  Dhenkanal
(“Trial Court” for short) in Sessions Trial No. 2-A of 1989,
whereby the appellant was convicted under Section 302 of
the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“IPC” for short) and sentenced
to imprisonment for life. 
1
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.05.01
11:18:14 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2.
The facts, in brief, leading to the present appeal, are as
follows: 
2.1
On  9th October,  1988,  the  Police  Station  Jarapada,
Angul, District Dhenkanal, received oral information at 3 PM
from Hemanta Kumar Sahu (PW-4) and Maheswar Pradhan,
to the effect that Laxminarayan Sahu has been murdered. On
the  basis  of  the  oral  information,  the  Office  In-Charge,
Jarapada Police Station (PW22) (“I.O.” for short), registered a
First Information Report (Exhibit-1) vide Crime No. 40(3) of
1988 for the offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC.
On registration of  the  FIR,  the  I.O.  visited  the  spot,  held
inquest over the dead body of the deceased, examined the
witnesses, seized the wearing apparels of the appellant as
well as the deceased. The I.O. also arrested the appellant on
13th October,  1988,  and  thereafter,  the  appellant  led  to
discovery of weapon of offence, i.e., knife (M.O.1). He also
made  a  query  to  the  doctor  and  sent  the  incriminating
articles for chemical examination.
2

2.2
The prosecution case in a nutshell is that the appellant
and deceased were having strained relationship on account of
property  dispute.  Laxminarayan  Sahu  (deceased),  one
Brajabandhu  Sahu  and  Bhagaban  Sahu  (PW-14)  were
brothers.  The  appellant  is  the  son  of  Brajabandhu  Sahu.
There was a partition of family properties between the three
brothers and their mother, in which their mother was allotted
Ac.1.80  decimals  of  land  for  her  maintenance.  She  was
staying most of the times either with PW14-Bhagaban Sahu
or with the deceased. After her death, about four years prior
to  the  date  of  occurrence,  Brajabandhu  Sahu  wanted  to
divide the landed property belonging to his mother, which
was objected to by the other brothers. Disputes thus arose
between Brajabandhu Sahu and the appellant on one side
and the other two brothers on the other side. This led to
litigations  between  the  parties.  On  9th October,  1988,
Laxminarayan Sahu (deceased) went to his land to plough,
the appellant reached there at about 12:30 PM and stabbed
3

Laxminarayan Sahu repeatedly by using a knife, as a result
of which Laxminarayan Sahu died at the spot. 
2.3
On  completion  of  investigation,  the  I.O.  submitted  a
chargesheet  against  the  appellant.  Since  the  case  was
exclusively triable by the Sessions Court, the same came to
be  committed  by  the  Sub-Divisional  Judicial  Magistrate,
Angul,  District  Angul  in  G.H.  Case  No.  509  of  1988  vide
Jarapada P.S. Case No. 40 dated 9th October, 1988, to the
Sessions Court. 
2.4
Charge was framed against the appellant.  The appellant
pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. The prosecution
examined twenty-two (22) witnesses to bring home the guilt
of the accused. The prosecution also exhibited twenty-one
(21)  documents.  It  also  proved  seven  (7)  material  objects
including the knife (M.O.1). The defence did not examine any
witness. Three (3) documents were admitted into evidence for
defence. The appellant completely denied the allegations. He
claimed that due to the land disputes, a case has been filed
to harass him and to grab his land. At the conclusion of the
4

trial, the Trial Court, vide judgment and order dated 24th
August, 1991, held that it is not a case under Section 302
IPC, but a case under Section 304 Part-I of IPC. Since the
appellant was in custody for nearly three years at that time,
considering his young age and close relationship with the
deceased, the Trial Court held that a sentence of three years
will meet the ends of justice. Accordingly, the appellant was
sentenced to undergo R.I. for three years, with the period in
custody to be set off against the period of conviction. 
2.5
Aggrieved by the judgment and order of the Trial Court,
the informant (PW4-Hemanta Kumar Sahu) filed a Criminal
Revision bearing No. 365 of 1991 under Section 401 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, challenging the judgement
and order of the Trial Court acquitting the appellant of the
charge  under  Section  302  IPC.  Vide  judgment  and  order
dated 14th January, 2000, the learned Single Judge of the
High Court partly set aside the judgment of the Trial Court,
so far as it relates to the acquittal of the appellant of the
charge under Section 302 IPC. The matter was remitted back
5

to the Trial Court for consideration on the limited aspect as
to whether the offence committed comes within the purview
of  Section  302  IPC  and  the  Trial  Court  was  directed  to
dispose of the matter by the end of April, 2000. 
2.6
On the matter being remitted back, the Trial Court vide
judgment and order dated 26th August 2000, came to the
conclusion that the appellant committed the murder of the
deceased.  In  result,  the  appellant  was  convicted  under
Section 302 IPC and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment,
with the period undergone to be set off as per law. 
2.7
Aggrieved by the judgment and order of the Trial Court
dated  26th August  2000,  the  appellant  filed  Jail  Criminal
Appeal  No.  213  of  2000  before  the  High  Court.  Vide  the
impugned judgment, the High Court dismissed the appeal
and confirmed the conviction under Section 302 IPC and the
sentence of life imprisonment.  Since the appellant was on
bail, the High Court while dismissing the appeal, directed the
appellant to surrender to undergo the remaining period of
sentence. 
6

2.8
Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal arises by
way of special leave.  This Court vide order dated 25th March
2022, granted leave.
3.
We have heard Shri T.N. Tripathi, learned counsel for
the  appellant  and  Shri  Suvendu  Suvasis  Dash,  learned
counsel for the respondent-State.
4.
Shri T.N. Tripathi submits that the appellant has been
falsely implicated in the crime.  He submits that the so-called
eyewitnesses  i.e.,  PW1-Kirtan  Sahu  and  PW2-Nagendra
Pradhan cannot be said to be the eyewitnesses.  He further
submits that the so-called extra-judicial confession given by
the  accused-appellant  to  PW6-Purna  Chandra  Pradhan
cannot be said to be voluntary, cogent and trustworthy so as
to base the conviction on the same.  He therefore submits
that the appeal deserves to be allowed.
5.
Mr. Suvendu Suvasis Dash, on the contrary, submits
that both the Trial Court and the High Court, on a correct
appreciation of evidence, have found that the prosecution has
7

proved the case beyond reasonable doubt and as such, no
interference is warranted in the concurrent findings.  
6.
Since it is not disputed that the death of the deceased is
a homicidal, it will not be necessary to refer to the medical
evidence.
7.
From the perusal of the evidence on record, it would
reveal that the Trial Court and the High Court have basically
rested the conviction on the basis of the testimonies of PW1-
Kirtan  Sahu,  PW2-Nagendra  Pradhan  and  PW3-Hrusikesh
Sahu.  The High Court has also believed the extra-judicial
confession  made  by  the  accused-appellant  to  PW6-Purna
Chandra Pradhan, who is a co-villager.  
8.
Another incriminating circumstance that the Trial Court
and the High Court have found against the appellant is with
regard to the recovery of knife, as proved in the depositions of
PW5-Harihar Behera and PW20-Choudhury Sasmal.
9.
PW1-Kirtan Sahu who is the co-villager, stated that on
the day of the incident, he had gone to Puranpani Jungle to
bring some fuel. When he was returning from the Jungle, he
8

heard the shouts of “Marigali, Marigali, Rakhyakara”.  He
went near the place from where the shouts were coming. He
saw the accused-appellant assaulting the deceased with the
knife.  He stated that the occurrence had taken place at a
distance of about 40-50 feet from that road. He then shouted.
When the accused-appellant looked at him, he ran away out
of fear.  He stated that he narrated the said incident to some
of his co-villagers, who had already come to know about the
said incident.  
10.
In his cross-examination, he had admitted that after he
had heard the sound of “Marigali, Marigali’, he did not run to
the  spot,  but  he  walked  over  the  distance  as  usual.   He
further stated that when he came to the spot, his first vision
was on the accused and the deceased and at that time the
deceased  was  trying  to  get up  and  was  falling  again  and
again. In his cross-examination, he had also admitted that
his statement was recorded by the I.O. after 4-5 days from
the date of the occurrence.  
9

11.
PW2-Nagendra Pradhan in his evidence also stated that,
on the date of the incident, he was coming from Dimirihuda
Taila.  He heard the noise of “Marigali Marigali, Jasobanta
Mote Maripakauchhi Kia Keanth Achhe Mote Rakhyara”.  He
found the deceased Laxminarayan was lying on the ground
and the accused-appellant was sitting on him and stabbing
him with a knife on his chest.  He also saw that the hands of
the accused-appellant were stained with blood. Seeing this,
out of fear, he went away from the place and came to the
village.  He also stated that when he reached the village, he
came to know that the villagers had already come to know
about the incident.  
12.
From the evidence of PW2, it would also reveal that,
after the incident, on the next morning, he went to his Taila
where there was a garden consisting of many fruit bearing
trees and vegetables.  He returned to his village after 5 days.
He further stated that after he returned from his Taila to his
village, he voluntarily appeared before the I.O. and gave his
statement.  
10

13.
He further admitted in his cross-examination that his
co-villagers knew that he was in his Taila for 5 days. The
village  school  where  the  I.O.  was  camping  would  be  at  a
distance of 500 yards from his house.  
14.
PW2 had admitted that his son was working as Havildar
in P.T.C. Angul.   PW2 stated that though after seeing the
incident he had shouted, but none came to the spot.  He
further stated that he was alone at the spot. 
15.
A serious doubt arises from the conduct of PW1 and
PW2 as to whether they were really the eyewitnesses to the
incident or not.   
16.
PW1 admitted that his statement was recorded 4-5 days
after the date of the incident. 
17.
The  conduct  of  PW2  is  more  abnormal,  particularly,
when his son himself is a Police Havildar.  After seeing such a
gruesome incident, he chose to go to his Taila, which is about
2 miles away from the place of occurrence, and he returned
11

from his Taila after 5 days and voluntarily gave his statement
to the I.O.    PW2 stated that the villagers were knowing that
he was in his Taila, which is 3 miles away from his village.  If
that be so, then the I.O. should have visited his Taila when
the villagers were specifically knowing that that this witness
(PW2) is an eyewitness.  The I.O.’s not going to his Taila to
record his statement casts a serious doubt on the question as
to whether this witness (PW2) was really an eyewitness or
not.  
18.
It is further to be noted that there are inconsistencies in
the evidence of PW1 and PW2.  PW1 stated in his evidence
that when he saw the incident he was alone at the spot, away
from about 40-50 feet.  He stated that he shouted, but when
the accused-Appellant looked at him, he ran away out of fear.
19.
Similarly, PW2 also stated in his evidence that when the
incident  happened,  he  was  alone  there.   He  stated  that
although  he  raised  hullah  calling  “Kis  Kaunthi  Achha
Rakhyakar”, but none came to the spot hearing his hullah.  
12

20.
In view of  these  inconsistencies,  it  is  doubtful  as  to
whether both these witnesses have actually witnessed the
incident or not.  
21.
The  I.O.  in  his  evidence  stated  that  all  the  4
eyewitnesses  had  not  come  to  him  voluntarily  to  depose
regarding what they had seen about the occurrence.  But he
called them and examined them in connection with the case.
Per Contra, both PW1 and PW2 stated in their evidence that
they were not called by the I.O. but they went voluntarily to
give  their  statement.   The  I.O.  further  admitted  in  his
evidence that both PW1 and PW2 were not available in the
village till 14th October 1988.  The I.O. stated in his evidence
that between 9th and 14th October, 1988, none of the villagers
came  forward  and  told  him  that  they  had  seen  the
occurrence.  However, as stated herein above, PW1 and PW2,
both had deposed that on the same day, they had informed
the  co-villagers  about  the  incident,  but  they  had  been
informed  that  the  co-villagers  had  already  come  to  know
13

about the incident. This fortifies the suspicion regarding the
evidence of PW1 and PW2.  
22.
It is  pertinent  to  note  that  PW15-Satyabadi Pradhan
and PW16-Santosh Pradhan, who were also the eyewitnesses
to the incident, had turned hostile and did not support the
prosecution’s case. 
23.
Insofar as PW3-Hrusikesh Sahu is concerned, he stated
in his evidence that when he was returning after cultivation,
he saw the accused-appellant coming and his hands were
stained with blood. He further stated that on being asked, the
accused-Appellant did not give any reply.  In his examination-
in-chief, he stated that though he asked Chaitan Sahu as to
whether the deceased came to the village and also intimated
him  as  to  how  the  hands  of  the  accused-appellant  were
stained with blood; he admitted in his cross-examination that
he did not intimate this fact to the family members of the
deceased. 
24.
Insofar as PW6-Purna Chandra Pradhan is concerned,
no doubt that he refers to the extra-judicial confession made
14

by the accused-appellant to him to the effect that “Sala Maa
Giha Laxmi Ki Maridei Palei Asiehhi”.  However, on a perusal
of his evidence, it would reveal that his evidence is full of
improvements. 
25.
It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of
this Court in the case of Harbeer Singh vs. Sheeshpal and
others1:
“22. The High Court has further noted
that  there  were  chance  witnesses
whose  statements  should  not  have
been relied upon. The learned counsel
for  the  respondents  has  specifically
submitted  that  PW  5  and  PW  6  are
chance  witnesses  whose  presence  at
the  place  of  occurrence  was  not
natural.
23. The  defining  attributes  of  a
“chance  witness”  were  explained  by
Mahajan,  J.,  in Puran v. State  of
Punjab [Puran v. State of Punjab, (1952)
2 SCC 454 : AIR 1953 SC 459 : 1953
Cri LJ 1925] . It was held that such
witnesses have the habit of appearing
suddenly on the scene when something
is  happening  and  then  disappearing
after  noticing  the  occurrence  about
1 (2016) 16 SCC 418
15

which they are called later on to give
evidence.
24. In Mousam  Singha  Roy v. State  of
W.B. [Mousam  Singha  Roy v. State  of
W.B., (2003) 12 SCC 377 : 2004 SCC
(Cri) Supp 429] , this Court discarded
the evidence of chance witnesses while
observing
 
that
 
certain
 
glaring
contradictions/omissions
 
in
 
the
evidence of PW 2 and PW 3 and the
absence of their names in the FIR has
been  very  lightly  discarded  by  the
courts
 
below.
Similarly, Shankarlal v. State
 
of
Rajasthan [Shankarlal v. State
 
of
Rajasthan, (2004) 10 SCC 632 : 2005
SCC
 
(Cri)
 
579]
 
and Jarnail
Singh v. State
 
of
 
Punjab [Jarnail
Singh v. State of Punjab, (2009) 9 SCC
719  :  (2010)  1  SCC  (Cri)  107]  are
authorities  for  the  proposition  that
deposition of a chance witness, whose
presence  at  the  place  of  incident
remains  doubtful,  ought  to  be
discarded.  Therefore,  for  the  reasons
recorded  by  the  High  Court  we  hold
that  PW  5  and  PW  6  were  chance
witnesses  and  their  statements  have
been rightly discarded.”
26.
The next circumstance on which the Trial Court and the
High Court had placed reliance is with regard to the recovery
16

of the weapon used in the crime.  The prosecution in this
respect relied on the evidence of the I.O. as well as the Panch
witnesses i.e. PW5 and PW20.  
27.
The evidence of the I.O. and the Panch witnesses i.e.,
PW5 and PW20, would reveal that the recovery of weapon was
made  from an open place.   The recovery is  made from  a
Bhalupadi Bush of Naga Sahu Mango Tope of Village Uggi.
As such, much reliance cannot be placed on such recovery.
In any case, the conviction, solely based on such recovery,
would not be tenable.  
28.
In the result, we find that the prosecution has failed to
prove the case beyond reasonable doubt.  The judgment and
order of conviction and sentence as recorded by the Trial
Court and as affirmed by the High Court are not sustainable
in law.  
29.
Consequently, and in the light of above, the appeal is
allowed.  The judgment and order passed by the Sessions
Judge, Dhenkanal dated 26th August 2000 in Sessions Trial
No.2-A of 1989 as well as the judgment and order dated 17th
17

July 2014 passed by the Orissa High Court, Cuttack in Jail
Criminal Appeal No.213 of 2000 is quashed and set aside.
The appellant is acquitted of all the charges charged with.  He
is directed to be set at liberty forthwith, if not required in any
other case.  
…….........................J.       
[B.R. GAVAI]
…….........................J.       
[SANDEEP MEHTA]
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 30, 2024
18