2024 INSC 357
1 
 
Non-Reportable 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2344 of 2024  
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL) NO. 10668 OF 2022) 
 
PRIYANKA JAISWAL  
 
 
 
 
…APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
THE STATE OF JHARKHAND AND OTHERS       …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 J U D G E M E N T 
 
Aravind Kumar, J.  
1. 
Heard. 
2. 
Leave granted 
 
3. 
The complainant/informant is calling in question the order dated 
16.06.2022 passed by the High Court of Jharkhand in Cr.M.P No.1291 of 
2021 whereby the proceedings initiated against respondent Nos. 3 to 8 
herein, for the offences punishable under Sections 323, 498A, 504 and 506 
IPC read with Section 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (hereafter 
referred to as ‘DP Act’) and the non-bailable warrants issued against them 
came to be quashed. 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.04.30
18:10:52 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
 
4. 
Facts in brief leading to filing of this appeal can be crystallised as 
under: 
 
5. 
The marriage between the appellant and the respondent No. 8 came 
to be solemnised under the Special Marriages Act on 05.10.2018 at Kolkata 
and as per the prevalent customs on 18.01.2019 at Jamshedpur. As 
respondent No. 8 was residing at Germany, appellant travelled with her 
husband to Frankfurt-Germany on 03.02.2019. The grievance of the 
appellant was that her father-in-law and mother-in-law (respondent Nos. 3 
and 4) were complaining of not having brought sufficient dowry and she was 
abused for the said reason. Though she had returned to India for short stay, 
she is said to have travelled back to Germany and on returning back she 
found her husband behaving strangely. It is the further claim of the appellant 
that she was badly treated and was abused by the respondent Nos. 6 and 7 
when she went back to her in-laws’ house at Kolkata and she was forcibly 
restrained from entering marital home and was physically assaulted. She 
also claimed that once she entered her matrimonial home, she was locked 
inside and with the help of her parents she could come out of captivity; she 
also contended that she was compelled to leave her marital house both at 
Kolkata and Frankfurt. In this background, appellant lodged a complaint on 
04.03.2021 (Annexure P-1) with the respondent No.2 which resulted in FIR 
No.68 of 2021 being registered against respondents 3 to 8 herein. 

3 
 
 
6. 
 On account of notices issued to the respondent Nos.3 to 8 by the 
Jurisdictional Police (respondent No.2) for the purposes of investigation, 
having not been answered, resulted in the Magistrate issuing non-bailable 
warrants against all the 6 accused namely respondent Nos.3 to 8 herein. They 
were unsuccessful in their attempts to seek cancellation of non-bailable 
warrants and respondent Nos.3 and 4 herein came to be arrested on 
17.06.2021. Respondents 3 to 7 filed several applications for grant of bail 
and were partly successful. 
  
7. 
For quashing of the non-bailable warrants issued by the 
Jurisdictional Magistrate and also for quashing of the entire proceedings a 
petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘Cr.P.C’) came to be filed in Cr.M.P No.1291 of 
2021. The High Court by the impugned order quashed the proceedings 
primarily on the grounds of (i) respondent Nos.3 and 4 herein were arrested 
without following the due process of law; (ii) the allegations made in the 
complaint are omnibus; and, (iii) that the Court of Jamshedpur does not have 
jurisdiction. Hence, the informant/complainant (wife) has filed this appeal.  
 
8. 
We have heard the learned Advocates appearing for both the parties. 
 

4 
 
9. 
It is the contention of the Smt. Anjana Prakash, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing for the appellant, that the High Court has committed a 
serious error in quashing the proceedings, that too on the premise that there 
is non-compliance of Section 41A of Cr.P.C. and even assuming for a 
moment that there was non-compliance, that itself would not result in the 
proceedings itself being quashed and at the most the non-bailable warrants 
issued against accused could have been quashed. Hence, she would contend 
that the High Court erred in quashing the entire proceedings. She would 
further contend that on a meaningful reading of the complaint it would 
clearly disclose the offence being made out and as such the High Court ought 
not to have interfered with the pending investigation and the High Court 
should have restrained itself from nipping the proceedings at the bud. She 
would further contend that, when the Trial Court has passed a well-reasoned 
order assuming the jurisdiction, the High Court could not have quashed the 
FIR on the ground of territorial jurisdiction. She would draw the attention of 
the Court to the complaint lodged by the appellant which had resulted in the 
FIR being registered against respondent Nos.3 to 8 herein to contend that 
allegation made therein would disclose the offence and conducting of a mini 
trial at this preliminary stage by the High Court was impermissible. She 
would further contend that the High Court erroneously applied the principles 
laid down by this Court in the matter of Rupali Devi V. State of Uttar 
Pradesh & Ors., (2019) 5 SCC 384, wherein it has been clearly held that 

5 
 
when wife takes shelter after being thrown out of matrimonial home and 
starts residing with her relatives, the complaint lodged from the jurisdiction 
where she resides, would also be ‘having jurisdiction’ which principle has 
been followed in the subsequent Judgments and this aspect has been lost 
sight off by the High Court. She would submit that the High Court has 
dwelled into the merits of the allegations made in the complaint at a pre-trial 
stage, where even chargesheet had not been filed and it was at the nascent 
stage of investigation and as such the exercise undertaken by the High Court 
was beyond its jurisdiction. She would contend that the High Court cannot 
conduct ‘a mini trial’, at the stage of deciding the prayer for quashing of the 
proceedings. Hence, by relying upon the following Judgments, she prays for 
the impugned order to be set aside and prays for allowing of the appeal: 
i. 
State Of Haryana vs. Bhajan Lal, 1992 supp(1) SCC 335  
ii. 
Rupali Devi V. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., (2019) 5 SCC 384  
iii. 
Ruhi v. Anees Ahmed and Ors., 2020 SCC OnLine SC 1308  
iv. 
Nitika v. Yadwinder Singh and Ors., (2020) 17 SCC 484  
v. 
State of U.P. v. Akhil Sharda, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 820  
 
10. 
Shri H.K. Chaturvedi, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of 
respondent Nos. 3 to 8 would support the impugned order and he would 
contend that the High Court has rightly quashed the proceedings essentially 
on 3 grounds namely, (i) want of service of notice on respondent Nos.3 to 8 

6 
 
issued under Section 41A of Cr.PC.; (ii) Jamshedpur Court not having the 
territorial jurisdiction; (iii) and the allegations in the complaint being general 
in nature and omnibus against the respondent Nos.3 to 8 herein. Elaborating 
his submissions on these 3 issues and by supporting the impugned judgment, 
he would contend that, this Court in Satender Kumar Antil v. CBI reported 
in (2021) 10 SCC 773 has clearly held that when there is violation of Section 
41A of Cr.P.C., proceedings should not be continued. He would contend that 
respondent Nos.3 and 4 were illegally arrested from Kolkata without serving 
notice under Section 41A of Cr.P.C. though the purported notices issued to 
them had been returned with an endorsement ‘door lock’ and taking note of 
these utter violations, the High Court has rightly quashed the proceedings. 
He would submit that alleged incident that has taken place even according 
to the allegations made in the complaint was at Kolkata or at Germany and 
that the appellant (wife) is currently residing at Germany and the husband 
(respondent No.8) having already obtained divorce from the Family Court, 
Frankfurt, Germany, the Court at Jamshedpur did not possess jurisdiction. 
By placing reliance on the documents filed before the High Court and 
contending that the correspondence made by the appellant-wife itself would 
disclose that she is a resident of Germany and the allegations made in the 
complaint would also disclose that the alleged incidents had occurred either 
at Germany or at Kolkata and these facts narrated in detail in the petition 
filed under Section 482 having not been denied by her had resulted in High 

7 
 
Court holding Jamshedpur Court not having jurisdiction. Hence, it was 
submitted that, it is too late in the day to contend that she is a resident of 
Jamshedpur and the finding of the High Court that she is a resident of 
Frankfurt, Germany and no part of cause of action had arisen within the 
jurisdiction of Court at Jamshedpur is correct. While substantiating and 
supporting the impugned order whereunder the proceedings have been 
quashed on the ground of the allegations in the complaint being general and 
omnibus against respondent Nos.3 to 8, learned counsel would draw the 
attention of this Court to various portions of the complaint to buttress his 
argument that they are generic, omnibus, lacking details and as such by 
relying upon the following Judgments, he prays for dismissal of the appeal: 
i. Arnesh Kumar Vs. State of Bihar (2014) 8 SCC 273  
ii. Satender Kumar Antil v. CBI, (2021) 10 SCC 773  
iii. Social Action Forum for Manav Adhikar and Anr. Versus 
Union of India, Ministry of Law and Justice & Ors., (2018) 
10 SCC 443  
iv. Rupali Devi V. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., reported in 
(2019) 5 SCC 384  
v. 
Abhishek v. State of M.P., 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1083  
vi. 
Priyanka Mishra v. State of M.P., 2023 SCC OnLine SC 978  
vii. 
Kahkashan Kausar v. State of Bihar, (2022) 6 SCC 599 
viii. 
Geeta Mehrotra v. State of U.P., (2012) 10 SCC 741 

8 
 
ix. 
Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand, (2010) 7 SCC 667 
x. 
Bhaskar Lal Sharma v. Monica, (2009) 10 SCC 604 
xi. 
Neelu Chopra v. Bharti, (2009) 10 SCC 184 
xii. 
State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 
xiii. 
R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab, 1960 SCC OnLine SC 21 
 
11. 
Having heard learned advocates for the parties and on perusal of the 
case papers we are of the considered view that following point would arise 
for our consideration: 
 Whether the impugned order suffers from any infirmity 
calling for our interference? 
OR 
Whether the High Court was correct and justified in 
quashing the FIR No.68 of 2021 registered by 
Jamshedpur Police Station for the offences punishable 
under Sections 323, 498A, 504 and 506 IPC read with 
Sections 3 and 4 of the DP Act against respondent Nos. 
3 to 8 herein?  
 
12. 
As already noticed herein above, from the arguments raised on 
behalf of respondent Nos.3 to 8 that essentially the High Court quashed the 
proceedings against respondent Nos.3 to 8 on 3 grounds namely (i) 
respondent Nos.3 and 4 were arrested without following the due process of 
law, (ii) the allegations made in the complaint is omnibus, (iii) that the Court 
of Jamshedpur is not having any jurisdiction.  

9 
 
In so far as the primary contention or primary ground on which the High 
Court interfered for quashing the proceedings, is based on the ground that 
allegations made in the complaint are omnibus or general in nature, requires 
to be considered at the outset for the purposes of outright rejection for 
reasons indicated hereinbelow. 
 
 
13. 
We say so for reasons more than one. This Court in catena of 
Judgments has consistently held that at the time of examining the prayer for 
quashing of the criminal proceedings, the court exercising extra-ordinary 
jurisdiction can neither undertake to conduct a mini trial nor enter into 
appreciation of evidence of a particular case. The correctness or otherwise 
of the allegations made in the complaint cannot be examined on the 
touchstone of the probable defence that the accused may raise to stave off 
the prosecution and any such misadventure by the Courts resulting in 
proceedings being quashed would be set aside. This Court in the case of 
Akhil Sharda1 held to the following effect: 
“28. Having gone through the impugned judgment and order 
passed by the High Court by which the High Court has set aside 
the criminal proceedings in exercise of powers under Section 482 
Cr.P.C., it appears that the High Court has virtually conducted a 
mini trial, which as such is not permissible at this stage and while 
deciding the application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. As observed 
and held by this Court in a catena of decisions no mini trial can 
be conducted by the High Court in exercise of powers under 
Section 482 Cr.P.C. jurisdiction and at the stage of deciding the 
application under Section 482 Cr.P.C., the High Court cannot get 
 
1 2022 SCC Online SC 820 

10 
 
into appreciation of evidence of the particular case being 
considered.” 
 
 
14. 
In the background of rival contentions raised with regard to there 
being no specific allegation against each of the accused for the offences 
punishable under Sections 323, 498A, 504 and 506 IPC read with Section 3 
and 4 of the DP Act requires to be examined in the background of allegations 
contained in the complaint itself. Hence, we extract the relevant paragraphs 
of the complaint which would clearly suggest or indicate the allegation of 
harassment regarding the demand of dowry being made against the mother-
in-law, father-in-law as also the husband viz., respondent 3, 4 and 8 is clear 
and they are to the following effect: 
“(8) On 10.02.2019, I went to my In-laws place at Kolkata after 
my In-laws asked me to come over at Kolkata, where my mother-
in-law Meena Devi and father-in–law Mahesh Chaudhary have 
stated sarcastically that you haven’t brought anything in dowry, 
they also stated that your mother father have promised us to give 
50 lakhs cash, one car and one flat in Kolkata reason being your 
parents have to give this. 
(14) My Mother-in Law and Father-in-Law along with the whole 
family started the same misbehaviour with me and for the greed 
of dowry slowly they harassed me. Once my mother-in-law 
pushed me and I has a collusion with the wall. In another incident 
she (i.e. my mother-in-law) stated to me that why don’t I die? Her 
aggression raised upon my silence and she choked my neck and 
stated if you don’t die by your own then I will kill you and all this 
incident took place in the presence of my father-in-law and my 
brother- in-law Prem Kant Shekhar with their agreement. My 
father-in-law told me if you don’t get the things (i.e. what has 
been asked for) then step out of my home.   
(16) After attending the function xxx Then on 25.01.2020, I went 
with my husband to my in-laws house at Kolkata where my 
mother-in-law and father-in-law again ill-treated me in front of 
my husband and repeated their demand (i.e. Rs. 50 lacs, one car 
and a flat in Kolkata) and even threatened me on those days that 
if these demands are not fulfilled, they will get their son married 

11 
 
to someone else for which a party offering Rs. 1 crore is already 
ready with them.”   
 
The aforesaid averments made in the complaint clearly discloses prima 
facie case made-out against these three accused persons viz, respondents 3, 
4 and 8 herein and correctness or otherwise of the same is a matter which 
requires to be investigated.  The High Court erred in entering into the merits 
of the said allegation by virtually conducting a mini trial which was clearly 
impermissible. Hence, on this ground also the impugned order cannot be 
sustained. 
 
15. 
However, we would take note of the arguments advanced by Shri 
H.K. Chaturvedi, learned Counsel appearing for respondent Nos.3 to 8 
deserves to be partly accepted in so far as respondent Nos.5 to 7 herein are 
concerned, since the allegations made against them are not only omnibus but 
also without any specific allegation of overt act imputed against them. The 
complainant states that when she was being threatened by her mother-in-
law, Shri Prem Kant Shekhar (accused No.5) along with respondents 6 and 
7 were present. The vague allegation in the complaint can be traced at 
paragraphs 14 which would clearly indicate that respondents 5, 6 and 7 were 
present. Not even an allegation of they having indulged in abusing her can 
be found. There is no whisper of any demand of dowry made by them and 
as such the impugned order deserves to be sustained to the extent of quashing 
of the proceedings against respondents Nos.5 to 7. 

12 
 
 
16. 
Turning our attention to the second issue on which the High Court 
proceeded to quash the proceedings namely on the ground that no part of the 
offence has taken place at Jamshedpur and the allegations made in the 
complaint itself disclosing that the alleged offence had taken place either at 
Germany or at Kolkata requires to be considered for the purposes of 
rejection. A plain reading of the complaint would clearly indicate that the 
appellant having been driven out of her matrimonial home had been residing 
at her father’s residence namely paternal home i.e. Jamshedpur and in 
paragraph 22 of the complaint, she clearly states to the following effect: 
“(22) That day at my In-laws xxx outside the house. In this 
manner my mother father took me back to my home at 55 
Jamshedpur and since then I am at my house at Jamshedpur and 
sometimes I go to meet my mother- father at my mother- father’s 
home at Ghodaling (Chandil).” 
                                        (Emphasis supplied by us) 
 
She has also stated that marriage had taken place on 18.01.2019 at 
Jamshedpur.  
  
17. 
The aforesaid averments made in the complaint would suffice to 
hold that the appellant having been driven out of her matrimonial home 
continued to reside at her parental home and as such the court at Jamshedpur 
had jurisdiction. Taking note of these aspects, the learned Magistrate by 
order dated 07.04.2022 (Annexure P-16) has rightly arrived at the 
conclusion that the court at Jamshedpur was having jurisdiction. It would be 
apposite to extract the findings recorded by learned Magistrate and any 

13 
 
elaboration of reasoning on this aspect would only burden this Judgment and 
as such we only extract the said findings: 
“A bare perusal xxx jurisdiction. From perusal of the complaint 
petition filed by the complainant/applicant it transpires that the 
complainant namely Priyanka Jaiswal has mentioned the present 
and permanent resident of Flat No. Orient-2, R-631, Anantara, 
Ashiyana, Pardih, PO & PS Mango, Town-Jamshedpur, District 
East Singhbhum, Jharkhand. In para 7 of the complaint petition it 
has been mentioned by the applicant that after registration of their 
marriage social marriage was solemnized on 18.01.19 at Citi Inn, 
Jamshedpur within the jurisdiction of this court according to the 
Hindu rites and rituals. (However the applicant has not filed any 
document in support of the fact that her marriage was solemnized 
on 18.01.19 at Citi Inn, Pardih Jamshedpur). Due to the extent of 
the address mentioned in the complaint petition it has been 
mentioned that the same is concerned with PO & PS Mango. The 
petition (in complaint petition) also bears the affidavit which also 
shows that the applicant/complaint namely Priyanka Jaiswal is 
present & permanent resident of Flat No. Orient-2, R-631, 
Anantara, Ashiyana Pardih, PO & PS Mango, Town-Jamshedpur, 
District East Singhbhum, Jharkhand. Copy of the Aadhar Card 
also is available/attached case record shows that Priyanka Jaiswal 
address shown as Saraikela-Kharsawan but the same merely is not 
conclusive. The respondent has filed a copy of affidavit of asset 
and liabilities for non-agrarian deponent filed by the complainant 
before the Ld. Principal Judge, Jamshedpur in Original 
Maintenance case no.149/2021, which also shows that the 
applicant Priyanka Jaiswal, D/o Mr. Pradeep Kumar Jaiswal is the 
resident of Sendweg, 127, 60316 Frankfurt Am main Germany & 
permanent resident of Flat No. Orient-2, R-631, Anantara, 
Ashiyana, Pardih, PO & PS Mango, Town- Jamshedpur, District 
East Singhbhum, Jharkhand. Though the said document has been 
filed by the respondent but an inference can be drawn that the 
applicant resides within the territorial jurisdiction of this court 
what else is required in when it has been shown that the applicant 
is permanent resident of Mango and the same has been 
substantiate also (emphasis supplied earlier). Apart from that the 
object of the domestic violence Act it is be considered that the 
legislature has provided the women covered under the Act with 
such wide option to institute a case against unscrupulous person 
with an intent that women may opt for the place which best suited 
for their convenience, comfort and accessibility. Therefore, this 
court do not find any merit in the petition filed by the a/respondent 
U/S 27 of the Act. 
Accordingly petition stands disposed of as rejected.” 
 

14 
 
The findings recorded by the High Court being contrary to the factual aspects 
narrated in the complaint, cannot be accepted and accordingly it is set aside.  
 
18. 
For the reasons afore-mentioned, we allow this appeal in part and set 
aside the order of quashing passed against respondent Nos.3, 4 and 8 and 
affirm the order of quashing of the proceedings passed against respondent 
Nos.5 to 7.   
 
19. 
Pending application(s), if any, stands consigned to records. 
 
 
 
…….………………….J. 
 (B.R. Gavai) 
 
 
…….………………….J. 
 (Aravind Kumar) 
 
 
…….…………………. J. 
 (Sandeep Mehta) 
New Delhi, 
April 30, 2024