2024 INSC 352
1
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 5569-5570  OF 2024
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS.1717-1718 OF 2020) 
SWAMI VEDVYASANAND JI MAHARAJ (D)  
THR LRS. 
             
…APPELLANT(S)
Versus
SHYAM LAL CHAUHAN & ORS.
      …RESPONDENT(S)
        
ORDER
          Leave granted.
2.
The present appeals arise out of an order in a pending Second Appeal
before the High Court of Judicature at Patna. The necessary facts for
our consideration are as follows: 
3.
Respondent Nos.1 to 4 were plaintiffs in a civil suit where Swami
Shivdharmanand  Ji  Maharaj  @  Deo  Shankar  Tiwary  (hereinafter
referred to as ‘Swami Shivdharmanand’) was one of the defendants.
It was a title suit seeking declaration regarding the  suit property
which is situated in Bihar.  The suit was dismissed by the Trial Court
on 26.03.1991.  The First Appellate Court allowed the appeal and
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2024.04.30
15:43:18 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
decreed  the  suit.  Consequently,  the  defendant  Swami
Shivdharmanand filed a second appeal, which is still pending before
the Patna High Court. 
      Meanwhile the defendant, who had filed the second appeal
passed away on 20th March, 1999.  There were two claimants, or
successors of the “Gaddi” of Swami Shivdharmanand, who sought
substitution  in  place  of  Swami  Shivdharmanand  in  the  Second
Appeal.   These  were  (a)  Swami  Triyoganand  Ji  Maharaj  @  Ram
Narayan Bind (hereinafter referred to as ‘Swami Triyoganand) and (b)
Swami Satyanand Ji Maharaj @ Ramjee Singh (hereinafter referred to
as ‘Swami Satyanand’) who is respondent no.6 in the present appeal.
4.
Initially, Patna High Court directed the Trial Court to conduct an
enquiry in the matter as laid down under Rule 5 of Order 22 of Civil
Procedure Code, for the purpose of substitution.  The Trial Court did
its enquiry and submitted the report before the Patna High Court,
where   the  findings  were  that  Swami  Satyanand  (i.e.,  present
respondent No.6) is the Legal Representative (hereinafter referred to
as ‘LR’) of Swami Shivdharmanand and is liable to be substituted as
the appellant before the High Court. Objections were filed to the said
report by the other party, which is the predecessor-in-interest of the
appellant before this Court.   The Patna High Court instead of giving a
decision based on the report and the objections, passed an order on

3
24.02.2009, allowing both the parties (Swami Satyanand and Swami
Triyoganand) to be substituted as LRs to Swami Shivdharmanand.
This order of the Patna High Court came to be challenged by both the
parties (i.e., Swami Triyoganand as well as Swami Satyanand), before
this Court. This court vide order dated 08.02.2018 had set aside the
order of the  High Court and remanded the matter  to Patna High
Court, with directions to consider the report of the Trial Court as well
as the ‘objections of parties’ and then to substitute one of the two
parties  as  appellant,  thereby  holding  that  only  one  of  the  two
claimants should be substituted as appellant/defendant. 
5.
Consequently,  the  High  Court  passed  an  order  dated  30.01.2019
wherein  it  upheld  the  findings  of  the  Trial  Court  on  the  legal
representation and came to the conclusion that Swami Satyanand is
the  LR  of  Swami  Shivdharmanand.  Thus,  Swami  Satyanand  was
ordered to be substituted as the appellant in the pending Second
Appeal. 
6.
Now the fact of the matter is that when this order was passed by the
High Court on 30.01.2019, Swami Triyoganand too passed away on
04.12.2018 and an adjournment was also sought to bring the LR of
Swami  Triyoganand  on  record,  but  the  substitution  could  not  be
done. The Patna High Court went ahead and passed the order in
favour of Swami Satyanand on the ground that the Trial Court in its

4
report has found Swami Satyanand to be the LR of the appellant-
Swami Shivdharmanand, and it is therefore needless to adjourn the
matter any further.
7.
Subsequently, the appellant before us, i.e., Swami Vedvyasanand Ji
Maharaj (hereinafter referred to as Swami Vedvyasanand) moved two
applications before the Patna High Court on 22.02.2019. The first
was to substitute himself in place of Swami Triyoganand, while the
second  was  to  recall  the  order  dated  30.01.2019.  Both  these
applications i.e., IA Nos.7 and 8 of 2019 were taken up and dismissed
vide the impugned order on 19.06.2019. 
8.
In doing so, the reasons given by the High Court are that Trial Court
had conducted an enquiry and concluded that the LR of deceased
Swami  Shivdharmanand  is  Swami  Satyanand.  This  report  was
accepted by the High Court and consequently, Swami Satyanand was
substituted  and  the  claim  of  Swami  Triyoganand  was  dismissed.
Since the claim of the deceased appellant-Swami Vedvyasanand is
based  only  on  the  claim  of  Swami  Triyoganand,  the  High  Court
perhaps did not find it appropriate or necessary to even consider his
substitution  application  and  therefore  rejected  the  substitution
application along with the recall application. Aggrieved by the same,
Swami Vedvyasanand had filed the present appeal.

5
  
We must further note here that the matter as it stands today is
that even Swami Vedvyasanand has passed away and now Sadhavi
Sarojanand, who claims to be the legal heir of Swami Vedvyasanand,
is seeking substitution as appellant in the pending second appeal
before the High Court.
9.
We have heard learned senior Counsel for both the parties at length
and have perused the material on record. 
10.
The only purpose of substitution is the continuation of the case. The
substitution as LR in a case by itself will not give any title in favour of
the person so substituted. It only confers the right to represent the
estate of the deceased in the pending proceedings. In Jaladi Suguna
v. Satya Sai Central Trust, (2008) 8 SCC 521 this limited right was
explained as follows:
“15.  Filing  an  application  to  bring  the  legal
representatives on record, does not amount to
bringing  the  legal  representatives  on  record.
When  an  LR  application  is  filed,  the  court
should  consider  it  and  decide  whether  the
persons  named  therein  as  the  legal
representatives, should be brought on record to
represent the estate of the deceased. Until such
decision by the court, the persons claiming to be
the  legal  representatives  have  no  right  to
represent  the  estate  of  the  deceased,  nor
prosecute  or  defend  the  case.  If  there  is  a
dispute as to who is the legal representative, a
decision should be rendered on such dispute.
Only when the question of legal representative is
determined  by  the  court  and  such  legal

6
representative  is brought  on  record,  can it  be
said  that  the  estate  of  the  deceased  is
represented. The determination as to who is the
legal representative under Order 22 Rule 5 will
of  course  be  for  the  limited  purpose  of
representation of the estate of the deceased, for
adjudication of that case. Such determination for
such  limited  purpose  will  not  confer  on  the
person held to be the legal representative, any
right to the property which is the subject-matter
of the suit, vis-à-vis other rival claimants to the
estate of the deceased.”
11.
Despite the limited purpose of substitution of legal representatives, it
has its significance in as much as it gives the right to the substituted
legal representatives to contest the claim of the deceased.
12.
In the present case, when parties had come before this Court earlier,
this Court vide order dated 08.02.2018 had remitted the matter to the
High Court to decide the question of legal representatives by taking
the report of the Trial Court and the objections into consideration,
after hearing both the sides. After the order of this Court, the High
Court vide order dated 30.01.2019 had upheld the findings of the
Trial Court by concluding that Swami Satyanand is the disciple of
Swami  Shivdharmanand,  while  rejecting  the  claims  of  the  Swami
Triyoganand including the appellant, who claimed their right through
the deceased Swami Triyoganand. Further, the application to recall
the order dated 30.01.2019 moved by the appellant was dismissed
vide impugned order on the ground that the appellant claimed himself

7
to be the disciple of Swami Triyoganand and the High Court has
already decided to reject the claim of Swami Triyoganand.  The High
Court ignored the fact that the order dated 30.01.2019 was passed
after the death of Swami Triyoganand and without considering the
pending substitution application.
13.
In our opinion, the High Court while substituting Swami Satyanand
(Respondent  No.6)  as  the  appellant  and  dismissing  the  claim  of
appellant’s  predecessor-in-interest i.e.,  Swami  Triyoganand  did not
follow the correct procedure. 
 We are not commenting on the merits of the High Court finding on
Swami Satyanand being the rightful representative in the case, we are
only on the procedure followed by the High Court while doing so. 
14. 
Order 22 Rule 5 of CPC reads as follows:
        “Determination of question as to legal representative.
— Where a question arises as to whether any person is or
is not the legal representative of a deceased plaintiff or a
deceased defendant, such question shall be determined
by the Court:
          Provided that where such question arises before an
Appellate Court, that Court may, before determining the
question, direct any subordinate Court to try the question
and to return the records together with evidence, if any,
recorded at such trial, its findings and reasons therefor,
and  the  Appellate  Court  may  take  the  same  into
consideration in determining the question.”

8
This Rule mandates that in case of death of plaintiff or defendant, if a
question  arises  as  to  whether  any  person  is  or  is  not  the  legal
representative of the deceased party, the court shall first determine
such a question. Proviso of this Rule is only an enabling provision
where the appellate court may before deciding the question can refer
the matter to a subordinate court to try and record its findings which
may be considered by the Appellate Court while taking a final call on
the issue.
15.
In the case at hand, the High Court had earlier fallen into error by
substituting  both  the  claimants  as  legal  representatives  of  the
deceased defendant for the purpose of hearing the appeal and thus,
the matter was remanded by this Court vide Order dated 08.02.2018.
We are afraid that the High Court has again misread Rule 5 as well as
our order, as it failed to consider the objections against the Trial
Court report while making its determination on substitution.
16.
In the order dated 30.01.2019, the High Court interprets this Court’s
order as if a request was made to substitute the one who is found to
be the legal representative in the enquiry: 
         “From perusal of the order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, it
appears that the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that the
person who is found to be the legal representative of the
deceased-appellant in an enquiry held under Order 22
Rule 5 should be substituted………”

9
          The High Court did not discuss the evidence in support of the claim
of the Respondent No. 6 nor did it consider the objections of the other
party  on  such  claims.  Moreover,  there  was  already  another
substitution  application  pending  before  the  Court  which  was  not
considered.
17.
Proviso to Rule 5 does not say that the Appellate Court can direct the
subordinate court to decide the question as to who would be the legal
representative, it only provides that the Appellate Court can direct the
subordinate court to try the question and return the records to the
Appellate Court, along with the evidence and the subordinate court
has then to send a report in the form of a reasoned opinion based on
evidence recorded, upon which the final decision has to be made
ultimately  by  the  Appellate  Court,  after  considering  all  relevant
material. While dealing with the report sent by the subordinate court
under Order 22 Rule 5 of CPC, the Appellate Court may consider the
findings of the subordinate court and then give its reasons before
reaching any conclusion. The words ‘the Appellate Court may take the
same  into  consideration  in  determining  the  question’ used  in  the
proviso to Rule 5 gives discretion to the Appellate Court to make its
own separate opinion notwithstanding the opinion of the subordinate
court. The proviso cannot be construed  to be a delegation of the
powers of the Appellate Court to substitute the deceased party, but is

10
merely to assist it in ultimately deciding the issue of substitution.
Thus, the Appellate Court ‘may’ take into consideration the material
referred by the subordinate court under Rule 5 of Order 22, CPC
along with the objections, if any, against the report while deciding on
the substitution of the appellant. 
18.
We, therefore, set aside the order dated 19.06.2019 and 30.01.2019,
and remit the matter back to the High Court for a fresh decision on
substitution. 
We reiterate that we have said nothing on the merit of the relative
claims of the contenders, our concern and our reasons for yet again
sending the matter back were only on the procedure.
19. 
Accordingly, these appeals stand disposed of along with the pending
application(s), if any.
……...……….………………….J.
       
      [A.S. BOPANNA]
      
      ..….....………………………….J.
      
      [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]
New Delhi.
April 30, 2024.