2024 INSC 390
                                           
NON-REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  467/2024
HANNA                                              ………APPELLANT(S)
                                VERSUS
THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                         ………RESPONDENT(S)
WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 468/2024
J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J
1.
The  appellants  are  accused  who  have  been  convicted  by  the
Trial Court for offences punishable under Sections 302 and 323,
read with Sections 149, 147, and 148 of the Indian Penal Code,
1860. The appellants have been sentenced to life imprisonment for
the  offence  of  culpable  homicide  amounting  to  murder  punishable
under Section 302, and separate sentences have been imposed for the
other crimes. All sentences were directed to run concurrently.
2.
The incident took place on 5th October 1995.  PW-1 - Nanhi Bahu
(mother of the deceased - Pappu @ Har Narayan) alleged that the
appellants killed her son.  The allegation is that the appellants
were carrying different weapons, and they assaulted her son.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  467/2024
1
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.05.08
11:43:36 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

3.
None  of  the  material  prosecution  witnesses  except  PW-3
(Santosh), the deceased's brother, supported the prosecution.  The
rest of the alleged eyewitnesses were declared hostile. PW-1 was
also  declared  hostile  as  she  did  not  support  the  prosecution.
However, after her recall, she supported the prosecution.
SUBMISSIONS
4.
The  learned  senior  counsel  appearing  for  the  appellants
(accused no.2 to 6) in Criminal Appeal No.468/2024 pointed out that
PW-1 did not support the prosecution.  However, after a gap of 1½
years, she was recalled, and from her deposition after recall, it
is  apparent  that  the  Police  had  compelled  her  to  depose  in  a
particular  manner.   Inviting  our  attention  to  the  documents  on
record, the learned senior counsel submitted that the evidence of
PW-1 must be disbelieved. Inviting our attention to the evidence of
PW-3,  he  submitted  that  there  are  material  omissions  and
contradictions brought on record in his evidence.  For example, he
pointed out that according to PW-3, he was sitting in his shop when
the assault on the deceased was made.  In the cross-examination, he
stated that he had not shown the shop to the Investigation Officer.
In  the  cross-examination,  he  accepted  that  he  did  not  see  the
incident from his shop.  The learned senior counsel also pointed
out that the mahazar of the site drawn by the Investigation Officer
shows that the shop was not in existence.  He also pointed out that
paragraph  9  of  his  cross-examination  shows  that  the  prosecution
could not establish the alleged motive.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  467/2024
2

5.
The  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  State  submitted  that
while appreciating the evidence of PW-1, it must be remembered that
she is a rustic woman who had lost her son.  He submitted that when
her evidence was earlier recorded, she was under a threat by the
accused. He submitted that after she was recalled, she told the
truth.  His submission is that the Court should not discard the
testimony of PW-1 as, ultimately, it is the testimony of a woman
who has lost her son as a result of a brutal murder.  He also
pointed out that PW-1 is an injured eyewitness and, therefore, her
testimony  should  not  be  discarded.   He  submitted  that  the
Investigation Officer is not highly educated. Consequently, it is
always  possible  that  he  would  make  mistakes  while  drawing  the
mahazar,  showing  the  situation  at  the  site  where  the  offence
occurred. Thus, too much importance should not be attached to the
fact that he has not shown the shop's existence on the map drawn by
him.  Lastly, he submitted that it is a case of brutal murder and
looking at the findings recorded by the Courts; leniency should not
be shown to the appellants.
OUR VIEW
6.
We have carefully examined the material on the Trial Court’s
record, including the testimonies of the witnesses. The Trial Court
has supplied a translated version of the record. PW-1 stepped into
the  witness  box  on  2nd May  1997.   She  did  not  support  the
prosecution. Therefore, she was declared hostile on the prayer made
by the learned Public Prosecutor.  In the cross-examination made by
the  Public  Prosecutor,  she  stated  that  she  did  not  report  the
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  467/2024
3

incident as she was unconscious.  When confronted with the report,
she stated that it was written by one Ramprakash Tiwari at Kotwali
which bears her thumb impression. Surprisingly, the prosecution has
not examined Ramprakash Tiwari as a witness.  What is important is
what she stated in paragraph 6 of her cross-examination made by the
Public Prosecutor. Paragraph 6 reads thus:
“6. These 6 men are detained in jail since 1.5
years. I was having rivalry with them, so I
mentioned their names. I had wrongly mentioned
names  of  accused.  I  did  not  complain  to
anyone that accused are wrongly detained on my
report. It is wrong to say that me and my son
had  taken  Rupees  Eighty  thousand  from  the
accused  and  is  not  stating  correctly  in
collusion with them. It is also wrong to say
that accused present in Court had killed my
son before me with axe, spear and sticks. It
is also wrong to say that when I tried to save
my son, accused Babu assaulted me.”
               (underlines supplied)
7.
As stated earlier, her evidence was recorded on 2nd May, 1997.
After that, there were two curious events.  The first is that Malti
Bai, the widow of the deceased, applied on 11 September 1998 to the
Trial  Court  stating  that  she  was  an  eye-witness,  but  the
prosecution has not included her name in the list of witnesses.
Therefore, she prayed that she may be examined as a witness.  At
this stage, we may note that in the evidence of PW-3, which was
recorded on 19th December 1998, though he claimed that the widow of
the  deceased  was  present  when  the  assault  was  committed,  this
statement is an omission. PW-1, after recall, did not depose about
the presence of the widow of the deceased near the place of the
incident. The prosecution did not take any steps to examine Malti
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  467/2024
4

Bai,  the  widow  of  the  deceased,  who  was  claiming  to  be  an
eyewitness.  Even  the  trial  court  did  not  direct  the  police  to
record  her  statement  and  to  examine  her  before  the  Court.  The
prosecution offered no explanation for not examining Malti Bai as a
witness.  Therefore, the only conclusion that can be drawn is that
the prosecution withheld the evidence of a material witness from
the Court, which may be a ground for drawing an adverse inference
against the prosecution.
8.
The second event is that on 5th February 1999, nearly 01 year
and 09 months from the date on which her deposition was recorded,
PW-1 made an application to the Court stating that her statement
given to the Police was true, but as the accused had threatened to
kill her and PW-3, she did not support the prosecution. She stated
that she desires to tell the truth before the Court.  She filed an
affidavit  in  support  of  her  application  on  the  same  day.   The
Police made no investigation into the alleged threat administered
by  the  accused  to  PW-1.   As  noted  earlier,  in  her  earlier
deposition, in paragraph 6, she stated that the accused continued
to  be  in  jail  for  1½  years.  Her  statement  indicates  that  the
accused  were  in  jail  till  the  day  of  her  deposition.  There  is
another  crucial  aspect.  Two  months  before  PW-1  submitted  the
application, PW-3 was examined before the Court on 19th December
1998.  Though PW-1 claimed that the accused had threatened to kill
PW-3,  surprisingly,  PW-3  did  not  depose  about  any  such  threat
administered to him.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  467/2024
5

9.
After the recall, PW-1 stepped into the witness box.  What she
stated in the witness box is very material.  In paragraph 7, she
stated thus:
“7. My statement was recorded earlier in this
District Court. I had stated correctly at that
time. I was threatened after that. Accused had
threatened  me. I  had  given  statement  after
that. Policemen had threatened me after that
statement  that  why  did  you  give  wrong
statement. I have come to give statement again
on  saying  again  by  the  police. After  that,
witness  was  told  that  say  what  you  want.
Witness  stated  "Hanna  was  carrying  spear,
Kappu had axe, Gaya had stick, Duli had stick,
Prakash had stick, Babu had stick, Gaya held
him and Hanna hit 4-5 times with spear, hit
with axe, hit struck 4-5 times, hit 4-5 times
with stick. Assaulted him in the middle of the
road. Assaulted at Kailgawa. Had gone towards
the river after assaulting. Killed my son when
he had gone to defecate. We mother in law and
daughter  in  law  had  gone  to  fetch  water,
killed him in 3 minutes. My son's head was in
west side and feet were in east side when he
died.”         
               (underlines supplied)
10.
It is very difficult to accept the prosecution case that PW-1
was threatened by the accused, and therefore, she did not support
the prosecution on 2nd May 1997 when her evidence was recorded.  The
reasons for discarding the case of threat administered to PW-1 and
PW-3 can be summarized as follows:
(a)
On 2nd May 1997, PW-1 deposed that the accused were in
jail for 1½ years;
(b)
After a long gap of 01 year and 09 months, on 5th February
1999,  for  the  first  time,  she  came  out  with  a  case  that
threats were administered by the accused way back in May 1997;
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  467/2024
6

(c)
Notwithstanding the statement of PW-1 in her application
dated  5th February  1999  and  the  affidavit  filed  in  support
thereof on the same day, the Police made no investigation into
the allegation made by PW-1; and
(d)
Though on 5th February 1999, PW-1 claimed that the accused
had threatened to kill PW-3, in his evidence recorded on 19th
December 1998, PW-3 did not depose anything about the threat
administered to him.
11.
What is more material is that PW-1 specifically stated after
her recall that a threat was administered to her by the Police as
she  did  not  support  the  prosecution  in  her  earlier  evidence.
Secondly, she stated that she had come before the Court to give a
statement at the instance of the Police.  Considering what we have
held earlier, her statement before the Court after recall that she
was  threatened  by  the  accused,  cannot  be  believed.   The  only
conclusion  which  can  be  drawn  is  that  after  recall,  she  was
compelled by the Police to depose in a particular manner.  The
Trial Court and the High Court should have discarded her evidence
recorded after the recall.  In fact, the Trial Court should have
seriously taken note of the threat administered by the Police to
PW-1 and directed the Police Officials to look into the role played
by the Policemen who were associated with the case.
12.
Now, we turn to the evidence of PW-3.  In paragraph 3 of his
examination-in-chief, he stated that accused Kappu owed his family
a sum of Rs.6,000/- (Rupees Six Thousand).  As he had asked the
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  467/2024
7

accused - Kappu, to pay the money, the accused had beaten him.  His
specific case is that the accused murdered his brother because of
this hostility.  However, in paragraph 9 of his cross-examination,
he stated that he did not tell the Police that accused - Kappu was
liable to pay his family a sum of Rs.6,000/- (Rupees Six Thousand).
Thus, the motive stated by PW-3 in his examination-in-chief is a
significant  omission  which  is  so  material  that  it  amounts  to
contradiction.  Therefore,  the  prosecution's  case  about  the
existence of motive has to be discarded.  In paragraph 3 of his
examination-in-chief, PW-3 also stated that one Ramprakash Tiwari
wrote  the  report  of  the  incident.  As  stated  earlier,  the  said
Ramprakash Tiwari has not been examined.
13.
In the cross-examination, PW-3 stated that the accused killed
his brother a few steps away from his shop, and he was in his shop
when the assault was committed.  He claimed that his mother (PW-1),
sister-in-law (Malti Bai), and other witnesses were present.  The
statement that Malti Bai was present is an omission, as is evident
from paragraph 6 of his cross-examination.  Moreover, the shop from
which the witness had allegedly seen the assault is not shown to be
in existence in the sketch of the scene of the offence drawn by the
Police.   PW-3  admitted  that  he  had  not  shown  his  shop  to  the
Police.  Later, he stated that he did not see the incident from his
shop.  Therefore, PW-3's evidence is full of material omissions and
contradictions. It is very difficult to believe PW-3's testimony.
14.
Therefore, it follows that the prosecution has not proved the
guilt of the accused.  Therefore, the Appeals must succeed.  We set
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  467/2024
8

aside the impugned judgments dated 26th August 2022 and 6th December
2007 passed by the High Court and the Trial Court.  We set aside
the conviction and sentence of the appellants.
15.
The Appeals are allowed accordingly.
16.
The appellant in Criminal Appeal No.467/2024 is on bail. His
bail  bonds  stand  cancelled.   As  far  as  the  appellants  (accused
nos.2 to 6) in Criminal Appeal No.468/2024 are concerned, we direct
that they shall be immediately set at liberty.
...................J.
      
   (ABHAY S.OKA)
         
                        
 ....................J.
 
        (UJJAL BHUYAN) 
NEW DELHI;
MAY 01, 2024.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  467/2024
9