2024 INSC 367
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6772-6773 OF 2023 
 
CHAITRA NAGAMMANAVAR 
 
 
 
   ...APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF KARNATAKA & ORS.      
 
 …RESPONDENT(S) 
J U D G M E N T 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
 
1. 
A routine service dispute involving competing claims for 
appointment was transformed into a pleasurable discourse by the 
newly designated senior advocates of this court, Mr. Shailesh 
Madiyal, Mr. Anand Sanjay M. Nuli, Mr. Gagan Gupta. Mr. D.L. 
Chidananda, appearing for the respondent-State rose to the 
occasion and made crisp, clear and categorical arguments to 
match the submissions made by the senior counsels.  
2. 
The facts, to the extent they are relevant for our consideration, 
are that the Banglore University, constituted under the Karnataka 
State Universities Act, 2000,1 issued an advertisement dated 
 
1 Hereinafter, referred to as the ‘Universities Act’. 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.05.02
17:26:29 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
21.03.2018 for filling up backlog vacancies to posts reserved for 
scheduled castes (SC’s) and scheduled tribes (ST’s). Of the 34 
posts advertised for Assistant Professors, one post of Assistant 
Professor in the department of English was reserved for a 
candidate belonging to the ST community.  
3. 
The advertisement provides that qualifications for the post shall 
be as provided under the UGC Regulations, 2010 and the UGC 
(4th Amendment) Regulations, 2016. The ‘Mode of Selection’, or 
the method of selection, as specified in the advertisement, is 
important.2 It is provided that the list of selected candidates will 
be prepared as per the Karnataka State Civil Services (Unfilled 
Vacancies Reserved For Persons Belonging to the SC’s and ST’s) 
(Special Recruitment) Rules, 2001, hereinafter referred to as the 
‘2001 Rules’. Rule 6 of the 2001 Rules provides for a preference 
in favour of candidates between the age bracket of 29 and 40 
years. In other words, amongst the eligible candidates belonging 
to a scheduled tribe, those who fall within the age bracket of 29-
 
2  “MODE OF SELECTION 
The list of selected candidates will be prepared as per the following Government of 
Karnataka Notifications: 
1. 
No. DPAR 13 SBC 2001 dated: 21.11.2001 & Dated: 01.06.2002 
2. 
UGC Regulations 2010, UGC (4th Amendment) Regulations, 2016 and AICTE 
2016 Regulations.” 

3 
 
40 years, would have a preferential right to be appointed over and 
above even meritorious candidates. 
4. 
The appellant and respondent No. 7 are both ST candidates, and 
both of them were eligible for appointment to the solitary post of 
Assistant Professor in the English department reserved for a 
candidate beloniging to the ST community. While the appellant 
was higher in merit, respondent no. 7 was within the age bracket 
of 29-40 years, and as such, was a preferential candidate as per 
Rule 6 of the 2001 Rules. Though the university advertised that 
the ‘Mode of Selection’ shall be as per the 2001 Rules, it followed 
its own procedure and proceeded to appoint the appellant on the 
basis of merit. Respondent no. 7 naturally challenged the 
appointment of the appellant by filing Writ Petition No. 
4923/2020 before the High Court of Karnataka.  
5. 
The Ld. Single Judge of the High Court, by a judgment dated 
16.01.2021, allowed the writ petition and set aside the 
appellant’s selection and appointment on the ground that the 
university specifically declared in the advertisement that the 
‘Mode of Selection’ shall be as per the 2001 Rules. Therefore, its 
appointment of the appellant, who did not fall in the age bracket 
of 29-40 years, was illegal. Consequently, Respondent No. 7, 
who is the preferential candidate, was directed to be appointed.  

4 
 
6. 
The appellant and the university filed their respective writ 
appeals, namely W.A. 190/2021 and 233/2021, before the 
Division Bench of the High Court. While confirming the order of 
the Single Judge, the Division Bench also directed that 
respondent No. 7 is entitled to be appointed as per the 2001 Rules. 
Thus, the present Civil Appeal by the appellant, who was the 
originally appointed candidate. 
7. 
Before we consider the rival contentions, it is necessary to refer to 
three legislations that have a bearing on the case. The Karnataka 
State Civil Services Act, 19783; the Karnataka SCs, STs and OBCs 
(Reservation of Appointments etc.) Act, 19904; and the Karnataka 
State Universities Act, 20005. Very importantly, we will also 
consider the applicability of the 2001 Rules framed under the Civil 
Services Act, 1978. 
8. 
The relevant law governing the filling up of backlog vacancies as 
per the advertisement issued by the university will be the 
Reservation Act, 1990 and the 2001 Rules. These rules are made 
under the Civil Services Act, which naturally relates to civil 
services under the State of Karnataka. The applicability of the 
2001 Rules to appointments by the universities, which is 
 
3 Hereinafter referred to as the Civil Services Act, 1978. 
4 Hereinafter referred to as the Reservation Act, 1990 
5 Hereinafter referred to as the Universities Act, 2000. 

5 
 
governed by the University Act, is the controversy that has led to 
the present litigation.  
9. 
The Bangalore University is governed by the Karnataka 
Universities Act, 2000. Sec. 536 of this law recognises a ‘Board of 
Appointment’ to be the appointing authority for teachers and 
other employees of the university. Sec. 547 provides that 
notwhithstanding anything in Sec. 53, but subject to the rules 
and orders of the State Government, appointments to the posts of 
professors, readers, principals and asst. professors shall be made 
by the syndicate as per the scheme evolved by the UGC. 
Furthermore, under Sec. 78, the Universities Act is given an 
overriding effect to it over other statutes.  
10. Apart from the Universities Act, there is an overarching law, 
namely, the Karnataka SCs, STs and OBCs (Reservation of 
 
6 “Sec. 53. Appointment of Teachers, Librarians.- (1) There shall be a Board of 
Appointment for selection of persons for appointment as teachers and librarians in 
the University […]” 
 
7 “Sec. 54. Appointment in accordance with the promotion schemes.- (1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 53 but subject to the rules and orders 
of the State Government issued from time to time for reservation of appointment and 
posts for the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under 
Article 16(4) and 16(4A) of the Constitution, the appointment to the post of Professors 
and Readers, Principals and Assistant Professors in the constituent Engineering 
Colleges and to the post of Principal Grade-I, Principal Grade-II, Lecturer (Selection 
Grade), Lecturer (Senior Scale) in the constituent Engineering Colleges shall be made 
by the Syndicate in accordance with the scheme governing promotions as prescribed 
by the Statutes adopting the schemes evolved by the University Grants Commission 
or All India Council for Technical Education.[…]” 

6 
 
Appointment etc.) Act, 1990. It is intended to provide reservations 
in favour of SCs, STs and other OBCs in the state civil services 
and ‘establishments’. The definitions of ‘establishment’  and 
‘appointing authority’ under the Reservation Act, 1990 are 
relevant. Sec. 2(2) and 2(3)(vi) defines ‘appointing authority’ and 
‘establishments in public sector’ as follows:  
“Section 2. Definitions: In the Act, unless the context 
otherwise requires […] 
(2) "appointing authority" in relation to a service or 
posts, means the authority empowered to make 
appointment to such service or post; 
(3) "establishments in public sector" means,- […] 
(vi) a University established or deemed to have been 
established by or under any law of the State Legislature 
[…]”.  
 
10.1  The most relevant provision in the Reservation Act, 1990 is Sec. 
4 and it is extracted hereinafter for ready reference:- 
“ Sec. 4. Reservation of appointments or posts 
etc:- (1) After the appointed day, while making 
appointments to any office in a civil service of the State 
of Karnataka or to a civil post under the State of 
Karnataka, appointments or posts shall be reserved for 
the member of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes 
and other Backward Classes to such extent and in such 
manner as may be specified from time to time in the 
order made by the Government under clause 4 of Article 
16 of the Constitution of India.” (emphasis supplied) 
10.2 There was uncertainty about the applicability of the procedure 
contemplated under Sec. 4 of the Reservation Act, 1990 for the 
appointments of teachers by the universities, as Section 4 speaks 

7 
 
about appointments in the civil service of the state and civil posts 
under the State of Karnataka. A common understanding was 
that an office in the civil service of the state or a civil post under 
the state did not include ‘teachers’ as contemplated under S. 53 
of the Universities Act. This uncertainty was greater with respect 
to filling up of backlog vacancies in the university by following 
the procedure provided in the 2001 Rules.  
10.3 It is under these circumstances that an amendment was 
proposed to the Reservation Act, 1990. The statements of objects 
and reasons (‘SOR’) for the introduction of sub-section (1A) to 
Sec. 4 clarifies the position and helps us understand the newly 
introduced sub-Section (1A) in its proper perspective.   
“Amending Act 8 of 2004.- Government issued a 
Notification dated: 21.11.2001 under the Karnataka 
Civil Services (Unfilled Vacancies reserved for the 
persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes (Special Recruitment) Rules, 2001 for filling up of 
vacancies reserved for persons belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. This Special 
Recruitment Rules was published under clause (a) of 
sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Karnataka Civil 
Services Act, 1978 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1990) in 
Notification No. DPAR 13 SBC 2001, dated 6th August 
2001. The Notification was issued to fill all unfilled 
vacancies by all the appointing authorities wherever 
the service conditions are governed by the Karnataka 
Civil Services Act, 1978. The Cabinet appointed a sub-
committee of the Cabinet to monitor and review the 
progress. The Social Welfare Department was made the 
nodal Department. As on date the Social Welfare 

8 
 
Department has identified 17021 numbers of vacancies 
out of them, 14485 have already been notified, of which 
11573 vacancies are filled up and the balance is in the 
process of being filled. During the course of the review 
meeting it was pointed out to the Cabinet Sub 
Committee that the Karnataka Civil Services (Unfilled 
Vacancies reserved for the persons belonging to 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Special 
Recruitment) Rules, 2001 does not apply to the 
Universities, including Agriculture Universities and 
other institutions, etc., because they do not come under 
the purview of the said Rules. The non-inclusion of 
these institutions under the purview of the Notification 
dated 21.11.2001 and 1.6.2002 meant that the filling 
up of the backlog vacancies by the Universities and 
other institutions could suffer from a legal infirmity. 
 In view of the fact that the process of recruitment by 
these institutions i.e., Universities etc. 80% of the 
recruitment are already over, both for teaching and non-
teaching staff and the persons recruited have already 
reported and are working, there is an immediate need 
to amend the Act to legally enforce the recruitment’s 
already made.[…]”  
 
10.4 It is clear from the SOR that the Cabinet Sub-Committee realised 
that the 2001 Rules were not made applicable to Universities as 
they do not come with the purview of the 2001 Rules. It is for this 
reason that the Reservation Act, 1990 is amended and the 
following sub-Section (1A) was introduced. The newly included 
sub-section (1A) to Sec. 4 of the Act is as follows: 
“Sec. 4: Reservation of appointments or posts etc:-  
1. […] 
(1A). Notwithstanding anything contained in any law 
for the time being in force, the appointing authority shall 
identify unfilled vacancies reserved for the persons 

9 
 
belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in 
any service or post in an establishment in public sector 
as existing on the date of commencement of the Second 
Amendment Act, 2004 and take action to fill them as a 
one time measure within a specified time. The manner 
in which the number of vacancies is to be computed, the 
procedure for filling such vacancies and the time within 
which action is to be taken shall be as specified by 
notification by the State Government. 
Provided that the provisions of sub-section shall 
not apply to any unfilled vacancy in Karnataka State 
Civil Services or Post in respect of which provisions 
have been already made […]” (emphasis supplied) 
 
11. The above-referred amendment to Sec. 4 of the Reservation Act, 
1990 had the effect of bringing universities established by the 
state, within the mandate of sub-section (1A) of the Reservation 
Act, 1990. A combined reading of Sec. 2(2), 2(3)(vi) and sub-
sections (1) and (1A) of Sec. 4 of the Reservation Act, 1990 with 
Sec. 53 and 54 of the Universities Act, 2000 would establish that 
the Board of Appointment of the university is tasked with 
identifying the unfilled vacancies reserved for SCs and STs 
existing as on the amendment dated 2004 and to fill them up as 
a one-time measure within a specified time. Till here there is no 
difficulty. In fact, this is in the natural flow of the two statutes.  
12. The difficulty, however, arises out of the latter part of sub-Section 
(1A) which provides that the manner, procedure and the time for 
identifying, filling and completing the same ‘shall be as specified 

10 
 
by the State Government by way of a notification’. There is nothing 
on record to show that the State Government issued any 
notification in furtherance of Sec. 4(1A) specifying the manner, 
procedure and time for identifying, filling and completing the 
same. Sub-Section (1A) delegates the power of specifying the 
method and manner of selection to the Government. 
13. Mr. Shailesh Madiyal, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 
appellant argues that the advertisement of the university, 
declaring that the ‘Mode of Selection’ shall be under the 2001 
Rules, is a mistake. He calls it a mistake because the university 
shall be governed by the Universities Act and the Statutes made 
thereunder and not the 2001 Rules, particularly when these Rules 
are made under the Karnataka State Civil Services Act, 1978.8 
The university is an autonomous institution and can never be 
bound, much less governed, by rules intended to regulate State 
Civil Services, is his argument. 
14. Mr. Anand Sanjay M. Nuli, learned Senior Counsel appearing for 
the university, has taken the same stand as the appellant. He 
submitted that Sec. 78 of the Universities Act gives an overriding 
effect to the provisions of this law over other laws. He has drawn 
 
8 Herinafter referred to as the ‘Civil Services Act’. 

11 
 
our attention to Sec. 53 of the Universities Act as the guiding 
principle for appointments to the post of ‘teachers’ in the 
university, which includes assistant professors, readers and 
professors.   
15. Mr. Gagan Gupta, learned Senior Counsel appearing for 
respondent no. 7, submits that the mandate under Sec. 4(1A) on 
the Government to specify the method and manner of selection by 
the issuance of a notification stood fulfilled when the university 
itself advertised by notifying that the ‘Mode of Selection’ shall be 
as per the 2001 Rules. He also submitted that this is the natural 
consequence of the purpose and object of introducing sub-Section 
(1A), which was to enable the universities to follow the 2001 
Rules. He also relied on certain letters written by the State 
Government calling upon the university to follow the mandate of 
the 2001 Rules.    
16. We will examine the question as to whether the advertisement 
issued by the university intending to follow the 2001 Rules made 
under the Civil Services Act suffers from any illegality. If we come 
to the conclusion that compliance with the 2001 Rules is 
mandatory, we will affirm the judgments of the Ld. Single Judge 
and the Division Bench, and dismiss these appeals. On the other 
hand, if we find that the 2001 Rules have no application, or that 

12 
 
they are not extended to appointment by the university, we will 
allow the appeals and affirm the appellant’s appointment. 
17. The controversy about filling up backlog vacancies of SCs and STs 
by the university comes to an end with the insertion of Sec. 4(1A) 
of the Reservation Act, 1990. In fact, the provocation for 
introducing sub-Section (1A) is that the mandate of the 2001 
Rules was not followed by the universities. In order to extend the 
provision of the 2001 Rules to universities, sub-Section (1A) was 
introduced and this is clear from the SOR of the amendment 
introducing sub-section (1A).  
18. The identification, procedure and the time for computing, filling 
and completing the exercise of filling up backlog vacancies is 
specifically delegated under sub-Section (1A) to the Government. 
The intent behind the amendment is to vest the power of 
specifying the method, procedure and time for identifying, filling 
and completing the same to the State. The importance of the 
Government specifying the same lies in the fact that these 
incidents vary from service to service and establishment to 
establishment. The Government is best placed to address the 
same due to its resources. This is also evident from Sec. 54 of the 
Universities Act, which suggests that appointments to several 
posts in a university shall be laid down by the Government. It is 

13 
 
an admitted fact that there is no notification issued by the 
Government to this effect. However, the university was aware of 
the continuous demand of the Government to follow the method 
of selection provided in the 2001 Rules. Therefore, in compliance 
with the statutory requirement and the Governmental demand, it 
issued the advertisement declaring that the ‘Mode of Selection’ 
shall be as per the 2001 Rules. 
19. There have been letters by the Government demanding 
compliance with the 2001 Rules while filling up the backlog 
vacancies for posts for SCs/STs and OBCs. We will now refer to 
these letters. Even before the advertisement was issued on 
21.03.2018, there was a letter addressed by the Principal 
Secretary, Department of Higher Education, State of Karnataka, 
to the university on 27.02.2018, instructing the latter to fill up 
backlog teaching posts as per the 2001 Rules and the guidelines 
prescribed by the university. We may mention at this very stage 
that similar letters were addressed by the State Government to 
the university on 22.05.2018 and 09.06.2021, directing that the 
procedure contemplated under the 2001 Rules must be followed 
for filling up the vacancies of SC/ST and other backward classes 
in the university. With these letters, the issue relating to the 

14 
 
legality and validity of the university’s advertisement is beyond 
doubt.  
20. While we reject the submission of Mr. Shailesh Madiyal that the 
advertisement declaring that the 2001 Rules will be the ‘Mode of 
Selection’, is a mistake, we also hold that the university is bound 
to comply with what is declared in its advertisement: the 2001 
Rules will be the guiding principles for the selection in question. 
We state this for the following reasons. Firstly, there was no 
uncertainty left after the introduction of sub-Section (1A) to Sec. 
4 of the Reservation Act, 1990, requiring an establishment, i.e., 
the university, to take action for filling the backlog vacancies as a 
one-time measure by following the method prescribed by the 
Government. Secondly, the purpose and object of the amendment 
was amply clear from its SOR contemplating the application of the 
2001 Rules for the universities. Thirdly, the conduct of the 
university in not responding to the categorical demands of the 
Government through its letters dated 27.02.2018, 22.05.2018 
and 09.06.2021 to implement the 2001 Rules is conclusive about 
its acceptance of the applicable law and the policy, and therefore, 
the advertisement. Hence, the requirement of the Government to 
specify the manner, procedure and time for identifying, filling 
backlog vacancies and completing the same was amply clear to 

15 
 
the university. It is with this view that the university advertised 
that the ‘Mode of Selection’ shall be as per the 2001 Rules. 
21. For the reasons stated above, the writ petition filed by respondent 
no. 7 was rightly allowed by the Ld. Single Judge of the High 
Court. While re-iterating the reasoning of the Single Judge, the 
Division Bench by the detailed order, upheld the findings of the 
Single Judge. Having considered the matter in detail, we have 
given our own reasons why respondent no. 7 should succeed even 
before this court. The appeals must, therefore, fail, and we hereby 
dismiss the same.  
22. Having dismissed the appeals, we realise that an unusual 
situation has arisen in this case because of the university's 
conduct. Though the appellant was appointed in contravention of 
Rule 6 of the 2001 Rules, she continued in office during the 
subsistence of the writ proceedings. When the Ld. Single judge 
allowed respondent no. 7’s writ petition and set aside the 
appellant’s appointment dated 27.12.2019, the appellant 
approached the Division Bench and obtained a stay. After the 
Division Bench affirmed the Ld. Single Judge’s order and 
dismissed the writ appeal, she approached this court and again 
obtained a stay, and this order is operating till date. In other 
words, the appellant's appointment dated 27.12.2019 is 

16 
 
continuing till date without any interruption. She has been 
working for almost four and a half years. On the other hand, the 
wrongful denial of appointment to respondent no. 7 was 
addressed by the Ld. Single Judge and Division Bench of the High 
Court by setting aside the appellant's appointment, and also 
directing that respondent no. 7 must be given the appointment 
instead. While we have agreed that respondent no. 7 must 
succeed and be restituted to the rightful position that he had 
earned, the university must also address the concern of the 
appellant. The unfortunate situation has arisen not because of 
anything wrong attributable to the appellant, but due to the 
indifferent manner with which the university conducted itself. In 
order to obviate the injustice caused to the appellant, the 
university may consider creating a supernumerary post to 
accommodate her. We are fully conscious of the limitations in 
creating such posts over and above the positions that are borne 
by a cadre,9 but this is an extraordinary situation for exercising 
such discretion.10 We leave it to the university to take a decision 
on this issue and pass the necessary orders.  
 
9 Official Liquidator v. Dayanand, (2008) 10 SCC 1.  
10 N.T. Devin Katti v. Karnataka Public Service Commission, (1990) 3 SCC 157. 
 

17 
 
23. For the reasons stated above, the Civil Appeal Nos. 6772-
6773/2023 against the judgment and final order dated 
12.03.2021 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru 
in Writ Appeal No. 233 of 2021 c/w Writ Appeal No. 190 of 2021 
(S-RES) are dismissed, subject to the observations made in the 
previous paragraph. 
24. There shall be no order as to costs. 
 
……………………………….J. 
                                     [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 
 
 
 
……………………………….J. 
[ARAVIND KUMAR] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
MAY 02, 2024