2024 INSC 365
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).           OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 43 OF 2022) 
 
 
R.K. MUNSHI                                               .…APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
 
UNION TERRITORY OF JAMMU & KASHMIR  
AND ORS. 
 
                                   ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
 
1. 
Leave granted.  
2. 
This appeal is directed against the judgment dated 27th 
September, 2021 passed by the learned Division Bench of the High 
Court of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh at Jammu in LPA No. 
38 of 2020 whereby, the learned Division Bench rejected the 
Letters Patent Appeal preferred by the appellant and affirmed the 
order dated 19th December, 2019 passed by the learned Single 
Judge in SWP No. 3440 of 2014 rejecting the writ petition filed by 
the appellant. 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2024.05.02
15:25:20 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
3. 
Succinctly stated facts relevant and essential for disposal of 
the appeal are that the appellant herein was working as an 
Inspector(Telecom) in Jammu and Kashmir Police, 4th Battalion. 
He superannuated from services on 30th April, 2014.  The 
appellant received a communication from the Director Police, 
Telecom regarding recovery of the outstanding rentals on account 
of unauthorized drawals of House Rent Allowance(hereinafter 
being referred to as ‘HRA’) by the appellant. The said action was 
taken under Rule 6(h) of The Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services 
(House Rent Allowance and City Compensation Allowance) Rules, 
1992(hereinafter being referred to as ‘Rules of 1992’) in pursuance 
of a complaint received by the authorities wherein, it was alleged 
that the appellant was availing Government accommodation and 
simultaneously drawing HRA. Notice was given to the appellant to 
deposit a sum of Rs.3,96,814/- determined to have been drawn by 
him as HRA without entitlement. By this very notice, the appellant 
was given a chance to produce documents in proof to indicate that 
the quarter in question, i.e., quarter No. 6-A was not under his 
occupation/possession. As the appellant failed to satisfy the 
authorities in this regard, the recovery notice was issued which 

3 
 
was subjected to challenge in the writ Court and the Letters Patent 
Appeal albeit unsuccessfully.  
4. 
Learned counsel Ms. Purnima Bhat, appearing on behalf of 
the appellant urged that indisputably, the quarter in question had 
been allotted in the name of appellant’s father who was a Retd. 
Deputy Superintendent of Police. The appellant occasionally 
shared the official accommodation allotted to his father. She urged 
that the High Court glossed over the relevant clauses of Rule 6(h) 
of Rules of 1992 while dismissing the writ petition as well as the 
appeal filed by the appellant, inasmuch as only, one part of the 
said rule was considered while ignoring the part which favourably 
covers the case of the appellant. The pertinent contention raised 
by the learned counsel was that had the High Court considered the 
provisions contained in Rule 6(h)(iv), the recovery notice could not 
have been sustained.  
5. 
For the sake of ready reference, Rule 6(h) of Rules of 1992 is 
reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“6. The grant of House Rent Allowance shall be subject to the 
following conditions:  
 
(a)-(g)….. 
 
(h)  
A Govt employee shall not be entitled to House Rent 
Allowance if: 
 

4 
 
(i) 
he/she shares accommodation allotted rent 
free to another Govt servant. 
 
(ii) 
he/she resides in accommodation allotted to 
his/her parents, son, daughter by the Govt; 
 
(iii)  
his wife/her husband has been allotted 
accommodation at the same station by the Govt 
whether he/she resides in that accommodation or 
he/she resides separately in accommodation rented 
by him/her. 
 
(iv) 
In 
cases 
where 
husband/wife/parents, 
children two or more of them being State Govt 
servants or employees of Central Govt, Autonomous 
Public Undertakings or semi Govt Organizations 
share 
accommodation 
allotted 
to 
another 
Government Servant, House Rent Allowance will be 
admissible to only one of them at their choice. 
 
(v)….”  
 
  
 
6. 
It was contended that admittedly quarter No. 6-A was allotted 
to the appellant’s father, Deputy Superintendent of Police, who 
retired from the post as a Gazetted Officer, and was a displaced 
Kashmiri pandit. Thus, the appellant cannot be charged HRA on 
account of occasional shared residence in the said quarter. She 
thus, implored the Court to set aside the impugned orders and the 
recovery notice. 
7. 
Per contra, Mr. Parth Awasthi learned counsel appearing on 
behalf of the State vehemently and fervently opposed the 
submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant. 
He urged that indisputably, the appellant enjoyed residence in the 

5 
 
Government quarter allotted to his father and thus by virtue of 
Rule 6(h)(i) and (ii) reproduced supra, he was not entitled to claim 
HRA. He thus, submitted that the impugned recovery notice is 
justified in the eyes of law. 
8. 
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the material 
available on record.  
9.  
The father of the appellant herein namely, Mr. H.K. Munshi 
had retired way back in the year 1993 and thus, it is axiomatic 
that he would not be entitled to claim HRA after demitting office. 
True it is that quarter No.6-A had been allotted to the appellant’s 
father as being a displaced Kashmiri pandit and a retired 
Government servant, but the fact remains that he would not be 
entitled to HRA after superannuation from service. Thus, reliance 
placed by learned counsel for the appellant on Rule 6(h)(iv) is 
misplaced as the said provision has no application to the situation 
at hand. Rule 6(h)(i) and 6(h)(ii) which were pressed into service by 
the High Court for rejecting the challenge laid by the appellant to 
the recovery notice clearly cover the controversy. By virtue of these 
two clauses, the appellant being a Government employee, could 
not have claimed HRA while sharing rent free accommodation 

6 
 
allotted to his father, a retired Government servant. There is no 
infirmity in the impugned orders warranting interference. 
10. As a consequence, the appeal is dismissed as being devoid of 
force.  
11. No order as to costs. 
12. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
May 02, 2024.