2024 INSC 372
Page 1 of 10 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.1980 of 2024 
 
 
MAHENDRA NATH SORAL & ANOTHER  
…  Appellant (s) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
RAVINDRA NATH SORAL AND OTHERS 
      
… Respondent(s) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
Rajesh Bindal, J. 
 
1.  
 
The present appeal has been preferred against the 
judgment1 passed by the High Court2 in S.B. Civil First Appeal No. 170 
of 2009, whereby the judgment and decree of the Trial Court3 was 
upheld.   
2. 
 
The appeal arises out of a dispute between the parties 
pertaining to partition of the properties left by their ancestor/Late 
Rameshwar Nath Soral who died on 28.01.1996.  He was survived by 
 
1 Dated 19.09.2018 
2 Rajasthan High Court Bench at Jaipur  
3 Civil Case No. 17 of 2006 
Digitally signed by
VARSHA MENDIRATTA
Date: 2024.05.03
15:54:09 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 10 
 
three sons and two daughters.  During the pendency of the litigation 
one of the daughter, Usha Sharma (Usha Soral) died on 09.05.2018 and 
her legal heirs were brought on record. 
3. 
 
From the facts available on record, it is evident that a suit4 
for partition was filed by the appellant no.1/Mahendra Nath Soral 
pertaining to the properties left by his late father, impleading his two 
brothers and two sisters as the defendants.  However, in the present 
appeal the appellants are disputing the partition proceedings only with 
reference to the roof rights of Plot No.5, Professor Colony, Nayapura, 
Kota, measuring 2300.00 sq. ft.  Besides this there was another property 
also bearing House No.15, Van Vihar Colony, Tonk Phatak, Jaipur. 
4. 
 
The Trial Court passed the preliminary decree on 
27.04.2005 holding all the legal heirs of Late Rameshwar Nath Soral 
entitled to equal shares in the immovable and movable properties. 
5. 
 
The aforesaid preliminary decree was challenged by 
Ravindra Nath Soral and Surendra Nath Soral by filing S.B. Civil Regular 
First Appeal No.500 of 2005 and S.B. Civil Regular First Appeal No.481 
of 2005, respectively before the High Court raising a grievance that 
Usha Sharma and Asha Soral who are daughters of deceased 
 
4 Civil Suit No.27 of 2000 

Page 3 of 10 
 
Rameshwar Nath Soral were given dowry items at the time of their 
respective marriages and they are not entitled to any share in the 
immovable properties in terms of Section 23 of the Hindu Succession 
Act, 1956; and that Surendra Nath Soral is not in possession of the 
ornaments, jewelry, gold and silver items.  
6. 
 
The third appeal, S.B. Civil Regular First Appeal No.309 of 
2001 arose out a suit filed by Ravindra Nath Soral and Surendra Nath 
Soral against Usha Sharma, her husband Mahesh Sharma and her son 
Mukul Sharma, seeking perpetual injunction with reference to one of 
the properties at Jaipur i.e. House No.15, Van Vihar Colony, Tonk 
Phatak, Jaipur. The suit was dismissed. 
7. 
 
Nothing hinges on this suit as the issue raised in the present 
appeal is only with reference to the partition of the property. 
8. 
 
The High Court vide common Judgment dated 18.09.2007 
decided the aforesaid three appeals. S.B. Civil Regular First Appeal 
No.309 of 2001 was dismissed as infructuous. 
9. 
 
Insofar as S.B. Civil Regular First Appeal No.500 of 2005 is 
concerned, it is evident that the issue sought to be raised was with 
reference to the rights of the daughters in the property.  The same was 

Page 4 of 10 
 
decided against the appellants and two daughters were held entitled 
to share in the properties left by Late Rameshwar Nath Soral.   
10. 
 
The issue raised in S.B. Civil Regular First Appeal No.481 of 
2005 was with reference to gold jewelry and silver items.  The 
preliminary decree of the Trial Court in that regard was modified.  This 
is also not a matter of consideration in the present appeal.  
11. 
 
During the pendency of the suit before the Trial Court, an 
approved Valuer was appointed for valuation of the properties to be 
partitioned who submitted his report dated 08.08.2008 with reference 
to Plot No.5, Professor Colony, Nayapura, Kota.  
12. 
 
Final decree5 was passed by the Trial Court on 03.01.2009.  
As per the details given by the Valuer with reference to Plot No.5, 
Professor Colony, Nayapura, Kota, the appellant no.1 was held entitled 
to Portion-A on ground floor and the common portion attached thereto.  
The Appellant No.2 was held entitled to Portion-B on ground floor and 
common portion attached thereto.  The Respondent No.2 was held 
entitled to Portion-C on first floor alongwith roof rights. The 
Respondent No.1 was held entitled to Portion-D on first floor alongwith 
roof rights. 
 
5 In Civil Case No. 17 of 2006 

Page 5 of 10 
 
13. 
 
Usha Sharma was independently held entitled to House 
No.15, Van Vihar Colony, Tonk Phatak, Jaipur.  As the value of the 
aforesaid house was more, after deducting the amount to the extent of 
her share, she was directed to pay ₹33,96,813/- to the other four co-
sharers.  The share of the Appellant No.1 came out to a sum of 
₹7,13,098/-, so was the amount to which the Appellant No.2/Asha Soral 
was held entitled to.  Two other sons (namely, Ravindra Nath 
Soral/Respondent No.1 and Surendra Nath Soral/Respondent No.2) 
were held entitled to ₹9,85,309/- each, from Usha Sharma.  
14. 
 
Ravindra Nath Soral and Surendra Nath Soral were held 
entitled to use and utilize the staircase for going on first floor and 
coming down as they were held entitled to shares on the first floor of 
the property. They were also given ownership of the roof of their 
respective portions.  Besides this, the Court also directed for partition 
of the cash and jewelry amongst all the parties to the litigation. 
15. 
 
The final decree was challenged by the appellants and 
another daughter Usha Sharma (now deceased), raising issue 
regarding valuation of the property and also roof rights of the house, in 
which the appellants were given two separate portions on the ground 
floor whereas the two sons were given two separate portions on the 
first floor along with roof rights.  One of the daughters was given a 

Page 6 of 10 
 
separate house.  The High Court did not find merit in the arguments 
raised by the appellants before the High Court. 
16. 
 
Impugning the High Court judgment, brief argument raised 
by the appellants was that in the valuation report dated 08.08.2008, the 
Valuer had failed to assess the value of the roof rights where further 
construction can be raised.  If that part is taken into consideration, the 
valuation of the property will change and as a result of which all the 
four co-sharers of the property will have equal roof rights as well.  The 
same shall not be limited to the said two co-sharers who have been 
given two separate portions on the first floor. 
17. 
 
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents 
submitted that the issue was examined threadbare by the Trial Court 
as well as the High Court and on appropriate valuation of the property, 
as assessed by the approved Valuer, the shares of the parties were 
determined.  The appellants are only trying to make the mountain out 
of a molehill.  The appellants have been given certain additional rights 
on the ground floor and the respondents have been given rights on the 
roof.  There is no error in the judgment of the High Court and the appeal 
deserved to be dismissed. 

Page 7 of 10 
 
18. 
 
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused 
the relevant referred record. 
19. 
 
The case in hand is an example of the bitterness amongst 
the legal heirs of Late Rameshwar Nath Soral with regard to the 
partition of the properties left by him. It is ‘properties’ vs ‘proper ties’. 
‘Short term gain’ vs ‘Long terms relations’. One can either get share in 
the properties that too by litigating or can maintain proper ties amongst 
the family members with little give and take, and not going to the extent 
of minute details.  It may not be a matter of dispute that none of the legal 
heirs of Late Rameshwar Nath Soral had contributed anything in 
acquisition of the plots or construction of the properties by themselves.  
Whatever is given to them is a kind of bounty but still they being 
greedy, not satisfied with whatever they received, are litigating for last 
more than two decades. 
20. 
 
After the valuation of the property was done by the 
approved Valuer appointed by the court, after the preliminary decree 
was passed, the Trial Court determined the portions of the property 
(bearing Plot No.5, Professor Colony, Nayapura, Kota) coming to the 
share of four parties. Keeping in view the fact that, the property at Kota 
could not be partitioned with metes and bounds in four shares and the 
property at Jaipur was being maintained by Usha Sharma. 

Page 8 of 10 
 
21. 
 
A perusal of the judgment of the Trial Court dated 
03.01.2009 shows that certain objections were raised by the parties 
with reference to valuation of the property. However, it is not evident 
that the appellants raised any objection. Certain objections were 
raised regarding valuation of the property at Jaipur, however, the 
Court rejected the same. The Court also recorded that the proposal put 
forth by the parties for partition was agreed in principle and thereafter 
the properties were partitioned. 
22. 
 
The partition of property in question amongst the legal heirs 
was upheld by the High Court.  Certain additional rights were given to 
two legal heirs, namely, Mahendra Nath Soral and Asha Soral, who 
were allowed shares on the ground floor, whereas roof rights were 
given to Ravindra Nath Soral and Surendra Nath Soral who were 
granted portions in the first floor.  If the argument raised by the 
appellants is to be accepted at this stage, the same would amount to 
coming back to square one, where all the properties will have to be 
revalued for the purpose of partition and this will open a new chapter 
of litigation between the parties.  In our opinion that course is not the 
appropriate one in the case in hand, once the rights of the parties and 
their shares were determined by the Trial Court in the final decree 

Page 9 of 10 
 
dated 03.01.2009 and the judgment of the Trial Court was upheld by 
the High Court on 19.09.2018.  
23. 
 
The case in hand was one of the most appropriate case in 
which the Court should have tried for resolution of dispute by adopting 
alternate means namely mediation and conciliation. This Court in 
Afcons Infrastructure Limited vs. Cherian Varkey Construction 
Company Private Limited and Others6 had opined that dispute 
relating to partition/division amongst family members/coparceners 
/co-owners should normally be settled through Alternative Disputes 
Redressal (ADR) Process. Reference can be made to para 28 thereof: 
“28.  
 
All other suits and cases of civil nature in 
particular the following categories of cases (whether 
pending in civil courts or other special tribunals/forums) 
are normally suitable for ADR processes: 
 
(i) 
x x x x 
 
(ii)  
All cases arising from strained or soured 
relationships, including 
 
•  disputes relating to matrimonial causes, 
maintenance, custody of children; 
•  disputes relating to partition/division 
among family members/coparceners/co-
owners; and 
•  disputes relating to partnership among 
partners. 
 
(iii) 
x x x x 
 
6 (2010) 8 SCC 24: 2010 INSC 431 

Page 10 of 10 
 
 
(iv)      x x x x 
 
(v) 
x x x x 
 
 
The above enumeration of “suitable” and “unsuitable” 
categorisation of cases is not intended to be exhaustive or 
rigid. They are illustrative, which can be subjected to just 
exceptions or additions by the court/tribunal exercising 
its jurisdiction/discretion in referring a dispute/case to an 
ADR process.” 
 
23.1  
The Courts are required to explore these methods for 
amicable settlement of family disputes. 
24. 
 
For the reasons mentioned above, we do not find any merit 
in the present appeal, the same is accordingly dismissed.  There shall 
be no order as to costs. 
 
      
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
……………………………….……………..J. 
    (RAJESH BINDAL) 
 
 
……………………………….……………..J. 
(PRASANNA BHALACHANDRA VARALE) 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
New Delhi 
May 03, 2024.