2024 INSC 370
1 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2194 OF 2022 
 
NIRMALA  
 
 
 
 
 
    ...APPELLANT (S) 
  
VERSUS 
KULWANT SINGH & ORS. 
 
 
 ...RESPONDENT (S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
1. 
The present appeal is filed against the final judgment and 
order of the Punjab and Haryana High Court,1 dated 23rd August, 
2022. The High Court vide the impugned judgment allowed the 
petition filed under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, 
by the respondent No. 1 herein,2 who is the father of the 
detenu/minor child and directed the appellant herein,3 i.e., the 
 
1 Hereinafter, High Court 
2 Hereinafter, respondent-father 
3 Hereinafter, appellant-grandmother 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.05.03
14:16:50 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
maternal grandmother to hand over the custody of the minor 
child to respondent-father. 
2. 
Aggrieved by the impugned judgment, the appellant-
grandmother has filed the present petition. Notice was issued by 
this Court on 23rd September, 2022 and it was directed that in 
the meantime, the child shall remain in the custody of the 
appellant-grandmother. Thereafter, leave was granted by this 
Court on 21st November, 2022 and the interim order was 
confirmed to last until the decision of this appeal. 
3. 
The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeal, are as 
follows:  
3.1 The marriage took place between Dr. Kulwant Singh 
(respondent-father) and one Sangeeta on 5th July, 2014. This 
marriage was the second marriage for both of them.  
3.2 From the marriage, one child, namely Garvit4 was born on 
5th July, 2015.  
 
4 Hereinafter, minor child 

3 
 
3.3 In 2019, the mother of the minor child, Sangeeta, went 
missing and so, on 5th April, 2019, a First Information Report5 
was registered under Section 346 of the Indian Penal Code, 
1860.6 On the next day, i.e., 6th April, 2019, father of Sangeeta 
(who is the husband of the appellant-grandmother), lodged a 
complaint at the Women police Station, Rohtak, stating that his 
daughter was continuously harassed by her husband and in-
laws, and that since his daughter is missing since yesterday, he 
fears that her husband and in-laws have done something wrong 
with her.  
3.4 On 9th April, 2019, Sangeeta’s body was found in a canal 
and so, Section 304B IPC was added in the FIR. The matter was 
further investigated by the police and thereafter, ultimately the 
police prepared a cancellation report in the FIR in the year 2019, 
and the said cancellation report was submitted to the competent 
Court on 31st August, 2021.  
 
5 FIR No. 108 @ P.S. Civil Lines, Rohtak dated 5th April, 2019 (hereinafter, FIR) 
6 Hereinafter, IPC 

4 
 
3.5 During the investigation phase, the respondent-father had 
voluntarily handed over the minor child to the appellant-
grandmother. Not only that, but the respondent-father had by 
way of an affidavit dated 1st May, 2019, appointed the appellant-
grandmother as “Guardian” of the minor child and the 
“Caretaker” of a property,7 that was gifted by the Aunt of 
respondent-father (Birmi Devi) to the minor child. Since then, the 
custody of the minor child has been with the appellant-
grandmother.  
3.6 On 29th July, 2019, the respondent-father filed an 
application/complaint8 with the Child Welfare Committee, 
Rohtak,9 and sought the custody of the minor child on the ground 
that the appellant-grandmother took the minor child by cheating 
and fraud.  
 
7 Plot No. D-102 situated at Anantpuram, Jind Road, The Indraprastha Cooperative House Building 
Society Ltd., Rohtak 
8 No. 3312 
9 Hereinafter, CWC 

5 
 
3.7 The CWC took note of the affidavit recording the interaction 
with the minor child in the counselling session and recorded the 
statement of the appellant-grandmother, respondent-father, 
Uncle and Aunt of the respondent-father and Aunt of the minor 
child/sister of the respondent-father (one Sunita Devi).  
3.8 Based on the statements/counselling affidavits and other 
documents available on record, the CWC vide order dated 5th 
February, 2020, decided that the minor child is “a child in need 
of care and protection” as defined under Section 2(14) of the 
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015,10 
and the respondent-father being the biological father and 
employed in a reputed government post, is able to take care and 
nurture the child, in result, it directed the SHO,11 to take the 
custody of the minor child from the appellant-grandmother and 
hand him over to the respondent-father.  
 
10 Hereinafter, JJ Act  
11 Sadar Police Station 

6 
 
3.9 Aggrieved by the decision of the CWC, the appellant-
grandmother filed a Criminal Appeal on 11th February, 2020 
under Section 101 of the JJ Act,12 challenging the order dated 5th 
February, 2020, passed by the CWC.  
3.10 The Appellate Court,13 allowed the appeal, set aside the 
order under challenge and held that neither the minor child was 
“a child in care of need and protection” as defined under Section 
2(14) of the JJ Act nor the CWC had any jurisdiction to pass any 
order regarding the minor child. The Appellate Court further held 
that, the CWC has exceeded its jurisdiction by passing the order 
under challenge. Therefore, the order dated 5th February, 2020, 
passed by the CWC is not only illegal, but without jurisdiction 
also and the same is not in accordance with the provisions of the 
JJ Act.  
3.11 Aggrieved by the decision of the Appellate Court, the 
respondent-father filed a Criminal Writ Petition on 5th February, 
 
12 Criminal Appeal No. 93/2020 
13 Additional Sessions Judge, Rohtak 

7 
 
2021 before the High Court,14 under Article 226/227 of the 
Constitution of India for a writ in the nature of Habeas Corpus, 
seeking release of the minor child from the alleged illegal custody 
of the appellant-grandmother. 
3.12 Vide impugned order dated 23rd August, 2022, the learned 
Single Judge of the High Court, taking into consideration the 
principle that “welfare of the child is of paramount consideration”, 
allowed the petition filed by the respondent-father. The High 
Court held that the welfare of the child, who at that time was 7 
years old, will be best in the hands of the father. The High Court 
further directed that the appellant-grandmother and her 
husband shall also have visiting rights in case they so desire and 
for the next one year, they shall have a right to visit the house 
where the child resides for a period of 8 hours at least once a 
month. The High Court also kept open the rights of the parties 
 
14 CRWP-1485-2021 (O&M) 

8 
 
for invoking any remedy that may be available under any special 
law for the time being in force and in accordance with law.   
3.13 Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the appellant-
grandmother is before this Court. It must be noted that 
throughout the pendency of the present appeal, the custody of 
the minor child has remained with the appellant-grandmother. 
4. 
We have heard Shri Narender Hooda, learned senior counsel 
appearing for the appellant-grandmother and Smt. Rukhmini 
Bobde, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-father. 
5. 
Shri Narender Hooda submits that the learned Single Judge 
of the High Court has erred in allowing the petition.  He submits 
that in the facts of the present case, the learned Single Judge of 
the High Court ought to have taken into consideration that it is 
the respondent-father who had placed the custody of the minor 
child with the appellant-grandmother and as such, the custody 
of the minor child could not have been considered as an illegal 
custody.   He further submits that in such circumstances, the 

9 
 
learned Single Judge ought not to have entertained the petition 
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and relegated the 
respondent-father to the remedy available to him in law under 
the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.   
6. 
Shri Hooda further submits that the minor child is living 
with his grandparents from the day when the mother of the minor 
child i.e., the wife of the respondent-father had died.  It is 
submitted that uprooting the minor child from the company of 
his grandparents at this tender age would cause a psychological 
trauma to the minor child.   He submits that taking into 
consideration the best interest of the minor child, the leaned 
Single Judge of the High Court ought not to have passed the 
impugned order. He relies on the judgment of this Court in the 
case of Jose Antonio Zalba Diez Del Corral alias Jose Antonio 
Zalba vs. State of West Bengal and others15. 
 
15 2021 SCC OnLine SC 3434 

10 
 
7. 
Per contra, Smt. Rukhmini Bobde, learned counsel, 
submits that the respondent-father is a natural guardian being 
the father of the minor child under Section 6 of the Hindu 
Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.  She submits that the 
respondent-father is a well-educated person and is Ph.D. in 
Economics from Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak and he 
is serving as an Assistant Professor in Centre for Research in 
Rural and Industrial Development, Chandigarh.  She submits 
that the respondent-father earns well and is in a better position 
to look after the minor child.   
8. 
Smt. Bobde submits that, as a natural guardian, the 
respondent-father can shape the career of the minor child in a 
better manner.  She submits that the minor child when 
interacted before CWC has specifically stated that he wants to 
live with both his father as well as his grandmother.  She submits 
that the appellant-grandmother was appointed as a guardian 
vide affidavit dated 1st May 2019 executed by the respondent-

11 
 
father only for the purposes of being caretaker of the Plot which 
was gifted to the minor child by his aunt (Birmi Devi).  Smt. 
Bobde submits that the said affidavit cannot be construed to be 
appointment of the guardian for all the purposes.  She submits 
that, in any case, when the statute itself provides for as to who 
shall be the natural guardian, the said affidavit would not have 
much significance.  Smt. Bobde in support of his submissions 
relied on the judgment of this Court in the cases of Tejaswini 
Gaud and others vs. Shekhar Jagdish Prasad Tewari and 
others16 and Yashita Sahu vs. State of Rajasthan and 
others17. 
9. 
Though allegations and counter allegations have been made 
by the parties against each other, we do not propose to go into 
them as they may cause prejudice to the rights of either of the 
parties in the proceedings that may arise between them.   
 
16 (2019) 7 SCC 42 
17 (2020) 3 SCC 67 

12 
 
10. The question on the maintainability of the Habeas Corpus 
petition with regard to custody of the minor child has come up 
for consideration before this Court in several matters.  
11. This Court in the case of Tejaswini Gaud and others 
(supra) after considering the earlier cases, observed thus: 
“19. Habeas corpus proceedings is not to 
justify or examine the legality of the 
custody. Habeas corpus proceedings is a 
medium through which the custody of the 
child is addressed to the discretion of the 
Court. Habeas corpus is a prerogative writ 
which is an extraordinary remedy and the 
writ is issued where in the circumstances 
of the particular case, ordinary remedy 
provided by the law is either not available 
or is ineffective; otherwise a writ will not 
be issued. In child custody matters, the 
power of the High Court in granting the 
writ is qualified only in cases where the 
detention of a minor by a person who is 
not entitled to his legal custody. In view of 
the pronouncement on the issue in 
question by the Supreme Court and the 
High Courts, in our view, in child custody 
matters, the writ of habeas corpus is 
maintainable where it is proved that the 
detention of a minor child by a parent or 

13 
 
others was illegal and without any 
authority of law. 
 
20. In child custody matters, the ordinary 
remedy lies only under the Hindu Minority 
and Guardianship Act or the Guardians 
and Wards Act as the case may be. In 
cases arising out of the proceedings under 
the Guardians and Wards Act, the 
jurisdiction of the court is determined by 
whether the minor ordinarily resides 
within the area on which the court 
exercises such jurisdiction. There are 
significant 
differences 
between 
the 
enquiry under the Guardians and Wards 
Act and the exercise of powers by a writ 
court which is summary in nature. What 
is important is the welfare of the child. In  
the writ court, rights are determined only 
on the basis of affidavits. Where the court 
is of the view that a detailed enquiry is 
required, the court may decline to exercise 
the extraordinary jurisdiction and direct 
the parties to approach the civil court. It is 
only in exceptional cases, the rights of the 
parties to the custody of the minor will be 
determined in exercise of extraordinary 
jurisdiction on a petition for habeas 
corpus. 
 

14 
 
21. In the present case, the appellants are 
the sisters and brother of the mother 
Zelam who do not have any authority of 
law to have the custody of the minor child. 
Whereas as per Section 6 of the Hindu 
Minority and Guardianship Act, the first 
respondent father is a natural guardian of 
the minor child and is having the legal 
right to claim the custody of the child. The 
entitlement of father to the custody of 
child is not disputed and the child being a 
minor aged 1½ years cannot express its 
intelligent preferences. Hence, in our 
considered 
view, 
in 
the 
facts 
and 
circumstances of this case, the father, 
being the natural guardian, was justified 
in invoking the extraordinary remedy 
seeking custody of the child under Article 
226 of the Constitution of India.” 
 
12. It can thus be seen that this Court has held that the habeas 
corpus is a prerogative writ which is an extraordinary remedy.  It 
has been held that recourse to such a remedy should not be 
permitted unless the ordinary remedy provided by the law is 
either not available or is ineffective.  It has been held that in child 
custody matters, the power of the High Court in granting the writ 

15 
 
is qualified only in cases where the detention of a minor by a 
person who is not entitled to his legal custody. It has further been 
held that in child custody matters, the writ of habeas corpus is 
maintainable where it is proved that the detention of a minor 
child by a parent or others was illegal and without any authority 
of law.  
13. This Court further held that in child custody matters, the 
ordinary remedy lies only under the Hindu Minority and 
Guardianship Act or the Guardians and Wards Act as the case 
may be. It has been held that there are significant differences 
between the enquiry under the Guardians and Wards Act and the 
exercise of powers by a writ court which is summary in nature.  
It has further been held that what is important is the welfare of 
the child.  It has been further held that where the court is of the 
view that a detailed enquiry is required, the court may decline to 
exercise the extraordinary jurisdiction and direct the parties to 
approach the civil court.  

16 
 
14. In the facts of the said case, this Court found that the child 
being a minor, aged 1½ years, cannot express its intelligent 
preferences and in the facts and circumstances of said case, the 
father being the natural guardian was justified in invoking the 
extraordinary remedy seeking custody of the child under Article 
226 of the Constitution of India. 
15. The same legal position has been reiterated by this Court in 
the cases of Jose Antonio Zalba Diez Del Corral alias Jose 
Antonio Zalba (supra) and Rajeswari Chandrasekar Ganesh 
vs. State of Tamil Nadu and others18. 
16. It can thus be seen that no hard and fast rule can be laid 
down insofar as the maintainability of a habeas corpus petition 
in the matters of custody of a minor child is concerned.   As to 
whether the writ court should exercise its extraordinary 
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India or not 
will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.   
 
18 2022 SCC OnLine SC 885 

17 
 
17. In the present case, it will be relevant to refer to the case 
pleaded by the respondent-father.  The learned Single Judge of 
the High Court himself recorded the submissions of the 
respondent-father in the impugned judgment as under: 
“He further submitted that when the wife 
of the petitioner died, then at that point of 
time due to psychological and social 
reasons, the child was sent to the 
maternal grand-parents which was the 
need of the hour at that time since the 
petitioner 
himself 
was 
also 
under 
psychological 
stress 
and 
a 
family 
environment was required for the child 
especially from the grand-parents and that 
was the sole reason as to why the son of 
the petitioner who at that point of time was 
of the age of 5 years was sent to them to 
be taken care of.” 
 
18.  It can thus be clearly seen that according to the case of the 
respondent-father 
himself, 
in 
the 
peculiar 
facts 
and 
circumstances of the case, a family environment was required for 
the child especially from the grandparents and that he had 
placed the custody of the minor child with the appellant-
grandmother for taking his care.  It can thus clearly be seen that 

18 
 
it is not a case that the appellant-grandmother had illegally kept 
the custody of the minor child.  It is the respondent-father who 
had placed the custody of the minor child with the appellant-
grandmother.  
19. We are of the considered view that in the peculiar facts and 
circumstances of the case, the High Court ought not to have 
entertained the habeas corpus petition under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India.  Since a detailed enquiry including the 
welfare of the minor child and his preference would have been 
involved, such an exercise could be done only in a proceeding 
under the provisions of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.   
20. In any case, we are of the view that compelling a minor child 
at the tender age of 7 years to withdraw from the custody of his 
grandparents with whom he has been living for the last about 5 
years may cause psychological disturbances.   
21. In our view, an exercise for promoting the bond between the 
minor child and the respondent-father in a graded manner and 

19 
 
thereafter considering the grant of custody of minor child to the 
respondent-father taking into consideration the paramount 
interest of the welfare of the minor child would be required to be 
done in the present matter.  Such an exercise would not be 
permissible in the extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of 
the Constitution of India.   
22. We therefore find that the High Court was not justified in 
entertaining the petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of 
India.   The impugned judgment and order of the Punjab and 
Haryana dated 23rd August 2022 in CRWP-1485-2021 (O&M) is 
quashed and set aside.  The writ petition filed by the respondent-
father is dismissed. 
23. However, we clarify that no observation in the impugned 
judgment and order and in the present judgment and order 
would be binding on the proceedings if taken by the respondent-
father under the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and the 

20 
 
proceedings would be decided in accordance with law on its own 
merits.   
24. In the light of the aforesaid, we direct that in the event the 
respondent-father files an application under the provisions of the 
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, the competent Court shall 
decide the same expeditiously.  We further direct that in the event 
such an application is made, an order at least with regard to 
visitation rights would be passed within a period of 4 weeks from 
the making of such an application.    
25. The appeal is allowed in the above terms.  Pending 
applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
…….........................J.        
[B.R. GAVAI] 
 
 
 
…….........................J.        
[SANDEEP MEHTA] 
NEW DELHI; 
MAY 03, 2024