2024 INSC 30
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 5348-5349 OF 2019 
 
THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH 
AND OTHERS  
    
 
 
 
   …APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
YOGENDERA MOHAN SENGUPTA 
AND ANOTHER  
 
 
               …RESPONDENT(S) 
WITH 
TRANSFERRED CASE (C) NO. 2 OF 2023 
INDEX 
I  
INTRODUCTION 
 
Paras 1 to 2 
II. 
FACTS  
 
Paras 3 to 4.1 
III. 
SUBMISSIONS  
 
Paras 5 to 29 
IV. 
CONSIDERATION 
 
Paras 30 to 122 
 
A. 
Legislative Scheme of the TCP Act. 
 
Paras 30 to 44 
 
B. 
Nature of functions/powers of the 
Authorities under Chapter-IV of the TCP 
Act. 
 
Paras 45 to 61 
 
C. 
Whether the NGT could have issued 
directions to the legislative body to 
exercise its legislative functions in a 
particular manner? 
 
Paras 62 to 70 
 
D. 
Whether observations in Para 47 of the 
Mantri Techzone Private Limited (supra) 
would operate as res judicata? 
 
Paras 71 to 78 
 
E. 
Development Plan 2041. 
 
Paras 79 to 90 
 
F. 
Whether the NGT was justified in 
passing the order dated 14th October 
2022 when the High Court was seized of 
the same issue during the pendency of 
Civil Writ Petition No.5960 of 2022? 
 
Paras 91 to 112 
 
G. 
Balancing the need for Development 
and Protection of the Environment. 
 
Paras 113 to 122 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
 
Paras 123 to 128 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.01.11
13:38:29 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
List of Abbreviations 
 
1.  NGT 
- 
National Green Tribunal, Principal 
Bench, New Delhi 
2.  First order of 
NGT 
- 
Order of NGT dated 16th November 
2017 
3.  Second order of 
NGT 
- 
Order of NGT dated 14th October 
2022 
4.  SPA 
- 
Shimla Planning Area 
5.  CWP 
- 
Civil Writ Petition 
6.  TCP Act 
- 
Himachal Pradesh Town & Country 
Planning Act, 1977 
7.  1978 Rules 
- 
Himachal Pradesh Town & Country 
Planning Rules, 1978 
8.  OA 
- 
Original Application 
9.  FC Act 
- 
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 
10. NDMA 
- 
National 
Disaster 
Management 
Authority 
11. HPMC Act 
- 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1994 
12. BPMC Act 
- 
Bombay 
Provincial 
Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1949 
13. MRTP Act 
- 
Maharashtra Regional and Town 
Planning Act, 1966 
14. AT Act 
- 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
I.  
INTRODUCTION 
 
Civil Appeal Nos. 5348-5349 OF 2019 
 
1. 
These appeals challenge the judgment and order dated 
16th November 2017 (hereinafter referred to as the “first order 
of NGT”) passed by the National Green Tribunal, Principal 
Bench, New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the “NGT”) in 
Original Application (OA) No. 121 of 2014, whereby various 

3 
 
directions were issued by the NGT, and the order dated 16th 
July 2018 passed by the NGT in Review Application No. 8 of 
2018, whereby the review sought of the first order of NGT by 
the present appellants was dismissed. 
Transferred Case (C) No. 2 of 2023 
2. 
The draft development plan for 22,450 hectares of Shimla 
Planning Area (hereinafter referred to as “SPA”) which was 
finalized vide a notification dated 16th April 2022, came to be 
stayed by the NGT, vide an interim order dated 12th May 2022. 
By the said order, it restrained the appellants herein from 
taking any further steps in pursuance of the draft development 
plan of the SPA.  The State of Himachal Pradesh and its 
instrumentalities-appellants 
herein 
preferred 
Civil 
Writ 
Petition (CWP) No. 5960 of 2022 titled State of Himachal 
Pradesh and another v. Yogendra Mohan Sengupta and 
Others before the High Court of Himachal Pradesh challenging 
the said interim order.  Despite the pendency of the said writ 
petition, the NGT, vide its final order dated 14th October 2022 
(hereinafter referred to as the “second order of NGT”) in OA No. 
297 of 2022, held that the draft development plan, being in 
conflict with the first order of NGT, was illegal and cannot be 

4 
 
given effect to.  Thereafter by an amendment in the said CWP 
No. 5960 of 2022, the second order of NGT also came to be 
challenged before the High Court of Himachal Pradesh. On 
14th November 2022, this Court passed an order in Civil 
Appeal Nos. 5348-5349 of 2019 transferring the said CWP No. 
5960 of 2022 from the High Court of Himachal Pradesh to 
itself, which came to be re-numbered as Transferred Case (C) 
No. 2 of 2023. 
II.  FACTS 
Facts giving rise to filing of Civil Appeal Nos.5348-5349 of 
2019: 
3. 
Facts, in brief, giving rise to the filing of Civil Appeal Nos. 
5348-5349 of 2019, are as follows: 
3.1 The Himachal Pradesh Town & Country Planning Act, 
1977 (hereinafter referred to as “TCP Act”) was enacted by the 
State of Himachal Pradesh in the year 1977.  Vide Government 
Notification dated 30th November 1977, the SPA came to be 
constituted.  The State of Himachal Pradesh, in exercise of 
powers conferred upon it by Section 87 of the TCP Act, enacted 
the Himachal Pradesh Town & Country Planning Rules, 1978 
(hereinafter referred to as “1978 Rules”).  The existing land-

5 
 
use for SPA was notified by a notice dated 29th December 1977 
and was adopted by another notice dated 14th March 1978. 
3.2 The interim development plan for SPA was approved by a 
notification dated 24th March 1979 for the period 1979-2001.  
Vide notification dated 11th August 2000 issued by the 
Department of Town & Country Planning (Government of 
Himachal Pradesh), further amendments were carried out to 
the interim development plan for the SPA notified by the 
aforesaid notification dated 24th March 1979.  
3.3 By another notification dated 7th December 2000 issued 
by the Department of Town & Country Planning (Government 
of Himachal Pradesh), in pursuance of the notification dated 
11th August 2000, a survey of “Green Belt” within existing Core 
& restricted areas of the SPA was carried out and areas were 
declared as “Green Belt”. 
3.4 A writ petition being CWP No. 4595 of 2011 titled Rajeev 
Varma and Others v. State of Himachal Pradesh and 
Others came to be filed in the year 2011 before the High Court 
of Himachal Pradesh.  A direction was sought in the said writ 
petition to the State of Himachal Pradesh to prepare a 

6 
 
development plan for the SPA in accordance with the TCP Act 
within a time-bound schedule. 
3.5 Respondent No.1 herein Yogendera Mohan Sengupta 
filed an OA (No. 121 of 2014) before the NGT, wherein he made 
the following prayers: 
 
(i) 
“Direct the State Government and the Respondent 
Nos. 3 and 4 to recognize the areas mentioned in 
notification dated 7.12.2000 as forest and any non-
forest activity should not be allowed without prior 
permission under Section 2 of the Forest. 
(ii) 
Direct the State Government not to change the land 
use in any forests/green belt area as stated in clause 
d of notification dated 11.8.2000 to protect the 
ecology, environment and future of Shimla. 
(iii) Pass any other orders as the Hon’ble Tribunal may 
deem fit and proper in facts and circumstances of the 
case.” 
 
3.6 The appellant-State of Himachal Pradesh (respondent in 
the said OA) filed a reply dated 23rd July 2014 before the NGT, 
wherein it specifically contended that the use of the words 
“Green Belt” does not include or bring the areas under forests 
and the “Green Belt” includes both forest and non-forest areas 
and that no permission for construction or any non-forestry 
activity would be allowed on forest land without approval 
under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (hereinafter referred 
to as the “FC Act”). 

7 
 
3.7 Despite the assurance given by the State Government, 
the NGT, suo motu, extended the scope of the application and 
vide an ad-interim order dated 30th May 2014 banned all types 
of construction activities in the Green Belt areas of Shimla 
covered under the notification dated 7th December 2000. 
3.8 Thereafter, vide order dated 12th October 2015 in the said 
OA No. 121 of 2014, the NGT constituted a Committee 
comprising of officers from the National Disaster Management 
Authority (NDMA), a senior scientist from Wadia Institute of 
Himalayan Geology, Dehradun as nominated by the Director 
and other officials of the State and Central Governments for 
submitting its report on various aspects including water 
supply and the strength of carrying capacity of the hills. 
3.9 Pursuant to the said order dated 12th October 2015 
passed by the NGT, the Additional Chief Secretary, 
Department of Town & Country Planning (Government of 
Himachal Pradesh) issued a notification dated 6th November 
2015 for the constitution of an Expert Committee.  The Expert 
Committee submitted a report to the NGT on 29th August 
2016.  Along with an affidavit filed by the State of Himachal 

8 
 
Pradesh, the final report of the Expert Committee came to be 
submitted to the NGT on 20th May 2017. 
3.10 Thereafter the first order of NGT came to be passed, 
whereby it issued various directions to the appellants herein 
and further banned all kinds of construction activities in 
core/forest/green areas in Shimla and further restricted the 
construction and re-construction activities in the entire SPA. 
3.11 Some of the directions issued vide first order of NGT, inter 
alia, prohibited new construction of any kind, i.e. residential, 
institutional and commercial, in any part of the core and 
green/forest area and also directed that even in the other 
areas which fall within the SPA, construction would not be 
permitted beyond 2 storeys + attic floor.  It further directed 
that, in case of unsafe and unfit residential structures in the 
core and green/forest areas, re-construction would only be 
allowed for residential purposes and that too, not beyond 2 
storeys and an attic floor. 
3.12 In direction No. VIII in the first order of NGT, it directed 
the State to finalise the development plan within three months 
from the date of the pronouncement of its first order.  It also 
directed the said development plan to be notified in accordance 

9 
 
with law and directed to take into consideration the directions 
and precautions as suggested in the first order of NGT while 
finalizing the development plan. 
3.13 The NGT also constituted an Implementation Committee 
and a Supervisory Committee entrusted with the responsibility 
for carrying out the specific directions given under the first 
order of NGT and to provide NOCs or necessary permissions 
to the stakeholders, whether State or private parties. 
3.14 The appellants thereafter filed a Review Application No. 8 
of 2018 seeking review of the first order of NGT.  However, the 
same was dismissed vide order dated 16th July 2018.  Being 
aggrieved thereby, Civil Appeal Nos.5348-5349 of 2019 have 
been filed before this Court. 
Facts giving rise to filing of Transferred Case (C) No.2 of 
2023: 
4. 
In pursuance of the directions issued vide first order of 
NGT and in exercise of the powers conferred upon it under the 
TCP Act and the 1978 Rules framed thereunder, the State of 
Himachal Pradesh published a draft development plan on 8th 
February 2022.  It is to be noted that various directions were 
also issued by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh from time 

10 
 
to time in CWP No. 4595 of 2011 for finalization of the 
development plan in accordance with the TCP Act.  The State 
of Himachal Pradesh also invited objections and suggestions 
from the general public in relation to the draft development 
plan. In all, 97 objections/suggestions were received by the 
State of Himachal Pradesh within stipulated time-period and 
the same were heard by the Director in due course.  CWP Nos. 
23 and 37 of 2022 were also filed before the High Court of 
Himachal Pradesh praying inter alia for stay of the draft 
development plan. 
4.1 In the meantime, respondent No.1 herein-Yogendera 
Mohan Sengupta filed another OA (No. 297 of 2022) before the 
NGT in relation to the draft development plan.  The NGT, vide 
interim order dated 12th May 2022, stayed the draft 
development plan and restrained the State of Himachal 
Pradesh from taking any further steps in pursuance of the 
draft development plan.  Being aggrieved thereby, the State of 
Himachal Pradesh filed CWP No. 5960 of 2022 under Article 
226/227 of the Constitution of India before the High Court of 
Himachal Pradesh.  Despite the pendency of the said CWP No. 
5960 of 2022, the NGT, vide its second order, held that the 

11 
 
draft development plan, being in conflict with the first order of 
NGT, is illegal and cannot be given effect to.  The appellants 
herein filed an application in CWP No. 5960 of 2022, before 
the High Court of Himachal Pradesh, praying for amending the 
writ petition so as to challenge the second order of NGT.  Since 
common issues were being considered by this Court in Civil 
Appeal Nos.5348-5349 of 2019, this Court vide an order dated 
14th November 2022, directed the transfer of the said CWP No. 
5960 of 2022 before itself. 
III. SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
We have heard Shri Anup Rattan, learned Advocate 
General appearing on behalf of the State of Himachal Pradesh, 
Shri Vinay Kuthalia, learned Senior Counsel appearing on 
behalf of the Shimla Municipal Corporation and Shri Sanjay 
Parikh, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the 
common respondent No.1 in Civil Appeal Nos.5348-5349 of 
2019 and Transferred Case (Civil) No.2 of 2023.. 
Submissions on behalf of the Appellants: 
6. 
It is submitted on behalf of the appellants that the State 
was fully aware of its duties and responsibilities as envisaged 
by the Constitution of India as well as the relevant statutory 

12 
 
provisions. It is submitted that while finalizing the 
development plan, the State has adopted a proactive role to 
ensure that a balance is struck between the developmental 
and environmental issues. 
7. 
It is submitted on behalf of the appellants that the 
development plan has been finalized in exercise of statutory 
powers vested in the appellants under Sections 13 to 20 of the 
TCP Act, after considering all the recommendations and 
suggestions of various expert bodies and technical committees 
as well as the directions and recommendations of the NGT. 
8. 
It is submitted on behalf of the appellants that a bare 
perusal of Chapters 12 and 17 of the development plan would 
go to show that the entire environmental aspects as well as the 
suggestions and directions of the NGT issued vide first order 
of NGT have been fully and duly considered before finalizing 
the development plan. 
9. 
It is submitted on behalf of the appellants that while 
taking steps to finalise the development plan, the appellants 
have attempted to balance the developmental requirements for 
catering to the needs of the expanding population, with the 
safeguards to preserve and protect the environment. It is 

13 
 
submitted that while finalizing the development plan, the 
entire procedure as prescribed under the Statutes was duly 
followed. 
10. The learned Advocate General as well as Shri Kuthalia 
submitted that the planning regulations divide the areas into 
different categories.  It is submitted that, in order to protect 
the environment, various stringent provisions have been made 
such as: 
(i) 
“In the core area, only 2 storeys + attic is permitted 
and parking floor is permitted only in those plots 
which are accessible by motorable road; 
(ii) 
In the non-core area and the Planning Area, only 3 
storeys + attic is permitted and parking floor is only 
permitted in plots which are adjacent to motorable 
roads; and 
(iii) Rebuilding and reconstruction of old buildings has 
been permitted strictly on old lines.  With the efflux of 
time in many buildings, there are different owners of 
each floor; 
(iv) 
In green belt areas which are lying between 
constructed areas, only single storey construction 
with attic is permissible.  However, no tree will be 
permitted to be felled in any such area and no 

14 
 
construction will be permitted in forest area without 
following the mandate of the Forest Conservation Act.” 
 
11. It is further submitted on behalf of the appellants that 
appropriate setbacks have also been made mandatory in order 
to avoid overcrowding.  It is submitted that because of the 
peculiar climate of Shimla, the attic is necessary because the 
roof is required to be sloping in hilly terrain, to allow for run-
off of rain and snow.  It is further submitted that construction 
will only be permitted after a soil investigation report of the 
area and assessment of structural stability by an expert are 
made.  The construction is required to be approved by a 
qualified architect or engineer. 
12. The first and second orders of NGT are also challenged 
by the appellants on the ground that the jurisdiction of NGT is 
limited to the civil cases where a substantial question relating 
to environment (including enforcement of any legal right 
relating to environment), is involved and such question arises 
out of the implementation of the enactments specified in 
Schedule I of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 
(hereinafter referred to as the “NGT Act”).  It is submitted that 
Schedule I of the NGT Act does not include town and country 

15 
 
planning and as such, the orders passed by the NGT are 
without jurisdiction. 
13. It is further submitted on behalf of the appellants that 
the exercise of power for finalisng the development plan is a 
quasi-legislative power and the NGT could not have issued 
directions to exercise that power in a particular manner.  It is 
submitted that the said would amount to encroachment upon 
the statutory functions of the State which are entrusted to it 
by virtue of the TCP Act. 
14. It is also submitted on behalf of the appellants that the 
NGT could not have suo motu enlarged the scope of OA No. 121 
of 2014 as it is a body constituted under a statute and it has 
to exercise its jurisdiction within the four corners of the 
statute. 
15. It is submitted on behalf of the appellants that various 
directions issued by the NGT are contrary to the provisions of 
the TCP Act, Himachal Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 
1994 (for short, “HPMC Act”) and the various Bye-laws, Rules 
and Notifications framed thereunder and as such, not 
sustainable in law.  A reliance in this respect is placed on the 
following judgments of this Court: 

16 
 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Bus 
Stand 
Management 
and 
Development Authority (H.P. BSM & DA) v. Central 
Empowered Committee and Others1, State of Madhya 
Pradesh v. Centre for Environment Protection Research 
and Development and Others2, Director General (Road 
Development) National Highways Authority of India v. 
Aam Aadmi Lokmanch and Others3, Tamil Nadu Pollution 
Control Board v. Sterlite Industries (India) Limited and 
Others4 and Techi Tagi Tara v. Rajendra Singh Bhandari 
and Others5. 
16. It is submitted that since the development plan was 
prepared by the State in exercise of its constitutional powers 
under Article 162 of the Constitution of India and statutory 
powers under the TCP Act and HPMC Act, the NGT could not 
have issued directions to act in a manner which would be 
contrary to those provisions.  Reliance in this respect is placed 
on the following judgments of this Court: 
 
1 (2021) 4 SCC 309 : 2021 INSC 18 
2 (2020) 9 SCC 781 : 2020 INSC 516 
3 (2021) 11 SCC 566 : 2020 INSC 452 
4 (2019) 19 SCC 479 : 2019 INSC 220 
5 (2018) 11 SCC 734 : 2017 INSC 986 

17 
 
State of Himachal Pradesh and Others v. Satpal Saini6, 
Ambesh Kumar (Dr.) v. Principal, L.L.R.M. Medical College, 
Meerut and Others7 and Bishambhar Dayal Chandra 
Mohan and Others v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Others8. 
17. The learned Advocate General further submitted that the 
directions issued by the NGT, rather than subserving any 
public interest are contrary to the public interest inasmuch as 
vast number of citizens are being put to great hardships and 
inconvenience. It is submitted that on account of the 
directions issued by the NGT, re-construction of the old 
structures which are in dilapidated condition and which is 
permissible on the existing plinth area, has been brought to a 
complete halt. 
18. The learned Advocate General further submitted that the 
State is alive to the requirement of protecting environment and 
as such, the Cabinet has taken a decision wherein it 
prescribed more stringent measures. 
19. Both the orders of NGT are also challenged on the ground 
that when the High Court was seized of the matter with regard 
 
6 (2017) 11 SCC 42  
7 1986 Supp SCC 543 : 1986 INSC 275 
8 (1982) 1 SCC 39 : 1981 INSC 189 

18 
 
to the draft development plan, the NGT could not have 
entertained the proceedings and passed the orders therein.  
Reliance in this respect is placed on the judgment of this Court 
in the case of State of Andhra Pradesh v. Raghu 
Ramakrishna Raju Kanumuru (Member of Parliament)9. 
Submissions on behalf of the Respondents: 
20. Shri Parikh, on the contrary, submitted that the first 
order of NGT threw light on the serious concerns regarding the 
fragile ecology of State of Himachal Pradesh in general and 
Shimla in particular.  The first order of NGT has also tried to 
address issues with regard to continuous instances of 
landslides and collapsing of buildings, cloud bursts and 
earthquakes. 
21. Shri Parikh further submitted that the first order of NGT 
is based on the report presented by the High Powered 
Committee appointed by it.  The NGT has considered in detail 
the report of the High Powered Committee, various other 
documents and government records.  After consideration of 
the same, directions have been given in order to ensure the 
 
9 (2022) 8 SCC 156 : 2022 INSC 632 

19 
 
protection of ecology and environment. It is submitted that the 
development plan is finalized keeping in view the directions 
issued by the NGT with regard to core areas, green areas, 
sinking areas and heritage areas. 
22. It is submitted on behalf of the respondents that the NGT 
has rightly issued the directions to re-construct in core area 
or green/forest area within legally permissible statutory limits 
of the old buildings and in any case not beyond 2 storeys and 
an attic floor.  It is submitted that further direction was that if 
any construction, particularly public utilities like hospitals, 
schools, offices are proposed to be constructed beyond 2 
storeys plus an attic floor, then the plan has to be duly 
approved and permission has to be obtained from the 
concerned authorities. 
23. Shri Parikh submitted that the “Green Belt” areas, by 
notification dated 7th December 2000, are covered under the 
dictionary meaning of ‘forest’ and are thus required to be 
protected under the provisions of the FC Act as per the order 

20 
 
of this Court passed in the case of T.N. Godavarman 
Thirumulkpad v. Union of India and Others10. 
24. Shri Parikh submitted that the challenge to the second 
order of NGT is also without substance inasmuch as the 
directions issued by the NGT, vide its first order, were binding 
upon the appellants and the draft development plan could not 
have been notified in contravention of the directions of the 
NGT.  A reliance in this respect is placed on the judgment of 
this Court in the case of Punjab Termination of Agreement 
Act, 2004, In Re, Special Reference No. 1 of 200411.  
Reliance is also placed on the judgment of this court in the 
case of State of Tamil Nadu v. State of Kerala and 
Another12. 
25. Shri Parikh further submitted that this Court in the case 
of 
Mantri 
Techzone 
Private 
Limited 
v. 
Forward 
Foundation and Others13 has held that the NGT has 
overriding powers over anything inconsistent contained in any 
other law or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any 
 
10 (1997) 2 SCC 267 : 1997 INSC 226 
11 (2017) 1 SCC 121 : 2016 INSC 1018 
12 (2014) 12 SCC 696 : 2014 INSC 373 
13 (2019) 18 SCC 494 : 2019 INSC 315 

21 
 
law. He further submitted that this Court has held that while 
providing for restoration of environment in an area, the NGT 
can specify buffer zones around specific lakes and waterbodies 
in contradiction with zoning regulations under these statutes 
or Revised Master Plan. 
26. Shri Parikh relies on the judgments of this Court in the 
cases of Pragnesh Shah v. Dr. Arun Kumar Sharma and 
Others14, 
Supreme 
Court Monitoring 
Committee 
v. 
Mussoorie Dehradun Development Authority and Others15 
and Resident’s Welfare Association and Another v. Union 
Territory of Chandigarh and Others16  in support of the 
proposition that the NGT has jurisdiction to issue directions 
in order to protect the ecologically sensitive areas. 
27. It is submitted that the jurisdiction of this Court under 
Section 22 of the NGT Act is very limited and an interference 
is warranted only when the court finds that there is an error 
apparent on the face of record in the findings of the NGT. 
28. It is submitted that if the directions issued by the NGT, 
which provide for a precautionary approach, are not followed 
 
14 (2022) 11 SCC 493 : 2022 INSC 47 
15 (1997) 11 SCC 605 
16 (2023) 8 SCC 643 : 2023 INSC 22 

22 
 
and the construction activities as provided in the development 
plan are carried out, it will be disastrous for future generations 
and will result in calamities like frequent landslides due to 
floods and earthquakes, cloudbursts and other natural 
disasters resulting in loss to the human lives and property.  It 
is therefore submitted that the present appeals as well as the 
transferred case arising out of the writ petitions pending before 
the High Court are liable to be dismissed. 
Submissions on behalf of the Interveners/Land Owners: 
29. It was argued on behalf of the interveners who were 
owners of the plots in “Green Belt” areas that on account of 
the restrictions imposed in the “Green Belt” areas, they were 
deprived of enjoyment of their property which would be 
violative of Article 300A of the Constitution of India.  It was 
therefore submitted that a direction be given to the State to 
pay compensation to such owners for not being in a position 
to utilize their plot of lands.  We prima facie find that such an 
issue could be beyond the scope of the present proceedings. 
 
 

23 
 
IV.  CONSIDERATION: 
A.  
Legislative Scheme of the TCP Act. 
30. It will be apposite to refer to the Preamble of the TCP Act, 
which reads thus: 
“An act to make provision for planning and 
development and use of land; to make better 
provision for the preparation of development plans 
and sectoral plans with a view to ensuring that town 
planning schemes are made in a proper manner and 
their execution is made effective to constitute the 
Town and Country Development Authority for proper 
implementation of town and country development 
plan, 
to 
provide 
for 
the 
development 
and 
administration of special areas through the Special 
Area Development Authority, to make provision for 
the compulsory acquisition of land required for the 
purpose of the development plans and for purposes 
connected with the matters aforesaid.” 
 
31. It can thus be seen that the TCP Act has been enacted to 
make provision for planning and development and use of land; 
to make better provision for the preparation of development 
plans and sectoral plans with a view to ensuring that town 
planning schemes are made in a proper manner and their 
execution is made effective.  It also provides for constitution of 
Town and Country Development Authority for proper 
 
 As amended vide Himachal Pradesh Town and Country Planning (Amendment) 
Act 2015 (Act 14 of 2015). 

24 
 
implementation of town and country development plan.  It also 
provides for development and administration of special areas 
through the Special Area Development Authority. 
32. Section 13 of the TCP Act reads thus: 
“13. Planning Area.—(1) The State Government may, 
by notification, constitute planning areas for the 
purposes of this Act and define the limits thereof. 
(2) The State Government may, by notification,- 
(a) alter the limits of a planning area so as 
to include therein or exclude there from 
such area as may be specified in the 
notification; 
(b) amalgamate two or more planning 
areas so as to constitute one planning 
area; 
(c) divide any planning area into two or 
more planning areas; 
(d) declare that the whole or part of the 
area constituting the planning area shall 
cease to be planning area or part thereof.” 
 
33. It can thus be seen that under Section 13 of the TCP Act, 
the State Government is empowered to constitute planning 
areas for the purposes of the Act and define the limits thereof.  
It is also empowered to alter the limits of a planning area, 
amalgamate two or more planning areas and also to divide any 
planning area into two or more planning areas. 

25 
 
34. Section 14 of the TCP Act reads thus: 
“14. Director to prepare Development Plans.—
Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder the Director shall— 
*(a) prepare an existing land use map 
indicating the natural hazard proneness of 
the area; 
*(b) prepare an interim development plan 
keeping in view the regulation for land use 
zoning for natural hazard prone area; 
(c) prepare a development plan keeping in 
view the regulation for land use zoning for 
natural hazard prone area; 
(d) prepare a sectoral plan; 
(e) carry such surveys and inspections and 
obtain 
such 
pertinent 
reports 
from 
Government 
departments, 
local 
authorities and public institutions as may 
be necessary for the preparation of the 
plans; 
(f) perform such duties and functions as 
are 
supplemental, 
incidental, 
and 
consequential to any of the foregoing 
functions or as may be assigned by the 
State Government for the purpose of 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.” 
 
35. Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Section 14 of the TCP Act have 
been amended vide Himachal Pradesh Town and Country 
 
 As amended vide Himachal Pradesh Town and Country Planning (Amendment) 
Act 2013 (Act No. 41 of 2013). 

26 
 
Planning (Amendment) Act 2013 (Act No. 41 of 2013). It can 
be seen that these clauses provide a special emphasis on the 
areas indicating the natural hazard. 
36. Section 15 of the TCP Act reads thus: 
“15. Existing Land use Maps.—(1) The Director 
shall carry out the survey and prepare an existing 
land use map and forthwith publish the same in such 
manner as may be prescribed together with public 
notice of the preparation of the map and of the place 
or places where the copies may be inspected, inviting 
objections and suggestions in writing from any 
person with respect thereto within thirty days from 
the date of publication of such notice. 
(2) After the expiry of the period specified in the notice 
published under sub-section (1), the Director may, 
after allowing a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard to all such persons who have filed the 
objections or suggestions, make such modification 
therein as may be considered desirable. 
(3) As soon as may be after the map is adopted with 
or without modifications the Director shall publish a 
public notice of the adoption of the map and the place 
or places where the copies of the same may be 
inspected. 
(4) A copy of the notice shall also be published in the 
Official Gazette and it shall be conclusive evidence of 
the fact that the map has been duly prepared and 
adopted.” 
37. Under Section 15 of the TCP Act, the Director is required 
to carry out the survey and prepare an existing land use map 

27 
 
and, forthwith publish the same in such manner as may be 
prescribed together with public notice of the preparation of the 
map.  It also provides for inviting objections and suggestions 
in writing from any person with respect thereto within thirty 
days from the date of publication of such notice.  Sub-section 
(2) of Section 15 thereof provides for allowing a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard to all such persons who have filed 
the objections or suggestions.  It also enables the Director to 
make such modification therein as may be considered 
desirable.  Sub-section (3) thereof provides that after the map 
is adopted with or without modifications, the Director shall 
publish a public notice of the adoption of the map.  A copy of 
the notice is required to be published in the Official Gazette. 
38. Section 15-A of the TCP Act deals with “Freezing of 
landuse pending preparation of existing landuse map under 
Section 15(1)”.  Section 16 of the TCP Act deals with “Freezing 
of land use on the publication of the existing land use map 
under Section 15”.  Section 17(1) of the TCP Act deals with 
“Interim Development Plans”.   

28 
 
39. The provisions of Sections 18, 19 and 20 of the TCP Act 
are most relevant for considering the issues involved in the 
present matter, which read thus: 
“18. Development Plan.—A development plan 
shall— 
(a) indicate broadly the land use proposed 
in the planning areas; 
(b) allocate broadly areas or sector of land 
for,— 
(i) residential, industrial, commercial 
or agricultural purposes, 
(ii) open spaces, parks and gardens, 
green belts, zoological gardens and 
play grounds, 
(iii) public institutions and offices, 
(iv) such special purposes as the 
Director may deem fit; 
(c) lay down the pattern of National and 
State highways connecting the planning 
area with the rest of the region ring roads, 
arterial roads, and the major roads within 
the planning area; 
(d) provide for the location of airports, 
railway 
stations, 
bus 
terminal 
and 
indicate the proposed extension and 
development of railways; 
(e) make proposals for general landscaping 
and preservation of natural areas; 
(f) project the requirement of the planning 
area of such amenities and utilities as 
water, drainage, electricity and suggest 
their fulfilment; 
(g) propose broad based regulations for 
sectoral development, by way of guideline, 
within each sector of the location, height, 

29 
 
size of buildings and structures, open 
spaces, court-yards and the use to which 
such buildings and structures and land 
may be put “including regulations for 
façade control and sloping roof conforming 
to the hill architecture and environs”; 
(h) lay down the broad based traffic 
circulation patterns in a city; 
(f) suggest architectural control features, 
elevation and frontage of buildings and 
structures; 
(j) indicate measures for flood control, 
*“and protection against land slide”, 
prevention of air and water pollution, 
disposal 
of 
garbage 
and 
general 
environmental control. 
19. Publication of Draft Development Plan.—(1) 
The Director shall forthwith publish the draft 
development plans prepared under section 18 in 
such manner as may be prescribed together with a 
notice of the preparation of the draft development 
plan and the place or places where the copies may be 
inspected, inviting objections and the suggestions in 
writing from any person with respect thereto, within 
thirty days from the date of publication of such 
notice. Such notice shall specify in regard to the draft 
development 
plan 
the 
following 
particulars, 
namely:— 
(i) the existing land use maps; 
(ii) a narrative report, supported by maps 
and charts, explaining the provisions of 
the draft development plan; 
(iii) the phasing of implementation of the 
draft development plan as suggested by 
the Director; 
(iv) the provisions for enforcing the draft 
development plan and stating the manner 
 
 As amended vide Himachal Pradesh Town and Country Planning (Amendment) 
Act 2013 (Act No. 41 of 2013). 

30 
 
in which permission to development may 
be obtained; 
(v) an approximate estimate of the cost of 
land acquisition for public purposes and 
the cost of works involved in the 
implementation of the plan. 
(2) The Director shall, not later than ninety days after 
the date of expiry of the notice period under sub-
section 
(1), 
consider 
all 
the 
objections 
and 
suggestions as may be received within the period 
specified in the notice under sub-section (1) and 
shall, after giving reasonable opportunity to all 
persons affected thereby of being heard, make such 
modifications in the draft development plan as he 
may consider necessary, and submit not later than 
six months after the publication of the draft 
development plan, the plan so modified, to the State 
Government for approval together with all connected 
documents, plans, maps and charts. 
20. Sanction of Development Plan.—(1) As soon as 
may be after the submission of the development plan 
under Section 19, the State Government may either 
approve the development plan or may approve it with 
such modifications as it may consider necessary or 
may return it to the Director to modify the same or to 
prepare a fresh plan in accordance with such 
directions as it may issue in this behalf. 
(2) Where the State Government approves the 
development plan with modifications, the State 
Government shall, by a notice published in the 
Official Gazette invite objections and suggestions in 
respect of such modifications within a period of not 
less than thirty days from the date of publication of 
the notice in the Official Gazette. 
(3) After considering objections and suggestions and 
after giving a hearing to the persons desirous of being 
heard the State Government may confirm the 
modification in the development plan. 
(4) The State Government shall publish the 
development plan as approved, under the foregoing 

31 
 
provisions in the Official Gazette and shall along with 
the plan publish a public notice, in such manner as 
may 
be 
prescribed, 
of 
the 
approval 
of 
the 
development plan and the place or places where the 
copies of the approved development plan may be 
inspected. 
(5) The development plan shall come into operation 
from the date of publication thereof in the Official 
Gazette and as from such date shall be binding on all 
Development Authorities constituted under this Act 
and all local authorities functioning within the 
planning area. 
(6) After the coming into operation of the development 
plan, the interim development plan shall stand 
modified or altered to the extent the proposals in the 
development plan are at variance with the interim 
development plan.” 
 
40. It can thus be seen that the development plan is required 
to consist of various factors.  Clause (b) of Section 18 of the 
TCP Act provides that it shall allocate broadly areas or sector 
of land for various purposes including residential, industrial, 
commercial or agricultural.  It shall also provide for open 
spaces, parks and gardens, green belts, zoological gardens and 
play-grounds.  It is also required to make proposals for general 
landscaping and preservation of natural areas.  It is required 
to project the requirement of the planning area of such 
amenities and utilities as water, drainage, electricity and 
suggest their fulfilment.  It is also required to propose broad-
based regulations for sectoral development, by way of guide-

32 
 
lines, within each sector of the location, height, size of 
buildings and structures, open spaces, court-yards and the 
use to which such buildings and structures and land may be 
put including regulations for façade control and sloping roof 
conforming to the hill architecture and environs. 
41. It can thus be seen that a special emphasis is placed on 
regulations for façade control and sloping roof conforming to 
the hill architecture and environs.  Clause (j) of Section 18 of 
the TCP Act, also specifically provides to indicate measures for 
flood control, protection against land slide, prevention of air 
and water pollution, disposal of garbage and general 
environmental control. 
42. Under Section 19(1) of the TCP Act, the Director is 
required to publish the draft development plan prepared under 
Section 18 in such manner as may be prescribed together with 
a notice of the preparation of the draft development plan and 
the place or places where the copies may be inspected.  It 
provides for inviting objections and suggestions, in writing, 
from any person with respect thereto, within thirty days from 
the date of publication of such notice.  The notice to be issued 
under Section 19 requires that it should specify the existing 

33 
 
land use maps, a narrative report supported by maps and 
charts, explaining the provisions of the draft development 
plan, the phasing of implementation of the draft development 
plan as suggested by the Director, the provisions for enforcing 
the draft development plan and stating the manner in which 
permission to development may be obtained and the 
approximate estimate of the cost of land acquisition for public 
purposes and the cost of works involved in the implementation 
of the plan. 
43. Under sub-section (2) of Section 19 of the TCP Act, the 
Director is required to consider all the objections and 
suggestions as may be received within the period specified in 
the notice under sub-section (1) thereof, not later than ninety 
days after the date of expiry of the notice period. He is also 
required to give reasonable opportunity to all persons affected 
thereby of being heard and make such modifications in the 
draft development plan as he may consider necessary.  He is 
also required to submit, not later than six months after the 
publication of the draft development plan, the plan so 
modified, to the State Government for approval together with 
all connected documents, plans, maps and charts. 

34 
 
44. Under Section 20 of the TCP Act, after the development 
plan under Section 19 is submitted to the State Government, 
it may either approve the development plan or it may approve 
it with such modifications as it may consider necessary or may 
return it to the Director to modify the same or to prepare a 
fresh plan in accordance with such directions as it may issue 
in this behalf.  Under sub-section (2) thereof, where the State 
Government 
approves 
the 
development 
plan 
with 
modifications, the State Government shall, by a notice, 
published in the Official Gazette, invite objections and 
suggestions in respect of such modifications within a period of 
not less than thirty days from the date of publication of the 
notice in the Official Gazette.  Under sub-section (3) thereof, 
after considering objections and suggestions and after giving a 
hearing to the persons desirous of being heard, the State 
Government may confirm the modification in the development 
plan.  Sub-section (4) thereof requires the State Government 
to publish the development plan as approved, under the 
foregoing provisions in the Official Gazette and shall along with 
the plan publish a public notice, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, of the approval of the development plan and the 

35 
 
place or places where the copies of the approved development 
plan may be inspected.  Sub-section (5) thereof provides that 
the development plan shall come into force from the date of 
publication thereof in the Official Gazette and as from such 
date shall be binding on all Development Authorities 
constituted under this Act and all local authorities functioning 
within the planning area.  Sub-section (6) thereof provides that 
after the coming into operation of the development plan, the 
interim development plan shall stand modified or altered to 
the extent the proposals in the development plan are at 
variance with the interim development plan. 
B.  
Nature of functions/powers of the Authorities under 
Chapter-IV of the TCP Act. 
 
45. A perusal of the aforesaid provisions, leaves no manner 
of doubt, that Chapter-IV of the TCP Act is a complete code, 
providing for preparation of 
draft development plan, 
publication of draft development plan with a publication of its 
notice, inviting objections and suggestions, giving reasonable 
opportunity to all persons affected of being heard, making 
modifications in the draft development plan as may be 

36 
 
considered 
necessary 
by 
the 
Director 
and 
thereafter 
submitting it to the State Government. 
46. Under Section 20 of the TCP Act, the State Government 
is empowered to either approve the development plan or may 
approve it with such modifications as it may consider 
necessary or may return it to the Director to modify the same 
or to prepare a fresh plan in accordance with such directions 
as it may issue in this behalf.  Sub-section (2) thereof provides 
that where the State Government approves the development 
plan with modifications, it is again required to be published in 
the Official Gazette to invite objections and suggestions in 
respect of such modifications.  The State Government is 
empowered to confirm the modification in the development 
plan after considering objections and suggestions and after 
giving a hearing to the persons desirous of being heard.   
47. It could thus be seen that Chapter-IV of the TCP Act 
provides for inviting objections and suggestions at two stages.  
Firstly, at the stage of Section 19 where the Director is 
required to invite objections and suggestions to the draft 
development plan and after giving an opportunity of being 
heard and considering the objections and suggestions, submit 

37 
 
the development plan to the State Government.  Under Section 
20 of the TCP Act, a second opportunity of making objections 
and suggestions has been provided.  Again, the State 
Government is required to give an opportunity of hearing to 
such objectors before granting final approval to the 
development plan. 
48. A perusal of the scheme of the TCP Act and particularly 
Chapter-IV thereof would establish beyond doubt that the 
powers vested with the Director and the State Government are 
for enacting a piece of delegated legislation.   
49. The distinction between the legislative function and 
administrative function is succinctly described by this Court 
in the case of Union of India and Another v. Cynamide 
India Ltd. and Another17, which reads thus: 
“7. The third observation we wish to make is, price 
fixation is more in the nature of a legislative activity 
than any other. It is true that, with the proliferation 
of delegated legislation, there is a tendency for the 
line between legislation and administration to vanish 
into an illusion. Administrative, quasi-judicial 
decisions tend to merge in legislative activity and, 
conversely, legislative activity tends to fade into and 
present an appearance of an administrative or quasi-
judicial activity. Any attempt to draw a distinct line 
between legislative and administrative functions, it 
 
17 (1987) 2 SCC 720 : 1987 INSC 100 

38 
 
has been said, is “difficult in theory and impossible 
in practice”. Though difficult, it is necessary that the 
line must sometimes be drawn as different legal 
rights and consequences may ensue. The distinction 
between the two has usually been expressed as “one 
between the general and the particular”. “A legislative 
act is the creation and promulgation of a general rule 
of conduct without reference to particular cases; an 
administrative act is the making and issue of a 
specific direction or the application of a general rule 
to a particular case in accordance with the 
requirements of policy”. “Legislation is the process of 
formulating a general rule of conduct without 
reference to particular cases and usually operating in 
future; administration is the process of performing 
particular acts, of issuing particular orders or of 
making decisions which apply general rules to 
particular cases.” It has also been said: “Rule-making 
is normally directed toward the formulation of 
requirements having a general application to all 
members of a broadly identifiable class” while, “an 
adjudication, on the other hand, applies to specific 
individuals or situations”. But, this is only a broad 
distinction, not necessarily always true. …..”  
 
50. Though, this Court, in the celebrated case of Cynamide 
India Ltd. (supra) observed that any attempt to draw a 
distinct line between legislative and administrative functions 
is difficult in theory and impossible in practice, it attempted to 
draw a line between the two inasmuch as different legal rights 
and consequences may ensue, in exercise of such functions. It 
has been held that the distinction between the two has usually 
been expressed as “one between the general and the 

39 
 
particular”. A legislative act is the creation and promulgation 
of a general rule of conduct without reference to particular 
cases; whereas an administrative act is the making and issue 
of a specific direction or the application of a general rule to a 
particular case in accordance with the requirements of policy. 
It has been held that legislation is the process of formulating 
a general rule of conduct without reference to particular cases 
and usually operating in future. Whereas, administration is 
the process of performing particular acts of issuing particular 
orders or of making decisions which apply general rules to 
particular cases. It has also been held that rule-making is 
normally directed towards the formulation of requirements 
having a general application to all members of a broadly 
identifiable class; whereas an adjudication, on the other hand, 
applies to specific individuals or situations. 
51. When we apply the aforesaid principles to the facts of the 
present case, it will be amply clear that the preparation of draft 
development plan under Section 18 of the TCP Act, finalization 
of the same under Section 19 of the TCP Act by the Director 
and grant of approval by the State under Section 20 of the TCP 
Act are all legislative functions.  The provisions enable the 

40 
 
delegated legislative body to formulate the provisions which 
will have a general application to all members of the broadly 
identifiable classes. 
52. In the case of Tulsipur Sugar Co. Ltd. v. The Notified 
Area Committee, Tulsipur18, again a challenge was made to 
the notification issued under Section 3 of the U.P. Town Areas 
Act, 1914 on the ground that before issuance of final 
notification, the principles of audi alteram partem were not 
followed. While rejecting the said contention and holding the 
exercise of powers as a piece of conditional legislation, this 
Court observed thus: 
“7. …..The power of the State Government to make a 
declaration under Section 3 of the Act is legislative in 
character because the application of the rest of the 
provisions of the Act to the geographical area which 
is declared as a town area is dependent upon such 
declaration. Section 3 of the Act is in the nature of a 
conditional legislation. Dealing with the nature of 
functions of a non-judicial authority, Prof. S.A. De 
Smith 
in Judicial 
Review 
of 
Administrative 
Action (3rd Edn.) observes at p. 163: 
“However, the analytical classification of a 
function may be a conclusive factor in 
excluding the operation of the audi 
alteram partem rule. It is generally 
assumed that in English law the making 
of a subordinate legislative instrument 
 
18 (1980) 2 SCC 295 : 1980 INSC 38 

41 
 
need not be preceded by notice or hearing 
unless the parent Act so provides.” 
……… 
9. We are, therefore, of the view that the maxim “audi 
alteram partem” does not become applicable to the 
case by necessary implication.” 
 
53. It is thus clear that this Court held that a declaration 
under Section 3 of the U.P. Town Areas Act, 1914 provided for 
enabling the application of the rest of the provisions of the Act 
to the geographical area which is declared as a town area.  It 
was thus held that the declaration made under Section 3 was 
legislative in character.   
54. In the case of Sundarjas Kanyalal Bhatija and Others 
v. Collector, Thane, Maharashtra and Others19, the 
Government of Maharashtra had issued a draft notification 
under Section 3(3) of the Bombay Provincial Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1949 (for short, “BPMC Act”).  The draft 
notification proposed for formation of “Kalyan Corporation”. 
Against the said proposal, there were many objections and 
representations received from different sections. In the earlier 
draft notification, the area of Ulhasnagar Municipal Council 
 
19 (1989) 3 SCC 396 : 1989 INSC 202 

42 
 
was proposed to be merged in the proposed area of Kalyan 
Corporation.  However, taking into consideration the 
objections, the area of Ulhasnagar Municipal Council was 
excluded from the area of Kalyan Corporation while issuing 
the final notification.  The same was challenged before the 
High Court by filing a writ petition.  One of the reasons which 
weighed with the High Court while allowing the petition was 
that the opportunity of hearing was not given to one of the 
parties while issuing the final notification under Section 3(2) 
of the BPMC Act.  It will be relevant to refer to the following 
observations of this Court while reversing the order of the High 
Court in the said case: 
“28. Equally, the rule issued by the High Court to 
hear the parties is untenable. The Government in 
the exercise of its powers under Section 3 is not 
subject to the rules of natural justice any more than 
is legislature itself. The rules of natural justice are 
not applicable to legislative action plenary or 
subordinate. The procedural requirement of hearing 
is not implied in the exercise of legislative powers 
unless hearing was expressly prescribed. The High 
Court, therefore, was in error in directing the 
Government to hear the parties who are not entitled 
to be heard under law.” 
 
55. It could thus be seen that this Court clearly held that the 
issuance of draft notification, consideration of objections and 

43 
 
publication of final notification are done in exercise of 
legislative powers.  The procedural requirement of hearing 
would not be implied unless the statute so provides for. 
56. This Court, in the case of Pune Municipal Corporation 
and Another v. Promoters and Builders Association and 
Another20, had an occasion to consider somewhat similar 
provisions under the Maharashtra Regional and Town 
Planning Act, 1966 (for short, “MRTP Act”).  In the said case, 
this Court was considering the power of the State Government 
to make any changes of its own in the modifications submitted 
by the Planning Authority under Section 37 of the MRTP Act.  
This Court observed thus: 
“5. Making of DCR or amendments thereof are 
legislative functions. Therefore, Section 37 has to be 
viewed as repository of legislative powers for effecting 
amendments to DCR. That legislative power of 
amending DCR is delegated to the State Government. 
As 
we 
have 
already 
pointed 
out, 
the 
true 
interpretation of Section 37(2) permits the State 
Government to make necessary modifications or put 
conditions while granting sanction. In Section 37(2), 
the legislature has not intended to provide for a 
public hearing before according sanction. The 
procedure for making such amendment is provided 
in Section 37. Delegated legislation cannot be 
questioned for violating the principles of natural 
justice in its making except when the statute itself 
provides for that requirement. Where the legislature 
 
20 (2004) 10 SCC 796 : 2004 INSC 348 

44 
 
has not chosen to provide for any notice or hearing, 
no one can insist upon it and it is not permissible to 
read natural justice into such legislative activity. 
Moreover, a provision for “such inquiry as it may 
consider necessary” by a subordinate legislating body 
is generally an enabling provision to facilitate the 
subordinate legislating body to obtain relevant 
information from any source and it is not intended to 
vest 
any 
right 
in 
anybody. 
(Union 
of 
India v. Cynamide India Ltd. [(1987) 2 SCC 720] , 
SCC paras 5 and 27. See generally H.S.S.K. 
Niyami v. Union 
of 
India [(1990) 
4 
SCC 
516] 
and Canara Bank v. Debasis Das [(2003) 4 SCC 557 
: 2003 SCC (L&S) 507] .) While exercising legislative 
functions, unless unreasonableness or arbitrariness 
is pointed out, it is not open for the Court to interfere. 
(See 
generally ONGC v. Assn. 
of 
Natural 
Gas 
Consuming Industries of Gujarat [1990 Supp SCC 
397] .) Therefore, the view adopted by the High Court 
does not appear to be correct.” 
 
57. It could thus be seen that this Court in the case of Pune 
Municipal Corporation (supra) held that making of 
Development Control Rules (DCR) or amendments thereof are 
legislative functions. 
58. In the said case, the Court also found that since the 
legislature did not provide for a public hearing before 
according sanction, the delegated legislation could not be 
questioned for violating the principles of natural justice in its 
making except when the statue itself provide for that 
requirement.  The Court went on to hold that where the 

45 
 
legislature has not chosen to provide for any notice or hearing, 
no one can insist upon it and it is not permissible to read 
natural justice into such legislative activity. 
59. Again, in the case of Bangalore Development Authority 
v. Aircraft Employees’ Cooperative Society Limited and 
Others21, the scheme for finalization of the development plan 
as provided under the Karnataka Town and Country Planning 
Act, 1961 was considered and the said power was held to be 
in exercise of the legislative powers. 
60. Recently, a three-Judges Bench of this Court in the case 
of Rajeev Suri v. Delhi Development Authority and 
Others22, after considering the earlier judgments, held that 
the change of use of government land which is of general 
nature would be a function which has a quasi-legislative hue 
to it. 
61. It can thus be seen that it is a settled position of law that 
the exercise of power for the preparation, finalization and 
approval of development plan is a power exercised by the 
delegatee for enacting a subordinate piece of legislation.  We 
 
21 (2012) 3 SCC 442 : 2012 INSC 50 
22 (2022) 11 SCC 1: 2021 INSC 4 

46 
 
therefore have no manner of doubt in holding that the 
aforesaid provisions as contained in the TCP Act provide for 
exercise of power by a delegatee to enact a piece of subordinate 
legislation. 
C.  
Whether the NGT could have issued directions to the 
legislative body to exercise its legislative functions in 
a particular manner? 
62. A perusal of the first order of NGT would reveal that the 
NGT, in effect, has issued directions to the authority 
empowered to enact the development plan, to do so in a 
particular manner.  The question therefore that will have to be 
considered is as to whether the NGT could have exercised its 
jurisdiction in such a manner, to issue such directions.   
63. In the case of V.K. Naswa v. Home Secretary, Union of 
India and Others23, the petitioner-in-person had approached 
this Court to issue directions to the Central Government, 
through the Ministry of Law & Justice, to amend the law for 
taking action against a person for showing any kind of 
disrespect to the national flag or for not observing the terms 
contained in the Flag Code of India, 2002.  In the alternative, 
 
23 (2012) 2 SCC 542 : 2012 INSC 10 

47 
 
it was prayed by the petitioner-in-person that this Court may 
be pleased to issue direction(s) in that regard.  
64. This Court, in the said case, after surveying various 
earlier judgments on the issue, observed thus: 
“6. It is a settled legal proposition that the court 
can neither legislate nor issue a direction to the 
legislature to enact in a particular manner. 
7. In Mallikarjuna Rao v. State of A.P. [(1990) 2 SCC 
707 : 1990 SCC (L&S) 387 : (1990) 13 ATC 724 : AIR 
1990 SC 1251] and V.K. Sood v. Deptt. of Civil 
Aviation [1993 Supp (3) SCC 9 : 1993 SCC (L&S) 907 
: (1993) 25 ATC 68 : AIR 1993 SC 2285] , this Court 
has held that the writ court, in exercise of its power 
under Article 226, has no power even indirectly to 
require the executive to exercise its law-making 
power. The Court observed that it is neither legal nor 
proper for the High Court to issue directions or 
advisory sermons to the executive in respect of the 
sphere which is exclusively within the domain of the 
executive under the Constitution. The power under 
Article 309 of the Constitution to frame rules is the 
legislative power. This power under the Constitution 
has to be exercised by the President or the Governor 
of a State, as the case may be. The courts cannot 
usurp the functions assigned to the executive 
under 
the 
Constitution 
and 
cannot 
even 
indirectly require the executive to exercise its 
law-making power in any manner. The courts 
cannot assume to themselves a supervisory role 
over the rule-making power of the executive 
under Article 309 of the Constitution. While 
deciding the said case, the Court placed reliance on 
a large number of judgments, particularly Narinder 
Chand Hem Raj v. UT, H.P. [(1971) 2 SCC 747 : AIR 
1971 SC 2399] , where it has been held that 
legislative power can be exercised only by the 
legislature or its delegate and none else. 

48 
 
8. In State of H.P. v. Parent of a Student of Medical 
College [(1985) 3 SCC 169 : AIR 1985 SC 910] , this 
Court deprecated the practice adopted by the courts 
to issue directions to the legislature to enact a 
legislation to meet a particular situation observing : 
(SCC p. 174, para 4) 
“4. … The direction given by the Division 
Bench was really nothing short of an 
indirect attempt to compel the State 
Government to initiate legislation with a 
view to curbing the evil of ragging, for 
otherwise it is difficult to see why, after the 
clear and categorical statement by the 
Chief Secretary on behalf of the State 
Government that the Government will 
introduce legislation if found necessary 
and so advised, the Division Bench should 
have proceeded to again give the same 
direction. Thus the Division Bench was 
clearly not entitled to do. It is entirely a 
matter for the executive branch of the 
Government to decide whether or not to 
introduce any particular legislation.” 
9. In Asif Hameed v. State of J&K [1989 Supp (2) 
SCC 364 : AIR 1989 SC 1899] this Court while 
dealing with a case like this at hand observed : (SCC 
p. 374, para 19) 
“19. … While doing so the court must 
remain within its self-imposed limits. The 
court sits in judgment on the action of a 
coordinate branch of the Government. 
While exercising power of judicial review of 
administrative action, the court is not an 
appellate authority. The Constitution does 
not permit the court to direct or advise the 
executive in matters of policy or to 
sermonise qua any matter which under the 
Constitution lies within the sphere of 
legislature or executive.” 
10. In Union 
of 
India v. Deoki 
Nandan 
Aggarwal [1992 Supp (1) SCC 323 : 1992 SCC (L&S) 

49 
 
248 : (1992) 19 ATC 219 : AIR 1992 SC 96] , this 
Court similarly observed : (SCC p. 332, para 14) 
“14. … It is not the duty of the court either 
to enlarge the scope of the legislation.… 
The court cannot rewrite, recast or 
reframe the legislation for the very good 
reason that it has no power to legislate. 
The power to legislate has not been 
conferred on the courts.” 
11. Similarly 
in Ajaib 
Singh v. Sirhind 
Coop. 
Marketing-cum-Processing Service Society Ltd. [(1999) 
6 SCC 82 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 1054 : AIR 1999 SC 1351] 
, this Court held that the court cannot fix a period of 
limitation, if not fixed by the legislature, as “the 
courts can admittedly interpret the law and do not 
make laws”. The court cannot interpret the statutory 
provision in such a manner “which would amount to 
legislation intentionally left over by the legislature”. 
12. A similar view has been reiterated by this Court 
in Union 
of 
India v. Assn. 
for 
Democratic 
Reforms [(2002) 5 SCC 294 : AIR 2002 SC 2112] 
observing that the court cannot issue direction to the 
legislature for amending the Act or Rules. It is for 
Parliament to amend the Act or Rules. In District 
Mining Officer v. TISCO [(2001) 7 SCC 358] , this Court 
held that function of the court is only to expound the 
law and not to legislate. 
13. Similarly, in Supreme Court Employees' Welfare 
Assn. v. Union of India [(1989) 4 SCC 187 : 1989 SCC 
(L&S) 569] , this Court held that the court cannot 
direct the legislature to enact a particular law for the 
reason that under the constitutional scheme 
Parliament exercises sovereign power to enact law 
and no outside power or authority can issue a 
particular piece of legislation. (See also State of 
J&K v. A.R. Zakki [1992 Supp (1) SCC 548 : 1992 
SCC (L&S) 427 : (1992) 20 ATC 285 : AIR 1992 SC 
1546] .) 
14. In Union of India v. Prakash P. Hinduja [(2003) 6 
SCC 195 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 1314 : AIR 2003 SC 2612] 

50 
 
, this Court held that if the court issues a direction 
which amounts to legislation and is not complied 
with by the State, it cannot be held that the State has 
committed the contempt of court for the reason that 
the order passed by the court was without 
jurisdiction and it has no competence to issue a 
direction amounting to legislation. 
15. The issue involved herein was considered by this 
Court in University of Kerala v. Council of Principals 
of Colleges [(2010) 1 SCC 353 : AIR 2010 SC 2532] . 
The Court elaborately explained the scope of 
separation of powers of different organs of the State 
under our Constitution; the validity of judicial 
legislation and if it is at all permissible, its limits; and 
the validity of judicial activism and the need for 
judicial restraint, etc. The Court observed : (SCC p. 
361, para 13) 
“13. … ‘19. At the outset, we would say 
that it is not possible for this Court to give 
any directions for amending the Act or the 
statutory rules. It is for Parliament to 
amend the Act and the rules.’ [Ed. : As 
observed in Union of India v. Assn. for 
Democratic Reforms, (2002) 5 SCC 294, p. 
309, para 19.] ” 
16. In State of U.P. v. Jeet S. Bisht [(2007) 6 SCC 586] 
, this Court held that issuing any such direction may 
amount to amendment of law which falls exclusively 
within the domain of the executive/legislature and 
the court cannot amend the law. 
17. In Delhi Jal Board v. National Campaign for 
Dignity 
and 
Rights 
of 
Sewerage 
and 
Allied 
Workers [(2011) 8 SCC 568 : (2011) 2 SCC (L&S) 375] 
, this Court while dealing with the issue made the 
observation that in exceptional circumstances where 
there is inaction by the executive, for whatever 
reason, the judiciary must step in, in exercise of its 
constitutional obligations to provide a solution till 
such time the legislature acts to perform its role by 
enacting proper legislation to cover the field. (See 
also Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan [(1997) 6 SCC 241 

51 
 
: 1997 SCC (Cri) 932 : AIR 1997 SC 3011] ; Common 
Cause v. Union of India [(2008) 5 SCC 511 : AIR 2008 
SC 2116] and Destruction of Public and Private 
Properties v. State of A.P. [(2009) 5 SCC 212 : (2009) 
2 SCC (Cri) 629 : AIR 2009 SC 2266] ) 
18. Thus, it is crystal clear that the court has a very 
limited role and in exercise of that, it is not open to 
have judicial legislation. Neither the court can 
legislate, nor has it any competence to issue 
directions to the legislature to enact the law in a 
particular manner.” 
[emphasis supplied by us] 
 
65. Constitution of India recognizes the independence and 
separation of powers amongst the three branches of the State 
viz. the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary. Each of 
the branches are co-equal. The Parliament or the Legislature 
is entrusted with the function of legislation, i.e., enacting the 
laws.  The Executive is entrusted with the function and power 
to implement those laws and discharge their functions in 
accordance with the provisions made in the Constitution of 
India and the laws so enacted. The Judiciary is entrusted with 
the function to ensure that the laws enacted by the Legislature 
are within the four corners of the Constitution of India and 
that the Executive acts within the four corners of the 
Constitution of India and the laws enacted by the Legislature. 
As to what should be the laws and the policy behind the said 
laws is clearly within the domain of the Legislature.  It is a 

52 
 
different matter for Judiciary to examine as to whether a 
particular piece of legislation stands the scrutiny of law within 
the limited grounds of judicial review available.  However, 
giving a direction or advisory sermons to the Executive in 
respect of the sphere which is exclusively within the domain 
of the Executive or the Legislature would neither be legal nor 
proper.  The Court cannot be permitted to usurp the functions 
assigned to the Executive, the Legislature or the subordinate 
legislature. The Court cannot also assume a supervisory role 
over the rule-making power of the Executive under Article 309 
of the Constitution of India. 
66. It is a settled law that the Constitution of India does not 
permit the courts to direct or advise the Executive in the 
matters of policy or to sermonize qua any matter which under 
the Constitution lies within the sphere of Legislature or 
Executive.  It is also settled that the courts cannot issue 
directions to the Legislature for enacting the laws in a 
particular manner or for amending the Acts or the Rules.  It is 
for the Legislature to do so. 

53 
 
67. A Constitution Bench, in the case of Manoj Narula v. 
Union of India24, was considering various questions.  One of 
the questions that has been considered was whether by taking 
recourse to the doctrine of advancing constitutional culture, 
could a court read a disqualification to the already expressed 
disqualifications either provided under the Constitution or 
under the Representation of People Act, 1951.  Answering the 
question in the negative, the Court observed thus: 
“67. The question that is to be posed here is whether 
taking recourse to this doctrine for the purpose of 
advancing constitutional culture, can a court read a 
disqualification 
to 
the 
already 
expressed 
disqualifications provided under the Constitution 
and the 1951 Act. The answer has to be in the 
inevitable negative, for there are express provisions 
stating the disqualifications and second, it would 
tantamount to crossing the boundaries of judicial 
review.” 
 
68. This Court, in the case of Satpal Saini (supra), 
considered whether it was permissible for the High Court to 
call upon the State Government to amend the provisions of 
Section 118 of the Himachal Pradesh Tenancy and Land 
Reforms Act, 1972.  The directions were issued by the High 
Court to the State Government to make amendment within 90 
 
24 (2014) 9 SCC 1 : 2014 INSC 568 

54 
 
days. Allowing the appeal filed by the State Government, this 
Court held that the High Court, while issuing the above 
directions, acted in a manner contrary to the settled 
limitations on the power of judicial review under Article 226 of 
the Constitution of India.  It held that the directions cannot be 
issued to the legislature to enact a law.  The power to enact 
legislation is a plenary constitutional power which is vested in 
the Parliament and the State Legislatures. 
69. It can thus be seen that it is a settled position of law that 
neither the High Courts while exercising powers under Article 
226 of the Constitution nor this Court while exercising powers 
under Article 32 of the Constitution can direct the legislature 
or its delegatee to enact a law or subordinate legislation in a 
particular manner.  If the High Courts and this Court, in their 
extra-ordinary powers under Articles 226 and 32 of the 
Constitution cannot do so, the answer to the question as to 
whether a Tribunal constituted under a statute, having a 
limited jurisdiction, can do so or not, would be obviously ‘No’. 
70. In that view of the matter, we find that the first order of 
NGT is liable to be set aside on the short ground that it has 
transgressed its limitations and attempted to encroach upon 

55 
 
the field reserved for the delegatee to enact a piece of delegated 
legislation.  We are of the considered view that when the TCP 
Act empowers the State Government and the Director to 
exercise the powers to enact a piece of delegated legislation, 
the NGT could not have imposed fetters on such powers and 
directed it to exercise its powers in a particular manner. 
D.  
Whether observations in Para 47 of the Mantri 
Techzone Private Limited (supra) would operate as 
res judicata? 
71. A reliance in this respect is placed by respondent No.1 on 
the judgment of this Court in the case of Mantri Techzone 
Private Limited (supra).  It will be relevant to refer to the 
arguments advanced by the State Government and the other 
private parties in the said case, which read thus: 
“27. The learned Advocate General, Shri Udaya 
Holla, appearing for the appellant State of Karnataka 
in CAs Nos. 4923-24 of 2017, has submitted that the 
State of Karnataka is also aggrieved by the order of 
NGT to the extent of setting aside the buffer zone in 
respect of waterbodies and drains specified in the 
Revised Master Plan, 2015, and enlargement of the 
buffer zone in respect of lakes and Rajakaluves. It is 
also aggrieved by the order of NGT directing the 
authorities 
to 
demolish 
all 
the 
offending 
constructions raised/built in the buffer zone, which 
will result in demolition of 95% of the buildings in 
Bengaluru. It is submitted that the Revised Master 
Plan is statutory in nature and NGT has no power, 
competence or jurisdiction to consider the validity or 
vires 
of 
any 
statutory 
provision/regulation. 

56 
 
Therefore, the order of NGT to that extent is liable to 
be set aside. 
28. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 
appellants in other cases, have also supported the 
arguments of the learned Advocate General. It was 
contended that the Revised Master Plan provides for 
a 30 m buffer zone around the lakes and a buffer zone 
of 50 m, 25 m and 15 m from the primary, secondary 
and tertiary drains, respectively to be measured from 
the centre of the drain. Vide the impugned judgment, 
NGT has revised these buffer zones and has directed 
that the buffer zone be maintained for 75 m around 
the lake and 50, 35 and 25 m respectively from the 
primary, secondary and tertiary drain, respectively. 
Variation of buffer zone, as directed by NGT is 
without any legal and scientific basis and has the 
effect of amending the Revised Master Plan, 2015, 
without there being any challenge to the same or any 
relief sought with respect to the said Revised Master 
Plan.” 
 
72. It will be relevant to refer to the contention made by the 
counsel appearing on behalf of the applicants in the said case, 
which reads thus: 
“29. On the other hand, Shri Sajan Poovayya, 
learned Senior Counsel, appearing for the applicants, 
has fairly submitted that the applications were filed 
only against the appellants in CAs Nos. 5016 and 
8002-03 of 2016 (Respondents 9 and 10). He has no 
objection to set aside the order insofar as the 
appellants in other appeals including the State of 
Karnataka are concerned. He has also no objection 
to set aside the general conditions and directions of 
NGT in para 1 of the order dated 4-5-2016 [Forward 
Foundation v. State of Karnataka, 2016 SCC OnLine 
NGT 1409] except the directions issued against 
Respondents 9 and 10. In view of the above, it is not 

57 
 
necessary to examine the contentions of the learned 
Advocate General in Civil Appeals Nos. 4923-24 of 
2017. It is also not necessary to consider the 
contentions urged in the other civil appeals except 
the appeals filed by Respondents 9 and 10.” 
 
73. It could thus be seen that this Court has specifically 
recorded the submissions made by the counsel that he has no 
objection if this Court sets aside the general conditions and 
directions of NGT in para 1 of the order dated 4th May 2016 in 
the case of Forward Foundation v. State of Karnataka25, 
except the directions issued against Respondents 9 and 10.   It 
could thus be seen that this Court, in view of the submissions 
recorded on behalf of the counsel for the applicants, did not 
find it necessary to consider the contentions urged in the other 
civil appeals except the appeals filed against Respondents 9 
and 10.  As such, the observations made in para 47 of Mantri 
Techzone Private Limited (supra) will have to be construed 
as restricted to the cases of respondent Nos. 9 and 10.  The 
position is further clarified from the observations of this Court 
in the said case in paras 60-61.   
 
25 2016 SCC OnLine NGT 1409 

58 
 
74. As to what could be a binding precedent has been 
succinctly observed by this Court in the case of Union of India 
and Others v. Dhanwanti Devi and Others26, which reads 
as under: 
“9. ……It is not everything said by a Judge while 
giving judgment that constitutes a precedent. The 
only thing in a Judge's decision binding a party is the 
principle upon which the case is decided and for this 
reason it is important to analyse a decision and 
isolate from it the ratio decidendi. According to the 
well-settled theory of precedents, every decision 
contains three basic postulates—(i) findings of 
material facts, direct and inferential. An inferential 
finding of facts is the inference which the Judge 
draws from the direct, or perceptible facts; (ii) 
statements of the principles of law applicable to the 
legal problems disclosed by the facts; and (iii) 
judgment based on the combined effect of the above. 
A decision is only an authority for what it actually 
decides. What is of the essence in a decision is its 
ratio and not every observation found therein nor 
what logically follows from the various observations 
made in the judgment. Every judgment must be read 
as applicable to the particular facts proved, or 
assumed to be proved, since the generality of the 
expressions which may be found there is not 
intended to be exposition of the whole law, but 
governed and qualified by the particular facts of the 
case in which such expressions are to be found. It 
would, therefore, be not profitable to extract a 
sentence here and there from the judgment and to 
build upon it because the essence of the decision is 
its ratio and not every observation found therein. The 
enunciation of the reason or principle on which a 
question before a court has been decided is alone 
binding as a precedent. The concrete decision alone 
 
26 (1996) 6 SCC 44 : 1996 INSC 911 

59 
 
is binding between the parties to it, but it is the 
abstract ratio 
decidendi, 
ascertained 
on 
a 
consideration of the judgment in relation to the 
subject-matter of the decision, which alone has the 
force of law and which, when it is clear what it was, 
is binding. It is only the principle laid down in the 
judgment that is binding law under Article 141 of the 
Constitution. A deliberate judicial decision arrived at 
after hearing an argument on a question which arises 
in the case or is put in issue may constitute a 
precedent, no matter for what reason, and the 
precedent by long recognition may mature into rule 
of stare decisis. It is the rule deductible from the 
application of law to the facts and circumstances of 
the case which constitutes its ratio decidendi.” 
 
75. This Court, in the case of Dhanwanti Devi (supra) in 
paragraph 9, has held that it is not profitable to extract a 
sentence here and there from the judgment and to build upon 
it.  It has been held that the essence of the decision is its ratio 
and not every observation found therein. It has been held that 
a deliberate judicial decision arrived at after hearing an 
argument on a question which arises in the case or is put in 
issue would constitute a precedent.   
76. Though at a first blush, the observations made in para 
47 of the judgment in the case of Mantri Techzone Private 
Limited (supra), would appear to support the case of the 
respondents, but if the entire judgment in the said case is 
perused, it is not so.   It can clearly be seen that the learned 

60 
 
Advocate General of the State has specifically argued that the 
Revised Master Plan is statutory in nature and the NGT has 
no power, competence or jurisdiction to consider the validity 
or vires of any statutory provision/regulation. It was therefore 
argued that the order of the NGT to that extent was liable to 
be set aside.  It was similarly argued on behalf of the other 
appellant that the order of the NGT impugned therein which 
revised buffer zones also had the effect of amending the 
Revised Master Plan 2015.  A perusal of para 29 of the Mantri 
Techzone Private Limited (supra) would clearly reveal that 
the counsel appearing for the applicants before the High Court 
has fairly conceded to the setting aside of those general 
directions.  It could thus be seen that, though the issue was 
raised before the High Court with regard to the power of the 
NGT to issue such directions, this Court did not go into that 
issue on the basis of the concessions made by the appellants.  
We are therefore of the considered view that the observations 
found in para 47 of the Mantri Techzone Private Limited 
(supra) could not be construed to be a precedent or a ratio 
decidendi.  

61 
 
77. We may also gainfully refer to the observations made by 
this Court in the case of Director General (Road 
Development) National Highways Authority of India 
(supra).  In the said case, one of the challenges was the 
notification issued by the State Government under Section 
154 of the MRTP Act.  The notification dated 14th November 
2017 referred to the general directions issued by the NGT in 
its order dated 19th May 2015.  Vide the said directions, it was 
directed that the planning authorities while preparing 
development plan for area in their jurisdiction or amending 
them in respect of undeveloped portion abutting the hills up 
to 100 feet should be shown as “No Development/Open Space 
Reservation”.  It further directed that in the event the 100 feet 
area abutting hills, has already been developed, in that area 
no permission be granted for additional FSI or TDR.  The Court 
observed thus: 
“92. In the present case, the State of Maharashtra 
has not shown any material or file containing the 
reasons behind the directive of 14-11-2017. It is not 
in dispute that the direction was consequential to, 
and solely based on the directions of the NGT in para 
17(e). As noticed earlier, those directions were not 
based on any scientific evidence or report of any 
technical expert. Furthermore, even the impugned 
notification does not specify what constitutes “hills”, 
and how they can be applied in towns and 

62 
 
communities set in undulating areas and hilly 
terrain. This is not only vague, but makes the 
directions arbitrary as they can be applied at will by 
the authorities concerned. More importantly, they 
amount to a blanket change of all regional and 
development plans. While such directions can be 
issued, if situations so warrant, such as in 
extraordinary 
or 
emergent 
circumstances, 
the 
complete absence of any reasons why the State 
issued them, coupled with the lack of any supporting 
expert report or input, renders it an arbitrary 
exercise. That they are based only on the NGT's 
orders 
[Aam 
Aadmi 
Lokmanch v. State 
of 
Maharashtra, 2015 SCC OnLine NGT 11] , only 
underlines the lack of any application of mind on the 
part of the State, while issuing them. 
93. For the above reasons, we hold that the 
impugned judgment [Harshada Coop. Housing 
Society Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra, 2018 SCC 
OnLine Bom 2576 : (2018) 6 Bom CR 154] of the 
Bombay High Court cannot be sustained; it is set 
aside. Consequently, the directions in the notification 
under Section 154 (dated 14-11-2017) are hereby 
quashed.” 
 
78. A perusal of the aforesaid would clearly reveal that, 
though the directive issued by the State Government under 
Section 154 of the MRTP Act was issued in accordance with 
the directions issued by the NGT, this Court found such 
exercise not to be permissible in law.  This Court held that the 
complete absence of any reasons as to why the State issued 
such directions, coupled with the lack of any supporting 
expert report or input, renders such a directive to be an 

63 
 
arbitrary exercise of power.  This Court, therefore, disapproved 
such a directive issued under Section 154 of the MRTP Act 
merely on the basis of the directions issued by the NGT and 
set aside the same.  
E.  
Development Plan 2041. 
79. In any case, we find that the appellants herein, while 
preparing the draft development plan, have taken into 
consideration the suggestions given by the NGT.  Chapter 
12.10 of the development plan elaborately considers the 
directions given by the NGT.   
80. Insofar as “Green Belt” areas, core areas and non-core 
areas are concerned, the development plan has considered as 
under:  
“12.11.4  Implication of Ld. NGT Order 
That it is a settled position of law that normally a 
Tribunal will deal with the controversy brought 
before it.  That is to say, it will adjudicate upon case 
put up by any aggrieved party before it.  Without 
conceding on the point of limitation, that the Learned 
Tibunal could have only adjudicated upon the case 
put up before it. The case put up before it in nutshell 
was that no construction should be allowed in forests 
and green belt area.  As already submitted green belt 
areas are those areas in which the land is also owned 
by the private land owners and is occupied by the 
structures. 
As 
per 
IDP 
Provisions, 
only 
reconstruction is permitted in the area and that too 

64 
 
on old lines.  No new construction or increase in 
constructed area is permissible in these areas.  So far 
as the forest lands are concerned, no construction 
upon that is permissible unless there is a clearance 
from the Central Government as per the provisions of 
Forest Conservation Act.  Further, no construction is 
permissible on the forest land until or unless 
proposal is cleared by the Competent Authority i.e. 
Central Government, but while disposing of the case, 
the Learned Tribunal has entered the field, which 
does not belong to it.  Whether the building should 
be one storey or three storeys is for the Competent 
Authority to decide.  Town Planning does not come 
under the purview of the NGT.  Further the state of 
Himachal Pradesh is not a non-compliant State.  It 
has been taking care of environment and has also 
been taking care of Town Planning.” 
 
81. Insofar as “Green Belt” areas are concerned, it has been 
found that “Green Belt” areas are those areas in which the 
land is also owned by the private land owners and is occupied 
by the structures. It provides that as per the provision, 
reconstruction would be permitted in the area and that too on 
old lines. No more new construction or increase in constructed 
area is permissible in these areas.  It further provided that 
insofar as forest lands are concerned, no construction upon 
them would be permitted unless there is a clearance from the 
Central Government as per the provisions of the FC Act.   
82. Not only that, as has already been referred to 
hereinabove, the learned Advocate General has placed on 

65 
 
record a Cabinet decision which provides that construction 
would be permitted only in those plots in which there are no 
trees.  It is further pointed out that the construction in “Green 
Belt” areas, would be permitted only to the extent of single 
storey with attic.   
83. The development plan has elaborately considered as to 
how vertical construction will have to be preferred over the 
horizontal construction, inasmuch as the land to be utilized 
for actual construction would be lesser and there would be 
more open space.   
84. The development plan also consists of the Chapters on 
“Land Use Zoning” and “Development Control Regulations”.  In 
“Green Belt” areas, limited construction with one parking floor 
+ one floor + habitable attic would be permitted for residential 
use only.  It is further clear that the parking floor is 
permissible only where the plot of land has an access to the 
motorable road.  The maximum permissible height shall be 10 
metre.  The maximum permissible FAR shall be 1.0.  The 
setbacks norms as prescribed for R1 use in core area shall be 
applicable.  Reconstruction on old lines shall be permissible 
with same plinth area and number of storeys.  Cutting and 

66 
 
felling of trees shall be prohibited.  Change of land use and 
building use shall be prohibited. So also detailed provision has 
been made for heritage land use as well as core areas and non-
core areas.   
85. A special provision has been made for Sinking and 
Sliding Areas which reads thus:  
“17.2.2.9.  Sinking and Sliding Area 
i. 
The development permission shall be granted 
by 
the 
Competent 
Authority 
in 
whose 
jurisdiction the Sinking and Sliding Area falls. 
ii. 
The Regulations as applicable for Core/Green 
Area and Non-Core Area shall be applicable in 
Sinking and Sliding Area. 
iii. 
The Soil Investigation Report shall be submitted 
by 
the 
applicant 
before 
construction/reconstruction of building(s) for 
the areas falling in sinking and sliding zones as 
defined in Shimla Planning Area, or for any 
reclaimed piece of land.  The Soil Investigation 
Report shall be given by the Geologist in the 
prescribed 
form. 
 
In 
case 
of 
negative 
observations, the construction shall not be 
allowed/shall be allowed as per conditions 
imposed by the consultant.”  
 
It can thus clearly be seen that unless a Soil Investigation 
Report 
is 
provided 
by 
the 
applicant 
before 
construction/reconstruction of building(s) for the areas falling 
in Sinking and Sliding Zones as defined in SPA, construction 

67 
 
would not be allowed or allowed only as per the conditions 
imposed by the consultant.  The Soil Investigation Report is 
required to be given by the Geologist in the prescribed form. 
86. It can thus be seen that while preparing the development 
plan, due care has been taken to ensure that environmental 
aspects are taken care of. 
87. We, however, do not propose to stamp our approval to all 
the provisions made in the development plan.  In that regard, 
if any person feels aggrieved by any of the provisions, they 
would always be at liberty to take recourse to such remedy as 
is available in law. 
88. However, we are of the considered view that the NGT 
could not have directed the delegatee who has been delegated 
powers under the TCP Act to enact the regulations, to do so in 
a particular manner.  As a matter of fact, the NGT has imposed 
fetters on the exercise of powers by the delegatee, who has 
been delegated such powers by the competent legislature.  In 
any case, it is clear that there were sufficient safeguards under 
the provisions of the TCP Act inasmuch as an aggrieved citizen 
was entitled to raise objections, give suggestions and was also 
entitled to an opportunity of hearing on more than one 

68 
 
occasion. The first one at the stage of finalization of the draft 
development plan by the Director, and the second one at the 
stage of grant of approval and publication of the final 
development plan by the State Government.  We are informed 
that 97 objections were received to the draft development plan 
in the present case.  An opportunity of being heard was given 
to all of them before finalization of the draft development plan.  
We are also informed that out of 97 objectors, all, except 5, 
had requested for more relaxation. 
89. The first order of NGT is also sought to be attacked by 
the appellants on the ground that the subject matter of the 
dispute did not concern any of the enactments listed in 
Schedule I of the NGT Act and therefore, the OA filed under 
Section 14 of the NGT Act itself was not tenable. 
90. Since we find that the first order of NGT is not 
sustainable on the ground of encroaching upon the powers of 
the delegatee to enact a delegated legislation and also amounts 
to imposing fetters on the exercise of such powers, we do not 
propose to go into the said issue and we keep the same open 
to be adjudicated upon in appropriate proceedings. 
 

69 
 
Transferred Case (C) No. 2 of 2023. 
F. 
Whether the NGT was justified in passing the order 
dated 14th October 2022 when the High Court was 
seized of the same issue during the pendency of Civil 
Writ Petition No.5960 of 2022? 
 
91. Insofar as the second order of NGT is concerned, the 
same arises out of publication of the draft development plan 
on 8th February 2022.  After the draft development plan was 
published, in all 97 objections/suggestions were received by 
the State of Himachal Pradesh within the stipulated time 
period and the same were heard.  After considering the 
objections and suggestions including the recommendations 
made by the NGT in its first order, the development plan was 
finalized for 22,450 hectares of SPA upto the year 2041.  
However in the meantime, CWP Nos. 23 and 37 of 2022 were 
filed before the High Court of Himachal Pradesh praying inter 
alia for stay of the draft development plan.   
92. Subsequent to the finalization of the draft development 
plan, the respondent No.1 herein filed another application 
being OA No. 297 of 2022 before the NGT.  The NGT passed an 
ex parte ad interim order dated 12th May 2022 restraining the 

70 
 
appellants herein from taking any further steps in pursuance 
of the draft development plan. 
93. Being aggrieved thereby, the State of Himachal Pradesh 
– appellant herein preferred CWP No. 5960 of 2022 before the 
High Court of Himachal Pradesh under Article 226/227 of the 
Constitution of India.  A prayer was made in the said writ 
petition to declare the order of the NGT dated 12th May 2022 
to be without jurisdiction.  It was also prayed that the Town 
and Country Planning Department and Municipal Corporation 
be permitted to perform their statutory duties and be 
authorized to grant approvals, sanctions and building 
permissions in accordance with the development plan.  The 
respondents therein have filed their reply to the said writ 
petition and the appellants filed their rejoinder. 
94. Despite the pendency of CWP No. 5960 of 2022 as well 
as other writ petitions relating to the same subject matter, the 
NGT passed its second order holding that the draft 
development plan, being in conflict with its first order, is illegal 
and therefore cannot be given effect to. 
95. Immediately after the said order was passed, the 
appellants filed an application before the High Court of 

71 
 
Himachal Pradesh in CWP No. 5960 of 2022 seeking leave to 
amend the writ petition so as to challenge the order of the NGT 
dated 12th May 2022. 
96. This Court, vide order dated 14th November 2022, in Civil 
Appeal Nos. 5348-5349 of 2019, transferred the said CWP No. 
5960 of 2022 before itself and directed it to be heard along 
with Civil Appeal Nos. 5348-5349 of 2019.  The said writ 
petition has been renumbered as Transferred Case (C) No. 2 of 
2023.   
97. At the outset, we allow the application seeking leave to 
amend the writ petition so as to challenge the second order of 
NGT and the impleadment application filed before the High 
Court of Himachal Pradesh. 
98. Subsequently, on 3rd May 2023, we passed an order in 
these proceedings, as under: 
“1. We are informed that on account of directions 
issued by the National Green Tribunal (NGT), the 
final development plan which is presently at the stage 
of ‘draft notification’ could not be published. We are 
further informed by the learned Advocate General for 
the State of Himachal Pradesh that 97 objections 
have been received to the draft development plan.  
2. In light of the facts and circumstances of these 
cases, we find that it will be appropriate, that the 
State Government decides the objections received to 

72 
 
the draft development plan and after considering the 
same issue a final development plan.  
3. We, therefore, direct the State of Himachal 
Pradesh to consider the objections to the draft 
development plan, decide them and publish the final 
development plan within a period of six weeks from 
today.  
4. We further clarify that after the final development 
plan is published, it would not be given effect to for a 
period of one month from the date of its publication.  
5. It is further directed that no construction should 
be permitted on the basis of the draft development 
plan.  
6. Learned counsel appearing for the impleadors 
submits that certain constructions are being carried 
out without there being a sanctioned plan.  
7. If any such construction is carried out without 
there being a sanctioned plan, indisputably, such a 
construction 
would 
be 
an 
unauthorized 
construction.  
8. We, therefore, grant liberty to the applicant(s) to 
take recourse to the remedy available under Article 
226 of the Constitution of India and bring 
unauthorized constructions to the notice of the High 
Court.  
9. Needless to state that on such petitions being filed, 
the High Court would decide such petitions with due 
urgency that the issue requires.  
10. List these matters on 12.07.2023.” 
 
99. In pursuance of the aforesaid directions, the Town and 
Country Planning Department, Government of Himachal 
Pradesh had notified the final development plan on 20th June 
2023. 

73 
 
100. It could thus be seen that when the second order of NGT 
was passed, the writ petition challenging the interim order 
dated 12th May 2022 was very much pending before the High 
Court.  Not only that, two other writ petitions being CWP Nos. 
23 and 37 of 2022, challenging the draft development plan, 
were also pending before the High Court.  It is thus clear that 
the High Court was in seisin of the matter related to 
finalization of the draft development plan. 
101. A Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of L. 
Chandra Kumar v. Union of India and Others27  was 
considering the issue regarding ouster of jurisdiction of this 
Court and the High Courts under Articles 32 and 226 of the 
Constitution 
of 
India 
as 
was 
provided 
under 
the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (for short, “AT Act”). The 
AT Act was constituted under the enabling provisions of Article 
323-A of the Constitution of India. Sub-clause (d) of Clause (2) 
of Article 323-A specifically enables the Parliament to legislate 
a law for establishment of AT Act and also provides for 
exclusion of jurisdiction of all the Courts except jurisdiction of 
 
27 (1997) 3 SCC 261 : 1997 INSC 288 

74 
 
this Court under Article 136 with respect to disputes or 
complaints referred to in Clause (1). This Court after scanning 
the entire law on the question as to whether the powers of this 
Court and High Courts of judicial review as could be found in 
Articles 32 and 226 respectively amounts to basic structure or 
not, observed thus in paragraph nos. 78 & 79:- 
“78. The legitimacy of the power of Courts within 
constitutional democracies to review legislative 
action has been questioned since the time it was first 
conceived. The Constitution of India, being alive to 
such criticism, has, while conferring such power 
upon the higher judiciary, incorporated important 
safeguards. An analysis of the manner in which the 
Framers of our Constitution incorporated provisions 
relating to the judiciary would indicate that they were 
very 
greatly 
concerned 
with 
securing 
the 
independence of the judiciary. These attempts were 
directed at ensuring that the judiciary would be 
capable of effectively discharging its wide powers of 
judicial review. While the Constitution confers the 
power to strike down laws upon the High Courts and 
the Supreme Court, it also contains elaborate 
provisions 
dealing 
with 
the 
tenure, 
salaries, 
allowances, retirement age of Judges as well as the 
mechanism for selecting Judges to the superior 
courts. The inclusion of such elaborate provisions 
appears to have been occasioned by the belief that, 
armed by such provisions, the superior courts would 
be insulated from any executive or legislative 
attempts to interfere with the making of their 
decisions. The Judges of the superior courts have 
been entrusted with the task of upholding the 
Constitution and to this end, have been conferred the 
power to interpret it. It is they who have to ensure 
that the balance of power envisaged by the 
Constitution is maintained and that the legislature 

75 
 
and the executive do not, in the discharge of their 
functions, transgress constitutional limitations. It is 
equally their duty to oversee that the judicial 
decisions 
rendered 
by 
those 
who 
man 
the 
subordinate courts and tribunals do not fall foul of 
strict standards of legal correctness and judicial 
independence. The constitutional safeguards which 
ensure the independence of the Judges of the 
superior judiciary, are not available to the Judges of 
the subordinate judiciary or to those who man 
Tribunals 
created 
by 
ordinary 
legislations. 
Consequently, Judges of the latter category can never 
be considered full and effective substitutes for the 
superior judiciary in discharging the function of 
constitutional interpretation. We, therefore, hold that 
the power of judicial review over legislative action 
vested in the High Courts under Articles 226 and in 
this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution is an 
integral and essential feature of the Constitution, 
constituting part of its basic structure. Ordinarily, 
therefore, the power of High Courts and the Supreme 
Court to test the constitutional validity of legislations 
can never be ousted or excluded. 
79. We also hold that the power vested in the High 
Courts to exercise judicial superintendence over the 
decisions of all Courts and Tribunals within their 
respective jurisdictions is also part of the basic 
structure of the Constitution. This is because a 
situation where the High Courts are divested of all 
other 
judicial 
functions 
apart 
from 
that 
of 
constitutional interpretation, is equally to be 
avoided.” 
 
102. It could thus be clearly seen that this Court, even when 
a provision in the Constitution enabled the Parliament to 
make a law thereby excluding the powers of judicial review 
except under Article 136 of the Constitution, held that the 

76 
 
power of judicial review vested in the High Courts under 
Articles 226 and in this Court under Article 32 of the 
Constitution, is an integral and essential feature of the 
Constitution, constituting part of its basic structure and, 
therefore, the power of High Courts and this Court to test the 
constitutional validity of legislations can never be ousted or 
excluded. This Court further goes on to observe that the power 
vested in the High Courts to exercise judicial superintendence 
over the decisions of all Courts and Tribunals within their 
respective jurisdictions is also part of the basic structure of 
the Constitution. 
103. It will be further relevant to refer to the following 
observations of this Court in paragraph nos. 90 to 92 in the 
said case which read thus: - 
“90. We may first address the issue of exclusion of 
the power of judicial review of the High Courts. We 
have already held that in respect of the power of 
judicial review, the jurisdiction of the High Courts 
under Article 226/227 cannot wholly be excluded. It 
has been contended before us that the Tribunals 
should not be allowed to adjudicate upon matters 
where the vires of legislations is questioned, and that 
they should restrict themselves to handling matters 
where constitutional issues are not raised. We 
cannot bring ourselves to agree to this proposition as 
that may result in splitting up proceedings and may 
cause avoidable delay. If such a view were to be 

77 
 
adopted, it would be open for litigants to raise 
constitutional issues, many of which may be quite 
frivolous, to directly approach the High Courts and 
thus subvert the jurisdiction of the Tribunals. 
Moreover, even in these special branches of law, 
some 
areas 
do 
involve 
the 
consideration 
of 
constitutional questions on a regular basis; for 
instance, in service law matters, a large majority of 
cases involve an interpretation of Articles 14, 15 and 
16 of the Constitution. To hold that the Tribunals 
have 
no 
power 
to 
handle 
matters 
involving 
constitutional issues would not serve the purpose for 
which they were constituted. On the other hand, to 
hold that all such decisions will be subject to the 
jurisdiction of the High Courts under Articles 
226/227 of the Constitution before a Division Bench 
of the High Court within whose territorial jurisdiction 
the Tribunal concerned falls will serve two purposes. 
While saving the power of judicial review of legislative 
action vested in the High Courts under Article 
226/227 of the Constitution, it will ensure that 
frivolous claims are filtered out through the process 
of adjudication in the Tribunal. The High Court will 
also have the benefit of a reasoned decision on merits 
which will be of use to it in finally deciding the 
matter. 
91. It has also been contended before us that even in 
dealing with cases which are properly before the 
Tribunals, the manner in which justice is dispensed 
by them leaves much to be desired. Moreover, the 
remedy provided in the parent statutes, by way of an 
appeal by special leave under Article 136 of the 
Constitution, is too costly and inaccessible for it to 
be real and effective. Furthermore, the result of 
providing such a remedy is that the docket of the 
Supreme Court is crowded with decisions of 
Tribunals that are challenged on relatively trivial 
grounds and it is forced to perform the role of a First 
Appellate Court. We have already emphasised the 
necessity for ensuring that the High Courts are able 
to exercise judicial superintendence over the 
decisions of Tribunals under Article 227 of the 

78 
 
Constitution. In R.K. Jain's case, after taking note of 
these facts, it was suggested that the possibility of an 
appeal from the Tribunals on questions of law to a 
Division Bench of a High Court within whose 
territorial jurisdiction the Tribunal falls, be pursued. 
It appears that no follow-up action has been taken 
pursuant to the suggestion. Such a measure would 
have improved matters considerably. Having regard 
to both the afore-stated contentions, we hold that all 
decisions of Tribunals, whether created pursuant to 
Article 323A or Article 323B of the Constitution, will 
be subject to the High Court's writ jurisdiction under 
Articles 226/227 of the Constitution, before a 
Division Bench of the High Court within whose 
territorial jurisdiction the particular Tribunal falls. 
92. We may add here that under the existing system, 
direct appeals have been provided from the decisions 
of all Tribunals to the Supreme Court under Article 
136 of the Constitution. In view of our above-
mentioned observations, this situation will also 
stand modified. In the view that we have taken, no 
appeal from the decision of a Tribunal will directly lie 
before the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the 
Constitution; but instead, the aggrieved party will be 
entitled to move the High Court under Articles 
226/227 of the Constitution and from the decision of 
the Division Bench of the High Court the aggrieved 
party could move this Court under Article 136 of the 
Constitution.” 
 
104. It would thus reveal that the Constitution Bench of this 
Court in unequivocal terms has held that the Tribunals will 
have a power to handle matters involving constitutional 
issues. This Court held that if it is held that the Tribunals do 
not have power to handle matters involving constitutional 
issues, they could not serve the purpose for which they were 

79 
 
constituted. It has further been observed that on the other 
hand to hold that all such decisions will be subject to 
jurisdiction of the High Court under Articles 226 and 227 of 
the Constitution of India and before Division Bench of High 
Court within whose jurisdiction the concerned Tribunal falls 
will serve two purposes. It held that while saving powers of 
judicial review of legislative action, vested in the High Courts 
under Articles 226 and 227 would ensure that frivolous claims 
are filtered out through the process of adjudication in the 
Tribunal. The High Court will also have the benefit of a 
reasoned decision on merits which will be of use to it in finally 
deciding the matter. The Constitution Bench of this Court 
clearly holds that all decisions of Tribunals, whether created 
pursuant to Article 323A or Article 323B of the Constitution, 
will be subject to the High Court's writ jurisdiction under 
Articles 226/227 of the Constitution, before a Division Bench 
of the High Court within whose territorial jurisdiction the 
particular Tribunal falls. 
105. The perusal of paragraph 92 of the judgment of the 
Constitution Bench would further reveal that the function of 
the Tribunals is only supplementary and all such decisions of 

80 
 
the Tribunals would be subject to scrutiny before the Division 
Bench of respective High Courts. The Constitution Bench 
holds that all such Tribunals will continue to act as the only 
Courts of first instance in respect of areas of law for which 
they have been constituted. It has been held that it will not be 
open for a litigant to directly approach the High Courts even 
in cases where the question of vires of statutory legislations 
(except as mentioned where the legislations which creates the 
particular legislation) is challenged by availing the jurisdiction 
of the Tribunal concerned. 
106. It could thus clearly be seen that it is a settled position 
of law that the High Courts exercise the power of judicial 
review over all the Tribunals which are situated within its 
jurisdiction.  
107. We may gainfully refer to the observations of this Court 
in the case of Priya Gupta and Another v. Additional 
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and 
Others28, wherein this Court has succinctly culled down the 
position as under : - 
 
28 (2013) 11 SCC 404 : 2012 INSC 601 

81 
 
“12. The government departments are no exception 
to the consequences of wilful disobedience of the 
orders of the Court. Violation of the orders of the 
Court would be its disobedience and would invite 
action in accordance with law. The orders passed by 
this Court are the law of the land in terms of Article 
141 of the Constitution of India. No Court or Tribunal 
and for that matter any other authority can ignore 
the law stated by this Court. Such obedience would 
also be conducive to their smooth working, otherwise 
there would be confusion in the administration of law 
and the respect for law would irretrievably suffer. 
There can be no hesitation in holding that the law 
declared by the higher court in the State is binding 
on 
authorities 
and 
tribunals 
under 
its 
superintendence and they cannot ignore it. This 
Court also expressed the view that it had become 
necessary to reiterate that disrespect to the 
constitutional ethos and breach of discipline have a 
grave impact on the credibility of judicial institution 
and encourages chance litigation. It must be 
remembered that predictability and certainty are 
important 
hallmarks 
of 
judicial 
jurisprudence 
developed in this country, as discipline is sine qua 
non for effective and efficient functioning of the 
judicial system. If the Courts command others to act 
in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution 
and to abide by the rule of law, it is not possible to 
countenance violation of the constitutional principle 
by those who are required to lay down the law. 
(Ref. East India Commercial Co. Ltd. v. Collector of 
Customs and Officials Liquidator v. Dayanand) (SCC 
p.57, paras 90-91).” 
 
108. It could thus be seen that this Court in unequivocal 
terms held that no Court or Tribunal and for that matter any 
other authority can ignore the law stated by this Court. It held 
that such obedience would also be conducive to their smooth 

82 
 
working, otherwise there would be confusion in the 
administration of law and the respect for law would 
irretrievably suffer. It has been held that the law declared by 
the higher court in the State is binding on authorities and 
tribunals under its superintendence and they cannot ignore 
it. This Court expressed a caution that it had become 
necessary to reiterate that disrespect to the constitutional 
ethos and breach of discipline have a grave impact on the 
credibility of judicial institution and encourages chance 
litigation. This Court further held that predictability and 
certainty are important hallmarks of judicial jurisprudence 
developed in this country, as discipline is sine qua non for 
effective and efficient functioning of the judicial system. 
109. In view of the settled legal position, we are of the view 
that the continuation of the proceedings by the NGT during 
the pendency of the writ petitions before the High Court was 
not in conformity with the principles of judicial propriety.  
Needless to state that the High Court of Himachal Pradesh, 
insofar as its territorial jurisdiction is concerned, has 
supervisory jurisdiction over the NGT. Despite pendency of the 
proceedings before the High Court including the one 

83 
 
challenging the interim order dated 12th May 2022 passed by 
NGT, the NGT went ahead with the passing of the second order 
impugned herein.  
110. It will also be relevant to refer to the observations of this 
Court in the case of Raghu Ramakrishna Raju Kanumuru 
(Member of Parliament) (supra), which read thus: 
“13.  We are, therefore, of the considered view that it 
was not appropriate on the part of the learned NGT 
to have continued with the proceedings before it, 
specifically, when it was pointed out that the High 
Court was also in seisin of the matter and had passed 
an interim order permitting the construction.  The 
conflicting orders passed by the learned NGT and the 
High Court would lead to an anomalous situation, 
where the authorities would be faced with a difficulty 
as to which order they are required to follow.  There 
can be no manner of doubt that in such a situation, 
it is the orders passed by the constitutional courts, 
which would be prevailing over the overs passed by 
the statutory tribunals.” 
 
111. It can be seen from the perusal of the orders of the NGT 
itself that though the NGT was informed about the High Court 
being in seisin of the proceedings, it went on to hold that the 
judgment given by it was binding and therefore, the draft 
development plan, which in its view, was not in conformity 
with its judgment, was liable to be set aside. 

84 
 
112. In any case, the second order of NGT is passed basically 
on the basis of the first order of NGT.  Since we have held the 
first order of NGT itself to be not tenable in law, the second 
order of NGT which is solely based on the first order of NGT, 
is liable to be set aside, on the short ground.  This, apart from 
the fact that as discussed hereinabove, on the ground of 
judicial propriety, the NGT ought not to have continued with 
the proceedings after the High Court was in seisin of the 
matter and specifically when it was informed about the same. 
G.  Balancing the need for Development and Protection 
of the Environment. 
 
113. A need for maintaining a balance between the 
development and protection/preservation of environmental 
ecology has been emphasized by this Court time and again.   
114. A three-Judges Bench of this Court in the case of Indian 
Council for Enviro-Legal Action v. Union of India and 
Others29, has observed thus: 
“31. ….. While economic development should not be 
allowed to take place at the cost of ecology or by 
causing widespread environment destruction and 
violation; at the same time, the necessity to preserve 
ecology and environment should not hamper 
economic and other developments. Both development 
 
29 (1996) 5 SCC 281 : 1996 INSC 237 

85 
 
and environment must go hand in hand, in other 
words, there should not be development at the cost 
of environment and vice versa, but there should be 
development while taking due care and ensuring the 
protection of environment. This is sought to be 
achieved by issuing notifications like the present, 
relating to developmental activities being carried out 
in such a way so that unnecessary environmental 
degradation does not take place. In other words, in 
order 
to 
prevent 
ecological 
imbalance 
and 
degradation that developmental activity is sought to 
be regulated.” 
 
115. This Court, again in the case of Essar Oil Limited v. 
Halar Utkarsh Samiti and Others30, emphasizing on the 
need for removal of deadlock between the development on the 
one hand and the environment on the other hand, observed 
thus: 
“27. This, therefore, is the aim, namely, to balance 
economic and social needs on the one hand with 
environmental considerations on the other. But in a 
sense all development is an environmental threat. 
Indeed, the very existence of humanity and the rapid 
increase 
in 
the 
population 
together 
with 
consequential demands to sustain the population 
has resulted in the concreting of open lands, cutting 
down of forests, the filling up of lakes and pollution 
of water resources and the very air which we breathe. 
However, there need not necessarily be a deadlock 
between development on the one hand and the 
environment on the other. The objective of all laws on 
environment should be to create harmony between 
the two since neither one can be sacrificed at the 
altar of the other…..” 
 
30 (2004) 2 SCC 392 : 2004 INSC 40 

86 
 
 
116. Emphasizing the need for sustainable development by 
balancing 
between 
the 
environmental 
protection 
and 
developmental activities, this Court, in the case of N.D. Jayal 
and Another v. Union of India and Others31, observed thus: 
“22. Before adverting to other issues, certain aspects 
pertaining to the preservation of ecology and 
development have to be noticed. In Vellore Citizens' 
Welfare Forum v. Union of India [(1996) 5 SCC 647] 
and in M.C. Mehta v. Union of India [(2002) 4 SCC 
356] it was observed that the balance between 
environmental 
protection 
and 
developmental 
activities could only be maintained by strictly 
following the principle of “sustainable development”. 
This is a development strategy that caters to the 
needs of the present without negotiating the ability of 
upcoming generations to satisfy their needs. The 
strict observance of sustainable development will put 
us on a path that ensures development while 
protecting the environment, a path that works for all 
peoples and for all generations. It is a guarantee to 
the present and a bequeath to the future. All 
environment-related developmental activities should 
benefit 
more 
people 
while 
maintaining 
the 
environmental balance. This could be ensured only 
by strict adherence to sustainable development 
without which life of the coming generations will be 
in jeopardy.” 
 
117. Again, in the said case, stressing on the right to clean 
environment to be a right guaranteed under Article 21 of the 
Constitution and also noting that the right to development also 
 
31 (2004) 9 SCC 362 : 2003 INSC 438 

87 
 
is a component of Article 21 of the Constitution, this Court 
observed thus: 
“24. The right to development cannot be treated as a 
mere right to economic betterment or cannot be 
limited as a misnomer to simple construction 
activities. The right to development encompasses 
much more than economic well-being, and includes 
within its definition the guarantee of fundamental 
human rights. The “development” is not related only 
to 
the 
growth 
of 
GNP. 
In 
the 
classic 
work, Development As Freedom, the Nobel prize 
winner Amartya Sen pointed out that “the issue of 
development 
cannot 
be 
separated 
from 
the 
conceptual framework of human right”. This idea is 
also part of the UN Declaration on the Right to 
Development. The right to development includes the 
whole spectrum of civil, cultural, economic, political 
and social process, for the improvement of peoples' 
well-being and realization of their full potential. It is 
an integral part of human rights. Of course, 
construction of a dam or a mega project is definitely 
an attempt to achieve the goal of wholesome 
development. Such works could very well be treated 
as integral component for development.” 
 
118. Recently, in the case of Rajeev Suri (supra), emphasizing 
the need for sustainable development, this Court observed 
thus: 
“520. The principle of sustainable development and 
precautionary principle need to be understood in a 
proper 
context. 
The 
expression 
“sustainable 
development” incorporates a wide meaning within its 
fold. It contemplates that development ought to be 
sustainable with the idea of preservation of natural 
environment for present and future generations. It 
would not be without significance to note that 

88 
 
sustainable development is indeed a principle of 
development, it posits controlled development. The 
primary requirement underlying this principle is to 
ensure that every development work is sustainable; 
and this requirement of sustainability demands that 
the 
first 
attempt 
of 
every 
agency 
enforcing 
environmental rule of law in the country ought to be 
to alleviate environmental concerns by proper 
mitigating measures. The future generations have an 
equal stake in the environment and development. 
They are as much entitled to a developed society as 
they are to an environmentally secure society. 
521. By 
the 
Declaration 
on 
the 
Right 
to 
Development, 1986, the United Nations has given 
express recognition to a right to development. Article 
1 of the Declaration defines this right as: 
“1. The right to development is an 
inalienable human right by virtue of which 
every human person and all peoples are 
entitled to participate in, contribute to, 
and enjoy economic, social, cultural and 
political development, in which all human 
rights and fundamental freedoms can be 
fully realized.” 
522. The right to development, thus, is intrinsically 
connected to the preservance of a dignified life. It is 
not 
limited 
to 
the 
idea 
of 
infrastructural 
development, rather, it entails human development 
as the basis of all development. The jurisprudence in 
environmental matters must acknowledge that there 
is immense interdependence between the right to 
development and the right to natural environment. 
523. In International 
Law 
and 
Sustainable 
Development, Arjun Sengupta in the chapter 
“Implementing the Right to Development [International 
Law and Sustainable Development — Principles and 
Practice (Publisher : Martinus Nijhoff, Edn. 2004) p. 
354.] ” notes thus: 

89 
 
“… Two rights are interdependent if the 
level of enjoyment of one is dependent on 
the level of enjoyment of the other…”” 
 
119. In the case of Resident’s Welfare Association (supra), 
this Court, speaking through one of us (B.R. Gavai, J.), 
observed thus: 
“151. One another important aspect that needs to be 
taken into consideration is the adverse impact on 
environment on account of haphazard urbanisation. 
It will be relevant to refer to Clause 20.3 of the CMP-
2031 
which 
we 
have 
already 
reproduced 
hereinabove. It has been recommended that an 
Effective 
Environmental 
Management 
Plan 
be 
devised for the region including Chandigarh, which 
includes 
environmental 
strategy, 
monitoring 
regulation, institutional capacity building and 
economic incentives. It is observed that the proposal 
needs a legal framework and a monitoring committee 
to 
examine 
the 
regional 
level 
proposals/big 
developments by the constitution of an Inter-State 
High-Powered Regional Environmental Management 
Board, as per the proposal of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests, Government of India. 
152. The United Nations Environment Programme 
(“UNEP”) notes in its publication titled “Integrating 
the Environment in Urban Planning and Management 
— Key Principles and Approaches for Cities in the 21st 
Century” that more than half of the world's 
population is now living in urban areas. It further 
noted that by the year 2050, more than half of Africa 
and Asia's population will live in towns and cities. It 
recognised that City Development Strategies (“CDSs”) 
have shown how to integrate environmental concerns 
in long-term city visioning exercises. It states that 

90 
 
environmental 
mainstreaming 
can 
help 
to 
incorporate relevant environmental concerns into the 
decisions of institutions, while emerging ideas about 
the green urban economy show how density can 
generate environmental and social opportunities. It 
states that the strategies need to be underpinned 
with governance structures that facilitate integration 
of environmental concerns in the planning process. 
153. The said publication defines EIA to be an 
analytical process or procedure that systematically 
examines the possible environmental consequences 
of the implementation of a given activity (project). It 
is 
aimed 
to 
ensure 
that 
the 
environmental 
implications of decisions related to a given activity 
are taken into account before the decisions are made. 
154. Judicial notice is also taken of the cover story 
published in the weekly, India Today, dated 24-10-
2022, titled as “Bengaluru — How to Ruin India's Best 
City” by Raj Chengappa with Ajay Sukumaran. The 
said article depicts the sorry state of affairs as to how 
the City of Bengaluru, once considered to be one of 
India's best cities, a “Garden city” has been ruined 
on account of haphazard urban development. It takes 
note of as to how on account of one major spell of 
rain in the September of 2022, the city bore the brunt 
of nature's fury. Various areas of the city were 
inundated with heavy rains. The loss the flood 
caused to the Outer Ring Road tech corridor alone 
was estimated to be over Rs 225 crores. 
155. The article notes that, while on one hand, on 
account of heavy rains, many of the houses were 
submerged in water, on the other hand, the city faced 
a huge shortage of drinking water. 
156. The article further notes that rapid expansion 
of the city with no appropriate thought given towards 
transportation and ease of mobility has led to 
nightmarish traffic jams on its arterial roads. It notes 

91 
 
that, almost overnight, Bengaluru's municipal 
jurisdiction grew from 200 sq km to 800 sq km. It 
observes that the only one to benefit was the 
politician-businessman-builder nexus, which has 
thrived. It further noted that though posh colonies 
mushroomed in new areas, the infrastructure lagged, 
as roads remained narrow, the drainage poor, and no 
adequate provision for garbage disposal too. 
157. The article notes that the primary canals known 
locally as rajakaluves were once natural rain-fed 
streams across which farmers built small bunds over 
time, to arrest the flow of water and create lakes. It 
further notes that these interlinked man-made lakes 
worked as a storm-water drain network. However, in 
order to meet the demand for space for construction 
and roads, the administrators allowed the lakes to be 
breached regularly. The lakes, which once numbered 
a thousand-odd, are now reduced to a paltry number. 
Worse, the rajakaluves that channelised the storm 
water had buildings built over them. 
158. The warning flagged by the City of Bengaluru 
needs to be given due attention by the legislature, 
executive and the policy-makers. It is high time that 
before permitting urban development, EIA of such 
development needs to be done.” 
 
120. Again, while emphasizing the need for balancing the 
development 
along 
with 
preservation 
of 
ecology 
and 
environment, this Court, speaking through one of us (B.R. 
Gavai, J.), in the case of State of Uttar Pradesh and Others 

92 
 
v. Uday Education and Welfare Trust and Others32, while 
referring to the earlier judgments on the issue observed thus:  
“100. Though we are allowing the appeals, setting 
aside the orders of the learned NGT, and upholding 
the action of the State Government in granting 
licenses, we would like to remind the State and its 
authorities that it is their duty to protect the 
environment. The State and its authorities should 
ensure that necessary steps are taken for arresting 
the problem of declining forest and tree cover. The 
State and its authorities should make meaningful 
and concerted efforts to ensure that the green cover 
in the State of Uttar Pradesh is not reduced and to 
ensure that it increases. 
101. The conservation of forest plays a vital role in 
maintaining the ecology. It acts as processors of the 
water cycle and soil and also as providers of 
livelihoods. As such, preservation and sustainable 
management of forests deserve to be given due 
importance in formulation of policies by the State. In 
this regard, it will be apposite to refer to certain 
earlier pronouncements of this Court. 
(a) In the case of Samatha v. State of A.P. 
[AIR 1997 SC 3297 : (1997) 8 SCC 191], a 
three-Judge Bench of this Court after 
referring to the earlier judgment in the 
case of State of H.P. v. Ganesh Wood 
Products  [(1995) 6 SCC 363] observed 
that, even while considering the grant of 
renewal of mining leases, the provisions of 
the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and 
the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
would apply. This Court held that the 
MOEF and all the States have a duty to 
prevent 
mining 
operations 
affecting 
forests. It further observed that, whether 
mining operations are carried on within 
 
32 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1469 : 2022 INSC 465 

93 
 
the reserved forest or other forest area, it 
is their duty to ensure that the industry or 
enterprise does not denude the forest to 
become a menace to human existence nor 
a source to destroy flora and fauna and 
biodiversity. It has further been held that 
if it becomes inevitable to disturb the 
existence of forests, there is a concomitant 
duty upon the State to reforest and restore 
the green cover and to ensure adequate 
measures to promote, protect and improve 
both man-made and natural environment, 
flora and fauna as well as biodiversity. It 
further held that there can be no 
distinction between government forests 
and private forests in the matter of forest 
wealth of the nation and in the matter of 
environment and ecology. 
(b) In the case of Essar Oil Ltd. v. Halar 
Utkarsh Samiti [(2004) 2 SCC 392], this 
Court discussed the need for a balance 
between the economic and social needs 
and development on the one hand and 
environment considerations on the other. 
It was observed that laws on environment 
should be to create harmony between the 
two since neither one can be sacrificed at 
the altar of the other. In this regard, the 
observations of this Court in the case 
of Indian 
Council 
for 
Enviro-Legal 
Action v. Union of India [(1996) 5 SCC 
281] were quoted as under: 
“While economic development 
should not be allowed to take 
place at the cost of ecology or by 
causing 
widespread 
environment destruction and 
violation; at the same time, the 
necessity to preserve ecology 
and environment should not 
hamper economic and other 

94 
 
developments. 
Both 
development and environment 
must go hand in hand, in other 
words, there should not be 
development at the cost of 
environment.” 
(c) In the case of Maharashtra Land 
Development 
Corporation v. State 
of 
Maharashtra 
[(2011) 
15 
SCC 
616] 
reference was made to Glanrock Estate 
Private Limited v. State of Tamil Nadu 
[(2010) 10 SCC 96] wherein it was 
observed as under: 
“27. …. Forests in India are an 
important 
part 
of 
the 
environment. They constitute 
[a] national asset. In various 
judgments 
of 
this 
Court 
delivered by the Forest Bench of 
this Court in T.N. Godavarman 
Thirumulpad v. Union 
of 
India (Writ Petition No. 202 of 
1995), it has been held that 
‘intergenerational equity’ is part 
of Article 21 of the Constitution. 
28. What is intergenerational 
equity? The present generation 
is answerable to the next 
generation by giving to the next 
generation a good environment. 
We are answerable to the next 
generation and if deforestation 
takes place rampantly then 
intergenerational equity would 
stand violated. 
29. The doctrine of sustainable 
development also forms part of 
Article 21 of the Constitution. 
The ‘precautionary principle’ 
and the ‘polluter pays principle’ 

95 
 
flow from the core value in 
Article 21. 
30. The important point to be 
noted is that in this case we are 
concerned 
with 
vesting 
of 
forests in the State. When we 
talk 
about 
intergenerational 
equity 
and 
sustainable 
development, we are elevating 
an ordinary principle of equality 
to the level of overarching 
principle.” 
(d) Of course, one cannot ignore one of the 
several 
dicta 
of 
this 
Court 
in T.N. 
Godavarman 
Thirumulkpad v. Union 
of 
India [(1997) 2 SCC 267 : AIR 1997 SC 
1228] wherein this Court enunciated the 
definition of “forest” in the following words: 
“4. The 
Forest 
Conservation 
Act, 1980 was enacted with a 
view 
to 
check 
further 
deforestation which ultimately 
results in ecological imbalance; 
and therefore, the provisions 
made 
therein 
for 
the 
conservation of forests and for 
matters connected therewith, 
must 
apply 
to 
all 
forests 
irrespective of the nature of 
ownership 
or 
classification 
thereof. The word “forest” must 
be understood according to its 
dictionary 
meaning. 
This 
description 
covers 
all 
statutorily recognised forests, 
whether 
designated 
as 
reserved, protected or otherwise 
for the purpose of Section 2(i) of 
the Forest Conservation Act. 
The 
term 
“forest 
land”, 
occurring in Section 2, will not 

96 
 
only 
include 
“forest” 
as 
understood in the dictionary 
sense, 
but 
also 
any 
area 
recorded 
as 
forest 
in 
the 
Government record irrespective 
of the ownership. This is how it 
has to be understood for the 
purpose of Section 2 of the Act. 
The provisions enacted in the 
Forest Conservation Act, 1980 
for the conservation of forests 
and the matters connected 
therewith must apply clearly to 
all 
forests 
so 
understood 
irrespective of the ownership or 
classification thereof…” 
102. Though we find that for the sustainable 
development of the State and on account of the 
availability of the timber, sanction of granting 
licenses can be permitted to continue, however, as a 
responsible 
State, 
it 
needs 
to 
ensure 
that 
environmental concerns are duly attended to. We, 
therefore, direct the State Government to ensure that 
while granting permission for felling trees of the 
prohibited species, it should strictly ensure that the 
permission is granted only when the conditions 
specified in the Notification dated 7th January 2020 
are satisfied. The State Government shall also ensure 
that when such permissions are granted to the 
applicants, the applicants scrupulously follow the 
mandate in the said notification of planting 10 trees 
against 1 and maintaining them for five years.” 
 
121. It is needless to state that, this Court, in a series of 
judgments and orders passed in the case of T.N. Godavarman 
Thirumulkpad v. Union of India and Others33 and lastly 
 
33 2023 INSC 430 

97 
 
vide order dated 26th April 2023, passed by a three-Judges 
Bench to which one of us (B.R. Gavai, J.) was a member, has 
emphasized the need to have a balance between the 
requirement of development and preservation of ecology and 
environment. 
122. It is thus clear that while ensuring the developmental 
activities so as to meet the demands of growing population, it 
is also necessary that the issues with regard to environmental 
and ecological protection are addressed too.   
V.  
CONCLUSION 
123. We have gone through the development plan.  The 
development plan has been finalized after taking into 
consideration the reports of various expert committees and the 
studies undertaken with regard to various aspects including 
environmental and ecological aspects. 
124. We, however, clarify that we have not considered the 
development plan in minute details.  Upon its prima facie 
consideration, we have come to a view that there are sufficient 
safeguards to balance the need for development while taking 
care of and addressing the environmental and ecological 
concerns.  We may however not be construed as giving our 

98 
 
imprimatur to the said development plan.  At the same time, 
it cannot be ignored that the development plan has been 
finalized after various experts from various fields including 
those concerned with urban planning, environment etc., were 
taken on board.  It also cannot be ignored that the 
development plan has been finalized after undergoing the 
rigorous process including that of inviting objections and 
suggestions at two stages, giving the hearing to such objectors 
and suggesters and after considering the same. If any of the 
citizen has any grievance that any provision is detrimental to 
the environment or ecology, it is always open to raise a 
challenge to such an independent provision before the 
appropriate forum.  Such a challenge can be considered in 
accordance with law.  But, in our view, the development plan, 
which has been finalized after taking recourse to the statutory 
provisions and undergoing the rigors thereto, cannot be stalled 
in entirety thereby putting the entire developmental activities 
to a standstill. 
125. Insofar as the grievance of the Interveners, who are the 
plot holders in the ‘Green Belt’ area, with regard to payment of 
compensation is concerned, we find that the said issue would 

99 
 
be beyond the scope of the present proceedings. We, therefore, 
without specifying any opinion on such claim, relegate the 
interveners to avail the appropriate remedy available to them 
in law. 
126. In the result, we pass the following order: 
(i) 
The Civil Appeal Nos. 5348-49 of 2019 as well as the 
Transferred Case (C) No. 2 of 2023 are allowed; 
(ii) 
The orders of the NGT dated 16th November 2017 in 
Original Application No. 121 of 2014, dated 16th July 
2018 in Review Application No. 8 of 2018, dated 12th 
May 2022 and 14th October 2022 in Original 
Application No. 297 of 2022 are quashed and set 
aside; and 
(iii) The appellant-State of Himachal Pradesh and its 
instrumentalities are permitted to proceed with the 
implementation of the development plan as published 
on 20th June 2023 subject to what has been observed 
by us hereinabove. 
127. In the facts and circumstances of the present case, there 
is no order as to costs. 

100 
 
128. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of in 
the above terms. 
 
….……..….......................J. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
                [B.R. GAVAI] 
 
 
……………..….........................J.        
[ARAVIND KUMAR] 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
JANUARY 11, 2024.