2024 INSC 381
Page 1 of 59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
WRIT PETITION (C)No.251 of 2016 
ABHIMEET SINHA & ORS.                                               …..PETITIONER(S) 
VERSUS 
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA & ORS.          ……RESPONDENT(S) 
With 
WRIT PETITION (C) No.663/2021, 
 WRIT PETITION (C) No.735/2021, 
 WRIT PETITION (C) No.1073/2022, 
 WRIT PETITION (C) No.1146/2022  
and  
WRIT PETITION (C) No.785/2023 
 
JUDGMENT 
Hrishikesh Roy, J. 
1. 
The common challenge in these six writ petitions filed under Article 32 of 
the Constitution of India is to the constitutionality of the Rules stipulating 
minimum qualifying marks in the viva voce test as a part of the selection 
criteria for appointment to the District Judiciary in the States of Bihar and 
Gujarat respectively. The writ petitioners have approached this Court alleging 
a violation of their fundamental rights under Articles 14 and 16 contained in 
Part III of the Constitution of India. The specific consideration to be made in 
these matters is whether prescribing minimum qualifying marks for viva voce 
is in contravention of the law laid down by this Court in All India Judges 
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2024.05.06
13:54:49 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 59 
 
Association and Others vs. Union of India and Others1 (for short “All India 
Judges (2002)) which accepted certain recommendations of Justice KJ Shetty 
Commission (for short “Shetty Commission”). The recruitment pertains to the 
selection of judicial officers of different ranks and respective selection cycles 
i.e. District Judge (Entry Level) by direct recruitment from the Bar (2015 
Advertisement) for the State of Bihar and the post of Civil Judge (2019 and 
2022 Advertisement) for the State of Gujarat. The Individual facts in the writ 
petitions may differ but the legal arguments broadly overlap.  Wherever 
necessary, the individual facts and legal arguments will be dealt with 
separately.  
I. FACTS 
2.       The writ petition i.e. WP(C) No.251 of 2016 (considered here as the lead 
case), relates to the recruitment of District Judge (Entry Level) direct from Bar 
Examination (2015), in the State of Bihar.  The recruitment process is 
governed by the Bihar Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1951 (for short “Bihar 
Rules, 1951”) as amended, from time to time. The prayer in the writ petition 
is to strike down Clause 11 of Appendix "C" of Bihar Superior Judicial 
(Amendment) Rules 2013 which is projected to be contrary to the 
recommendation of the Shetty Commission, as accepted by this Court in All 
India Judges (2002) in paragraphs 37 and 38.  The second prayer in the writ 
petition is to set aside the selection for Bihar Superior Judicial Service, under 
the Advertisement No. 1/2015 as published vide notice dated 08.04.2016.    
3.     The connected matters i.e. WP(C) No.663/2021, WP(C) No.735/2021, 
WP(C) No.1073/2022, WP(C) No.1146/2022 and WP(C) No.785/2023 relate to 
 
1 (2002) 4 SCC 247 

Page 3 of 59 
 
the recruitment to the post of Civil Judge in Gujarat. The writ petitioners 
therein challenged the vires of the amended Rule 8(3) of the Gujarat State 
Judicial Service Rules, 2005 (for short "Gujarat Rules, 2005”), which was 
amended by notification dated 23.6.2011 as well as the corresponding clauses 
of the advertisement of the respective recruitment years. The ancillary prayer 
is to prepare a fresh select list based on the aggregate marks of written 
examination and interview, irrespective of the cut-off marks prescribed. 
 
A) Bihar Selection Process (2015) 
4. 
 The main writ petition is filed by 46 unsuccessful candidates who 
participated in the District Judges (Direct from Bar) Examination in 2015. The 
Bihar Rules,1951 came into force on 31.7.1951. The amendment to the Bihar 
Rules, 1951 was brought by a notification dated 3.4.2013, which, inter alia, 
provided for a screening test, a written main test, and also an interview for 
selection to the Bihar Superior Judicial Service. The total marks in the main 
written examination and the interview were 250 and 50 marks respectively.  
To qualify, candidates had to secure a minimum of 150 marks out of 250 
marks (60%) in the main written examination and at least 10 out of the total 
50 marks (20%), in the viva voce segment. 
4.1.     Following the further amendment on 3.12.2014 of the Bihar Rules, 
1951, a proviso was added to clause 10 of Appendix C, granting power to the 
High Court to relax the qualifying marks in aggregate. Clauses 10,11 and 12 
of the appendix C of Bihar Rules, 1951 provided as follows: - 
“10. A candidate will qualify for interview only if he secures minimum 
45% marks in each paper and 55% marks in aggregate in the written 
test. 

Page 4 of 59 
 
Provided that in case the number of qualified candidates are not 
adequate, the High Court may, in the interest of judiciary, relax the 
qualifying marks in aggregate as may be required but this relaxation 
will not be below 50% in aggregate. 
11. The candidates must secure at least 10 marks out of 50 marks in 
the interview. 
12. The candidate must pass both the written test and interview before 
he is considered for appointment.” 
4.2 .  With the above prescription of marks, the advertisement No. 1/2015 
was issued in January 2015 by the Patna High Court to fill up 99 vacancies 
in the Bihar Superior Judicial Service.  The advertisement provided in clauses 
6(d) and (e) that the candidates will have to secure at least 10 out of 50 marks, 
in the interview segment.        
4.3.    Responding to the above advertisement in January 2015, around 6771 
candidates appeared in the preliminary examination held on 22.03.2015.  
Those securing 176 marks or more in the screening test were cleared to 
participate in the main examination.  Some unsuccessful candidates had 
filed writ petitions before the High Court alleging discrepancies in the 
framing of questions and revised model answers. Eventually, on the High 
Court’s 
interim 
order, 
those 
with 
a 
reduced 
score 
of 
173 
or               
more marks in the screening test were also “provisionally” allowed to write 
the main examination.  The main written test was held on 12.7.2015 where 
around 1000 candidates (qualifying in the preliminary examination) 
appeared.  
4.4.   However, only 3 candidates were found to have obtained the qualifying 
marks i.e. above 55 % in the written examination. Accordingly, the five 
Judges of the Selection and Appointment Committee of the Patna High Court 
proposed moderation of marks in their meeting dated 8.1.2016. This led to 

Page 5 of 59 
 
adding of 4% marks in paper 1 and 6% marks in paper 2 in the respective 
scores of the individual candidates. 
4.5.  Despite the above moderation exercise, very few candidates could 
secure the notified 55% marks in aggregate.  To address the issue, the 
Selection and Appointment Committee permitted a relaxation of 5% in the 
aggregate in the meeting held on 13.1.2016 by exercising options under the 
proviso to Clause 10 of Appendix – ‘C’ of the Bihar Rules 1951.  The Full 
Court endorsed the relaxation of aggregate marks at 50% in the written test.  
With this, 81 candidates who had scored 50% in the written test qualified for 
the interview, and their results were declared on 22.1.2016.  
4.6.    In the meantime, the Patna High Court on 8.1.2016 dismissed the 
Writ Petition (CWJC No.11731/2015) of candidates who were earlier allowed 
by way of an ad-interim order, to appear in the main written exam with the 
declaration that candidates who had secured less than 176 marks in the 
screening test, are ineligible to take part in the main examination.  
Accordingly, 5 such candidates who scored less than 176 marks were 
disqualified on 1.2.2016.  During the verification process, 3 other shortlisted 
candidates were found to be not practicing as lawyers and were thus found 
ineligible.  Finally, 69 candidates were cleared for the interview which was 
conducted in February 2016, by a Committee of 5 Judges of the High Court.  
Following the viva voce test, after computing the average of the marks 
awarded by the individual members of the Board, it was found that only 9 
candidates had secured the minimum 10 marks out of 50, in the interview 
segment.  The Full Court of the Patna High Court in their meeting held on 

Page 6 of 59 
 
5.4.2016 then approved the appointment of these 9 candidates and they were 
appointed on 17.5.2016.  
4.7.    Challenging the selection process in Bihar, 46 candidates who did not 
qualify for not securing the minimum 10 marks in the interview, moved this 
Court. As noted earlier, the validity of Clause 11 of Appendix – C of the Bihar 
Rules 1951 (amended on 3.4.2013) is challenged in this writ petition.  Notice 
was issued in the Writ Petition on 2.5.2016 by this Court.   
4.8.    When the reply was being prepared by the Patna High Court to respond 
to the writ petition, certain discrepancies were noticed during decoding, 
tabulation, and collation of marks in the main examination and the Registrar 
General of the High Court on 1.6.2016 apprised the Selection and 
Appointment Committee, about the errors.  Then the Chairperson of the 
Committee in consultation with the Acting Chief Justice of the Patna High 
Court ordered for fresh tabulation. Following detailed verification of the 
records, it was found that 3 more candidates had obtained the qualifying 
marks in the written examination and as such were eligible to appear in the 
interview segment. It was simultaneously found that 4 candidates earlier 
shown to have qualified, had not actually obtained the qualifying marks.  
Following the resultant course corrections, 3 more candidates were allowed 
to participate in the interview and a corrigendum was issued for the 4 
candidates, who were wrongly shown to have been qualified.  Then the 
interview of the 3 candidates was held on 19.7.2016 but none of them 
secured the minimum 10 marks prescribed in the interview segment.  Two 
serving judicial officers had applied under the 25% quota meant for Bar 
members and under a judicial order passed by the High Court on 9.8.2016, 

Page 7 of 59 
 
both judicial officers were permitted to participate in the selection process, 
without requiring them to resign from their job.  One of them had not secured 
the required minimum marks for appearing in the interview segment and 
accordingly, only one person (Sunil Kumar Singh) was called for the interview 
on 31.8.2016. But since the concerned candidate failed to secure the 
minimum 10 marks in the interview, he was also not selected.  
 
     B) Developments Post-2015 Selection in Bihar 
5. 
  In August 2016, the Patna High Court issued another advertisement for 
filling up posts for District Judge (Entry Level), for 98 vacancies (including 90 
unfilled vacancies of 2015 examination).  In the meantime, the proposal was 
made to amend the Bihar Rules 1951 and delete the cut-off requirement of 
minimum 10 marks, for qualifying in the interview.  The August 2016 
advertisement did not provide for a minimum qualifying mark in the interview 
segment.  The appropriate in-tune amendment of the Rules was approved by 
the Full Court on 22.6.2016.  Thereafter, the Bihar Rules 1951 was again 
amended on 16.2.2017 and Clauses 10,11 and 12 of Appendix-C of the Bihar 
Rules 1951 were substituted as follows: - 
“10. The ratio of marks of theory papers and viva-voce will be 80% and 
20%. 
 11. A candidate will be called for viva-voce only if he secures at least 
45% in each theory paper. 
 12. A candidate will qualify for appointment if the candidate secures 
at least 45% marks in each theory paper and 50% in aggregate in written 
test (theory papers) and viva-voce, taken together.” 
 
5.1.    Following the aforesaid amendment, the 2016 recruitment process was 
conducted and 98 selected candidates were appointed in March 2018, against 
the advertised vacancies. 

Page 8 of 59 
 
5.2.      Further examinations were held under the aforenoted amended Rules 
through the advertisement in the year 2019 for 16 vacancies against which, 
12 candidates were appointed.  In the next examination conducted in 2020, 
16 more candidates were selected and appointed.   
5.3. 
After the above recruitment process in the years 2016, 2019 and 
2020 respectively, on 6.1.2020 the Bihar Rules 1951 were amended again by 
which Clause 12 of Appendix-C was substituted.   The amended Clause 12 
reads as under:- 
“12. A candidate will qualify for appointment if the candidate secures at 
least 45% marks in each theory paper, 30% marks in viva-voce/interview 
and 50% marks in aggregate in written test (theory papers) and viva-voce 
taken together.” 
 
5.4.       With the above amendment carried out on 6.1.2020, a candidate 
aspiring for selection in the Bihar Superior Judicial Service is required to score 
30% marks in the interview and 50% in the aggregate of written test and viva-
voce test taken together, to qualify for recruitment.   
C) Gujarat Selection Process 
6. 
    For the batch of five writ petitions relating to the selection process in 
Gujarat, the relevant facts are taken from the WP(C) 663/2021.   The salient 
facts on which the challenge is raised, are substantially similar in these cases. 
The Gujarat Rules, 2005, substituted the erstwhile Gujarat Judicial Services 
Recruitment Rules,1961.  The Gujarat Rules,2005 came to be amended firstly 
by the Gujarat State Judicial Service (Amendment) Rules, 2011 dated 23.6.2011 
and secondly by the Gujarat State Judicial Service(Amendment Rule,2014) 
dated 9.9.2014. As per the amendments, Rule 8 provided for competitive 
examination for recruitment to the respective cadres of District Judge and Civil 
Judge.  The following was the prescription for the competitive examination: 

Page 9 of 59 
 
"8. Competitive examination:- 
 
(1) the competitive examination for direct recruitment to the cadre 
of District Judge or Civil Judges shall consist of:- 
(i) a written examination of not less than two hours of duration with 
200 maximum marks; and 
(ii) viva voce test of maximum 50 marks. 
  
(2) the candidates who obtain fifty percent (50%) or more marks in 
the competitive examination conducted for direct recruitment to the 
cadre of District Judge or Civil Judge, shall be eligible for being 
called for Viva-voce; 
 
Provided that the candidates belonging to Schedule Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes who obtain forty five percent (45%) or above 
marks, in the written examination, conducted for direct 
recruitment to the cadre of Civil Judges, shall be eligible for being 
called for Viva-Voce. 
 
(3) the minimum qualifying marks in the Viva-voce conducted for 
direct recruitment to the cadre of District Judge and Civil Judge, shall 
be forty percent (40%) of marks.  
 
(4) merit list shall be prepared on the basis of total marks obtained in 
the written examination and Viva-Voce Test (interview). 
 
(5) the object of the Viva-Voce Test (interview) is to assess the 
suitability of the candidate for the cadre by judging the mental 
alertness, knowledge of law, clear and logical exposition, balance of 
judgment, skills, attitude, ethics, power of assimilation, power of 
communication, character and intellectual depth and the like, of the 
candidate. 
 
(6) all necessary procedure not provided for in these rules of 
recruitment shall be decided by the High Court." 
 
6.1.     With the Rules amended as above, an advertisement was issued on 
26.8.2019, for recruitment of Civil Judges in Gujarat. The scheme of 
examination and syllabus was notified for the preliminary examination, main 
written examination, and the viva-voce test in the advertisement.  Under 
Clause 5 (II) (B), it was specified that the viva-voce test shall be of 50 marks.  
Under sub-Clause (ii) of Clause 5 (II) (B) the object of the Viva-voce test was 
indicated as under: 
“(II) (B) (i) **** **** 

Page 10 of 59 
 
(ii) The object of the Viva-voce Test is to assess the suitability of the 
Candidate for the cadre by judging the mental alertness, knowledge of 
law, clear and logical exposition, balance of judgment, skills, attitude, 
ethics, power of assimilation, power of communication, character and 
intellectual depth and the like, of the Candidate.” 
 
6.2.   It was also specified in the advertisement under sub-Clause (iii) of 
Clause 5 (II) (B) that for being eligible to be included in the select list, the 
candidate must obtain a minimum of 40% marks in the viva-voce test.  
6.3.   On 8.9.2019, Kritika Bodha (WP(C) 663/2021), one of the candidates, 
submitted her application for selection to the post of Civil Judge. The results 
of the preliminary exam were declared on 18.12.2019. The main written 
examination was conducted on 19.1.2020 and the results thereof were 
published on 24.7.2020, declaring 132 candidates as successful for the 
interview round. The interview was conducted on 7.3.2021. The last candidate 
in the general category had 124 marks and the writ petitioner (because of the 
below 40% viva voce marks), despite getting 135.33 marks, was not selected. 
The prayer in all five writ petitions is to quash Rule 8(4) of Gujarat Rules,2005 
(as amended in 2011) specifying 40% qualifying marks for viva voce. The 
related prayers are to quash the selection list and conduct fresh interviews.  
 
II. SUBMISSIONS 
7. 
We have heard learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Ajit Kumar Sinha, Mr. 
Yatinder Singh, Mr. Rameshwar Singh Malik, and learned counsel, Ms. 
Shraddha Deshmukh, Mr. Pawanshree Agrawal and Mr. Rishabh Sancheti for 
the writ petitioners. Learned counsel, Mr. Gautam Narayan, and Mr. Purvish 
Jitendra Malkan, represented High Courts of Patna and Gujarat respectively. 
8. 
The fundamental challenge in these cases is the prescription of the 
minimum cut-off in the viva voce segment i.e. 20 per cent for the recruitment 

Page 11 of 59 
 
by the Patna High Court and 40 per cent for the recruitment under the Gujarat 
High Court respectively. 
9. 
   The learned counsel on behalf of the writ petitioners contend that the 
selection process is vitiated as the same is in contravention of the law laid 
down in All India Judges (2002) where a three Judges Bench after deliberating 
on the report dated 11.11.1999 submitted by Shetty Commission, inter alia, 
in the matter of direct recruitment of judicial officers, opined that subject to 
various modifications in the judgment, all other recommendations of the 
Commission are accepted. As because Shetty Commission while suggesting 
the procedure for selection of judicial officers had specifically indicated that 
the interview segment shall carry 50 marks without any minimum cut-off 
marks, the prescription of minimum marks in the viva-voce test is contended 
to be arbitrary and unreasonable. 
10.     According to the learned counsel, the writ petitioners have better 
aggregate score (written and viva-voce combined), but are deprived of selection 
only because they failed to secure the qualifying marks in the interview. It is 
additionally argued that the interview marks are arbitrarily awarded and that 
is why the Shetty Commission recommended doing away with the cut-off of 
marks, in the viva-voce segment.  
11.    Mr. Ajit Kumar Sinha, learned senior counsel appearing in the lead writ 
petition, highlights the discrepancies in the Bihar selection process. 
Commenting on the meandering nature of the selection process under the 
Patna High Court and the decision taken for the moderation of marks and 
granting further relaxation of 5% in aggregate marks in the written 
examination, Mr. Sinha argued that moderation of marks should have been 

Page 12 of 59 
 
considered for the interview segment, as well for facilitating selection of those 
who scored high marks in the written examination but failed to qualify only 
for securing the below cut off marks in the interview segment. The learned 
counsel questions the fairness of the process which needed repeated course 
correction such as resorting to moderation and the relaxation of aggregate 
marks in the written test segment, as is clearly admitted in the additional 
affidavit of the Patna High Court.  It is therefore argued that the Court should 
not only pass appropriate order on the faulty selection process but should also 
allow appointment on the basis of the aggregate score (written+viva) basis, 
without enforcing the cut-off marks bar, in the viva segment.     
12.      According to the petitioner’s counsel, even after the declaration of the 
final result on 8.4.2016, the Selection and Appointment Committee, continued 
to act till September, 2016, by issuing corrigendum, publishing fresh result of 
the written examination, conducting interviews for a few candidates and 
publishing the ultimate result.  It is then argued by Mr. Sinha that if the Patna 
High Court wanted to consider candidates from a larger pool, because of the 
large number of vacancies, the relaxation of qualifying marks in the interview 
segment should have been a natural option.  
13.      The learned counsel Mr. Pawanshree Agarwal in his turn submits that 
the interview board members in the Gujarat Selection Board had access to the 
written marks of the candidates and therefore it was possible for the interview 
board to arbitrarily disqualify a meritorious candidate, by awarding them less 
than the qualifying marks.  It is also submitted that the Rules were amended 
in 2011 only with the consultation of the High Court of Gujarat but not the 

Page 13 of 59 
 
Gujarat Public Service Commission. Therefore, such an amendment violates 
Article 234 of the Constitution of India. 
14.    In the same line, Mr. Rishabh Sancheti, learned counsel appearing in 
the WP(C) No.1146/2022 argued that denial of appointment because of below 
par score in the viva-voce segment, is discriminatory since such power can be 
selectively used for knocking out deserving candidates.  
15.    Projecting the contrary view, the learned counsel representing the High 
Court of Patna, Mr. Gautam Narayan argued that the High Court in order to 
make the best selection has the discretion to enforce a stricter criteria than 
what was prescribed by the Shetty Commission. According to Mr. Narayan, 
the procedure suggested by the Shetty Commission is only recommendatory. 
The recommendations of the Shetty Commission according to the learned 
counsel should be construed as guidelines only. It is submitted that the Patna 
High Court broadly adhered to the recruitment process for the District 
Judiciary and only made it slightly more stringent. The objective was to ensure 
the selection of meritorious judicial officers and ultimately maintain the 
standard of the District Judiciary.  It is also submitted that the writ petitions 
at the instance of the unsuccessful candidates is not maintainable.        
16.     Mr. Purvish Malkan, learned counsel for the High Court of Gujarat 
while adopting the other submissions of Mr. Narayan, argues that the power 
is vested with the High Court to evolve its own procedure under Articles 
233,234 and 235 of the Constitution.  With this Mr. Malkan supports the 
amendment of the Rules by the High Court.  The learned counsel refers to the 
High Court’s counter affidavit to contend that the Internal Board members did 

Page 14 of 59 
 
not have access to the marks in the written test while conducting the viva voce 
test.   
III.ISSUES 
 
17. The issues to be considered here are: 
i) Whether the prescription of minimum marks for viva voce is in 
contravention of the law laid down by this Court in All India 
Judges(2002) which accepted certain recommendations of the Shetty 
Commission? 
ii) Whether the prescription of minimum marks for viva voce is violative 
of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India? 
iii) Whether the selection process in Bihar is vitiated given the 
moderation of marks and corrective steps, highlighted by the 
petitioners in the Bihar Selection process? 
iv) Whether non-consultation with the Public Service Commission as 
required under Article 234 of the Constitution for selection to the post 
of Civil Judge in the State of Gujarat would render the Gujarat 
Rules,2005(as amended in 2011) void?  
 
IV. MAINTAINABILITY 
 
18.    At the outset, it is apposite to address the issue of the maintainability 
of the writ petitions. It is argued by Mr. Gautam Narayan and Mr. Purvish 
Jitendra Malkan learned counsel that after having participated in the 
recruitment process, the writ petitioners having not succeeded, cannot turn 
around and challenge the recruitment process or the vires of the Recruitment 
Rules.  It is submitted that all candidates knew about the prescription of 
minimum marks for viva voce, well before the selection process commenced 
and the principle of estoppel will operate against the unsuccessful challengers.  
On the other hand, the learned counsel representing the writ petitioners 
argued that the principle of estoppel would have no application when there are 

Page 15 of 59 
 
glaring illegalities2 in the selection process. Further, estoppel is not applicable 
when the arbitrariness affects fundamental rights under Articles 14 and 16 of 
the Constitution of India3.  
19.    As argued by the learned counsel for the High Courts, the legal position 
is that after participating in the recruitment process, the unsuccessful 
candidates cannot turn around and challenge the recruitment process4. 
However, it is also settled that the principle of estoppel cannot override the 
law5.  Such legal principle was reiterated by the Supreme Court in Dr.(Major) 
Meeta Sahai Vs. Union of India6 where it was observed as under: 
“17. However, we must differentiate from this principle insofar as the 
candidate by agreeing to participate in the selection process only 
accepts the prescribed procedure and not the illegality in it. In a 
situation where a candidate alleges misconstruction of statutory rules 
and discriminating consequences arising therefrom, the same cannot 
be condoned merely because a candidate has partaken in it. The 
constitutional scheme is sacrosanct and its violation in any manner is 
impermissible. In fact, a candidate may not have locus to assail the 
incurable illegality or derogation of the provisions of the Constitution, 
unless he/she participates in the selection process.” 
 
20.   Guided by the above ratio, in matters like this, to non-suit the writ 
petitioners at the threshold would hardly be reasonable particularly when the 
alleged deficiencies in the process could be gauged only by participation in the 
selection process.  
21.   The next question is whether the principle of res judicata is attracted in 
these cases. Mr. Purvish Malkan, learned counsel for the High Court of 
 
2 Raj Kumar v Shakti Raj(1997) 9 SCC 527 
3 Basheshwar Nath v. Commr. of Income-tax, Delhi AIR 1959 SC 149; Olga Tellis v. Bombay 
Municipal Corporation AIR 1986 SC 180 ; Nar Singh Pal v. Union of India and others 2000 3 
SCC 588. 
4 Madan Lal v. State of J&K (1995) 3 SCC 486; Dhananjay Malik v. State of Uttaranchal (2008) 
4 SCC 171; Ramesh Chandra Shah v. Anil Joshi (2013) 11 SCC 309 ; Anupal Singh v State of 
Uttar Pradesh (2020) 2 SCC 173 
5 Krishna Rai v Banaras Hindu University (2022) 8 SCC 713 
6 (2019) 20 SCC 17 

Page 16 of 59 
 
Gujarat brought to our notice that the validity of Rule 8(3) of the Gujarat 
Rules,2005 (as amended on 23.6.2011) was earlier challenged before the 
Supreme Court in WP(C) 291 of 2013. This Court after completion of pleadings 
transferred the said writ petition to the Gujarat High Court. Thereafter, the 
Gujarat High Court in a detailed judgment in the Special Civil Application 
No.8793 of 2015, upheld the validity of the amendment prescribing 40% cut-
off marks for interview. The Special Leave Petition arising from the said 
judgment was dismissed by this Court on 30.1.2017.    
22.   In the above context, a Constitution Bench of this Court in Daryao v 
State of UP7 (for short “Daryao”) unanimously held that the principle of res 
judicata is one of universal application and since the final judgment is binding 
on the parties thereto, an applicant under Article 226 cannot apply on the 
same grounds under Article 32, without getting the adverse judgment set aside 
in appeal. However, a distinction was made between cases where the 
application under Article 226 has been dismissed on merits and cases where 
it is dismissed on a preliminary ground. It was further held that an Article 32 
petition would not be maintainable on the same facts and the same grounds.  
23. The above ratio cannot however be applied stricto sensu in the present 
facts. This is for the reason that it is not the same writ petitioner who has 
approached this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution.  The Court here 
is confronted with a different set of facts, another set of litigants who have 
raised additional contentions.  Therefore, the submission of Mr. Pawanshree 
Agrawal, learned counsel for the writ petitioner that the writ petition should 
not be dismissed on the ground of res-judicata, is found to be more reasonable.    
 
7 AIR 1961 SC 1457 

Page 17 of 59 
 
In any case, the dismissal of a Special Leave Petition has no consequence on 
the question of law8.  
24.    Let us now address the fundamental question as to whether prescribing 
minimum marks for interview contravenes the ratio in All India Judges(2002).  
To do this, it is necessary to bear in mind the following contextual background. 
 
V. GENESIS OF THE SHETTY COMMISSION 
25. In 1989, the All-India Judges’ Association and its working President filed 
a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India seeking various 
reliefs for members of the District Judiciary focusing on uniformity in service 
conditions. On 13.11.1991, a three-judge bench speaking through Ranganath 
Misra CJ disposed of the said writ petition in All India Judges Association v 
Union of India9, after considering, inter alia, the issues relating to pay scales 
and service conditions of the District Judiciary. The Supreme Court directed 
States and Union Territories to separately examine and review the pay 
structure. Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment, the Union of India and few 
State Governments filed review petitions before this Court. In All India Judges 
Association v Union of India10(for short “All India Judges(1993)), this Court on 
24.8.1993, modified some of the reliefs in the original judgment but, inter alia, 
recommended that the service conditions of judicial officers should be 
reviewed periodically by an independent Commission exclusively constituted 
for the purpose. From 1993 onwards, this Court exercising its writ remedy of 
‘continuing mandamus’ had issued multiple directions under the rubric of this 
case.  
 
8 Inderjit Singh Sodhi v. Chairman, Punjab State Electricity Board, (2021) 1 SCC 198. 
9 (1992) 1 SCC 119 
10 (1993) 4 SCC 288 

Page 18 of 59 
 
26. Pursuant to the aforementioned direction, the Union of India appointed 
the first National Judicial Pay Commission on 21.3.1996 under the 
chairmanship of Justice KJ Shetty. Justice Shetty Commission submitted a 
preliminary report on 31.1.1998 and a final report on 11.11.1999. The terms 
of reference of the Commission are extracted below: 
“(a) To evolve the principles which should govern the structure of pay 
and other emoluments of judicial officers belonging to the subordinate 
judiciary all over the country. 
(b) To examine the present structure of emoluments and conditions of 
service of judicial officers in the States, Union territories taking into 
account the total packet of benefits available to them and make suitable 
recommendations having regard, among other relevant factors, to the 
existing relativities in the pay structure between the officers belonging to 
subordinate judicial service vis-a-vis other civil servants. 
(c) To examine and recommend in respect of minimum qualifications, age 
of recruitment, method of recruitment, etc., for judicial officers. In this 
context, the relevant provisions of the Constitution and directions of the 
Supreme Court in All India Judges Association case and other cases may 
be kept in view. 
(d) To examine the work methods and work environment as also the 
variety of allowances and benefits in kind that are available to judicial 
officers in addition to pay and to suggest rationalization and 
simplification thereof with a view to promoting efficiency in judicial 
administration, optimizing the size of the judiciary etc.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27. The above would indicate that the terms of reference essentially focused 
on the evolution of principles that would govern the formulation of pay 
structure and emoluments of judicial officers. Suggestions were also expected 
on minimum qualifications, age, and “method of recruitment” etc. for judicial 
officers. The final report submitted on 11.11.1999 focused on the age of 
retirement, nomenclature for judicial officers, equation of posts, inter-se 
seniority, the age for direct recruitment, the establishment of All India Judicial 
Service, etc.   

Page 19 of 59 
 
28. Before extracting the relevant portion of the Shetty Commission report 
which inter-alia, prescribed that no cut-off marks should be fixed for the 
interview segment, a reference to the context is apposite: 
“10.95 We have earlier set out the procedures followed by the High 
Courts for selecting candidates for direct recruitment. Most of the High 
Courts are having only Viva Voce Test.  
10.96 High Courts of Andhra Pradesh, Allahabad, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, however, have prescribed written test in 
addition to viva-voce.  
10.97 The Commission has received innumerable complaints that the    
selection by only viva-voce has more often led to arbitrariness if not 
whimsical selection, unjust if not unreasonable. With respect to High 
Courts, we do not want to carry any such impression. But we do feel 
that there is less transparency and objectivity in the selection process.” 
 
                
29. Since most of the High Courts were selecting candidates based only on the 
viva voce test without conducting the written test, the absence of transparency 
and objectivity in the interview process was noticed. The Commission therefore 
opined that accepting the viva voce as the sole selection mode could lead to 
arbitrariness. However, this by itself does not lend any clarity on how 
prescribing minimum cut-off marks for viva voce together with the written test, 
could possibly lead to arbitrariness in selection. In order to reduce subjectivity, 
the Shetty Commission in its subsequent recommendation, delineated the 
methodology for conducting viva voce as under:  
“10.97. ….We would, therefore, like to recommend the following 
procedure to reduce degrees of subjectivity and arbitrariness: 
 
(i)There shall be written examination followed by viva-voce.  
(ii) 
Written 
Examination 
must 
carry 
200 
marks 
on 
the 
subject/subjects prescribed by the High Court. The paper should be 
of a duration of minimum two hours.  
(iii) The cut off marks in the Written Examination should be 60% or 
corresponding 
grade 
for 
general 
candidates 
and 
50% 
or 
corresponding grade for SC/ST candidates. Those who have secured 
the marks above the cut off marks shall be called for viva-voce Test.  
(iv) The viva-voce Test should be in a thorough and Scientific Manner 
and it should be taken anything between 25 and 30 minutes for each 

Page 20 of 59 
 
candidate. The viva-voce shall carry 50 marks. There shall be no cut 
off marks in viva-voce test. 
(v) The merit list will be prepared on the basis of marks/grades 
obtained both in the Written Examination and viva-voce.” 
 
 
 
 
30.   At this point, the fundamental fallacy in the argument of the writ 
petitioners, as is pointed out by Mr. Gautam Narayan, the learned counsel for 
the High Court of Patna becomes distinctly discernible. If the above procedure 
recommended by the Shetty Commission is to be implemented stricto sensu, 
the cut-off marks even for the written examination can never be, below 60%. 
Therefore, if the recruitment process of the Patna High Court is to be tested 
on the recommended threshold marks of Shetty Commission i.e. 150 marks 
out of 250 marks for shortlisting general category candidates in the written 
exam, none of the writ petitioners would qualify for the viva-voce segment 
since they never secured the minimum 60% in the written marks aggregate.  
In the present case, the minimum cut-off as per the amended Rules was 55% 
and this was further lowered to 50% as per proviso to Clause 10 of Bihar Rules, 
1951.  The writ petitioners should not therefore be permitted to argue for 
selective implementation of the Shetty Commission recommendation, for doing 
away with the cut-off marks in the viva voce segment.  In other words, the 
candidates cannot be allowed to “approbate and reprobate”11 in the same 
breath.   As such, it would be impermissible to seek dilution of the Shetty 
Commission recommended criteria, only for the viva voce segment.  
31.   The Shetty Commission recommended that the degree of subjectivity 
and arbitrariness should be reduced and the selection should be transparent. 
In clauses (vi) and (vii) of Para 10.99 of the Report, it was specifically noted as 
under: 
 
11 Pradeep Kumar Rai v Dinesh Kumar Pandey (2015) 11 SCC 493 (Para 17) 

Page 21 of 59 
 
“(vi) Today, the viva voce examination can be more unfair than the 
written examination in view of the fact that it is decided on chance 
or impression in the shortest possible time. Rural candidates are 
generally at a disadvantage in this process. English-speaking 
candidates sometimes gain advantage without they being superior 
in skills for the job. A dominant member of the interview board may 
carry the day to the disadvantage of many deserving candidates. 
These things happen not necessarily because of any conscious bias 
or disposition of members of the Board. This is inherent in the 
process itself as it operates at present in many places. The judiciary 
cannot afford to lose opportunities to get the most outstanding 
candidate because of infirmities in the selection system. As such, an 
alternative procedure by and large modelled on the lines of the 
written examination is recommended for the viva voce as well.  
(vii) The viva-voce Examination will adopt the following procedure:  
 
(a) A proforma containing categories such as knowledge /Skills/ 
Attitude/ Ethics/Communication /Character, etc., be developed (this 
will depend on what are the qualities the judiciary is looking for in 
the prospective Judges being interviewed) in advance and each 
category may be given relative weightage (credits)in terms of marks. 
For example, if the total Viva marks are 100, one may assign 10 
marks for knowledge /comprehension, 5 marks for ethics /attitude, 
25 marks for skills of judging, 10 marks for communication abilities, 
10 marks for general knowledge, etc 
(b) Each member of the Board including the Chairman will be asked 
to assign marks for each category immediately after a candidate is 
interviewed and before the next candidate is called in. To strike some 
commonality or relative parity in approach of members, the board 
may have some general discussion before commencement of interview 
on range of marks to be given for a particular level of assessment. If 
necessary, some written guidelines may also be circulated to be 
adhered to in assigning marks at the time of interview.  
(c) At the end of each day’s interview, the tabulator will convert the 
numerical marks assigned to each category into grades and then to 
grade values. This will then be totalled up and the Cumulative Grade 
Value Average of each candidate interviewed will be obtained.”    
  
32. As rightly noted above, the English-speaking urban candidates could 
possibly be at an advantage compared to those from a rural background and 
those belonging to marginalized communities. It must however be seen that 
the Shetty Commission report was in the backdrop of High Courts selecting 
candidates simply on the basis of viva voce without conducting written test. 

Page 22 of 59 
 
What is also essential to note is that the Shetty Commission recommended 
evaluation through grades instead of numerical marks, for the selection of 
judicial officers, whether in written exam or viva voce. It also suggested that 
there must be written guidelines for assigning marks at the time of the 
interview. 
 
VI. ISSUE WISE DISCUSSION 
Issue No.1) Whether the prescription of minimum marks for viva voce is in 
contravention of the law laid down by this Court in All India Judges(2002) 
which accepted certain recommendations of the Shetty Commission? 
 
33.   The judgment in All India Judges (2002), will now have to be analyzed in 
the 
above 
prefatory 
context. 
The 
Court 
therein 
accepted 
certain 
recommendations made by the Shetty Commission while modifying or 
rejecting a few others.  In paragraph 27, the 3-judge bench speaking through 
Justice B.N. Kirpal specifically noted thus:  
      “27. … At the same time, we are of the opinion that there has to be 
certain minimum standard, objectively adjudged, for officers who are to 
enter the Higher Judicial Service as Additional District Judges and 
District Judges. While we agree with the Shetty Commission that the 
recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service i.e. the District Judge cadre 
from amongst the advocates should be 25 per cent and the process of 
recruitment is to be by a competitive examination, both written and viva 
voce, we are of the opinion that there should be an objective method of 
testing the suitability of the subordinate judicial officers for promotion 
to the Higher Judicial Service.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[emphasis supplied] 
34.    The above would show that while dealing with the method of 
recruitment, this Court stressed the importance of an objective standard for 
recruitment and emphasized that the process of direct recruitment should be 
through a written and viva-voce examination. A careful reading of the entire 
judgment would show that there is no direct discussion on the aspect of viva 

Page 23 of 59 
 
voce except the remark in paragraph 27 that there should be an objective 
method of testing suitability. The issue as to whether there should be 
minimum qualifying marks for viva-voce, did not engage the Court’s attention.  
Moreover, even the Shetty Commission report did not provide any specific 
reasoning as to why there should be no minimum marks for viva voce. For this 
discussion, we may benefit by referring to the recent decision of this Court in 
Dr.Kavita Kamboj v. High Court of Punjab and Haryana and Others12(for short 
“Kavita Khamboj”). Chief Justice, DY Chandrachud writing for the three-judge 
bench adverted to the earlier judgment in All India Judges (2002) and 
specifically noted that the Court did not make any observation about the 
desirability or otherwise of a minimum cut-off generally. The following passage 
from the judgment is relevant here:- 
“41. Now, it is true that certain recommendations of the Shetty 
Commission in regard to the improvement of the pay scales of the 
judicial officers were accepted by this Court in the decision of this 
Court in All India Judges’ Association (supra). However, there was no 
specific finding in paragraphs 27 and 28 of the All India Judges’ 
Association (supra) in regard to whether a cut-off should be imposed for 
recruitment by way of regular promotion. The Court had merely 
remarked that “there should be an objective method of testing the 
suitability of the subordinate judiciary”, without making any 
observation about the desirability or otherwise of minimum cutoffs for 
viva voce generally.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           [emphasis supplied] 
35. Also in the aforementioned judgment, the bench noted that the High 
Court cannot be precluded from framing Rules prescribing a minimum cut-off 
based on the exigencies of the Service in the State. 
36. In the present case, the writ petitioners additionally argued that by virtue 
of paragraph 37 in All India Judges(2002), the Court accepted even those 
 
12 2024 SCC OnLine SC 254 

Page 24 of 59 
 
recommendations which were not otherwise discussed in the judgment. The 
said paragraph reads as under: 
“37. Subject to the various modifications in this judgment, all other 
recommendations of the Shetty Commission are accepted.” 
 
37. The above paragraph cannot persuade us to conclude that this Court 
accepted the recommendation of the Shetty Commission to do away with 
minimum marks for the interview. This is simply because in the preceding 
paragraphs, the Court listed various recommendations of the Shetty 
Commission. Dispensing with minimum marks for interview however finds no 
mention in the said list.  Without such specific mention, it would be logical to 
say that the judgment in All India Judges (2002) is sub-silentio, on the aspect 
of minimum marks for interview.  Therefore, this judgment cannot be 
considered as having authoritatively pronounced on doing away with 
minimum cut-off marks in the interview segment.  
38.  Let us now turn to the other cases where this Court had the occasion to 
interpret the recommendations of the Shetty Commission in situations where 
the recruitment rules were inconsistent with the recommendations:  
i) 
In Syed T.A. Naqshbandi v. State of J&K13, while giving 
primacy to the Rules framed by the High Court vis-a-vis policy 
decisions and Full Court Resolutions, the Supreme Court made the 
following pertinent observations:  
“8. Reliance placed upon the recommendations of Justice 
Jagannatha Shetty Commission or the decision reported in All 
India Judges' Assn. v. Union of India [(2002) 4 SCC 247 : 2002 
SCC (L&S) 508] or even the resolution of the Full Court of the High 
Court dated 27-4-2002 is not only inappropriate but a misplaced 
one and the grievances espoused based on this assumption 
deserve a mere mention only to be rejected. The conditions of 
service of members of any service for that matter are governed by 
statutory rules and orders, lawfully made in the absence of rules 
 
13 (2003) 9 SCC 592 

Page 25 of 59 
 
to cover the area which has not been specifically covered by such 
rules, and so long as they are not replaced or amended in the 
manner known to law, it would be futile for anyone to claim for 
those existing rules/orders being ignored yielding place to certain 
policy decisions taken even to alter, amend or modify them.” 
 
ii) 
In Rakhi Ray v. High Court of Delhi14, the Supreme Court concluded 
that the recommendations of the Commission even if accepted by this 
Court were required to be incorporated in the statutory Rules governing 
the service conditions of the Judicial Officers.  However, in the absence 
of statutory Rule to deal with a particular issue, the High Courts are 
bound to give effect to the decisions of the Supreme Court. 
iii) 
Likewise in Mahinder Kumar v High Court of Madhya Pradesh15 (for 
short “Mahinder Kumar”), the challenge was to the procedure adopted by 
the High Court of Madhya Pradesh for recruitment of District Judge 
(entry level). While discussing paragraph 10.97 of the Shetty 
Commission, the 3 judge Bench speaking through Justice FM Ibrahim 
Kalifulla, clarified as under: 
“71. Sub-paras (i) to (v) of Para 10.97 of the Shetty Commission 
Report have been set out to show how while holding a written 
examination and a viva voce examination, prescription of marks 
and other aspects are to be followed. In fact those sub-
paragraphs, contained in Para 10.97 of the Shetty Commission 
Report, can at best be stated to be a guideline, which any High 
Court should keep in mind, while resorting to selection for filling 
up the posts in the Higher Judicial Service. In this context, in 
para 28 of All India Judges Assn. (3) [(2002) 4 SCC 247 : 2002 
SCC (L&S) 508] , this Court while prescribing the extent to which 
direct recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service for the post of 
Higher Judicial Service for the District Judges can be made, also 
said that appropriate rules should be framed by the High Courts 
at the earliest possible time. Therefore, once the rules come into 
place it will have to held that what all that can be expected of the 
High Court, would be to follow the said rules. We have in this 
judgment held that by virtue of Rule 7 and Para 9(iv), the 1st 
respondent High Court had every authority to prescribe the 
procedure, while making the selection to the post of Higher 
 
14 (2010) 2 SCC 637 
15 (2013) 11 SCC 87 

Page 26 of 59 
 
Judicial Service and that such procedure followed was also 
rational.”   
 
In the above paragraph, the Court specifically noted that the Shetty 
Commission recommendations can at best be considered a guideline 
and that the High Court is vested with the required power to evolve its 
own procedure for selection of judicial officers.  We must reiterate that 
a reference was also made to paragraph 28 of All India Judges (2002) 
which provided for the High Court to frame appropriate Rules. 
Moreover, the Shetty Commission itself mentioned that the 
recommendation was subject to the prescription of Rules by the High 
Court.  
iv) 
In like manner, this Court in Sasidhar Reddy v State of AP16, 
observed that the recommendations of the Shetty Commission would have 
to be supported by the Rules for implementation. It was clarified that when 
recommendations and the Rules are at variance, the statutory Rules 
should be followed. The grievance of the appellant therein was that it was 
not necessary to complete 35 years for being appointed to the post of 
District and Sessions Judge (Entry Level) in the AP State Judicial Service.  
In this context, the Court analysed the recommendations of the Shetty 
Commission as under: 
“14. The said concept, with regard to the minimum age, has been 
brought in only from the report of the Commission. For the 
reasons recorded in the report of the Commission, the 
Commission was of the view that the post of a District and 
Sessions Judge, being an important post, which not only 
requires integrity and intelligence but also requires maturity, the 
Commission was of the view that a person not having completed 
35 years of age should not be appointed to the said post. It is 
pertinent to note that this was merely a recommendation or 
suggestion made by the Commission. The recommendation or 
suggestion, if not supported by the Rules, cannot be 
implemented. In the instant case, the Rules are silent with regard 
to the minimum age. It only speaks about the maximum age. In 
the circumstances, one cannot read provisions incorporated in 
the report of the Commission into the Rules. The Rules are 
 
16 (2014) 2 SCC 158 

Page 27 of 59 
 
statutory and framed under the provisions of Article 309 of the 
Constitution of India. In our opinion, if the recommendations 
made by the Commission and the statutory rules are at variance, 
the provisions incorporated in the recruitment rules have to be 
followed. It is pertinent to note that when such a question had 
been raised before this Court, in Syed T.A. Naqshbandi 
case [Syed T.A. Naqshbandi v. State of J&K, (2003) 9 SCC 592 : 
2003 SCC (L&S) 1151] , this Court had also observed that till 
relevant recruitment rules are suitably amended so as to 
incorporate the recommendations made by the Commission, 
provisions of the statutory rules must be followed. 
17. In our opinion, the High Court was in error while giving 
undue weightage to the recommendations made by the Shetty 
Commission, especially when the Rules do not provide for any 
minimum age for the appointment to the post in question. 
Moreover, even Article 233 of the Constitution of India is also 
silent about the minimum age for being appointed as a District 
Judge.” 
 
39. With the above pronouncements on the inter-play between the Shetty 
Commission recommendations and the prevalent Rules, the following logical 
deduction can be laid down: -   
(i) In case of inconsistency between the recommendations and the 
Rules, primacy should be given to the existing statutory Rules.  
(ii)   In the absence of existing Rules, the High Court should follow 
the directions of this Court.  
40. For the sake of completeness, we may however clarify that even though the 
statutory Rules can be supplemented to fill in gaps17, the High Court cannot act 
contrary to the Rules18.  
41. With the above understanding, let us now examine the contention that the 
judgments in Hemani Malhotra v. High Court of Delhi19(for short “Hemani 
Malhotra”), and Ramesh Kumar v. High Court of Delhi20 (for short “Ramesh 
 
17 Dr. Kavita Khamboj v High Court of Punjab and Haryana, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 254 
18 Sivananda CT v High Court of Kerala (2024) 3 SCC 799 
19 (2008) 7 SCC 11 
20 (2010) 3 SCC 104 

Page 28 of 59 
 
Kumar”), are authorities for the proposition that there can be no minimum marks 
for viva voce since the recommendations of the Shetty Commission were accepted 
in All India Judges(2002). Mr. Rishabh Sancheti, the learned counsel for the writ 
petitioners would additionally argue that the judgment in Mahinder Kumar(supra) 
is per incuriam because despite being a subsequent decision, it does not refer or 
consider the earlier relevant observations in Ramesh Kumar(supra). Mr. 
Pawanshree Agarwal, the learned counsel would submit that there is a dichotomy 
between the decisions in Mahender Kumar(supra) and Ramesh Kumar(supra). 
While 
Mahender 
Kumar(supra) 
endorses 
the 
Shetty 
Commission 
recommendations to be a guideline, Ramesh Kumar(supra) notes that the 
recommendations were accepted by this Court in All India Judges (2002).  
42. The learned counsel for the writ petitioners have relied on the following 
paragraph from Hemani Malhotra(supra):  
“18. This Court notices that in All India Judges' Assn. v. Union of 
India [(2002) 4 SCC 247 : 2002 SCC (L&S) 508] subject to the various 
modifications 
indicated 
in 
the 
said 
decision, 
the 
other 
recommendations of the Shetty Commission were accepted by this 
Court. It means that prescription of cut-off marks at viva voce test by 
the respondent was not in accordance with the decision of this Court. 
It is an admitted position that both the petitioners had cleared written 
examination and therefore after adding marks obtained by them in 
the written examination to the marks obtained in the viva voce test, 
the result of the petitioners should have been declared. As noticed 
earlier 16 vacant posts were notified to be filled up and only five 
candidates had cleared the written test. Therefore, if the marks 
obtained by the petitioners at viva voce test had been added to the 
marks obtained by them in the written test then the names of the 
petitioners would have found place in the merit list prepared by the 
respondent. Under the circumstances, this Court is of the opinion 
that the petitions filed by the petitioners will have to be accepted in 
part.”  
43. The factual backdrop of the aforementioned case was that there was no 
prescription of minimum cut-off marks or viva voce in the Delhi Higher Judicial 
Service Examination, 2006. Therefore, the issue before the Court was whether 
the introduction of the requirement of minimum marks for interview, after the 

Page 29 of 59 
 
selection process was completed, would amount to changing the rules of the 
game after the game was played. It is noteworthy that the Court in paragraph 
15 of Hemani Malhotra(supra) itself notes that: 
“15. There is no manner of doubt that the authority making rules 
regulating the selection can prescribe by rules the minimum marks 
both for written examination and viva voce, but if minimum marks are 
not prescribed for viva voce before the commencement of selection 
process, the authority concerned, cannot either during the selection 
process 
or 
after 
the 
selection 
process 
add 
an 
additional 
requirement/qualification that the candidate should also secure 
minimum marks in the interview. Therefore, this Court is of the opinion 
that prescription of minimum marks by the respondent at viva voce 
test was illegal.”  
 
 
 
 
 
[emphasis supplied] 
44.     The above findings in Hemani Malhotra(supra) were in the absence of 
rules prescribing minimum marks for interview. The facts here are 
significantly different since the qualifying marks in the interview segment was 
notified before commencement of the recruitment process.  In line with the 
settled principle of law as discussed above, in case of inconsistency of the 
existing Rules with the recommendations, the Rules will prevail.    
45.     Similarly in the other cited cases i.e., Ramesh Kumar(supra), the Court 
noted that in the absence of any contrary provision in relevant Rules, the 
competent authority can fix minimum qualifying marks, both for the written 
and viva voce. It was held that if specific Rules provide for minimum marks 
for viva voce, strict adherence to the same is mandatory. Significantly, the 
judgment also elucidates the importance of the viva voce test in bringing out 
a candidate’s overall intellectual and personal qualities. Importantly in 
Hemani Malhotra(supra) and Ramesh Kumar(supra), the fundamental issue 
was whether the rules of the game could be changed midway through the 
selection process.  However, in the present matters, the writ petitioners were 

Page 30 of 59 
 
aware of the rules of the game i.e. the prescription of minimum marks, well 
before the selection process commenced. This distinguishing feature cannot 
be overlooked. At this point, we may also note that the present writ petitions 
were de-tagged from the five-judge Constitution Bench matter21 concerning 
the issue of changing the rules of the game which is currently reserved for 
judgment. This has been fairly conceded by the learned senior counsel for the 
petitioners, Mr. Ajit Kumar Sinha. Therefore, the challenge here is not w.r.t. 
changing the rules of the game but the implication of the Shetty Commission 
recommendations and the law laid down in All India Judges (2002). 
46.     On the contention relating to the decision in Mahender Kumar(supra) 
being per incuriam, it is plausible in the present facts to reconcile both 
decisions i.e. Mahender Kumar(supra) and Ramesh Kumar(supra).  Crucially 
in both the decisions, it is emphasized that primacy must be given to the 
existing statutory rules. The relevant passage in Ramesh Kumar(supra) is 
extracted below: 
“15. Thus, the law on the issue can be summarised to the effect that 
in case the statutory rules prescribe a particular mode of selection, 
it has to be given strict adherence accordingly. In case, no procedure 
is prescribed by the rules and there is no other impediment in law, 
the competent authority while laying down the norms for selection 
may prescribe for the tests and further specify the minimum 
benchmarks for written test as well as for viva voce.”   
 
47.    The above paragraph explicitly provides that the Courts can fix 
minimum qualifying marks for viva voce.  In the present cases, the Rules 
provided for the qualifying marks and as such the cited judgments can be of 
no assistance for the writ petitioners.  
 
21 Tej Prakash Pathak And Ors. v. Rajasthan High Court And Ors. C.A. No. 2634/2013 & 
batch 

Page 31 of 59 
 
48.    The implications of the split judgment in Salam Samarjeet Singh vs. 
High Court of Manipur at Imphal22  will next bear consideration. Justice 
Banumathi in her judgment noticed that All India Judges (2002) is sub silentio 
on the aspect of minimum cut off marks for the viva-voce test.  In his 
dissenting judgment, Justice Shiva Kirti Singh had not expressed any 
disagreement on the said sub silentio observation but left it open for 
determination in a future case. There again, the dissent of Justice Singh was 
based on the fact that minimum cut off was not prescribed in the recruitment 
Rules and were brought in midway through the recruitment process, just 
prior to the stage of interview, by resolution of the Court.  Here however the 
prescription of minimum cut-off in the recruitment process was notified for 
information of the candidates well before the commencement of the selection 
process under the Patna High Court and also under the Gujarat High Court 
and this distinguishing feature will have to be borne in mind. 
49.    The Justice Shetty Commission was constituted to bring about 
uniformity in service conditions of judicial officers. The recommendations 
made by the Commission are in the nature of guidelines and those will have 
to be seen in the context of the Rules governing recruitment of judicial 
officers. By virtue of the decision in All India Judges (2002), it cannot be said 
that adequate elbow room was not available to prescribe qualifying marks in 
the interview segment to ensure the selection of the best possible person.  
Therefore, the prescription of minimum marks in the Rules is not found to be 
in contravention of the judgment in the All-India Judges (2002). 
 
 
22 (2016) 10 SCC 484 

Page 32 of 59 
 
Issue No. ii) Whether the prescription of minimum marks for viva voce 
violates Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India? 
 
50.     The learned counsel for the writ petitioners argued that the 
prescription of minimum marks for viva voce is violative of Articles 14 and 16 
of the Constitution of India for being manifestly arbitrary. Reliance has been 
placed on decisions of this Court which have expanded the scope of 
examination under Article 14.23  In this context, we must recall the oft-quoted 
passage from the five-judge bench decision in E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N24, 
where the Court while dealing with an allegedly discriminatory transfer order 
noted as under: 
 “85…….From a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to 
arbitrariness. In fact, equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; 
one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the other, to the whim 
and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is 
implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and 
constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article 14, and if it effects 
any matter relating to public employment, it is also violative of Article 
16.  Articles 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in State action and ensure 
fairness and equality of treatment. They require that State action must 
be based on valid relevant principles applicable alike to all similarly 
situate and it must not be guided by any extraneous or irrelevant 
considerations because that would be denial of equality. Where the 
operative reason for State action, as distinguished from motive 
inducing from the antechamber of the mind, is not legitimate and 
relevant but is extraneous and outside the area of permissible 
considerations, it would amount to mala fide exercise of power and 
that is hit by Articles 14 and 16. Mala fide exercise of power and 
arbitrariness are different lethal radiations emanating from the same 
vice: in fact the latter comprehends the former. Both are inhibited 
by Articles 14 and 16.”  
 
23 Shayara Bano v Union of India 2017(9) SCC 1; Joseph Shine v Union of India (2019) 3 SCC 
39; Lok Prahari v State of  UP[Para 30,35,36,39] (2016) 8 SCC 389 
24 (1974) 4 SCC 3 

Page 33 of 59 
 
51. Commenting on the principle of non-arbitrariness in the words of Article 
14, another five-judge bench speaking through P.N. Bhagwati J. in Ajay 
Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi25, (for short “Ajay Hasia”) made the 
following pertinent observations: 
“16. …It must therefore now be taken to be well settled that what 
Article 14 strikes at is arbitrariness because any [ Under Article 32 
of the Constitution] action that is arbitrary, must necessarily 
involve negation of equality. The doctrine of classification which is 
evolved by the courts is not paraphrase of Article 14 nor is it the 
objective and end of that article. It is merely a judicial formula for 
determining whether the legislative or executive action in question 
is arbitrary and therefore constituting denial of equality. If the 
classification is not reasonable and does not satisfy the two 
conditions referred to above, the impugned legislative or executive 
action would plainly be arbitrary and the guarantee of equality 
under Article 14 would be breached. Wherever therefore there is 
arbitrariness in State action whether it be of the legislature or of the 
executive or of an “authority” under Article 12, Article 14 
immediately springs into action and strikes down such State action. 
In fact, the concept of reasonableness and non-arbitrariness 
pervades the entire constitutional scheme and is a golden thread 
which runs through the whole of the fabric of the Constitution.” 
52.    In Shayara Bano v Union of India26, after examining a long line of 
precedents, the Supreme Court noted that a legislation can also be struck 
down for being manifestly arbitrary, if it is “irrational, capricious and/or 
without an adequate determining principle”. This principle of manifest 
arbitrariness has been highlighted in other decisions of this Court27.  The 
issue to be examined now is whether the vice of arbitrariness is attracted for 
the Rules prescribing qualifying marks for the viva voce test.    
53.    The challenge raised on behalf of the writ petitioners to the prescription 
of minimum marks for viva voce is not uncommon and the precedents suggest 
 
25 (1981) 1 SCC 722 
26 2017(9) SCC 1 
27 Association for Democratic Reforms v Union of India; 2024 INSC 113; Joseph Shine v Union 
of India 2019(3) SCC 39; Lok Prahari v Union of India 2018(6) SCC 1; Shayara Bano v Union 
of India 2017(9) SCC 1 

Page 34 of 59 
 
that much turns on the nature of the post and the extent of weightage given 
to viva voce.  For the present matters, the distinction between the Bihar Rules, 
1951 governing the selection process for higher judiciary, specifically District 
Judges, and Rule 8(3) of the Gujarat Rules, 2005 which pertains to the 
recruitment of both Civil and District Judges would need careful 
consideration.  
54. The relevant clauses of Bihar Rules,1951 dealing with the appointment to 
the Higher judiciary are extracted below for ready reference: 
“10. candidate will qualify for interview only if he secures minimum 
45% marks in each paper and 55% marks in aggregate in the written 
test. 
Provided that in case the number of qualified candidates are not 
adequate, the High Court may, in the interest of judiciary, relax the 
qualifying marks in aggregate as may be required but this relaxation 
will not be below 50% in aggregate. 
11. The candidates must secure at least 10 marks out of 50 marks 
in the interview. 
12. The candidate must pass both the written test and interview 
before he is considered for appointment.” 
55.    The significance of interview for selection in judicial service can be best 
understood from the opinion of Justice O Chinappa Reddy J in Lila Dhar v 
State of Rajasthan28: 
“5. …It is now well recognised that while a written examination 
assesses a candidate's knowledge and intellectual ability, an 
interview test is valuable to assess a candidate's overall intellectual 
and personal qualities. While a written examination has certain 
distinct advantage over the interview test there are yet no written 
tests which can evaluate a candidate's initiative, alertness, 
resourcefulness, dependableness, cooperativeness, capacity for clear 
and logical presentation, effectiveness, in discussion, effectiveness in 
meeting and dealing with others, adaptability, judgment, ability to 
make decision, ability to lead, intellectual and moral integrity. Some 
of these qualities may be evaluated, perhaps with some degree of 
error, by an interview test, much depending on the constitution of the 
interview Board.” 
 
 
28 (1981) 4 SCC 159 

Page 35 of 59 
 
56.    The above view has been consistently endorsed by later decisions of this 
Court29. Notably in Tanya Malik v Registrar General of High Court30, in the 
context of recruitment to the post of District Judge, it was held that 
prescribing minimum marks for interview is not only desirable but also 
necessary. More recently in Kavita Khamboj(supra), a 3-judge bench upheld 
the requirement of 50% minimum marks in interview for promotion as District 
Judges.  Making a succinct distinction between judicial appointments at the 
junior level and higher levels of judiciary, this Court speaking through Chief 
Justice DY Chandrachud observed the following: 
“44….the interview in such cases is not being held at the very 
threshold of the service, while making recruitments at the junior-
most level. Rather, the interview is being held to fill up a senior 
position in the District Judiciary, that of an Additional District 
and Sessions Judge. Such officers, based on their prior 
experience, must be expected to demonstrate a proficiency in 
judicial work borne from their long years of service. The purpose 
of the interview for officers in that class is to assess the officer in 
terms of the ability to meet the duties required for performing the 
role of an Additional District and Sessions Judge. Consequently, 
there would be a reasonable and valid basis, if the High Court 
were to do so, to impose a requirement of a minimum eligibility 
or cut-off both in the written test and in the viva voce separately.” 
57. The recruitment procedure should not only test the candidate’s intellect 
but also their personality, for appointment to posts in the higher judiciary.  The 
writ petitioners have placed great reliance on the judgment in Ajay 
Hasia(supra) where it is canvassed that providing for more than 15% of the 
total marks for interview, is arbitrary and constitutionally invalid. In Ajay 
Hasia(supra) the challenge was to the validity of admissions made to the 
 
29 KH Siraj v High Court of Kerela (2006) 6 SCC 395; State of UP v Rafiquiddin, 1987 Supp 
SCC 410; Taniya Malik v Registrar General of the High Court of Delhi,(2018) 14 SCC 129; 
Pranav Verma v The Registrar General of High Court (2020) 15 SCC 377 
30 (2018) 14 SCC 129 

Page 36 of 59 
 
Regional Engineering College for the academic year 1979-80. Out of 150 total 
marks, 50 marks were earmarked for interview.  Commenting on the validity 
of viva voce as a permissible test, the Court observed thus: 
“But, despite all this criticism, the oral interview method continues 
to be very much in vogue as a supplementary test for assessing the 
suitability of candidates wherever test of personal traits is considered 
essential. Its relevance as a test for determining suitability based on 
personal characteristics has been recognised in a number of 
decisions of this Court which are binding upon us.” 
 
58. It was further noted that: 
 
“The oral interview test is undoubtedly not a very satisfactory test for 
assessing and evaluating the capacity and calibre of candidates, but 
in the absence of any better test for measuring personal 
characteristics and traits, the oral interview test must, at the present 
stage, be regarded as not irrational or irrelevant though it is 
subjective and based on first impression, its result is influenced by 
many uncertain factors and it is capable of abuse. We would, 
however, like to point out that in the matter of admission to college 
or even in the matter of public employment, the oral interview test as 
presently held should not be relied upon as an exclusive test, but it 
may be resorted to only as an additional or supplementary test and, 
moreover, great care must be taken to see that persons who are 
appointed to conduct the oral interview test are men of high integrity, 
calibre and qualification.” 
 
59. It was ultimately concluded that providing for as high a percentage as 
33.5% for the interview segment, was infecting the admission procedure with 
the vice of arbitrariness.  For the facts of the present case, the writ petitioners’ 
contention on violation of the aforementioned dictum in Ajay Hasia(supra) is 
adequately answered in Lila Dhar(supra) where the three-judge bench 
considered the issue of selection of Munsifs for Rajasthan Judicial Service.  
The selection was to be made through written examination as well as interview 
where 25% marks were earmarked for the viva voce segment. Distinguishing 
the judgement in Ajay Hasia(supra) which was in the context of college 
admissions, the Court in Lila Dhar(supra) pertinently opined as under: 
“The observations of the Court were made, primarily in connection with 
the problem of admission to colleges, where naturally, academic 

Page 37 of 59 
 
performance must be given prime importance. The words "or even in the 
matter of public employment" occurring in the first extracted passage 
and the reference to the marks allocated for the interview test in the 
Indian Administrative Service examination were not intended to lay down 
any wide, general rule that the same principle that applied in the matter 
of admission to colleges also applied in the matter of recruitment to 
public services. The observation relating to public employment was per 
incuriam since the matter did not fall for the consideration of the Court 
in that case. Nor do we think that the Court intended any wide 
construction of their observation. As already observed by us the weight 
to be given to the interview test should depend on the requirement of the 
service to which recruitment is made, the source material available for 
recruitment, the composition of the interview Board and several like 
factors. Ordinarily recruitment to public services is regulated by rules 
made under the proviso to Art. 309 of the Constitution and we would be 
usurping a function which is not ours, if we try to redetermine the 
appropriate method of selection and the relative weight to be attached to 
the various tests.” 
 
60.   The above opinion in Lila Dhar(supra) makes it clear that the ratio in Ajay 
Hasia(supra), in the context of college admission, may not have much bearing 
on recruitment for judicial vacancies where oral interviews play an important 
role to test the personality and caliber of the aspirant to judicial posts.  
61.   Let 
us 
now 
examine 
the 
specific 
challenge 
questioning 
the 
constitutionality of Rule 8(3) of Gujarat Rules,2005 which deals with both 
District Judges and Civil Judges.  The Rule 8(3) reads as under: 
“The minimum qualifying marks in the Viva-voce conducted for 
recruitment to the cadre of District Judge and Civil Judge, shall be 
forty percent {40%) of marks.” 
 
62. To strike down Rule 8(3) of Gujarat Rules,2005 under Article 14, the 
argument of the petitioners is that a classification is sought to be created 
between meritorious and non-meritorious candidates since meritorious 
candidates who have worked hard to score good marks in the written test may 
not succeed since the interviewing committee can award below par marks to 
a candidate, based on their subjective evaluation. The second argument is on 
the issue of the absence of a level playing field for those from a marginalized 

Page 38 of 59 
 
background suggesting that such candidates will be at a disadvantage.  In 
response the learned counsel for the High Court of Gujarat submits that the 
objective is to select the best possible candidates and the High Court Judges 
who are conducting the interviews can certainly test the real potential of a 
candidate, irrespective of their background. 
63.    A relevant question here is whether those who had high marks in the 
written test can by itself be considered in the “meritorious” category? This is a 
debatable issue since the high scores for the written test by itself do not 
determine the merit and suitability of an aspirant. The performance would also 
depend on the social, economic, and cultural capital of the candidate. Access 
to resources such as coaching institutes, quality school education, financial 
stability, time and flexibility, networking opportunities, mentorship, and 
access to relevant study materials, are vital factors which also manifestly 
contribute to the performance in the written test.  In the context, the 
observations of this Court in a case relating to reservation in promotion in B.K. 
Pavitra v Union of India31 is illuminating where the aspects of “merit” and 
“efficiency” was discussed in the following passage:- 
“134. It is well settled that existing inequalities in society can lead to a 
seemingly ―neutral system discriminating in favour of privileged 
candidates. As Marc Galanter notes, three broad kinds of resources are 
necessary to produce the results in competitive exams that qualify as 
indicators of ―merit.  
These are: ―…  
(a) economic resources (for prior education, training, materials, freedom 
from work, etc.);  
(b) social and cultural resources (networks of contacts, confidence, 
guidance and advice, information, etc.); and  
(c) intrinsic ability and hard work…‖ [Galanter M., Competing Equalities 
: Law and the Backward Classes in India, (Oxford University Press, New 
Delhi 1984), cited by Deshpande S., Inclusion versus excellence : Caste 
and the framing of fair access in Indian higher education, 40 : 1 South 
African Review of Sociology 127-147.]  
 
31 (2019) 16 SCC 129 

Page 39 of 59 
 
135. The first two criteria are evidently not the products of a candidate's 
own efforts but rather the structural conditions into which they are 
borne.” 
 
64.   As can be seen from above, the reliance on competitive exams or written 
tests as the sole determinant of merit is increasingly being frowned upon. To 
borrow the phrase from philosopher Michael Sandel’s book, “The Tyranny of 
Merit”, successful candidates often feel a sense of “meritocratic hubris”32, 
overlooking how factors such as socio-economic background, caste, gender, 
and other structural inequalities can shape opportunities and outcomes. 
65.    The written test cannot possibly capture the full spectrum of the 
individual's abilities and potential. An interview can also provide a medium for 
marginalized candidates to showcase their talents in ways which a written test 
may not possibly allow. However, a caveat may be necessary here that 
candidates hailing from English-speaking urban environments might possess 
linguistic fluency and familiarity with cultural norms typically associated with 
interviews and therefore are likely to navigate the viva voce segment with 
relative ease. Conversely, candidates from marginalized communities may face 
challenges due to their lack of exposure to urban settings. This is further 
exacerbated by conscious and unconscious bias on grounds of gender, 
religion, caste etc. But can we ignore the intrinsic ability of the members of 
the interview panel constituted by the High Court judges to separate the grain 
from the chaff? This Court would like to believe that the members of the 
interview board can provide a level-playing field during the interview process 
for those who come from a disadvantaged background, to assess the true merit 
and potential of the interviewees.  The solution lies in the interviewing 
 
32 Michael J Sandel, The Tyranny of Merit: What’s become of the Common Good? (Allen 
Lane,2020) 

Page 40 of 59 
 
members being aware and sensitive to alleviate bias in the process of Interview.  
However, the apprehension of bias cannot be the sole ground to strike down a 
Rule.  
66. As is seen from the precedents, only the overriding weightage to the viva-
voce segment has been frowned upon by this Court but the prescription of 
reasonable qualifying cut-off marks33 is not considered discriminatory. In any 
case, administrative law remedies are always available to secure relief in cases 
where abuse of power is seen.  When the minimum cut-off of 20% for the Bihar 
recruitment and 40% for the Gujarat recruitment are taken into account, 
those cannot be considered to provide a high threshold if one keeps in mind 
that the recruitment is for selection of judicial officers.  In the context, the 
object of viva voce set out in Rule 8(5) of Gujarat Rules, 2005 deserves attention 
and is extracted: 
“(5) the object of the Viva-Voce Test (interview) is to assess the 
suitability of the candidate for the cadre by judging the mental 
alertness, knowledge of law, clear and logical exposition, balance of 
judgment, skills, attitude, ethics, power of assimilation, power of 
communication, character and intellectual depth and the like, of the 
candidate.” 
 
67. The above would show that there is a reasonable and direct nexus with 
the object sought to be achieved i.e. the appointment of well-rounded judicial 
officers. The prescription of minimum cut off is also not perceived to be of such 
a nature that it reeks of irrationality, or was capricious and/or without any 
adequate determining principle. It does not appear to be disproportionate so 
as to adversely affect “meritorious” candidates, as has been argued.  It is 
certainly not manifestly arbitrary, or irrational or violative of Article 14 of the 
Constitution of India. For recruitment of judicial officers, ideally the effort 
 
33 Manish Kumar Shahi v State of Bihar(2010) 12 SCC 576 

Page 41 of 59 
 
should be to not only test the candidate’s intellect but also their personality. 
An interview unveils the essence of a candidate— their personality, passion, 
and potential. While the written exam measures knowledge, the interview 
reveals character and capability. Therefore, a person seeking a responsible 
position particularly as a judicial officer should not be shortlisted only by their 
performance on paper, but also by their ability to articulate and engage which 
will demonstrate their suitability for the role of a presiding officer in a court.  
In other words, the capability and potential of the candidate, to preside in 
Court to adjudicate adversarial litigation must also be carefully assessed 
during the interview. 
68.     On the above parameters, it can’t be said that the concerned 
recruitment Rules are unconstitutional. It may also be observed here that 
there is no violation of the legitimate expectation of the writ petitioners so as 
to fail the test under Article 14. In Sivananda CT v High Court of Kerala34  
which is cited, the factual backdrop was different.  The Kerala State Higher 
Judicial Services Rules 1961 stipulated that the direct recruitment from the 
Bar shall be “on the basis of aggregate marks/grade obtained in a competitive 
examination and viva voce conducted by the High Court.” It was only after the 
conduct of viva voce that the High Court decided to have a minimum cut off, 
as a qualifying criterion. The distinguishing feature is that neither the 
provisions of the Kerala State Higher Judicial Services Special Rules,1961 nor 
the exam scheme or recruitment notification therein stipulated any cut-off for 
the viva voce. Therefore, it was in that context that the Court held that the 
minimum cut-off marks was manifestly arbitrary for frustrating the 
 
34 (2024) 3 SCC 799 

Page 42 of 59 
 
substantive legitimate expectation of the candidates under Article 14 of the 
Constitution. Therefore, the cited case can have no application in the present 
matters where the cut off marks in the viva voce was notified before 
commencement of the selection process.  
Issue No.iii) Whether the selection process in Bihar is vitiated given the 
moderation of marks and corrective steps, highlighted by the petitioners in the 
Bihar Selection process? 
69. For this, it needs to be seen whether there are proven allegations of 
violations of statutory Rules, bias, malafide or fraud35. In this regard, the four-
judge bench in Ashok Kumar Yadav v. State of Haryana36, discussed the 
threshold for invalidating the entire selection process as under: 
“21. …But suspicion cannot take the place of proof and we cannot strike 
down the selections made on the ground that the evaluation of the 
merits of the candidates in the viva voce examination might be arbitrary. 
It is necessary to point out that the Court cannot sit in judgment over 
the 
marks 
awarded 
by 
interviewing 
bodies 
unless 
it 
is proved or obvious that the marking is plainly and indubitably 
arbitrary or affected by oblique motives. It is only if the assessment is 
patently arbitrary or the risk of arbitrariness is so high that a reasonable 
person would regard arbitrariness as inevitable, that the assessment of 
marks at the viva voce test may be regarded as suffering from the vice 
of arbitrariness.” 
 
70.    Guided by the above principle, the steps taken by the High Court 
after the issuance of advertisement as mentioned in the additional affidavit 
of Patna High Court summarized below, would bear consideration. 
 i)  The preliminary examination was held on 22.3.2015. 6,771 
candidates appeared for the same. 
ii)   The main exam was held on 12.7.2015 and over 1000 candidates 
appeared for the same. 
 
35 K.H. Siraj v. High Court of Kerala, (2006) 6 SCC 395; Inderpreet Singh Kahlon v. State of 
Punjab, (2006) 11 SCC 356 
36 (1985) 4 SCC 417 

Page 43 of 59 
 
iii)  The affidavit notes that only 15 candidates obtained qualifying marks 
in the written exam i.e. above 55%. However, Mr. Gautam Narayan, 
learned counsel for the Patna High Court has clarified that this is a 
typographical error and only 3 candidates had, in fact, obtained 
qualifying marks. This is in consonance with the RTI Reply dated 
10.2.2017. 
iv)  In order to fill up vacancies, the Selection and Appointment 
Committee of the High Court examined 20 answer sheets of each paper 
at random. It was decided that there was a need for moderation. 
Accordingly, the Selection and Appointment Committee comprising of 5 
judges of the High Court in its meeting dated 8.1.2016 proposed for 
moderation by adding 4% marks in Paper I & 6% marks in Paper II. 
v)   Despite moderation, only few candidates secured above 55% marks 
in aggregate. Thereafter, the Full Court decided to permit relaxation of 
5% in the aggregate marks under proviso to Clause 10 of Appendix C of 
the 1951 Rules.  
vi)   After relaxation of marks to 50%, 81 candidates were found qualified 
in the written examination and results were uploaded on 22.1.2016.   
vii)  The interviews for those who scored 50% in the written, were 
conducted on 19.2.2016, 20.2.2016,22.2.2016 and 23.2.2016 by a 
Board of 5 judges of the High Court. Eventually, only 9 candidates could 
secure 10 marks or more out of 50 total marks in the interview. The said 
9 persons upon Full Court approval were appointed by the Bihar 
Government on 17.5.2016.  
71.   After issuance of notice in the Bihar writ petition, the concerned High 
Court officials while preparing the response, noticed discrepancies during 
decoding, tabulation and collation of marks and arranged for re-verification of 
the selection data. Thereafter, the following directions were issued by the 
Chairperson of the Committee in consultation with the Acting Chief Justice of 
the Patna High Court: 
"In view of summer vacations, the Committee is not available. Discussed 
the matter with Hon'ble ACJ on phone. Being a serious lapse, the 
following steps need be taken immediately: 
1) Under personal supervision of Registrar (App ), Sr. Programmer, 
Nitesh will undertake the entire exercise of decoding, collation, and 
tabulation a fresh. In case of any assistance required Registrar 
General will be consulted. Prepare fresh tabulation, identifying 
lapses, submit report.  
2) Registrar General will conduct enquiry to find out where was the 
lapses and consequently who was responsible. On this report being 
submitted, to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the person 
responsible for these lapses. Registrar General will issue show cause 
and Brother Ajay Kumar Tripathi will conduct the disciplinary 

Page 44 of 59 
 
proceedings. Put up before Hon'ble ACJ no sooner he is available. 
Matters to be dealt with utmost urgency and confidentiality." 
 
72.    After detailed verification of the record, it was found that 3 more 
candidates had obtained qualifying marks in the written examination for the 
purpose of viva voce having roll nos. 1111006603, 1111006636 and 
1111006667 respectively.  It was also found that 4 candidates had not 
obtained the qualifying marks in the written examination, though they were 
earlier shown to be qualified. Therefore, a corrigendum was issued on 
30.6.2016 by which the High Court cancelled the candidatures of 4 unqualified 
candidates and also called the 3 other candidates for the viva-voce, who had 
obtained qualifying marks. The interview of the 3 candidates was held on 
19.7.2016. However, none of them could qualify. 
73.   Mr. Ajit Sinha, learned Senior Counsel had argued that these 
irregularities are so egregious that it would vitiate the entire selection process.  
While conceding that moderation did benefit the writ petitioners, it is still 
argued that the defective procedure must persuade this Court to set aside the 
selection process in Bihar.  Per Contra, Mr. Gautam Narayan, learned counsel 
for the High Court of Patna argues that the discrepancies in Roll Numbers were 
due to the mistake of the candidates themselves. As regards moderation, Mr. 
Narayan, produced a chart before us containing the marks obtained by the 
candidates before and after moderation to show that it enured to the benefit of 
the writ petitioners.   
74.   Whether moderation of marks was legally permissible, would require a 
reference to the relevant Rules and Advertisement. The relevant Clause 13 of 
Appendix C of Bihar Rules,1951 is extracted below: - 
“13. The Standing committee of the High Court, Patna may issue 
orders/directions in case of any doubt and difficulty” 

Page 45 of 59 
 
 
The Para 10 of the 2015 Advertisement reads as under: 
“10. The High Court shall have the power to make any relaxation in or 
exemption from the aforesaid terms and condition in the interest of 
Judiciary.” 
 
75. The above makes it clear that the High Court has been vested with 
requisite powers to provide clarification, relaxation and even exemption in the 
interest of the Judiciary. The words “relaxation” as also the general power to 
issue orders/directions in case of any “difficulty”, would in our view permit 
the process of moderation in order to provide for the adequate number of 
candidates for the interview test. The Clause 13 of Appendix C of the Bihar 
Rules read with Para 10 of the Advertisement provide adequate elbow room 
to the High Court to overcome difficulties in the selection process.   It is 
nobody’s case that the corrective measures were not bonafide.  Moreover, the 
process adopted is consistent with the Rules.    
76.   In a moderation exercise, addition of marks and/or deduction of marks 
is envisaged. This Court in Sanjay Singh v UP Public Service Commission37, laid 
down certain guidelines for moderation of marks in judicial services 
examination. Preferring the method of “moderation” over “scaling”, it was noted 
that moderation is a more viable technique to reduce the variability of the 
examiners.  
77.  In the same context, it would be useful to refer to the judgment in Pranav 
Verma & Ors. v. Registrar General of the High Court of Punjab & Haryana38 
where this Court underscored the option of using moderation or normalization 
of marks, to ensure the selection of adequate number of candidates. In the said 
 
37 (2007) 3 SCC 720 
38 (2020) 15 SCC 377 

Page 46 of 59 
 
case, this Court had appointed Justice (Retd.) A.K. Sikri, a former Supreme 
Court judge to examine the selection process in a recruitment exercise where 
adequate number of candidates had not qualified. The learned judge verified 
the selection process but found no fundamental flaws. However, deficiencies 
were found in the evaluation of the Civil Law-I paper as only 8.5 minutes were 
available to the candidates to answer for each question. This was noted to be 
insufficient for the descriptive type questions and the lengthy paper.  It was 
also noticed that marking in the Civil Law-II paper was too stringent, with the 
highest score being 95 out of 200 (47.5%) and the evaluators, as can be 
noticed, expected lengthy answers for each question without considering the 
limited time available for the candidates. Despite noting these facts, the 
Supreme Court held that the selection process need not be invalidated. Instead 
to save the selection, the Court directed that grace marks be awarded to all 
examinees.  
78.   The above would show that if certain resolvable deficiencies are noticed 
in the selection process, the High Court has the elbow room to take corrective 
measures. The process of moderation can always be exercised bona fide if it 
uniformly benefits all the candidates. In the context, the chart produced by the 
learned counsel for the High Court makes it clear that moderation, in fact, 
benefited the present writ petitioners to facilitate their participation in the 
Interview round. The reduction of aggregate marks from 55% to 50% is 
traceable to the proviso to Clause 10 of Appendix – ‘C’ of the Bihar Rules 1951.  
A modest variation in the sequence of events narrated in the RTI Reply is shown 
but even in such situation the additional affidavit makes it clear that following 

Page 47 of 59 
 
the moderation exercise, the aggregate marks were reduced to 50%,  in 
accordance with the Rules. 
79.    The argument that for the interview also the qualifying marks should 
have been reduced just like in the written test is not acceptable since the Rules 
itself provided for a reduction in the aggregate marks in the written test. The 
proviso concerning relaxation is contained in Clause 10 which deals only with 
the written test.  The Court in any case should not step into the shoes of the 
Selection Committee. The assessment and evaluation of the candidates 
appearing before the Selection Committee/Interview Board should best be left 
to the members of the Committee unless it is violative of the statutory Rules or 
tainted with ill motive.  The decision of the Selection Committee was approved 
by the Full Court for increasing the number of candidates available for final 
selection.      
80.    On examination of the subsequent steps taken by the High Court after 
conducting the exam, we do not find any mala fide or statutory violation so as 
to vitiate the entire selection process in Bihar.  Similarly, in the Gujarat cases, 
besides making vague allegations, the petitioners have not presented any 
material to demonstrate any malicious intent or bias on the part of the 
selection Committee in the interview process. Thus, the selection process is 
not found to be tainted. 
 
Issue No. iv) Whether non-consultation with the Public Service Commission 
as required under Article 234 of the Constitution for amending the selection 
Rules stipulating minimum viva voce marks is rendered void?  
 

Page 48 of 59 
 
81. Mr. Pawanshree Agarwal, the learned counsel for the writ petitioner has 
argued that in IA 20279 of 2022 in WP(C) 663 of 2021, an additional challenge 
on account of violation of Article 234 has been raised. It is argued that the 
prescription of minimum qualifying marks in the viva-voce under Rule 8(3) as 
amended in 2011 was only in consultation with the High Court of Gujarat but 
not with the Gujarat Public Service Commission. Therefore, in view of the 
mandatory requirement of Article 234, the Rules must be declared to be void. 
On the other hand, Mr. Malkan on behalf of the Gujarat High Court contended 
that the Public Service Commission itself requested for exemption as per the 
Gujarat 
Public 
Service 
Commission 
(Exemption 
from 
Consultation) 
Regulations,1960 framed under the proviso to Article 320(3) of the Constitution 
of India. Additionally, Ms. Deepanwita Priyanka who appeared through video 
conferencing for the State of Gujarat, read out the contents of a letter dated 
10.6.2005 written by the Gujarat Public Service Commission stating that the 
proposed post of “Civil Judge”, does not fall within its jurisdiction.  
82.  To appreciate the above contentions, it would be helpful to note the 
relevant portion of the Gujarat Rules,2005 prior to the 2011 amendment: 
“In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 read 
with Article 234 of the Constitution of India, the Governor of Gujarat, 
after consultation with the High Court of Gujarat and the Gujarat Public 
Service Commission, and in supersession of the Gujarat Judicial Services 
Recruitment Rules, 1961 hereby makes the following Rules regulating the 
Recruitment to the Gujarat State Judicial) Service.” 
 
83.  The relevant portion of Gujarat Rules,2005(as amended in 2011) is next 
extracted: 
“In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to article a) read with 
Articles 233 and 234 of the Constitution of India, the Governor of Gujarat 
after consultation with the High Court of Gujarat hereby makes the 
following rules further to amend the Gujarat State Judicial Service Rules, 
2005.” 

Page 49 of 59 
 
 
84.  The omission of the words “and the Gujarat Public Service Commission” 
in the 2011 Rules is a relevant aspect, that requires attention. Articles 233, 
Article 234 and 235 in the Constitution which deals with “Subordinate Courts” 
would bear consideration here. Article 233 provides for the appointment of 
District Judges without requirement of consultation with Public Service 
Commission. The Article 234 empowers the Governor of a State to make 
appointments of persons other than District Judges to the judicial service of a 
State in accordance with the Rules after consultation with the State Public 
Service Commission and with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation 
to such State. Article 235 provides for the control of the High Court over the 
Subordinate Courts. Article 234 is relevant for our purpose: 
      “Appointment of persons other than district judges to the judicial 
service of a State shall be made by the Governor of the State in 
accordance with rules made by him in that behalf after consultation 
with the State Public Service Commission and with the High Court 
exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State” 
 
85.    Since the Rules were framed as per the proviso to Article 309, it is also 
extracted below for ready reference: 
“309.    Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the 
Union or a State 
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Acts of the appropriate 
Legislature may regulate the recruitment, and conditions of service of 
persons appointed, to public services and posts in connection with the 
affairs of the Union or of any State:Provided that it shall be competent 
for the President or such person as he may direct in the case of services 
and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union, and for the 
Governor of a State or such person as he may direct in the case of 
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State, to make 
rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons 
appointed, to such services and posts until provision in that behalf is 
made by or under an Act of the appropriate Legislature under this article, 
and any rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any 
such Act.” 

Page 50 of 59 
 
 
86.   This Court has had the occasion to examine the aforementioned 
provisions in the Articles in multiple decisions. While it is true that Article 234 
mandates consultation with the Public Service Commission and the High 
Court, the five-judge Constitution Bench of this Court in State of Bihar v. Bal 
Mukund Sah39(for short “Bal Mukund”), noted that there is a fine distinction in 
the nature of consultation between the two: 
“51. As seen earlier, consultation with the High Court as envisaged by 
Article 234 is for fructifying the constitutional mandate of preserving the 
independence of the Judiciary, which is its basic structure. The Public 
Service Commission has no such constitutional imperative to be fulfilled. 
The scope of the examining body's consultation can never be equated with 
that of consultation with the appointing body whose agent is the former. 
It is also pertinent to note that the essence of consultation is the 
communication of a genuine invitation to give advice and a genuine 
consideration of that advice which in turn depends on sufficient 
information and time being given to the party concerned to enable it to 
tender useful advice. It is difficult to appreciate how the Governor while 
consulting the Public Service Commission before promulgating the rules 
of recruitment under Article 234 has to solicit similar type of advice as he 
would solicit from the High Court on due consultation. The advice which 
in the process of consultation can be tendered by the Public Service 
Commission will confine itself to the constitutional requirements of Article 
320. They are entirely different from the nature of consultation and advice 
to be solicited from the High Court which is having full control over the 
Subordinate Judiciary under Article 235 of the Constitution and is 
directly concerned with the drafting of efficient judicial appointments so 
that appropriate material will be available to it through the process of 
selection both at the grass-root level and at the apex level of the District 
Judiciary. Consultation, keeping in view the role of the High Court under 
Article 234 read with Article 235, stands on an entirely different footing 
as compared to the consultation with the Public Service Commission 
which has to discharge its functions of an entirely different type as 
envisaged by Article 320 of the Constitution.” 
 
87.   It is well-settled that the consultation with the High Court as envisaged 
in Article 234 is to preserve the constitutional mandate of the Independence 
 
39 (2000) 4 SCC 640 

Page 51 of 59 
 
of the judiciary which forms part of the basic structure of the Constitution of 
India.  The consultation with the High Court must be given primacy in matters 
of judicial recruitment as compared to the consultation with the Public Service 
Commission.  
88. With the above understanding of the law, let us now refer to Article 320 
of the Constitution of India which is extracted below: 
“Functions of Public Service Commission 
(1)It shall be the duty of the Union and the State Public Service 
Commissions to conduct examinations for appointments to the 
services of the Union and the services of the State respectively. 
(2)It shall also be the duty of the Union Public Service Commission, if 
requested by any two or more States so to do, to assist those States in 
framing and operating schemes of joint recruitment for any services 
for which candidates possessing special qualifications are required. 
(3)The Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service 
Commission, as the case may be, shall be consulted— 
 
a.  on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil services 
and for civil posts; 
b. on the principles to be followed in making appointments to civil 
services and posts and in making promotions and transfers from 
one service to another and on the suitability of candidates for such 
appointments, promotions or transfers; 
c.   on all disciplinary matters affecting a person serving under the 
Government of India or the Government of a State in a civil capacity, 
including memorials or petitions relating to such matters; 
d.  on any claim by or in respect of a person who is serving or has 
served under the Government of India or the Government of a State 
or under the Crown in India or under the Government of an Indian 
State, in a civil capacity, that any costs incurred by him in 
defending legal proceedings instituted against him in respect of acts 
done or purporting to be done in the execution of his duty should 
be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India, or, as the case may 
be, out of the Consolidated Fund of the State; 
e.   on any claim for the award of a pension in respect of injuries 
sustained by a person while serving under the Government of India 
or the Government of a State or under the Crown in India or under 
the Government of an Indian State, in a civil capacity, and any 
question as to the amount of any such award, 
and it shall be the duty of a Public Service Commission to advise on 
any matter so referred to them and on any other matter which the 

Page 52 of 59 
 
President, or, as the case may be, the Governor of the State, may 
refer to them: 
Provided that the President as respects the all- India services and 
also as respects other services and posts in connection with the 
affairs of the Union, and the Governor, as respects other services and 
posts in connection with the affairs of a State, may make regulations 
specifying the matters in which either generally, or in any particular 
class of case or in any particular circumstances, it shall not be 
necessary for a Public Service Commission to be consulted. 
Nothing in clause (3) shall require a Public Service Commission to 
be consulted as respects the manner in which any provision 
referred to in clause (4) of article 16 may be made or as respects the 
manner in which effect may be given to the provisions of article 335. 
All regulations made under the proviso to clause (3) by the President 
or the Governor of a State shall be laid for not less than fourteen 
days before each House of Parliament or the House or each House 
of the Legislature of the State, as the case may be, as soon as 
possible after they are made, and shall be subject to such 
modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as both 
Houses of Parliament or the House or both Houses of the Legislature 
of the State may make during the session in which they are so laid.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
89.    The source for the consultation with the “Public Service Commission” 
under Article 234 of the Constitution of India is to be traced from Article 320 
of the Constitution which deals with the “Functions of Public Service 
Commission”. In this regard, Justice Hidayatullah in Constitutional Law of 
India40  had this to say on the nature of consultation: 
“The Consultation with the High Court is imperative. The insistence on 
the consultation with the High Court is obviously attributable to the 
recognition of that source as one from which the most useful advice is 
obtainable on a matter concerning a service under its own control. 
Requirement to consult the Public Service Commission is equally 
understandable for the reason that the Commission is enjoined by 
Article 320 to conduct examinations for appointment to the Services 
under the State.” 
 
 
40  M. Hidayatullah(Ed), Constitutional law of India (The Bar Council of India Trust in 
association with Arnold-Heinemann Publishers, 1984) Vol. 2,147 

Page 53 of 59 
 
90. This Court has consistently held41 that the High Court should be assigned 
primacy in the process of consultation and the Rules framed without such 
consultation would be void.  The same however is not true for absence of 
consultation, with the Public Service Commission. In State of U.P. v. 
Manbodhan Lal Srivastava42, this Court while interpreting Article 320(3) of the 
Constitution had noted that the word “shall” though generally taken in a 
mandatory sense, must be interpreted as “may”, leading to the conclusion that 
the consultation under Article 320(3), is not mandatory. Tracing the power of 
the High Court under Article 235 of the Constitution of India, in Rajendra 
Singh Verma v. Lt. Governor (NCT of Delhi)43, in the context of compulsory 
retirement, the Court pertinently noted that: 
“36. The Governor could not have passed any order on the advice of the 
Public Service Commission in this case. The advice should be of no other 
authority than the High Court in the matter of judicial officers. This is the 
plain implication of Article 235. Article 320(3)(c) is entirely out of place so 
far as the High Court is concerned dealing with judicial officers. To give 
any other interpretation to Article 320(3)(c) will be to defeat the supreme 
object underlying Article 235 of the Constitution specially intended for 
the protection of the judicial officers and necessarily the independence of 
the subordinate judiciary. It is absolutely clear that the Governor cannot 
consult the Public Service Commission in the case of judicial officers and 
accept its advice and act according to it. There is no room for any outside 
body between the Governor and the High Court.” 
 
91. At this stage, it needs to be clarified that this Court is not tasked to 
authoritatively decide whether consultation with Public Service Commission 
should be “mandatory” or “directory” under Article 234 of the Constitution of 
India. The question that needs to be answered in these matters is whether the 
Rules would be rendered void, in case the Public Service Commission itself 
 
41 AC Thalwal v High Court of Himachal Pradesh, (2000) 7 SCC 1; Supreme Court Advocates-
on-Record Association v Union of India (1993) 4 SCC 441; Hari Dutt Kainthla v State of 
Himachal Pradesh 1980 3 SCC 189 
42 AIR 1957 SC 912 
43 (2011) 10 SCC 1 

Page 54 of 59 
 
didn’t wish to be consulted?  The letter dated 10.6.2005, written by the Joint 
Secretary of the Public Service Commission is relevant and is extracted as 
follows: - 
             “Sir, 
With reference to the subject noted above, vide the Notification No. 
GK-2005-5-JSR-1982-994-D, 
dated 
9/05/2005 
of 
the 
Legal 
Department, the recruitment rules of instant post have been issued. 
In pursuance of the details of the letter dated 6/06/2005 of the 
Commission, it is requested to remove the provision of “and the 
GPSC” from third line of the first paragraph of aforementioned rules. 
As the proposed posts under the recruitment rules do not fall within 
the purview of the Commission, it is requested to initiate the 
procedure to remove aforementioned words from aforesaid published 
recruitment rules.” 
 
92.     The learned counsel for the Gujarat High Court has relied on Entry 11B 
in the Schedule to the Gujarat Public Service Commission (Exemption from 
Consultation) Regulations,1960 framed under the proviso to Article 320(3) of 
the Constitution which mentions the post of “The Civil Judge (Junior Division) 
and Judicial Magistrate of First Class.”  
93.    The above discussion persuades us to say that the Governor is under 
no compulsion to consult the Public Service Commission in case the 
Commission does not wish to be consulted. Such a course would be in 
consonance with the proviso to Article 320(3) of the Constitution. The 
concerned Gujarat Rules cannot, therefore, be declared to be void on this 
count.  
94.      For the Writ Petitioner, reliance has been placed by Mr. Pawanshree 
Agarwal on the decision of the Bombay High Court in Goa Judicial Officer’s 
Association v State of Goa44 to argue that the consultation with Public Service 
Commission is mandatory. While it is true that the Bombay High Court 
 
44 1997(4) BOM CR 372 

Page 55 of 59 
 
decided that the consultation is mandatory, a careful reading of the judgment 
would show that the Court refused to grant any relief to the petitioner therein 
noting that this was an issue between the Government and the PSC and the 
petitioner could not claim any cause of action. The High Court specifically 
noted as under: 
“20. This controversy, however, need not detain us for long, because even 
assuming that there was no consultation at all, whether the petitioner is 
entitled to get any relief in this petition on that score is to be examined. 
The consultation or non-consultation is a matter between the Public 
Service Commission and the Government and that too at the stage of 
framing rules. Therefore, individual candidates are not very much 
concerned with that. Their rights are not dependent upon or decided 
upon the consultation or non-consultation with either the High Court or 
with the Public Service Commission. Therefore, non-consultation with 
the Public Service Commission will not give any cause of action to the 
petitioner or any one of the members of the petitioner's Association to 
maintain this writ petition.” 
 
95.   Similarly, reliance by the petitioners counsel on the judgment of the 
Madras High Court in  N. Devasahayam v. State of Madras45  as regards the 
mandatory nature of the Consultation which is argued to have been endorsed 
by the Constitution Bench of this Court in Bal Mukund(supra), is found to be  
misplaced.   In Bal Mukund(supra), the Court endorsed the finding in N. 
Devasahayam (supra), but the judgment would also show that there is no 
authoritative finding on the ‘mandatory’ or ‘directory’ nature of Article 234. 
96.   Likewise, the judgment of the Supreme Court in AC Thalwal v High Court 
of HP46 would also be of no assistance for the petitioners as in that case, the 
Ex-Servicemen (Reservation of Vacancies in the Himachal Pradesh Judicial 
Service) Rules, 1981 was declared ultra vires the Constitution and hence void 
 
45 AIR 1958 Mad 53 
46 (2000) 7 SCC 1 

Page 56 of 59 
 
in the context of non-consultation with the High Court but not with the Public 
Service Commission under Article 234 of the Constitution of India.  As 
discussed earlier, the Court noted that “the status which the High Court as 
an institution enjoys in the constitutional scheme and the expertise and the 
experience which it possesses of judicial services, justify a place of primacy 
being assigned to the High Court in the process of consultation.”  It is 
undoubtedly mandatory to consult the High Court for framing Rules and any 
Rule enacted by the State Government without such consultation is 
considered ultra vires. The rationale is to safeguard the judicial service from 
executive influence which is rooted in the constitutional objective of 
establishing an independent judiciary. 
97.  In Gujarat, when the Public Service Commission did not wish to be 
consulted under the proviso to Article 320(3) of the Constitution of India, in 
the absence of such consultation, it cannot be held that the Gujarat Rules, 
2005 suffers from any legal or constitutional invalidity particularly when the 
Rules were framed with due consultation with the High Court. 
 VII. CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS 
98. Before reaching our final conclusion in these matters, reference to Malik 
Mazhar v. U.P Public Service Commission47 would be in order where the 
Supreme Court emphasised the importance of having a prescribed time-
schedule for conducting the judicial service examinations. The need for having 
a fixed timeline for each step of the examination process was also suggested 
in this case. Recently, taking note of the judicial vacancies in District 
 
47 (2006) 9 SCC 507  

Page 57 of 59 
 
Judiciary, this Court had taken suo moto cognizance48 and directed the High 
Courts and State governments to report on whether the judicial vacancies will 
be filled in a timely fashion, as prescribed in Malik Mazhar(supra) . A report of 
the Supreme Court’s Centre for Research and Planning49 notes that despite 
the judgment in Malik Mazhar(supra) prescribing timelines for recruitment, 
only 9 out of 25 states completed the recruitment of Civil Judge (Judge 
Division), within the stipulated time frame. The report notes that the State of 
Bihar took 945 days to complete the recruitment process computed from the 
date of advertisement (March 9,2020) to the date of final result (October 
10,2022). 
99. As can also be seen in the matters before us, for the Bihar selection 
process, the advertisement was issued in January, 2015; the final selection 
was made on 17.5.2016, and because of the need to do a few course 
corrections, the last candidate was called for the interview only in August, 
2016. Similarly, for the selection of Civil Judges in Gujarat, while the 
advertisement was issued in 2019, the selection process could be completed 
only in 2021.  
100.   To avoid the meandering process noticed in the recruitment in the State 
of Bihar and to ensure more clarity and certainty with the process, we deem it 
necessary to declare that processes such as moderation should be preferably 
set out in the Rules to ensure transparency and avoid dilemmas in the 
selection process. The moderation of marks for bonafide reasons should be 
permitted when the authority needs to do so, to address the issue of non-
 
48 Filling up of Vacancies, In re, 2018 SCC OnLine SC 3648 
49 Centre for Research and Planning, Supreme Court of India, State of the Judiciary, A Report 
on Infrastructure, Budgeting, Human Resources and ICT(November 2023) 

Page 58 of 59 
 
availability of adequate number of candidates for consideration in the 
interview segment.  As a confidence building measure, the designation of those 
in the interview panel, could also be provided for appropriately, in the Rules. 
It would be apposite at this stage to note a few of the recommendations flagged 
in the December,2018 Report of Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy titled “Discretion 
& Delay- Challenges of Becoming a District & Civil Judge”50  which examined 
the judicial Service Rules of 29 States. The absence of a designated authority 
that can be approached by the candidates is flagged in the said report. As this 
appears to be a valid concern, the concerned High Court should notify a 
designated authority for a given recruitment process with clearly defined roles, 
functions and responsibilities. The candidates can approach such a 
designated authority to seek clarification in case of any doubt and this would 
assuage the anxiety of the candidates to a considerable extent. Another such 
suggestion of providing a basic outline of the syllabus for the proposed test 
will also help candidates from diverse backgrounds to plan and prepare for the 
proposed examination even before the examination notification is released.  
The recruitment process must adhere to the timeline but if there is any special 
and unavoidable exigency, the stakeholders should be kept informed with due 
promptitude.  
101.  To enable all the stakeholders to take consequential steps pursuant to 
the above directions, this judgment should be brought to the notice of the 
Hon’ble Chief Justices of all the High Courts in India.  
 
50 Diksha Sanyal and Shriyam Gupta, “Discretion and Delay: Challenges in Becoming a District 
and Civil Judge” (December 2018)< https://vidhilegalpolicy.in/research/2019-1-7-discretion-
and-delaychallenges-of-becoming-a-district-and-civil-judge/> accessed 3rd May,2024 

Page 59 of 59 
 
102.   With the foregoing discussion, the following conclusions are reached for 
the cases under consideration: - 
i) 
The Prescription of minimum qualifying marks for interview is 
permissible and this is not in violation of All India Judges (2002) which 
accepted certain recommendations of the Shetty Commission.  
ii) 
The validity challenge to Clause 11 of the Bihar Rules, 1951 and 
Rule 8(3) of the Gujarat Rules, 2005 (as amended in 2011) prescribing 
minimum marks for interview are repelled.  
iii) 
The impugned selection process in the State of Bihar and Gujarat 
are found to be legally valid and are upheld. 
iv) 
The non-consultation with the Public Service Commission would 
not render the Gujarat Rules, 2005 (as amended in 2011) void. 
         The Writ petitions are, accordingly, dismissed without any order on cost.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
……….………………………...J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[HRISHIKESH ROY] 
 
…………………………………..J 
[PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA] 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
MAY 06, 2024