2024 INSC 389
 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 1 of 17 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7708 OF 2014 
 
ALL INDIA BANK OFFICERS’ CONFEDERATION 
.....  
APPELLANT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
  
 
THE REGIONAL MANAGER, 
CENTRAL BANK OF INDIA, AND OTHERS 
 
.....  
 
RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18459 OF 2017 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18460 OF 2017 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18462 OF 2017 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18463 OF 2017 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18461 OF 2017 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18464 OF 2017 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 18465-18466 OF 2017 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 18457-18458 OF 2017 
 
AND 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18467 OF 2017 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
SANJIV KHANNA, J. 
 
This common judgment decides the appeals filed by staff unions and 
officers’ associations of various banks, impugning judgments which dismiss 
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
Date: 2024.05.07
17:37:15 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 2 of 17 
 
their writ petitions, where the vires of Section 17(2)(viii) of the Income Tax Act, 
19611 or Rule 3(7)(i) of the Income Tax Rules, 19622, or both, were challenged. 
 
2. 
Section 17(2)(viii) of the Act includes in the definition of ‘perquisites’3, ‘any 
other fringe benefit or amenity’, ‘as may be prescribed’.4 Rule 3 of the Rules 
prescribes additional ‘fringe benefits’ or ‘amenities’, taxable as perquisites, 
pursuant to Section 17(2)(viii). It also prescribes the method of valuation of 
such perquisites for taxation purposes. Rule 3(7)(i) of the Rules stipulates that 
interest-free/concessional loan benefits provided by banks to bank employees 
shall be taxable as ‘fringe benefits’ or ‘amenities’ if the interest charged by the 
bank on such loans is lesser than the interest charged according to the Prime 
Lending Rate5 of the State Bank of India6.  
 
3. 
Section 17(2)(viii) and Rule 3(7)(i) are challenged on the grounds of excessive 
and unguided delegation of essential legislative function to the Central Board 
of Direct Taxes7. Rule 3(7)(i) is also challenged as arbitrary and violative of 
Article 14 of the Constitution insofar as it treats the PLR of SBI as the 
 
1 For short, “Act”. 
2 For short, “Rules”. 
3 Section 17(2) of the Act defines perquisites. It specifies a list of benefits/advantages, incidental to 
employment, and received in excess of salary, which are made taxable as perquisites. Section 
17(2)(viii) is a residuary clause that authorizes a subordinate rule-making authority to prescribe ‘any 
other fringe benefits or amenities’ that are liable to taxation as ‘perquisites’.  
4 Before amendments brought in by Finance (No.2) Act, 2009, with effect from 01.04.2010, Section 
17(2)(vi) of the Act read: “(vi) the value of any other fringe benefit or amenity (excluding the fringe 
benefits chargeable to tax under Chapter XIIH) as may be prescribed”. Post the amendment, Section 
17(2)(viii), in effect contains the same stipulations as erstwhile Section 17(2)(vi), with some 
modifications. It states: “(viii) the value of any other fringe benefit or amenity as may be prescribed.” 
Thus, the present Section 17(2)(viii) contains similar stipulations as erstwhile Section 17(2)(vi), 
reference to Chapter XIIH only being deleted. To retain uniformity, we will be referring to it as Section 
17(2)(viii).  
5 For short, “PLR”. 
6 For short, “SBI”. 
7 For short, “CBDT”. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 3 of 17 
 
benchmark instead of the actual interest rate charged by the bank from a 
customer on a loan.  
 
4. 
Sections 15 to 17 of the Act relate to income tax chargeable on salaries.  
 Section 15 stipulates incomes that are chargeable to income tax as 
‘salaries’.  
 Section 16 prescribes deductions allowable under ‘salaries’.  
 Section 17 defines the expressions ‘salary’, ‘perquisites’ and ‘profits in 
lieu of salary’ for Sections 15 and 16.  
 
5. 
Section 17(1) includes in the definition of ‘salary’: wages, annuity or pension, 
gratuity, fee, commission, perquisites, or profits in lieu of or in addition to salary 
or wages, advance of salary, payments received by an employee in respect of 
leave not availed, annual accretion to the balance at the credit of the employee 
participating in a recognised provident fund, etc.  
 
6. 
Section 17(2) relates to ‘perquisites’ and reads:8 
“(2) “Perquisite” includes— 
 
(i) 
the value of rent-free accommodation provided to the 
assessee by his employer computed in such manner 
as may be prescribed; 
 
(ii) 
the value of any accommodation provided to the 
assessee by his employer at a concessional rate. 
 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-clause, it 
is clarified that accommodation shall be deemed to 
have been provided at a concessional rate, if the 
value of accommodation computed in such manner 
as may be prescribed, exceeds the rent recoverable 
from, or payable by, the assessee; 
 
(iii) 
the value of any benefit or amenity granted or provided 
free of cost or at concessional rate in any of the 
following cases— 
 
8 Post 01.04.2010. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 4 of 17 
 
(a) by a company to an employee who is a director 
thereof; 
(b) by a company to an employee being a person who 
has a substantial interest in the company; 
(c) by any employer (including a company) to an 
employee to whom the provisions of paragraphs (a) 
and (b) of this sub-clause do not apply and whose 
income under the head “Salaries” (whether due from, 
or paid or allowed by, one or more employers), 
exclusive of the value of all benefits or amenities not 
provided 
for 
by 
way 
of 
monetary 
payment, 
exceeds fifty thousand rupees: 
 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that the use of any vehicle provided by a 
company or an employer for journey by the assessee 
from his residence to his office or other place or work, 
or from such office or place to his residence, shall not 
be regarded as a benefit or amenity granted or 
provided to him free of cost or at concessional rate for 
the purposes of this sub-clause; 
 
(iv) 
any sum paid by the employer in respect of any 
obligation which, but for such payment, would have 
been payable by the assessee; and 
 
(v) 
any sum payable by the employer, whether directly or 
through a fund, other than a recognised provident fund 
or an approved superannuation fund or a Deposit-
linked Insurance Fund established under Section 3-
G of 
the Coal 
Mines 
Provident 
Fund 
and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948 (46 of 1948), or, 
as the case may be, Section 6-C of the Employees' 
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
1952 (19 of 1952), to effect an assurance on the life of 
the assessee or to effect a contract for an annuity; 
 
(vi) 
the value of any specified security or sweat equity 
shares allotted or transferred, directly or indirectly, by 
the employer, or former employer, free of cost or at 
concessional rate to the assessee. 
 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-
clause,— 
(a) “specified security” means the securities as 
defined in clause (h) of Section 2 of the Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) and, 
where employees' stock option has been granted 
under any plan or scheme therefor, includes the 
securities offered under such plan or scheme; 
(b) “sweat equity shares” means equity shares issued 
by a company to its employees or directors at a 
discount or for consideration other than cash for 
providing know-how or making available rights in the 
nature of intellectual property rights or value 
additions, by whatever name called; 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 5 of 17 
 
(c) the value of any specified security or sweat equity 
shares shall be the fair market value of the specified 
security or sweat equity shares, as the case may be, 
on the date on which the option is exercised by the 
assessee as reduced by the amount actually paid by, 
or recovered from the assessee in respect of such 
security or shares; 
(d) “fair market value” means the value determined in 
accordance with the method as may be prescribed; 
(e) “option” means a right but not an obligation 
granted to an employee to apply for the specified 
security or sweat equity shares at a predetermined 
price; 
 
(vii) 
the amount or the aggregate of amounts of any 
contribution made to the account of the assessee by 
the employer— 
(a) in a recognised provident fund; 
(b) in the scheme referred to in sub-section (1) of 
Section 80-CCD; and 
(c) in an approved superannuation fund, 
to the extent it exceeds seven lakh and fifty thousand 
rupees in a previous year; 
 
                     (viia)  
the annual accretion by way of interest, dividend or 
any other amount of similar nature during the previous 
year to the balance at the credit of the fund or scheme 
referred to in sub-clause (vii) to the extent it relates to 
the contribution referred to in the said sub-clause 
which is included in total income under the said sub-
clause in any previous year computed in such manner 
as may be prescribed; and 
 
(viii) 
the value of any other fringe benefit or amenity as 
may be prescribed: 
xx                         xx                         xx” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    (emphasis supplied) 
 
7. 
Rule 3(7)(i) of the Rules9 reads:  
“(7) In terms of provisions contained in Sub-Clause (vi) of 
Sub-Section (2) of Section 17,10 the following other fringe 
benefits or amenities are hereby prescribed and the value 
thereof shall be determined in the manner provided 
hereunder: 
 
(i) the value of the benefit to the assessee resulting from 
the provision of interest-free or concessional loan for any 
purpose made available to the employee or any member of 
 
9 As it stands after amendment vide Income Tax (First Amendment) Rules, 2004, with effect from 
01.04.2004. 
10 See supra note 4. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 6 of 17 
 
his household during the relevant previous year by the 
employer or any person on his behalf shall be determined 
as the sum equal to the simple interest computed at the rate 
charged per annum by the State Bank of India Act, 1955 
(23 of 1955), as on the 1st day of the relevant previous year 
in respect of loans for the same purpose advanced by it on 
the maximum outstanding monthly balance as reduced by 
the interest, if any, actually paid by him or any such member 
of his household.  
 
However, no value would be charged if such loans are 
made available for medical treatment in respect of diseases 
specified in Rule 3A of these Rules or where the amount of 
loans are petty not exceeding in the aggregate of 
Rs.20,000:  
 
Provided that where the benefits relates to the loans made 
available for medical treatment referred to above, the 
exemption so provided shall not apply to so much of the 
loan as has been reimbursed to the employee under any 
medical insurance scheme." 11 
 
 
8. 
Section 17(1), provides a broad and inclusive definition of ‘salary’. It states that 
salary, inter alia, includes wages as well as other payments paid to employees 
like perquisites. Thus, perquisites paid by the employer to the employee are 
taxable as ‘salary’.  
 
9. 
‘Perquisite’ has been defined in Section 17(2) for clarity, and also, to include 
and widen its scope. Clauses (i) to (viiia) to Section 17(2) make the following 
taxable as ‘perquisites’:  
 Clause (i) - rent-free accommodation by employer.  
 Clause (ii) -  accommodation at a concessional rate by employer.  
 Clause (iii) - benefit of amenity provided free of cost/at a concessional 
rate, in specified cases.  
 
11 It is relevant to state here that the appellants have not challenged Rule 3(7)(i) as it existed for the 
period 01.04.2001 to 31.03.2004, that is, prior to the amendment vide the Income Tax (First 
Amendment) Rules, 2004, with effect from 01.04.2004. We are thus referring to the said Rule. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 7 of 17 
 
 Clause (iv) - sum paid by the employer for an obligation.  
 Clause (v) – sum payable by the employer through a fund (barring 
specified exceptions) to effect an assurance on the life of the assessee 
or to effect a contract for annuity.  
 Clause 
(vi) 
– 
specified 
security 
or 
sweat 
equity 
shares 
allotted/transferred by employer at concessional rate/free of cost. 
 Clause (vii) – specified amounts contributed to assessees’ account by 
employer such as provident fund, superannuation fund etc. 
 Clause (viia) – annual accretion by way of interest, dividend or other 
similar amounts with respect to clause (vii).  
 
10. 
After specifically stipulating what is included and taxed as ‘perquisite’, clause 
(viii) to Section 17(2), as a residuary clause, deliberately and intentionally 
leaves it to the rule-making authority to tax ‘any other fringe benefit or amenity’ 
by promulgating a rule. The residuary clause is enacted to capture and tax any 
other ‘fringe benefit or amenity’ within the ambit of ‘perquisites’, not already 
covered by clauses (i) to (viia) to Section 17(2). 
 
11. 
In terms of the power conferred under Section 17(2)(viii), CBDT has enacted 
Rule 3(7)(i) of the Rules. Rule 3(7)(i) states that interest-free/concessional loan 
made available to an employee or a member of his household by the employer 
or any person on his behalf, for any purpose, shall be determined as the sum 
equal to interest computed at the rate charged per annum by SBI, as on the 
first date of the relevant previous year in respect of loans for the same purpose 
advanced by it on the maximum outstanding monthly balance as reduced by 
interest, if any, actually paid. However, the loans made available for medical 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 8 of 17 
 
treatment in respect of diseases specified in Rule 3A or loans whose value in 
aggregate does not exceed Rs.20,000/- , are not chargeable.  
 
12. 
The effect of the rule is twofold. First, the value of interest-free or concessional 
loans is to be treated as ‘other fringe benefit or amenity’ for the purpose of 
Section 17(2)(viii) and, therefore, taxable as a ‘perquisite’. Secondly, it 
prescribes the method of valuation of the interest-free/concessional loan for 
the purposes of taxation. 
 
13. 
While enacting laws, the legislature can and does delineate the meaning of 
terms through explicit definitions. Specific meanings are assigned for 
precision, to distinguish words/expressions from loose or popular meanings, 
expand or restrict the scope of words or expressions, or to designate ‘terms of 
art’, that is, words or phrases with specialized meanings. Explicit definitions 
are useful, but it is wrong to state that all words or expressions must be 
explicitly defined. Defining each word or expression that is part of normal or 
commercial vocabulary is neither possible nor expedient. It would be a 
superfluous exercise, and make statutes voluminous. Instead, popular 
meaning makes the statute simpler and easier for the common people. After 
all, it is the common person who is concerned with the ramifications of a 
statute, and thus, the common man’s understanding is the definitive index of 
the legislative intent. The reason is simple. The legislature is assumed to be 
aware of the well-understood meaning attributed to the word/expression, and 
by necessary implication the legislature by not prescribing a fixed and exact 
definition, ascribes the prevalent meaning assigned to the word/expression in 
common parlance or commercial usage. This would include meaning assigned 
to technical words in a particular trade, business or profession, etc. when the 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 9 of 17 
 
legislation is concerning a particular trade, business or transaction. This rule 
equally applies to construing words or expressions in a taxation statute. 
 
14. 
In the present case, Section 17(2(viii) is a residuary clause, enacted to provide 
flexibility. Since it is enacted as an enabling catch-within-domain provision, the 
residuary clause is not iron-cast and exacting. A more pragmatic and 
commonsensical approach can be adopted by locating the prevalent meaning 
of ‘perquisites’ in common parlance and commercial usage.   
 
15. 
The expression ‘perquisite’ is well-understood by a common person who is 
conversant with the subject matter of a taxing statute. New International 
Webster’s Comprehensive Dictionary defines ‘perquisites’ as any incidental 
profit from service beyond salary or wages; hence, any privilege or benefit 
claimed due.12 ‘Fringe benefit’ is defined as any of the various benefits received 
from an employer apart from salary, such as insurance, pension, vacation, etc. 
Similarly, Black’s Law Dictionary defines ‘fringe benefit’ as a benefit (other than 
direct salary or compensation) received by an employee from the employer, 
such as insurance, a company car, or a tuition allowance.13 The Major Law 
Lexicon has elaborately defined the words ‘perquisite’ and ‘fringe benefit’.14 
 
16. 
‘Perquisites’ has also been interpreted as an expression of common parlance 
in several decisions of this Court. For example, ‘perquisite’ was interpreted in 
Arun Kumar v. Union of India15, with respect to Section 17(2) of the Act. The 
 
12 The New International Webster’s Comprehensive Dictionary, p.941. 
13 Black’s Law Dictionary, p.188 (10th Edition). 
14 Perquisite means something gained by a place or office beyond the regular salary or fee. It is a gain 
or profit incidentally made from employment. P. Ramanatha Aiyar The Major Law Lexicon, Vol. 5, p. 
5059-5069 (4th Edition). 
Fringe benefit is a term embracing a variety of employees’ benefits, paid by the employers and 
supplementing the workers’ basic wage or salary. P. Ramanatha Aiyarm The Major Law Lexicon, Vol. 
3 (4th Edition). 
15 (2007) 1 SCC 732. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 10 of 17 
 
Court referenced its dictionary meanings and held that ‘perquisites’ were a 
privilege, gain or profit incidental to employment and in addition to regular 
salary or wages. This decision refers to the observations of the House of Lords 
in Owen v. Pook16, where the House observed that ‘perquisite’ has a known 
normal meaning, namely, a personal advantage. However, the perquisites do 
not mean the mere reimbursement of a necessary disbursement. Reference 
was also made to Rendell v. Went17, wherein the House held that ‘perquisite’ 
would include any benefit or advantage, having a monetary value, which a 
holder of an office derives from the employer’s spending on his behalf.  
 
17. 
Similarly, in Additional Commissioner of Income Tax v. Bharat V. Patel18, 
this Court held that ‘perquisite’, in the common parlance relates to any perk or 
benefit attached to an employee or position besides salary or remuneration. It 
usually includes non-cash benefits given by the employer to the employee in 
addition to the entitled salary or remuneration. 
 
18. 
Thus, ‘perquisite’ is a fringe benefit attached to the post held by the employee 
unlike ‘profit in lieu of salary’, which is a reward or recompense for past or 
future service. It is incidental to employment and in excess of or in addition to 
the salary. It is an advantage or benefit given because of employment, which 
otherwise would not be available.  
 
19. 
From this perspective, the employer’s grant of interest-free loans or loans at a 
concessional rate will certainly qualify as a ‘fringe benefit’ and ‘perquisite’, as 
understood through its natural usage in common parlance. 
 
 
16 (1969) 2 WLR 775 (HL). 
17 (1964) 1 WLR 650 (HL). 
18 (2018) 15 SCC 670. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 11 of 17 
 
20. 
Two issues arise for consideration now: (I) Does Section 17(2)(viii) and/or Rule 
3(7)(i) lead to a delegation of the ‘essential legislative function’ to the CBDT?; 
and (II) Is Rule 3(7)(i) arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution 
insofar as it treats the PLR of SBI as the benchmark? 
 
I. 
Does Section 17(2)(viii) and/or Rule 3(7)(i) lead to a delegation of the 
‘essential legislative function’ to the CBDT? 
 
21. 
A Constitution Bench of Seven Judges of this Court in Municipal Corporation 
of Delhi v. Birla Cotton, Spinning and Weaving Mills, Delhi and Another19,  
has held that the legislature must retain with itself the essential legislative 
function. ‘Essential legislative function’ means the determination of the 
legislative policy and its formulation as a binding rule of conduct. Therefore, 
once the legislature declares the legislative policy and lays down the standard 
through legislation, it can leave the remainder of the task to subordinate 
legislation. In such cases, the subordinate legislation is ancillary to the primary 
statute. It aligns with the framework of the primary legislation as long as it is 
made consistent with it, without exceeding the limits of policy and standards 
stipulated by the primary legislation. The test, therefore, is whether the primary 
legislation has stated with sufficient clarity, the legislative policy and the 
standards that are binding on subordinate authorities who frame the delegated 
legislation. 
 
22. 
In our opinion, the subordinate authority’s power under Section 17(2)(viii), to 
prescribe ‘any other fringe benefit or amenity’ as perquisite is not boundless. It 
is demarcated by the language of Section 17 of the Act. Anything made taxable 
by the rule-making authority under Section 17(2)(viii) should be a ‘perquisite’ 
 
19 (1968) SCC OnLine SC 13. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 12 of 17 
 
in the form of ‘fringe benefits or amenity’. In our opinion, the provision clearly 
reflects the legislative policy and gives express guidance to the rule-making 
authority.  
 
23. 
Section 17(2) provides an ‘inclusive’ definition of ‘perquisites’. Section 17(2)(i) 
to (vii)/(viia) provides for certain specific categories of perquisites. However, 
these are not the only kind of perquisites. Section 17(2)(viii) provides a 
residuary clause that includes ‘any other fringe benefits or amenities’ within the 
definition of ‘perquisites’, as prescribed from time to time. The express 
delineation does not take away the power of the legislature, as the plenary 
body, to delegate the rule-making authority to subordinate authorities, to bring 
within the ambit of ‘perquisites’ any other ‘fringe benefit’ or annuities’ as 
‘perquisite’. The legislative intent, policy and guidance is drawn and defined. 
Pursuant to such demarcated delegation, Rule 3(7)(i) prescribes interest-
free/loans at concessional rates as a ‘fringe benefit’ or ‘amenity’, taxable as 
‘perquisites’. This becomes clear once we view the analysis undertaken in 
Birla Cotton 7J (supra) viz. the ‘essential legislative function’ test.  
 
24. 
Birla Cotton 7J (supra) refers to In Re.: The Delhi Laws Act 191220, wherein 
this Court held that an unlimited right of delegation is not inherent in the 
legislative power itself. The legitimacy of delegation depends upon its usage 
as an ancillary measure, which the legislature considers necessary for the 
complete and effective exercise of legislative powers. Provided that the 
legislative policy is enunciated with sufficient clearness or a standard is laid 
down, the courts should not interfere with the discretion that undoubtedly rests 
 
20 1951 SCC 568. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 13 of 17 
 
with the legislature itself in determining the extent of delegation necessary in a 
particular case.  
 
25. 
Birla Cotton 7J (supra) refers to Raj Narain Singh v. Chairman, Patna 
Administration Committee21, wherein this Court held that an executive 
authority can be authorised by a statute to modify either existing or future laws 
but not in any essential feature. What constitutes an essential feature cannot 
be enunciated in exact terms. However, it was held that modification could not 
include a change in policy, since the ‘essential legislative function’ consists of 
the determination of legislative policy and its formulation as a binding rule of 
conduct. In the context of Section 17(2)(viii) and Rule 3(7)(i), we are of the 
opinion that main legislation does not fall foul of the essential feature test. They 
do not modify an essential feature nor do they violate the condition of 
determining legislative policy or a binding rule of conduct.   
 
26. 
Birla Cotton 7J (supra) also refers to Hari Shankar Bagla v. State of Madhya 
Pradesh22, where the majority held that the legislature must declare the policy 
of law and legal principles which are to control any given cases and thereby 
provide a standard of guidance to the executive, empowered to execute laws.  
 
27. 
In Western India Theatres Limited v. Municipal Corporation of the City of 
Poona23, referred by Birla Cotton 7J (supra), the issue related to the power 
of the municipality to levy “any other tax to the nature and object of which the 
approval of the Governor-in-Council shall have been obtained prior to the 
selection contemplated”. The delegated legislation was upheld on the ground 
 
21 (1955) 1 SCR 290. 
22 (1955) 1 SCR 380. 
23  AIR 1959 SC 586. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 14 of 17 
 
that municipality was authorised by the principal enactment to impose the tax. 
The enactment defined the obligations and functions cast upon the 
municipality. The taxes could only be levied for implementing those specific 
purposes and not for any other purpose. Further, the section in the enactment 
laid down the procedure that the municipality had to follow for imposing the tax. 
Thus, the legislature had not abdicated its function in favour of the municipality. 
Same is true in the present case. 
 
28. 
In Birla Cotton 7J (supra), the assessee had challenged a resolution passed 
by the municipal corporation to levy three taxes, including a levy of tax on 
consumption or sale of electricity. The challenge was that the levy of tax by the 
Corporation was by way of excessive delegation and was therefore ultra 
vires. This Court relied upon the judgment in Pandit Banarsi Das Bhanot v. 
State of Madhya Pradesh24, to uphold the levy. In Pandit Banarsi (supra), 
this Court had observed that a delegated legislation is not unconstitutional 
when the legislature leaves it to the executive to determine details relating to 
the working of taxation laws, such as selection of persons on whom the tax has 
to be levied, the rates at which it is to be charged in respect of different classes 
of goods and the like. The principal legislature, it was held, has not given 
unqualified power to fix the rate of tax without guidance, control or safeguard.  
 
29. 
Pandit Banarsi Das (supra) also refers to Powell v. Apollo Candle Company 
Ltd.25 which had upheld the power of delegation to levy duties by observing 
that there was complete guidance in the manner of fixing the rate of duty and 
 
24 1959 SCR 427. 
25 8 AC 282. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 15 of 17 
 
finally the order passed by the Governor had to be laid before both Houses of 
the Parliament without unnecessary delay. 
 
30. 
In Devidas Gopal Krishnan v. State of Punjab26, this Court distinguished its 
earlier decision in Corporation of Calcutta v. Liberty Cinema27 where the 
majority upheld the fixation of tax on cinema shows, albeit the Calcutta 
Municipal Act, 1951 had failed to prescribe a limit to which tax could go. The 
majority in Liberty Cinema (supra) had referred to Pandit Banarsi Das 
(supra) and held that there is no in-principle distinction between delegation of 
power to fix rates of taxes to be charged on different classes of goods and 
power to fix rates simpliciter; if power to fix rates in some cases can be 
delegated then equally the power to fix rates generally can be delegated. The 
Court held that if the power to decide who is to pay the tax is not an essential 
part of legislation, neither would the power to decide the rate of tax be so. The 
Court thus held that fixation of tax rate was not unqualified as the legislature 
had stipulated the maximum rate. The guidance rule was held as satisfied.  
 
31. 
We are of the opinion that the enactment of subordinate legislation for levying 
tax on interest free/concessional loans as a fringe benefit is within the rule-
making power under Section 17(2)(viii) of the Act. Section 17(2)(viii) itself, and 
the enactment of Rule 3(7)(i) is not a case of excessive delegation and falls 
within the parameters of permissible delegation. Section 17(2) clearly 
delineates the legislative policy and lays down standards for the rule-making 
authority. Accordingly, Rule 3(7)(i) is intra vires Section 17(2)(viii) of the Act. 
 
26 AIR (1967) SC 1895. 
27 (1965) 2 SCR 477. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 16 of 17 
 
Section 17(2)(viii) does not lead to an excessive delegation of the ‘essential 
legislative function’. 
 
II. 
Is Rule 3(7)(i) arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution 
insofar as it treats the PLR of SBI as the benchmark? 
 
32. 
Rule 3(7)(i) posits SBI’s rate of interest, that is the PLR, as the benchmark to 
determine the value of benefit to the assessee in comparison to the rate of 
interest charged by other individual banks. The fixation of SBI’s rate of interest 
as the benchmark is neither an arbitrary nor unequal exercise of power. The 
rule-making authority has not treated unequal as equals. The benefit enjoyed 
by bank employees from interest-free loans or loans at a concessional rate is 
a unique benefit/advantage enjoyed by them. It is in the nature of a ‘perquisite’, 
and hence is liable to taxation.    
 
 
33. 
Rule 3(7)(i), it can be hardly argued, is arbitrary or irrational for the reason it 
benchmarks computation of the perquisite with reference to the SBI’s PLR. SBI 
is the largest bank in the country and the interest rates fixed by them invariably 
impact and affect the interest rates being charged by other banks. By fixing a 
single clear benchmark for computation of the perquisite or fringe benefit, the 
rule prevents ascertainment of the interest rates being charged by different 
banks from the customers and, thus, checks unnecessary litigation. Rule 
3(7)(i) ensures consistency in application, provides clarity for both the 
assessee and the revenue department, and provides certainty as to the 
amount to be taxed. When there is certainty and clarity, there is tax efficiency 
which is beneficial to both the tax payer and the tax authorities. These are all 
hallmarks of good tax legislation. Rule 3(7)(i) is based on an uniform approach 

 
Civil Appeal No. 7708 of 2014 & Ors. 
 
Page 17 of 17 
 
and yet premised on a fair determining principle which aligns with constitutional 
values.  
 
34. 
It is also apposite to note that when it comes to uniform approach the laws 
relating to fiscal or tax measures enjoy greater latitude than other statutes.28 
The Legislature should be allowed some flexibility in such matters and this 
Court would be more inclined to give judicial deference to legislative wisdom.29 
Commercial and tax legislations tend to be highly sensitive and complex as 
they deal with multiple problems and are contingent. This Court would not like 
to interfere with the legislation in question, which prevents possibilities of abuse 
and promotes certainty. It is not iniquitous, draconian or harsh on the 
taxpayers. A complex problem has been solved through a straitjacket formula, 
meriting judicial acceptance. To hold otherwise, would lead to multiple 
problems/issues and override the legislative wisdom. The universal test in the 
present case is pragmatic, fair and just. Therefore, Rule 3(7) is held to be intra 
vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India. 
 
35. 
We, accordingly, dismiss the appeals and uphold the impugned judgments of 
the High Courts of Madras and Madhya Pradesh. No order as to costs.  
 
 
 
......................................J. 
(SANJIV KHANNA) 
 
 
 
......................................J. 
(DIPANKAR DATTA) 
NEW DELHI; 
MAY 07, 2024. 
 
28 Govt. of A.P. v. P. Laxmi Devi, (2008) 4 SCC 720. 
29  Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (2019) 4 SCC 17.