2024 INSC 387
Page 1 of 77 
 
REPORTABLE  
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                    OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 3033 of 2024) 
 
 
 
CHILD IN CONFLICT WITH LAW  
THROUGH HIS MOTHER   
 
            
       …  Appellant (s) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF KARNATAKA AND ANOTHER        … Respondent(s) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Rajesh Bindal, J. 
 
 
Leave granted. 
BRIEF FACTS 
2.  
 
The present appeal has been filed by Child in Conflict with 
Law1 impugning the order2 passed by the High Court3. 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as “CCL”. 
2 Order dated 15.11.2023 passed in Criminal Revision Petition No. 1243 of 2023. 
3 High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru. 
Digitally signed by Dr.
Naveen Rawal
Date: 2024.05.07
13:43:17 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 77 
 
3. 
 
Vide aforesaid order, the High Court set aside the order 
dated 10.04.2023 passed by the Board4. 
4. 
 
Briefly, the facts as available on record are that FIR5 was 
registered against the CCL for commission of offences under sections 
376(i), 342 IPC and sections 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of Protection of Children 
from Sexual Offences Act, 20126. After his apprehension on 03.11.2021, 
the CCL was produced before the Board. On 09.11.2021, he was 
released on bail. After completion of investigation, charge-sheet was 
filed. The Board was called upon to decide the issue as to whether the 
CCL is to be tried by the Board or as an adult by the Children’s Court. 
The arguments in the matter were heard on 29.03.2022 by the Principal 
Magistrate and a Member of the Board. The matter was adjourned to 
05.04.2022 for order. 
4.1 
 
On 05.04.2022, the Principal Magistrate of the Board passed 
an order holding that as per preliminary assessment report and the 
social investigation report, the CCL is to be tried as an adult by the 
Children’s Court. The record was directed to be transferred to the Court 
concerned. However, when the file was put up before the Member of the 
 
4  Additional Juvenile Justice Board, Bangalore City. 
5 Crime No. 239/2021 dated 03.11.2021. 
6 Hereinafter referred to as “2012 Act”. 

Page 3 of 77 
 
Board for signatures, he recorded: “I am having a dissenting view to 
abovesaid order. I will pass detailed order on next date of hearing.”. The 
matter was adjourned to 12.04.2022. No separate order, as recorded by 
the Member of the Board on 05.04.2022, was passed by him. On 
12.04.2022 the matter was apparently heard afresh by two Members of 
the Board without there being the Principal Magistrate. Order was 
passed that as per the preliminary assessment report and the social 
investigation report, the enquiry regarding the alleged offence 
committed by the CCL has to be conducted by the Board as a juvenile. 
4.2 
 
An application under Section 19 of the Juvenile Justice (Care 
and Protection of Children) Act, 20157 dated 18.10.2022 was filed by the 
complainant/mother of the victim before the Board for termination of 
proceedings and transferring the matter to the Children’s Court, to 
which objections were filed by the CCL. 
4.3 
 
Vide order dated 10.4.2023, the Board dismissed the 
application. 
4.4 
 
Impugning the aforesaid order, revision petition8 was filed 
by the Complainant before the High Court, which was allowed. The 
 
7 Hereinafter referred to as “the Act” 
8 Criminal Revision Petition No. 1243 of 2023 

Page 4 of 77 
 
impugned order dated 10.04.2023 passed by the Board was set aside. 
The Board was directed to transmit the record to the Children’s Court for 
trial. 
4.5 
 
The aforesaid order is under challenge before this Court by 
the CCL. 
ARGUMENTS OF THE APPELLANT 
5. 
 
Mr. Sidharth Luthra and Mr. S. Nagamuthu, learned senior 
counsel appearing for the CCL, submitted that the practice of passing 
order while stating that the reasons will follow has been deprecated by 
this Court. It deprives the party concerned to avail of his appropriate 
remedy, when no reasons are available. In the case in hand, firstly the 
Principal Magistrate mentioned that the order was being passed by him 
and another Member of the Board. However, the Member of the Board 
did not sign the same. He only mentioned that he dis-agrees with the 
views of the Principal Magistrate and will pass a detailed order on the 
next date. The matter was kept for 12.04.2022. In support of the 
arguments, reliance was placed upon the judgment of this Court in 

Page 5 of 77 
 
Balaji Baliram Mupade and Another v. State of Maharashtra and 
Others9. 
5.1 
 
It was further argued that the order passed on 05.04.2022 is 
not an order in the eyes of law. The matter being listed on 12.04.2022, 
the arguments were heard by two Members of the Board including the 
Member who had earlier not signed the order. An order was passed 
directing that the enquiry into the offence shall be conducted by the 
Board, treating the CCL as juvenile.  He further referred to the 
documents placed on record with Crl. M.P. No. 28749 of 2024 that even 
the Principal Magistrate was present in Court on that date. He had also 
heard the arguments but did not sign the order. There was a well-
considered order passed on 12.04.2022, against which the only remedy 
available to the victim was to file an appeal. However, the same was not 
availed of within the period provided for under Section 101 of the Act. 
5.2 
 
It was further submitted that after the commencement of trial 
before the Board, nearly six months thereafter an application was filed 
for terminating the proceedings before the Board and transferring the 
matter to the Children’s Court, to which objections were filed by the 
 
9 (2021) 12 SCC 603  

Page 6 of 77 
 
CCL. The Board appreciated the position of law correctly and dismissed 
the application filed by the mother of the victim. 
5.3 
 
It was submitted that even if for arguments’ sake it is 
assumed that the order passed on 12.04.2022 cannot be legally 
sustained. It may, at the most, revive the order dated 05.04.2022 against 
which the CCL has a remedy of filing an appeal. However, in view of the 
developments which had taken place since the passing of the order on 
12.04.2022, the CCL has been deprived of his remedy of appeal. If this 
Court is of the view that the order passed on 05.04.2022 was an order, 
the CCL be given liberty to avail remedy of appeal against the same, as 
with the passing of the impugned order by the High Court, the CCL has 
been left remediless against the order. 
5.4 
 
Section 15(1) of the Act provides for preliminary assessment 
regarding mental status and physical capacity of the CCL, who had 
allegedly committed heinous offence. In case the Board is satisfied, that 
enquiry into the matter has to be conducted by the Board, it shall follow 
the procedure as prescribed. However, an order can also be passed in 
terms of Section 18(3) of the Act for trial of the CCL by the Children’s 

Page 7 of 77 
 
Court. It is only the assessment, as to whether the Board or the 
Children’s Court has to hold inquiry or conduct trial.   
5.5 
 
Section 18(3) of the Act provides that after preliminary 
assessment under Section 15 of the Act, the Board shall pass an order 
that there is a need for trial of the CCL as an adult. The records of the 
case have to be transferred for trial to the Children’s Court having 
jurisdiction. 
5.6 
 
Section 17 of the Act provides for procedure in relation to the 
Board. It was submitted that the Board as such is not a court and any 
proceeding conducted by the Board are not to be treated as an order. It 
is merely an opinion. The Board, as defined in section 2(10) of the Act, 
means the Board as constituted under section 4 thereof. It shall consist of 
a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of First Class, not 
being the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate 
with at least three years’ experience and two social workers selected in 
the manner prescribed, one of them has to be a woman.  
5.7 
 
Section 7(3) of the Act provides that there shall be at least two 
members including the Principal Magistrate present at the time of final 
disposal of a case or make an order under Section 18(3) of the Act. 

Page 8 of 77 
 
5.8 
 
It was further submitted that the appeal against an order 
passed under Section 18(3) of the Act by the Board, directing trial of the 
CCL by the Children’s Court would lie to the Court of Sessions. 
5.9 
 
The term Children’s Court has been defined in Section 2(20) 
of the Act. It means a Court established as such under the Commissions 
for Protection of Child Rights Act, 200510 or a Special Court under the 
2012 Act, and where such Courts have not been designated, the Court of 
Sessions having jurisdiction. The argument is, that two separate 
authorities have been mentioned in sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 
101 of the Act, otherwise separate provisions were not required. This is 
the spirit of the law. 
5.10  
Section 19 of the Act deals with the powers of Children’s 
Court. After receipt of the preliminary assessment from the Board under 
Section 15, the Children’s Court may decide that the child is to be tried 
as an adult or that there is no need for trial of the CCL as an adult. An 
order passed by the Children’s Court is appealable before the High 
Court in terms of Section 101(5) of the Act. 
 
10 Hereinafter referred to as “2005 Act” 

Page 9 of 77 
 
5.11  
Reference was made to Rule 10A of the Juvenile Justice 
(Care and Protection of Children) Model Rules, 2016 11  which 
prescribes the procedure for preliminary assessment regarding the age 
of the CCL under Section 14, and inquiry by the Board or trial by the 
Children’s Court under Section 15 of the Act.  
5.12  
Referring to the aforesaid scheme of the Act, it was submitted 
that an assessment under Section 15 of the Act does not envisage 
passing of an order. It is merely a satisfaction recorded, and there is no 
final satisfaction recorded by the Board on 05.04.2022 as next date of 
hearing had been given. The matter had to be considered by the Board 
subsequently. In fact, no order had been passed under Section 18(3) of 
the Act. Subsequent orders passed by the Board showed that the inquiry 
had already commenced. It was at a later stage that the Complainant 
filed an application for termination of proceedings before the Board, 
which was dismissed on 10.04.2023.  The order was appealable under 
Section 101(1) of the Act. However, no appeal was filed.  A revision was 
filed before the High Court under Section 397 read with Section 399 of 
the Cr.P.C., which was not maintainable. 
 
11 Hereinafter to be referred as “the 2016 Rules” 

Page 10 of 77 
 
5.13  
It was further argued that in terms of Section 14(3) of the Act 
preliminary assessment under Section 15 thereof, has to be made within 
a period of three months from the date of first production of CCL before 
the Board. In the case in hand, the child was produced before the Board 
for the first time on 03.11.2021. The period of three months expired on 
02.02.2022. No order could possibly be passed by the Board on 
05.04.2022. The result thereof is that the CCL is to be tried by the Board 
and no order for his trial by the Children’s Court could be passed 
thereafter. 
5.14  
Reliance was placed upon the judgment of this Court in 
Barun Chandra Thakur vs. Master Bholu & Anr.12 to submit that this 
Court opined that the timelines provided for under the Act have to be 
adhered to. If the time provided for in Section 14(3) for preliminary 
assessment under Section 15 cannot be extended, no order for trial of 
the CCL by the Children’s Court can be passed. Reliance was also 
placed upon judgment of this Court in Shilpa Mittal vs. State (NCT of 
Delhi)13. 
 
 
12 2022 INSC 716: (2022) 10 SCR 595 
13 (2020) 2 SCC 787: 2020 INSC 25: (2020) 2 SCR 478 

Page 11 of 77 
 
ARGUMENTS OF RESPONDENTS 
6. 
 
On the other hand, learned counsel for the State submitted 
that even after the order is passed by the Board transferring the matter 
to the Children’s Court for trial of the CCL, it can be reconsidered by the 
Children’s Court under Section 19(1) of the Act. Any order passed by 
the Children’s Court is appealable under Section 101(5) of the Act. The 
scope of Section 101(1) and 101(2) is different. Sub-section (1) deals with 
final orders, whereas sub-section (2) deals with preliminary assessment. 
The trial of the offence is only by the Children’s Court. 
6.1 
 
It was further submitted that, in terms of proviso to Section 
15(1) of the Act, the Board may take assistance of experienced 
psychologists, psycho-social workers or other experts to enable the 
Board to reach a proper conclusion.  
6.2 
 
In this case, a report dated 01.02.2022 has been submitted by 
the Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, NIMHANS-DWCO. 
It was in response to a letter dated 12.01.2022 from the Police Inspector, 
Marathahalli Police Station to the Psychiatrist, NIMHANS Hospital, 
Bengaluru. Going backward, learned counsel for the State referred to 
the interim order of the Board dated 09.11.2021 in terms of which the 

Page 12 of 77 
 
Board had called for the social investigation report of the child to enable 
the Board to pass further order in terms of Section 18(3) of the Act. 
However, no report was produced on 06.12.2021. The matter was 
adjourned from 06.12.2021 to 11.01.2022, and thereafter to 21.02.2022. 
The Social Investigation Report was received by the Board on 
19.02.2022. 
6.3 
 
The arguments on the issue of trial of the CCL by the 
Children’s Court or inquiry by the Board, were completed on 29.03.2022 
and the matter was adjourned to 05.04.2022 for orders, when the 
Principal Magistrate passed an order directing for trial of the CCL by the 
Children’s Court. Another member of the Board did not append his 
signature and recorded that he had a dissenting view and would pass 
the detailed order on the next date i.e. 12.04.2022. In fact, in terms of 
Section 7(4) of the Act, the proceeding for determination of the forum, 
which was to conduct the inquiry or trial, concluded on that day itself, as 
the opinion of the Principal Magistrate is final. The manner in which the 
case was dealt with subsequently, is strange. Subsequent order dated 
12.04.2022 was passed by different members of the Board. The entire 
proceedings were non-est. There was no error in the application moved 

Page 13 of 77 
 
by the victim for termination of proceedings before the Board and 
referring the matter to the Children’s Court, for which an order had 
already been passed by the Principal Magistrate on 05.04.2022. 
6.4 
 
It was further argued that merely because proceedings 
under Section 15 of the Act could not be concluded within three months, 
by default the CCL will not be tried by the Board. The provision cannot 
be held to be mandatory, as no consequence of such a default has been 
provided in the Act. Even proviso to Section 14(4) provides for extension 
of time in case the inquiry as envisaged under Section 14(1) cannot be 
concluded within the time prescribed.  
6.5 
 
It was further submitted that though there is no direct 
judgment of this Court in this matter dealing with Section 14(3) of the 
Act. However, the learned counsel for the State referred to the following 
judgments of the Madhya Pradesh, Punjab & Haryana and Delhi High 
Courts Bhola vs State of Madhya Pradesh14, Neeraj and Others vs 
State of Haryana15 and X vs. State16. 
 
14 2019 SCC OnLine MP 521 
15 2005 SCC OnLine P&H 611 
16 2019 SCC OnLine Del 11164 

Page 14 of 77 
 
6.6 
 
It was further argued that the inquiry envisaged under 
Section 15 of the Act provides for taking opinion from experienced 
psychologists or psycho-social workers or other experts. The role of 
investigating officer is also relevant as he is investigating the same. 
There can be intentional delays caused in the process also to take 
benefit, in case by default CCL in a heinous offence is to be tried by the 
Board. As in the case in hand the investigating officer himself took about 
two months in getting the report from NIMHANS. In such a situation the 
Board should not be treated as powerless to extend the time for reasons 
to be recorded. No doubt, in such a matter all the proceedings have to 
be completed as expeditiously as possible. 
6.7 
 
It was further submitted that there is no merit in the 
arguments raised by the learned counsel for the appellant, to give him 
liberty to challenge the order dated 05.04.2022 in case he has grievance 
against the same. Much water has flown thereafter. All possible 
arguments were raised in the revision decided by the High Court, and 
considered. To give liberty to the appellant to raise the same before a 
lower authority would be an exercise in futility. The same would rather 

Page 15 of 77 
 
result in delaying the process further. The prayer is for the dismissal of 
the appeal. 
DISCUSSION 
7. 
 
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the 
relevant referred record. We have divided our judgment in different 
parts, as mentioned below: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
HEADING 
PARA 
No(s). 
PAGE 
No(s). 
I. 
Relevant provisions. 
8 
16-37 
II. 
Whether 
the 
period 
provided 
for 
completion of preliminary assessment 
under section 14(3) of the Act is mandatory 
or directory. 
9-9.28 
37-57 
III. 
Exercise of revisional power by the High 
Court. 
10-10.5 
58-61 
IV. 
Anomaly in Section 101 of the Juvenile 
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Act, 2015. 
(A) Regarding the terms used as 
‘Children’s Court’ and ‘Court of 
Sessions’. 
(B) Time for filing appeal against 
order of the Board under Section 
15 of the Act. 
(C)  Regarding second appeal. 
 
 
 
11-12.2 
 
 
13-13.2 
 
 
14-14.1 
 
 
 
62-66 
 
 
66-67 
 
 
67-68 
V. 
Validity of order passed by the Board on 
05.04.2022. 
15-15.5 
68-71 
VI. 
Remedy of appeal to appellant. 
16-16.2 
71-72 
VII. 
Additional issues. 
17-17.3 
72-74 
VIII. Reliefs and Directions. 
18-19 
74-77 
 

Page 16 of 77 
 
I. 
RELEVANT PROVISIONS 
8. 
 
The relevant provisions of various statutes and the Rules 
applicable in the matter are extracted below: 
EXTRACTS 
OF 
RELEVANT 
PROVISIONS 
OF 
THE 
JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF 
CHILDREN) ACT, 2015 
 
“Section 2(10). “Board” means a Juvenile Justice Board 
constituted under section 4. 
Section 2(13).  "child in conflict with law” means a child 
who is alleged or found to have committed an offence and 
who has not completed eighteen years of age on the date of 
commission of such offence. 
Section 2(20).  "Children's 
Court" 
means 
a 
court 
established under the Commissions for Protection of Child 
Rights Act, 2005 (4 of 2006) or a Special Court under the 
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (32 of 
2012), wherever existing and where such courts have not 
been designated, the Court of Sessions having jurisdiction to 
try offences under the Act. 
Section 2(22).  "Committee" 
means 
Child 
Welfare 
Committee constituted under section 27. 

Page 17 of 77 
 
Section 2(23).  "court" means a civil court, which has 
jurisdiction in matters of adoption and guardianship and may 
include the District Court, Family Court and City Civil Courts. 
Section 2(33). 
 “heinous offences” includes the offences for 
which the minimum punishment under the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860) or any other law for the time being in force is 
imprisonment for seven years or more. 
  
 
       x  
 
x 
 
x 
Section 4.  Juvenile Justice Board.— 
(1) 
 
       xx                   xx                  
(2) 
A Board shall consist of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Judicial Magistrate of First Class not being Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate (hereinafter referred 
to as Principal Magistrate) with at least three years 
experience and two social workers selected in such manner 
as may be prescribed, of whom at least one shall be a 
woman, forming a Bench and every such Bench shall have the 
powers conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974) on a Metropolitan Magistrate or, as the case may 
be, a Judicial Magistrate of First Class. 
(3)  to  (7)  
xx                   xx                        
Section 7. Procedure in relation to Board.— 
(1) & (2) 
 
xx                   xx                              

Page 18 of 77 
 
(3) 
A Board may act notwithstanding the absence of any 
member of the Board, and no order passed by the Board shall 
be invalid by the reason only of the absence of any member 
during any stage of proceedings: 
Provided that there shall be atleast two members including 
the Principal Magistrate present at the time of final disposal 
of the case or in making an order under sub-section (3) of 
section 18. 
(4) 
In the event of any difference of opinion among the 
members of the Board in the interim or final disposal, the 
opinion of the majority shall prevail, but where there is no 
such majority, the opinion of the Principal Magistrate, shall 
prevail. 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
Section 14.  Inquiry by Board regarding child in conflict 
with law.—(1) Where a child alleged to be in conflict with 
law is produced before Board, the Board shall hold an inquiry 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and may pass 
such orders in relation to such child as it deems fit under 
sections 17 and 18 of this Act. 
(2)  
The inquiry under this section shall be completed 
within a period of four months from the date of first 
production of the child before the Board, unless the period is 
extended, for a maximum period of 2 more months by the 

Page 19 of 77 
 
Board, having regard to the circumstances of the case and 
after recording the reasons in writing for such extension. 
(3) 
A preliminary assessment in case of heinous offences 
under section 15 shall be disposed of by the Board within a 
period of three months from the date of first production of the 
child before the Board.  
(4) 
If inquiry by the Board under sub-section (2) for petty 
offences remains inconclusive even after the extended 
period, the proceedings shall stand terminated: 
       Provided that for serious or heinous offences, in case the 
Board requires further extension of time for completion of 
inquiry, the same shall be granted by the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or, as the case may be, the Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate, for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
(5) 
 
 
xx                   xx                              
x 
 
x 
 
x 
Section 15. Preliminary assessment into heinous offences 
by Board.—(1) In case of a heinous offence alleged to have 
been committed by a child, who has completed or is above 
the age of sixteen years, the Board shall conduct a 
preliminary assessment with regard to his mental and 
physical capacity to commit such offence, ability to 
understand the consequences of the offence and the 
circumstances in which he allegedly committed the offence, 

Page 20 of 77 
 
and may pass an order in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section (3) of section 18:  
  
 
Provided that for such an assessment, the Board 
may take the assistance of experienced psychologists or 
psycho-social workers or other experts.  
  
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, it 
is clarified that preliminary assessment is not a trial, but is to 
assess the capacity of such child to commit and understand 
the consequences of the alleged offence.  
(2)  
Where the Board is satisfied on preliminary assessment 
that the matter should be disposed of by the Board, then the 
Board shall follow the procedure, as far as may be, for trial in 
summons case under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974): 
Provided that the order of the Board to dispose of the 
matter shall be appealable under sub-section (2) of section 
101. 
  
  
Provided further that the assessment under this 
section shall be completed within the period specified in 
section 14. 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
Section 17.   Orders regarding child not found to be in 
conflict with law.—(1) Where a Board is satisfied on inquiry 
that the child brought before it has not committed any 

Page 21 of 77 
 
offence, then notwithstanding anything contrary contained in 
any other law for the time being in force, the Board shall pass 
order to that effect. 
(2) 
In case it appears to the Board that the child referred to 
in sub-section (1) is in need of care and protection, it may 
refer the child to the Committee with appropriate directions. 
Section 18. Orders regarding child found to be in conflict 
with law.— 
(1) & (2) 
     
xx                   xx                                
(3)  
Where the Board after preliminary assessment under 
section 15 pass an order that there is a need for trial of the 
said child as an adult, then the Board may order transfer of 
the trial of the case to the Children’s Court having jurisdiction 
to try such offences. 
Section 19. Powers of Children’s Court.—(1) After the 
receipt of preliminary assessment from the Board under 
section 15, the Children’s Court may decide that—  
(i)  
there is a need for trial of the child as an 
adult as per the provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and pass appropriate 
orders after trial subject to the provisions of this 
section and section 21, considering the special 
needs of the child, the tenets of fair trial and 
maintaining a child friendly atmosphere;  

Page 22 of 77 
 
(ii)  
there is no need for trial of the child as an 
adult and may conduct an inquiry as a Board and 
pass appropriate orders in accordance with the 
provisions of section 18.  
(2)    The Children’s Court shall ensure that the final order, 
with regard to a child in conflict with law, shall include an 
individual care plan for the rehabilitation of child, including 
follow up by the probation officer or the District Child 
Protection Unit or a social worker.  
(3)       The Children’s Court shall ensure that the child who is 
found to be in conflict with law is sent to a place of safety till 
he attains the age of twenty-one years and thereafter, the 
person shall be transferred to a jail:      
  
 
Provided that the reformative services including 
educational services, skill development, alternative therapy 
such as counselling, behaviour modification therapy, and 
psychiatric support shall be provided to the child during the 
period of his stay in the place of safety.  
(4) 
The Children’s Court shall ensure that there is a 
periodic follow up report every year by the probation officer 
or the District Child Protection Unit or a social worker, as 
required, to evaluate the progress of the child in the place of 
safety and to ensure that there is no ill-treatment to the child 
in any form.  

Page 23 of 77 
 
(5) 
The reports under sub-section (4) shall be forwarded to 
the Children’s Court for record and follow up, as may be 
required. 
  
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
Section 101. Appeals. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this 
Act, any person aggrieved by an order made by the 
Committee or the Board under this Act may, within thirty days 
from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the 
Children’s Court, except for decisions by the Committee 
related to Foster Care and Sponsorship After Care for which 
the appeal shall lie with the District Magistrate:     
          Provided that the Court of Sessions, or the District 
Magistrate, as the case may be, may entertain the appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from filing the appeal in time and such appeal shall be 
decided within a period of thirty days.  
(2) 
 An appeal shall lie against an order of the Board 
passed after making the preliminary assessment into a 
heinous offence under section 15 of the Act, before the Court 
of Sessions and the Court may, while deciding the appeal, 
take the assistance of experienced psychologists and 
medical specialists other than those whose assistance has 
been obtained by the Board in passing the order under the 
said section.  

Page 24 of 77 
 
 (3)  No appeal shall lie from any order of acquittal made by 
the Board in respect of a child alleged to have committed an 
offence other than the heinous offence by a child who has 
completed or is above the age of sixteen years. 
(4)   No second appeal shall lie from any order of the Court 
of Session, passed in appeal under this section.  
(5)  
Any person aggrieved by an order of the Children’s 
Court may file an appeal before the High Court in 
accordance with the procedure specified in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
(6) & (7) 
 
xx 
 
xx 
 
 
102. Revision.—The High Court may, at any time, either on 
its own motion or on an application received in this behalf, 
call for the record of any proceeding in which any Committee 
or Board or Children’s Court, or Court has passed an order, 
for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or 
propriety of any such order and may pass such order in 
relation thereto as it thinks fit: Provided that the High Court 
shall not pass an order under this section prejudicial to any 
person without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard.” 
EXTRACTS OF RELEVANT RULES 10, 10A, 11 & 13 OF 
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF 
CHILDREN) MODEL RULES, 2016 

Page 25 of 77 
 
“Rule 10. Post-production processes by the Board.- (1) 
 On production of the child before the Board, the report 
containing the social background of the child, circumstances 
of apprehending the child and offence alleged to have been 
committed by the child as provided by the officers, 
individuals, agencies producing the child shall be reviewed 
by the Board and the Board may pass such orders in relation 
to the child as it deems fit, including orders under sections 17 
and 18 of the Act, namely: 
(i)  
disposing of the case, if on the consideration 
of the documents and record submitted at the time of 
his first appearance, his being in conflict with law 
appears to be unfounded or where the child is 
alleged to be involved in petty offences;  
(ii)  
referring the child to the Committee where 
it appears to the Board that the child is in need of 
care and protection; 
(iii)  
releasing the child in the supervision or 
custody of fit persons or fit institutions or Probation 
Officers as the case may be, through an order in 
Form 3, with a direction to appear or present a child 
for an inquiry on the next date; and 
(iv)  
directing the child to be kept in the Child 
Care Institution, as appropriate, if necessary, 
pending inquiry as per order in Form 4. 

Page 26 of 77 
 
(2)  
In all cases of release pending inquiry, the Board shall 
notify the next date of hearing, not later than fifteen days of 
the first summary inquiry and also seek social investigation 
report from the Probation Officer, or in case a Probation 
Officer is not available the Child Welfare Officer or social 
worker concerned through an order in Form 5. 
(3)  
When the child alleged to be in conflict with law, after 
being admitted to bail, fails to appear before the Board, on 
the date fixed for hearing, and no application is moved for 
exemption on his behalf or there is not sufficient reason for 
granting him exemption, the Board shall, issue to the Child 
Welfare Police Officer and the Person-in-charge of the Police 
Station directions for the production of the child. 
(4)  
If the Child Welfare Police Officer fails to produce the 
child before the Board even after the issuance of the 
directions for production of the child, the Board shall instead 
of issuing process under section 82 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 pass orders as appropriate under section 26 
of the Act. 
(5)  
In cases of heinous offences alleged to have been 
committed by a child, who has completed the age of sixteen 
years, the Child Welfare Police Officer shall produce the 
statement of witnesses recorded by him and other documents 
prepared during the course of investigation within a period 
of one month from the date of first production of the child 

Page 27 of 77 
 
before the Board, a copy of which shall also be given to the 
child or parent or guardian of the child. 
(6)  
In cases of petty or serious offences, the final report 
shall be filed before the Board at the earliest and in any case 
not beyond the period of two months from the date of 
information to the police, except in those cases where it was 
not reasonably known that the person involved in the offence 
was a child, in which case extension of time may be granted 
by the Board for filing the final report. 
(7)  
When witnesses are produced for examination in an 
inquiry relating to a child alleged to be in conflict with law, 
the Board shall ensure that the inquiry is not conducted in the 
spirit of strict adversarial proceedings and it shall use the 
powers conferred by section 165 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 (1 of 1872) so as to interrogate the child and proceed 
with the presumptions in favour of the child. 
(8)  
While examining a child alleged to be in conflict with 
law and recording his statement during the inquiry under 
section 14 of the Act, the Board shall address the child in a 
child-friendly manner in order to put the child at ease and to 
encourage him to state the facts and circumstances without 
any fear, not only in respect of the offence which has been 
alleged against the child, but also in respect of the home and 
social surroundings, and the influence or the offences to 
which the child might have been subjected to. 

Page 28 of 77 
 
(9)  
The Board shall take into account the report containing 
circumstances of apprehending the child and the offence 
alleged to have been committed by him and the social 
investigation report in Form 6 prepared by the Probation 
Officer or the voluntary or non- governmental organisation, 
along with the evidence produced by the parties for arriving 
at a conclusion. 
Rule 10A. Preliminary assessment into heinous offences 
by Board.- (1) The Board shall in the first instance determine 
whether the child is of sixteen years of age or above; if not, it 
shall proceed as per provisions of section 14 of the Act. 
(2)  
For 
the 
purpose 
of 
conducting 
a 
preliminary 
assessment in case of heinous offences, the Board may take 
the assistance of psychologists or psycho-social workers or 
other experts who have experience of working with children 
in difficult circumstances. A panel of such experts may be 
made available by the District Child Protection Unit, whose 
assistance can be taken by the Board or could be accessed 
independently. 
(3)  
While making the preliminary assessment, the child 
shall be presumed to be innocent unless proved otherwise. 
(4)  
Where the Board, after preliminary assessment under 
section 15 of the Act, passes an order that there is a need for 
trial of the said child as an adult, it shall assign reasons for the 

Page 29 of 77 
 
same and the copy of the order shall be provided to the child 
forthwith. 
Rule 11. Completion of Inquiry.- (1) Where after 
preliminary assessment under section 15 of the Act, in cases 
of heinous offences allegedly committed by a child, the 
Board decides to dispose of the matter, the Board may pass 
any of the dispositional orders as specified in section 18 of 
the Act. 
(2)  
Before passing an order, the Board shall obtain a social 
investigation report in Form 6 prepared by the Probation 
Officer or Child Welfare Officer or social worker as ordered, 
and take the findings of the report into account. 
(3)  
All dispositional orders passed by the Board shall 
necessarily include an individual care plan in Form 7 for the 
child in conflict with law concerned, prepared by a Probation 
Officer or Child Welfare Officer or a recognised voluntary 
organisation on the basis of interaction with the child and his 
family, where possible. 
(4)  
Where the Board is satisfied that it is neither in the 
interest of the child himself nor in the interest of other 
children to keep a child in the special home, the Board may 
order the child to be kept in a place of safety and in a manner 
considered appropriate by it. 

Page 30 of 77 
 
(5)  
Where the Board decides to release the child after 
advice or admonition or after participation in group 
counselling or orders him to perform community service, 
necessary direction may also be issued by the Board to the 
District Child Protection Unit for arranging such counselling 
and community service. 
(6)  
Where the Board decides to release the child in conflict 
with law on probation and place him under the care of the 
parent or the guardian or fit person, the person in whose 
custody the child is released may be required to submit a 
written undertaking in Form 8 for good behaviour and well-
being of the child for a maximum period of three years.  
(7)  
The Board may order the release of a child in conflict 
with law on execution of a personal bond without surety in 
Form 9.  
(8)  
In the event of placement of the child in a fit facility or 
special home, the Board shall consider that the fit facility or 
special home is located nearest to the place of residence of 
the child’s parent or guardian, except where it is not in the 
best interest of the child to do so.  
(9)  
The Board, where it releases a child on probation and 
places him under the care of parent or guardian or fit person 
or where the child is released on probation and placed under 
the care of fit facility, it may also order that the child be 
placed under the supervision of a Probation Officer who shall 

Page 31 of 77 
 
submit periodic reports in Form 10 and the period of such 
supervision shall be maximum of three years.  
(10)  Where it appears to the Board that the child has not 
complied with the probation conditions, it may order the 
child to be produced before it and may send the child to a 
special home or place of safety for the remaining period of 
supervision.  
(11)  In no case, the period of stay in the special home or the 
place of safety shall exceed the maximum period provided in 
clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 18 of the Act. 
  
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
Rule 13. Procedure in relation to Children’s Court and 
Monitoring Authorities.- 
(1)  
Upon receipt of preliminary assessment from the Board 
the Children’s Court may decide whether there is need for 
trial of the child as an adult or as a child and pass appropriate 
orders. 
(2)  
Where an appeal has been filed under sub-section (1) 
of section 101 of the Act against the order of the Board 
declaring the age of the child, the Children’s Court shall first 
decide the said appeal. 
(3)  
Where an appeal has been filed under sub-section (2) 
of section 101 of the Act against the finding of the preliminary 
assessment done by the Board, the Children’s Court shall first 
decide the appeal. 

Page 32 of 77 
 
(4)  
Where the appeal under sub-section (2) of section 101 
of the Act is disposed of by the Children’s Court on a finding 
that there is no need for trial of the child as an adult, it shall 
dispose of the same as per section 19 of the Act and these 
rules. 
(5)  
Where the appeal under sub-section (2) of section 101 
of the Act is disposed of by the Children’s Court on a finding 
that the child should be tried as an adult the Children’s Court 
shall call for the file of the case from the Board and dispose of 
the matter as per the provisions of the Act and these rules. 
(6)  
The Children’s Court shall record its reasons while 
arriving at a conclusion whether the child is to be treated as 
an adult or as a child. 
(7)  
Where the Children’s Court decides that there is no 
need for trial of the child as an adult, and that it shall decide 
the matter itself: 
(i)  
It may conduct the inquiry as if it were 
functioning as a Board and dispose of the matter in 
accordance with the provisions of the Act and these 
rules. 
(ii)  
The Children’s Court, while conducting the 
inquiry shall follow the procedure for trial in 
summons case under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973. 

Page 33 of 77 
 
(iii)  
The proceedings shall be conducted in 
camera and in a child friendly atmosphere, and 
there shall be no joint trial of a child alleged to be in 
conflict with law, with a person who is not a child. 
(iv)  
When 
witnesses 
are 
produced 
for 
examination the Children’s Court shall ensure that 
the inquiry is not conducted in the spirit of strict 
adversarial proceedings and it shall use the powers 
conferred by section 165 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 (1 of 1872). 
(v)  
While examining a child in conflict with law 
and recording his statement, the Children’s Court 
shall address the child in a child-friendly manner in 
order to put the child at ease and to encourage him 
to state the facts and circumstances without any fear, 
not only in respect of the offence which is alleged 
against the child, but also in respect of the home and 
social surroundings and the influence to which the 
child might have been subjected. 
(vi)  
The dispositional order passed by the 
Children’s Court shall necessarily include an 
individual care plan in Form 7 for the child in conflict 
with law concerned, prepared by a Probation 
Officer or Child Welfare Officer or recognized 

Page 34 of 77 
 
voluntary organisation on the basis of interaction 
with the child and his family, where possible. 
(vii)  
The Children’s Court, in such cases, may 
pass any orders as provided in sub-sections (1) and 
(2) of section 18 of the Act. 
(8) 
Where the Children’s Court decides that there is a 
need for trial of the child as an adult: 
(i)  
It shall follow the procedure prescribed by 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 of trial by 
sessions 
and 
maintaining 
a 
child 
friendly 
atmosphere. 
(ii)  
The final order passed by the Children’s 
Court shall necessarily include an individual care 
plan for the child as per Form 7 prepared by a 
Probation Officer or Child Welfare Officer or 
recognized voluntary organisation on the basis of 
interaction with the child and his family, where 
possible. 
(iii)  
Where the child has been found to be 
involved in the offence, the child may be sent to a 
place of safety till the age of twenty-one years. 
(iv)  
While the child remains at the place of 
safety, there shall be yearly review by the Probation 
Officer or the District Child Protection Unit or a 

Page 35 of 77 
 
social worker in Form 13 to evaluate the progress of 
the child and the reports shall be forwarded to the 
Children’s Court. 
(v)  
The Children’s Court may also direct the 
child to be produced before it periodically and at 
least once every three months for the purpose of 
assessing the progress made by the child and the 
facilities provided by the institution for the 
implementation of the individual care plan. 
(vi)  
When the child attains the age of twenty-one 
years and is yet to complete the term of stay, the 
Children’s Court shall: 
(a)  
interact with the child in order to 
evaluate whether the child has undergone 
reformative changes and if the child can be a 
contributing member of the society. 
(b)   
take into account the periodic reports 
of the progress of the child, prepared by the 
Probation Officer or the District Child Protection 
Unit or a social worker, if needed and further 
direct that institutional mechanism if inadequate 
be strengthened. 
(c) to (cd) 
 
xx 
 
xx 
 
 
(vii) 
 
 
 
xx 
 
xx” 

Page 36 of 77 
 
EXTRACT OF RELEVANT PROVISION OF PROTECTION 
OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES ACT, 2012 
“Section 28. Designation of Special Courts.— 
(1)  
For the purposes of providing a speedy trial, the State 
Government shall in consultation with the Chief Justice of the 
High Court, by notification in the Official Gazette, designate 
for each district, a Court of Session to be a Special Court to 
try the offences under the Act: 
  Provided that if a Court of Session is notified as a 
children's court under the Commissions for Protection of 
Child Rights Act, 2005 (4 of 2006) or a Special Court 
designated for similar purposes under any other law for the 
time being in force, then, such court shall be deemed to be a 
Special Court under this section. 
(2)  
While trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court 
shall also try an offence [other than the offence referred to in 
subsection (1)], with which the accused may, under the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) be charged at the 
same trial. 
(3)  
The 
Special 
Court 
constituted 
under 
this 
Act, 
notwithstanding anything in the Information Technology Act, 
2000 (21 of 2000) shall have jurisdiction to try offences under 
section 67B of that Act in so far as it relates to publication or 
transmission of sexually explicit material depicting children 

Page 37 of 77 
 
in any act, or conduct or manner or facilitates abuse of 
children online.” 
II 
WHETHER 
THE 
PERIOD 
PROVIDED 
FOR 
COMPLETION 
OF 
PRELIMINARY 
ASSESSMENT 
UNDER SECTION 14(3) OF THE ACT IS MANDATORY 
OR DIRECTORY. 
 
9. 
 
Section 15 of the Act enables the Board to make preliminary 
assessment into heinous offences where such an offence alleged to have 
been committed by a child between 16 and 18 years of age.  The 
preliminary assessment is to be conducted with regard to his mental and 
physical capacity to commit such an offence, ability to understand the 
consequences of the offence and the circumstances in which the offence 
was allegedly committed.  Proviso to the aforesaid section provides that 
for making such an assessment the Board may take assistance of an 
experienced psychologist or psycho-social worker or other experts.  
Explanation thereto provides that the process of preliminary assessment 
is not a trial but merely to assess the capacity of such a child to commit 
and understand the consequences of the alleged offence.  The 
importance of the assistance from the expert is even evident from 
Section 101(2) of the Act.  While considering the appeal against an order 

Page 38 of 77 
 
passed under Section 15, the appellate authority can also take assistance 
of experts other than those who assisted the Board. 
9.1 
 
The importance of the aforesaid provision was considered by 
this Court in Barun Chandra Thakur’s case (supra) where 
requirement of such assistance was held to be mandatory, even though 
the words used in proviso to Section 15(1) and Section 101(2) of the Act 
are ‘may’. 
9.2 
 
Section 14(3) of the Act provides that the preliminary 
assessment in terms of Section 15 is to be completed by the Board within 
a period of three months from the date of first production of the child 
before the Board. 
9.3 
 
In case the Board after preliminary assessment under Section 
15 of the Act comes to a conclusion that the trial of the CCL is to be 
conducted as an adult, then the Board shall transfer the records to the 
Children’s Court having jurisdiction. 
9.4 
 
The argument raised by learned counsel for the appellant 
was that the CCL was produced before the Board on 03.11.2021. The 
period of three months having expired on 02.02.2022, any order passed 

Page 39 of 77 
 
by the Board thereafter is non-est, and the trial of CCL cannot now be 
transferred to the Children’s Court. 
9.5 
 
What we need to consider is as to whether the timeline for 
the conclusion of inquiry as envisaged under Section 14 is mandatory or 
directory? 
9.6 
 
As per the scheme of Section 14 of the Act, sub-section (1) 
thereof provides that, when a CCL is produced before the Board, after 
holding inquiry, it may pass order in relation to such CCL as it deems fit 
under Section 17 and 18 of the Act. 
9.7 
 
Section 17 of the Act envisages the order regarding a child 
not found to be in conflict with the law. Whereas Section 18 (1) envisages 
an order passed in case a child is found to be in conflict with law. It 
includes child of the age of 16 years and above, who is involved in a 
heinous offence, but inquiry to be conducted by the Board. 
9.8 
 
Section 14(2) of the Act provides that the inquiry as 
envisaged under Section 14(1) thereof shall be completed within a 
period of four months from the date of first production of the child before 
the Board. The time is extendable by the Board for a maximum period of 
two months, for the reasons to be recorded. The consequences of non-

Page 40 of 77 
 
conclusion of any such inquiry have been provided in Section 14(4) of 
the Act, only with reference to petty offences. The aforesaid sub-section 
provides that if inquiry by the Board under sub-section (2) for petty 
offences remains inconclusive even after the extended period, the 
proceedings shall stand terminated. Proviso to the aforesaid sub-section 
provides that in case the Board requires further extension of time for 
completion of inquiry into serious and heinous offences, the same shall 
be granted by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or, as the case may be, the 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, for reasons to be recorded in writing.  
9.9 
 
Meaning thereby that as far as inquiry of CCL, as envisaged 
under Section 14(1) of the Act, by the Board for heinous offences is 
concerned, there is no deadline after which either the inquiry cannot be 
proceeded further or has to be terminated. 
9.10  
Now coming to the issue in hand. It is not in dispute that the 
CCL has allegedly committed a heinous offences. The argument is with 
reference to the period provided for the conclusion of preliminary 
assessment under Section 15 of the Act and passing of an order under 
Section 15(2) or 18(3) of the Act, namely as to whether the matter is to be 

Page 41 of 77 
 
enquired into by the Board or is to be transferred to the Children’s Court 
for trial of the CCL as an adult. 
9.11  
We may add here that apparently the placement of Section 
18(3) does not seem to be appropriate. Sub-sections (1) and (2) of 
Section 18 deal with final orders to be passed by the Board on inquiry 
against the CCL, whereas sub-section (3) envisages passing of an order 
by the Board as to whether the trial of CCL is to be conducted by the 
Children’s Court in terms of preliminary assessment, as envisaged in 
Section 15 thereof. Passing of such an order could very well be placed in 
Section 15 itself after sub-section (2) thereof. 
9.12  
The inquiry as envisaged in Section 15(1) of the Act enables 
the Board to take assistance from experienced psychologists or psycho-
social workers or other experts. The proviso has nexus with the object 
sought to be achieved. The Act deals with the CCL. The preliminary 
assessment as envisaged in Section 15 has large ramifications, namely, 
as to whether inquiry against the CCL is to be conducted by the Board, 
where the final punishment, which could be inflicted is lighter or the trial 
is to be conducted by the Children’s Court treating the CCL as an adult, 
where the punishment could be stringent. 

Page 42 of 77 
 
9.13  
As noticed earlier, the preliminary assessment into the 
heinous offence by the Board in terms of Section 15(1) of the Act has to 
be concluded within a period of three months in terms of Section 14(3) of 
the Act.  The Act as such does not provide for any extension of time and 
also does not lay down the consequence of non-compilation of inquiry 
within the time permissible.  In the absence thereof the provision 
prescribing time limit of completion of inquiry cannot be held to be 
mandatory.  The intention of the legislature with reference to serious or 
heinous offences is also available from the language of Section 14 of the 
Act which itself provides for further extension of time for completion of 
inquiry by the Board to be granted by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate for the reasons to be recorded in writing.  
It is in addition to two months’ extension which the Board itself can grant.  
9.14  
As in the process of preliminary inquiry there is involvement 
of many persons, namely, the investigating officer, the experts whose 
opinion is to be obtained, and thereafter the proceedings before the 
Board, where for different reasons any of the party may be able to delay 
the proceedings, in our opinion the time so provided in Section 14(3) 
cannot be held to be mandatory, as no consequences of failure have 

Page 43 of 77 
 
been provided as is there in case of enquiry into petty offences in terms 
of Section 14(4) of the Act. If we see the facts of the case in hand, the 
investigating officer had taken about two months’ time in getting the 
report from the NIMHANS. 
9.15  
Where consequences for default for a prescribed period in a 
Statute are not mentioned, the same cannot be held to be mandatory. 
For this purpose, reference can be made to the following decisions of 
this Court.  
9.16  
This Court in Topline Shoes Ltd vs Corporation Bank17 
while interpretating Section 13(2)(a) of the repealed Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986 prescribing time limit for filing reply to the 
complaint, held the same to be directory in nature. Relevant para 11 
thereof is extracted below: 
“11.  
We have already noticed that the provision as 
contained under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 13 is 
procedural in nature. It is also clear that with a view to 
achieve the object of the enactment, that there may be 
speedy disposal of such cases, that it has been provided that 
reply is to be filed within 30 days and the extension of time 
may not exceed 15 days. This provision envisages that 
 
17 (2002) 6 SCC 33: 2002 INSC 287: (2002) 3 SCR 1167 

Page 44 of 77 
 
proceedings may not be prolonged for a very long time 
without the opposite party having filed his reply. No penal 
consequences have however been provided in case 
extension of time exceeds 15 days. Therefore, it could not be 
said that any substantive right accrued in favour of the 
appellant or there was any kind of bar of limitation in filing of 
the reply within extended time though beyond 45 days in all. 
The reply is not necessarily to be rejected. All facts and 
circumstances of the case must be taken into account. The 
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act also provides 
that the principles of natural justice have also to be kept in 
mind.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
9.17  
This Court in Kailash vs Nanhku and Others 18  while 
interpretating Order VIII Rule 1 CPC prescribing time limit for filing 
written statement, held the same to be directory in nature. Relevant 
paras 30 and 46 thereof are extracted below: 
“30.  
It is also to be noted that though the power of the 
court under the proviso appended to Rule 1 Order 8 is 
circumscribed by the words “shall not be later than ninety 
days” but the consequences flowing from non-extension of 
time are not specifically provided for though they may be 
read in by necessary implication. Merely because a 
 
18 (2005) 4 SCC 480: 2005 INSC 186: (2005) 3 SCR 289 

Page 45 of 77 
 
provision of law is couched in a negative language implying 
mandatory character, the same is not without exceptions. The 
courts, when called upon to interpret the nature of the 
provision, may, keeping in view the entire context in which 
the provision came to be enacted, hold the same to be 
directory though worded in the negative form. 
 
 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
46. 
 
We sum up and briefly state our conclusions as 
under: 
(i) - (iii)  
 
xxxx 
(iv) 
 
The purpose of providing the time 
schedule for filing the written statement under 
Order 8 Rule 1 CPC is to expedite and not to 
scuttle the hearing. The provision spells out a 
disability on the defendant. It does not impose an 
embargo on the power of the court to extend the 
time. Though the language of the proviso to Rule 1 
Order 8 CPC is couched in negative form, it does 
not specify any penal consequences flowing from 
the non-compliance. The provision being in the 
domain of the procedural law, it has to be held 
directory and not mandatory. The power of the 
court to extend time for filing the written statement 
beyond the time schedule provided by Order 8 
Rule 1 CPC is not completely taken away. 

Page 46 of 77 
 
(v) 
 
Though Order 8 Rule 1 CPC is a part of 
procedural law and hence directory, keeping in 
view the need for expeditious trial of civil causes 
which 
persuaded 
Parliament 
to 
enact 
the 
provision in its present form, it is held that 
ordinarily the time schedule contained in the 
provision is to be followed as a rule and departure 
therefrom would be by way of exception. A prayer 
for extension of time made by the defendant shall 
not be granted just as a matter of routine and 
merely for the asking, more so when the period of 
90 days has expired. Extension of time may be 
allowed by way of an exception, for reasons to be 
assigned by the defendant and also be placed on 
record in writing, howsoever briefly, by the court 
on its being satisfied. Extension of time may be 
allowed if it is needed to be given for 
circumstances which are exceptional, occasioned 
by reasons beyond the control of the defendant 
and grave injustice would be occasioned if the 
time was not extended. Costs may be imposed 
and affidavit or documents in support of the 
grounds pleaded by the defendant for extension 
of time may be demanded, depending on the facts 
and circumstances of a given case.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

Page 47 of 77 
 
9.18  
This Court in State of Bihar and Others vs Bihar Rajya 
Bhumi Vikas Bank Samiti 19  while section 34 (5) and (6) of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 held the period prescribed in 
sub-section (6) to be directory. The relevant paras 23, 25 and 26 are 
extracted below: 
“23.  
It will be seen from this provision that, unlike 
Sections 34(5) and (6), if an award is made beyond the 
stipulated or extended period contained in the section, the 
consequence of the mandate of the arbitrator being 
terminated is expressly provided. This provision is in stark 
contrast to Sections 34(5) and (6) where, as has been stated 
hereinabove, if the period for deciding the application under 
Section 34 has elapsed, no consequence is provided. This is 
one more indicator that the same Amendment Act, when it 
provided time periods in different situations, did so intending 
different consequences. 
  
 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
25. 
 
We come now to some of the High Court 
judgments. The High Courts of Patna [Bihar Rajya Bhumi 
Vikas Bank Samiti v. State of Bihar, 2016 SCC OnLine Pat 
10104], Kerala [Shamsudeen v. Shreeram Transport Finance 
Co. Ltd., 2016 SCC OnLine Ker 23728], Himachal Pradesh 
[Madhava Hytech Engineers (P) Ltd. v. Executive Engineers, 
 
19 (2018) 9 SCC 472: 2018 INSC 648: (2018) 7 SCR 1147 

Page 48 of 77 
 
2017 SCC OnLine HP 2212], Delhi [Machine Tool India Ltd. v. 
Splendor Buildwell (P) Ltd., 2018 SCC OnLine Del 9551], and 
Gauhati [Union of India v. Durga Krishna Store (P) Ltd., 2018 
SCC OnLine Gau 907] have all taken the view that Section 
34(5) is mandatory in nature. What is strongly relied upon is 
the object sought to be achieved by the provision together 
with the mandatory nature of the language used in Section 
34(5). Equally, analogies with Section 80 CPC have been 
drawn to reach the same result. On the other hand, in Global 
Aviation Services (P) Ltd. v. Airport Authority of India [Global 
Aviation Services (P) Ltd. v. Airport Authority of India, 2018 
SCC OnLine Bom 233] , the Bombay High Court, in answering 
Question 4 posed by it, held, following some of our 
judgments, that the provision is directory, largely because no 
consequence has been provided for breach of the time-limit 
specified. When faced with the argument that the object of 
the provision would be rendered otiose if it were to be 
construed as directory, the learned Single Judge of the 
Bombay High Court held as under: (SCC OnLine Bom para 
133) 
“133.  
 
Insofar as the submission of the 
learned counsel for the respondent that if 
Section 34(5) is considered as directory, the 
entire purpose of the amendments would be 
rendered otiose is concerned, in my view, there 
is no merit in this submission made by the 

Page 49 of 77 
 
learned counsel for the respondent. Since there 
is no consequence provided in the said 
provision in case of non-compliance thereof, the 
said 
provision 
cannot 
be 
considered 
as 
mandatory. The purpose of avoiding any delay 
in proceeding with the matter expeditiously is 
already served by insertion of appropriate rule 
in the Bombay High Court (Original Side) Rules. 
The Court can always direct the petitioner to 
issue notice along with papers and proceedings 
upon other party before the matter is heard by 
the Court for admission as well as for final 
hearing. The vested rights of a party to 
challenge an award under Section 34 cannot be 
taken away for non-compliance of issuance of 
prior notice before filing of the arbitration 
petition.” 
The aforesaid judgment has been followed by recent 
judgments of the High Courts of Bombay [Maharashtra State 
Road 
Development 
Corpn. 
Ltd. 
v. 
Simplex 
Gayatri 
Consortium, 2018 SCC OnLine Bom 805] and Calcutta [Srei 
Infrastructure 
Finance 
Ltd. 
v. 
Candor 
Gurgaon 
Two 
Developers and Projects (P) Ltd., 2018 SCC OnLine Cal 
5606]. 

Page 50 of 77 
 
26.   
We are of the opinion that the view propounded 
by the High Courts of Bombay and Calcutta represents the 
correct state of the law. However, we may add that it shall be 
the endeavour of every court in which a Section 34 
application is filed, to stick to the time-limit of one year from 
the date of service of notice to the opposite party by the 
applicant, or by the Court, as the case may be. In case the 
Court issues notice after the period mentioned in Section 
34(3) has elapsed, every court shall endeavour to dispose of 
the Section 34 application within a period of one year from 
the date of filing of the said application, similar to what has 
been provided in Section 14 of the Commercial Courts, 
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of 
High Courts Act, 2015. This will give effect to the object 
sought to be achieved by adding Section 13(6) by the 2015 
Amendment Act.” 
 
 
                                                       
                                                                 (emphasis supplied) 
9.19  
This Court in C. Bright vs District and Others 20 while 
interpretating the nature of section 14 of the Securitisation and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest 
Act, 2002 held the period prescribed therein mandating the District 
Magistrate to deliver possession of a secured asset within 30 days, 
 
20 (2021) 2 SCC 392: 2020 INSC 633: (2020) 7 SCR 997 

Page 51 of 77 
 
extendable to an aggregate of 60 days, to be directory in nature. The 
relevant paras 8 and 11 are extracted below: 
“8. 
 
A well-settled rule of interpretation of the statutes 
is that the use of the word “shall” in a statute, does not 
necessarily mean that in every case it is mandatory that 
unless the words of the statute are literally followed, the 
proceeding or the outcome of the proceeding, would be 
invalid. It is not always correct to say that if the word “may” 
has been used, the statute is only permissive or directory in 
the sense that non-compliance with those provisions will not 
render the proceeding invalid [State of U.P. v. Manbodhan 
Lal Srivastava, AIR 1957 SC 912] and that when a statute uses 
the word “shall”, prima facie, it is mandatory, but the Court 
may ascertain the real intention of the legislature by carefully 
attending to the whole scope of the statute [State of U.P. v. 
Babu Ram Upadhya, AIR 1961 SC 751]. The principle of literal 
construction of the statute alone in all circumstances without 
examining the context and scheme of the statute may not 
serve the purpose of the statute [RBI v. Peerless General 
Finance & Investment Co. Ltd., (1987) 1 SCC 424]. 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
11.   
In a judgment reported as Remington Rand of 
India Ltd. v. Workmen [Remington Rand of India Ltd. v. 
Workmen, AIR 1968 SC 224], Section 17 of the Industrial 

Page 52 of 77 
 
Disputes Act, 1947 came up for consideration. The argument 
raised was that the time-limit of 30 days of publication of 
award by the Labour Court is mandatory. This Court held that 
though Section 17 is mandatory, the time-limit to publish the 
award within 30 days is directory inter alia for the reason that 
the non-publication of the award within the period of thirty 
days does not entail any penalty.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
9.20  
As against above, where consequences of non-compliance 
within the period prescribed for anything to be done in the statute have 
been mentioned, the same was held to be mandatory by this Court in 
SCG Contracts (India) (P) Ltd. v. K.S. Chamankar Infrastructure (P) 
Ltd.21 It was with reference to Order VIII Rule 1 CPC as amended for 
suits relating to commercial disputes in terms of Commercial Division 
and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Act, 2015. Relevant 
paras of the judgment are extracted hereinbelow: 
“10.  
Several High Court Judgments on the amended 
Order 8 Rule 1 have now held that given the consequence of 
non-filing of written statement, the amended provisions of the 
CPC will have to be held to be mandatory.  See Oku Tech (P) 
Ltd. v. Sangeet Agarwal, 2016 SCC OnLine Del 6601 by a 
 
21 (2019) 12 SCC 210: 2019 INSC 187: (2019) 3 SCR 1050  

Page 53 of 77 
 
learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court dated 11-8-2016 
in CS (OS) No.3390 of 2015 as followed by several other 
judgments including a judgment of the Delhi High Court in 
Maja Cosmetics v. Oasis Commercial (P) Ltd., 2018 SCC 
OnLine Del 6698. 
11. 
 
We are of the view that the view taken by the 
Delhi High Court in these judgments is correct in view of the 
fact that the consequence of forfeiting a right to file the 
written statement; non-extension of any further time; and the 
fact that the Court shall not allow the written statement to be 
taken on record all points to the fact that the earlier law on 
Order 8 Rule 1 on the filing of written statement under Order 
8 Rule 1 has now been set at naught.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
9.21  
The judgment of this Court in Barun Chandra Thakur’s 
case (supra) does not come to the rescue of the appellant. This Court in 
the aforesaid judgment had only noticed the scheme of the Act in paras 
59 and 60 and concluded that the conclusion of the inquiry and trials 
under Act should be expeditious, is the scheme of the Act. 
9.22  
Hence, we are of the opinion that the time provided in 
Section 14(2) of the Act to conduct inquiry is not mandatory but 
directory.  The time so provided in Section 14(3) can be extended by the 

Page 54 of 77 
 
Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, as the 
case may be, for the reasons to be recorded in writing. 
9.23  
After holding that the period as provided for under Section 
14(3) for completion of preliminary assessment is not mandatory, what 
further? We deem it our duty to clarify the position further. For this 
purpose, the tools of interpretation as were used in Afcons 
Infrastructure Limited and Another vs Cherian Varkey Construction 
Company Private Limited and Others22 could be aptly used to clarify 
the position further. In the aforesaid case, the consideration before this 
Court was the interpretation of Section 89 CPC. (See: paragraphs 20   
and 21) 
9.24  
The rule of causus omissus i.e. ‘what has not been provided in 
the Statute cannot be supplied by the courts’ in the strict rule of 
interpretation.  However, there are certain exceptions thereto.  Para ‘19’ 
of the judgment of this Court in Surjit Singh Kalra vs. Union of India 
and Another23 throws light thereon.  The same is extracted below: 
“19.    
True it is not permissible to read words in a 
statute which are not there, but “where the alternative lies 
 
22(2010) 8 SCC 24: 2010 INSC 431: (2010) 8 SCR 1053  
23 (1991) 2 SCC 87: 1991 INSC 36: (1991) 1 SCR 364 

Page 55 of 77 
 
between either supplying by implication words which appear 
to have been accidentally omitted, or adopting a construction 
which deprives certain existing words of all meaning, it is 
permissible to supply the words” (Craies Statute Law, 7th 
edn., p.109).  Similar are the observations in Hameedia 
Hardware Stores v. B. Mohan Lal Sowcar, (1988) 2 SCC 513, 
524-25 where it was observed that the court construing a 
provision should not easily read into it words which have not 
been expressly enacted but having regard to the context in 
which  a provision appears and the object of the statute in 
which the said provision is enacted the court should construe 
it in a harmonious way to make it meaningful.  An attempt 
must always be made so to reconcile the relevant provisions 
as to advance the remedy intended by the statute. (See: 
Sirajul Haq Khan v. Sunni Central Board of Waqf, 1959 SCR 
1287, 1299:AIR 1959 SC 198)” 
(emphasis supplied) 
9.25  
The issue was thereafter considered by this Court in Rajbir 
Singh Dalal (Dr.) vs. Chaudhari Devi Lal University, Sirsa and 
Another24. In the aforesaid case this Court observed as: ‘where the 
alternative lies between either supplying by implication words which 
appear to have been accidentally omitted, or adopting a strict construction 
which leads to absurdity or deprives certain existing words of all meaning, 
 
24 (2008) 9 SCC 284: 2008 INSC 913: (2008) 11 SCR 992 

Page 56 of 77 
 
and in this situation it is permissible to supply the words (vide Principles of 
Statutory Interpretation by Justice G.P. Singh, 9th Edn., pp.71-76)’.  This 
Court also considered the traditional principles of interpretation known 
as the ‘Mimansa rules of interpretation’.  The issue under consideration 
in the aforesaid case was regarding requisite academic qualification for 
appointment to the post of Reader in the University in Public 
Administration.  Applying the tools of interpretation, this Court opined 
that ‘relevant subject’ should be inserted in the qualification required for 
the post of Reader after the words ‘at the Masters degree level’ to give 
the rules a purposive interpretation by filling in the gap. 
9.26  
The same principles were followed by this Court in Central 
Bureau of Investigation, Bank Securities and Fraud Cell vs. Ramesh 
Gelli and Others25. 
9.27  
In our opinion, the guidance as is evident from sub-section 
(4) of section 14 of the Act enabling the Chief Judicial Magistrate or 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate to extend the period of inquiry as 
envisaged under Section 14(1), shall apply for extension of period as 
envisaged in sub-section (3) also. Such an extension can be granted for 
 
25 (2016) 3 SCC 788: 2016 INSC 134: (2016) 1 SCR 762 

Page 57 of 77 
 
a limited period for the reasons to be recorded in writing. While 
considering the prayer for extension of time, the delay in receipt of 
opinion of the experts shall be a relevant factor. This shall be in the spirit 
of the Act and giving the same a purposive meaning. 
9.28  
We approve the views expressed by the High Court of 
Madhya Pradesh in Bhola vs State of Madhya Pradesh26 and the High 
Court in Delhi in CCL vs State (NCT) of Delhi27 who while dealing with 
the provisions of section 14 of the Act have held that the time period 
prescribed for completion of the preliminary assessment is not 
mandatory but merely directory in nature. We also approve the views 
expressed by the High Court of the Punjab and Haryana in Neeraj and 
Others vs State of Haryana28 and by the High Court of Delhi in X 
(Through his Elder Brother) vs State29 who also expressed similar 
views while dealing with the pari materia provisions of the repealed 
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000. 
 
 
26 2019 SCC OnLine MP 521 
27 2023 SCC OnLine Del 5063 
28 2005 SCC OnLine P&H 611 
29 2019 SCC OnLine Del 11164 

Page 58 of 77 
 
III 
EXERCISE OF REVISIONAL POWER BY THE HIGH 
COURT 
10. 
 
The order under challenge in the present appeal was passed 
by the High Court in revision filed by the complainant, impugning the 
order dated 10.04.2023 passed by the Board vide which the application 
filed by her under section 19 of the Act for termination of proceedings 
before the Board and transferring the case to the Children’s Court for 
trial, was rejected. It was for the reason that the order passed by the 
Principal Magistrate on 05.04.2022 was final in terms of Section 7(4) of 
the Act, as no majority opinion could have been given. 
10.1  
In terms of the provision of law, the CCL could have 
grievance against that order and availed of his remedy against the same 
but, the proceedings were allowed to be continued further. Lesser said 
the better as to how two members of the Board without the Principal 
Magistrate being there had conducted the proceedings taking a 
different view in the matter. It is relevant to note that when subsequent 
order was passed by two members of the Board on 12.04.2022, the 
Principal Magistrate had already been transferred, as is evident from 
impugned order of the High Court (para 19).  In fact, the order passed 
by the two members of the Board on 12.04.2022 directing inquiry in the 

Page 59 of 77 
 
case by the Board was non-est in the eyes of law, if considered strictly in 
terms of Section 7(4) of the Act. From various orders passed by the 
Board, it is evident that the inquiry could not proceed further either on 
account of the absence of the Presiding Officer or APP (Public 
Prosecutor) or the witnesses summoned. At that stage, an application 
was moved by the complainant for termination of proceedings before 
the Board and transferring the matter to the Children’s Court, to which 
objections were filed by the appellant. The Board vide order dated 
10.04.2023 dismissed the application holding that the complainant had a 
right of appeal against the order dated 12.04.2022, which could have 
been availed and the Board does not have any power to review its order. 
The aforesaid order was challenged by the complainant before the High 
Court by filing the Revision Petition invoking power under Section 397 
read with Section 399 Cr.P.C. It is the order passed in the aforesaid 
petition which is impugned before this Court. 
10.2  
Firstly, the issue is mentioning of Section 397 read with 
Section 399 Cr. P.C for filing revision petition before the High Court and 
about its maintainability on that account. Nothing hinges on that, as it 
was mere mentioning of a wrong section in the petition. The High Court 

Page 60 of 77 
 
otherwise has the power to deal with the subject-matter. Section 102 of 
the Act enables the High Court to exercise its revisional powers with 
reference to any order or proceeding by the Board or the Children’s 
Court. Hence, on that account we do not find that the revision should 
have been dismissed. 
10.3  
Another argument raised by learned counsel for the 
appellant was that there being remedy of appeal available with the 
complainant against the order dated 12.04.2024 vide which two 
members of the Board had directed inquiry into the offence allegedly 
committed by CCL by the Board. In our opinion, even though such a 
remedy may be available to the complainant which should normally be 
availed, but what is evident from the facts of the case is that there was an 
earlier order passed by the Principal Magistrate on 05.04.2022, which 
was final regarding conduct of trial of the CCL by the Children’s Court, 
still subsequently two members of the Board without the Principal 
Magistrate being there passed an order on 12.04.2022 directing inquiry 
into the offence by the Board. In fact, the subsequent order was totally 
non-est. Even if in such a situation the aforesaid order was not 

Page 61 of 77 
 
challenged by availing the remedy of appeal, in our opinion the revision 
under Section 102 of the Act cannot be said to be not maintainable. 
10.4  
Firstly, there is no time limit provided for filing a revision 
therein, and secondly it could be on an application filed by any of the 
parties. The High Court can exercise its revisional powers for satisfying 
itself as to the legality or propriety of any such order and may pass such 
order in relation thereto as it thinks fit. Besides the legality of the order 
dated 12.04.2022, the case in hand is such where even the propriety of 
the proceeding was also in question. The proceedings before the Board 
could not continue after the passing of the order dated 05.04.2022, in 
terms of Section 7(4) of the Act.  
10.5  
Hence, non-availment of the remedy of appeal by the 
complainant in such a situation cannot be held to be fatal. We may also 
add here that even the appellant could have availed the remedy of 
appeal against the order dated 05.04.2022, but he thought of continuing 
before the Board in a non-est proceeding. 
 
 

Page 62 of 77 
 
IV 
ANOMALY IN SECTION 101 OF THE JUVENILE 
JUSTICE 
(CARE 
AND 
PROTECTION 
OF 
CHILDREN) ACT, 2015 
 
(A) REGARDING 
THE 
TERMS 
USED 
AS 
‘CHILDREN’S 
COURT’ 
AND 
‘COURT 
OF 
SESSIONS’ 
 
11. 
 
Section 101 of the Act provides for appeal against various 
orders as provided therein. Sub-section (1) thereof provides that any 
person aggrieved by an order made by the Committee or the Board 
under the Act may within 30 days from the date of such order prefer an 
appeal to the Children’s Court, with an exception that against decision 
of the Committee relating to foster care and sponsorship care the appeal 
shall lie to the District Magistrate. The term ‘Committee’ has been 
defined in Section 2(22) of the Act to mean ‘Child Welfare Committee’ 
constituted under Section 27 thereof.  
The proviso to sub-section (1) of section 101 provides that the 
Court of Sessions or District Magistrate, as the case may be, may 
entertain the appeal after expiry of the period of 30 days in case 
sufficient cause is shown for the delay in filing. 
11.1  
Sub-section (2) of Section 101 provides that an appeal against 
the order passed by the Board after making preliminary assessment 

Page 63 of 77 
 
under Section 15 of the Act shall lie before the Court of  
Sessons. While deciding the appeal, the Court can take assistance of 
experienced psychologists and medical specialists, other than those 
whose assistance was taken by the Board while passing the order 
impugned.  It shows independent examination of the issue.  Sub-section 
(4) provides that, no second appeal will be maintainable from the order 
passed by the Court of Sessions. In Barun Chandra Thakur’s case 
(supra) the provisions have been held to be mandatory. 
11.2  
Some anomalies are evident in the aforesaid proviso, as 
pointed out by the learned counsel for the parties at the time of hearing. 
Their contention was that the anomalies should also be addressed, so as 
to streamline the procedure in future. We also think in the same 
direction, keeping in view the spirit of law. 
11.3  
The term Court of Sessions as such has not been defined in 
the Act. The trial of CCL, who is of the age of 16 years or above and is 
involved in a heinous offence is to be conducted by the Children’s 
Court, treating him as an adult.  
11.4  
‘Children’s Court’ has been defined in the Act in Section 
2(20) to mean the Court established under the 2005 Act or a Special 

Page 64 of 77 
 
Court established under the 2012 Act. Where such Courts are not 
existing, the Court of Sessions shall have jurisdiction to try the offence 
under the Act. Meaning thereby the Presiding Officer of the Children’s 
Court and the Court of Sessions have been put in same bracket. There is 
no doubt with the proposition that a Sessions Judge would include an 
Additional Sessions Judge as well.   
11.5  
Section 25 of the 2005 Act provides that for providing speedy 
trial of offences against children or violation of child rights, the State 
Government in concurrence with the Chief Justice of the High Court by 
notification specify at least a Court in the State or for each district a 
Court of Sessions to be a Children’s Court. Meaning thereby the Special 
Court under the 2005 Act is at the level of the Sessions Court. 
11.6  
Section 101(1) of the Act deals with filing of appeals against 
certain orders passed by the Board or the Committee before the 
Children’s Court, as the case may be. The proviso to the aforesaid sub-
section provides that in case there is any delay in filing the appeal, the 
power of condonation has been vested with the Court of Sessions. The 
word ‘Children’s Court’ is not mentioned, though appeal is maintainable 
before Children’s Court. 

Page 65 of 77 
 
11.7  
Sub-section (2) of Section 101 of the Act provides for an 
appeal against an order passed by the Board under Section 15 of the 
Act.  The appellate authority is stated to be Court of Sessions. 
11.8  
Rule 13 of the 2016 Rules deals with the procedure in relation 
to Children’s Court and Monitoring Authorities.  Sub-rules (3) and (4) 
thereof which deal with appeal filed under Section 101(2) of the Act refer 
the appellate authority as the ‘Children’s Court’ though in Section 101(2) 
of the Act appeal is stated to be maintainable before the Court of 
Sessions.  From the above provision also, it is evident that the words 
‘Court of Sessions’ and the ‘Children’s Court’ have been used 
interchangeably. 
12. 
 
Section 102 of the Act provides for revisional power of the 
High Court.  This again talks of calling for records of any proceedings in 
which a Committee or a Board or Children’s Court or Court has passed 
an order. It does not talk of exercise of revisional power against the 
order passed by the Sessions Court.  To put the record straight, it is 
added that the term ‘court’ has been defined in the Act in Section 2(23) 
to mean a civil court, which has jurisdiction in matters of adoption and 

Page 66 of 77 
 
guardianship and may include the District Court, Family Court and City 
Civil Courts.  
12.1  
Similarly, sub-section (2) provides that against an order 
passed by the Board after preliminary assessment under Section 15 of 
the Act, the appeal is maintainable before the Court of Sessions. The 
Board is headed by the Principal Magistrate. Here, the word Children’s 
Court is not mentioned.   
12.2  
From a conjoint reading of the aforesaid provisions of the Act 
and the 2016 Rules, in our opinion, wherever words ‘Children’s Court’ or 
the ‘Sessions Court’ are mentioned both should be read in alternative.  
In the sense where Children’s Court is available, even if the appeal is 
said to be maintainable before the Sessions Court, it has to be 
considered by the Children's Court.  Whereas where no Children’s 
Court is available, the power is to be exercised by the Sessions Court. 
(B) TIME FOR FILING APPEAL AGAINST ORDER 
OF THE BOARD UNDER SECTION 15 OF THE 
ACT 
13. 
 
Though, the right of appeal has been provided in Section 
15(2) and Section 101(2) of the Act against an order passed under 
Section 18(3) after preliminary assessment under Section 15 of the Act, 

Page 67 of 77 
 
however, neither any time has been fixed for filing the appeal nor any 
provision is provided for condonation of delay in case need be. 
13.1  
In our opinion, the same being an omission. In order to make 
the Act workable and putting timelines for exercise of statutory right of 
appeal which always is there, we deem it appropriate to fill up this gap, 
which otherwise does not go against the scheme of the Act. Hence, for 
the period for filing of appeal in Section 101(2), we take guidance from 
Section 101(1) of the Act.  The period provided for filing the appeal 
therein is 30 days and in case sufficient cause is shown the power to 
condone the delay has also been conferred on the appellate authority.  
Timeline has also been provided for decision of appeal. 
13.2  
Ordered accordingly. 
(C) REGARDING SECOND APPEAL 
14. 
 
In sub-section (4), it is provided that no second appeal shall 
lie from the order of Sessions Court. Sub-section (5) provides for appeal 
to the High Court against an order of Children’s Court, for this 
procedure of CrPC is applicable, as if the second appeal may lie against 
the order passed by the Children’s Court. High Court has also been 
conferred revisional powers under Section 102 of the Act. 

Page 68 of 77 
 
14.1  
The aforesaid provisions will also need examination in detail 
for seamless working of the provisions of the Act removing anomalies. 
However, as this is not the issue involved in the present appeal and no 
arguments have been addressed thereon, hence, we leave this issue 
open to be considered in some appropriate case. 
V 
VALIDITY OF ORDER PASSED BY THE BOARD ON 
05.04.2022 
15. 
 
In the case in hand, after receipt of the report dated 
01.02.2022 submitted by the Department of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, NIMHANS-DWCO, the arguments of learned counsel for the 
parties were heard by the Board and vide order dated 29.03.2022 the 
matter was kept for orders on 05.04.2022. On that day, the Principal 
Magistrate passed the order, after considering the preliminary 
assessment report and the social investigation report, that the CCL is to 
be tried by the Children’s Court as an adult. The records of the case 
were directed to be transferred to the Children’s Court, Bengaluru. 
When the file was put up before the member of the Board for signature, 
he recorded as under: 
“I am having a dissenting view to above said order. I will 
pass detailed order on next date of hearing.” 

Page 69 of 77 
 
15.1  
The matter was directed to be put up on 12.04.2022. On the 
next date, the Principal Magistrate being not there and another person 
having been appointed as a member of the Board, the arguments 
apparently were reheard by the two members of the Board in the 
absence of the Principal Magistrate, and it was directed that enquiry into 
the offence allegedly committed by the CCL is to be conducted by the 
Board. 
15.2  
Section 7 of the Act deals with the procedure in relation to the 
Board. Sub-Section 3 thereof provides that the Board may act 
notwithstanding absence of any member of the Board. No order passed 
by the Board shall be invalid by reason only of absence of any member 
during any stage of proceedings. The proviso thereto provides that at 
the time of final disposal of the case or making an order under Section 
18(3) of the Act, there shall be at least two members including the 
Principal Magistrate. 
15.3  
When the arguments in the matter were heard with reference 
to the order under Section 18(3) of the Act, and the order was reserved 
on 29.03.2022 the Board consisted of a Principal Magistrate and a 
Member. 

Page 70 of 77 
 
15.4  
Section 7(4) of the Act provides that in case there is any 
difference of opinion in the interim or the final disposal, the opinion of 
the majority shall prevail. Where there is no such majority, the opinion 
of the Principal Magistrate shall prevail. 
15.5  
A perusal of the record shows that after the order was 
reserved on 29.03.2022, the matter was listed on 05.04.2022 for orders. 
The Principal Magistrate recorded his opinion that the CCL is to be tried 
by the Children’s Court. The other member of the Board recorded his 
dissent though, no detailed reasons were given as such. In terms of 
Section 7(4) of the Act, the opinion of the majority is to prevail. The case 
in hand does not fall in that category, as the Board on that date consisted 
of the Principal Magistrate and a Member, and the Member had 
recorded his dissent. In such a situation the opinion of the Principal 
Magistrate will prevail. In the case in hand the order was signed by the 
Principal Magistrate.  Even if the other member of the Board had not 
signed the order and had merely mentioned that he had a dissenting 
view, without any reasons being recorded, the order of the Principal 
Magistrate will prevail. Needless to add that reasons in any order are 
‘heart and soul’ and are helpful for the next higher Court to examine the 

Page 71 of 77 
 
matter. The proceedings with reference to the opinion of the Board 
regarding inquiry or trial of the CCL, either by the Board or Children’s 
Court, stood culminated. Any further proceedings in that matter were 
non-est and without jurisdiction. Much less to say anything more about 
the same. The opinion of the High Court in that regard does not call for 
any interference. 
VI 
REMEDY OF APPEAL TO APPELLANT 
16. 
 
In our opinion, considering the facts of the case in hand, the 
appellant deserves to be granted that right.  
16.1  
Initially the application filed by the complainant was rejected 
by the Board.  Aggrieved against the same, the complainant preferred 
revision before the High Court.  The High Court decided the same 
merely on the issue of finality of the opinion of the Board.  It was in terms 
of Section 7(4) of the Act, which provides that where majority opinion is 
not possible, the opinion of the Principal Magistrate shall prevail.  An 
appeal is a valuable right. The arguments, if any, which the CCL may 
have against the order dated 05.04.2022 passed by the Board directing 
for his trial by the Children’s Court, have not been considered.  The 
impugned order only noticed as fact that the Board had formed opinion 

Page 72 of 77 
 
after considering the opinion received from NIMHANS. If scheme of the 
Act is considered, an appeal against order of the Board passed under 
Section 15 of the Act lies to the Court of Sessions. The appellate 
authority, to examine the issues, is entitled to get the assistance of 
experienced psychologists and medical specialists other than those 
whose assistance has been obtained by the Board. Hence, independent 
examination is envisaged. The said process has not been followed in the 
case in hand. We do not want to prejudice the rights of the parties in that 
regard. 
16.2  
Hence, we are of the opinion that the CCL can exercise his 
right of appeal against order dated 05.04.2022 passed by the Board 
within 10 days and appeal, if any filed, shall be decided by the appellate 
authority within two months thereafter. 
 
 
VII ADDITIONAL ISSUES  
17. 
 
Before parting with the judgment, we quote with approval 
para 25 of the impugned order passed by the High Court.  The same is 
extracted below: 
“25.  
One more point observed by this Court is that 
while signing the order sheet and also orders, the names of 
the Judicial Member as well as Non-judicial Members are not 

Page 73 of 77 
 
noted below their signatures. This is coming in the way of 
anyone knowing the names of the members who were 
present and who were absent. Therefore, only on the basis of 
signatures, this Court was able to distinguish as to who was 
the Non-Judicial Member present on 05.04.2022 and who was 
the third member who joined in expressing dissenting 
opinion on 12.04.2022. This Court is of the considered 
opinion that it would be appropriate to mention the names of 
the members below their signatures, which would also help 
the transparency in conduct of the said proceedings and put 
the members on guard about their roles played in the said 
proceedings.” 
17.1  
The High Court has noticed an important issue which arises 
in judicial and quasi-judicial proceedings throughout the country.  The 
Presiding Officers or Members of the Board, as the case in hand, or 
Tribunals do not mention their names when the order is passed.  As a 
result of which it becomes difficult to find out later on, as to who was 
presiding the Court or Board or Tribunal or was the member at the 
relevant point of time.  There may be many officers with the same name.  
Insofar as the judicial officers are concerned, unique I.D. numbers have 
been issued to them. 

Page 74 of 77 
 
17.2  
We expect that wherever lacking, in all orders passed by the 
Courts, Tribunals, Boards and the quasi-judicial authorities, the names of 
the Presiding Officers or the Members be specifically mentioned in the 
orders when signed, including the interim orders.  If there is any 
identification number given to the officers, the same can also be added.   
17.3  
The matter does not rest here. In many of the orders the 
presence of the parties and/or their counsels is not properly recorded. 
Further, it is not evident as to on whose behalf adjournment has been 
sought and granted.  It is very relevant fact to be considered at different 
stages of the case and also to find out as to who was the party delaying 
the matter.  At the time of grant of adjournment, it should specifically be 
mentioned as to the purpose therefor.  This may be helpful in imposition 
of costs also, finally once we shift to the real terms costs.  
VIII RELIEFS AND DIRECTIONS  
18. 
 
In view of our aforesaid discussions, the present appeal is 
disposed of with the following directions: 
(i) 
 
The provision of Section 14(3) of the Act, 
providing for the period of three months for completion of a 
preliminary assessment under Section 15 of the Act, is not 
mandatory.  The same is held to be directory.  The period can 

Page 75 of 77 
 
be extended, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, by 
the Chief Judicial Magistrate or, as the case may be, the Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate. 
(ii) 
 
The words ‘Children’s Court’ and ‘Court of 
Sessions’ in Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Act, 2015 and the 2016 Rules shall be read interchangeably. 
Primarily jurisdiction vests in the Children’s Court.  However, 
in the absence of constitution of such Children’s Court in the 
district, the power to be exercised under the Act is vested 
with the Court of Sessions. 
(iii)  
Appeal, under Section 101(2) of the Act against an 
order of the Board passed under Section 15 of the Act, can be 
filed within a period of 30 days.  The appellate court can 
entertain the appeal after the expiry of the aforesaid period, 
provided sufficient cause is shown.  Endeavour has to be 
made to decide any such appeal filed within a period of 30 
days. 
(iv) 
 
There is no error in exercise of revisional 
jurisdiction by the High Court in the present matter. 

Page 76 of 77 
 
(v) 
 
There is no error in the order dated 15.11.2023 
passed by the High Court dealing with the procedure as 
provided for under the Act in terms of Section 7(4) thereof.  
(vi)   
Order passed by the Board as signed by the 
Principal Magistrate on 05.04.2022 was final. However, the 
same is subject to right of appeal of the aggrieved party. The 
appellant shall have the right of appeal against the aforesaid 
order within a period of 10 days from today. The appellate 
authority shall make an endeavour to decide the same within 
a period of two months from the date of filing. 
(vii)  
In all the orders passed by the Courts, Tribunals, 
Boards and the Quasi-Judicial Authorities the names of the 
Presiding Officer and/or the Members who sign the orders 
shall be mentioned. In case any identification number has 
been given, the same can also be added.  
(viii)  
The Presiding Officers and/or Members while 
passing the order shall properly record presence of the 
parties and/or their counsels, the purpose for which the 

Page 77 of 77 
 
matter is being adjourned and the party on whose behalf the 
adjournment has been sought and granted.  
19. 
 
A copy of the judgment be sent to all the Registrar Generals 
of High Courts for further circulation amongst the Judicial Officers and 
the Members of the Juvenile Justice Boards, the Directors of the National 
Judicial Academy and the State Judicial Academies. 
 
……………….……………..J. 
 (C.T. RAVIKUMAR) 
 
 
……………….……………..J. 
(RAJESH BINDAL) 
 
New Delhi 
May 07, 2024.