2024 INSC 36
 
1
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9695 OF 2013 
 
ASMA LATEEF & ANR.                                          …APPELLANTS 
 
VS. 
 
SHABBIR AHMAD & ORS.                                  …RESPONDENTS 
 
J U D G M E N T 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J. 
The Challenge 
1. 
Respondents 1 to 3 had filed an objection under section 47 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (“CPC”, hereafter) in an execution 
application filed before the Executing Court by the appellants. It was 
urged, based on the case pleaded therein, that the decree put to 
execution was inexecutable. The Executing Court, on 19th March, 
2008, allowed the objections of the respondents 1 to 3, resulting in 
dismissal of the execution application.  
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2024.01.12
16:43:20 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
2
2. 
A revision was carried by the appellants from the order dated 19th 
March, 2008 before the Revisional Court which, vide its order dated 
21st February, 2009, dismissed the objection filed by the respondents 
1 to 3 and directed the Executing Court to proceed with the execution 
of the decree whilst treating such objection as non-maintainable.  
3. 
The revisional order dated 21st February, 2009 was challenged by the 
respondents 1 to 3 in an application under Article 227 of the 
Constitution1 before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad (“High 
Court”, hereafter). The High Court, by its judgment and order dated 
4th February, 2011, quashed the order passed by the Revisional Court 
and relegated the parties to the remedy of having their rights, in 
respect of the suit property, adjudicated by the appropriate forum. 
4. 
This appeal, by special leave, registers a challenge to the said 
judgment and order of the High Court. 
Factual Conspectus 
5. 
Having regard to the nature and extent of controversy raised at the 
stage of execution, a decision on this appeal does not necessitate 
noting the facts triggering it and the rival contentions in great depth; 
however, we propose to briefly narrate the essential facts and 
submissions advanced by learned counsel for the parties before 
recording our conclusions.  
6. 
The relevant facts, shorn of unnecessary details, are noticed 
hereunder: 
 
1 Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 15236 of 2009 

 
3
a. Appellants claimed that their great-grandmother, one Khatoon 
Jannat Bibi, had orally gifted them a certain property (“suit 
property”, hereafter) on 16th August, 1988 whereafter a 
memorandum recording the same was also executed before the 
relevant tehsildar and that they were in peaceful possession of 
the same continuously. 
b. Appellants, as plaintiffs, through their power of attorney holder, 
instituted a civil suit2 (“Suit”, hereafter) before the Trial Court 
under section 38 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 ("Specific Relief 
Act”, hereafter) against three defendants - a son of Khatoon 
Jannat Bibi named Asad Ullah Kazmi [defendant no. 1] 
(“Kazmi”, hereafter), Kazmi’s son Samiullah [defendant no. 2] 
and one purported caretaker, Mr. Ram Chandra Yadav 
[defendant no. 3] in respect of the suit property, more 
particularly described in the plaint. Appellants prayed for a 
permanent injunction against the three defendants from 
interfering with the appellants’ peaceful possession of the suit 
property. 
c. Kazmi, sometime in 1990, initiated proceedings for declaration 
of rights before the Sub-Divisional Officer under section 229B 
of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 
1950 (“UPZA & LR Act”, hereafter); the said proceedings were, 
 
2 Original Suit No. 58 of 1990 

 
4
however, dismissed on 27th February, 1999 [4 (four) years after 
his death].  
d. In the Suit, an application for interim injunction was filed by 
the appellants. The Trial Court on 31st May, 1990, allowed the 
application and directed Kazmi and Samiullah to maintain 
status quo with regard to the suit property, and directed them 
not to interfere with the appellants’ peaceful possession 
thereof. 
e. Kazmi filed his written statement in the Suit on 5th December, 
1990 where he inter alia contended that the Suit was barred by 
section 331 of the UPZA & LR Act and not maintainable before 
a civil court since the suit property was bhoomidhari land. It 
was further averred that the Suit was barred by section 41(h) 
of the Specific Relief Act; he also contended that his son 
Samiullah, the defendant no.2, had no concern with the suit 
property as long as his father (Kazmi) was alive and, hence, 
Samiullah had been wrongly impleaded as the defendant no.2. 
Kazmi also denied that Khatoon Jannat Bibi had the right to 
make any oral gift; inasmuch as she had only a life interest in 
the property, after her demise, the same devolved upon him 
exclusively.  
f. It is to be noted that no written statement was filed on behalf 
of the other two defendants.  

 
5
g. Upon the appellants moving an application under Rules 5 and 
10 of Order VIII, CPC for pronouncement of judgment against 
Samiullah, the same was allowed by the Trial Court by its order 
dated 5th August, 19913, to which we propose to advert in 
course of our analysis. 
h. Subsequently, the Trial Court, on 10th October, 1991, framed 11 
(eleven) issues for consideration in the Suit, of which the very 
first one was on its competency to try the Suit.  
i. Kazmi passed away on 15th July, 1995, after which his sons, 
Samiullah and Fariduddin [respondents 4 and 5 herein] 
transferred the suit property to the respondents 1 to 3 
(“Purchasers”, hereafter) vide a sale deed dated 3rd November, 
1997. The Suit against Kazmi remained pending even after his 
demise, and none of his other heirs or legal representatives 
were brought on record as substituted defendants. The Suit 
against Kazmi was finally dismissed as abated on 27th April, 
2009.  
j. Appellants, as purported decree holders, filed an execution 
application4 before the Executing Court, on 16th December, 
1997, praying that respondents 4 and 5 be punished for 
violating the order dated 5th August, 1991 and that the sale 
 
3 The decree was signed on 11th November, 1991. 
4 Execution Application No. 58 of 1997 

 
6
deed dated 3rd November, 1997 in favour of the Purchasers be 
declared invalid.  
k. The Executing Court, vide an interim order passed on 16th 
January, 1998, restrained the Purchasers from interfering in 
any manner with the suit property.   
l. Thereupon, the Purchasers filed their objection under section 
47, CPC wherein they submitted, inter alia, that the order dated 
5th August, 1991 was neither a judgment nor a decree and 
could not be executed.  
m. Further, on 7th December, 2004, the appellants filed a contempt 
petition5 against the respondents alleging contempt of orders 
dated 31st May, 1990 and 5th August 1991, and the Executing 
Court order dated 16th January, 1998 by interfering with the 
appellants’ possession of the suit property.  
n. These events were followed by the proceedings and the 
judgments/orders referred to in paragraphs 1 to 4 hereinabove. 
Impugned Judgment 
7. 
The Purchasers invoked the appropriate jurisdiction of the High Court 
by challenging the order dated 21st February, 2009 of the Revisional 
Court. The High Court formulated two points for determination, viz. 
(i) whether the petitioners before it (respondents 1 to 3 herein), who 
are subsequent purchasers of the suit property, had any right to 
maintain an objection under section 47, CPC against execution of the 
 
5 Civil Misc Contempt Petition No. 62 of 2004 

 
7
decree? and (ii) whether the order dated 5th August, 1991, passed in 
purported exercise of power under Rule 10 of Order VIII, CPC 
decreeing the suit against Samiullah alone is without jurisdiction and 
a nullity which is non est and inexecutable in nature? The High Court 
also framed an ancillary point as to whether the sale deed dated 23rd 
November, 1997 made by Samiullah in favour of the Purchasers was 
null and void.  
8. 
While the two main points were answered in the affirmative, the 
ancillary point was answered in the negative. In course of rendering 
its judgment, the High Court held the order dated 5th August, 1991, 
and consequently the decree drawn on the basis thereof, to be 
beyond jurisdiction and a nullity. The High Court was also of the 
opinion that the revisional order dated 21st February, 2009 deserved 
to be set aside and the writ petition allowed, which it duly ordered. 
The parties were granted liberty to take recourse to available legal 
remedies to have determination of the title to the suit property 
adjudicated. Certain salient observations made by the High Court in 
the impugned judgment are summarised below for convenience: 
a.  The order dated 5th August 1991, passed by the Trial Court, in 
the Suit, restrained only the defendant no.2 from interfering 
with the peaceful enjoyment of the appellants’ rights relating 
to the suit property, but did not restrict the sons of Kazmi from 
dealing with or transferring the same. 

 
8
b. The transfer of the suit property was not in derogation of 
section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (“ToP Act”, 
hereafter) and that the Purchasers could object to the 
appellants’ execution application. 
c. It is a cardinal principle that to succeed in a suit for permanent 
prohibitory injunction, the plaintiff must either establish title, 
proprietary rights over the suit property or prove possession 
over the same; however, the Trial Court had not found either 
the title of the plaintiffs or proved their possession in respect 
of the suit property. 
d. A court need not always pronounce judgment on the facts of a 
plaint or on those admitted due to non-filing of a written 
statement or want of specific denial. A court has the option of 
pronouncing judgment only in cases where it deems it prudent; 
it also has the option to pass such an appropriate order as it 
seems fit. 
e. A reading of Rules 1, 5 and 10 of Order VIII, CPC show that 
they concern themselves with only a single defendant to a suit 
and not several defendants. The Trial Court, instead, could have 
proceeded to hear the Suit ex parte under Rule 11 of Order IX, 
CPC since Kazmi’s written statement was on the record. Hence, 
the Trial Court had no authority in law to decree the Suit against 
one defendant without adjudicating upon the controversy 
involved. 

 
9
f. The order dated 5th August, 1991 was not a judgment within 
the scope of section 2(9) read with Rule 4(2) of Order XX, CPC 
and did not meet the basic requirements of a “judgment” and 
a decree as per section 2(9) and 2(2), CPC, respectively.  
Rival Contentions 
9. 
Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned senior counsel for the appellants while 
seeking our interference with the impugned judgment submitted as 
under: 
a. The High Court fell into error by not appreciating the fact that 
the Executing Court exceeded its jurisdiction by going behind 
the order dated 5th August, 1991 and the decree that was 
drawn up in terms thereof, returning a finding that the same 
was not executable. 
b. Samiullah had been provided ample opportunity to file his 
written statement but had failed to do so. In any event, the 
order dated 5th August, 1991 had not been challenged, and had 
attained finality. 
c. The Trial Court, vide an interim order dated 31st May, 1990, had 
directed Kazmi and Samiullah to maintain status quo and not 
interfere with the peaceful possession of the suit property, by 
the appellants. The High Court had erroneously held that a 
perusal of the aforementioned order did not indicate any rider 
placed upon the parties from alienating the suit property, and 

 
10 
that the sale deed dated 3rd November, 1997 was validly 
entered into. 
d. The Purchasers were purchasers pendente lite and could not 
have purchased the suit property without leave of the Trial 
Court. The decisions in Surjit Singh and Others v. Harbans 
Singh and Others6 and Manohar Lal v. Ugrasen7 were 
referred to in support of the contentions that the transfer of 
property during pendency of proceedings and also in 
contravention of 
the interim order 
of injunction 
was 
impermissible.  
e. Further, the Purchasers forcibly dispossessed the appellants of 
their peaceful possession of the suit property on 10th October, 
2004 in gross violation of the injunction order dated 16th 
January, 1998 passed by the Executing Court.  
f. Reliance placed by the High Court on Balraj Taneja v. Sunil 
Madan8 was misplaced in the present case as this Court, in 
Balraj Taneja (supra), while holding that reasons must be 
given while decreeing a suit under Rule 10 of Order VIII, CPC, 
was seized of a matter where the decree was challenged in 
appellate proceedings. In the present case, the decree was 
sought to be declared inexecutable in execution proceedings, 
far beyond the reach of such a narrow jurisdiction. 
 
6 (1995) 6 SCC 50 
7 (2010) 11 SCC 557 
8 (1999) 8 SCC 396 

 
11 
10. 
Ms. 
Preetika 
Dwivedi, 
learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
Purchasers 
(respondents 1 to 3) in support of upholding of the impugned 
judgment, submitted as under: 
a. The order dated 5th August, 1991 passed by the Trial Court is 
not a judgment within the scope of section 2(9) read with Rule 
4 of Order XX, CPC and the principle of law laid down in Balraj 
Taneja (supra) was rightly applied by the High Court.  
b. The High Court had rightly granted all the parties liberty to have 
the title to the suit property adjudicated by the appropriate 
forum; hence, it could not be said that the appellants were 
prejudiced in any manner whatsoever. Further, any question 
relating to the title, and validity of the sale deed in favour of 
the Purchasers could be determined by the appropriate forum. 
c. At the time of purchase, the names of Kazmi’s sons, i.e. 
respondents 4 and 5, were present in the land revenue records 
pertaining to the suit property, after which the Purchasers’ 
names have been inserted through mutation.  
d. As per the law laid down in Hukam Chand v. Om Chand9 and 
Nagubai Ammal v. B. Shama Rao10, the transfer of the suit 
property was not in violation of section 52, ToP Act since the 
statute did not put an absolute embargo on the transfer of such 
property pendente lite.  
 
9 (2001) 10 SCC 715 
10 AIR 1956 SC 593 

 
12 
Analysis 
11. 
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the 
impugned judgment as well as the other materials on record.  
12. 
The sole question of law which arises for a decision in this appeal is:  
Whether the order dated 5th August, 1991 suffered from a 
jurisdictional error so grave that the decree drawn up 
subsequently is incapable of execution by the Executing Court 
and an objection that it is inexecutable was available to be 
raised under section 47, CPC by the respondents 1 to 3? 
13. 
Prior to answering the above question, we consider it appropriate to 
examine the scope and extent of power exercisable under Rule 10 of 
Order VIII, CPC. 
14. 
Rule 10 of Order VIII, CPC, used as the primary source of power by 
the Trial Court in passing the order dated 5th August, 1991 against 
Samiullah, postulates the procedure that could be adopted when a 
party fails to present its written statement upon the same being 
called for by the court. Rule 10 reads as follows: 
“10. Procedure when party fails to present written statement 
called for by Court.— 
Where any party from whom a written statement is required 
under rule 1 or rule 9 fails to present the same within the time 
permitted or fixed by the Court, as the case may be, the Court 
shall pronounce judgment against him, or make such order in 
relation to the suit as it thinks fit and on the pronouncement of 
such judgment a decree shall be drawn up.” 
15. 
We have no hesitation to hold that Rule 10 is permissive in nature, 
enabling the trial court to exercise, in a given case, either of the two 

 
13 
alternatives open to it. Notwithstanding the alternative of proceeding 
to pronounce a judgment, the court still has an option not to 
pronounce judgment and to make such order in relation to the suit it 
considers fit. The verb ‘shall’ in Rule 10 [although substituted for the 
verb ‘may’ by the Amendment Act of 1976] does not elevate the first 
alternative to the status of a mandatory provision, so much so that 
in every case where a party from whom a written statement is invited 
fails to file it, the court must pronounce the judgment against him. If 
that were the purport, the second alternative to which ‘shall’ equally 
applies would be rendered otiose.     
16. 
At this stage, we consider it apposite to take a quick look at Balraj 
Taneja (supra) to examine the scope of Rule 10 of Order VIII. 
Therein, this Court ruled that a court is not supposed to pass a 
mechanical judgment invoking Rule 10 of Order VIII, CPC merely on 
the basis of the plaint, upon the failure of a defendant to file a written 
statement. The relevant paragraphs of the judgment are reproduced 
below for convenience: 
“29. As pointed out earlier, the court has not to act blindly upon 
the admission of a fact made by the defendant in his written 
statement nor should the court proceed to pass judgment 
blindly merely because a written statement has not been filed 
by the defendant traversing the facts set out by the plaintiff in 
the plaint filed in the court. In a case, specially where a written 
statement has not been filed by the defendant, the court should 
be a little cautious in proceeding under Order 8 Rule 10 CPC. 
Before passing the judgment against the defendant it must see 
to it that even if the facts set out in the plaint are treated to 
have been admitted, a judgment could possibly be passed in 
favour of the plaintiff without requiring him to prove any fact 

 
14 
mentioned in the plaint. It is a matter of the court's satisfaction 
and, therefore, only on being satisfied that there is no fact 
which need be proved on account of deemed admission, the 
court can conveniently pass a judgment against the defendant 
who has not filed the written statement. But if the plaint itself 
indicates that there are disputed questions of fact involved in 
the case regarding which two different versions are set out in 
the plaint itself, it would not be safe for the court to pass a 
judgment without requiring the plaintiff to prove the facts so as 
to settle the factual controversy. Such a case would be covered 
by the expression ‘the court may, in its discretion, require any 
such fact to be proved’ used in sub-rule (2) of Rule 5 of Order 
8, or the expression ‘may make such order in relation to the 
suit as it thinks fit’ used in Rule 10 of Order 8.” 
                                             
 
No doubt this decision was rendered considering that the verb used 
in the provision is ‘may’, but nothing substantial turns on it. 
17. 
What emerges from a reading of Balraj Taneja (supra), with which 
we wholeheartedly concur, is that only on being satisfied that there 
is no fact which need to be proved on account of deemed admission, 
could the court pass a judgment against the defendant who has not 
filed the written statement; but if the plaint itself suggests 
involvement of disputed questions of fact, it would not be safe for the 
court to pass a judgment without requiring the plaintiff to prove the 
facts. Balraj Taneja (supra) also lays down the law that provision of 
Rule 10 of Order VIII, CPC is by no means mandatory in the sense 
that a court has no alternative but to pass a judgment in favour of 
the plaintiff, if the defendant fails or neglects to file his written 
statement. 
18. 
If indeed, in a given case, the defendant defaults in filing written 
statement and the first alternative were the only course to be 

 
15 
adopted, it would tantamount to a plaintiff being altogether relieved 
of its obligation to prove his case to the satisfaction of the court. 
Generally, in order to be entitled to a judgment in his favour, what is 
required of a plaintiff is to prove his pleaded case by adducing 
evidence. Rule 10, in fact, has to be read together with Rule 5 of 
Order VIII and the position seems to be clear that a trial court, at its 
discretion, may require any fact, treated as admitted, to be so proved 
otherwise than by such admission. Similar is the position with section 
58 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. It must be remembered that a 
plaint in a suit is not akin to a writ petition where not only the facts 
are to be pleaded but also the evidence in support of the pleaded 
facts is to be annexed, whereafter, upon exchange of affidavits, such 
petition can be decided on affidavit evidence. Since facts are required 
to be pleaded in a plaint and not the evidence, which can be adduced 
in course of examination of witnesses, mere failure or neglect of a 
defendant to file a written statement controverting the pleaded facts 
in the plaint, in all cases, may not entitle him to a judgment in his 
favour unless by adducing evidence he proves his case/claim.  
19. 
Having noted what Rule 10 of Order VIII postulates, the order dated 
5th August, 1991 may be examined now since it is the genesis of the 
present litigation before us. The order made by the Trial Court on 5th 
August, 1991, reads as below: 
“68-C application moved by the plaintiffs under Order-8 Rule-5 
(2) & (3) read with Rule 10 CPC. According to the plaintiff, 
Samiullah son of Asad Ullah Kazmi, defendant no. 1 has been 

 
16 
impleaded as defendant no. 1 (sic, defendant no. 2) as he was 
also threatening to encroach the right of the plaintiff in the 
disputed property. He appeared through counsel and moved 
application and has also filed affidavits 50-C & 57-C but he 
failed to file any written statement. It is clear that so many date 
has been given for written statement and lastly it was 29.4.91, 
which was fixed for written statement and for issues, but the 
defendant has (sic, not) filed written statement and on this 
ground the plaintiff has moved the above application 68-C. 
 
The learned counsel for the plaintiff has argued that he has 
appeared through counsel and enough time has been given to 
him calling upon him to file the written statement, but he failed 
to file written statement. The case is covered by Order-8 Rule 
10 C.P.C. The defendant no. 2 remained absent. In view of the 
above, I am of the opinion that it is fit case to proceed under 
Order-8 Rule 10 C.P.C. 
 
Accordingly, the suit of the plaintiffs is decreed under Order-8 
Rule 10 C.P.C. with cost against defendant no. 2. The defendant 
no. 2 is restrained not to interfere in the peaceful right and 
enjoyment of the plaintiff in respect of the disputed building, 
trees and other properties. 
 
Fix 9.9.1991 for Issues.” 
  
20. 
In the present case, Kazmi had indeed filed his written statement 
dealing with the appellants’ plaint before the order dated 5th August, 
1991 was made. There, not only had Kazmi denied the assertions 
made in the plaint but he had also specifically objected to the 
maintainability of the suit itself before the Trial Court on the ground 
noted above. The Trial Court is presumed to be aware of the fact that 
the written statement of Kazmi was on record or else it would not 
have fixed the next date for settling ‘issues’. In a situation where 
maintainability of the suit was in question and despite Samiullah not 
having filed his written statement, it was not a case where the Trial 
Court could simply pronounce judgment without even recording a 

 
17 
satisfaction that it had the jurisdiction to try the suit and adjudicate 
the contentious issue(s), not to speak of pronouncing its verdict 
against Samiullah without assigning a single reason by treating the 
averments in the plaint to be admitted. The High Court rightly 
observed that even on pronouncement of judgment against 
Samiullah, the lis remained alive as against Kazmi and decision on 
the objection as to maintainability could have resulted in a contrary 
decision.  
21. 
No tribunal, far less a civil court, in exercise of judicial power ought 
to play ducks and drakes with the rights of the parties. We are left to 
wonder what would have been the status of the rival claims if Kazmi 
had not passed away and accepting his objection, the Suit were 
dismissed on the ground of maintainability. In such a case, could such 
a dismissal be reconciled with the purported decree drawn up against 
Samiullah? The answer would have to be in the negative. Or, take 
the situation that has cropped up here. The suit has been dismissed 
qua Kazmi on 27th April, 2009 as abated. Although Ms. Arora had 
submitted in course of hearing that steps have since been 
successfully taken to set aside abatement and an assurance was 
given to file additional documents by 12th December, 2023 in support 
of such a submission, the additional documents e-filed beyond time 
do not reveal that (i) abatement has been set aside, (ii) the 
heirs/legal representatives substituted in place of Kazmi and (iii) the 
suit restored to its original file and number. The result is that the suit 

 
18 
stands dismissed as against the principal defendant without any 
determination by the Trial Court on his objection that such court did 
not possess the jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit.  
22. 
We are constrained to observe that it is to avoid such a situation of 
contradictory/inconsistent decrees that power under Rule 10 of Order 
VIII ought to be invoked with care, caution, and circumspection, only 
when none of several defendants file their written statements and 
upon the taking of evidence from the side of the plaintiff, if deemed 
necessary, the entire suit could be decided. As in the present case, 
where even one of several defendants had filed a written statement, 
it would be a judicious exercise of discretion for the court to opt for 
the second alternative in Rule 10 of Order VIII, CPC unless, of course, 
extraordinary circumstances exist warranting recourse to the first 
alternative. In the matter at hand, the filing of the written statement 
by Kazmi denying the averments made in the plaint warranted that 
the appellants’ claims be proved by evidence, oral and/or 
documentary, instead of decreeing the suit against one of the 
defendants in a most slipshod manner.  
23. 
We find close resemblance of the facts and circumstances under 
consideration in Swaran Lata Ghosh v. H.K. Banerjee11. A money 
suit instituted by the respondent before this Court was tried by the 
 
11 (1969) 1 SCC 709 

 
19 
High Court at Calcutta and after taking evidence the learned Single 
Judge on 17th August, 1962, passed the following order: 
“There will be a decree for Rs 15,000 with interest on judgment 
on Rs 15,000 at 6% per annum and costs. No interim interest 
allowed.” 
Pursuant to that order a decree was drawn up. An appeal carried from 
the decree before the Division Bench failed. The Division Bench 
assigned sketchy reasons for the conclusion that the Trial Court 
“rightly decreed the suit” and disposed of the appeal with certain 
modification of the decree. While allowing the appeal and setting 
aside the decree passed by the high court and remanding the suit to 
the Court of first instance for trial according to law, this Court noted 
that Rules 1 to 8 of Order XX, CPC are, by the express provision 
contained in Rule 3(5) of Order XLIX, CPC inapplicable to a Chartered 
High Court in the exercise of its ordinary or extraordinary original civil 
jurisdiction and hence, a judge of a Chartered High Court was not 
obliged to record reasons in a judgment strictly according to the 
provisions contained in Rules 4(2) and 5 of Order XX, CPC. 
Notwithstanding such a provision, this Court proceeded to record in 
paragraph 6 as follows: 
“6. Trial of a civil dispute in court is intended to achieve, 
according to law and the procedure of the court, a judicial 
determination between the contesting parties of the matter in 
controversy. Opportunity to the parties interested in the dispute 
to present their respective cases on questions of law as well as 
fact, ascertainment of facts by means of evidence tendered by 
the parties, and adjudication by a reasoned judgment of the 

 
20 
dispute upon a finding on the facts in controversy and 
application of the law to the facts found, are essential attributes 
of a judicial trial. In a judicial trial, the Judge not only must 
reach a conclusion which he regards as just, but, unless 
otherwise permitted, by the practice of the court or by law, he 
must record the ultimate mental process leading from the 
dispute to its solution. A judicial determination of a disputed 
claim where substantial questions of law or fact arise is 
satisfactorily reached, only if it be supported by the most 
cogent reasons that suggest themselves to the Judge a mere 
order deciding the matter in dispute not supported by reasons 
is no judgment at all. Recording of reasons in support of a 
decision of a disputed claim serves more purposes than one. It 
is intended to ensure that the decision is not the result of whim 
or fancy, but of a judicial approach to the matter in contest: it 
is also intended to ensure adjudication of the matter according 
to law and the procedure established by law. A party to the 
dispute is ordinarily entitled to know the grounds on which the 
court has decided against him, and more so, when the 
judgment is subject to appeal. The appellate court will then 
have adequate material on which it may determine whether the 
facts are properly ascertained, the law has been correctly 
applied and the resultant decision is just. It is unfortunate that 
the learned trial Judge has recorded no reasons in support of 
his conclusion, and the High Court in appeal merely recorded 
that they thought that the plaintiff had sufficiently proved the 
case in the plaint.” 
24. 
However, there, it was an appellate decree which this Court was 
called upon to examine. We realise that we are not examining the 
correctness of a judgment/order arising from exercise of appellate 
jurisdiction by the High Court but a judgment approving an order on 
an objection under section 47, CPC, scope wherefor is limited. 
25. 
Our real task is to ascertain whether the decree drawn up on the basis 
of the order dated 5th August, 1991 and put to execution by the 
appellants could have been objected to by the respondents 1 to 3 as 
inexecutable under section 47, CPC. Section 47, CPC, being one of 
the most important provisions relating to execution of decrees, 

 
21 
mandates that an executing court shall determine all questions 
arising between the parties to the suit or their representatives in 
relation to the execution, discharge, or satisfaction of the decree and 
that such questions may not be adjudicated in a separate suit.  
26. 
Reference to a couple of authorities on the scope and nature of 
section 47, CPC, at this stage, would not be inapt.  
27. 
In Vasudev Dhanjibhai Modi v. Rajabhai Abdul Rehman12, this 
Court was considering the scope of objection under section 47 of the 
CPC in relation to the executability of a decree. Therein, it was laid 
down that only such a decree could be the subject-matter of objection 
which is a nullity and not a decree which was erroneous either in law 
or on facts. Law was laid down in the following terms: 
“6. A court executing a decree cannot go behind the decree: 
between the parties or their representatives it must take the 
decree according to its tenor and cannot entertain any 
objection that the decree was incorrect in law or on facts. Until 
it is set aside by an appropriate proceeding in appeal or 
revision, a decree even if it be erroneous is still binding between 
the parties. 
7. When a decree which is a nullity, for instance, where it is 
passed without bringing the legal representative on the record 
of a person who was dead at the date of the decree, or against 
a ruling prince without a certificate, is sought to be executed 
an objection in that behalf may be raised in a proceeding for 
execution. Again, when the decree is made by a court which 
has no inherent jurisdiction to make objection as to its validity 
may be raised in an execution proceeding if the objection 
appears on the face of the record: where the objection as to 
the jurisdiction of the Court to pass the decree does not appear 
on the face of the record and requires examination of the 
questions raised and decided at the trial or which could have 
been but have not been raised, the executing Court will have 
no jurisdiction to entertain an objection as to the validity of the 
 
12 (1970) 1 SCC 670 

 
22 
decree even on the ground of absence of jurisdiction….”                  
                                            (underlining ours, for emphasis) 
 
28. 
In Dhurandhar Prasad Singh v. Jai Prakash University13, this 
Court further expounded the powers of a court under section 47, CPC 
in the following words:  
“24. The exercise of powers under Section 47 of the Code is 
microscopic and lies in a very narrow inspection hole. Thus it is 
plain that executing court can allow objection under Section 47 
of the Code to the executability of the decree if it is found that 
the same is void ab initio and a nullity, apart from the ground 
that the decree is not capable of execution under law either 
because the same was passed in ignorance of such a provision 
of law or the law was promulgated making a decree 
inexecutable after its passing….”       
                                            (underlining ours, for emphasis)                  
 
29. 
The legality of the order of the High Court, together with the order of 
the Executing Court that the former went on to uphold, has to be 
tested having regard to the settled position of law as noticed above 
and bearing in mind that the powers of an executing court, though 
narrower than an appellate or revisional court, can be exercised to 
dismiss an execution application if the decree put to execution is 
unmistakably found to suffer from an inherent lack of jurisdiction of 
the court that made the same rendering it a nullity in the eye of law.  
30. 
For reasons more than one, we propose to hold that the Executing 
Court and the High Court were right in holding that the objection 
raised by the respondents 1 to 3 to the executability of the decree 
was well-founded.  
 
13 (2001) 6 SCC 534 

 
23 
31. 
What appears to be of significance in the light of the decisions 
referred to above is the importance of the legal term ‘jurisdiction’, 
and the question whether the Trial Court did have the jurisdiction to 
pass the order it did on 5th August, 1991 followed by the decree 
signed on 11th November, 1991.  
32. 
What does ‘jurisdiction’ mean? In the ensuing discussion, we feel 
inclined to draw guidance from certain decisions of ancient vintage 
which have stood the test of time.  
33. 
The wisdom of Sir Ashutosh Mukherjee, A.C.J., speaking for a Full 
Bench of the High Court at Calcutta in Hirday Nath Roy v. 
Ramachandra Barna Sarma14, more than a century back, 
profitably assists us in understanding what is meant by ‘jurisdiction’, 
‘lack of jurisdiction’ and ‘error in the exercise of jurisdiction’. The 
relevant passage reads as under: 
“…An examination of the cases in the books discloses numerous 
attempts to define the term ‘jurisdiction’, which has been stated 
to be ‘the power to hear and determine issues of law and fact’; 
‘the authority by which judicial officers take cognizance of and 
decide causes’; ‘the authority to hear and decide a legal 
controversy’; ‘the power to hear and determine the subject-
matter in controversy between parties to a suit and to 
adjudicate or exercise any judicial power over them’; ‘the 
power to hear, determine and pronounce judgment on the 
issues before the Court’; ‘the power or authority which is 
conferred upon a Court by the legislature to bear and determine 
causes between parties and to carry the judgments into effect’; 
‘the power to enquire into the facts, to apply the law, to 
pronounce the judgment and to carry it into execution. … This 
jurisdiction of the Court may be qualified or restricted by a 
variety of circumstances. Thus, the jurisdiction may have to be 
considered with reference to place, value, and nature of the 
 
14 1920 SCC OnLine Cal 85 : ILR LXVIII, Cal 138 

 
24 
subject-matter. … This classification into territorial jurisdiction, 
pecuniary jurisdiction and jurisdiction of the subject-matter is 
obviously of a fundamental character. Given such jurisdiction, 
we must be careful to distinguish exercise of jurisdiction from 
existence of jurisdiction; for fundamentally different are the 
consequences of failure to comply with statutory requirements 
in the assumption and in the exercise of jurisdiction. The 
authority to decide a cause at all and not the decision rendered 
therein is what makes up jurisdiction; and when there is 
jurisdiction of the person and subject-matter, the decision of all 
other questions arising in the case is but an exercise of that 
jurisdiction. The extent to which the conditions essential for 
creating and raising the jurisdiction of a Court or the restraints 
attaching to the mode of exercise of that jurisdiction should be 
included in the conception of jurisdiction itself is sometimes a 
question of great nicety…But the distinction between existence 
of jurisdiction and exercise of jurisdiction has not always been 
borne in mind and this has sometimes led to confusion. … We 
must not thus overlook the cardinal position that in order that 
jurisdiction may be exercised, there must be a case legally 
before the Court and a hearing as well as a determination. A 
judgment pronounced by a Court without jurisdiction is void, 
subject to the well-known reservation that when the jurisdiction 
of a Court is challenged, the Court is competent to determine 
the question of jurisdiction, though the result of the enquiry 
may be that it has no jurisdiction to deal with the matter 
brought before it. 
*** 
Besides 
the 
cases 
mentioned 
therein, 
reference 
may 
particularly be made to the judgment of Srinivas Aiyangar, J., 
in Tuljaram v. Gopala [32 Mad. L.J. 434; 21 Mad. L.J. 220 
(1916).] , where the true rule was stated to be that if a Court 
has jurisdiction to try a suit and has authority to pass orders of 
a particular kind, the fact that it has passed an order which it 
should not have made in the circumstances of that litigation, 
does not indicate total want or loss of jurisdiction so as to 
render the order a nullity.” 
(underlining ours, for emphasis) 
34. 
Hirday Nath Roy (supra) found approval in Official Trustee v. 
Sachindra Nath Chatterjee15, a co-ordinate Bench decision of this 
 
15 AIR 1969 SC 823 

 
25 
Court. The relevant observations of this Court in Sachindra Nath 
Chatterjee (supra) are reproduced below: 
“12. It is plain that if the learned judge had no jurisdiction to 
pass the order in question then the order is null and void. It is 
equally plain that if he had jurisdiction to pronounce on the plea 
put forward before him the fact that he made an incorrect order 
or even an illegal order cannot affect its validity. … 
15. *** it is clear that before a Court can be held to have 
jurisdiction to decide a particular matter it must not only have 
jurisdiction to try the suit brought but must also have the 
authority to pass the orders sought for. It is not sufficient that 
it has some jurisdiction in relation to the subject-matter of the 
suit. Its jurisdiction must include the power to hear and decide 
the questions at issue, the authority to hear and decide the 
particular controversy that has arisen between the parties. …” 
(underlining ours, for emphasis) 
35. 
The essence really is that a court must not only have the jurisdiction 
in respect of the subject matter of dispute for the purpose of 
entertaining and trying the claim but also the jurisdiction to grant 
relief that is sought for. Once it is conceded that the jurisdiction on 
both counts is available, it is immaterial if jurisdiction is exercised 
erroneously. An erroneous decision cannot be labelled as having been 
passed ‘without jurisdiction’. It is, therefore, imperative that the 
distinction between a decision lacking in inherent jurisdiction and a 
decision which suffers from an error committed in the exercise of 
jurisdiction is borne in mind.    
36. 
Moving on to decisions of not too distant an origin, we notice that this 
Court in Rafique Bibi v. Sayed Waliuddin16 whilst relying on 
 
16 (2004) 1 SCC 287 

 
26 
Vasudev Dhanjibhai Modi (supra), has made valuable observations 
as to the circumstances where an order passed could be regarded as 
a nullity. The relevant observations made in Rafique Bibi (supra) 
read thus: 
“6. What is ‘void’ has to be clearly understood. A decree can be 
said to be without jurisdiction, and hence a nullity, if the court 
passing the decree has usurped a jurisdiction which it did not 
have; a mere wrong exercise of jurisdiction does not result in 
a nullity. The lack of jurisdiction in the court passing the decree 
must be patent on its face in order to enable the executing 
court to take cognizance of such a nullity based on want of 
jurisdiction, else the normal rule that an executing court cannot 
go behind the decree must prevail. 
7. Two things must be clearly borne in mind. Firstly, ‘the court 
will invalidate an order only if the right remedy is sought by the 
right person in the right proceedings and circumstances. The 
order may be ‘a nullity’ and ‘void’ but these terms have no 
absolute sense: their meaning is relative, depending upon the 
court's willingness to grant relief in any particular situation. If 
this principle of illegal relativity is borne in mind, the law can 
be made to operate justly and reasonably in cases where the 
doctrine of ultra vires, rigidly applied, would produce 
unacceptable results.” (Administrative Law, Wade and Forsyth, 
8th Edn., 2000, p. 308.) …  
8. A distinction exists between a decree passed by a court 
having no jurisdiction and consequently being a nullity and not 
executable and a decree of the court which is merely illegal or 
not passed in accordance with the procedure laid down by law. 
A decree suffering from illegality or irregularity of procedure, 
cannot be termed inexecutable by the executing court; the 
remedy of a person aggrieved by such a decree is to have it set 
aside in a duly constituted legal proceedings or by a superior 
court failing which he must obey the command of the decree. 
A decree passed by a court of competent jurisdiction cannot be 
denuded of its efficacy by any collateral attack or in incidental 
proceedings.”                          
(underlining ours, for emphasis) 
 
37. 
Also, a reading of Rafique Bibi (supra) makes it clear that the lack 
of jurisdiction must be patent on the face of the decree to enable an 
executing court to conclude that the decree was a nullity. Hence, it is 

 
27 
clear that all irregular or wrong decrees would not necessarily be void. 
An erroneous or illegal decision, which was not void, could not be 
objected in execution or incidental proceedings. This dictum was also 
affirmed by a Bench of 3 (three) Hon’ble Judges of this Court in 
Balvant N. Viswamitra v. Yadav Sadashiv Mule17. 
38. 
What follows from a conspectus of all the aforesaid decisions is that 
jurisdiction is the entitlement of the civil court to embark upon an 
enquiry as to whether the cause has been brought before it by the 
plaintiff in a manner prescribed by law and also whether a good case 
for grant of relief claimed been set up by him. As and when such 
entitlement is established, any subsequent error till delivery of 
judgment could be regarded as an error within the jurisdiction. The 
enquiry as to whether the civil court is entitled to entertain and try a 
suit has to be made by it keeping in mind the provision in section 9, 
CPC and the relevant enactment which, according to the objector, 
bars a suit. Needless to observe, the question of jurisdiction has to 
be determined at the commencement and not at the conclusion of 
the enquiry. 
39. 
Although not directly arising in the present case, we also wish to 
observe that the question of jurisdiction would assume importance 
even at the stage a court considers the question of grant of interim 
relief. Where interim relief is claimed in a suit before a civil court and 
the party to be affected by grant of such relief, or any other party to 
 
17 (2004) 8 SCC 706 

 
28 
the suit, raises a point of maintainability thereof or that it is barred 
by law and also contends on that basis that interim relief should not 
to be granted, grant of relief in whatever form, if at all, ought to be 
preceded by formation and recording of at least a prima facie 
satisfaction that the suit is maintainable or that it is not barred by 
law. Such a satisfaction resting on appreciation of the averments in 
the plaint, the application for interim relief and the written objection 
thereto, as well as the relevant law that is cited in support of the 
objection, would be a part of the court’s reasoning of a prima facie 
case having been set up for interim relief, that the balance of 
convenience is in favour of the grant and non-grant would cause 
irreparable harm and prejudice. It would be inappropriate for a court 
to abstain from recording its prima facie satisfaction on the question 
of maintainability, yet, proceed to grant protection pro tem on the 
assumption that the question of maintainability has to be decided as 
a preliminary issue under Rule 2 of Order XIV, CPC. That could 
amount to an improper exercise of power. If the court is of the opinion 
at the stage of hearing the application for interim relief that the suit 
is barred by law or is otherwise not maintainable, it cannot dismiss it 
without framing a preliminary issue after the written statement is 
filed but can most certainly assign such opinion for refusing interim 
relief. However, if an extraordinary situation arises where it could 
take time to decide the point of maintainability of the suit and non-
grant of protection pro tem pending such decision could lead to 

 
29 
irreversible consequences, the court may proceed to make an 
appropriate order in the manner indicated above justifying the course 
of action it adopts. In other words, such an order may be passed, if 
at all required, to avoid irreparable harm or injury or undue hardship 
to the party claiming the relief and/or to ensure that the proceedings 
are not rendered infructuous by reason of non-interference by the 
court.  
40. 
Turning to the facts of the present case, Kazmi had challenged the 
maintainability of the Suit in the written statement filed by him before 
the Trial Court contending inter alia that the suit property was 
bhoomidhari land owing to which the Suit was barred by section 331 
of UPZA & LR Act as well as it was barred under section 41(h) of the 
Specific Relief Act and, thus, not maintainable before the civil court. 
What was required of the Trial Court in such situation was to record 
a satisfaction, at least prima facie, that the Suit was maintainable 
and then proceed to pass such orders as it considered proper in the 
circumstances. A glance at the order dated 5th August, 1991, is 
sufficient to inform us that the Trial Court, in no words whatsoever, 
made any decision on whether it was entitled in law to decide the 
plea before it, prior to decreeing the Suit against Samiullah under 
Rule 10 of Order VIII, CPC. The question of competence to try the 
Suit, we have found, was the first of several issues arising for decision 
in the Suit and despite such looming presence of an important issue 
before the Trial Court which, if examined and answered in favour of 

 
30 
Kazmi, would have ousted jurisdiction, it preferred not to wait and 
proceeded to decree the same against Samiullah without a whisper 
on its competency to do the same.  
41. 
The legal and factual position of the present case having been noted 
above, we hold that a decision rendered by a court on the merits of 
a controversy in favour of the plaintiff without first adjudicating on its 
competence to decide such controversy would amount to a decision 
being rendered on an illegal and erroneous assumption of jurisdiction 
and, thus, be assailable as lacking in inherent jurisdiction and be 
treated as a nullity in the eye of law; as a logical corollary, the order 
dated 5th August, 1991 is held to be ab initio void and the decree 
drawn up based thereon is inexecutable.   
42. 
There is one other reason which we wish to assign as a ground for 
upholding the order of the Executing Court and the High Court. 
43. 
Reference may once again be made to Balram Taneja (supra) where 
the law has been reiterated succinctly, as follows: 
“41. There is yet another infirmity in the case which relates to 
the ‘judgment’ passed by the Single Judge and upheld by the 
Division Bench. 
42. ‘Judgment’ as defined in Section 2(9) of the Code of Civil 
Procedure means the statement given by the Judge of the 
grounds for a decree or order. What a judgment should contain 
is indicated in Order 20 Rule 4(2) which says that a judgment 
‘shall contain a concise statement of the case, the points for 
determination, the decision thereon, and the reasons for such 
decision’. It should be a self-contained document from which it 
should appear as to what were the facts of the case and what 
was the controversy which was tried to be settled by the court 
and in what manner. The process of reasoning by which the 

 
31 
court came to the ultimate conclusion and decreed the suit 
should be reflected clearly in the judgment. 
43. *** 
44. ***  
45. Learned counsel for Respondent 1 contended that the 
provisions of Order 20 Rule 4(2) would apply only to contested 
cases as it is only in those cases that ‘the points for 
determination’ as mentioned in this rule will have to be 
indicated, and not in a case in which the written statement has 
not been filed by the defendants and the facts set out in the 
plaint are deemed to have been admitted. We do not agree. 
Whether it is a case which is contested by the defendants by 
filing a written statement, or a case which proceeds ex parte 
and is ultimately decided as an ex parte case, or is a case in 
which the written statement is not filed and the case is decided 
under Order 8 Rule 10, the court has to write a judgment which 
must be in conformity with the provisions of the Code or at least 
set out the reasoning by which the controversy is resolved. 
46. *** Even if the definition were not contained in Section 
2(9) or the contents thereof were not indicated in Order 20 Rule 
4(2) CPC, the judgment would still mean the process of 
reasoning by which a Judge decides a case in favour of one 
party and against the other. In judicial proceedings, there 
cannot be arbitrary orders. A Judge cannot merely say ‘suit 
decreed’ or ‘suit dismissed’. The whole process of reasoning has 
to be set out for deciding the case one way or the other. This 
infirmity in the present judgment is glaring and for that reason 
also the judgment cannot be sustained.” 
                                                   (underlining ours, for emphasis) 
We concur with the observation that a judgment, as envisaged in 
section 2(9), CPC, should contain the process of reasoning by which 
the court arrived at its conclusion to resolve the controversy and 
consequently to decree the suit. 
44. 
It is indubitable that a “judgment”, if pronounced by a court under 
Rule 10 of Order VIII, CPC, must satisfy the requirements of Rule 
4(2) of Order XX, CPC, and thereby conform to its definition provided 
in section 2(9) thereof.  

 
32 
45. 
Further, even a cursory reading of Rule 10 of Order VIII, CPC 
impresses upon us the fundamental mandate that a “decree” shall 
follow a “judgment” in a case where the court invokes power upon 
failure of a defendant to file its written statement. It is, therefore, 
only a “judgment” conforming to the provisions of the CPC that could 
lead to a “decree” being drawn up. As is manifest on the face of the 
record of the present case, apart from the ipse dixit of the Trial Court 
that the case is fit for being proceeded against under Rule 10 of Order 
VIII and that the suit qua Samiullah ought to be decreed with the 
injunctive order, no ingredients that a “judgment” should contain as 
per the CPC appear in the order dated 5th August, 1991. 
46. 
We deem it fit to advert to the fine words of wisdom imparted to us 
by Hon’ble P.B. Mukharji, CJ., in ‘The New Jurisprudence: The 
Grammar of Modern Law’ where the learned author says: 
"The supreme requirement of a good judgment is reason. 
Judgment is of value on the strength of its reason. The weight 
of a judgment, its binding character or its persuasive character 
depends on the presentation and articulation of reason. Reason, 
therefore, is the soul and spirit of a good judgment.” 
47. 
It is one of the cardinal principles of the justice delivery system that 
any verdict of a competent judicial forum in the form of a 
judgment/order, that determines the rights and liabilities of the 
parties to the proceedings, must inform the parties what is the 
outcome and why one party has succeeded and not the other - the 
‘why’ constituting the reasons and ‘what’ the conclusion. Apart from 

 
33 
anything else, insistence of the requirement for the reason(s) to 
support the conclusion guarantees application of mind by the 
adjudicator to the materials before it as well as provides an avenue 
to the unsuccessful party to test the reasons before a higher court. 
48. 
All civil courts in the country have to regulate their judicial work in 
accordance with the terms of the provisions of the CPC. Any 
egregious breach or violation of such provisions, including the one 
noticed here, would be ultra vires. 
49. 
Let us now examine whether there is a ‘decree’ within the scope of 
section 2(2), CPC. Section 2(2) is reproduced hereunder: 
(2) "decree" means the formal expression of an adjudication 
which, so far as regards the Court expressing it, conclusively 
determines the rights of the parties with regard to all or any of 
the matters in controversy in the suit and may be either 
preliminary or final. It shall be deemed to include the rejection 
of a plaint and the determination of any question within section 
144, but shall not include - 
(a) any adjudication from which an appeal lies as an appeal 
from an order, or  
(b) any order of dismissal for default.  
                                            (underlining ours, for emphasis) 
50. 
The decree signed by the Trial Court on 11th November, 1991 is not 
on record. Nevertheless, at the cost of repetition, we record that 
examination of the order dated 5th August, 1991 does not reveal any 
adjudication leading to determination of the rights of the parties in 
relation to any of the matters in controversy in the suit and, 
therefore, the decree since drawn up is not a formal expression of an 
adjudication/determination 
since 
there 
has 
been 
no 

 
34 
adjudication/determination so as to conform to the requirements of 
a decree within the meaning of section 2(2). In this regard, we 
express our concurrence with both the High Court and the Executing 
Court that there is no decree at all in the eye of law. 
51. 
We, therefore, hold that a decree that follows a judgment or an order 
(of the present nature) would be inexecutable in the eyes of law and 
execution thereof, if sought for, would be open to objection in an 
application under section 47, CPC.   
Conclusion 
52. 
For the reasons mentioned above, we conclude that the Trial Court 
had no authority to decree the suit against Samiullah in exercise of 
its power under Rule 10 of Order VIII, CPC.  
53. 
There is no reason to interfere with the judgment and order of the 
High Court under challenge. It is upheld and the appeal, accompanied 
by any pending applications, stands dismissed. Parties shall bear their 
own costs.  
54. 
It is, however, made clear that no part of the observations of this 
Court, or of the High Court or of those below, be treated as an 
expression of opinion in any particular matter or on any factual aspect 
whatsoever. Determination of the title to the suit property, 
adjudication on the validity of the sale deed in favour of the 
Purchasers, or decision on any other contentious issue are left open 
for a forum of competent jurisdiction to embark upon, if approached 
by any of the parties.  

 
35 
55. 
We are aware that pursuant to Interim Application No. 4 of 2013 
moved by the appellants, this Court had appointed one Mr. 
Suryanarayana Singh as the Court Receiver in respect of the property 
(“Court Receiver”, hereafter) on 14th March, 2014. The Court Receiver 
already 
appointed 
shall 
stand 
discharged 
forthwith. 
Unpaid 
remuneration, if any, shall be borne by the appellants.  
56. 
However, the Court Receiver shall provide accounts of income and 
expenditure in respect of the suit property to the appellants as well 
as the respondents 1 to 3 within two months and any claim of either 
of the parties would be open to be raised and addressed in accordance 
with law. 
 
     ..............................J.  
  [B.R. GAVAI] 
 
 
 
.............................J.  
 [DIPANKAR DATTA]  
 
 
 
..............................J.  
[ARAVIND KUMAR] 
NEW DELHI;  
12TH JANUARY, 2024.