2024 INSC 397
SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 1 of 27 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).                      OF 2024 
[Arising out of SLP (C) No(s). 28466 of 2023] 
 
 
COL. RAMNEESH PAL SINGH                   …APPELLANT(S) 
  
VERSUS 
SUGANDHI AGGARWAL 
               …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J.  
 
Introduction 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeal preferred by the Appellant seeks to 
assail the correctness of an order dated 11.10.2023 passed by a 
Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi (the 
“High Court”) in M.A.T. APP (F.C.) 132 of 2020 (the 
“Impugned Order”). Vide the Impugned Order the High Court 
partly allowed the appeal preferred by the Respondent against an 
Digitally signed by
Neetu Khajuria
Date: 2024.05.08
17:06:44 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 2 of 27 
 
order dated 22.08.2020 passed by the Learned Family Court, 
West, Tis Hazari Court (the “Family Court”) in GP No. 45/17 
(Old GP No. 75 of 2015) whereby the Family Court granted 
permanent custody of minor children to the Appellant and 
provided visitation rights to the Respondent (the “Underlying 
Order”). Pertinently, vide the Impugned Order, the High Court 
set aside the Underlying Order; and accordingly granted the 
parties shared custody of the Minor Children (defined below). 
 
Factual Background 
3. 
The facts and proceedings germane to the contextual 
understanding of the present lis, are as follows: 
3.1. The marriage between (i) the Appellant i.e., now serving 
as a Colonel in the Indian Armed Forces presently posted 
at Jalandhar, Punjab; and (ii) the Respondent i.e., now 
employed as a teacher in Delhi Public School, Gurugram - 
was solemnized on 22.12.2002 at Delhi, in accordance 
with Hindu/Sikh rites and rituals. Two minor children were 
born out of the wedlock i.e., (i) a 15 (fifteen) year old 
daughter (hereinafter “SSU”); and (ii) a 12 (twelve) year 
old son (hereinafter "SSH”) (hereinafter, SSU and SSH 
shall collectively be referred to as the “Minor Children”). 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 3 of 27 
 
3.2. In December 2013, the Appellant having been promoted to 
the rank of Colonel in the Indian Armed Forces, was 
posted to serve in the Jammu and Kashmir. Accordingly, it 
was decided that the Respondent together with the Minor 
Children would reside in New Delhi. The relationship 
between the Parties deteriorated significantly; and 
thereafter took a turn for the worst on 08.08.2015, forcing 
the Respondent to leave the matrimonial home for 1 (one) 
night. Upon returning the next day i.e., 09.08.2015, the 
Respondent found the residence locked, and the Appellant 
along with the Minor Children unavailable at aforesaid 
residence. 
3.3. The Respondent was constrained to file (i) a missing 
children’s report on 19.08.2015; and thereafter (ii) an 
application under Section 12 of the Protection of Women 
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (the “DV Act”) on 
17.08.2015. Subsequently, the Respondent learnt that the 
Minor Children along with the Appellant were residing in 
Gulmarg, Jammu and Kashmir and were scheduled to 
move to Bikaner, Rajasthan in furtherance of the nature of 
the Appellant’s service. Aggrieved, the Respondent filed a 
petition under Section 7, 9 and 25 of the Guardian and 
Wards Act, 1890 (the “Act”) before the Family Court 
seeking custody of the Minor Children on 21.11.2015. On 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 4 of 27 
 
the other hand, the Appellant filed a similar petition 
seeking custody of the Minor Children before the Learned 
Principal Jude, Family Court, Bikaner, Rajasthan. 
3.4. This Court vide an order dated 29.03.2017, transferred the 
custody petition filed by the Appellant before the Learned 
Principal Jude, Family Court, Bikaner, Rajasthan to the 
Family Court in Delhi. Thereafter, vide an order dated 
16.10.2017, the Family Court granted interim custody of 
the Minor Children to the Respondent (the “Interim 
Custody Order”). Aggrieved, the Respondent preferred 
an Appeal before the High Court. Vide an order dated 
06.12.2017, the High Court initially stayed the operation 
of the Interim Custody Order; thereafter vide an order 
dated 19.04.2018 granted the Respondent custody of the 
Minor Children on alternative weekends; and finally vide 
an order dated 01.10.2019, dismissed the appeal and 
vacated the interim order(s) observing inter alia that the 
appeal was not maintainable. 
3.5. Aggrieved, the Appellant preferred a writ petition under 
Article 227 of the Constitution of India before the High 
Court challenging the correctness of the Interim Custody 
Order (the “Writ Petition”). Vide an order dated 
29.04.2020, the High Court formulated an interim custody 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 5 of 27 
 
arrangement between the parties after interacting with the 
Minor Children. Pertinently, although an SLP was 
preferred against the aforesaid order, this Court did not 
interfere with the order passed by the High Court; and only 
directed the Family Court to decide the custody petition 
within a period of 1 (one) month. 
3.6. In the aforesaid context, the custody petition came to be 
disposed of by the Family Court vide the Underlying Order 
as under: 
“16.1 In view of the aforesaid discussion, it is 
directed that the permanent custody of minor 
children SSU and SSH shall remain with the 
respondent.  However, the petitioner shall be 
entitled to have interaction with the minor children 
daily through audio-video call for half an hour, 
between 7:00 PM to 8:00 PM.  The respondent shall 
facilitate the said call.  She shall also be entitled to 
visit the minor children and take them out with her 
from 10:00 AM to 5:00 PM, on every second and 
fourth Sunday, at the station, where the minor 
children 
are 
staying, 
subject 
to 
their 
school/educational commitments.  She can pick up 
the children from their residence at 10:00 AM and 
drop them back at 5:00 PM.  If it is not possible to 
have visitation on any such day, it shall be 
compensated on the next Sunday i.e. third or 
fifth/first Sunday.  Further, during the summer 
vacations and the winter vacations in the school(s) 
of the minor children, the petitioner shall be entitled 
to have the custody of the minor children for ten 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 6 of 27 
 
days and five days respectively.  Such days can be 
mutually decided by the parties.  Accordingly, the 
petition filed by the petitioner for seeking custody of 
the minor children SSU and SSH is dismissed, 
subject to contact/visitation/custody rights of the 
petitioner as aforesaid.” 
3.7. Aggrieved by the Underlying Order, the Respondent 
preferred an appeal under Section 19 of Family Courts Act, 
1984 before the High Court. During the pendency of the 
appeal, certain interim order(s) came to be passed from 
time to time, subsequently, vide the Impugned Order, the 
High Court granted the parties shared custody of the Minor 
Children as under: 
“34. In view of the aforesaid discussion, the 
impugned order dated 22.08.2020 is set aside.  We, 
accordingly, partly allow the appeal and direct that 
the appellant and the respondent will share custody 
of the minor children ‘SSU’ and ‘SSH’ in the 
following manner: 
(i) Till the start of the next academic session the 
appellant would be entitled to have overnight 
custody of the minor children on the second and 
fourth weekend of every month.  For the said 
purpose, the appellant shall travel to the 
respondent’s station of posting, on her own expenses 
on the second Friday of every month.  She shall 
either 
make 
her 
own 
arrangements 
for 
accommodation or request the respondent to 
arrange for her accommodation at a guest house in 
the Cantonment Area.  The respondent will hand 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 7 of 27 
 
over the custody of the children to the appellant on 
the evening of Friday, after she has arrived.  The 
children shall remain with the appellant till Sunday 
evening and thereafter, the respondent shall pick 
them up before the appellant leaves for Delhi.  On 
the fourth Friday of every month, the respondent 
shall either bring the children to Delhi or send them 
by flight, while placing them in the care of the 
airline staff.  In such a situation, the appellant will 
pick the children up from the airport.  The children 
shall be returned by flight available on Sunday 
evening.  The expenses for the to and fro journey of 
the children on such fourth weekend of each month 
shall be borne by the respondent.   
(ii) Prior to the beginning of the next academic 
session, the appellant shall ensure that admission of 
the minor children is secured at the school where 
she is currently teaching, i.e., Delhi Public School, 
Gurugram, Haryana.  The respondent shall fully 
cooperate in the admission process.  Thereafter, the 
respondent shall hand over the custody of the minor 
children to the appellant.  The children will stay 
with the appellant at her residence in Delhi.  In such 
a situation, the respondent would be entitled to have 
overnight custody of the minor children on the 
second and fourth weekend of every month.  For the 
said purpose, the respondent shall travel to Delhi, 
on his own expenses on every second Friday.  He 
shall 
make 
his 
own 
arrangements 
for 
accommodation.  The appellant will hand over the 
custody of the children to the respondent on the 
evening of Friday, after he has arrived.  The 
children shall remain with the respondent till 
Sunday evening and thereafter, the appellant shall 
pick them up before the respondent leaves.  On the 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 8 of 27 
 
fourth Friday of every month, the appellant shall 
either bring the children to the respondent’s station 
of posting or send them by flight, while placing them 
in the care of the airline staff.  In such a situation, 
the respondent will pick the children up from the 
airport.  The children shall be returned by flight 
available on Sunday evening.  The expenses for the 
to and fro journey of the children on such fourth 
weekend of each month shall be borne by the 
appellant.  
(iii) In case the respondent is posted to a station in 
the NCT of Delhi, the appellant and the respondent 
will have custody of the minor children for two 
weeks each including the weekends, every month.  
The children shall stay with the appellant for the 
first two weeks of every month and with the 
respondent for the next two weeks of every month.  
At the end of the second week of every month, i.e., 
on Sunday evening, the appellant shall drop the 
children at the respondent’s accommodation.  At the 
end of every fourth week, i.e., on Sunday evening, 
the respondent shall drop the children back at the 
appellant’s residence.  
(iv) During summer vacations and winter vacations, 
the appellant and the respondent shall have custody 
of the minor children for an equal number of days.  
Such days can be mutually agreed upon by the 
parties.  It is clarified that in case the children are 
required to travel as a result of the said 
arrangement during vacations, the expenses for 
their travel shall be borne by the parent who they 
are visiting.  Therefore, if the children are travelling 
from the respondent’s station of posting to Delhi, the 
expenses shall be borne by the appellant.  If the 
children are travelling from Delhi to the 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 9 of 27 
 
respondent’s station of posting, the expenses shall 
be borne by the respondent.”  
3.8. Aggrieved by the Impugned Order, the Appellant preferred 
SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023 (the “SLP”) before this Court 
i.e., now converted to this instant appeal. Vide an order 
dated 05.01.2024, this Court stayed the operation of the 
Impugned Order.  
3.9. It would also be relevant to clarify that, up until this stage, 
the custody of the Minor Children has essentially remained 
with the Appellant despite (i) various interim order(s) 
passed by (a) the High Court; and (b) the Family Court in 
favour of the Respondent; and (ii) the initiation of 
contempt proceedings before the High Court. 
Contentions of the Parties 
4. 
Shri Vivek Chib, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on 
behalf of the Appellant, urged the following: 
4.1. That the Minor Children have been residing with him 
happily since ‘15 i.e., for period extending to almost to 9 
(nine) years and it is the desire of the Minor Children to 
continue to reside with the Appellant. In this regard, it was 
submitted that the aforesaid preference has been 
communicated by the Minor Children to various court(s) 
from time -to-time including inter alia the High Court.  

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 10 of 27 
 
4.2. That the High Court proceeded on an erroneous 
assumption that the prolonged period of separation 
between the Respondent and the Minor Children has sub-
consciously influenced the Minor Children against the 
Respondent. 
4.3. That the Underlying Order passed by the Family Court was 
a detailed and well-reasoned order which has been passed 
after a thorough analysis of the copious evidence and 
material(s) on record in favour of the Appellant. 
4.4. Lastly, Mr. Chib relied on the following decision(s) of this 
Court to buttress the aforesaid submission(s): 
(a) 
Jitender Arora v. Sukriti Arora, (2017) 3 SCC 726; 
(b) 
Nil Ratan Kundu v. Abhijit Kundu, (2008) 9 SCC 
413; 
(c) 
Mausami Moitra Ganguli v. Jayant Ganguli, 
(2008) 7 SCC 673; 
(d) 
Vishnu v. Jaya, (2010) 6 SCC 733; and 
(e) 
Lahari Sakhamuri v. Sobhan Kodali, (2019) 7 SCC 
311. 
5. 
Ms. Vandana Sehgal, AOR appearing on behalf of the 
Respondent brought forth the following key contentions: 
5.1. That the Appellant has forcefully retained the custody of 
the Minor Children for a prolonged period of 8 (eight) 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 11 of 27 
 
years in blatant disregard of various order(s) passed by the 
High Court and / or the Family Court directing interim 
shared custody of the Minor Children at different points of 
time. 
5.2. That the Underlying Order granted the Appellant custody 
of the Minor Children proceeding on an erroneous and 
irrelevant consideration i.e., the alleged act of adultery. 
5.3. That the Appellant has deliberately disenfranchised the 
Minor Children from their mother i.e., the Respondent 
herein, and accordingly it was vehemently contended that 
the present lis is a classic case of ‘parental alienation 
syndrome’ (“PAS”). 
5.4. That the Minor Children are at an impressionable age and 
require the presence of their mother i.e., the Respondent.  
5.5. That the Court whilst exercising its parens patriae 
jurisdiction must not limit itself to the wish and / or desire 
of the Minor Children but must ensure the welfare of the 
Minor Children. 
5.6. That the Respondent is employed as a teacher in a reputed 
school in Gurugram; and would be able to provide the 
Minor Children with a stable and conducive environment 
as opposed to Appellant i.e., a serving officer in the Indian 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 12 of 27 
 
Armed Forces, who is due to be transferred to a field 
station as opposed to a family station.  
5.7. In regard to the aforesaid, Ms. Sehgal relied on the 
following:  
(a) 
Vivek Singh v. Romani Singh, (2017) 3 SCC 231; 
(b) 
Gaurav Nagpal v. Sumedha Nagpal (2009) 1 SCC 
 
 
42; 
(c) 
Nil Ratan Kundu (Supra); and 
(d) 
Rosy Jacob v. Jacob A. Chakramakkal, (1973) 1 
SCC 840. 
 
Analysis and Findings 
6. 
We have heard the learned counsels appearing on behalf of 
the respective parties at length and we have carefully considered 
and deliberated upon the submission(s) made on behalf of the 
parties.  
7. 
In the instant appeal we have been called upon to decide 
the guardianship of 2 (two) minor children i.e., (i) SSU; and (ii) 
SSH, till they attain the age of majority. 
8. 
It is well settled that the principal consideration of the 
Court whilst deciding an application for guardianship under the 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 13 of 27 
 
Act in exercise of its parens patriae jurisdiction would be the 
‘welfare’ of the minor children.1  
9. 
The aforesaid principle is also enshrined in Section 17 of 
the Act, the same is reproduced as under:  
“17. Matters to be considered by the Court in 
appointing guardian. – (1) In appointing or 
declaring the guardian of a minor, the Court shall, 
subject to the provisions of this section, be guided 
by what, consistently with the law to which the 
minor is subject, appears in the circumstances to be 
for the welfare of the minor. 
(2) In considering what will be for the welfare of the 
minor, the Court shall have regard to the age, sex 
and religion of the minor, the character and 
capacity of the proposed guardian and his nearness 
of kin to the minor, the wishes, if any, of a deceased 
parent, and any existing or previous relations of the 
proposed guardian with the minor or his property.   
(3) If the minor is old enough to form an intelligent 
preference, the Court may consider that preference.  
 2*  
* 
 
* 
 
* 
 
* 
(5) The Court shall not appoint or declare any 
person to be a guardian against his will.” 
10. 
In this context, it would be appropriate to refer to a 
decision of this Court in Nil Ratan Kundu (Supra) wherein 
parameters of ‘welfare’ and principles to be considered by courts 
 
1 V. Ravi Chandran (Dr.) (2) v. Union of India, (2010) 1 SCC 174 
2 Sub-section (4) omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule. 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 14 of 27 
 
whilst deciding questions involving the custody of minor 
children came to be enunciated. The relevant paragraph(s) are 
reproduced as under:  
“52. In our judgment, the law relating to custody of 
a child is fairly well settled and it is this: in deciding 
a difficult and complex question as to the custody of 
a minor, a court of law should keep in mind the 
relevant statutes and the rights flowing therefrom. 
But such cases cannot be decided solely by 
interpreting legal provisions. It is a human problem 
and is required to be solved with human touch. A 
court while dealing with custody cases, is neither 
bound by statutes nor by strict rules of evidence or 
procedure nor by precedents. In selecting proper 
guardian of a minor, the paramount consideration 
should be the welfare and wellbeing of the child. In 
selecting a guardian, the court is exercising parens 
patriae jurisdiction and is expected, nay bound, to 
give due weight to a child's ordinary comfort, 
contentment, 
health, 
education, 
intellectual 
development and favourable surroundings. But over 
and above physical comforts, moral and ethical 
values cannot beignored. They are equally, or we 
may say, even more important, essential and 
indispensable considerations. If the minor is old 
enough to form an intelligent preference or 
judgment, the court must consider such preference 
as well, though the final decision should rest with 
the court as to what is conducive to the welfare of 
the minor. 
 
xxx 
 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 15 of 27 
 
55. We are unable to appreciate the approach of the 
courts below. This Court in a catena of decisions 
has held that the controlling consideration 
governing the custody of children is the welfare of 
children and not the right of their parents.  
56. In Rosy Jacob [(1973) 1 SCC 840] this Court 
stated:  
(SCC p. 854, para 15) 
“15. … The contention that if the husband 
 
[father] is not unfit to be the guardian of his 
 
minor children, then, the question of their 
 
welfare does not at all arise is to state the 
 
proposition a bit too broadly and may at times 
 
be somewhat misleading.” 
It was also observed that the father's fitness has to 
be 
considered, 
determined 
and 
weighed 
predominantly in terms of the welfare of his minor 
children in the context of all the elevant 
circumstances. The father's fitness cannot override 
considerations of the welfare of the minor children. 
57. In our opinion, in such cases, it is not the 
“negative test” that the father is not “unfit” or 
disqualified to have custody of his son/daughter that 
is relevant, but the “positive test” that such custody 
would be in the welfare of the minor which is 
material and it is on that basis that the court should 
exercise the power to grant or refuse custody of a 
minor in favour of the father, the mother or any 
other guardian.” 
 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 16 of 27 
 
11. 
Furthermore, this Court in Gaurav Nagpal (Supra) 
undertook a comprehensive and comparative analysis of laws 
relating to custody in the American, English, and Indian 
jurisdiction(s) and observed that the Court must construe the term 
‘welfare’ in its widest sense i.e., the consideration by the Court 
would not only extend to moral and ethical welfare but also 
include the physical well-being of the minor children.  
12. 
Accordingly, in view of the aforesaid, not only must we 
proceed to decide the present lis on the basis of a holistic and all-
encompassing approach including inter alia (i) the socio-
economic and educational opportunities which may be made 
available to the Minor Children; (ii) healthcare and overall-
wellbeing of the children; (iii) the ability to provide physical 
surroundings conducive to growing adolescents but also take into 
consideration the preference of the Minor Children as mandated 
under Section 17(3) of the Act.3 Furthermore, we are equally 
conscious that the stability of surrounding(s) of the Minor 
Children is also a consideration to be weighed appropriately.4 
13. 
In the present factual matrix, the minor children i.e., SSU; 
and SSH have interacted with the Court(s) to express their 
preference of guardian on a plethora of occasions. Accordingly, 
 
3 Lahari Sakhamuri (Supra); and Tejaswini Gaud v. Shekhar Jagdish Prasad Tewari, 
(2019) 7 SCC 42. 
4 Shazia Aman Khan and Ors. vs. The State of Orissa and Ors., 2024 INSC 163. 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 17 of 27 
 
we consider it appropriate to briefly delve into the observations 
of the Court(s) vis-à-vis the preference expressed by the Minor 
Children:  
13.1. The Learned Single Judge of the High Court engaged with 
the Minor Children on 24.02.2020 i.e., SSU was 
approximately 11.5 (eleven and a half) years old; and SHH 
was approximately 8 (eight) years old. The Learned Single 
Judge in his order dated 29.04.2020 recorded that he found 
the Minor Children to be confident and well-groomed. 
Furthermore, it has been categorically stated no overt 
preference was indicated by the Minor Children in respect 
to one parent over the other. 
13.2. Thereafter, the Family Court engaged in a personal 
interaction with the Minor Children on 11.08.2020 i.e., 
when SSU was approximately 12 (twelve) years old; and 
SSH was approximately 8.5 (eight and a half) years old. 
Pertinently, in Underlying Order, the Family Court 
observed that the Minor Children expressed their 
preference to reside with the Appellant. Additionally, it 
was observed that the Minor Children were doing well in 
the pursuit of their education and co-curricular activities 
whilst residing with the Appellant; and that the Minor 
Children were well-settled and progressing fine. 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 18 of 27 
 
13.3. Subsequently, the Division Bench of the High Court 
interacted with the Minor Children on two occasions i.e., 
(i) 23.08.2021; and (ii) 17.08.2022. Pertinently, the 
Division Bench in an order dated 23.08.2021 observed that 
the children were intelligent and reasonably grown up. On 
the other hand, the Division Bench in the Impugned Order 
observed that the Minor Children expressed their clear 
desire to reside with the Appellant. 
13.4. In the Supreme Court, we considered it necessary to 
interact with the Minor Children ourselves. Accordingly, 
vide an order dated 19.03.2024, we directed the Appellant 
to produce the Minor Children in Court so as to enable us 
to interact with them. On 05.04.2024, we interacted with 
both SSU; and SSH in chambers. We found the Minor 
Children to be intelligent, confident, cognisant of the pros 
and cons of their decisions and most importantly content / 
happy. During our interactions with the Minor Children, 
despite probing the issue of guardianship on more than one 
occasion, the Minor Children categorically stated that they 
were happy and wished to reside with their father only i.e., 
the Appellant. 
14. 
The natural and consequential deduction from the 
aforesaid interaction(s) between the Minor Children and various 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 19 of 27 
 
Court over a period spanning over 4 (four) years, is the 
unwavering and strong desire of the children to continue to reside 
with the Appellant. The aforesaid desire / preference although in 
itself cannot be determinative of custody of the children, but it 
must be given due consideration on account of it being a factor 
of utmost importance. 
15. 
Having settled the preference of the Minor Children, we 
turn towards, the next leg of the analysis to be undertaken by this 
Court in questions involving custody of children i.e., 
considerations of welfare of the children. 
16. 
In the instant appeal, certain contentions were raised by 
Ms. Sehgal in relation to the nature of employment of the 
Appellant posing a challenge in the upbringing and welfare of the 
Minor Children. We find ourselves unable to subscribe to the 
aforesaid view, as we find that the Indian Armed Forces provides 
a robust support system to the kin of its officer(s) so as to ensure 
minimal disruption in the lives of the civilian member(s) of an 
officer’s family. This support system includes residential 
accommodation, a network of army schools, hospitals and 
healthcare facilities. Moreover, various extra-curricular activities 
i.e., sport(s) facilities and recreational clubs; and other social and 
cultural functions are made available for the benefit of the kin of 
officers of the Indian Armed Forces – the aforesaid support 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 20 of 27 
 
system undoubtedly, aids in the mental stimulation, growth and 
overall development of personality of a child. 
17. 
At this juncture it would also be relevant to deal with the 
main thrust of the argument put forth by Ms. Sehgal in relation 
to the preference indicated by the Minor Children i.e., it was 
contended that the present case is a classic case of PAS wherein 
the Minor Children have been influenced against the Respondent; 
and accordingly the preference indicated by the Minor Children 
ought not to be considered representative of the true emotions of 
the Minor Children. In view of the aforesaid, the decision of this 
Court in Vivek Singh (Supra) was heavily relied upon to 
substantiate her submission. The relevant paragraph is 
reproduced as under:  
“18. The aforesaid observations, contained in para 
31 of the order of the High Court extracted above, 
apply with greater force today, when Saesha is 8 
years' old child. She is at a crucial phase when there 
is a major shift in thinking ability which may help 
her to understand cause and effect better and think 
about the future. She would need regular and 
frequent contact with each parent as well as 
shielding from parental hostility. Involvement of 
both parents in her life and regular school 
attendance are absolutely essential at this age for 
her personality development. She would soon be 
able to establish her individual interests and 
preferences, shaped by her own individual 
personality as well as experience. Towards this end, 
it also becomes necessary for parents to exhibit 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 21 of 27 
 
model good behaviour and set healthy and positive 
examples as much and as often as possible. It is the 
age when her emotional development may be 
evolving at a deeper level than ever before. In order 
to ensure that she achieves stability and maturity in 
her thinking and is able to deal with complex 
emotions, it is necessary that she is in the company 
of her mother as well, for some time. This Court 
cannot turn a blind eye to the fact that there have 
been strong feelings of bitterness, betrayal, anger 
and distress between the appellant and the 
respondent, where each party feels that they are 
“right” in many of their views on issues which led 
to separation. The intensity of negative feeling of 
the appellant towards the respondent would have 
obvious effect on the psyche of Saesha, who has 
remained in the company of her father, to the 
exclusion of her mother. The possibility of 
appellant's effort to get the child to give up her own 
positive perceptions of the other parent i.e. the 
mother and change her to agree with the appellant's 
viewpoint cannot be ruled out thereby diminishing 
the affection of Saesha towards her mother. 
Obviously, the appellant, during all this period, 
would not have said anything about the positive 
traits of the respondent. Even the matrimonial 
discord between the two parties would have been 
understood by Saesha, as perceived by the 
appellant. Psychologists term it as “The Parental 
Alienation Syndrome” [The Parental Alienation 
Syndrome was originally described by Dr Richard 
Gardner in “Recent Developments in Child Custody 
Litigation”, The Academy Forum, Vol. 29, No. 2: 
The American Academy of Psychoanalysis, 1985]. 
It has at least two psychological destructive effects: 
 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 22 of 27 
 
(i) First, it puts the child squarely in the middle 
of a contest of loyalty, a contest which cannot 
possibly be won. The child is asked to choose who 
is the preferred parent. No matter whatever is the 
choice, the child is very likely to end up feeling 
painfully guilty and confused. This is because in the 
overwhelming majority of cases, what the child 
wants and needs is to continue a relationship with 
each parent, as independent as possible from their 
own conflicts. 
(ii) Second, the child is required to make a shift 
in assessing reality. One parent is presented as 
being totally to blame for all problems, and as 
someone 
who 
is 
devoid 
of 
any 
positive 
characteristics. Both of these assertions represent 
one parent's distortions of reality.” 
18. 
The aforesaid submission found favour with the High 
Court. Pertinently, the High Court in the Impugned Order 
observed that the possibility of the Minor Children having been 
influenced against the Respondent, could not be ruled out. 
19. 
We find ourselves unable to agree with the High Court - in 
our considered opinion, the High Court has failed to appreciate 
the intricacies and complexities of the relationship between the 
parties and accordingly, proceeded to entertain allegations of PAS 
on an unsubstantiated basis. 
20. 
PAS is a thoroughly convoluted and intricate phenomenon 
that requires serious consideration and deliberation. In our 
considered 
opinion, 
recognising 
and 
appreciating 
the 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 23 of 27 
 
repercussions of PAS certainly shed light on the realities of long-
drawn and bitter custody and divorce litigation(s) on a certain 
identified sect of families, however, it is equally important for us 
to remember that there can no straitjacket formula to invoke the 
principle laid down by this Court in Vivek Singh (Supra). 
21. 
The role of a Court vis-à-vis allegation(s) of PAS came to 
be considered recently by an English Court i.e., the High Court 
of Justice Family Division in Re C ('parental alienation'; 
instruction of expert), [2023] EWHC 345 (Fam). Pertinently, the 
Court reflected on the changing narrative in relation to PAS -  
placed before the Court therein, by an expert body i.e., the 
Association of Clinical Psychologists - UK (“ACP”) and 
thereafter observed as under: 
“103. Before leaving this part of the appeal, one 
particular paragraph in the ACP skeleton argument 
deserves to be widely understood and, I would 
strongly urge, accepted: 
'Much like an allegation of domestic 
abuse; the decision about whether or not 
a parent has alienated a child is a 
question of fact for the Court to resolve 
and not a diagnosis that can or should 
be offered by a psychologist. For these 
purposes, the ACP-UK wishes to 
emphasise that “parental alienation” is 
not a syndrome capable of being 
diagnosed, 
but 
a 
process 
of 
manipulation of children perpetrated by 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 24 of 27 
 
one parent against the other through, 
what 
are 
termed 
as, 
“alienating 
behaviours”. It is, fundamentally, a 
question of fact.' 
It is not the purpose of this judgment to go further 
into the topic of alienation. Most Family judges 
have, for some time, regarded the label of 'parental 
alienation', and the suggestion that there may be a 
diagnosable syndrome of that name, as being 
unhelpful. What is important, as with domestic 
abuse, is the particular behaviour that is found to 
have taken place within the individual family 
before the court, and the impact that that 
behaviour may have had on the relationship of a 
child with either or both of his/her parents. In this 
regard, the identification of 'alienating behaviour' 
should be the court's focus, rather than any quest 
to 
determine 
whether 
the 
label 
'parental 
alienation' can be applied.” 
22. 
We find ourselves in agreement with the aforesaid 
position. Courts ought not to prematurely and without 
identification of individual instances of ‘alienating behaviour’, 
label any parent as propagator and / or potential promoter of such 
behaviour. The aforesaid label has far-reaching implications 
which must not be imputed or attributed to an individual parent 
routinely. 
23. 
Accordingly, it is our considered opinion that Courts must 
endeavour to identify individual instances of ‘alienating 
behaviour’ in order to invoke the principle of parental alienation 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 25 of 27 
 
so as to overcome the preference indicated by the minor 
children.5 
24. 
In the instant appeal, the Family Court has categorically 
recorded that there was nothing on record to suggest that the 
interests and welfare of the Minor Children were in any manner 
affected during their stay with the Appellant. Additionally, the 
Learned Single Judge of the High Court interacted with the 
Minor Children on 24.02.2020 i.e., a period of close to 4.5 (four 
and a half) years after the alleged incident on 08.08.2015, and 
categorically recorded that the Minor Children expressed no 
overt preference amongst their parents – the aforesaid 
observation by the Learned Single Judge, is crucial as it 
underscores that while the relationship between the parties may 
have been strained; the Minor Children could not be said to have 
exhibited any indication of  ‘parental alienation’ i.e., there was 
no overt preference expressed by the Minor Children between the 
parents and thus, the foundation for any claim of parental 
alienation  was clearly absent. The aforesaid position is also 
supported by materials on record to suggest that (i) the Minor 
Children are cognisant and aware of the blame game being 
played inter se the parties; and (ii) that the Minor Children did 
not foster unbridled and prejudiced emotions towards the 
Respondent.  Accordingly, we find that the Appellant could not 
 
5 Recognised by this Court in Vivek Singh (Supra). 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 26 of 27 
 
have been said to have engaged or propagated ‘alienating 
behaviour’ as alleged by the Respondent. 
25. 
 Therefore, in our considered opinion, the High Court 
failed to appreciate the aforesaid nuance and proceeded on an 
unsubstantiated assumption i.e., that allegations of parental 
alienation could not be ruled out, despite the stark absence of any 
instances of 'alienating behaviour' having been identified by any 
Court. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we find that the 
reliance placed on Vivek Singh (Supra) by the Respondent is 
misdirected and the High Court erred in law and in fact whilst 
relying on the said decision. 
26. 
Accordingly, on an overall consideration, we are 
convinced that the High Court was neither correct nor justified in 
interfering with the well-considered and reasoned order passed 
by the Family Court granting custody of the Minor Children to 
the Appellant for the reasons recorded above.  
 
Directions & Conclusions 
27. 
In view of the aforesaid discussion, we consider it just and 
appropriate that the custody of the Minor Children is retained by 
the Appellant, subject to the visitation rights of the Respondent 
as granted by the Family Court vide the Underlying Order i.e., 
the final order dated 22.08.2020. 

SLP (C) No. 28466 of 2023  
 
Page 27 of 27 
 
28. 
The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms; the Impugned 
Order is set aside. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 
No order as to cost(s). 
 
……………………………………J. 
   
 
 
 
                            [VIKRAM NATH] 
 
 
 
 
……………………………………J. 
                                             [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
 
NEW DELHI 
MAY 08, 2024