2024 INSC 396
REPORTABLE
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6144  OF 2024
(@ SLP (C) No. 14213 of 2015)
K.P. Khemka & Anr.
… Appellant (s)
Versus
 
Haryana State Industrial and Infrastructure 
Development Corporation Limited & Ors. 
...Respondent(s)
With
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6145  OF 2024
(@ SLP (C) No. 23041 of 2015)
Charanjeet Gaba
… Appellant (s)
Versus
 
State of Haryana & Ors. 
...Respondent(s)
O R D E R 
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.
Leave granted.
1
Digitally signed by
satish kumar yadav
Date: 2024.05.08
15:57:29 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2.
The  present  appeals  arise  from  the  judgment  of  a
Division Bench of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at
Chandigarh dated 24.04.2015 in CWP No. 15983 of 2013 and
CWP No. 26452 of 2014.  By the said judgment, the High
Court dismissed the writ petitions and rejected the contention
of the appellants herein that if a debt is time-barred under the
Limitation  Act,  1963,  the  same  cannot  be  recovered  by
resorting to the Haryana Public Moneys (Recovery of Dues)
Act, 1979 (for short “the Recovery of Dues Act”) read with
the State Financial Corporation Act, 1951.  In so holding, the
Division Bench applied the well established principle that the
Limitation Act, which applies to Courts, merely bars the
remedy and does not extinguish the debt.  
3.
The appellants herein had relied upon the judgment of a
three-Judge Bench of this Court in  State of Kerala and
Others
 
   vs. V.R. Kalliyanikutty & Anr. (1999) 3 SCC 657 to
contend that a time-barred debt under the Limitation Act
cannot be recovered under the Recovery of Dues Act. While
2

dealing with this contention, the High Court relied upon the
judgment of a Constitution Bench of this Court in Bombay
Dyeing and Manufacturing Company Limited vs. The
 
    State
of  Bombay  and  Ors., 1958  SCR  1122 to  reiterate  the
principle that the Limitation Act merely bars the remedy and
does  not  extinguish  the  debt.   The  High  Court  also
distinguished the judgment in V.R. Kalliyanikutty (supra) by
holding that the judgments of this Court in Bombay Dyeing
and  Manufacturing  Company  Limited  (supra) 
and
Tilokchand and Motichand and Others vs.  H.B. Munshi
and Another,  (1969) 1 SCC 110 were not brought to the
notice of the Bench deciding V.R. Kalliyanikutty (supra).   
4. Facts in Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 14213 of
2015 are as follows:
i.
Respondent No.3 - M/s Khemka Ispat Limited was a
Company  engaged  in  the  business  of  manufacture,
production, import, export, sale and distribution of all types
3

of Cold Rolled Strips, steel  sockets, pipe and tube products,
and other allied goods. 
ii.
On  07.03.2003, Respondent No.3 had taken a Term
Loan under an Equipment Finance Scheme from Respondent
No.1  -  Haryana  State  Industrial  and  Infrastructure
Development Corporation Limited (hereinafter referred to as
“the HSIDC Ltd.”) for a sum of Rs.105.90 lakhs.  In view of
the said Term Loan, Respondent No.3 had entered into a
Loan Agreement with HSIDC Ltd. along with the personal
guarantees of the appellants herein. 
iii.
On 31.03.2003, the sanctioned loan amount to the tune
of  Rs.105  lakhs  was  disbursed  to  Respondent  No.3.  On
15.07.2003, further amount of Rs. 2 lakhs was disbursed.
The Loan was to be repaid in five years with a moratorium
period of six months w.e.f. 01.10.2003.  
iv.
On 19.08.2004, the First Default Notice was issued to
Respondent No.3 by HSIDC  Ltd. along with intimation of a
4

right under Section 29 of the State Financial Corporations
Act.
v.
In  the  meantime,  Respondent  No.3  became  a  Sick
Company and reference was made to the Board for Industrial
and Financial Reconstruction (for short “the BIFR”).  On
31.07.2006, the outstanding as on date to HSIDC Ltd. was
Rs.99.32 lakhs. 
vi.
 On  17.08.2006,  BIFR  declined  Respondent  No.3’s
Reference and the One-Time Settlement request. ING Vysya
Bank  also  informed  the  BIFR  that  it  had  taken  over
possession of the unit, in accordance with which the BIFR
ordered  the  reference  to  have  abated.  Respondent  No.  3
informed the said ING Vysya Bank that the latter will not be
responsible for the dues of the HSIDC Ltd, and that the
machinery is in possesison of the Company.  On 01.06.2007,
HSIDC Ltd. took possession of the movables.  
vii.
While  proceedings  were  carrying  on  against  the
principal borrower, on 08.08.2007, Respondent No.1 HSIDC
5

Ltd. issued a show cause notice under Section 3(1)(b) of the
Recovery of Dues Act to Respondent No.3, which notice was
returned back with the remarks “closed/left”.  
viii. On 25.09.2007, a winding up petition was filed by one
of the creditors of Respondent No.3 in C.P. NO. 171 of 2007
before the High Court of Delhi, wherein a provisional order
to  wind-up  was  passed  and  a  provisional  liquidator
appointed.  Further, Final Order of winding up of Respondent
No.3 appears to have been passed on 24.03.2009.  
ix.
When the matter stood thus, on 29.10.2009, Respondent
No.1 issued a show cause notice under Section 3(1)(b) of the
Recovery of Dues Act to the Appellants and the same was
returned with the remarks “left/closed”.  
x. 
Thereafter, on 10.01.2012, recovery notice sent to the
appellants  by  Respondent  No.2,  the  Additional  General
Manager  of  HSIDC  Ltd.,  under  Section  3(1)(b)  of  the
Recovery  of  Dues  Act  was  returned  with  the  remarks
6

“left/closed”. The order determining the amount due as Rs.
213.19 lakhs w.e.f 10.01.2012 was passed by the HSIDC Ltd.
xi.
On 02.02.2012, the HSIDC Ltd. sent a notice under the
provisions of the Recovery of Dues Act to the Appellants and
the Respondent No. 3 indicating the sum determined to be
due from them, which was to the tune of Rs.213.19 lakhs.
On  01.03.2012, the appellants filed their reply.  This was
rejected  by  the  Respondent  No.  2,  Additional  General
Manager  of  HSIDC  Ltd.,  on  15.11.2012.  Thereafter,  the
Respondent No. 2, Additional General Manager of HSIDC
Ltd.,  issued  a  Final  Notice  under  the  provisions  of  the
Recovery of Dues Act dated  15.11.2012 calling upon the
appellants to pay Rs. 213.19 lakhs which was determined to
be due from the Appellants and Respondent No. 3.  
xii. On 11.01.2013, recovery certificate under Section 3(1) of
the Recovery of Dues Act for a sum of Rs. 243.11 lakhs, was
issued.  
7

xiii. On 12.07.2013, appellants filed CWP No. 15983 of 2013
challenging the recovery notice. The relevant ground was
raised in the following terms: 
“G.  BECAUSE  the  Impugned  Orders  deserve  to  be
quashed as the recovery which has been initiated by first
sending the notice on 10.01.2012 under the provisions of
Haryana Public Moneys (Recovery of Dues) Act, 1979 is
much beyond the limitation to recover any dues by the
Corporation. The period of limitation if any was 3 years
from 31.07.2004, when the amount stood and payable by
Respondent No. 3 Company (in Liqn.). The period to
recovery from either the Company or the Guarantors who
stood surety for the said amount expired in the year 2007.
The recovery as per the notices sent by the Respondent
Corporation admittedly have been sent on 10.01.2012
and subsequent thereto and therefore any adjudication or
determination of a sum due in view of the above said Act
is unsustainable and is in any case time barred”
xiv.  The  Writ  Petition  was dismissed  vide  the  impunged
order. 
5.
The facts in Civil Appeal arising out of Special Leave
Petition (C) No. 23041 of 2015 are as under:
i.
The Haryana Financial Corporation sanctioned a term
loan of Rs.88,74,000/- to Respondent No.5 - Cosmo Flex
Private Limited on  31.01.1996. The loan was to be repaid
within  a  period  of  eight  weeks  by  way  of  quarterly
8

instalments and the agreed rate of interest was 19.5% with
half yearly rests.  On  17.03.1997, the loan agreement was
executed. 
ii.
The appellant, who was a Director of the R-5 Company,
claims  that  he  resigned  from  the  Directorship  of  the
Respondent No. 5 Company on 06.04.1998.  
iii. 
On  29.07.1998, the loan was recalled by the Haryana
Financial Corporation.  
iv.  In the meantime, the appellant claims that on account of
his resignation from Directorship of the Respondent No. 5
company, he was paid a full and final settlement from the
Company  on  23.10.1998.  Thereafter,  he  claims  that  the
Registrar of Companies was also intimated about the fact of
his resignation, on 12.10.1998. 
v. 
The  Haryana  Financial  Corporation,  on  19.08.1999,
sent a notice for taking over possession of the Company’s
assets and thereafter took possession on 31.08.1999.  
9

vi. 
The  Haryana  Financial  Corporation  has  set-out  the
time-line of events where multiple recovery notices under the
Recovery  of  Dues  Act  were  issued,  leading  up  to  the
determination of the sum due from the Appellants herein, in
the following terms:
“4. ...On continous non-repayment of dues, the possession
of the mortgaged properties was taken over under section
29 of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951. The
primary security was disposed of by the Corporation for
Rs. 61.00 lakh on 16.12.1999. The Recovery Certificate
was issued on  22.09.2000 to the Collectors Gurgaon,
Delhi & Srinagar and were returned in the year 2001 on
the ground that no immovable/movable properties were
available in the names of directors/guarantors and they
were  not  residing  at  the  given  addresses.  The  fresh
Recovery Certificate was issued on 10.08.2005 u/s 3 of
Haryana Public Moneys (Recovery of Dues) Act, 1979 in
the name of Collectors, Sri Nagar, Delhi & Gurgaon
through  Collector,  Gurgaon.  The  Recovery  Certificate
pertaining  to  Collectors,  Sri  Nagar  &  Delhi  were
returned by Collector, Gurgaon to send the same directly
to the concerned Collectors as there was no provisions to
send the same by one Collector to another Collector.
After obtaining legal opinion as per which, it was advised
that as per Section 3 of the Revenue Recovery Act, the
Collector  may  send  a  certificate  to  other  Collector,
Recovery  Certificates  were  returned  to  Collector,
Gurgaon. However, Recovery Certificate in the name of
Collector  Gurgaon  was  being  pursued.  As  Recovery
Certificate with Collector Delhi was not traceable in his
office, photocopy  of  the  Recovery  Certificate was  re-
lodged  with  Collector  Delhi  on  16.04.2008. It  was
informed by Collector Delhi that the Recovery Certificate
10

lodged with them was not in their jurisdiction and as
such recovery cannot be effected. Further, the directors
residing  at  Gurgaon  &  Delhi  had  shifted  to  some
unknown places. However, as the new addresses of one of
the Directors Sh. Charanjeet Gaba were found out, fresh
RCs were issued to Collectors Delhi (Central, East, South
& West), Gurgaon & Sri Nagar (Kashmir) on 19.04.2010
u/s  32G  of  the  State  Financial  Corporations  Act.
However, the Recovery Certificate dated 19.04.2010 was
quashed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana vide
order dated  02.12.2011  passed in CWP No. 12226 of
2010 on the ground that the same was issued without
affording  the  Petitioners  an  opportunity  of  personal
hearing. The Corporation was given liberty to proceed
after hearing the petitioner and giving him opportunity to
file his objections. 
xxx xxx xxx
7.
Accordingly,  personal  hearings  were  given  to
defaulting borrowers/guarantors for sum determination
under Section 32-G of the State Financial Corporations
Act, 1951 on  11.12.2013,  19.03.2014 and  06.08.2014,
objection  raised  by  Sh.  Charanjeet  Gaba,
borrower/guarantor verbally during the personal hearing
as well as through various representations were dealt in
detail in the proceeding of  personal  hearing held on
06.08.2014. However, as no constructive proposal for
repayment/settlement under the new Settlement Policies
of HFC-2011 was recived from Sh. Charanjeet Gaba or
other  borrowers/guarantors,  Recovery  Certificate  was
issued to Collectors, Srinagar, Solan (HP), Gurgaon &
Delhi  on
 08.10.2014 
for  the  recovery  of  Rs.
14,55,11,275/-  with  further  interest  @24%  from
01.03.2014, the same stand challenged by the petitioner
before the Hon’ble High Court as  stated above.”
(emphasis supplied)
11

vii. The appellant challenged the proceedings dated 06.08.2014
by filing CWP No. 26452 of 2014. By the Impugned Order, the
Writ Petition was dismissed.
viii. In the Special Leave Petition filed before this Court, the
case of the Appellant as regards the debt being time-barred is as
follows:
“A. Because the order/proceedings dated 06.08.2014 passed
by  Respondent  No.  3  under  Section  32  (G)  of  the  State
Financial Corporation Act for recovery of Rs. 14,55,11,275/-
along with pendente lite and future interest could not have
been issued as the recovery had already become time barred
against  the  petitioner.  Since  the  recovery  on  the  basis  of
mortgaged property had already been effected by way of sale
dated  16.12.1999  the  remaining  amount  could  not  be
recovered beyond the limited time of three years”
Contentions of the Parties
6.
Before us, learned counsel for the appellants contend that
the judgment in V.R. Kalliyanikutty (supra) directly covers the
issue as according to them, in substance, there is no difference
between the provisions of the Kerala Revenue Recovery Act,
with which V.R. Kalliyanikutty (supra) was concerned, and the
Recovery of Dues Act of the State of Haryana.  According to the
12

learned counsel, V.R. Kalliyanikutty (supra) has clearly held that
Acts, like the Recovery of Dues Act, are intended for speedy
recovery of loans and do not create a new right in the creditor. It
is their contention that on that reasoning the word “due” in the
Recovery of Dues Act cannot be interpreted to include time-
barred debts.  
7.
Learned counsel for the respondent-Corporations strongly
refuted these contentions and contended that the impugned order
was perfectly justified in holding that the decision of this Court
in V.R. Kalliyanikutty (supra) has not considered the holding in
Bombay Dyeing (supra) and Tilokchand Motichand (supra).
Questions that arise for this Court’s consideration
8.
The questions that fall for consideration are, firstly, are the
appellants  right  in  contending  that  the  recovery  proceedings
initiated against them under the Recovery of Dues Act are barred
in view of the principle laid down in V.R.Kalliyanikutty (supra).
Secondly,  if  they  are  right,  then  is  the  decision  in  V.R.
13

Kalliyaikutty (supra) contrary to the holding in Bombay Dyeing
and Manufacturing Company Limited (supra) and if so what is
the course open for this two-Judge Bench.
Reasoning in V.R. Kalliyanikutty 
 
 (supra)
9.
To  appreciate  these  contentions,  we  need  to  first
understand the law laid down in  V.R. Kalliyanikutty (supra).
The primary question of law involved in  V.R. Kalliyanikutty
(supra) was, whether a debt which is barred by the law of
limitation can be recovered by resorting to recovery proceedings
under the Kerala Revenue Recovery Act, 1968. This apart, the
Bench,  after  setting  out  the  scheme  of  the  Kerala  Revenue
Recovery Act, examined the further question as to whether the
object of the Kerala Revenue Recovery Act was only for speedy
recovery or if the said Act also enlarged the right to recover.
Additionaly, the Bench addressed the question as to whether the
words “amount due” would refer to the amounts repayable under
the terms of the Loan Agreement executed between the debtor
and the creditor irrespective of whether the claim was time-
14

barred or whether the words refer to only those claims which are
legally recoverable.
10.
Relying upon  Hansraj Gupta vs.  Dehra Dun-Mussorie
Electric Tramway Co. Ltd.,  AIR 1933 PC 63, the Bench in
Kalliyanikutty (supra) held that the Kerala Recovery Act did not
create any new right and that it merely provided a process for
speedy recovery.  In view of the same, it held that since the Act
did not create any right, the person claiming recovery cannot
claim recovery of amounts which are not legally recoverable.
The Bench thereafter distinguished the judgment in Khadi 
 
 Gram
Udyog Trust v.  Ram Chandraji Virajman Mandir, Sarasiya
Ghat, Kanpur, (1978) 1 SCC 44 as having no applicability to
the  interpretation  of  the  Kerala  Revenue  Recovery  Act.   It
further relied on the judgment of this Court in  Director of
Industries, U.P. vs. Deep Chand Agarwal (1980) 2 SCC 332 to
reinforce its holding on the interpretation of the word ‘due’
under  the Kerala  Revenue Recovery  Act.  The  plea  that  the
15

statute of limitation merely bars the remedy and does not touch
upon the right was not accepted by the Court by holding that the
rights of the parties are not enlarged by the Kerala Revenue
Recovery Act and that unless the Act expressly provided for
enlargement of claims extending to the recovery of barred debts,
that principle will not apply.  Ultimately, the Court held that
under the provisions of the Kerala Revenue Recovery Act a debt
which is barred by the law of limitation cannot be recovered.  
11.
The Division Bench, in the impugned order, has relied on
Bombay Dyeing (supra) to reinforce the point that the statute of
limitation only bars the remedy and does not extinguish the debt.
The decision in Bombay Dyeing (supra) was a case where the
Constitution Bench of this Court reiterarted the principle that
statutes of limitation only bar the remedy and do not extinguish
the right and so holding, it found that the definition of “unpaid
accumulations” in that case did apply to wages of employees
that were time-barred.  The Court went on to hold that while
16

time-barred wages did vest in the State, since the Act did not, in
that case, provide for disbursement of the wages to the workers
whose  claims  could  be  established  and  since  there  was  no
provision for the workers making the claim, the Act was held to
be contrary to Article 31(2) of the Constitution, which then
existed.  
12.
It is well settled that the laws of limitation only bar the
remedy and do not extinguish the right, except in cases where
title is acquired by prescription.  We may note here that  V.R.
Kalliyanikutty (supra) did not dispute the principle that the
statute  of  limitation  only  bars  the  remedy  and  does  not
extinguish the debt. After considering this principle it went onto
hold  that  there  was  no  enlargement  of  right  in  the  Kerala
Revenue Recovery Act. The impugned order, in the present case,
further holds that Bombay Dyeing (supra) and Tilokchand and
Motichand  (supra) were  not  brought  to  the  notice  in  V.R.
Kalliyanikutty  (supra).  The  decision  in  Tilokchand  and
17

Motichand  (supra) was  a  case  which  inter  alia dealt  with
extension of the principles of laches and res judicata to writ
proceedings  and  have  no  direct  relevance  to  the  present
controversy. The impugned order, in the present case, thereafter
goes  on to  hold  that  the  machinery  for  recovery  under the
Recovery of Dues Act or the State Financial Corporations Act do
not have the trappings of a Court to hold that the provisions of
the Limitation Act have no application for the same.
Discussion and Reasoning
 
 :-
13.
In our view, the findings of the Division Bench in the
impugned order do not directly address the holding in  V.R.
Kalliyanikutty (supra) that the Kerala Revenue Recovery Act
did not create any additional right to recover and enforce the
outstanding amounts due.  
14.
The real  question  that  arises  is  do the  State  Financial
Corporations Act, 1951 and the Recovery of Dues Act create a
distinct  right  and  provided  an  alternative  mechanism  of
18

enforcement to reover the amount due, even if the amounts due
were time barred? To answer this question, we need to examine
the relevant statutory provisions.  
15. The objects and reasons of the State Financial Corporations
Act are relevant for the purposes of the present case. They read
as under:
“The intention is that the State Corporations will confine their
activities to financing medium and small scale industrial and
will, as far as possible, consider only such cases as are outside
the  scope  of  the  Industrial  Finance  Corporation.  The  State
Governments also consider that the State Corporations should be
established under a special Statute in order to make it possible to
incorporate in the Constitution necessary provisions in regard to
majority  control  by  Government,  guaranteed  by  the  State
Government  in  regard  to  the  repayment  of  principal,  and
payment of a minimum rate of dividend on the shares, restriction
on  distribution  of  profits  and  special  powers  for  the
enforcement of its claims and recovery of dues.
The main features of the Bill are as follows:- 
(vii) The Corporation will be authorised to make long-term loans
to industrial concerns and to guarantee loans raised by industrial
concerns which are repayable within a period of not exceeding
25  years.  The  Corporation  will  be  further  authorised  to
underwrite the issue of stocks, shares, bonds or debentures by
industrial concerns, subject to the provision that the Corporation
will be required to dispose of any shares, etc., acquired by it in
fulfilment of its underwriting liability within a period of 7 years.
(ix)   The  Corporation  will  have  special  privileges  in  the
matter of enforcement of its claims against borrowers”
19

(emphasis supplied)
Section 32-G of the State Financial Corporations Act reads as
under:- 
“32G. Recovery of amounts due to the Financial Corporation
as an arrear of land revenue.—Where any amount is due to the
Financial Corporation in respect of any accommodation granted
by it to any industrial concern, the Financial Corporation or any
person authorised by it in writing in this behalf, may, without
prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an application
to the State Government for the recovery of the amount due to it,
and  if  the  State  Government  or  such  authority,  as  that
Government  may  specify  in  this  behalf,  is  satisfied,  after
following such procedure as may be prescribed, that any amount
is so due, it  may issue a certificate for that amount to the
Collector, and the Collector shall proceed to recover that
amount in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.”
(emphasis supplied)
16.
This apart, for the purposes of the present case, the relevant
provisions of the Recovery of Dues Act, being Section 2(c) and
Section 3 of the Recovery of  Dues Act, are for the sake of
convenience set out hereinbelow:
“2. Definitions
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(c) “defaulter” means a person who either as principal or as
surety, is a party – 
(i) to any agreement relating to a loan, advance or grant given
under that agreement or relating to credit in respect of, or relating
20

to hire-purchase of, goods sold by the State Government or the
Corporation, by way of financial assistance; 
and such person makes any default in repayment of the loan or
advance or any instalment thereof or, having become liable under
the conditions of the grant to refund the grant or any portion
thereof, makes any default in the refund of such grant or portion
or any instalment thereof or otherwise fails to comply with the
terms of the agreement;
3. Recovery of certain dues as arrears of land revenue
(1) Where any sum is recoverable from a defaulter – 
(a)  by  the  State  Governemnt,  such  officer  as  it  may,  by
notificaitaon, appoint in this behalf;
(b)  by  a  Corporation  or  a  Government  company,  the
Managing Director thereof, shall determine the sum due from
the defaulter.
(2) The Officer or the Managing Director, as the case may be,
referred to in sub-section (1), shall  send a certificate to the
Collector  mentioning  the  sum  due  from  the  defaulter  and
requesting that such sum together with the cost of proceedings be
recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue. 
(3) A certificate sent under sub-section (2) shall be conclusive
proof of the matters stated therein and the Collector, on receipt of
such  certificate,  shall  proceed  to  recover  the  amount  stated
therein as an arrear of land revenue. 
(4) No civil court shall have jurisdiction – 
(a) to entertain or adjudicate upon any case; or
(b) to adjudicate upon or proceed with any pending case;
relating to the recovery of any sum due as aforesaid from the
defaulter. The proceedings relating to the recoery of the sums due
from the defaulters, pending at the commencement of this Act in
any civil court, shall abate.”
(emphasis supplied)
21

17.
It will be clear from Section 32-G of the State Financial
Corporations Act that the Section confers a right of recovery on
the financial corporation, without prejudice to any other mode of
recovery which includes the right to file a suit. The conferment
of such a right to recover an ‘amount due’ as arrears of land
revenue,  notwithstanding  any  other  remedy,  is  for  a  public
purpose and in public interest.
18.
At this point, we deem it appropriate to refer to a passage
from Salmond on Jurisprudence, 12th Edition, on the concepts of
“Right” and “Power” [Page 224, 229 & 230]:
“42. Legal rights in a wider sense of the term
We must now consider the wider use of the term, according to
which rights, do not necessarily correspond with duties. In this
generic sense, a legal right may be defined as any advantage or
benefit conferred upon a person by a rule of law. Of rights in this
sense there are four distinct kinds. These are (1) Rights (in the
strict sense), (2) Liberties, (3) Powers, and (4) Immunities. Each
of these has its correlative, namely (1) Duties, (2) No-Rights, (3)
Liabilities, and (4) Disabilities. 
A debt is not the same thing as a right of action for its recovery.
A  former  is  the  right  in  the  strict  and  proper  sense,
corresponding to the duty of the debtor to pay; the latter is a
legal power, corresponding to the liability of the debtor to be
22

sued. That the two are distinct appears from the fact that the
right of action may be destroyed (as by prescription) while the
debt remains
A power may be defined as ability conferred upon a person by
the law to alter, by his own will directed to that end, the rights,
duties, liabilities or other legal relations, either of himself or of
other persons. Powers are either public or private. The former
are those which are vested in a person as an agent or instrument
of the functions of the state; they comprise the various forms of
legislative, judicial, and executive authority…The correlative of
power is a liability. This connotes the presence of a power vested
in someone else, as against the person with the liability. It is the
position of one whose legal rights (in the wide sense) may be
altered by the exercise of a power…the most important form of
liability is that which corresponds to the various powers of
action  and  prosecution.  Such  liability  is  independent  of  the
question whether the particular action or prosecution will be
successful, and is therefore independent of (say) the duty to pay
damages for a civil wrong”
(emphasis supplied)
As would be clear from the passage above, a debt is not the same
thing as the right of action for its recovery.  While the debt is the
right in the creditor with the corelative duty on the debtor the
right of action for recovery is in the nature of a legal power.
While the process of filing a civil suit may be barred because of
the statute of limitation, the power to recover vested through
Section 32-G of the State Financial Corporations Act read with
Section 2(c) and Section 3 of the Recovery of Dues Act is a
23

distinct  power  which  continues  notwithstanding  that  another
mode of recovery through a civil suit is barred.  Understood in
that sense, it does appear that there is an additional right to
enforce the claims of the financial corporations notwithstanding
the bar of limitation. The same is the case with the provisions of
the Kerala Revenue Recovery Act which fell for consideration of
this Court in V.R. Kalliyanikutty (supra). 
19.
No doubt, even where the statute of limitation does not
apply, the power has to be exercised within a reasonable time. In
that scenario the further question would be: Whether the time
available would analogously be the time available for execution
of decrees?  Since no specific arguments have been advanced
and since the Division Bench in the Impugned Order was not
engaged with that issue, we refrain from dealing with the same.
20. In the context of the Kerala Revenue Recovery Act, the
decision in  V.R. Kalliyanikutty (supra) needs to be discussed.
The relevant portions of the judgment is extracted hereinbelow:
24

“3.  ...Under  Section  71,  however,  there  is  a  provision  for
extending  the  Act  to  recovery  of  certain  other  dues  if  the
Government is satisfied that it is necessary to do so in public
interest. Under Section 71 it is provided as follows:
“71. Power of Government to declare the Act applicable to
any institution.—The Government may, by notification in the
Gazette, declare, if they are satisfied that it is necessary to do
so in public interest, that the provisions of this Act shall be
applicable to the recovery of amounts due from any person or
class of persons to any specified institution or any class or
classes of institutions, and thereupon all the provisions of this
Act shall be applicable to such recovery.”
4.  In  exercise  of  its  powers  under  Section  71,  the  State
Government has issued a notification bearing SRO No. 797 of
1979 by which the provisions of the said Act have been made
applicable to the recovery of the amounts due from any person to
any bank on account of any loan advanced to such person by that
bank for agriculture or agricultural purposes. Under another
notification SRO No. 851 of 1979 issued under Section 71 by the
State Government the provisions of the said Act are also made
applicable to the recovery of amounts due from any person or
class of persons to the Kerala Financial Corporation. Thus in
public interest  the State Government  has made the said Act
applicable for speedy recovery of loans given by a bank for
agricultural purposes as well as for speedy recovery of loans
given by the Kerala Financial Corporation. The overall scheme
of the Act, therefore, is to provide for speedy recovery, not merely
of public revenue but also of certain other kinds of loans which
are required to be recovered speedily in public interest.
5. Explaining analogous provisions of the U.P. Public Moneys
(Recovery  of  Dues)  Act,  1965,  this  Court  in  Director  of
Industries, U.P. v. Deep Chand Agarwal [(1980) 2 SCC 332 :
AIR 1980 SC 801] held that the said Act is passed with the object
of  providing  a  speedier  remedy  to  the  State  Government  to
realise  the  loans  advanced  by  it  or  by  the  Uttar  Pradesh
Financial Corporation. Explaining the need for speedy recovery,
it says that the State Government while advancing loans does not
25

act  as  an  ordinary  banker  with  a  view  to  earning  interest.
Ordinarily  it  advances  loans  in  order  to  assist  the  people
financially in establishing an industry in the State or for the
development of agriculture, animal husbandry or for such other
purposes which would advance the economic well-being of the
people. Moneys so advanced have to be recovered expeditiously
so that fresh advances may be made for the same purpose. It is
with  the  object  of  avoiding  the usual  delay  involved  in the
disposal of suits in civil courts and providing for an expeditious
remedy that the U.P. Act had been enacted. It was on this ground
that  this Court  upheld the classification of  loans  which  are
covered by the said U.P. Act in a separate category. It held that
this is a valid classification and the provisions of the Act are not
violative of Article 14.
6. The same reasoning would apply to the loans which are
covered by the said notifications under Section 71 of the Kerala
Revenue Recovery Act. Agricultural loans and loans by the State
Financial Corporation are also loans given in public interest for
the purpose of economic advancement of the people of the State,
to  help  them  in  agricultural  operations  or  establishment  of
industries. For this reason the Kerala Revenue Recovery Act has
been made applicable to such loans so that there can be a speedy
recovery of such loans and the amounts can be utilised for
similar objects again.
18. In the premises under Section 71 of the Kerala Revenue
Recovery Act claims which are time-barred on the date when a
requisition is issued under Section 69(2) of the said Act are not
“amounts due” under Section 71 and cannot be recovered under
the said Act. Our conclusion is based on the interpretation of
Section 71 in the light of the provisions of the Kerala Revenue
Recovery Act.”
Under the said provision, the Government in public interest
could make the Revenue Recovery Act applicable to recovery of
amounts due to any person or class of persons or to any specified
26

institution or any class or classes of institutions and on such
notification by the provisions of the Act was applicable to such
recovery.   Admittedly,  in  V.R.  Kalliyanikutty  (supra) a
notification was issued making the provisions of the Kerala
Revenue  Recovery  Act  applicable  to  the  Kerala  Financial
Corporation.   The  Kerala  Financial  Corporation  is  also  a
Corporation under the said Financial Corporation Act to which
Section 32-G applied. 
21.
In our view, while the Court focused on the implication of
a notification under Section 71 of the Kerala Revenue Recovery
Act  whereunder  the  Government  could  declare  the  Act
applicable to any institution, the attention of the Court in V.R.
Kalliyanikutty (supra) was not drawn to the powers envisaged
under the State Financial Corporations Act which were also
applicable to the recovery of debts in Kerala. As noticed above,
the  statement  of  objects  and  reasons  of  the  State  Financial
Corporations  Act  refers  to  providing  State  Financial
Corporations  with  ‘special  privileges  in  the  matter  of
27

enforcement  of  claims  against  borrowers’.  This  is  reflected
through Section 32-G of the State Financial Corporations Act
which we have set-out hereinabove. 
22.
This Court in  V.R. Kallliyanikutty (supra) held that the
words ‘amounts due’ occuring in the Kerala Revenue Recovery
Act  would  only  include  legally  recoverable  debts  i.e.  debts
which are not time-barred. For this purpose, it may be apposite
to  refer  to  the  relevant  portions  from  the  decision  in  V.R.
Kalliyanikutty (supra):
“9.  In  the  case  of  Hansraj  Gupta  v.  Dehra  Dun-Mussoorie
Electric Tramway Co. Ltd. [AIR 1933 PC 63 : 60 IA 13] the
Privy Council was required to interpret the words “money due”
under Section 186 of the Companies Act, 1913. Section 186 dealt
with the recovery of any money due to the company from a
contributory. Interpreting the words “money due”, the Privy
Council said that the phrase would only refer to those claims
which were not time-barred. 
10. The same reasoning would apply in the present case also.
The Kerala Revenue Recovery Act does not create any new right.
It merely provides a process for speedy recovery of moneys due.
Therefore, instead of filing a suit, (or an application or petition
under any special Act), obtaining a decree and executing it, the
bank or the financial institution can now recover the claim under
the Kerala Revenue Recovery Act. Since this Act does not create
any  new  right,  the  person  claiming  recovery  cannot  claim
recovery of amounts which are not legally recoverable nor can a
defence of limitation available to a debtor in a suit or other legal
28

proceeding be taken away under the provisions of the Kerala
Revenue Recovery Act. In fact, under Section 70 of the Kerala
Revenue Recovery Act, it is provided that when proceedings are
taken under this Act against any person for the recovery of any
sum of money due from him, such person may, at any time before
the commencement of the sale of any property attached in such
proceedings,  pay  the  amount  claimed  and  at  the  same  time
deliver a protest signed by himself to the officer issuing the
demand or conducting the sale as the case may be. Sub-section
(2) of Section 70 provides that when the amount is paid under
protest, the officer issuing the demand or the officer at whose
instance the proceedings have been initiated, shall enquire into
the  protest  and  pass  appropriate  orders.  If  the  protest  is
accepted, the officer disposing of the protest shall immediately
order the refund of the whole or part of the money paid under
protest. Under sub-section (3) of Section 70, the person making a
payment under protest shall have the right to institute a suit for
the refund of the whole or part of the sum paid by him under
protest.
11. Therefore, under Section 70(3) a person who has paid under
protest  can  file  a  suit  for  refund  of  the  amount  wrongly
recovered. In law he would be entitled to submit in the suit that
the claim against which the recovery has been made is time-
barred. Hence no amount should have been recovered from him.
When the right to file a suit under Section 70(3) is expressly
preserved, there is a necessary implication that the shield of
limitation available to a debtor in a suit is also preserved. He
cannot, therefore, be deprived of this right simply by making a
recovery under the said Act unless there is anything in the Act
which expressly brings about such a result. Provisions of the said
Act, however, indicate to the contrary. Moreover, such a wide
interpretation of “amount due” which destroys an important
defence  available  to  a  debtor  in  a  suit  against  him  by  the
creditor, may attract Article 14 against the Act. It would be ironic
if an Act for speedy recovery is held as enabling a creditor who
has delayed recovery beyond the period of limitation to recover
such delayed claims.
29

12. In the case of New Delhi Municipal Committee v. Kalu Ram
[(1976) 3 SCC 407] relying on the Privy Council decision in
Hansraj Gupta v. Dehra Dun-Mussoorie Electric Tramway Co.
Ltd. [AIR 1933 PC 63 : 60 IA 13] this Court interpreted Section
7 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Act, 1958 in a similar way. Under that section where any person
is in arrears of rent payable in respect of any public premises,
the Estate Officer may, by order, require that person to pay the
same  within  such  time  and  in  such  instalments  as  may  be
specified in the order. While considering the meaning of the
words “arrears of rent payable” this Court examined whether
Section 7 creates a right to realise arrears of rent without any
limitation of time. The Court observed that the word “payable”
is  somewhat  indefinite  in  import  and  its  meaning  must  be
gathered from the context in which it occurs. In the context of
recovery of arrears of rent under Section 7, this Court said that if
the recovery is barred by the law of limitation, it is difficult to
hold that the Estate Officer could still insist that the said amount
was payable. When a duty is cast on an authority to determine
the arrears of rent the determination must be in accordance with
law. Section 7 only covers arrears not otherwise time-barred.
16. There is no question, however, in the present case of any
payment voluntarily made by a debtor being adjusted by his
creditor against a time-barred debt. The provisions in the present
case are statutory provisions for coercive recovery of “amounts
due”. Although the necessity of filing a suit by a creditor is
avoided, the extent of the claim which is legally recoverable is
not thereby enlarged. Under Section 70(2) of the Kerala Revenue
Recovery Act the right of a debtor to file a suit for refund is
expressly  preserved.  Instead  of  the  bank  or  the  financial
institution filing a suit which is defended by the debtor, the
creditor first recovers and then defends his recovery in a suit
filed by the debtor.  The rights of the parties are not thereby
enlarged.  The  process  of  recovery  is  different.  An  Act  must
expressly  provide  for  such  enlargement  of  claims  which  are
legally recoverable, before it can be interpreted as extending to
the recovery of those amounts which have ceased to be legally
recoverable  on  the  date  when  recovery  proceedings  are
undertaken. Under the Kerala Revenue Recovery Act such a
30

process of recovery would start with a written requisition issued
in the prescribed form by the creditor to the Collector of the
district  as  prescribed  under  Section  69(2)  of  the  said  Act.
Therefore, all claims which are legally recoverable and are not
time-barred on that date can be recovered under the Kerala
Revenue Recovery Act.”
(emphasis supplied)
23.
In order to arrive at the conclusion that the words ‘amounts
due’ occurring in the Kerala Revenue Recovery Act would only
include legally recoverable debts i.e. debts which are not time-
barred, the Court in  V.R. Kalliyanikutty (supra) relies upon
three decisions. First is the decision of the Privy Council in
Hansraj Gupta (supra), second is the decision of the this Court
in  New
 
    Delhi Municipal Committee vs. Kalu Ram, (1976) 3
SCC 407 and third, is the decision of this Court Deep Chand
(supra). 
24.
The decision in Hansraj Gupta (supra) was in the context
of an application filed by the Official Liquidator praying that the
Appellants therein, in their capacity as contributories, must be
ordered to pay a debt owed by them to the Company. This
31

Application  was  made  under  Section  186(1)  of  the  Indian
Companies Act, which provides as follows:
“Court may, at any time after making a winding-up Order, make
an order on any contributory for the time being settled on the list
of contributories to pay, in manner directed by the order, any
money due from him or from the estate of the person whom he
represents to the company exclusive of any money payable by
him or the estate by virtue of any call in pursuance of this Act.”
The decision in Hansraj Gupta (supra) involved interpretation
of the words ‘any money due’ occurring in Section 186(1) of the
Indian Companies Act. The Privy Council, while following and
affirming the judgment of the Lahore High Court in Sri Narain
v. Liquidator, Union Bank of India, ILR 4 Lah. 109, held that a
time-barred debt could not be enforced by a summary order
under Section 186 since the section did not create new liability
or confer new rights and since it merely created a summary
procedure for enforcing existing liabilities.  
25.
Additionally,  in  Hansraj  (supra)  the  Limitation  Act
applied to the company court, since it was a ‘court’. Section 46-
B of the State Financial Corporations Act provides that the said
Act was to have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
32

therewith contained in any other law. The authority under the
Recovery of Dues Act not being a ‘court’, the provisions of the
Limitation Act cannot proprio vigore apply.
26.
The decision of this Court in Kalu Ram (supra) is again
based fully on the interpretation of the Privy Council in Hansraj
(supra). That apart, the decision in Kalu Ram (supra) involved
the interpretation of the words ‘arrears of rent payable’ under
Section  7 of the  Public Premises (Eviction  of  Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1958. The Court noted that the word ‘payable’
generally  means  ‘that  which  should  be  paid’ and  thereafter
concluded that the word can only be interpreted to mean dues
which are legally recoverable. The provisions herein use the
words ‘amounts due’ and are provisions which create a right to
recover through a separate mechanism, notwithstanding the right
to file a civil suit. 
27.
At this juncture, we also deem it fit to note the decision of
this Court in  KGU Trust  (supra).The decision in  KGU Trust
(supra) was  rendered  while  interpreting  the  words  ‘entire
33

amount  of  rent  due’ occurring  in  Section  20(4)  of  the  U.P
Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972.
While the landlord could file an eviction suit on the ground that
the tenant is in arrears of rent, the Tenant was given an option to
resist this eviction suit by depositing this ‘entire amount of rent
due’. While the decision in V.R. Kalliyanikutty (supra) rightly
states that the said provision was a benefit being conferred on
the tenant, we deem it necessary to refer to the other findings of
this Court in KGU Trust (supra) which are of relevance for the
purposes of answering the questions before us. In arriving at the
conclusion that the ‘entire amount of rent due’ would include
even  time-barred  claims,  the  Court  in  KGU  Trust  (supra)
specifically noted the decision in Bombay Dyeing (supra) and
the principle that the Limitation Act only bars the remedy and
does not extinguish the debt. The Court also noted Halsbury’s
Laws of England  where it is stated that the Limitation Act
would  only  take  away  the  remedy  while  leaving  the  right
untouched, and that ‘if a creditor whose debt is statute-barred
34

has any means of enforcing his claim other than by action or
set-off, the Limitation Act does not prevent him from recovering
by those means’. [Paragraph 4, 5 of KGU Trust (supra)] 
28.
Deep  Chand  (supra) was  a  case  where  there  was  a
challenge to the constitutionality of Section 3 of the U.P Public
Moneys (Recovery of Dues) Act, 1965. The argument was that
Section 3 provided two remedies to the Government – one being
a suit and another being a remedy under the Act – and that the
latter remedy was more onerous and without any guidelines in
law. [Paragraph 2 of  Deep Chand (supra)] In upholding the
Constitutionality of the U.P Act, the Court noted that the object
of the U.P Act was to enable speedy recovery of money and that
therefore, the classification was valid. [Para 6 of  Deep Chand
(supra)]
29.
While it is true that the U.P Act, similar to the Haryana
Revenue  Recovery  Act  [in  the  present  case]  or  the  Kerala
Revenue Recovery Act, was enacted with the object to have
speedy recovery of dues, this does not take away from the fact
35

that the right was vested in the Financial Corporations to recover
the loans through the said Acts, notwithstanding any other right,
including the right to file a suit. 
30.
As  far  as  the  finding  in  V.R.  Kalliyanikutty  (supra)
regarding Section 70(3) of the Kerala Revenue Recovery Act,
which provides for a suit by the debtor for refund after payment
under protest, is concerned, what is to be noted is that the
defence  for  the  State  Financial  Corporations  that  the  State
Financial  Corporations  Act  conferred  an  additional  right  to
recover amounts due would still be applicable. Therefore, the
existence of the right to the debtor under Section 70(3) of the
Kerala Revenue Recovery Act cannot be said to be determinative
of the issue. 
31.
It would also be apposite to point out that the applicability
of V.R. Kalliyanikutty (supra) to Section 56(2) of the Electricity
Act, 2003 recently fell for consideration before a three-judge
Bench of this Court in K.C. Ninan v. Kerala State Electricity
Board, 2023 INSC 560. One of the questions which the Court
36

was faced with was whether the statutory bar on recovery of
electricity dues after the limitation period of two years provided
under Section 56(2) of the Electricity Act, 2003 would have an
implication on the civil remedies of the Electric Utilities to
recover such arrears. The auction purchasers, who had purchased
premises where electricity had been disconnected due to defaults
of the previous owners, argued that the period of limitation
would apply to such dues and that Electric Utilities could not
demand such time-barred dues from them. The Court in  K.C.
Ninan (supra), after a comprehensive analysis of the scheme of
the Electricity Act, held that the power to initiate proceedings to
recover the electricity dues was independent of the power to
disconnect electrical supply. Thereafter, the Court noticed the
decision  in  V.R. Kalliyanikutty  (supra)  and  concluded  that
statute of limitation only barred a remedy, while the right to
recover the loan through ‘any other suitable manner provided’
remains  untouched.  Having  so  held,  the  Court  rejected  the
argument of the auction purchasers and concluded that the bar of
37

limitation under Section 56(2) of the Electricity Act would only
restrict the remedy of disconnection under Section 56 of the
Electricity Act and that the Electric Utilities were entitled to
reocver electricity arrears through civil remedies or in exercise
of its statutory power.  
32.
In view of what has been pointed out hereinabove, we are
of the opinion that, for a comprehensive consideration and an
authoritative  pronouncement  after  taking  into  account  all
aspects, including those dealt with hereinabove, the matter needs
to  be  placed  before  the  Hon’ble  Chief  Justice  of  India  to
constitute an appropriate three-judge bench.
33.
Let the  papers  along  with  this  order  be  placed  before
Hon’ble  the  Chief  Justice  of  India  for  seeking  appropriate
directions from His Lordship, in this regard.
…..…………………J.
(Surya Kant)
…..…………………J.
(K.V. Viswanathan)
New Delhi;
May 08, 2024
38