2024 INSC 393
1 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  906 OF 2023 
 
 
 
SELVAMANI 
 
 
 
                  …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE REP. BY THE  
INSPECTOR OF POLICE   
 
 
…RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
 
1. 
This appeal challenges the final judgment and order 
dated 27th August 2019, passed by the learned Single Judge 
of the High Court of Judicature at Madras1, whereby vide a 
common judgment, the High Court dismissed Criminal 
Appeal Nos. 449 and 840 of 2012. The present Appellant, 
who is Accused No. 2, had filed the Criminal Appeal No. 840 
of 2012, along with Accused Nos. 3 and 4, under Section 374 
of Criminal Procedure Code, 19732, challenging the judgment 
and order dated 26th June 2012, passed by the learned 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as, “High Court”.  
2 Hereinafter referred to as, “CrPC”.  
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.05.08
15:07:15 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
Additional District and Sessions Judge, Court No. III, 
Thirupathur, Vellore District3, in Sessions Case No. 277 of 
2010, whereby the trial court had convicted and sentenced 
the accused persons for offences punishable under Section 
376(2)(g) and 506(1) of Indian Penal Code, 18604, and Section 
4 of the Tamil Nadu Prevention of Women Harassment Act.  
2. 
The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeal are 
as given below:  
2.1 On 28th January 2006, Police Station Vaniyampadi 
Town received a written information from the victim (PW-1), 
to the effect that she had been gang raped. On the basis of 
the said written information, Police Station Vaniyampadi 
Town registered a First Information Report (FIR), vide P.S. 
Crime No. 115 of 2006 for the offence punishable under 
Sections 341, 323, 376 and 506(2) IPC read with Section 4 of 
Tamil Nadu Prevention of Women Harassment Act. On 
registration of the FIR, Shri Loganthan, Inspector of Police, 
Vanianpadi Town Police Station (PW-13) (I.O.) visited the 
place of occurrence and prepared observation Mahazar and 
sketch. He recorded the statement of witnesses. The accused 
 
3 Hereinafter referred to as, “trial court”.  
4 Hereinafter referred to as, “IPC”.  

3 
persons were arrested. The medical officer examined the 
victim and her statement was recorded under Section 164 
CrPC by the Judicial Magistrate, Thirupattur. 
2.2 The prosecution case, in a nutshell, is that the victim 
was working at Emerald Shoe Company, Vaniyampadi for 
three years leading upto the day of the incident. On the day 
of the incident, i.e., 27th January 2006, at about 7 PM, when 
the victim, aged 22 years, was returning to her house, after 
completing her work, the Accused No. 1 who was the 
Manager/Owner of the said Company came to her and told 
her that he wanted to talk to her about certain matter and so 
he took her to a place near the Railway Bridge, where already 
the other four persons (Accused Nos. 2 to 5) were standing, 
who then forcibly dragged her to a secluded place and 
threatened to throw her on the railway track if she shouted. 
They then stripped her. The victim cried for help, upon which 
she was threatened with a knife. The accused persons 
committed gang rape on her. Accused No. 1 assaulted the 
victim as well. The act continued till 3:30 AM, the next 
morning, when she escaped and came back to her house. On 
her return, she informed her mother (PW-2) and aunt (PW-3) 

4 
and later during the same day, she got the FIR registered. 
2.3 At the conclusion of the investigation, a charge-sheet 
came to be filed by the I.O. in the Court of Vanianpadi 
Judicial Magistrate. Since the offence charged against the 
accused persons was triable only by the Court of Sessions, 
the case was committed to the learned Principal District and 
Sessions Judge, Vellore, and the same was made over to the 
learned trial court, for disposal.  
2.4 Charges were framed by the trial court under Sections 
376(2)(g) and 506(1) of IPC and Section 4 of Tamil Nadu 
Prevention of Women Harassment Act. 
2.5 The accused persons pleaded not guilty and claimed to 
be tried. To bring home the guilt of the accused, the 
prosecution examined fourteen (14) witnesses, twenty-five 
(25) exhibits were marked along with two (2) material objects. 
The defence of the accused was that they had been falsely 
implicated. At the conclusion of the trial, the trial court 
found that the prosecution had proved the case beyond 
reasonable doubt against the accused persons and so 
convicted them under Section 376(2)(g) and 506(1) IPC and 
Section 4 of Tamil Nadu Prevention of Women Harassment 

5 
Act and sentenced each accused person to 10 years rigorous 
imprisonment and fine of Rs. 5,000/- for the offence 
committed under Section 376(2)(g) IPC, 1-year rigorous 
imprisonment and fine of Rs. 1,000/- for the offence 
committed 
under 
Section 
506(1) 
IPC 
and 
1-year 
imprisonment for the offence committed under Section 4 of 
the Tamil Nadu Prevention of Women Harassment Act, in 
default of payment of fine they were to undergo 3-months 
simple imprisonment. The sentence was to run concurrently 
and the period already undergone was to be set-off. Since the 
Accused No. 5 had died during the trial, the case against him 
stood abated. 
2.6 Being aggrieved thereby, the accused persons preferred 
appeal against the final judgment and order of the trial court. 
There were two appeals before the High Court. Accused No. 1 
filed Criminal Appeal No. 449 of 2012 and the Accused Nos. 
2 to 4 filed Criminal Appeal No. 840 of 2012. Vide impugned 
judgment, the High Court dismissed both the criminal 
appeals and upheld the findings of the trial court. 
2.7 Aggrieved as a result, the present appeal has been filed 
only on behalf of Accused No. 2. 

6 
3. 
We have heard Shri Rahul Shyam Bhandari, learned 
counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant and Shri V. 
Krishnamurthy, learned Senior Additional Advocate General 
appearing on behalf of the State of Tamil Nadu. 
4. 
Shri Rahul Shyam Bhandari, learned counsel appearing 
for the appellant, submits that the High Court has grossly 
erred in dismissing the appeal filed by the appellant herein.  
It is submitted that the victim (PW-1) as well as her mother-
Jaya (PW-2) and her aunt-Jamuna (PW-3) have not 
supported the prosecution case in their cross examination.  
Learned counsel for the appellant further submits that the 
medical evidence also does not support the evidence of the 
prosecution.  Learned counsel for the appellant, relying on 
the judgment of this Court in the case of Rai Sandeep alias 
Deepu v. State (NCT of Delhi)5, submits that when the 
evidence of the prosecutrix and the medical evidence does 
not support the prosecution case, the conviction could not be 
sustainable. 
5. 
In the present case, the prosecutrix as well as her 
mother-Jaya (PW-2) and her aunt-Jamuna (PW-3) have fully 
 
5 (2012) 8 SCC 21 : 2012 INSC 322 

7 
supported the prosecution case.  The examination-in-chief of 
the prosecutrix would reveal that she has stated that when 
she was returning to her house, the Accused No.1, who is the 
owner of the company in which she works, came and asked 
her to come with him for giving details of some official work.  
Accused No.1 took the victim, where four accused persons 
were standing and then Accused No.1 asked the prosecutrix 
to remove her clothes and when she refused, her clothes were 
removed by the other accused and thereafter they ravished 
her.  The evidence would also show that though she informed 
that she was at pains, they committed forcible sexual 
intercourse with her one by one on various occasions.  She 
has stated that, when the accused persons left at around 3 
o’clock in the morning, she went home and narrated the 
version to her mother and relatives.  PW-2 and PW-3, mother 
and aunt of the prosecutrix respectively, have also stated in 
their evidence that when the prosecutrix came home, she 
narrated the incident to them.  The FIR came to be lodged 
immediately on the very same day. 
6. 
The statement of the prosecutrix under Section 164 
CrPC was also recorded before Smt. Lakshmi Ramesh, 

8 
Judicial Magistrate (PW-6).   PW-6 has also deposed about 
the prosecutrix, giving the statement and narrating the entire 
incident. 
7. 
Dr. Indrani, Medical Expert (PW.8), who had examined 
the victim, has clearly stated that the prosecutrix was having 
injuries on her person. Her evidence establishes the fact that 
there was forcible sexual intercourse several times by several 
persons.  Her evidence also shows that on account of the said 
incident, the victim lost her virginity and there were also 
abrasions on the private parts of the victim.   
8. 
No doubt that the prosecutrix and her mother and aunt 
in their cross-examination, which was recorded three and a 
half months after the recording of the examination-in-chief, 
have turned around and not supported the prosecution case. 
9. 
A 3-Judge Bench of this Court in the case of Khujji @ 
Surendra Tiwari v. State of Madhya Pradesh6, relying on 
the judgments of this Court in the cases of Bhagwan Singh 
v. State of Haryana7, Sri Rabindra Kuamr Dey v. State 
of Orissa8, Syad Akbar v. State of Karnataka9, has held 
 
6 (1991) 3 SCC 627 : 1991 INSC 153 
7 (1976) 1 SCC 389 : 1975 INSC 306 
8 (1976) 4 SCC 233 : 1976 INSC 204 
9 (1980) 1 SCC 30 : 1979 INSC 126 

9 
that the evidence of a prosecution witness cannot be rejected 
in toto merely because the prosecution chose to treat him as 
hostile and cross-examined him.  It was further held that the 
evidence of such witnesses cannot be treated as effaced or 
washed off the record altogether but the same can be 
accepted to the extent their version is found to be dependable 
on a careful scrutiny thereof.     
10. This Court, in the case of C. Muniappan and Others v. 
State of Tamil Nadu10, has observed thus: 
“81. It is settled legal proposition that : (Khujji case, 
SCC p. 635, para 6) 
‘6. … the evidence of a prosecution 
witness cannot be rejected in toto merely 
because the prosecution chose to treat 
him as hostile and cross-examined him. 
The evidence of such witnesses cannot be 
treated as effaced or washed off the record 
altogether but the same can be accepted 
to the extent their version is found to be 
dependable on a careful scrutiny thereof.’ 
82. In State of U.P. v. Ramesh Prasad Misra, (1996) 
10 SCC 360] this Court held that (at SCC p. 363, 
para 7) evidence of a hostile witness would not be 
totally 
rejected 
if 
spoken 
in 
favour 
of 
the 
prosecution or the accused but required to be 
subjected to close scrutiny and that portion of the 
evidence which is consistent with the case of the 
prosecution or defence can be relied upon. A similar 
view has been reiterated by this Court in Balu 
Sonba Shinde v. State of Maharashtra, (2002) 7 SCC 
543], Gagan Kanojia v. State of Punjab, (2006) 13 
 
10 (2010) 9 SCC 567 : 2010 INSC 553 

10 
SCC 516], Radha Mohan Singh v. State of 
U.P.,(2006) 2 SCC 450], Sarvesh Narain Shukla v. 
Daroga Singh, (2007) 13 SCC 360] and Subbu Singh 
v. State, (2009) 6 SCC 462. 
83. Thus, the law can be summarised to the effect 
that the evidence of a hostile witness cannot be 
discarded as a whole, and relevant parts thereof 
which are admissible in law, can be used by the 
prosecution or the defence. 
84. In the instant case, some of the material 
witnesses i.e. B. Kamal (PW 86) and R. Maruthu 
(PW 51) turned hostile. Their evidence has been 
taken into consideration by the courts below strictly 
in 
accordance 
with 
law. 
Some 
omissions, 
improvements in the evidence of the PWs have been 
pointed out by the learned counsel for the 
appellants, but we find them to be very trivial in 
nature. 
85. It is settled proposition of law that even if there 
are 
some 
omissions, 
contradictions 
and 
discrepancies, 
the 
entire 
evidence 
cannot 
be 
disregarded. After exercising care and caution and 
sifting through the evidence to separate truth from 
untruth, exaggeration and improvements, the court 
comes to a conclusion as to whether the residuary 
evidence is sufficient to convict the accused. Thus, 
an undue importance should not be attached to 
omissions, contradictions and discrepancies which 
do not go to the heart of the matter and shake the 
basic version of the prosecution's witness. As the 
mental abilities of a human being cannot be 
expected to be attuned to absorb all the details of 
the incident, minor discrepancies are bound to 
occur in the statements of witnesses. Vide Sohrab v. 
State of M.P., (1972) 3 SCC 751, State of U.P. v. M.K. 
Anthony, (1985) 1 SCC 505, Bharwada Bhoginbhai 
Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat, (1983) 3 SCC 217, State 
of Rajasthan v. Om Prakash, (2007) 12 SCC 381, 
Prithu v. State of H.P., (2009) 11 SCC 588, State of 
U.P. v. Santosh Kumar, (2009) 9 SCC 626 and State 
v. Saravanan, (2008) 17 SCC 587” 

11 
 
11. In the case of Vinod Kumar v. State of Punjab11, this 
Court has observed thus: 
“51. It is necessary, though painful, to note that PW 
7 was examined-in-chief on 30-9-1999 and was 
cross-examined on 25-5-2001, almost after 1 year 
and 8 months. The delay in said cross-examination, 
as we have stated earlier had given enough time for 
prevarication due to many a reason. A fair trial is to 
be fair both to the defence and the prosecution as 
well as to the victim. An offence registered under the 
Prevention of Corruption Act is to be tried with all 
seriousness. We fail to appreciate how the learned 
trial Judge could exhibit such laxity in granting so 
much time for cross-examination in a case of this 
nature. It would have been absolutely appropriate 
on the part of the learned trial Judge to finish the 
cross-examination on the day the said witness was 
examined. As is evident, for no reason whatsoever it 
was deferred and the cross-examination took place 
after 20 months. The witness had all the time in the 
world to be gained over. We have already opined 
that he was declared hostile and re-examined. 
52. It is settled in law that the testimony of a hostile 
witness can be relied upon by the prosecution as 
well as the defence. In re-examination by the Public 
Prosecutor, 
PW 
7 
has 
accepted 
about 
the 
correctness of his statement in the court on 13-9-
1999. He has also accepted that he had not made 
any complaint to the Presiding Officer of the court 
in writing or verbally that the Inspector was 
threatening him to make a false statement in the 
court. It has also been accepted by him that he had 
given the statement in the court on account of fear 
of false implication by the Inspector. He has agreed 
to have signed his statement dated 13-9-1999 after 
going through and admitting it to be correct. It has 
 
11 (2015) 3 SCC 220 : 2014 INSC 670 

12 
come in the re-examination that PW 7 had not 
stated in his statement dated 13-9-1999 in the 
court that recovery of tainted money was not 
effected in his presence from the accused or that he 
had been told by the Inspector that amount has 
been recovered from the accused. He had also not 
stated in his said statement that the accused and 
witnesses were taken to the Tehsil and it was there 
that he had signed all the memos. 
53. Reading the evidence in entirety, PW 7's 
evidence cannot be brushed aside. The delay in 
cross-examination has resulted in his prevarication 
from the examination-in-chief. But, a significant 
one, 
his 
examination-in-chief 
and 
the 
re-
examination impels us to accept the testimony that 
he had gone into the octroi post and had witnessed 
about the demand and acceptance of money by the 
accused. In his cross-examination he has stated 
that he had not gone with Baj Singh to the Vigilance 
Department at any time and no recovery was made 
in his presence. The said part of the testimony, in 
our considered view, does not commend acceptance 
in the backdrop of entire evidence in examination-
in-chief and the re-examination. 
 
 
 
xxx  
 
xxx  
 
xxx 
 
57. Before parting with the case we are constrained 
to reiterate what we have said in the beginning. We 
have expressed our agony and anguish for the 
manner in which trials in respect of serious offences 
relating to corruption are being conducted by the 
trial courts: 
57.1. Adjournments are sought on the drop of a hat 
by the counsel, even though the witness is present 
in court, contrary to all principles of holding a trial. 
That apart, after the examination-in-chief of a 
witness is over, adjournment is sought for cross-
examination and the disquieting feature is that the 
trial courts grant time. The law requires special 

13 
reasons to be recorded for grant of time but the 
same is not taken note of. 
57.2. As has been noticed earlier, in the instant 
case the cross-examination has taken place after a 
year and 8 months allowing ample time to 
pressurise the witness and to gain over him by 
adopting all kinds of tactics. 
57.3. There is no cavil over the proposition that 
there has to be a fair and proper trial but the duty 
of the court while conducting the trial is to be 
guided by the mandate of the law, the conceptual 
fairness and above all bearing in mind its 
sacrosanct duty to arrive at the truth on the basis of 
the material brought on record. If an accused for his 
benefit takes the trial on the path of total mockery, 
it cannot be countenanced. The court has a sacred 
duty to see that the trial is conducted as per law. If 
adjournments are granted in this manner it would 
tantamount to violation of the rule of law and 
eventually turn such trials to a farce. It is legally 
impermissible and jurisprudentially abominable. 
The trial courts are expected in law to follow the 
command of the procedure relating to trial and not 
yield to the request of the counsel to grant 
adjournment for non-acceptable reasons. 
57.4. In fact, it is not at all appreciable to call a 
witness for cross-examination after such a long 
span of time. It is imperative if the examination-in-
chief is over, the cross-examination should be 
completed on the same day. If the examination of a 
witness continues till late hours the trial can be 
adjourned to the next day for cross-examination. It 
is inconceivable in law that the cross-examination 
should be deferred for such a long time. It is 
anathema to the concept of proper and fair trial. 
57.5. The duty of the court is to see that not only 
the interest of the accused as per law is protected 
but also the societal and collective interest is 
safeguarded. It is distressing to note that despite 
series of judgments of this Court, the habit of 
granting adjournment, really an ailment, continues. 

14 
How long shall we say, “Awake! Arise!”. There is a 
constant 
discomfort. 
Therefore, 
we 
think 
it 
appropriate that the copies of the judgment be sent 
to the learned Chief Justices of all the High Courts 
for circulating the same among the learned trial 
Judges with a command to follow the principles 
relating to trial in a requisite manner and not to 
defer the cross-examination of a witness at their 
pleasure or at the leisure of the defence counsel, for 
it eventually makes the trial an apology for trial and 
compels the whole society to suffer chicanery. Let it 
be remembered that law cannot be allowed to be 
lonely; a destitute.” 
 
12. Relying on the aforesaid judgments, this Court has 
taken a similar view in the case of Rajesh Yadav and 
Another v. State of Uttar Pradesh12. 
13. In the present case also, it appears that, on account of a 
long gap between the examination-in-chief and cross 
examination, the witnesses were won over by the accused 
and they resiled from the version as deposed in the 
examination-in-chief which fully incriminates the accused.  
However, when the evidence of the victim as well as her 
mother (PW-2) and aunt (PW-3) is tested with the FIR, the 
statement recorded under Section 164 CrPC and the evidence 
of the Medical Expert (PW-8), we find that there is sufficient 
corroboration to the version given by the prosecutrix in her 
 
12 (2022) 12 SCC 200 : 2022 INSC 148 

15 
examination-in-chief. 
14. Insofar as the reliance placed by the learned counsel for 
the appellant on the judgment of this Court in the case of 
Rai Sandeep alias Deepu (supra) is concerned, the said 
case can be distinguished, inasmuch as in the said case 
except a minor abrasion on the right side of the neck below 
jaw, there were no other injuries on the private part of the 
prosecutrix, although it was allegedly a forcible gang rape.  
As such, the said judgment would not be applicable in the 
present case. 
15. In the result, we find no reason to interfere with the 
concurrent findings of fact recorded by the trial court as well 
as the High Court on appreciation of the evidence.  
16. The appeal is dismissed. 
17. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
..............................J.              
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
..............................J.   
(SANDEEP MEHTA)   
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
MAY 08, 2024