2024 INSC 391
 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 1 of 30 
 
 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL N0. 1389 OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP (C) No.11136 of 2023) 
 
SHEIKH NOORUL HASSAN 
 
 
  … APPELLANT 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
NAHAKPAM INDRAJIT SINGH & ORS.   … RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
MANOJ MISRA, J. 
 
1.  
This appeal is directed against the order of the High 
Court of Manipur at Imphal1 dated 14.03.2023, whereby leave 
has been granted to the election petitioner (the first respondent 
herein) to file a replication in answer to the new facts asserted 
in the written statement filed by the returned candidate (the 
appellant herein).  
 
 
 
1 High Court 
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2024.05.08
12:54:23 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 2 of 30 
 
 
  
 
Factual Matrix 
 
2.  
The first respondent filed an election petition seeking a 
declaration that the election of the returned candidate, 
namely, the appellant herein, is null and void under: (a) 
Section 100(1) (d) (i) (ii) and (iv); and (b) Section 100 (1) (b) of 
the Representation of Peoples Act, 19512. In addition, thereto, 
a prayer was made to declare the election petitioner as duly 
elected from the concerned legislative constituency3 of 12th 
Manipur Legislative Assembly.  
3.  
In the election petition, it was alleged, inter alia, that 
the returned candidate had failed to make necessary 
disclosures in the nomination paper/the affidavit (i.e., Form 
26) which had a material bearing on the election result. In 
support of that allegation, particulars of such non-disclosure 
/ incorrect disclosure were detailed in the election petition. 
These allegations, however, were not only traversed in the 
written statement filed by the returned candidate (i.e. the 
appellant herein) but additional facts were also laid out 
 
2 1951 Act 
3 4- Kshetrigao Assembly Constituency.  

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 3 of 30 
 
 
therein. As a result, the election petitioner filed an application 
seeking leave to file a replication, which came to be allowed by 
the impugned order of the High Court. 
  
 
Impugned Order 
4.  
The High Court vide impugned order allowed the 
application seeking leave to file subsequent pleading while, 
inter alia, observing as follows: 
 
“15. The petitioner has filed the election petition, inter 
alia, on the ground that the first respondent has failed to 
disclose the details – status of his bank accounts with 
respective balances in Form 26. The first respondent has 
also failed to disclose the details of liability and also the 
car bearing DL4CNB4776 owned by him in Form 26. 
 
 
16. On a reading of the election petition, it is seen that 
the petitioner has also taken other grounds. However, in 
reply to the ground for non-disclosure of the account 
details, the first respondent replied in his written 
statement that the said accounts opened for establishment 
of Self Help Group, namely, Panthoibi SHG, Yaiphabi SHG. 
Paragraphs 12 and 17 of the written statement speak 
about the opening of the bank accounts and also stated 
that some of the accounts have NIL balance and were lying 
in a dormant condition at the time of filing nomination 
papers. Therefore, there is no necessity to disclose the 
same in Form 26. The opening of the accounts for 
establishment of Self Help Groups, according to the 
petitioner, is new plea and the petitioner has to controvert 
the said facts by clarifying the relation between the 
accounts and Self Help Groups. 
  
 
17. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted 
that the accounts are joint accounts which actually 
belonged to the first respondent and others and nowhere 
mentioned that these accounts are the social or charitable 
account. The argument of the learned counsel for the 
petitioner appears to merit consideration. 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 4 of 30 
 
 
 
 
18. The petitioner being election petitioner and the 
election petition being civil litigation, the celebrated 
principle of variance between pleading and proof is very 
much attracted in the matter of appreciation of evidence. 
It is lawful to the petitioner to file an application to add to 
his pleas already made in the election petition and the only 
condition thereon is the leave of the court. Even in cases 
that require leave, it is open to the court to grant leave with 
or without conditions. 
 
 
19. It is pertinent to note that the law is well settled 
that the plaintiff cannot be permitted to raise a new plea 
under the garb of filing rejoinder/replication or take a plea 
inconsistent to the pleas taken by him in the plaint, nor 
the rejoinder can be filed as a matter of right, even the 
Court can grant leave only after applying its mind on the 
pleas taken in the plaint and the written statement. 
 
xxx 
 
 
23. The specific plea of the petitioner is that the first 
respondent has asserted some new facts in his written 
statement, particularly, paragraphs 1(i) to (x), 10, 12, 13, 
14, 15, 16, 18, 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 19, 21 and 30 and it is 
necessary for the petitioner to reply by filing the 
replication. Though the first respondent contended that 
the petitioner has filed the proposed replication and 
introducing new facts and also trying to fill up the lacuna, 
nothing has been produced to prove the same. 
 
 
 
24. Admittedly, on a reading of the averments set out 
in the subsequent pleading/replication, it is clear that they 
are the clarification and amplification of the earlier 
pleading made in the election petition and if the pleading 
of the election petition is read conjointly with the pleading 
of the replication, the pleading of replication are the 
addition of facts of the earlier facts of the election petition 
and the annexed documents are also related with the 
earlier facts of the election petition. In other words, the 
replication of the petitioner is to controvert the averments 
made in the written statement to the election petition. That 
apart, prima facie, the averments pleaded in the 
replication are not contrary to the averments made in the 
election petition and in fact, they are only explanatory to 
the plea taken by the first respondent in the written 
statement. 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 5 of 30 
 
 
 
 
25. The argument of the learned counsel for the first 
respondent that the replication sought to be made by the 
petitioner clearly violates the requirement of the provisions 
of the Representation of People Act, 1951 and that the 
petitioner sought to introduce new facts after the expiry of 
45 days, cannot be countenanced for the reason that the 
petitioner does not insert any new facts. It appears that 
the first respondent has filed his written statement on 
4.8.2022 and petition to grant leave to file replication was 
filed on 7.9.2022 within a reasonable time. 
 
 
26. As stated supra, the statement made in the 
replication are the denial of the statement made in the 
written statement filed by the first respondent to the 
election petition. If the same is received, no prejudice 
would be caused to the other side, especially, the first 
respondent. Moreover, it is the bounden duty of the 
election petitioner to clarify the averments made by the 
first respondent in his written statement. That apart, there 
is no bar for clarification of the earlier pleading, which has 
already been taken in the election petition by the 
petitioner. 
xxx 
 
 
31.  …………. On a perusal of the replication filed by 
the petitioner, this Court finds that the averments set out 
in the replication are not contrary to the averments set out 
in the election petition and these are only explanatory to 
the plea advanced by the first respondent in the written 
statement. Therefore, in order to explain/clarify the plea of 
the first respondent and for fair trial of the election petition 
and also in the interest of justice, this court is inclined to 
grant leave to the petitioner to file replication.”  
  
  
5.  
We have heard Mr. Shyam Divan, learned senior 
counsel, for the appellant (i.e., the returned candidate) and 
Mr. Anupam Lal Das, learned senior counsel, for the 
contesting respondent (i.e., the election petitioner). 
 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 6 of 30 
 
 
 
Submissions on behalf of Appellant/Returned Candidate 
 
6.  
Mr. Shyam Divan appearing for the appellant, inter 
alia, submitted: 
  
(i) The remedy of an election petition is a statutory 
remedy governed by the provisions of the 1951 Act. There is 
no provision in the 1951 Act for filing a replication in response 
to a written statement. Hence, there is no foundation in law 
for the impugned order; 
  
(ii) 
Election petitioner’s replication is barred by the 
provisions of section 814 (1) of the 1951 Act as it sets out a 
time-limit of 45 days for filing an election petition. Taking into 
consideration 
new 
allegations 
introduced 
through 
a 
replication would tantamount to entertaining a time-barred 
petition. Allegations in paragraphs 15, 16, 18, 19, 22 and 23 
of the Replication are new. Not only that, new documents have 
 
4 Section 81. Presentation of petitions.— (1) An election petition calling in question any election may be 
presented on one or more of the grounds specified in sub section (1) of Section 100 and Section 101 to the High 
Court by any candidate at such election or any elector within 45 days from, but not earlier than the date of election 
of the returned candidate, or if there are more than one returned candidate at the election and dates of that election 
are different, the latter of those two dates. 
 Explanation.- In this sub-section, elector means a person who was entitled to vote at the election, to which the 
election petition relates, whether he has voted at such election or not.  
 (2) ****** (Omitted by Act 47 of 1966, w.e.f. 14.12.1966) 
 (3) Every election petition shall be accompanied by as many copies thereof as there are respondents mentioned 
in the petition, and every such copy shall be attested by the petitioner under his own signature to be a true copy 
of the petition.  

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 7 of 30 
 
 
been annexed by way of: (i) Ex.-A-18- List of Self-Help groups 
in the concerned Assembly Constituency; (ii) Ex.- A-19 and 20 
- Status report of Income Tax demands; and (iii) A-21- Original 
Copy 
of 
registration 
certificate 
of 
vehicle 
number 
DL4CNB4776. 
 
Submissions on behalf of First Respondent/ Election 
Petitioner 
 
7.  
Per contra, Mr. Anupam Lal Das, inter alia, submitted: 
  
(i) 
Section 875 of the 1951 Act provides that subject 
to the provisions of the Act, and of any rules made thereunder, 
an election petition shall be tried by the High Court in 
accordance with the procedure applicable under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 19086 to try a suit. A written statement can 
be rebutted under Order VIII Rule 97 of the CPC. Therefore, it 
 
5 Section 87. Procedure before the High Court.— (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and of any rules 
made thereunder, every election petition shall be tried by the High Court, as nearly as may be, in accordance 
with the procedure applicable under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) to the trial of suits: 
 Provided that the High Court shall have the discretion to refuse, for reasons to be recorded in writing, to examine 
any witness or witnesses, if it is of the opinion that the evidence of such witness or witnesses is not material for 
the decision of the petition or that the party tendering such witness or witnesses is doing so on frivolous grounds 
or with a view to delay the proceedings. 
 (2) The provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), shall subject to the provisions of this Act, be 
deemed to apply in all respects to the trial of an election petition. 
6 CPC 
7 Order VIII Rule 9.— Subsequent pleadings.— No pleading subsequent to the written statement of a 
defendant other than by way of defence to set off or counterclaim, and shall be presented except by the leave of 
the Court and upon such terms as the Court thinks fit; but the Court may at any time require a written statement 
or additional written statement from any of the parties and fix a time of not more than 30 days for presenting the 
same. 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 8 of 30 
 
 
is incorrect to state that filing of a replication in the 
proceedings of an election petition has no legal basis. 
   
(ii) 
No new case has been introduced by way of the 
replication. Though, by way of rebuttal of paragraphs 1(i) to (x) 
and paragraphs 14, 18.1 and 18.2 of the written statement, 
which introduced new facts, explanatory facts, by way of 
clarification / amplification of earlier pleading, have been 
pleaded, which is permissible in law. These include: (a) details 
of bank accounts; (b) details of tax demands/liability; and (c) 
ownership of vehicle, which are referred to in the original 
petition. The replication only seeks to rebut the explanation 
offered in the written statement in respect of those accounts, 
demands and the vehicle.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
8.  
Having taken note of the rival submissions, before we 
proceed to weigh the rival submissions in respect of the 
correctness of the impugned order, it would be useful to 
consider the following issue: 
  
Whether during the course of the proceeding of an 
election petition, preferred under the provisions of the 1951 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 9 of 30 
 
 
Act, subsequent pleading, as envisaged in Order VIII Rule 9 
CPC, is permissible? If yes, in what circumstances leave to file 
such subsequent pleading may be granted by an Election 
Tribunal/ Court?  
 
Subsequent Pleading can be filed in an Election Petition. 
 
9.  
Before we deal with the aforesaid issue, it would be 
useful to refer to the provisions of the CPC in relation to 
pleadings. Order VI Rule 1 of the CPC declares that pleading 
shall mean a plaint and a written statement. Rule 9 of Order 
VIII specifically edicts that no pleading subsequent to the 
written statement of a defendant other than by way of defence 
to set off or counter-claim shall be presented except by the 
leave of the Court. Though, however, the Court may at any 
time require a written statement or additional written 
statement.  
10. 
In Anant Construction (P) Ltd. v. Ram Niwas8, High 
Court of Delhi, in an exhaustive judgment authored by R. C. 
Lahoti, J, as His Lordship then was, dealt with the terms 
‘Replication’ and ‘Rejoinder’, as is commonly used for 
 
8 1994 (31) DRJ 205 = 1994 SCC OnLine Del 615 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 10 of 30 
 
 
subsequent pleadings, as also as to when leave for filing 
subsequent pleading may be granted by the Court. After 
referring to various legal texts including Corpus Juris 
Secundum, it was observed: 
 
“12. A more detailed rather exhaustive statement of law 
is to be found in CORPUS JURIS SECUNDUM. It would be 
useful to extract and reproduce the following paragraphs:  
 
 
“A reply or replication is purely a defensive 
pleading, the office or function of which is to deny, 
or allege facts in avoidance of, new matters alleged 
in the plea or answer and thereby join or make 
issue as to such new matters. (para 184) 
 
No reply or replication is necessary where the 
issues are completed by, and no new matter is set 
up, in the plea or answer. (para 185 a.) 
 
At common law a replication is necessary 
where a plea introduces new matter and concludes 
with a verification; but under the codes, practice 
acts, or rules of civil procedure of a number of 
states a reply to new defensive matter is not 
necessary or is necessary only when ordered by the 
court. A reply to a counterclaim is generally 
necessary; but under some code provisions no 
reply or replication is required in any case. (para 
185 b.(1)) 
 
The discretion which the court possesses, 
under some codes or practice acts, to direct the 
plaintiff, on the defendant’s application, to reply to 
new matter alleged as a defence by way of 
avoidance will be exercised in favour of granting the 
application where the new matter, if true, will 
constitute a defence to the action  and 
granting 
the order will prevent surprise and be of 
substantial advantage to the defendant without 
prejudice to the plaintiff. (para 185 b.(ii)) 
 
A replication, however, is unknown in the 
practice of a few states and in some states is not 
permitted. So too, under a statute providing that 
there shall be no reply except in enumerated 
situations, a reply is not permissible in a case not 
within one of the exceptions. Indeed, generally, in 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 11 of 30 
 
 
jurisdictions wherein pleading is governed by 
statutory provisions, plaintiff has no right to file a 
reply when a reply is not required by statute or order 
of court and a reply filed in a case where no reply is 
required is to be treated as a nullity, unless, and to 
the extent that, it constitutes an admission by 
plaintiff, as discussed infra para 204. 
 
Under the common law system of pleading, 
plaintiff may, at his election, file a replication to a 
special plea setting up an affirmative defence. On 
the other hand, it is proper to reject a replication to 
pleas which merely traverse allegations of the 
declaration and set up no new matter. Where the 
plea concludes to the contrary, plaintiff cannot 
reply with any new matter but must either accept 
it by a similiter or demur. So a good special traverse 
can be answered only by joining issue thereon and 
not by filing a replication. (para 191).  
 
 
13. Decided cases in India use the term rejoinder 
loosely for a reply or replication filed by the plaintiff in 
answer to the defendant’s plea. Strictly speaking a reply 
filed by the plaintiff (when permissible) is a replication. A 
pleading filed by the defendant subsequent to replication 
is a rejoinder. 
 
 
14. A replication is not to be permitted to be filed 
ordinarily, much less in routine. A replication is 
permissible only in three situations: (1) when required by 
law; (2) when a counter-claim is raised by the defendant; 
(3) when the court directs or permits a replication being 
filed. The court may direct filing of a replication when the 
court having scrutinised the plaint and the written 
statement feels the necessity of asking the plaintiff to join 
specific pleadings to a case specifically and newly raised 
by the defendant in the written statement. The plaintiff 
may also feel the necessity of joining additional pleading to 
put forth his positive case in reply to the defendant’s case 
but he shall have to seek the leave of the court by 
presenting the proposed replication along with an 
application seeking leave to file the same. The court having 
applied its mind to the leave sought for, may grant or 
refuse the leave. Ordinarily the necessity of doing so would 
arise only for ‘confession and avoidance.’ 
 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 12 of 30 
 
 
 Having observed so, a distinction between a plea requiring 
amendment of the plaint and a plea sought to be introduced 
by way of a replication was noticed as under: 
 
“17. A distinction between a plea requiring amendment 
of the plaint and a plea sought to be introduced by 
replication shall have to be kept in view. A plea which 
essentially constitutes the foundation of a claim made by 
the plaintiff or which is essentially a part of plaintiff's 
cause of action cannot be introduced through a 
replication. As already stated replication is always a 
defensive pleading in nature. It is by way of confession and 
avoidance or explanation of a plea raised in defence. It will 
be useful to quote from Halsbury’s Laws of England 
(Volume 36, para 62, page 48):- 
 
 “62. Necessity for amendment. The fact that a party 
may not raise any new ground of claim, or include 
in his pleadings any allegation or fact inconsistent 
with his previous pleadings, has been considered 
elsewhere. In order to raise such a new ground of 
claim, or to include any such allegation, amendment 
of the original pleading is essential.” 
 
 
17.1 In MSM Sharma versus Sri Krishna Sinha, AIR 
1959 SC 395, their Lordships refused to consider a plea 
raised in rejoinder for the first time, observing: 
  
 “The case of bias of the Chief Minister (respondent 
No.2) has not been made anywhere in the petition 
and we do not think it would be right to permit the 
petitioner to raise this question, for it depends on 
facts which were not mentioned in the petition but 
were put forward in a rejoinder to which the 
respondent had no opportunity to reply.” 
 
Finally, the Court summed up its conclusions as under: 
 
“24. To sum up: 
 
(1) ‘Replication’ and ‘rejoinder’ have well defined 
meanings. Replication is a pleading by plaintiff in answer 
to defendant’s plea. ‘Rejoinder’ is a second pleading by 
defendant in answer to plaintiff’s reply i.e. replication. 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 13 of 30 
 
 
 
(2) To reach the avowed goal of expeditious disposal, all 
interlocutory applications are supposed to be disposed of 
soon on their filing. A delivery of copy of the I.A. to the 
counsel for opposite party is a notice of application. Reply, 
if any, may be filed in between, if the time gap was 
reasonable enough, enabling reply being filed. 
 
(3) I.A.s which do not involve adjudication of 
substantive rights of parties and / or which do not require 
investigation or inquiry into facts are not supposed to be 
contested by filing written reply and certainly not by filing 
replication. 
 
(4) A replication to written statement is not to be 
filed nor permitted to be filed ordinarily, much less in 
routine. 
A 
replication 
is 
permissible 
in 
three 
situations: 
 
i. when required by law; 
 
ii. when a counter claim is raised or set off is 
pleaded by defendant; 
 
iii. when the court directs or permits a replication 
being filed. 
 
(5) Court would direct or permit replication being 
filed when having scrutinised plaint and written 
statement the need of plaintiff joining specific 
pleading to a case specifically and newly raised in 
written statement is felt. Such a need arises for the 
plaintiff introducing a plea by way of ‘confession and 
avoidance’. 
 
(6) A plaintiff seeking leave of the Court has to 
present before it the proposed replication. On applying 
its mind the court may grant or refuse the leave. 
 
(7) A mere denial of defendant’s case by plaintiff 
needs no replication. The plaintiff can rely on rule of 
implied or assumed traverse and joinder of issue. 
 
(8) Subsequent pleadings are not substitute for 
amendment in original pleadings. 
 
(9) A plea inconsistent with the plea taken in 
original pleadings cannot be permitted to be taken in 
subsequent pleadings. 
 
(10) A plea which is foundation of plaintiff’s case or 
essentially a part of cause of action of plaintiff, in 
absence whereof the suit will be liable to be dismissed 
or the plaint liable to be rejected, cannot be introduced 
for the first time by way of replication.” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 14 of 30 
 
 
11. 
Now we shall have a look at the provisions of the 1951 
Act in respect of addressing disputes regarding elections. Part 
VI of the 1951 Act, which comprises of five Chapters, deals 
with disputes regarding elections. Chapter I contains the 
definition clause (i.e., Section 79). Chapter II comprising of 
Sections 80 to 85 deals with presentation of election petitions 
to the High Court. Section 80 provides that no election shall 
be called in question except by an election petition presented 
in accordance with the provisions of Part VI. Section 80A, inter 
alia, provides that the High Court shall have jurisdiction to try 
an election petition. Section 81, inter alia, provides that an 
election petition calling in question any election may be 
presented on one or more of the grounds specified in sub-
section (1) of Section 100 and Section 101 to the High Court 
by any candidate at such election or any elector within 45 days 
from the date of election.  Section 829 specifies as to who shall 
be the parties to an election petition. Whereas, Section 8310, 
 
9 Section 82. Parties to the petition. — A petitioner shall join as respondents to his petition— 
 (a) where the petitioner, in addition to claiming declaration that the election of all or any of the returned 
candidates is void, claims a further declaration, that he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected, all 
the contesting candidates other than the petitioner, and where no such for the declaration is claimed, all the 
returned candidates; and  
(b) any other candidate against whom allegations of any corrupt practice are made in the petition. 
10 Section 83. Contents of petition.— (1) An election petition— 
 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 15 of 30 
 
 
inter alia, specifies as to what an election petition must 
contain. Section 8411 speaks of the reliefs which an election 
petitioner may claim. Section 85, which dealt with the 
procedure on receiving petition, has been omitted with effect 
from 14.12.1966 by Act No.47 of 1966. 
12. 
Chapter III comprising of Sections 86 to 107 deals with 
trial of Election Petitions. Section 8612, inter alia, provides 
 
 (a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies;  
 (b) shall set forth full particulars of any practice that the petitioner alleges, including as full statement as possible 
of the names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt practice and the date and place of the 
commission of each such corrupt practice; and  
 (c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908) for the verification of pleadings:  
[Provided that where the petitioner alleges any corrupt practice, the petition shall also be accompanied by an 
affidavit in the prescribed form in support of the allegation of such corrupt practice and the particulars thereof.] 
(2) Any schedule or annexure to the petition shall also be signed by the petitioner and verified in the same manner 
as the petition. 
11 Section 84. Relief that may be claimed by the petitioner.— A petitioner may, in addition to claiming a 
declaration that the election of all or any of the returned candidates is void, claim a further declaration that he 
himself or any other candidate has been duly elected. 
12 Section 86. Trial of election petitions.— (1) The High Court shall dismiss an election petition which does 
not comply with the provisions of section 81 or section 82 or section 117. 
 Explanation. – An order of the High Court dismissing an election petition under this sub-section shall be deemed 
to be an order made under clause (a) of section 98. 
 (2) As soon as may be after the election petition has been presented to the High Court, it shall be referred to the 
judge or one of the judges who has or have been assigned by the Chief Justice for the trial of election petitions 
under sub-section (2) of section 80 A. 
 (3) Where more election petitions than one are presented to the High Court in respect of the same election, all of 
them shall be referred for trial to the same judge, who may, in his discretion, try them separately or in one or 
more groups. 
 (4) Any candidate not already a respondent shall, upon application made by him to the High Court within 14 
days from the date of commencement of the trial and subject to any order as to security for costs, which may be 
made by the High Court, being entitled to be joined as a respondent. 
 Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section and of section 97, the trial of a petition shall be deemed to 
commence on the date fixed for the respondent to appear before the High Court and answer the claim or claims 
made in the petition. 
 (5) The High Court may, upon such terms as to costs and otherwise, as it may deem fit, allow the particular 
particulars of any corrupt practice, alleged in the petition to be amended or amplified in such manner, as may in 
its opinion, be necessary for ensuring affair and effective trial of the petition, but shall not allow any amendment 
of the petition which will have the effect of introducing particulars of a corrupt practice, not previously alleged 
in the petition. 
 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 16 of 30 
 
 
that,— (a) the High Court shall dismiss an election petition 
which does not comply with the provisions of Section 81 or 
Section 82 or Section 117 of the 1951 Act; (b) the High Court 
may allow the particulars of any corrupt practice alleged in the 
petition to be amended or amplified, but shall not allow any 
amendment of the petition which will have the effect of 
introducing particulars of a corrupt practice, not previously 
alleged in the petition; and (c) the election petition shall be 
tried as expeditiously as possible and there shall be an 
endeavour to conclude the trial within six months from the 
date on which the election petition is presented to the High 
Court for trial. Section 87 provides that every election petition, 
subject to the provisions of the Act, and of any rules made 
there under, be tried by the High Court, as nearly as may be, 
in accordance with the procedure applicable under the CPC to 
the trial of suits. Sections 93 to 99 deal with other procedural 
aspects which are not relevant for the controversy on hand. 
 
 (6) The trial of an election petition shall, so far as is practicable consistently with the interest of justice in respect 
of the trial, be continued from day to day until its conclusion, unless the High Court finds the adjournment of the 
trial beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded. 
 (7) Every election petition shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to conclude 
the trial within six months from the date on which the election petition is presented to the High Court for trial. 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 17 of 30 
 
 
Section 10013 enumerates the grounds for declaring election 
to be void. Section 101 deals with a situation when a candidate 
other than the returned candidate may be declared to have 
been elected. Section 102 addresses a situation where during 
the trial of an election petition, it appears that there is an 
equality of votes between candidates. Sections 103 to 107 deal 
with other procedural aspects which are not relevant for the 
case on hand.  
 
13 Section 100. Grounds for declaring election to be void.— (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), 
if the High Court is of opinion –  
 (a) that on the date of his election, returned candidate was not qualified, or was disqualified, to be chosen to fill 
the seat under the Constitution or this Act or the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963); or  
 (b) that any corrupt practice has been committed by a returned candidate or his election agent or by any other 
person with the consent of a returned candidate or his election agent; or  
 (c) that any nomination has been properly rejected; or  
 (d) that the result of the election, insofar as it concerns a returned candidate, has been materially affected –  
 (i) by the improper acceptance of any nomination, or  
 (ii) by any corrupt practice committed in the interests of the returned candidate by an agent other than his election 
agent; or  
 (iii) by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any vote or the reception of any vote which is void; or  
 (iv) by any non-compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act or of any rules or orders made 
under this Act,  
the High Court shall declare the election of the return candidate to be void.  
(2) If in the opinion of the High Court, returned candidate has been guilty by an agent, other than his election 
agent, of any corrupt practice but the High Court is satisfied –  
 (a) that no such practice was committed at the election by the candidate or his election agent, and every such 
correct practice was committed contrary to the orders, and without the consent, of the candidate, or his election 
agent; 
 (b) ***** (omitted by Act 58 of 1958) 
 (c) that the candidate and his election agent took all reasonable means for preventing the commission of corrupt 
practises at the election; and  
 (d) that in all other respects the election was free from any corrupt practice on the part of the candidate or any of 
his agents,  
then the High Court may decide that the election of the return candidate is not void. 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 18 of 30 
 
 
13. 
Chapter IV deals with withdrawal and abatement of 
election petition, whereas Chapter IVA deals with appeals.  
Chapter V deals with costs and security of costs.   
14. 
Part VII of the 1951 Act enlists corrupt practices and 
electoral offences.   
15. 
A plain reading of Section 87 of the 1951 Act would 
indicate that, subject to the provisions of the 1951 Act and of 
any rules made thereunder, an election petition is to be tried, 
as nearly as may be, in accordance with the procedure 
applicable under the CPC to the trial of suits. Order VI Rule 1 
of CPC defines pleading as a plaint and a written statement. 
The object and purpose of pleadings is to ensure that the 
litigants come to trial with all issues clearly defined. Its object 
is also to ensure that each side is fully alive to the questions 
that are likely to be raised or considered so that they may have 
an opportunity of placing the relevant evidence appropriate to 
the issues before the Court for its consideration. A case not 
specifically pleaded can be considered by the court only where 
the pleadings in substance, though not in specific terms, 
contain the necessary averments to make out a particular 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 19 of 30 
 
 
case, and the issues framed also generally cover the question 
involved and the parties proceed on the basis that such case 
was at issue and had led evidence thereon (see Bachhaj Nagar 
v. Nilima Mandal and Anr.14).   
16. 
Replication, though not a pleading as per Rule 1 of 
Order VI, is permissible with the leave of the Court under Order 
VIII Rule 9 of the CPC, which gives a right to file a reply in 
defence to set-off or counter-claim set up in the written 
statement. However, if filing of replication is allowed by the 
Court, it can be utilised for the purposes of culling out issues. 
But mere non-filing of a replication would not mean that there 
has been admission of the facts pleaded in the written 
statement (see K. Laxmanan v. Thekkayil Padmini and 
Ors.15).  
17. 
Section 83 of the 1951 Act mandates that an election 
petition must contain a concise statement of the material facts 
on which the petitioner relies. Additionally, an election petition 
should set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice that the 
petitioner alleges, including as full a statement as possible of 
 
14 (2008) 17 SCC 491, paragraphs 13 and 17 
15 (2009) 1 SCC 354, paragraph 29 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 20 of 30 
 
 
the names of the parties alleged to have committed such 
corrupt practice and the date and place of the commission of 
each such practice. Since, an election petition is to be 
dismissed under sub-section (1) of Section 86 if not filed within 
the time specified in Section 81, such material facts and 
particulars as to commission of corrupt practice are required 
to be given in the election petition and not in the replication 
filed much after the expiry of the period of limitation for filing 
election petition. The material facts and particulars alleged for 
the first time in the replication and not forming part of the 
averment made in the election petition cannot be tried and 
cannot be made the subject matter of issues framed by the 
court (See Jeet Mohinder Singh v. Harminder Singh 
Jassi16). 
18. 
Though the High Court while dealing with an election 
petition exercises powers under the CPC, those powers are 
subject to the provisions of the 1951 Act and of any rules made 
thereunder. In consequence, the general power of amendment 
of a pleading or of grant of leave to file replication, as is 
 
16 (1999) 9 SCC 386, paragraph 45 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 21 of 30 
 
 
otherwise available to a Court under Order VI Rule 17 and 
Order VIII Rule 9 of the CPC, is limited by the provisions of the 
1951 Act and the rules made thereunder. For example, sub-
section (5) of Section 86 of the 1951 Act provides that the High 
Court may allow the particulars of any corrupt practice alleged 
in the petition to be amended or amplified in such manner as 
may, in its opinion, be necessary for ensuring a fair and 
effective trial of the petition, but it shall not allow any 
amendment of the petition which will have the effect of 
introducing particulars of a corrupt practice not previously 
alleged in the petition. The significance of sub-section (5) of 
Section 86 of the 1951 Act has been considered by a three-
Judge Bench of this Court in F.A. Sapa and others v. Singora 
and others17 in the following terms:  
 
“19. …….Section 86 (5) as it presently stands empowers 
the High Court to allow the ‘particulars’ of any corrupt practice 
alleged in the petition to be amended or amplified provided the 
amendment does not have the effect of widening the scope of 
the election petition by introducing particulars in regard to a 
corrupt practice not previously alleged or pleaded within the 
period of limitation in the election petition. In other words the 
amendment or amplification must relate to particulars of a 
corrupt practice already pleaded and must not be an effort to 
expand the scope of the enquiry by introducing particulars 
regarding a different corrupt practice not earlier pleaded. Only 
the particulars of that corrupt practice of which the germ exists 
in the election petition can be amended or amplified and there 
 
17 (1991) 3 SCC 375 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 22 of 30 
 
 
can be no question of introducing a new corrupt practice. It is 
significant to note that Section 86 (5) permits ‘particulars’ of 
any corrupt practice ‘alleged in the petition’ to be amended or 
amplified and not the ‘material facts’. It is, therefore, clear from 
the trinity of clauses (a) and (b) of Section 83 and sub-section 
(5) of Section 86 that there is a distinction between ‘material 
facts’ referred to in clause (a) and ‘particulars’ referred to in 
clause (b) and what Section 86 (5) permits is the amendment / 
amplification of the latter and not the former. Thus, the power 
of amendment granted by section 86 (5) is relatable to clause 
(b) of Section 83 (1) and is coupled with a prohibition, namely, 
the amendment will not relate to a corrupt practice not already 
pleaded in the election petition. The power is not relatable to 
clause (a) of Section 83 (1) as the plain language of Section 86 
(5) confines itself to the amendments of ‘particulars’ of any 
corrupt practice alleged in the petition and does not extend to 
‘material facts’…..” 
 
19. 
As to what meaning is to be ascribed to the expression 
‘material facts’, and what a pleading must contain, a three-
Judge Bench of this Court in Harkirat Singh v. Amrinder 
Singh18 observed as under: 
 
“48. The expression “material facts” has neither been 
defined in the Act nor in the Code. According to the dictionary 
meaning, “material” means “fundamental”, “vital”, “basic”, 
“cardinal”, “central”, “crucial”, “decisive", “essential”, “pivotal”, 
“indispensable”, “elementary”, or “primary” [Burton’s Legal 
Thesaurus 
(3rd 
Edition), 
p.349]. 
The 
phrase  
“material facts”, therefore, may be said to be those facts upon 
which a party relies for its claim or defence. In other words, 
“material facts” are facts upon which the plaintiff’s cause of 
action or the defendant’s defence depends. What particulars 
could be said to be material facts would depend upon the facts 
of each case and no rule of universal application can be laid 
down. It is, however, absolutely essential that all basic and 
primary facts which must be proved at the trial by the party to 
establish the existence of a cause of action or defence are 
material facts and must be stated in the pleading by the party. 
 
18 (2005) 13 SCC 511 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 23 of 30 
 
 
 
 
51. A distinction between “material facts” and “particulars”, 
however, must not be overlooked. “Material facts” are primary 
or basic facts which must be pleaded by the plaintiff or by the 
defendant in support of the case set up by him either to prove 
his cause of action or defence. “Particulars”, on the other hand, 
are details in support of “material facts” pleaded by the party. 
They amplify, refine and embellish material facts by giving 
distinctive touch to the basic contours of a picture already 
drawn so as to make it full, more clear and more informative. 
“Particulars” thus ensure conduct of fair trial and would not 
take the opposite party by surprise. 
 
 
52. All “material facts” must be pleaded by the party in 
support of the case set up by him. Since the object and purpose 
is to enable the opposite party to know the case he has to meet 
with, in the absence of pleading, a party cannot be allowed to 
lead evidence. Failure to state even a single material fact, hence, 
will entail dismissal of the suit or petition. Particulars, on the 
other hand, are the details of the case which is in the nature of 
evidence a party would be leading at the time of trial.” 
 
20. 
In light of the analysis above, we are of the view that by 
virtue of the provisions of Section 87 (1) of the 1951 Act, the 
High Court, acting as an Election Tribunal, subject to the 
provisions of the 1951 Act and the rules made thereunder, is 
vested with all such powers as are vested in a civil court under 
the CPC. Therefore, in exercise of its powers under Order VIII 
Rule 9 of the CPC, it is empowered to grant leave to an election 
petitioner to file a replication.  
21. 
However, such leave is not to be granted mechanically. 
The Court before granting leave must consider the averments 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 24 of 30 
 
 
made in the plaint/election petition, the written statement and 
the replication. Upon consideration thereof, if the Court feels 
that to ensure a fair and effective trial of the issues already 
raised, the plaintiff/election petitioner must get opportunity to 
explain/clarify the facts newly raised or pleaded in the written 
statement, it may grant leave upon such terms as it deems fit. 
Further, while considering grant of leave, the Court must bear 
in mind that,— (a) a replication is not needed to merely 
traverse facts pleaded in the written statement; (b) a replication 
is not a substitute for an amendment; and (c) a new cause of 
action or plea inconsistent with the plea taken in original 
petition/plaint is not to be permitted in the replication. 
Grant of leave justified 
 
22. 
In the instant case, the material facts alleged in the 
election petition, inter alia, were that while filing nomination 
papers the returned candidate had failed to disclose: (a) details 
of some of his bank accounts (i.e. six in number); (b) 
ownership of a motor vehicle, which stood registered in his 
name; (c) details of his spouse’s profession or occupation; (d) 
the investment made by him on the land, by way of 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 25 of 30 
 
 
development, construction etc.; and (e) the details of his 
liability owed to the Bank.  
23. 
In his written statement, the returned candidate 
(appellant herein) before giving a para-wise reply to the 
averments made in the election petition, made certain 
explanatory/preliminary 
averments 
in 
paragraph 
1. 
Thereafter, in paragraph 10, it was averred that the returned 
candidate had filed two nomination papers along with form 26 
affidavits and both were accepted after proper scrutiny on 
9.2.2022. In paragraph 12, the returned candidate gave an 
explanation for bank account number 920010008072418 
maintained with the Axis Bank. The explanation was to the 
effect that this account was of a self-help group for the 
purposes of providing aid to those who were affected by 
COVID-19 pandemic. In paragraph 13 a similar explanation 
was offered in respect of another bank account number 
920010008661144 maintained with the Axis Bank. In 
paragraph 14, it was averred that the aforesaid bank accounts 
actually did not belong to the returned candidate, his spouse 
or dependents, but were for social and charitable purpose, and 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 26 of 30 
 
 
that the returned candidate was associated with those 
accounts in a fiduciary capacity. It was alleged that those 
accounts were actually of self-help groups therefore, the 
returned candidate was under no obligation to disclose the 
amounts of money available in those accounts. In paragraph 
15 of the written statement, an explanation was offered in 
respect of Axis Bank account number 910010004837498. It 
was claimed that the account had a zero balance and was lying 
dormant at the time of filing nomination papers, therefore no 
disclosure was warranted. The returned candidate also denied 
that there was an existing liability against that account. 
Similarly, in paragraph 16 of the written statement it was 
stated that Axis Bank account number 915020012865061 had 
zero balance and was lying dormant at the time of filing 
nomination paper, therefore no disclosure was warranted. In 
paragraph 18 of the written statement, fact with regard to filing 
of a writ petition to protect rights of forest dwellers was 
disclosed, and in paragraph 18.1, in respect of ICICI Bank 
account number 264301001639, explanation was offered to 
the effect that it was a joint bank account for the benefit of 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 27 of 30 
 
 
victim families dwelling in the forest, and that the account was 
in the name of certain other persons whereas the returned 
candidate had signed in the account opening form as a patron. 
In paragraph 18.2, a further statement was made that the 
bank account did not belong to the returned candidate, his 
spouse, or dependents, and that the account was for 
social/charitable use wherein the returned candidate had 
associated in a fiduciary capacity of a coordinator/facilitator. 
Further, to substantiate the said plea, the details of the 56 
affected poor families were given. In paragraph 18.3, another 
defence in respect of those accounts was taken. In paragraph 
19, it was averred that the motor vehicle of which disclosure 
was not made by the returned candidate had been gifted to one 
person in the year 2012, therefore there was no concealment 
in respect of that vehicle. In paragraph 21 of the written 
statement, it was stated that since value of immovable property 
was disclosed, there was no separate disclosure as regards the 
amount spent in the construction of residential house standing 
thereupon. Thus, there was no concealment. In paragraph 30 
of the written statement, apart from a denial of the averments 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 28 of 30 
 
 
made in the paragraph of the election petition under reply, 
there was a statement with regard to filing of two nomination 
papers along with two affidavits. 
24. 
In the application seeking leave to file replication, the 
election petitioner stated that the returned candidate had, in 
paragraphs 1 (I) to (x), 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 18.1, 18.2, 
18.3, 19, 21 and 30, stated new facts of which a reply was 
required, therefore leave to file a replication be granted. In the 
replication, in paragraph 15, the election petitioner dealt with 
account number 920010008072418 maintained with the Axis 
Bank. Paragraph 16 of the replication dealt with account 
number 920010008661144, whereas paragraph 17 dealt with 
account numbers 920010008072418, 920010008661144. 
Similarly in paragraph 18 account number 910010004837498 
was discussed and a report in respect of demand analysis and 
recoverability status was provided in a tabular form. In 
paragraph 19 account number 915020012865061 was 
discussed. Likewise, in paragraph 22, account number 
264301001639 of the ICICI bank was discussed. In paragraph 
23 again, account number 264301001639 was discussed. In 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 29 of 30 
 
 
paragraph 24, the registration of the vehicle in the name of the 
returned candidate was reiterated, and the claim that the 
vehicle was gifted in the year 2012 was denied.  In paragraph 
25, it was stated that whether the disclosure already made in 
respect of profession or occupation of spouse was proper or 
not, is for the Court to decide. Similarly, in paragraph 26 it was 
stated that the returned candidate was obliged to disclose the 
amount invested in the construction of residential house. 
25. 
It is clear from above that the non-disclosure of bank 
accounts, alleged in the election petition, was sought to be 
explained by the returned candidate in his written statement. 
The replication only sought to meet that explanation. Similarly, 
the reply in the written statement in respect of other material 
facts pleaded in the election petition was sought to be dealt 
with, by way of explanation, in the replication. The replication 
does not seek to incorporate any new material facts or a new 
cause of action to question the election. It only seeks to explain 
the averments made in the written statement. Thus, in our 
view, leave to file replication was justified and well within the 
discretionary jurisdiction of the High Court. 

 
                 
                    Civil Appeal No. ____ of 2024                                                                   Page 30 of 30 
 
 
26. 
We, therefore, find no merit in this appeal. The same is 
dismissed. There is no order as to costs. 
 
…………………………………..CJI. 
     
 
 
 
 
    (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud) 
 
..............................................J. 
                      (J.B. Pardiwala) 
 
 
..............................................J. 
                   (Manoj Misra) 
New Delhi; 
May 8, 2024