2024 INSC 392
Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No. 4106/2021                                                                                              Page 1 of 38 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.6135 OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP (Civil) No.4106/2021) 
 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. 
 
  … APPELLANTS 
                   
 
 
Versus 
 
SANTOSH KUMAR TIWARI        … RESPONDENT 
 
J U D G M E N T 
MANOJ MISRA, J. 
1.  
Leave granted. 
2.  
This appeal is against the judgment and order 
of the High Court of Orissa at Cuttack1 dated 
10.12.2020, whereby the Writ Appeal No. 435/2020, 
preferred by the appellants against the judgment and 
order of the learned Single Judge dated 14.01.2020, 
has been dismissed and the order of the learned 
Single Judge has been affirmed. 
 
 
1 High Court 
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2024.05.08
12:54:22 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 2 of 38 
 
Factual Matrix 
3.  
The respondent2 was a Head Constable in 
Central Reserve Police Force3. He was charge-sheeted 
on allegations of assaulting and abusing his fellow 
colleague.  In the ensuing enquiry, the charges were 
found proved against the respondent. As a result 
thereof, the respondent was compulsorily retired 
from service vide order dated 16.02.2006. Aggrieved 
therewith, the respondent filed a departmental 
appeal, which was dismissed by the Deputy Inspector 
General (P), CRPF vide order dated 28.07.2006. 
4.  
Assailing the order of compulsory retirement 
and dismissal of his appeal, the respondent filed a 
Writ Petition (C) No.17398/2006 before a Single 
Judge Bench of the High Court.  The learned Single 
Judge vide order dated 14.01.2020 allowed the writ 
petition, 
inter 
alia, 
on 
the 
ground 
that 
the 
punishment of compulsory retirement was not one of 
 
2 The original petitioner 
3 CRPF 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 3 of 38 
 
the punishments specified in Section 11 (1) of the 
Central Reserve Police Force Act, 19494.  The 
operative portion of the order of the learned Single 
Judge is extracted below:  
“Thus, this court is of the opinion that the award 
of punishment by the order vide Annexure 5 not 
only remains bad, but in the circumstances, the 
consequential order vide Annexure 7 also becomes 
bad. In such view of the matter and as the 
Disciplinary 
Authority 
is 
to 
reconsider 
the 
question of punishment, this matter is relegated 
back to the Disciplinary Authority to hear the 
question of punishment, giving opportunity of 
hearing to the petitioner and pass the final order 
involving the disciplinary proceeding. For a 
remand 
of 
the 
matter 
to 
the 
Disciplinary 
Authority, this court observes, the Disciplinary 
Authority, while reconsidering the matter will also 
consider other grounds raised herein. For the 
setting aside of the order vide Annexure 5 and as 
the matter is relegated back to the authority, the 
position of the petitioner before passing of the 
final order shall be restored and for interference of 
this court with the order vide Annexures 5 and 7 
release of the arrears, if any, involving the 
petitioner shall be dependent on the ultimate 
outcome involving fresh disposal of the proceeding 
by the Disciplinary Authority in terms of the 
directions of the apex court in paragraph 24 of the 
judgement in the case of Ranjit Singh versus 
Union of India as reported in (2006) 4 SCC 153.” 
 
5.  
Aggrieved with the order of the learned Single 
Judge, the appellants preferred writ appeal (supra) 
 
4 CRPF Act 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 4 of 38 
 
before the Division Bench of the High Court, inter 
alia, on the following grounds:  
(i) 
The charges against the respondent were 
found proved in the enquiry.  They were of 
serious nature warranting penalty including 
that of dismissal or removal from service. 
Compulsory retirement is nothing but a 
species of removal from service and, therefore, 
being a lesser penalty than dismissal or 
removal from service, was an imposable 
punishment. 
(ii) 
Section 11 of the CRPF Act provides 
that, subject to the rules made under the Act, 
the Commandant or any other authority or 
officer, as may be prescribed, award in lieu of, 
or in addition to, suspension or dismissal, 
anyone or more of the punishments specified 
therein to any member of the Force whom he 
considers to be guilty of disobedience, neglect 
of duty or remissness in the discharge of any 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 5 of 38 
 
duty or of other misconduct in his capacity as 
a member of the Force. Sub-section (1) of 
Section 18 empowers the Central Government 
to notify rules for carrying out the purposes of 
the CRPF Act. Sub-section (2) of Section 18 
provides 
that 
without 
prejudice 
to 
the 
generality of the foregoing power, rules may 
provide for all or any of the matters specified 
therein, which includes regulating the award 
of minor punishment under Section 11, and 
providing for appeals from, or the revision of, 
orders under that section, or remission of 
fines imposed under that section. Rule 27 of 
the Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 19555, 
specifies the procedure for the award of 
punishments. 
Clause 
(a) 
of 
Rule 
27 
enumerates 
in 
a 
tabular 
form 
the 
punishments which could be imposed and the 
authority 
competent 
to 
impose 
such 
 
5 CRPF Rules 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 6 of 38 
 
punishments. At serial no.4, under column 
no.2, in the table, the punishment of 
compulsory retirement is mentioned as being 
one of the punishments that may be imposed 
by 
the 
Commandant 
after 
a 
formal 
departmental enquiry.  Thus, in light of the 
provisions of Section 11 of the CRPF Act read 
with Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules, and by 
taking into consideration that charges were 
duly proved in the enquiry, the punishment of 
compulsory retirement was fully justified.  
6.  
The Division Bench of the High Court, 
however, found no merit in the writ appeal and 
dismissed the same accordingly. 
7.  
In these circumstances, the appellants are 
before 
this 
Court 
questioning 
the 
impugned 
judgment and order of the High Court. 
8.  
We have heard Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned 
Additional Solicitor General, appearing for the 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 7 of 38 
 
appellants, and Mr. Anand Shankar, learned counsel, 
appearing for the respondent. 
 
Submissions on behalf of the appellants 
9.  
Ms. Bhati, learned counsel for the appellants, 
inter alia, submitted: 
(i)  The only ground pressed by the original 
petitioner 
was 
that 
the 
punishment 
of 
compulsory retirement is not imposable as it is 
not provided for in Section 11 of the CRPF Act, 
which is nothing but misconceived; 
(ii) The High Court while accepting the above 
ground failed to consider:  
(a) 
Section 116 of the CRPF Act is expressly 
made subject to any rules made under the 
 
6 11. Minor punishments— 
(1) The Commandant or any other authority or officer as may be prescribed, may, subject to any rules 
made under this Act, award in lieu of, or in addition to, suspension or dismissal any one or more of the 
following punishments to any member of the Force whom he considers to be guilty of disobedience, 
neglect of duty, or remissness in the discharge of any duty or of other misconduct in his capacity as a 
member of the Force, that is to say,— 
(a) reduction in rank; 
(b) fine of any amount not exceeding one month’s pay and allowances; 
(c) confinement to quarters, lines or camp for a term not exceeding one month; 
(d) confinement in the quarter-guard for not more than twenty-eight days, with or without punishment 
drill or extra guard, fatigue or other duty; and 
(e) removal from any office of distinction or special emolument in the Force. 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 8 of 38 
 
Act.  Section 187 of the CRPF Act empowered 
the Central Government to make rules for 
 
(2) Any punishment specified in clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) may be awarded by any 
gazetted officer when in command of any detachment of the Force away from headquarters, provided 
he is specially authorised in this behalf by the commandant. 
(3) The Assistant Commandant, a company officer or a subordinate officer, not being below the rank of 
subedar or inspector, commanding a separate detachment or an outpost, or in temporary command at 
the headquarters of the Force, may, without a formal trial, award to any member of the Force who is for 
the time being subject to his authority any one or more of the following punishment for the commission 
of any petty offence against discipline which is not otherwise provided for in this Act, or which is not of a 
sufficiently serious nature to require prosecution before a criminal court, that is to say,— 
(a) confinement for not more than seven days in the quarter-guard or such other place as may be 
considered suitable, with forfeiture of all pay and allowances during its continuance; 
(b) punishment drill, or extra guard, fatigue or other duty, for not more than thirty days with or without 
confinement to quarters, lines or camp; 
(c) censure or severe censure: 
Provided that this punishment may be awarded to a subordinate officer only by the Commandant. 
(4) A jemadar or sub-inspector who is temporarily in command of a detachment or an outpost may, in 
like manner and for the commission of any like offence, award to any member of the Force for the time 
being subject to his authority any of the punishments specified in clause (b) of sub-section (3) for not 
more than fifteen days. 
 
7 18. Power to make rules: - 
1) The Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:-  
(a) regulating the classes and grades of, and the pay, pension and other remuneration of, member of the 
force, and their conditions of service in the force;  
(b) regulating the powers and duties of officers authorized to exercise any function by or under this Act;  
(c) fixing the period of service for members of the force;  
(d) regulating the award of minor punishment under section 11, and providing for appeals from, or the 
revision of, orders under that section, or the remission of fines imposed under that section, and the 
remission of deductions made under section 13;  
(e) regulating the several or collective liability of member of the force in the case of the loss or theft of 
weapons and ammunition; 
(f) for the disposal of criminal cases arising under this Act and for specifying the prison in which a person 
convicted in any such case may be confined.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the cases may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
 
 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 9 of 38 
 
carrying out the purposes of the Act and 
without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing 
power, 
rules 
could 
be 
made 
regulating the award of punishment under 
Section 11. CRPF Rules, 1955 were notified 
by 
the 
Central 
Government. 
Rule 
278 
 
8 27. Procedure for the award of punishments — 
(a) [The punishments shown as items 1 to 11 in column 2 of the table] below may be inflicted on non--
Gazetted Officers and men of the various ranks shown in each of the headings of columns 3 to 6, by the 
authorities named below such headings under the conditions mentioned in column 7. 
[TABLE 
SI. 
No. 
Punishment 
Subedar 
(inspector) 
Sub 
Inspector 
Others 
except 
Const. & 
enrolled 
followers 
Consts. & 
enrolled 
followers 
Remarks 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
1. 
Dismissal or removal 
from the Force 
DIGP 
DIGP 
Comdt. 
Comdt. 
 
 
 
 
To 
be 
inflicted after 
formal 
departmental 
enquiry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
Reduction to a lower time-
scale of pay or service 
DIGP 
DIGP 
Comdt. 
Comdt. 
3. 
Reduction to a lower stage 
in the time-scale of pay for 
a specified period 
DIGP 
DIGP 
Comdt. 
Comdt. 
4. 
Compulsory retirement 
DIGP 
DIGP 
Comdt. 
Comdt. 
5. 
Fine of any amount not 
exceeding one month’s pay 
and allowances 
DIGP 
DIGP 
Comdt. 
Comdt. 
6. 
Confinement 
in 
the 
Quarter Guard exceeding 
seven days but not more 
than twenty eight days 
with 
or 
without 
punishment drill or extra 
guard fatigue or other duty 
- 
- 
- 
Comdt. 
7. 
Stoppage of increment 
DIGP 
DIGP 
Comdt. 
Comdt. 
 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 10 of 38 
 
specifically 
provided 
for 
compulsory 
retirement 
as 
one 
of 
the 
punishments 
imposable on a non-gazetted officer, like the 
respondent. Thus, the impugned order of the 
High Court is in ignorance of the relevant 
provisions of the Act as well as the rules. 
(b) 
Section 11 empowers the Commandant 
or any other competent authority to award in 
lieu of, or in addition to, suspension or 
 
8.. 
Removal from any office of 
distinction 
or 
special 
emolument in the Force 
DIGP 
DIGP 
Comdt. 
Comdt. 
May 
be 
inflicted 
without 
a 
formal 
departmental 
enquiry 
9. 
Censure 
Comdt. 
Comdt. 
Asstt. 
Comdt. 
or 
Coy 
Comdr. 
A. Comdt. or 
Coy Comdr. 
 
10. 
Confinement to quarter 
Guard for not more than 
seven days with or without 
punishment or extra guard 
fatigue or other duty 
- 
- 
- 
Comdt. 
 
11. 
Confinement to quarters 
lines, camp, punishment, 
drill, fatigue duties, etc., 
for a term not exceeding 
one month 
- 
- 
- 
Comdt. 
 
 
Note— 1. When the post of Deputy Inspector General remains unfilled for a period of over one month at 
a time the Commandant shall exercise the powers of punishing the Subedars (Inspectors) and Sub-
Inspectors except the powers of ordering dismissal or removal from the Force. 
Note— 2. When the post of Commandant remains unfilled for a period of over one month at a time 
consequent on the incumbent proceeding on leave or otherwise, the Assistant Commandant shall 
exercise the powers of punishment vested in the Commandant, except the powers of ordering dismissal 
or removal from the Force. 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 11 of 38 
 
dismissal anyone or more of the specified 
punishments. The specified punishments 
include removal from any office of distinction 
or special emolument in the Force.  Dismissal 
is the highest of those punishments. Removal 
is a lesser punishment.  Section 11 uses the 
word removal as an expression of wide 
amplitude so as to include any punishment 
that has the effect of terminating the service. 
As compulsory retirement also entails in 
termination of service, it is nothing but a 
species of removal, which is permissible 
under the CRPF Rules. Therefore, once an 
enquiry is held, charge of gross indiscipline is 
found proved, bearing in mind that the 
original petitioner was a member of a 
disciplined force, the punishment awarded, 
being one of the punishments imposable, was 
not liable to be interfered with by the High 
Court.   

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 12 of 38 
 
10. 
In support of her submissions, Ms. Bhati 
relied on two decisions of this Court, namely, (a) 
Union of India & Ors. v. Ghulam Mohd. Bhat9; and 
(b) Union of India & Ors. v. Diler Singh10.  
 
 
Submissions on behalf of the respondent 
11. 
Mr. Anand Shankar, learned counsel for the 
respondent, 
defending 
the 
impugned 
order 
submitted: 
(i) Punishment of compulsory retirement as 
specified in Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules is ultra 
vires the provisions of Section 11 of the CRPF 
Act, which is exhaustive, and no punishment 
beyond what is specified therein can be 
imposed; 
(ii) Decision of this Court in Ghulam Mohd. 
Bhat (supra) is of no help to the appellants as 
it relates to the punishment of removal from 
 
9 (2005) 13 SCC 228 
 
10 (2016) 13 SCC 71 
 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 13 of 38 
 
service and not compulsory retirement from 
service; 
(iii) Rule 27 was framed in exercise of power 
delegated to the Central Government under 
clause (d) of sub-section (2) of Section 18 of 
the CRPF Act, which is only to regulate the 
award of minor punishment not to introduce 
any other species / kind of punishment. 
Therefore, 
a 
punishment 
which 
is 
not 
contemplated under the statute cannot be 
introduced by way of a rule, particularly in 
absence of specific delegation of power in this 
regard. Dismissal and compulsory retirement 
are two different kinds of punishment and 
cannot be treated as interchangeable. Thus, 
in absence of any delegation of power to frame 
rules introducing a new punishment, Rule 27, 
to the extent it introduces the punishment of 
compulsory retirement, is ultra vires the CRPF 
Act; 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 14 of 38 
 
(iv) The charge levelled on the original 
petitioner was not established, as no eye-
witness was presented to prove it. Otherwise 
also, Hawaldar M. Devnath, who was allegedly 
assaulted by the original petitioner, was 
inimical to the original petitioner and made a 
false complaint. The Disciplinary Authority 
and the Appellate Authority acted in a 
mechanical manner. 
12. In support of his submissions, Mr. Anand 
Shankar relied on a decision of this Court in 
General Officer Commanding-in-Chief & Anr. v. 
Subash Chandra Yadav & Anr11. 
 
 
11 (1988) 2 SCC 351 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 15 of 38 
 
Issues 
13. 
Having taken note of the rival submissions, 
the issues that arise for our consideration in this 
appeal are as follows:  
(i)  Whether the punishment of compulsory 
retirement from service could have been 
imposed upon the respondent by relying upon 
the provisions of Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules? 
(ii) 
Whether Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules to 
the extent it provides for punishments other 
than those specified in Section 11 of the CRPF 
Act, ultra vires the CRPF Act and as such 
inoperable and void? 
(iii) Whether the punishment of compulsory 
retirement imposed upon the respondent 
suffers from any procedural infirmity and / or 
is shockingly disproportionate to the proven 
misconduct of the respondent?    
 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 16 of 38 
 
An Overview of the CRPF Act and the Rules 
14.  
Before we address the above issues it would 
be useful to have an overview of the relevant 
provisions of the CRPF Act and the rules made 
thereunder.  The CRPF Act is “an Act to provide for 
the constitution and regulation of an armed Central 
Reserve Police Force (for short the Force)”. Section 3 
provides for constitution of the Force.  Sub-section 
(2) of Section 3 provides that the Force shall be 
constituted in such manner, and the members of the 
Force shall receive such pay, pension and other 
remuneration, as may be prescribed. The word 
“prescribed” is defined in Section 2 (f) as prescribed 
by rules made under the Act. Section 812 vests the 
superintendence, control and administration of the 
 
12 Section 8. Superintendence, Control and Administration of the Force.--- ( 1) The superintendence of, 
and control over, the Force shall vest in the Central Government; and the Force shall be administered by 
the Central Government, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and of any rules made there 
under, through such officers as the Central Government may from time to time appoint in this behalf. 
 
(2) The headquarters of the force shall be at Neemuch or at such other place as may from time 
to time be specified by the Central Government. 
 
(3) While on active duty outside its headquarters, the Force shall be subject to the general 
control and direction of such authority or officer as may be prescribed or as may be specially appointed 
by the Central Government in this behalf.   
 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 17 of 38 
 
Force in the Central Government.  It declares that the 
Force 
shall 
be 
administered 
by 
the 
Central 
Government in accordance with the provisions of the 
Act and of any rules made thereunder, through such 
officers as the Central Government may from time to 
time appoint in that behalf. Section 9 enumerates 
“more 
heinous 
offences”, 
whereas 
Section 
10 
enumerates “less heinous offences”, both punishable 
under the Act. For “more heinous offences”, the 
punishment is of transportation for life or for a term 
of not less than seven years or with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to 14 years or with fine 
which may extend to three months’ pay, or with fine 
to that extent, in addition to such sentence of 
transportation or imprisonment. The punishment for 
“less heinous offences” is imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine which 
may extend to three months’ pay or with both. 
Section 11 deals with minor punishments. According 
to it, the Commandant or any other authority or 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 18 of 38 
 
officer as may be prescribed, may, subject to any 
rules made under the Act, award in lieu of, or in 
addition to, suspension or dismissal anyone or more 
of the punishments specified therein to any member 
of the Force whom he considers to be guilty of 
disobedience, neglect of duty, or remissness in the 
discharge of any duty or of other misconduct in his 
capacity as a member of the Force. One of the minor 
punishments specified in Section 11, other than 
dismissal or suspension, is “removal from any office 
of distinction or special emolument in the Force”.  
15. 
Section 18 confers rule-making power on the 
Central Government. Sub-section (1) of Section 18 
states that the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Act. Sub-section (2) 
of Section 18 provides that without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the matters specified therein. 
Amongst other matters specified therein, clause (d), 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 19 of 38 
 
inter alia, empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for regulating the award of minor punishment 
under Section 11, and providing for appeals from, or 
the revision of, orders under that section. 
16. 
An overview of the CRPF Act would make it 
clear that the Central Government has overall 
superintendence and control over the Force and the 
Force 
is 
to 
be 
administered 
by 
the 
Central 
Government in accordance with the provisions of the 
CRPF Act and of any rules made thereunder through 
such officers as the Central Government may from 
time to time appoint.  
 
Discussion/ Analysis 
 
17. 
The 
rule-making 
power 
of 
the 
Central 
Government found in Section 18 is in broad terms. 
sub-section (1) of Section 18 empowers the Central 
Government to make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of the CRPF Act. Rule-making power under 
sub-section (2) of Section 18 is without prejudice to 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 20 of 38 
 
the generality of the power conferred by sub-section 
(1) thereof. Thus, the Central Government is not only 
empowered to make rules for regulating the award of 
minor punishment under Section 11 but also to carry 
out the purposes of the Act which includes 
superintendence of, and control over, the Force as 
well as its administration. 
Punishment of compulsory retirement is intra 
vires the CRPF Act 
 
18. 
Ordinarily a person in service cannot be 
visited with a punishment not specified in the 
contract of service or the law governing such service. 
Punishments may be specified either in the contract 
of service or in the Act or the rules governing such 
service. In State Bank of India and Ors. v. T.J. 
Paul13 this Court had occasion to deal with a 
situation where, for a proven charge of gross 
misconduct, punishment of removal was not one of 
the punishments specified in the extant rules 
 
13 1999 (4) SCC 759 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 21 of 38 
 
though, punishment of dismissal was imposable. 
This Court set aside the punishment of removal and 
remitted the matter to the Appellate Authority for 
considering 
imposition 
of 
one 
or 
the 
other 
punishment as specified in the extant rules. 
19. 
In the case on hand the CRPF Rules provide 
for imposition of the punishment of compulsory 
retirement though the CRPF Act itself does not 
provide for it in specific terms.  Therefore, the 
argument on behalf of the respondent is that the 
CRPF Rules are ultra vires the CRPF Act. In support 
of this submission reliance has been placed on a 
decision of this Court in Subash Chandra Yadav 
(supra) where it was observed: 
“14……. It is well settled that rules framed under 
the provisions of a statute form part of the 
statute. In other words, rules have statutory force. 
But before a rule can have the effect of a 
statutory provision, two conditions must be 
fulfilled, namely, (1) it must conform to the 
provisions of the statute under which it is 
framed; and (2) it must also come within the 
scope and purview of the rule-making power of 
the authority framing the rule. If either of 
these two conditions is not fulfilled, the rule 
so framed would be void.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 22 of 38 
 
       
20. 
The CRPF Act while dealing with offences and 
punishments, categorizes offences in two parts. One 
“more heinous offences” (vide Section 9) and the 
other “less heinous offences” (vide Section 10). These 
two categories of offences entail a punishment of 
imprisonment and/or fine. The usual disciplinary 
action which befalls on a delinquent employee is 
envisaged as a minor punishment under Section 11 
of the CRPF Act even though many of the 
punishments specified therein, such as dismissal, 
reduction in rank and removal from office of 
distinction, in common service jurisprudence are 
considered major punishment. That apart, Section 11 
which describes minor punishments declares: (a) that 
the minor punishments specified in Section 11 may 
be awarded “in lieu of, or in addition to, suspension or 
dismissal”; 
and 
(b) 
that 
the 
power 
of 
the 
Commandant or any other authority or officer, as 
may 
be 
prescribed, 
to 
award 
the 
specified 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 23 of 38 
 
punishment “is subject to any rules made under the 
CRPF Act”. Another important feature is that Section 
11 does not use common expressions such as 
“dismissal from service” or “removal from service” 
while describing the punishments.  Though, Rule 27 
(vide Table) uses those expressions.    
21. 
The question which would therefore arise for 
our consideration is whether Section 11 is exhaustive 
as far as minor punishments imposable under the 
CRPF Act are concerned or it merely provides for a 
skeletal framework to be supplemented by the rules 
framed under the Act.   
22. 
In Ghulam Mohd. Bhat (supra), a question 
arose whether punishment of removal from service 
could be awarded to a Constable in the Force. The 
argument against the award of punishment of 
removal from service was that it is not one of the 
punishments specified in Section 11 of the CRPF Act. 
The Union of India defended the said punishment on 
the ground that it is a species of dismissal and is 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 24 of 38 
 
permissible under Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules. After 
examining the provisions of Section 11 of the CRPF 
Act and Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules, this Court 
observed:  
 “5. A bare perusal of Section 11 shows that it 
deals with minor punishment as compared to the 
major punishments prescribed in the preceding 
section. It lays down that the Commandant or any 
other authority or officer, as may be prescribed, 
may, subject to any rules made under the Act, 
award any one or more of the punishments to any 
member of the Force who is found guilty of 
disobedience, neglect of duty or remissness in the 
discharge of his duty or of other misconduct in his 
capacity as a member of the Force. According to 
the High Court the only punishments which can 
be awarded under this section are reduction in 
rank, fine, confinement to quarters and removal 
from any office of distinction or special emolument 
in the Force. In our opinion, the interpretation is 
not correct, because the section says that these 
punishments may be awarded in lieu of, or in 
addition to, suspension or dismissal. 
 
6. The use of the words “in lieu of, or in addition 
to, suspension or dismissal”, appearing in sub-
section (1) of Section 11 before clauses (a) to (e) 
shows that the authorities mentioned therein are 
empowered to award punishment of dismissal or 
suspension to the member of the Force who is 
found guilty and in addition to, or in lieu thereof, 
the punishment mentioned in clauses (a) to (e) 
may also be awarded. 
 
8. It is fairly well-settled position in law that 
removal is a form of dismissal. This Court in 
Dattatraya Mahadev Nadkarni (Dr.) v. Municipal 
Corpn. of Greater Bombay [(1992) 2 SCC 547 : 
1992 SCC (L&S) 615 : (1992) 20 ATC 275 : AIR 
1992 SC 786] explained that removal and 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 25 of 38 
 
dismissal from service stand on the same 
footing and both bring about termination of 
service though every termination of service 
does not amount to removal or dismissal. The 
only difference between the two is that in the case 
of dismissal the employee is disqualified from 
future employment while in the case of removal he 
is not debarred from getting future employment. 
Therefore, 
dismissal 
has 
more 
serious 
consequences in comparison to removal. In any 
event, Section 11(1) refers to the Rules made 
under the Act under which action can be 
taken. Rule 27 is part of the Rules made under 
the Act. Rule 27 clearly permits removal by 
the competent authority. In the instant case 
the Commandant who had passed the order of 
removal was the competent authority to pass 
the order.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
23. 
The learned counsel for the respondent seeks 
to distinguish the above decision, inter alia, on the 
ground that removal may be a species of dismissal or 
vice versa but compulsory retirement is not, because 
in 
common 
service 
jurisprudence 
compulsory 
retirement 
is 
not 
considered 
a 
punishment. 
Therefore, according to him, Rule 27 prescribes an 
altogether 
new 
punishment 
which 
is 
not 
contemplated by the CRPF Act. Hence, according to 
him, Rule 27 to that extent is ultra vires the CRPF 
Act and as such void. 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 26 of 38 
 
24.  To determine whether the punishment of 
compulsory retirement prescribed in Rule 27 is ultra 
vires the CRPF Act, it would be apposite to first 
examine the scope of rule-making power conferred on 
the Central Government by the statute. The CRPF 
Act, vide sub-section (1) of Section 18, grant the 
power to make rules in general terms, that is, “to 
carry out the purposes of this Act”. And, vide sub-
section (2) of Section 18, “in particular and without 
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power”, to 
make rules for all or any of the matters enumerated 
therein. Interpreting such a rule-making provision, in 
State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Lakhwinder 
Kumar and Ors.14, a two-Judge Bench of this Court, 
relying on a Constitution Bench decision in Rohtak 
& Hissar Districts Electric Supply Co. Ltd. v. 
State of U.P. & Ors.15, held: 
“23. In our opinion, when the power is 
conferred in general and thereafter in respect 
of enumerated matters, as in the present case, 
 
14 (2013) 6 SCC 333 
15 AIR 1966 SC 1471 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 27 of 38 
 
the particularization in respect of specified 
subject is construed as merely illustrative and 
does not limit the scope of general power. 
Reference in this connection can be made to a 
decision of this Court in Rohtak and Hissar 
Districts Electric Supply Co. Ltd. v. State of UP, in 
which it has been held as follows: 
“18……… Section 15 (1) confers wide 
powers on the appropriate government to 
make rules to carry out the purposes of the 
Act; and Section 15 (2) specifies some of 
the matters enumerated by clauses (a) to 
(e) in respect of which rules may be 
framed. 
It 
is 
well 
settled 
that 
the 
enumeration of the particular matters by 
sub-section (2) will not control or limit the 
width of the powers conferred on the 
appropriate government by sub-section (1) 
of Section 15; and so, if it appears that the 
item added by the appropriate government 
has relation to conditions of employment, 
its addition cannot be challenged as being 
invalid in law.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
 
 
 
This would imply that the intention of the legislature, 
as indicated in the enabling Act, must be the prime 
guide to the extent of delegate’s power to make rules. 
However, the delegate must not travel wider than the 
object of the legislature rather it must remain true to 
it16. 
25. 
In St. Johns Teachers Training Institute v. 
Regional Director, National Council for Teacher 
 
16 Dr. Mahachandra Prasad Singh v. Chairman, Bihar Legislative Council & Ors., (2004) 8 SCC 747, para 13    

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 28 of 38 
 
Education and Anr.17, a three-Judge Bench of this 
Court observed: 
“10. …………. The power to make subordinate 
legislation is derived from the enabling act and it 
is fundamental that the delegate on whom such a 
power is conferred has to act within the limits of 
authority conferred by the Act. Rules cannot be 
made to supplant the provisions of the 
enabling act but to supplement it. What is 
permitted is the delegation of ancillary or 
subordinate legislative functions, or, what is 
fictionally called, a power to fill up details. The 
legislature may, after laying down the legislative 
policy confer discretion on an administrative 
agency as to the execution of the policy and leave 
it to the agency to work out the details within the 
framework of policy………………..  
 
12. The question whether any particular 
legislation suffers from excessive delegation 
has to be decided having regard to the subject 
matter, the scheme, the provisions of the 
statute including its preamble and the facts 
and circumstances in the background of which 
the statute is enacted…….It is also well settled 
that in considering the vires of subordinate 
legislation 
one 
should 
start 
with 
the 
presumption that it is intra vires and if it is 
open to two constructions, one of which would 
make it valid and the other invalid, the courts 
must adopt that construction  which makes it 
valid and the legislation can also be read down 
to avoid its being declared ultra vires.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
26. 
Francis Bennion in his treatise on Statutory 
Interpretation (Fifth Edition, page 262, Section 69) 
has written:  
 
17 (2003) 3 SCC 321 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 29 of 38 
 
 
“There 
are 
various 
types 
of 
delegated 
legislation, 
but 
all 
are 
subject 
to 
certain 
fundamental factors. Underlying the concept of 
delegated legislation is the basic principle that the 
legislature delegates because it cannot directly 
exert its will in every detail. All it can in practice 
do is lay down the outline. This means that the 
intention of the legislature, as indicated in the 
outline (that is the enabling Act), must be the 
prime 
guide 
to 
the 
meaning 
of 
delegated 
legislation and the extent of the power to make it.”  
 
27. 
As discussed above, since the rule-making 
power under Section 18 of the CRPF Act is in broad 
terms, that is to carry out the purposes of the Act as 
well as to regulate the award of minor punishment 
under Section 11, in order to determine whether Rule 
27 of the CRPF Rules, insofar as it prescribes an 
additional punishment of compulsory retirement, is 
intra vires or ultra vires the CRPF Act, we would have 
to consider: (a) whether the intention of the 
legislature, as borne out from the provisions of the 
CRPF Act, was to leave it open for the Central 
Government 
to 
prescribe 
any 
other 
minor 
punishment than what has already been prescribed 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 30 of 38 
 
in Section 11 of the Act; and (b) whether it is in 
conflict with any of the provisions of the CRPF Act.  
28. 
As regards Section 11 being exhaustive of the 
minor punishments which could be imposed, the 
intention of the legislature appears to the contrary. 
Section 11 expressly uses the phrase “subject to any 
rules made under this Act” before “award in lieu of, or 
in addition to, suspension or dismissal any one or 
more of the following punishments”. Importantly, 
while prescribing punishment for “more heinous 
offences” and “less heinous offences” in Sections 9 
and 10 respectively, the phrase “subject to any rules 
made under this Act” is not used. The expression 
“subject to” conveys the idea of a provision yielding 
place to another provision or other provisions subject 
to which it is made18. 
 
18 P. Ramanatha Aiyer’s Advanced Law Lexicon 4th Edition Vol.4 at page 4640, see also Southern 
Petrochemical Industries Co. Ltd. v. Electricity Inspector & ETIO, (2007) 5 SCC 447, paragraph 
68. 
 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 31 of 38 
 
29. 
G.P. Singh in his treatise “Principles of 
Statutory Interpretation” (13th Edition, Chapter 12 at 
page 1019, published by LexisNexis) writes: “The 
delegate cannot override the Act either by exceeding 
the authority or by making provisions inconsistent 
with the Act. But when the enabling Act itself permits 
its modification by rules, the rules made prevail over 
the provision in the Act. When provision A in the Act is 
subject to other provisions of the Act, a valid 
notification issued under any other provision in the Act 
would in case of conflict with section A override its 
provisions.”  
30. 
In light of the discussion above, we are of the 
view that while enacting the CRPF Act the legislative 
intent was not to declare that only those minor 
punishments could be imposed as are specified in 
Section 11 of the CRPF Act. Rather, it was left open 
for the Central Government to frame rules to carry 
out the purposes of the Act and the punishments 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 32 of 38 
 
imposable were subject to the rules framed under the 
Act.  
31. 
In that context, one of the purposes of the Act 
could be gathered from Section 8, which vests the 
superintendence and control over the Force in the 
Central Government. The concept of “control”, as per 
P. Ramantha Aiyer’s Advanced Law Lexicon (4th 
Edition), inter alia, implies that the controlling 
authority must be in a position to dominate the 
affairs of its subordinate19. In State of West Bengal 
v. Nripendra Nath Bagchi20, a Constitution Bench of 
this Court had occasion to explore the true import of 
the expression ‘control’ as used in Article 235 of the 
Constitution 
of 
India. 
After 
considering 
the 
submissions, it was held that the word ‘control’ must 
include disciplinary jurisdiction. In Madan Mohan 
Choudhary v. State of Bihar & Ors.21 it was 
reiterated that the expression ‘control,’ as used in 
 
19 See also Prasar Bharti & Ors. v. Amarjeet Singh & Ors., (2007) 9 SCC 539, paragraph 20 
20 AIR 1996 SC 447 
21 (1999) 3 SCC 396, paragraphs 25 and 26 
 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 33 of 38 
 
Article 235 of the Constitution, includes disciplinary 
control. 
It 
was 
also 
observed 
that 
transfers, 
promotions, and confirmations including transfer of 
District Judges or the recall of District Judges posted 
on 
ex-cadre 
post 
or 
on 
deputation 
or 
on 
administrative 
post 
etc. 
is 
also 
within 
the 
administrative control of the High Court. So also, 
premature and compulsory retirement is within the 
control of the High Court.   
32. 
From above, it is clear that ‘control’ is a word 
of wide amplitude and includes disciplinary control. 
Therefore, in our view, if the CRPF Act envisages 
vesting of control over the Force in the Central 
Government and the various punishments imposable 
under Section 11 are subject to the rules made under 
the Act, the Central Government in exercise of its 
general rule-making power, to ensure full and 
effective control over the Force, can prescribe 
punishments other than those specified in that 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 34 of 38 
 
section, including the punishment of compulsory 
retirement.  
33. 
It 
cannot 
be gainsaid 
that 
compulsory 
retirement is a well-accepted method of removing 
dead wood from the cadre without affecting his 
entitlement for retirement benefits, if otherwise 
payable. It is another form of terminating the service 
without affecting retirement benefits. Ordinarily, 
compulsory 
retirement 
is 
not 
considered 
a 
punishment. But if the service rules permit it to be 
imposed by way of a punishment, subject to an 
enquiry, so be it.  To keep the Force efficient, weeding 
out undesirable elements therefrom is essential and 
is a facet of control over the Force, which the Central 
Government has over the Force by virtue of Section 8 
of the CRPF Act. Thus, to ensure effective control 
over the Force, if rules are framed, in exercise of 
general 
rule-making 
power, 
prescribing 
the 
punishment of compulsory retirement, the same 
cannot be said to be ultra vires Section 11 of the 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 35 of 38 
 
CRPF Act, particularly when sub-section (1) of 
Section 
11 
clearly 
mentions 
that 
the 
power 
exercisable therein is subject to any rules made 
under the Act. We, therefore, hold that the 
punishment of compulsory retirement prescribed by 
Rule 27 is intra vires the CRPF Act and is one of the 
punishments imposable. Issues (i) and (ii) are decided 
in the above terms. 
Punishment of compulsory retirement suffers 
from no other infirmity. 
 
34. 
The charge against the respondent has been 
that on 18.06.2005, during Forest Camp Training, he 
abused M. Devnath, Forest Camp Training Haw/ 
B.H.M. and assaulted him with a stick. M. Devnath 
was medically examined. The medical examination 
report confirmed that he suffered injuries. P.K. Sahu 
(PW-1), who was the Camp Commander, proved that 
M. Devnath came to him and complained to him 
about being beaten by the respondent.  PW-2, G D 
Bhukara, initially supported the case against the 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 36 of 38 
 
respondent but during cross-examination stated that 
no third person was present during the incident. PW-
3, 
T.K. 
Hajra, 
stated 
that 
M. 
Devnath 
had 
complained to him about the conduct of the 
respondent, and he could also notice presence of 
injuries on his body. Similar is the statement of PW-4 
Heera Lal Yadav. PW-5 Liyakat Ali, stated that he 
saw them fighting and saw respondent striking a 
stick blow to M. Devnath. He also stated that M. 
Devnath went to his tent saying that he would 
commit suicide, though he was rescued.  The 
statement of M. Devnath (the victim) was also 
recorded. He supported the charge. After considering 
the statement of the witnesses, including the victim, 
and perusing the documents, including the medical 
report, 
the 
charges 
were 
found 
proved. 
In 
consequence, after considering the defence of the 
respondent and the tenure of his service, the 
Commandant imposed punishment of compulsory 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 37 of 38 
 
retirement on the respondent and preserved his right 
for pension and gratuity. 
35. 
The learned counsel for the respondent made 
a feeble attempt to challenge the finding returned in 
the enquiry by claiming that the enquiry officer and 
the disciplinary authority did not meticulously 
consider 
the 
respondent’s 
defence 
and 
the 
weaknesses in the evidence led against him. To test 
the above submission, and to find out whether there 
is any perversity in the enquiry report, we went 
through the materials on record and found that there 
is no such perversity in the enquiry report, which is, 
in fact, founded on the evidence on record as noticed 
in the preceding paragraph.  Further, no palpable 
error in the conduct of the enquiry was brought to 
our notice.  The punishment awarded is also not 
shockingly 
disproportionate 
to 
the 
proven 
misconduct.  Rather, considering his past service, 
already a sympathetic view has been taken in the 
matter and no further latitude need be shown to the 

 Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.4106/2021                                                                                            Page 38 of 38 
 
respondent who was part of a disciplined force and 
has been found guilty of assaulting his colleague. 
Consequently, we find no good reason to interfere 
with the punishment awarded to the respondent.  
36. 
For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is 
allowed. The impugned order of the High Court is set 
aside. The writ petition filed by the respondent 
(original petitioner) shall stand dismissed. The 
punishment of compulsory retirement awarded to the 
respondent is affirmed.  There is no order as to costs.              
 
 
….........................................CJI. 
     
     
                    (DR. D. Y. CHANDRACHUD) 
  
…............................................J. 
     
 
 
  (J. B. PARDIWALA) 
 
…............................................J. 
     
 
 
  (MANOJ MISRA) 
 
New Delhi; 
May 8, 2024.