2024 INSC 35
 
1 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
  
S.L.P.(C) No. 21211 of 2012 
 
 
BIRLA CORPORATION LIMITED         
THROUGH ITS MANAGING DIRECTOR                         … PETITIONER 
  
 
VERSUS 
 
  
BHANWAR SINGH AND OTHERS 
                 … RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
WITH 
 
SLP (C) No. 22377 of 2012 
 
WITH  
 
SLP (C) NO. 23551 OF 2012 
 
WITH  
 
SLP (C) NO. 29698 OF 2012 
 
WITH  
 
SLP (C) NO. 25186 OF 2012 
 
WITH  
 
SLP (C) NO. 31905 OF 2013 
 
WITH  
 
SLP (C) NO. 31724 OF 2012 
 
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2024.01.12
17:11:05 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
2 
 
O R D E R   
 
1. 
The Chittorgarh Fort represents the quintessence of a tribute to 
nationalism, courage, medieval chivalry, and sacrifice exhibited between 
the seventh and the sixteenth centuries by several rulers, like the Mewar 
rulers of Sisodia, their kinsmen, women, and children. The Chittorgarh Fort 
has weathered and withstood many battles and has been a witness to the 
power and pride of the kings who occupied the Fort. The history is replete 
with brave, extraordinary and indomitable courage exhibited by the rulers 
and occupants of the Fort.  
1.1  The Chittorgarh Fort is a notified monument under the Ancient and 
Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Declaration 
of National Importance) Act, 1951 and the Ancient Monuments 
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958, and also a notified UNESCO 
World Heritage Site. The Fort attracts tourists from far and near for 
sightseeing and to look at the tall and strong structures on the hilltop of 
Chittorgarh, evidencing the grit and ability to withstand all adversities. 
Despite  the  passage  of  centuries,  from  the  time of  construction, the  

 
3 
Chittorgarh Fort retains some significant, world-class structures, including 
the Vijay Stambh, Kirti Stambh, Padmini Palace, Kumbha Palace and 
Meera Mandir. 
2. 
The Fort’s history and legacy make it a preferred destination for 
tourists. The serene hillock, which had less populated surroundings at one 
point, is subject to contemporaneous development, urbanisation, etc. The 
principal issue considered by the High Court of Rajasthan in the judgement 
impugned before us does not deal with the peripheral inconveniences that 
the Fort has experienced with the onset of urbanisation and tourism in the 
immediate past. But a distinct problem of considerable importance. 
3. 
The immutable geology of the area has limestone formation of the 
Vindhyan age, and as per geological study and assessment, the limestone 
is located in Nimbahera city. The mineral reserve of this stone occurs 
between Nimbahera shales and Suket shales.  
4. 
The limestone is a valuable mineral resource from the perspective 
of the State exchequer and is a material or a raw material used in more 
than one sense. The State Government granted prospective mining leases 
of small, medium and large areas in and around the hillock and the 
surrounding areas of the Chittorgarh Fort to individuals/industrial houses. 
The exploitation of minerals available in the surrounding area by the 
lessees to the State Government, particularly in an unscientific manner or 

 
4 
disproportionate exploitation of minerals in hard and rude mining activities, 
was seen as a threat to the existential utility of the Chittorgarh Fort and the 
structures referred to in paragraph no. 1.1 (supra) of this Order. 
5. 
One Shri Thakur Umed Singh Rathore filed W.P. (PIL) No. 
1316/1999 before the High Court of Rajasthan, questioning the blasting 
operations undertaken for limestone extraction resulting in possible 
damage to the existing structures of the Chittorgarh Fort. The gist of the 
complaint is that continuous/frequent exposure of the ancient structures in 
the Chittorgarh Fort to the peak particle velocity (PPV) generated by the 
explosives used in mineral extraction would damage the heritage 
monument, and this negligence of the present generation will leave only 
the remnants of the Chittorgarh Fort to the succeeding generations.  
6.  
The issue is undoubtedly of grave concern, and the conflict between 
the exploitation of mineral wealth and sustaining the neighbourhood, 
stated pithily, adheres to the principle of sustainable exploitation of mineral 
resources without adversely affecting the community interest in any 
manner. 
7. 
On 06.08.2002, W.P. (PIL) No. 1316/1999 was disposed of. For the 
present purpose, we are not referring to the material and the larger 
question considered by the Rajasthan High Court in the order dated 
06.08.2002, in W.P. No. 1316/1999. 

 
5 
8. 
Respondents Nos. 1 to 6 herein filed W.P. (PIL) No. 6591/2011 
before the High Court of Rajasthan against the Union of India through 
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI)/Respondent No. 7 herein and others. 
The gist of the writ prayer is stated thus:- 
i. 
To protect the Chittorgarh Fort. 
ii. 
To stop blasting within a radius of ten kilometres from the Fort. 
iii. 
To refrain the Mining Department from granting mining leases 
within ten kilometres of the radius of the Fort. 
iv. 
To prohibit open blasting within a radius of ten kilometres from 
the Fort. 
Birla Corporation Limited Chanderiya, Chittorgarh/Petitioner herein is 
arrayed as Respondent No. 20 in W.P. (PIL) No. 6591/2011.  
9. 
During the pendency of W.P. No. 6591/2011, the High Court had the 
advantage of the replies from the contesting respondents; the affidavits of 
government departments setting out their view on all the issues 
considered by the High Court in W.P. (PIL) No. 6591/2011 and on the 
impact of blasting on the Chittorgarh Fort on 25.05.2012 W.P. (PIL) No. 
6591/2011 was disposed of.  
10. 
To conclude this part of the narrative, we refer to the following 
paragraphs of the impugned judgement:- 

 
6 
“For causing severe damage to the fort structures including Vijay 
Stambha, Kirti Stambha and Kumbha Mahal and houses and affecting 
ecology and environment, considering the polluter-pays principle, it is just 
and proper to direct Birla Cement and other mine holders to pay 
compensation for restoring back glory of ancient monument to the extent 
it is possible after damage. A lot of damage has also been caused in the 
area in question, let restoration and its reclamation be done as 
expeditiously as possible. 
Accordingly, we make the interim order absolute and direct that no mining 
activities and blasting shall take place within 10 kms from the fort wall. 
The mining leases granted within 10 kms from fort wall are cancelled. 
The Birla Cement as well as mine holders are directed to make payment 
of compensation to the tune of Rs. 5 crores (Five Crores only), out of 
which, 90% shall be paid by Birla Cement and the remaining amount shall 
be paid by other mine holders involved in blasting. The amount of 
compensation shall be kept at the disposal of Archaeological Survey of 
India (ASI) and be utilized for repair and upkeep of the fort in question. 
The plan to repair damages and improve facilities be submitted to this 
Court within four months.” 
11. 
Hence, SLP (C) No. 21211 of 2012 at the instance of Birla 
Corporation Limited Chanderiya, Chittorgarh/Respondent No. 20 in W.P. 
(PIL) No. 6591/2011.  
12. 
On 20.07.2012, a notice on the SLP was issued. The order dated 
18.01.2013 of this Court reads thus:-  
“It is evident from the impugned order that the main issue before the High 
Court pertained to the impact of blasting operations in the periphery of 
Chittorgarh fort. Hence, the question of a complete ban on mining 
operations around the fort, even without involving blasting, has not been 
examined. The parties are ad idem that before making final orders on the 
prayer for stay of the impugned directions, a report from an expert on the 
subject matter be called for. It is suggested that in the first instance, the 
Central Building Research Institute, Roorke, may be asked to conduct a 
study of impact of mining on the said fort even without blasting operations 
and submit its interim report. In other words, an expert should evaluate 
the effect of mining in the fort area, with any kind of manual or electric 
gadgets, like surface scrappers, rock breakers, etc.  
We accede to the prayer and accordingly request the Director of the Said 
Institute to nominate an expert to undertake the said exercise and submit 
his report as expeditiously as possible. In any case, interim report shall 

 
7 
be submitted within three weeks from today. It will be open to the said 
expert to consult or seek assistance of any other agency, as he may 
deem necessary. It is agreed that all the expenses in this regard shall be 
borne by M/s Birla Corporation Ltd. The Secretarial assistance shall, 
however, be provided by the State. In the meanwhile, the petitioners are 
permitted to carry out mining operations manually, without the use of any 
kind of heavy equipment like the JCBs, Earth movers etc. As the said fort 
is a protected monument, the ASI shall closely monitor the mining 
operations. [D.K Jain, Madan B. Lokur, JJ].” 
13. 
On 08.03.2013, as part of monitoring the effect of the mining 
activities in the neighbourhood of the Chittorgarh Fort, the consensus 
emerged from the submissions made by the parties appearing in this lis, 
this Court directed the study of a cumulative impact of peak particle 
velocity (PPV) on the structures in the Fort from the blasting operations 
undertaken by the lessees of the mining leases. The Petitioner before this 
Court possesses a mining lease for 598.98 hectares at a distance of about 
4.5 kilometres from the boundary of the Chittorgarh Fort and the Petitioner 
challenges the directions issued by the High Court in paragraph no. 10 
(supra). A few other SLPs are tagged with the main case. We are not 
referring to the challenge in these SLPs, for the directions we are 
considering through this order. 
14. 
This Court, permitted the study of cumulative impacts of vibrations 
and peak particle velocity (PPV) on the structures in the Fort from the 
blasting operations and simultaneously prohibited blasting for any 
purpose, including the proposed study, within the radius of one kilometre 
from the boundary of the Chittorgarh Fort. This Court directed the Central 

 
8 
Building Research Institute, Roorkee (CBRI, Roorkee), to undertake a 
comprehensive study of the environmental impact on the subject 
monument from the mining and blasting activities by the lessees of the 
mining lease within a radius of ten kilometres. 
15. 
CSIR-CBRI, Roorkee, constituted a team of experts and officers to 
undertake a comprehensive study to assess the impact of mining by using 
explosives on the structural integrity of the Chittorgarh Fort based on the 
following terms of reference:-  
i. 
Whether blasting including the cumulative effect of blasting 
beyond a specified distance has any impact whatsoever upon the 
structure of the Fort? 
ii. 
What appeared to be the causes that have led to cracks and other 
damage caused to the Fort, other than ageing simplicitor? 
iii. 
Whether the uncontrolled access to tourist has any adverse impact 
upon the structure and if so, any suggested steps to regulate this 
activity. 
iv. 
Whether the activities within the colony situated in the Fort as well 
as the flow of traffic including heavy traffic in the vicinity of the Fort 
have any adverse consequences upon the structural integrity of 
the Fort, and if so the suggested measures to deal with the 
problems. 
v. 
General recommendations on the steps to be taken to restore the 
structural integrity to repair the cracks and generally ensure that 
no damage in future is caused to the structural integrity. 
vi. 
A comprehensive Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
covering all kind of pollution-air, ground water, noise etc. by the 
complete cycle of mining activities including its transportation. 
16. 
CSIR-CBRI, Roorkee, between November 2013 and September 
2014, undertook the study of the environmental impact from the mining 
activities and generated data from the site during the full-scale blasting 
operations both individually and in combinations from the mines. CSIR-

 
9 
CBRI, Roorkee associated the Central Institute of Mining and Fuel 
Research (CIMFR) in the study and submitted the Report dated 
30.09.2014. It is apposite to excerpt a few of the conclusions in the report 
dated 30.09.2014:- 
“1.10: General recommendations for all the mines 
i. 
Although the vibration induced by blasting was found to be 
within the permissible limits, it is recommended that 
continuous vibration monitoring using suitable instruments 
in each group of mines shall be carried out by the mining 
personnel. Periodic review, say half yearly of the vibration 
recoded by each mine operator shall be done by expert 
agency. This will not only provide control on the unguarded 
blasting practices but over a period of time, blasting 
practices will be improved by educating the mine operators, 
particularly in case of Manpura and Bhairon Singhji ka 
Khera quarries. 
ii. 
In BSK and Manpura quarries, advanced blasting 
techniques using delay detonator both electric as well as 
non-electric initiation systems should be implemented in 
phased manner by imparting training to the mine operators. 
This will enhance safety as well as productivity of all the 
stake holders. 
iii. 
Structural health monitoring of Chittorgarh Fort structures 
should be carried out for at least another two years by 
installing number of sensors at critical structures to 
measure response of the Fort structures during actual 
mining operations. 
iv. 
DMG shall be given greater responsibility towards the 
supervision of routine blasting practices in compliance with 
safety guidelines and MMR 1962 in case of mining of minor 
minerals. 
v. 
There should be at least one licensed blaster for each 
group of five small quarries for both BSK and Manpura 
quarries separately. Only a licensed blaster shall be 
allowed to conduct blast after following proper safety 
precautions and evacuation of men and machinery from the 
danger zone. 
vi. 
In all the basting practices, safety guidelines and approval 
as suggested by Directorate General of Mines Safety, 
Dhanbad and other regulatory bodies shall be strictly 
followed. 
 
1.11 Conclusion: 

 
10 
Monitoring of blast-induced vibration and air overpressure were 
done at more than 500 locations by conducting approximately 100 
blasts and mines between 1.0 and 10.0 km. Based on that, the 
following conclusions are drawn- 
1. Review of various National and International standards for 
safe limit of ground vibration induced by traffic, machinery 
and blasting reveal that the ground vibration and air 
overpressure below 2.0 mm/s and 134 dB (L) respectively 
will not cause any damage to the historic building 
irrespective of the source of vibration and air overpressure. 
2. In BCW mines, values of ground vibration and air 
overpressure are reduced to less than 2.0 m/s and 110 dB 
(L) at distance of 500 m and 800 m respectively whereas 
the minimum distance of the Fort from the mine boundary 
is about 4.5 km. 
3. In Bhairon Singhji ka Khera (BSK) and Manpura quarries, 
values of vibration and air overpressure were less than the 
recommended values of 2.0 mm/s and 134 dB (L) 
respectively at 200 m distance from the blasting source. 
4. It can therefore be concluded that the vibration and air 
overpressure induced by blasting in mines of Birla Cement 
Works, Chittorgarh, Bhairon Singhji ka Khera and Manpura 
Quarries may be concluded to absolutely safe as per 
various National and International Standards. 
5. Blast design parameters as discussed in “Section 10.0 
Recommended Blasting Practices” of this report shall be 
used for routine blasting practices in each mine. 
6. It is suggested that continuous supervision of blasting 
operations, monitoring of blast induced ground vibrations in 
Jai-Surjana Mine of Birla Cements Works (BCW), Bhairon 
Singhji Ka Khera and Manpura quarries shall be carried out 
by the mining personnel themselves and recorded data of 
vibration should be checked and ratified by an expert 
agency at least once in a year.” 
17. 
We have heard the Learned Counsel appearing for the parties and 
have perused the Report dated 30.09.2014 filed by CSIR-CBRI, Roorkee. 
The Learned Counsel appearing for the State of Rajasthan has placed 
before us an abstract of the Report by the Indian Bureau of Mines, Mining 
Research Cell, TMP Division on the impact of blast-induced ground 
vibration on the Chittorgarh Fort, due to working of limestone, china clay 
and red ochre mines in the radius of ten kilometres of Chittorgarh Fort.  

 
11 
18. 
The report filed on behalf of the State of Rajasthan records 
independent conclusions for Jai-Surjana and Block-B (Bherda), Manpura 
stone quarries and Bheiron Singh Ji Ka Khera which read thus:-   
“Jai-Surjana and Block-B (Bherda)- The minimum distance from 
the lease hold area to Chittorgarh fort is 4 kms and therefore, it is 
concluded that there is no impact on Chittorgarh fort due to 
induced ground vibration using 160-300 kg/delay with present 
existing practice. However, the maximum charge 500 kg per delay 
will also dissipate at a distance of 2191 m and will have no 
significant impact on Chittorgarh fort. Thus, it is evident that the 
maximum charge per delay should be restricted to 500 kg during 
rainy season and not increase beyond this limit in any 
circumstances for safe protection of Chittorgarh fort due to mine 
blasting. Thus, it is concluded from the regression analysis and the 
field observations considering the importance of the Historical 
/Archaeological monuments - Chittorgarh Fort maximum charge 
of explosive /delay as per existing practice may be restricted 
upto 300 kg in dry season and 500 Kg in rainy season for safe 
protection of Chittorgarh fort. There is no adverse effect on 
Chittorgarh Fort and other monuments situated on the hill 
due to present existing blasting practices/mining operations 
in the mines of Birla Cement (Block-C Jai-Surjana) limestone 
mines.  
Manpura stone quarries- It is concluded from the regression 
analysis and the field observations, that there is no adverse impact 
on Chittorgarh fort due to blasting using the maximum charge per 
delay 0.125 kg as per existing practice. The low frequency range 
data less than 25 Hz not recorded during the monitoring and 
therefore explosive charge/delay as per existing practice may 
be continued upto 0.125 kg for the safety of Chittorgarh Fort. 
Bheiron Singh Ji Ka Khera- It can be concluded from the 
regression analysis and the field observations, that there is no 
adverse impact on Chittorgarh fort due to blasting using the 
maximum charge per delay 0.125-0.25 kg as per existing practice. 
The low frequency range data less than 25 Hz not recorded during 
the monitoring and therefore explosive charge/delay as per 
existing practice may be continued upto 0.125 - 0.250 kg for 
the safety of Chittorgarh Fort. 
Segwa Area- China clay/Red ochre mines (15 nos.) falling within 
10 km distance of Chittorgarh are situated at Segwa Area and are 
not covered in this study as they have not approached to IBM for 
study.”        

 
12 
19. 
Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Learned Senior Counsel appearing for 
the Petitioner/Birla Corporation Limited invited our attention to the 
chronology of dates and events concerning the Petitioner, which operates 
a mining lease of 598.98 hectares at a distance of about 4.5 kilometres 
from the Chittorgarh Fort. The mining operations undertaken by the 
Petitioner from any viewpoint to wit scientific, technical and legal principles 
are safe and do not cause a debilitating effect on the structures in the 
Chittorgarh Fort. Therefore, the directives issued by the High Court in the 
impugned judgement are unreasonable directions, based on mere 
apprehensions, conjectures and contrary to the record before the High 
Court. The State government, after appreciating the distance at which the 
limestone mines of the Petitioner are located and being satisfied with the 
safety, granted mining leases to the Petitioner. The manual prospecting or 
mining of limestone is onerous, economically disadvantageous, and 
without there being direct or indirect injury from the activities of the 
Petitioner, the impugned judgement imposed a ban on safe and technical 
ways of mineral extraction from the mines situated at Jai-Surjana and 
Block-B (Bherda). Therefore, he prays for setting aside the judgement.  
19.1  Dr. Singhvi contends by relying on the report dated 30.09.2014 of 
CSIR-CBRI, that the study of impact from blasting at the Petitioner’s mine, 
has not travelled beyond a maximum distance of 1 ½ kilometres, and the 

 
13 
blasts carried out at subject mines did not record any vibrations/ peak 
particle velocity (PPV) at the Fort. Therefore, he contends that the 
impugned judgment is liable to be set aside, and the Petitioner is allowed 
to operate the mines in accordance with the grant conditions. 
19.2  The Senior Counsel alternatively placed on record the view of the 
Petitioner/ Birla Corporation Limited on preserving the existing grandeur 
of the Chittorgarh Fort for posterity. As a responsible corporate entity, the 
Petitioner is prepared to establish its bonafides in any further study 
intended to correlate between the alleged debilitating effect on structures 
and the causes for such findings on the monuments in the Chittorgarh Fort. 
He argues that the Petitioner proposes to adopt electronic blasting 
systems, which have far lesser impacts of vibrations than the blasting 
verified in the previous study. According to the Petitioner, electronic 
blasting systems for fragmentation improvement are the latest technology. 
This technology is used worldwide as a safe and scientifically proven 
blasting method employed in mineral ore extraction by the lessees. The 
Learned Counsel suggests that this Court can direct a fresh study on the 
impact of blasting of the mines on the structures in the Chittorgarh Fort; 
measures for ensuring the safety and structural soundness of the Fort, 
and the Court monitors the working of mines before a final verdict on the 
minimum distance to be maintained for blasting operations is rendered. 

 
14 
However, it is argued that if the ipse dixit allegations resulting in the 
impugned directions are allowed to operate, the stakeholders would suffer 
irreparable injuries.  
20. 
The Learned Senior Counsel, Dr. Manish Singhvi, appearing for the 
State, placing reliance on the Report of the Ministry of Coal and Mines, 
Indian Bureau of Mines, Mining Research Cell, argues that though the 
Report stipulates the operation beyond 1½ kilometres as a safe radius, 
still he advises strict care and caution, and prefers to err on the side of 
caution than cure in stipulating the prohibited radius. He contends that the 
blasting should be restricted within a radius of five kilometres. We 
appreciate the contention and, even a study of the impact from blasting 
operations is directed by us. The study shall be undertaken beyond a five-
kilometre radius from the Chittorgarh Fort. During the proposed study, the 
Expert Committee ensures that the maximum permissible explosives 
recommended in the Report of the Indian Bureau of Mines, Mining 
Research Cell is taken note of and acted accordingly. The study on the 
impact from electronic blasting systems with the latest technology is 
undertaken. He prays that until a framework on the working of mines in 
the neighbourhood of the Chittorgarh Fort is finalised, this Court continues 
to monitor the mining activities, particularly those carried out by blasting 
to protect the monuments located in the Fort. 

 
15 
21. 
Mr. Jayant Kumar Mehta, Learned Senior Counsel appearing for 
Respondent Nos. 1 to 6 contends that the impugned judgement has not 
prohibited mining within the radius of ten kilometres but has restricted the 
operation of the mining lease to manual mining alone. The Report 
submitted by CSIR-CBRI, Roorkee, cannot be treated as a report of the 
experts in the field of explosives/mine blasting operations. Firstly, it is 
argued that the directions in the impugned judgement are tenable and, 
secondly, essential in the circumstances established in the instant case. 
21.1  Advocate Ajay Kumar Singh stated that any study of the impact 
from blasting on the monument is by the experts in mining engineering, 
civil engineering and geologists. According to the Counsel, the scope of 
study must include baseline data collection, advanced remote sensing 
techniques, advanced survey techniques, seismic monitoring and 
vibration analysis, geological and geotechnical investigations and 
structural analysis to implement the precautionary principle applied as a 
stepping aid to sustainable development.  
22. 
The Chittorgarh Fort was constructed in the Mauryan period, and 
from time to time, the rulers of the kingdom rebuilt, expanded and 
continued the legacy inherited. The Report of CSIR-CBRI, Roorkee, deals 
with the impact on the Chittorgarh Fort from the explosives used in mining 
and the peak particle velocity (PPV) on the structures existing in and 

 
16 
around the Fort. The Report also deals with the ancillary causes for the 
present state of affairs, i.e., footfall of tourists, the presence of monkeys 
and haphazard maintenance by the ASI and local authorities. We are of 
the view that the approach to preserving the monument must be multi-
dimensional. With the passage of every year, the need to preserve 
monuments increases. The prohibition and regulation of blasting would 
address only one front of the problems identified in the Report. Therefore, 
this Court is of the firm view that the Chittorgarh Fort, a heritage 
monument, must be maintained and preserved under all the 
circumstances. The common thread running through the argument of all 
the Counsel in the steps needed to preserve the Fort are implemented 
and if need be, this Court issues continuous mandamus from time to time 
to the authorities. 
23. 
We take note of the assertions of the Petitioner and the opposition 
voiced by Respondent Nos. 1 to 6 and other impleaded respondents. At 
this juncture, we place on record our appreciation for the work undertaken 
by CSIR-CBRI, Roorkee in filing the Report dated 30.09.2014. However, 
we are also of the view that the safe minimum distance for blasting 
operations from the Chittorgarh Fort suggested in the Report of the CSIR-
CBRI, Roorkee in all material particulars is not in line with the Report of 
the Ministry of Coal and Mines, Indian Bureau of Mines, Mining Research 

 
17 
Cell. At the same time, despite reports suggesting that blasting operations 
can be undertaken beyond the safe distance as suggested by the experts 
would ought not to be given effect unless examined in a detailed study 
undertaken by exploring the latest techniques and technologies. The 
scientific/technological advancements can only be ignored if their efficacy 
as wanting is established in a study undertaken by a committee 
constituted by this Court. This Court at this stage of consideration ought 
not to accept the electronic blasting system technique suggested by the 
Petitioner can be a safe solution to allow mining operations by blasting 
without a prohibitory radius. By choice, we prefer a third-party institution 
and experts in this branch of engineering/science to undertake the study 
independently and file a report before this Court on the aspects discussed 
above.  
24. 
In the preceding paragraphs, we have noticed other contributory 
circumstances viz. negligence causing deterioration to the structures in 
Chittorgarh Fort. Monkey menace, human/tourist footfall, unwanted 
vegetation growth, and the defacing of statues are a few factors recorded 
in the report dated 30.09.2014 that are contributing to the deterioration of 
the Fort.  The extent of damage to the monument is a serious question. 
So, the prevention of damage from any such collateral activities must be 
simultaneously addressed by the State Government of Rajasthan and the 

 
18 
ASI. Therefore, through this order, a three-pronged study and action plan 
are implemented. Hence, the following directions:-  
24.1  
The recommendations in the Report dated 
30.09.2014 which are directed against ASI and the State of 
Rajasthan are implemented within two months from the 
receipt of this Order. For the said purpose, we direct the 
Union of India, through the Director General, ASI, to file a 
compliance report on the deficiencies noted in the 
monument’s maintenance, steps initiated and progress 
made by the next date of hearing.  
24.2  
Respondent No. 8 is directed to ensure strict 
implementation of the Solid Waste Management Rules, 
2016 and to take all steps necessary to control the monkey 
menace and the sources of unauthorised littering in the 
entire Fort and the neighbourhood. Respondents Nos. 8 and 
12 are directed to issue orders within four weeks from today 
to the local self-government for the said purpose and the 
implementation of the directives, is monitored by the 
regional office of Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board 
(RSPCB). All the steps needed to implement Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016, are completed within four weeks 

 
19 
from today. A report on periodic monitoring and the progress 
made is filed by Respondent No. 12 for and on behalf of 
Respondent No. 8. The above takes us to the crux of the 
controversy in the SLPs. 
24.3  
We declare and hold that notwithstanding any 
liberal recommendation on undertaking blasting operations 
nearer to the Chittorgarh Fort, keeping in perspective the 
continuous exposure of ancient monuments to peak particle 
velocity (PPV) arising from blasting, a radius of five 
kilometres from the compound wall of the Fort shall not be 
subjected to mining by blasting or use of explosives for 
mining 
of 
any 
minerals. 
In 
other 
words, 
the 
manual/mechanical mining operations permitted within a 
radius of five kilometres are allowed to be continued, subject 
to the lessees possessing a valid lease in accordance with 
law.  
24.4  
To undertake the study of environmental pollution 
and impact on all the structures in the Chittorgarh Fort from 
the blasting operations beyond a five-kilometre radius, the 
Chairman, Indian Institute of Technology (Indian School of 
Mines), 
Dhanbad, 
Jharkhand 
[IIT 
(ISM)- 
Dhanbad] 

 
20 
constitutes a team of multi-disciplinary experts in civil 
engineering, earthquake engineering, structural geology 
and mining engineering, within two weeks from the receipt 
of a copy of this order and communicates it to the chief 
engineer of the RSPCB and the Petitioner herein. The chief 
engineer of the RSPCB shall be the member secretary of the 
Expert Committee. 
24.5  
We reiterate the terms of reference already 
formulated for the study as well, now ordered by this Order, 
the terms read thus:- 
i. 
Whether blasting including the cumulative effect of blasting 
beyond a specified distance has any impact whatsoever upon the 
structure of the Fort? 
ii. 
What appeared to be the causes that have led to cracks and other 
damage caused to the Fort, other than ageing simplicitor? 
iii. 
Whether the uncontrolled access to tourist has any adverse impact 
upon the structure and if so, any suggested steps to regulate this 
activity. 
iv. 
Whether the activities within the colony situated in the Fort as well 
as the flow of traffic including heavy traffic in the vicinity of the Fort 
have any adverse consequences upon the structural integrity of 
the Fort, and if so the suggested measures to deal with the 
problems. 
v. 
General recommendations on the steps to be taken to restore the 
structural integrity to repair the cracks and generally ensure that 
no damage in future is caused to the structural integrity. 
vi. 
A comprehensive Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
covering all kind of pollution-air, ground water, noise etc. by the 
complete cycle of mining activities including its transportation.  
24.6  
With 
the 
passage 
of 
time, 
technological 
innovations have taken place and are kept in perspective by 

 
21 
the Committee for carrying out the proposed study. The 
Committee, in addition to the terms of reference, keeps in 
perspective, the framework of baseline data collection, 
advanced remote sensing techniques, advanced survey 
techniques, seismic monitoring and vibration analysis, 
geological and geotechnical investigations and structural 
analysis, as may be applicable to the study. The study shall 
be carried out for four months from the date of 
commencement and the blasting activities are allowed to be 
undertaken during the study period. 
24.7  
Respondent No. 8 is directed to prepare the list of 
the leaseholders beyond five kilometres and within a ten-
kilometre radius and furnish the details of lessees who 
desire to operate by blasting to the Committee. 
24.8  
The statement of the Petitioner is accepted that in 
the proposed study, the Petitioner uses an electronic 
blasting system, and the explosives used for delay shall not 
exceed the quantity suggested in the Report of Ministry of 
Coal and Mines, Indian Bureau of Mines, Mining Research 
Cell.  

 
22 
24.9  
Similarly, 
any 
other 
lessee 
proposing 
to 
undertake mine blasting shall furnish complete data of the 
mining operations to Respondent Nos. 8 and 12, who would, 
in turn, pass on the information to the Committee constituted 
to study the impact of blasting operations from those sites 
as well.  
24.10  
Respondent No. 8 ensures that no other lessee 
undertakes mine blasting operations except the lessees 
notified to the Committee.  
24.11  
The 
hillock 
and 
Nimbahera 
limestone, 
a 
geological formation, have existed for ages. The structures 
on the hillock do not wither away willy-nilly on mineral 
extraction. 
24.12  
Respondent Nos. 8 and 12 are authorised to 
direct stopping of blasting operations if the study at any 
place results in unexpected damage to the structures in the 
Fort without waiting for the orders of this Court.  
24.13  
The Petitioner/Birla Corporation Limited defray all 
the expenses for carrying out the above study by the 
committee constituted in terms of this Order.  

 
23 
24.14  
In the event of any exigency or urgency, the 
parties are given liberty to move the Court for directions. 
24.15  
The Committee files its Report on or before July 
5th 2024.  
25. 
Post on July 9th, 2024. 
 
.…..………...................J. 
                                                                      [SANJIV KHANNA] 
   
 
  
.…....……….................J. 
                                                                       [S.V.N. BHATTI] 
                           
 
NEW DELHI; 
JANUARY 12, 2024.