2024 INSC 401
Reportable
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 16956-16957 OF 2017
Mrugendra Indravadan Mehta and others  
… Appellants
Versus
Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation
 
… Respondent
J U D G M E N T
SANJAY KUMAR, J
1.
These two appeals arise out of the common judgment dated
18.06.2013 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Gujarat at
Ahmedabad in First Appeal No. 3596 of 2009 and Cross-Objection No. 81
of 2010 in First Appeal No. 3596 of 2009. Thereby, the Division Bench
allowed the first appeal filed by the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation
(for brevity, ‘the Corporation’) and dismissed the cross-objection filed by
1
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2024.05.10
16:04:06 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

the  respondents  in  the  first  appeal.  Aggrieved  thereby,  the  said
respondents filed these appeals.
2.
The Corporation filed the aforestated first appeal challenging
the judgment and decree dated 17.12.2008 passed by a learned Judge of
the City Civil Court, Ahmedabad, in Civil Suit No. 4583 of 1998. The said
suit was filed by the appellants herein against the Corporation seeking
compensation of ₹1,63,97,673/- with interest thereon @ 18% p.a. or, in
the alternative, allotment of land, i.e., an extent of 974 sq. mts., in any
Town Planning Scheme in the western zone of Ahmedabad.
3.
The suit averments of the appellants (hereinafter, referred to
as ‘the plaintiffs’) were as follows: The plaintiffs’ father was the owner of
original Plot Nos. 144, 150/P and 151/P in Survey Nos. 155, 209 and
210/P respectively, admeasuring 19823 sq. yds./16575 sq. mts. While so,
the Corporation prepared Town Planning Scheme No.6, Paldi, under the
provisions of the Gujarat Town Planning and Urban Development Act,
1976 (for brevity, ‘the Act of 1976’). The scheme came into force from
01.08.1963, whereupon the plaintiffs’ father was required to contribute
21.40% of his lands, i.e., 4247 sq. yds./3552 sq. mts., to the Corporation
for public purposes. For the remaining extent of 15576 sq. yds./13023 sq.
mts., the Corporation allotted two separate final plots, viz., Final Plot No.
2

478, admeasuring 11686 sq. yds./9771 sq. mts., and Final Plot No. 463,
admeasuring 3890 sq. yds./3252 sq. mts. The vacant possession of Final
Plot No. 478 was delivered to the plaintiffs’ father but the Corporation
failed to deliver possession of Final Plot No. 463 owing to its occupation
by slum dwellers. Town Planning Scheme No. 6 was varied thereafter in
1983 but without any alternative plot being allotted in lieu of Final Plot No.
463. The Corporation then prepared a second varied scheme in the year
1986,  viz.,  Town Planning Scheme No. 6, Paldi (second varied), which
came into force on 26.04.1991. Thereunder, Final Plot No. 463 was taken
back for the purpose of slum upgradation and the plaintiffs were offered
Final Plot No. 187, admeasuring 2724 sq. yds./2278 sq. mts. In effect, the
land  allotment  in  their  favour  was  reduced  by  974  sq.  mts.,  when
compared with the area of the initially allotted plot. The plaintiffs claimed
that they were offered meagre compensation @ ₹25/- per sq. mt. for the
deducted area of 974 sq. mts, though the value of the land in 1991 was
about ₹6000/- per sq. mt. in Paldi area. Even after the second variation of
the  scheme,  in  which  Final  Plot  No.  187  was  allotted  to  them,  the
Corporation failed to give vacant possession thereof, due to litigation
between the Corporation and the occupant of the said plot. Ultimately, the
Corporation was able to handover possession of Final Plot No. 187 to
3

them only on 31.01.1996, after the litigation came to an end. Thus, from
01.08.1963,  the  date  on  which  Town  Planning  Scheme  No.  6,  Paldi
(Principal  Scheme),  came  into  force,  the  plaintiffs  were  deprived  of
possession and enjoyment of 3890 sq. yds. of land, as was promised
initially, as the Corporation was not in a position to allot the said land to
them and on 31.01.1996, they were finally delivered possession of Final
Plot No. 187 admeasuring only 2278 sq. mts. The compensation awarded
to them for the shortfall of 974 sq. mts. @ ₹25/- per sq. mt. was an eye
wash in view of the prevailing prices of land in Paldi area in the year
1991. The plaintiffs stated that they were, therefore, constrained to sue
for compensation for the damages suffered by them due to the failure of
the Corporation in discharging its duties under the Act of 1976. 
4.
Further,  the  plaintiffs  pointed  out  that,  in  Town  Planning
Scheme No. 6, Final Plot No. 187 was reserved for construction of a
school but the Corporation permitted one Pulkit Trust to use it as a
playground in 1970. In the first variation of the scheme, Final Plot No. 187
was reserved for a Civic Centre. Litigation cropped up between Pulkit
Trust  and  the  Corporation  and  during  the  pendency  thereof,  the
Corporation prepared the second varied scheme, whereby the plaintiffs
were allotted Final Plot No. 187 though it was still in the occupation of
4

Pulkit  Trust.  The  Corporation  issued  Notice  dated  27.04.1992  under
Section 68 of the Act of 1976 proposing to evict Pulkit Trust from the land.
After considering the objections raised by Pulkit Trust, the Corporation
informed it on 27.09.1994 that the same were not accepted. Thereupon,
Pulkit Trust filed Civil Suit No. 5415 of 1994, which ultimately culminated
with the dismissal of the SLP filed by it before this Court in 1995.
5.
The plaintiffs further stated that, in the meantime, a public
interest litigation was instituted before the High Court of Gujarat  vide
Special Civil Application No. 3980 of 1992. The plaintiffs also joined the
litigation thereafter as necessary parties. This case was finally dismissed
by the High Court on 3/4.04.1995. The plaintiffs stated that they had
suffered huge monetary losses as they were deprived of the benefit of
enjoying the property since 1963 and the failure of the Corporation in
allotting them suitable land, at the time the scheme was implemented,
amounted to failure in discharge of its statutory obligation and duty under
Sections 65, 68, 84 and 85 of the Act of 1976. The plaintiffs claimed that
the market rate of the land allotted to the plaintiffs was about ₹150/- per
sq. yd. in the year 1963 and, therefore, the value of 3890 sq. yds. would
come to ₹5,83,500/-. They asserted that if this amount had been invested
at 10% p.a. compound rate of interest, it would come to ₹1,63,97,673/-.
5

They prayed for compensation of ₹1,63,97,673/-. They further stated that,
the scheme was framed as per the provisions of the Act of 1976, whereby
deduction of 21.40% of their land was necessitated, but they were finally
allotted land with a  further  deduction of 974 sq. mts. illegally.  They,
therefore, sought allotment of that land in the alternative.
6.
The Corporation filed its written statement in the suit, stating
as under:
The suit, as framed, was not maintainable and the Civil Court
had no jurisdiction to entertain it and grant the reliefs prayed for therein.
The suit also required to be dismissed for non-joinder of parties, as the
State Government had not been impleaded therein. Even on merits, the
plaintiffs were not entitled to the reliefs prayed for. The plaintiffs were
allotted  Final  Plot  No.  187,  admeasuring  2278  sq.  mts.,  under  the
scheme, which had been varied after following the due procedure. As
regards the shortfall of land, the plaintiffs were paid compensation @
₹25/- per sq. mt. under the scheme itself and, as such, the plaintiffs
accepted possession of Final Plot No. 187 and the compensation, in
respect  of  the  remaining  area  of  land,  without  protest  and  without
challenging the same. Therefore, it was not open to them to make out a
grievance either with respect to the remaining area of land and/or the
quantum of compensation. If they had any grievance with respect to the
6

quantum of compensation, they were required to prefer an appeal under
Section 54 of the Act of 1976. Further, the plaintiffs could not pray for
compensation for the extent of 974 sq. mts. on the basis of the original
Town Planning Scheme No. 6, Paldi, as upon variation of the scheme, the
original scheme ceased to be in existence and stood substituted by the
varied scheme under Section 71 of the Act of 1976. The Corporation,
accordingly, prayed for dismissal of the suit.
7.
On  the  basis  of  the  aforesaid  pleadings,  the  Trial  Court
framed the following issues for consideration: -
‘1)
Whether the plaintiff proves that deceased father was the
original owner of land bearing S. Nos. 255, 209 and 210/P (original
plot Nos. 144, 150/P and 151/P) admeasuring 19823 sq. yards in
Paldi area?
2)
Whether the plaintiff proves that they required to be allotted
155/6  sq.  yards  by  Ahmedabad  Municipal  Corporation  due  to
enforcement of Town Planning Scheme?
3)
Whether the plaintiff proves that one final plot was allotted
on the original plot itself and another final plot admeasuring about
3890 sq. yards bearing S. No. 403 was allotted to other side?
4)
Whether  the  plaintiff  proves  that  the  defendant  failed
perform its legal obligation to give vacant and peaceful possession
of Final Plot No. 463 due to alleged reasons?
5)
Whether the plaintiff proves that the defendant offered Final
Plot No. 187 admeasuring 2278 sq. mts.?
6)
Whether the plaintiff proves that the defendant offered a
meagre compensation for the deducted area of 972 sq. meter.
7

Even though the real value of the land in 1991 was about Rs.
6000/- per sq. meter, in Paldi area?
7)
Whether the plaintiff proves that the defendant handed over
and allotted the possession of Final Plot No. 187 on dt. 3196 after
litigation as alleged in the plaint?
8)
Whether  the  plaintiff  proves  that  the  compensation
awarded, for the difference of 974 sq. meter. At the rate of Rs. 25
per sq. meter, was merely an eye wash in view of the prevailing
prices of land in Paldi area in the year 1991?
9)
Whether the plaintiff proves that as alleged plots handed
over to him on different dates, so he suffered huge monetary loss
and deprived of benefit on enjoyment of their property since 1963?
10)
Whether the plaintiff proves that the prevailing market rate
of the allotted land to them was about Rs. 150/- per sq. yard in
1963?  And  value  of  3890  sq.  yards  land  would  come  to  Rs.
5,83,500?
11)
Whether the plaintiffs prove that they are entitled to the
interest at the rate of 10% p.a. on Rs. 5,83,500/- which have
turned out in investment at compound rate of interest comes to Rs.
1,63,97,673/- as alleged?
11A)
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to be allotted remaining land
of 974 sq. meter by the defendant as prayed for in para 10(A) of
plaint?
12)
Whether  the  defendant  proves  that the  suit  is  bad  and
illegal for non-joinder of necessary parties as alleged?
13)
Whether  the  defendant  proves  that  the  suit  is  not
maintainable as alleged?
14)
Whether  the  defendant  proves  that the  plaintiff  had  not
raised any objection at the proper time as alleged?
15)
Whether  the  defendant  proves  that  the  plaintiff  is  not
entitled to any special notice as alleged?
8

16)
Whether the defendant proves that in plaintiff’s case they
followed all the necessary procedure as alleged?
17)
Whether  the  defendant  proves  that  this  Court  has  no
jurisdiction to try this suit?
18)
What order and what decree?’
8.
After considering the evidence, oral and documentary, and the
arguments of both sides, the Trial Court answered Issue Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,7,
8,9 and 11A in the affirmative and Issue Nos. 6,10,11,12,13,14,15,16 and
17 in the negative. Significantly, the Corporation adduced no oral or
documentary evidence. As regards Issue Nos. 4 and 5, pertaining to the
offer and allotment of Final Plot No. 187, admeasuring 2278 sq. mts., the
Trial Court noted that Resolution dated 15.10.1986 was passed by the
Town Planning Committee, in which it was stated that in the place of Final
Plot No. 463, it was advised that the same area in Final Plot No. 187 is to
be allotted. The Trial Court also noted the Resolution passed by the
Corporation on 30.10.1986 that the plaintiffs would be allotted the same
area of land which was earlier allotted in Final Plot No. 463. The Trial
Court further noted the correspondence thereafter, which reflected that
Final Plot No. 187 was being allotted to the plaintiffs and that the change
of allotment of plots resulted in a reduction of 974 sq. mts. of land. The
Trial Court accordingly answered Issue Nos. 4 and 5 in the affirmative. As
9

regards Issue No. 6, pertaining to the compensation for the reduced area
of 974 sq. mts., the Trial Court noted that though the plaintiffs pleaded
that, in the year 1991 the value of the land in Paldi area was about
₹6000/-  per  sq.  mt.,  they  did  not  produce  a  single  document  or
corroborative  evidence  to  prove  that  fact.  The  issue  was,  therefore,
answered in the negative. 
9.
As regards Issue Nos. 8 and 9 as to whether the compensation
@ ₹25/- per sq. mt. was merely an eye wash and whether the plaintiffs
suffered huge monetary losses, the Trial Court noted that Final Plot No.
187 had been allotted to the plaintiffs in the place of Final Plot No. 463,
which was initially allotted to them in the year 1963 and for which the rate
was shown as ₹25/- per sq. mt. The Trial Court noted that 33 years after
the allotment of Final Plot No. 463, Final Plot No. 187 was handed over to
the plaintiffs in January, 1996, and the same rate of ₹25/- per sq. mt. was
adopted for the compensation. The Trial Court, accordingly, agreed with
the  plaintiffs  that  the  said  rate  was  meagre  and,  therefore,  the
compensation offered at that rate was merely an eye wash. As Final Plot
No. 187 was handed over to the plaintiffs 33 years after the allotment of
the first plot and as Paldi area could be considered a posh area, the Trial
Court  affirmed  that  the  plaintiffs  had  suffered  monetary  loss  by  the
10

deprivation of the benefit of enjoying the property since 1963. Issue Nos.
8 and 9 were accordingly answered in the affirmative. 
10.
As the plaintiffs failed to adduce evidence in support of their
claim as to the market value of the land but as they had proved that the
Corporation failed to allot the remaining extent of 974 sq. mts. due to total
negligence, they were held entitled to get that extent of land. Issue Nos.
10  and  11  were  answered  in  the  negative  but  Issue  No.  11A was
answered in the affirmative. Issue No. 12, pertaining to the maintainability
of the suit, was answered in favour of the plaintiffs and in the negative. 
11.
Issue Nos. 13,14,15,16 and 17 were taken up together and the
Trial Court answered all of them also in the negative. As regards the bar
under Section 105 of the Act of 1976, the Trial Court opined that this
provision was not intended to protect injustice caused to the parties and
as the Corporation had failed to provide the second final plot till the year
1996 and the same was given with a short fall in area and with meagre
compensation therefor, the said actions were not in good faith and the
statutory provision would not protect the Corporation.
12.
The Trial Court, accordingly, decreed the suit by accepting the
alternative prayer made by the plaintiffs that they should be allotted an
extent of 974 sq. mts. in any Town Planning Scheme in the western zone
11

of  Ahmedabad,  but  rejected  the  main  prayer  for  compensation  of
₹1,63,97,673/-  with  interest  thereon.  The  plaintiffs  were,  however,
directed to repay the amount of compensation received by them @ ₹25/-
per sq. mt. for the extent in question. 
13.
Assailing the aforestated judgment and decree, the Corporation
preferred the subject first appeal before the High Court while the plaintiffs
filed their cross-objection therein, apropos the rejection of their main
prayer for compensation to the tune of 1,63,97,673/-. Before doing so,
₹
the plaintiffs deposited 24,350/-, being the amount awarded towards
₹
compensation for 974 sq. mts. of land @ 25/- per sq. mt., as directed by
₹
the Trial Court. Thereafter, by the impugned judgment, the High Court
held in favour of the Corporation by allowing its appeal and against the
plaintiffs by rejecting their cross-objection.
14.
Perusal of the impugned judgment reflects that the High Court
noted the  contentions of  both  parties  and  then  extracted  the  issues
framed by the Trial Court in extenso. The High Court, however, did not
frame the points that arose for determination in the appeal, in terms of
Order 41 Rule 31 CPC. The High Court then referred to the arguments
advanced on behalf of the parties and started the discussion on merits
from  para  5.1  of  the  judgment.  The  High  Court  observed  that
12

compensation had been paid for the shortfall of 974 sq. mts. @ 25/- per
₹
sq. mt. and noted that it was not in dispute that the said compensation
amount had been accepted without protest. The High Court also noted
that the plaintiffs had not challenged the second varied Town Planning
Scheme No. 6, Paldi, under which they were allotted Final Plot No. 187,
admeasuring 2278 sq. mts., in lieu of the originally allotted Final Plot No.
463, admeasuring 3890 sq. yds. The High Court also took note of the fact
that the plaintiffs supported the second varied scheme before the Division
Bench of the High Court in Special Civil Application No. 3980 of 1992 and
concluded that they could not make out a grievance with regard to the
non-delivery of the remaining 974 sq. mts. of land.
15.
Reference was made by the High Court to Section 71 of the Act
of 1976, which allowed variation of a Town Planning Scheme and it was
held that any right with respect to the remaining 974 sq. mts., on the
basis of the original Town Planning Scheme No. 6, Paldi, no longer
remained in existence after such variation. The High Court, accordingly,
held that the Trial Court had erred in directing the Corporation to allot 974
sq. mts. of land in any other scheme in the western zone of Ahmedabad.
The High Court also took note of the fact that the Trial Court had opined
that the compensation paid to the plaintiffs for the shortfall of 974 sq. mts.
13

@ 25/- per sq. mt. was inadequate, which had led to the direction to the
₹
Corporation  to  allot  an  equivalent  extent  of  land  in  any  other  Town
Planning Scheme, while directing the plaintiffs to return the amount of
compensation paid to them. The High Court, thereupon, observed that
once the plaintiffs accepted Final Plot No. 187 and the compensation for
the 974 sq. mts. of land @ 25/- per sq. mt. under the second varied
₹
Town Planning Scheme, No. 6, Paldi, without protest, it was not open to
the Trial Court to pass any order which would tantamount to further
varying the scheme when it was not even challenged by the plaintiffs.
16.
As regards the inaction on the part of the Corporation in handing
over vacant possession of Final Plot No. 463, the High Court observed
that once the original Town Planning Scheme was varied, it was not open
to the plaintiffs to assert any grievance in relation to the plot allotted to
them under that scheme. As regards the inadequacy of compensation,
the High Court held that the Trial Court could not have gone into that
issue as no appeal was preferred by the plaintiffs under Section 54 of the
Act of 1976, if they were unhappy with the quantum of compensation.
17.
Insofar as the cross-objection filed by the plaintiffs is concerned,
the High Court noted that the Trial Court had not accepted their prayer to
award them compensation of 1,63,97,673/- as they had failed to prove,
₹
14

by leading evidence, that at the relevant time in 1963 the market price of
the land was 150/- per sq. mt. The High Court further held that it was
₹
not open to them to claim any damages, having accepted the smaller plot
allotted to them under the varied scheme and the compensation for the
shortfall of 974 sq. mts. @ 25/- per sq. mt. without protest. The High
₹
Court, accordingly, concluded that the cross-objection deserved to be
dismissed. It is on this basis that the High Court allowed the first appeal
filed  by  the  Corporation  and  dismissed  the  cross-objection  of  the
plaintiffs.
18.
Before we proceed further, it would be apposite to take note of
the statutory milieu pertinent to this case and the case law relevant
thereto. Chapter 5 of the Act of 1976 is titled ‘Town Planning Schemes’
and comprises Sections 40 to 76. Section 40 deals with the making and
the contents of a Town Planning Scheme and empowers the appropriate
authority  to  make  one  or  more  Town  Planning  Scheme(s)  for  a
development area. Section 40(3) states that a Town Planning Scheme
may make provision for the matters enumerated in clauses (a) to (m)
thereunder. Clause (jj) therein was, however, substituted with effect from
01.05.1999. Clause (a) refers to laying out or re-laying out of land, either
vacant or already built upon, while clause (d) relates to the construction,
15

alteration and removal of buildings, bridges and other structures. Clause
(e) relates to the allotment or ear-marking of land for roads, open spaces,
gardens,  recreation  grounds,  schools,  markets,  green-belts,  dairies,
transport facilities and public purposes of all kinds. Section 41 requires
the appropriate authority, in consultation with the Chief Town Planner, to
declare its intention to make a Town Planning Scheme in respect of a
particular area and, within 21 days from the date of such declaration,
publish the same in the prescribed manner and dispatch a copy thereof to
the State  Government, along with a  plan  showing  the  area which it
proposes to include in the Town Planning Scheme. A copy of such plan
shall be open to public inspection at the office of the appropriate authority.
Section 42 deals with the making and publication of a draft scheme and
states that, within 9 months from the date of declaration of intention under
Section 41, the appropriate authority shall make a draft scheme of the
area in respect of which the said declaration was made and publish the
same in the Official Gazette along with the draft regulations for carrying
out the provisions of the scheme. Section 44 details the contents of the
draft  scheme  and  provides  that  it  should  contain  the  particulars
enumerated under Clauses (a) to (h). Clause (a) pertains to the area,
ownership and tenure of each original plot while clause (b) relates to the
16

particulars of land allotted or reserved under Section 40(3)(e). Clause (c)
relates to the extent to which it is proposed to alter the boundaries of the
original plot and clause (e) requires a full description of all the details of
the scheme under Section 40(3), as may be applicable. 
19.
Section 45 of the Act of 1976 pertains to the reconstitution of
plots and Section 45(1) states that, in the draft scheme referred to in
Section 44, the size and shape of every plot shall be determined, so far
as may be, to render it suitable for building purposes and where the plot
has  already  been  built  upon,  to  ensure  that  the  building,  as  far  as
possible, complies with the provisions of the scheme as regards open
spaces. Section 45(2) states that, for the purposes of sub-section (1), the
draft scheme may contain proposals as to the details mentioned under
clauses (a) to (e). This provision reads as under: -
‘(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the draft scheme may
contain proposals-
(a) to form a final plot by the reconstitution of an original plot by
the alteration of its boundaries, if necessary;
(b) to form a final plot from an original plot by the transfer of
any adjoining lands;
(c) to provide with the consent of the owners that two or more
original plots which are owned by several persons or owned by
persons jointly be held in ownership in common as a final plot,
with or without alteration of boundaries;
17

(d) to allot a final plot to any owner dispossessed of land in
furtherance of the scheme; and
(e) to  transfer  the  ownership  of  a  plot  from  one  person  to
another.’
20.
Section  47  of  the  Act  of 1976  provides for objections being
raised against the draft scheme and states that such objections are to be
made in writing within one month from the date of publication of the draft
scheme and the same should be considered by the appropriate authority.
Further, before submitting the draft scheme to the State Government, the
appropriate authority may modify the scheme as it thinks fit. Section 48
empowers the State Government to sanction the draft scheme. Section
50 requires the State Government to appoint a Town Planning Officer
within one month from the date on which the draft scheme has been
sanctioned and notified in the Official Gazette and the duties of such
Town Planning Officer are set out in Section 51. Thereunder, the Town
Planning Officer is required, within twelve months from the date of his
appointment, to sub-divide the Town Planning Scheme into a preliminary
scheme and a final scheme, following the prescribed procedure. Section
52 details the contents of the preliminary and final schemes. Insofar as a
preliminary scheme is concerned, the Town Planning Officer is required,
under  Section 52(1), to give notice in  the  prescribed manner to  the
18

persons affected by the scheme and define and demarcate the areas
allotted to or reserved for a public purpose or for the purpose of the
appropriate authority and the final plots. Under Section 52(1)(iii), the
Town Planning Officer is empowered to provide for the total or partial
transfer of any right in an original plot to a final plot or provide for the
transfer of any right in an original plot in accordance with the provisions of
Section 81. Section 52(2) requires the Town Planning Officer to submit
the preliminary scheme so prepared to the State Government for sanction
and to, thereafter, prepare and submit to the State Government the final
scheme in accordance with the provisions of Section 52(3).
21.
In the said final scheme, the Town Planning Officer is required,
under Section 52(3), to fix the difference between the total of the values
of the original plots and the total of the values of the plots included in the
scheme, in accordance with the provisions of Section 77(1)(f). Under
Clause (iii) of Section 52(3), the Town Planning Officer is required to
estimate the sums payable as compensation on each plot used, allotted
or reserved for a public purpose or for the purpose of the appropriate
authority, which is beneficial partly to owners or residents within the area
of the scheme and partly to the general public, which shall be included in
the costs of the scheme. Clauses (iv) to (ix), thereafter, deal with the
19

Town Planning Officer’s power to calculate and determine the contribution
to be made by the plot owners in relation to the plots used, allotted or
reserved  for  public  purposes  or  for  the  purpose  of  the  appropriate
authority which is beneficial partly to the owners or residents within the
area of the scheme and partly to the general public. This would also
include the calculation of the contribution to be levied on each plot owner
under the final scheme. Section 52(3)(x) requires the Town Planning
Officer to estimate, with reference to claims made before him, after giving
due notice in the prescribed manner and form, the compensation to be
paid to the owner of any property or right injuriously affected by the
making of the Town Planning Scheme, in accordance with the provisions
of Section 82. Section 54 provides for an appeal against any decision of
the Town Planning Officer under Section 52(3)(iii), (iv), (vi), (vii), (viii) and
(x) which are to be communicated forthwith to the party concerned and
such party, if aggrieved thereby, is entitled to file an appeal within one
month from the date of such communication before the Board of Appeal,
constituted under Section 55. Section 67(a) refers to the effect of a
preliminary scheme and states that, on the day on which the preliminary
scheme comes into force, all lands required by the appropriate authority
shall, unless it is otherwise determined in such scheme, vest absolutely in
20

the  appropriate  authority,  free  from  all  encumbrances.  Section  67(b)
states that upon the preliminary scheme coming into force, all rights in
the original plots, which have been reconstituted into final plots, shall
determine and the final plots shall become subject to the rights settled by
the Town Planning Officer. Section 68 empowers the appropriate authority
to summarily evict any person continuing to occupy land which he is not
entitled to occupy under the preliminary scheme, in accordance with the
prescribed procedure, after such preliminary scheme comes into force.
Section 70 empowers the appropriate authority to apply in writing to the
State Government for variation of the preliminary or final scheme after it
has come into force, if the said authority considers that the scheme is
defective on account of an error, irregularity or informality. Section 71 is
titled ‘Variation of Town Planning Scheme by another scheme’. It begins
with a non-obstante clause and reads as under: -
‘71.
Variation of town planning scheme by another scheme.
-Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  Section  70,  a  town
planning scheme may at any time be varied by a subsequent
scheme made, published and sanctioned in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.’
]
21

22.
Section 81 is titled ‘Transfer of right from original to final plot or
extinction of such right’ and states that any right in an original plot which,
in  the  opinion  of  the  Town  Planning  Officer,  is  capable  of  being
transferred wholly or in part, without prejudice to the making of a Town
Planning Scheme, to a final plot shall be so transferred and any right in
an original plot which, in the opinion of the Town Planning Officer, is not
capable of being so transferred, shall be extinguished. Section 82 is titled
‘Compensation in respect of property or right injuriously affected by the
scheme’ and states that the owner of any property or right which is
injuriously affected by the making of a Town Planning Scheme shall, if he
makes a claim before the Town Planning Officer within the prescribed
time, be entitled to be compensated in respect thereof by the appropriate
authority or by any person benefited or partly by the appropriate authority
and partly by such person, as the Town Planning Officer may in each
case determine. The  proviso thereunder states that the value of such
property or right shall be deemed to be its market value on the date of
declaration  of  the  intention  to  make  a  scheme  or  the  date  of  the
notification issued by the State Government under Section 43(1) without
reference to improvements contemplated in the scheme, as the case may
be. Section 84 deals with cases in which the amount payable to the
22

owner exceeds the amount due from him and states that, if the owner of
an original plot is not provided with a plot in the preliminary scheme or if
the contribution to be levied on him under Section 79 is less than the total
amount to be deducted therefrom under any of the provisions of the Act
of 1976, the net amount of his loss shall be payable to him by the
appropriate authority in case or in such other manner as may be agreed
upon by the parties. Section 105 is titled ‘Bar of legal proceedings’ and
states that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against
the State Government, the appropriate authority or any public servant or
person duly appointed or authorized under the Act of 1976 in respect of
anything in good faith done or purported to be done under the provisions
thereof or any rules or regulations made thereunder. 
23.
Section 118 of the Act of 1976 empowers the State Government
to make rules consistent with the provisions of that statute to carry out the
purposes thereof. In exercise of such power, the Gujarat Town Planning
and Urban  Development  Rules, 1979,  were  framed. Rule  16  thereof
prescribes the procedure to be followed for publication of the declaration
under Section 41 of the Act of 1976. Rule 17 states that, for the purpose
of making the draft scheme under Section 42 of the Act of 1976, the
appropriate authority shall call a meeting or meetings of the owners of the
23

lands included in the Town Planning Scheme, by a public notice as well
as by individual notice to every owner whose address is known to the
appropriate authority, and explain in such meeting the tentative proposals
of the draft scheme for eliciting public opinion and suggestions on the
said proposals. Thereafter, the appropriate authority is empowered to
take into consideration all such suggestions and objections raised on the
proposals for making the draft scheme under Section 42. Rule 26 details
the procedure to be followed by the Town Planning Officer under Sections
51 and 52(1) of the Act of 1976. Rule 26(1) requires the Town Planning
Officer to give notice in Form H of the date on which he would commence
his duties for preparing the preliminary scheme and final scheme and he
shall also state the time within which the owner of any property or right
which is injuriously affected by the making of the scheme, who would be
entitled under Section 82, to make a claim for compensation before him.
Under Rule 26(4), the Town Planning Officer is required to give every
person, interested in any land affected by a scheme, sufficient opportunity
of stating their views and not give a decision till he has duly considered
their representations, if any. Rule 37 states that a claim under Section 82
shall be made within three months from the date fixed in the notice given
under Rule 26(1).
24

24.
Now, a quick recce of precedential thought on the Act of 1976
and the like. In State of Gujarat vs. Shantilal Mangaldas and others1, a
Constitution  Bench  had  occasion  to  consider  the  provisions  of  the
Bombay Town Planning Act, 1955. The provisions of that enactment were
earlier applicable in the State of Gujarat and are in  pari materia  with
those of the Act of 1976. Section 53 of the Bombay Town Planning Act,
1955, provided that all lands required by the local authority shall, on the
day on which the final scheme comes into force, vest absolutely in the
local  authority  free  from  all  encumbrances,  unless  it  is  otherwise
determined in such scheme, and that all rights in the original plots which
have been reconstituted shall determine and the reconstituted plots shall
become subject to the rights settled by the Town Planning Officer. In
effect, this provision is identical to Section 67 of the Act of 1976. The
argument advanced in that case before the High Court, which had found
favour with it in holding Section 53  ultra vires, was that when a plot is
reconstituted and out of that plot, a smaller area is given to the owner and
the remaining area is utilized for a public purpose, the area so utilized
vests in the local authority but as the Act did not provide for giving
compensation, which is a just equivalent of the land expropriated on the
date of extinction of interest, the guaranteed right under Article 31(2) of
1
(1969) 1 SCC 509
25

the Constitution stood infringed. Negating this contention, the Constitution
Bench held that Section 53 did not provide that a reconstituted plot is
transferred or is deemed to be transferred from the local authority to the
owner of the original plot, as it provides for statutory readjustment of the
rights of the owners of the original plots of land. The Bench pointed out
that when the scheme comes into force, all rights in the original plots
stand extinguished and, simultaneously therewith, ownership springs in
the reconstituted plots. Noting that there is no vesting of original plots in
the local authority nor transfer of the rights of the local authority in the
reconstituted plots, the Bench observed that a part or even the whole plot
belonging to an owner may go to form a reconstituted plot which may be
allotted to another person or may be appropriated to public purposes
under the scheme. The Bench further observed that the source of the
power to appropriate the whole or a part of the original plot in forming a
reconstituted plot is statutory and it does not predicate ownership of the
plot in the local authority and no process - actual or notional - of transfer
is contemplated in that appropriation. The Bench ultimately held that the
concept that lands vest in the local authority when the intention to make a
scheme is notified is against the plain intendment of the Act. Significantly,
while considering the provision in the Bombay Town Planning Act, 1955,
26

pertaining  to  the  method  of  adjustment  of  contribution  against
compensation receivable by an owner of land, viz., Section 67, the Bench
noted  that  the  said  provision  states  that  the  difference  between  the
market value of the plot, with all the buildings and works thereon, on the
date of declaration of the intention to make a scheme and the market
value of the plot as reconstituted on the same day and without reference
to  the  improvements  contemplated  in  the  scheme,  is  to  be  the
compensation due to the owner and in the event the owner of the original
land is not allotted a plot at all, he shall be paid the value of the original
plot on the date of declaration of the intention to make a scheme. 
25.
In Prakash Amichand Shah vs. State of Gujarat and others2,
another Constitution Bench again dealt with the provisions of the Bombay
Town  Planning  Act,  1955.  It  was observed  therein  that,  on  the  final
scheme coming into force, the lands affected by the said scheme which
are  needed  by  the  local  authority  for  the  purposes  of  the  scheme
automatically vest in the local authority and there is no need to set in
motion the  provisions of  the  Land  Acquisition  Act,  1894.  The  Bench
pointed out that the Town Planning Officer is authorized to determine
whether any reconstituted plot can be given to a person whose land is
affected by the scheme, as all rights of private owners in the original plots
2
(1986) 1 SCC 581
27

would determine and certain consequential rights in favour of the owners
would arise therefrom. The Bench noted that, if reconstituted or final plots
are allotted to them in the scheme, they become owners of such final
plots, subject to the rights settled by the Town Planning Officer in the final
scheme,  and in some cases the original plot  of  an owner might be
completely allotted by the local authority for a public purpose and such
private owner may be paid compensation or given a reconstituted plot in
some other place. Significantly, it was noted that such a reconstituted plot
may be a smaller or a bigger plot and, in some cases, it may not be
possible to allot a final plot at all. Reference was made to the provisions
of the said Act, which provided for certain financial adjustments regarding
payment of money to the local authority or to the owners of the original
plots and it was noted that the development and planning carried out
under the Act is primarily for the benefit of the public and the local
authority is under an obligation to function according to the Act and bear
a part of the expenses of the development. The Bench observed that, in
one sense, it is a package deal. 
26.
In  Ahmedabad  Municipal  Corporation  and  another  vs.
Ahmedabad Green Belt Khedut Mandal and others3, a 3-Judge Bench
of  this  Court  considered  the  provisions  of  the  Act  of  1976.  It  was
3
(2014) 7 SCC 357
28

observed that the provisions of the Act of 1976, read conjointly, give a
clear picture that the Town Planning Scheme is just like consolidation
proceedings as the land belonging to various persons is first put into a
pool and then allocated for different purposes and, in such a way, after
having all deductions, the loss and profit of individual tenure-holders is to
be calculated. It was noted that a Town Planning Scheme would provide
for  pooling  the  entire  land  covered  by  the  scheme  and,  thereafter,
reshuffling and reconstituting of plots and the market value of the original
plots and final plots is to be assessed and the authority has to determine
as to whether a land owner has suffered some injury or has gained from
such  process.  It  was  also  pointed  out  that  reconstitution  of  plots  is
permissible, as provided under the scheme of the Act and as is evident
from  a  reading  of  Sections  45(2)(a),(b),(c)  and  Section  52(1)(iii),  in
accordance with Section 81 of the Act of 1976. The Bench observed that,
if  by  reconstitution  of  the  plots,  anybody  suffers  injury,  the  statutory
provisions  provide  for  compensation  under  Section  67(b)  read  with
Section  82  of  the  Act  of  1976.  It  was  further  noted  that,  by  such
reconstitution and readjustment of plots, there is no vesting of land in the
local authority and the Act of 1976 provides for payment of non-monetary
compensation and that mode was approved by the Constitution Bench in
29

Shantilal Mangaldas (supra), wherein this Court held that when the
scheme comes into force, all rights in the original plots are extinguished
and,  simultaneously therewith,  ownership  springs in  the  reconstituted
plots. Reference was also made to Maneklal Chhotalal and others vs.
M.G. Makwana and others4,  wherein it was observed that, even if an
original plot owner is allotted a smaller extent of land in the final plot and
has to pay certain amount as contribution, having regard to the scheme
and its objects, it is inevitable and would not amount to deprivation. The
3-Judge Bench, accordingly, observed that it is evident that in case a land
owner is not provided with a final plot, the amount of his loss would be
payable to him as required under Section 82 of the Act of 1976. Again
referring to  Shantilal Mangaldas (supra), it was noted that there is no
necessity to acquire the land as the title of the owners is readjusted upon
the scheme  being  sanctioned and the lands required  for  any of  the
purposes of the scheme need not be acquired otherwise than under the
Act, for it is a settled rule of interpretation of statutes that when power is
given thereunder to do a certain thing in a certain way, the thing must be
done in that way or not at all.
27.
This being the legal position  vis-à-vis the Act of 1976, it was
contended before us by the plaintiffs that the impugned judgment of the
4
AIR 1967 SC 1373
30

High Court is liable to be set aside on the short ground that no points for
determination were framed therein, as required by Order 41 Rule 31
CPC. Reliance was placed on Malluru Mallappa (Dead) through Lrs. vs.
Kuruvathappa and others5, wherein this Court observed that the first
appellate Court is required to set out the points for determination, record
the decision thereon and give its own reasoning. It was further observed
that, even when the said Court affirms the judgment of the Trial Court, it
has  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  Order  41  Rule  31  CPC  as
non-observance  thereof  would  lead  to  an  infirmity  in  its  judgment.
However, it may be noted that no absolute proposition was laid down
therein to the effect that failure to frame points for determination, in itself,
would render the first appellate Court’s judgment invalid on that ground. 
28.
Reference was also made to Santosh Hazari vs. Purushottam
Tiwari (Deceased) by LRs6, wherein this Court held that a first appeal is a
valuable right and unless restricted by law, the whole case would be open
for rehearing before it, both on questions of fact and law, and, therefore,
the  judgment  of  the  first  appellate  Court  must  reflect  conscious
application of mind and it must record findings supported by reasons on
all the issues arising, along with the contentions put forth and pressed by
5
(2020) 4 SCC 313
6
(2001) 3 SCC 179
31

the parties for decision of the said Court. It was further observed that,
while reversing a finding of fact, the first appellate Court must come into
close quarters with the reasoning of the Trial Court and then assign its
own reasons for arriving at a different finding. This, per this Court, would
satisfy the requirement of Order 41 Rule 31 CPC.
29.
However, in  Laliteshwar Prasad Singh and others vs. S.P.
Srivastava (Dead) thru. Lrs.7, this Court, while affirming the aforestated
principles, observed that it is well settled that the mere omission to frame
the points for determination would not vitiate the judgment of the first
appellate  Court,  provided  that  the  first  appellate  Court  recorded  its
reasons based on the evidence adduced by both parties. 
30.
Thus, even if the first appellate Court does not separately frame
the points for determination arising in the first appeal, it would not prove
fatal as long as that Court deals with all the issues that actually arise for
deliberation in the said appeal. Substantial compliance with the mandate
of Order 41 Rule 31 CPC in that regard is sufficient. In this regard, useful
reference  may  be  made  to  G.  Amalorpavam  and  others  vs.  R.C.
Diocese of Madurai and others8, wherein this Court held as under: -
‘9. The question  whether in  a particular case there  has been
substantial compliance with the provisions of Order 41 Rule 31 CPC has
7
(2017) 2 SCC 415
8
(2006) 3 SCC 224
32

to be determined on the nature of the judgment delivered in each case.
Non-compliance with the provisions may not vitiate the judgment and
make it wholly void, and may be ignored if there has been substantial
compliance with it and the second appellate court is in a position to
ascertain the findings of the lower appellate court. It is no doubt desirable
that the appellate court should comply with all the requirements of Order
41 Rule 31 CPC. But if it is possible to make out from the judgment that
there  is  substantial  compliance  with  the  said  requirements  and  that
justice has not thereby suffered, that would be sufficient. Where the
appellate  court  has  considered  the  entire  evidence  on  record  and
discussed the same in detail, come to any conclusion and its findings are
supported by reasons even though the point has not been framed by the
appellate court there is substantial compliance with the provisions of
Order 41 Rule 31 CPC and the judgment is not in any manner vitiated by
the  absence  of  a  point  of  determination.  Where  there  is  an  honest
endeavour  on  the  part  of  the  lower  appellate  court  to  consider  the
controversy between the parties and there is proper appraisement of the
respective cases and weighing and balancing of the evidence, facts and
the other considerations appearing on both sides is clearly manifest by
the perusal of the judgment of the lower appellate court, it would be a
valid  judgment  even  though  it  does  not  contain  the  points  for
determination. The object of the rule in making it incumbent upon the
appellate court to frame points for determination and to cite reasons for
the decision is to focus attention of the court on the rival contentions
which  arise  for  determination  and  also  to  provide  litigant  parties
opportunity  in  understanding  the  ground  upon  which  the  decision  is
founded with a view to enable them to know the basis of the decision and
if so  considered  appropriate  and  so  advised  to  avail  the  remedy of
second appeal conferred by Section 100 CPC.’
33

31.
As already noted hereinabove, the High Court did set out all the
issues framed by the Trial Court in the body of the judgment and was,
therefore, fully conscious of all the points that it had to consider in the
appeal.  Further,  we  do  not  find  that  any  particular  issue  that  was
considered  by  the  Trial  Court  was  left  out  by  the  High  Court  while
adjudicating the appeal. In effect, we do not find merit in the contention that
the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside on this preliminary ground,
warranting reconsideration of the first appeal by the High Court afresh.
32.
As regards the merits of the matter, we may note that though the
father of the plaintiffs was allotted Final Plot No. 463, admeasuring 3890
sq. yds./3252 sq. mts. in the original Town Planning Scheme No. 6, Paldi,
in the year 1963, possession thereof could not be delivered to him as it was
occupied by slum dwellers. It was only in the second variation of Town
Planning Scheme No. 6 in August, 1986, that Final Plot No. 187 was
allotted to the plaintiffs in lieu of Plot No. 463 and it had a smaller area by
974 sq. mts. Reliance was placed by the plaintiffs upon the resolutions
passed by the Town Planning Committee in its meeting held on 15.10.1986
and the Corporation  in  its  general  board  meeting  held  on  30.10.1986
respectively to contend that it was the intention of the authorities concerned
to allot the same area as in Final Plot No. 463 to them. However, we find
34

from the resolutions in question that Final Plot No. 187 was specifically
mentioned therein and the intention was that this plot should be allotted to
the plaintiffs. It is an admitted fact that this final plot was part of the original
Town Planning Scheme No. 6, Paldi, and it was always of the same area,
i.e., 2724 sq. yds/2278 sq. mts. Therefore, the mere use of the words
‘same area’ or ‘equal area’ in the resolutions had no impact as those words
were used in juxtaposition to Final Plot No. 187 and the area of the said
plot must have been within the knowledge of all concerned as on the dates
of the resolutions, given the statutory scheme of transparency.
33.
Further, though so much stress was laid by the plaintiffs upon the
resolutions passed by the authorities in the year 1986 to contend that the
‘same area’ was to be allotted to them in lieu of Plot No. 463, we may note
that this mistaken impression, if at all entertained by the plaintiffs, despite
the clear mention of Final Plot No. 187 in those resolutions and their own
knowledge of the details of the scheme, stood dispelled in April, 1995. They
were  parties  to  the  public  interest  litigation  initiated  in  Special  Civil
Application No. 3980 of 1992 before a Division Bench of the High Court of
Gujarat at Ahmedabad. The challenge therein was to the allotment of Final
Plot No. 187 to them on the ground that the said plot was meant for a
public purpose. The plaintiffs were respondent Nos. 4 and 5 in Special Civil
35

Application  No.  3980  of  1992.  In  the  judgment  rendered  therein  on
03/04.04.1995, the Division Bench observed that Final Plot No. 187 was to
be given to the plaintiffs instead of Final Plot No. 463 which was larger. The
Division Bench further observed that it was they who appeared to have lost
in the bargain, because the plot of land which was now being offered to
them, viz., Plot No. 187, was nearly 1200 sq. yds. lesser than Plot No. 463
and the only advantage which they got was that Plot No. 187 was free from
encumbrance. Nearly nine months later, Final Plot No. 187 was actually
delivered to the plaintiffs. However, in the interregnum, they raised no
objection or grievance as to the reduction in the plot size and quietly waited
for delivery of Final Plot No. 187. It is also an admitted fact that, shortly
thereafter,  in  the  year  1998,  the  plaintiffs  sold  the  said  plot  to
J.K. Cooperative Housing Society Limited.
34.
The failure of the Corporation in handing over vacant possession
of Plot No. 463 was also subjected to attack, but we find that when the said
allotment was modified by the second variation of Town Planning Scheme
No. 6, Paldi, in the year 1986, whereby the plaintiffs were allotted Final Plot
No. 187 which was of a lesser area, they silently accepted the same and
did  not  choose  to  either  seek  implementation  of  the  original  scheme,
whereunder  they  were  allotted  a  larger  plot,  or  challenge  the  varied
36

scheme, whereby they were given a smaller plot. Having accepted the plot
allotted to them upon variation of the scheme without demur or protest, the
plaintiffs cannot now seek to reopen the negligence and delay, if any, on
the part of the Corporation prior to such variation. Further, as is evident
from  the  edicts  laid  down  by  this  Court,  referred  to  supra,  upon  the
preparation or variation of a Town Planning Scheme, the rights in the earlier
plots of land would stand extinguished. That being so, such rights, if any,
which have become extinct cannot be the basis for a later cause of action.
35.
No doubt, even in 1986, when Final Plot No. 187 was allotted to
the plaintiffs, it was not free of occupation as it had been given to Pulkit
Trust for utilization as a playground. Even if this action on the part of the
Corporation is held to be not in good faith, it would only entail a claim for
compensation or damages, but as noted by the Trial Court as well as the
High Court, the plaintiffs did not choose to adduce any evidence in support
of their claim for the quantified damages of 1,63,97,673/-. No document
₹
was produced by the plaintiffs in proof of the price of land in Paldi area
being 150/- per sq. yd. in the year 1963. Though reference was made to
₹
the decision of this Court in Union of India and another vs. Smt. Shanti
Devi and others9 in the context of a return of 10% p.a. being anticipated
from investment in land and a multiplier of 13% being adopted for the
9
(1983) 4 SCC 542
37

purpose  of  capitalization,  this  method  of  calculation  would  have  had
meaning had the value of the land in the present case at the relevant point
of time been determined. However, as the plaintiffs did not adduce any
evidence whatsoever in proof of their claim as to the market value of the
land in question at the relevant point of time, this judgment does not further
their case, insofar as their claim for compensation/damages is concerned.
Reference to N. Nagendra Rao and Co. vs. State of A.P.10, in support of
the  plaintiffs’  claim  for  compensation  owing  to  the  negligence  of  the
authorities is also of no avail as the principles contained therein would have
had application if the plaintiffs’ claim for damages/compensation was duly
supported by material evidence, which it is not.
36.
Further, though it has been contended before us that the plaintiffs
never actually received the compensation offered by the Corporation for the
shortfall of 974 sq. mts. @ 25/- per sq. yd., it is an admitted fact that,
₹
pursuant to the judgment and decree of the Trial Court, the plaintiffs did
deposit the sum of 24,350/-, being the compensation for 974 sq. mts. @
₹
25/- per sq. mt., as directed by the Trial Court. Had it been their case that
₹
they did not receive such compensation, they ought not to have abided by
the direction of the Trial Court and deposited that amount. This voluntary
act on their part precludes them from contending, at this stage, that the
10
(1994) 6 SCC 205
38

said compensation was never paid to them and that they had deposited the
amount as it was only a paltry sum. 
37.
The further argument of the plaintiffs that the Act of 1976 does not
contemplate a second reduction in the reconstituted plot area does not
merit acceptance. Section 45 of the Act of 1976 deals with reconstitution of
plots and it is a settled legal position,  per the decisions of this Court in
Prakash Amichand Shah and Ahmedabad Green Belt Khedut Mandal,
referred to hereinabove, that a plot owner who has surrendered his original
land for the purposes of the Town Planning Scheme is not even assured of
allotment of a reconstituted plot in lieu thereof. In such an event, he is
entitled  only  to  compensation.  Therefore,  there  is  no  guaranteed  right
vesting in a plot owner who surrendered his land in accordance with the
Town Planning Scheme that he would be allotted another plot of land in lieu
thereof, much less, a plot of the same area. It is an admitted fact that, when
the plaintiffs’ father surrendered an extent of 19823 sq. yds./16575 sq. mts.,
he was allotted a lesser extent of 15576 sq. yds./13023 sq. mts in two plots
in the original Town Planning Scheme No. 6, Paldi, with a deduction of
21.40%. 
38.
Though  it  has been  contended  on  behalf  of  the  plaintiffs that
variation of the Town Planning Scheme as permitted under Sections 70 and
39

71 of the Act of 1976 must be read together, we find no merit in this
submission. Section 70 deals with the power to vary a Town Planning
Scheme on the ground of error, irregularity or informality while Section 71 is
general in nature and states that, notwithstanding anything contained in
Section 70, a Town Planning Scheme may at any time be varied by a
subsequent scheme made, published and sanctioned in accordance with
the provisions of the Act of 1976. The very fact that Section 71 begins with
a  non-obstante  clause referring to Section 70, manifests that the power
thereunder is not fettered in any manner, unlike the power under Section 70
which  can  only  be  exercised  on  the  grounds  of  error,  irregularity  or
informality. Further, Section 71 postulates that the variation of the Town
Planning Scheme is to be made, published and sanctioned in accordance
with the provisions of the Act of 1976, which would mean that the entire
exercise  would  be  undertaken  afresh  upon  such  variation,  including
reconstitution of the plots under Section 45. Therefore, further reduction of
a plot notified in the original Town Planning Scheme is implicit in the
general power of variation vesting in the authority under Section 71 of the
Act of 1976. Reference in this regard may be made to the Division Bench
judgment of the Gujarat High Court in Bhupendra Kumar Ramanlal and
others vs. State of Gujarat and others11, wherein It was held that Section
11
(1995) 1 GLH 1124 = (1996) AIHC 109
40

71 of the Act of 1976 provides for the procedure laid down in the Act of
1976 for making a Town Planning Scheme being followed for the purpose
of  varying  a  sanctioned  scheme.  We  are  in  complete  and  respectful
agreement with the above view expressed by the High Court.
39.
Viewed thus, we find that the plaintiffs, being well aware of the fact
that Final Plot No. 187 allotted to them under the second varied Town
Planning Scheme No. 6, Paldi, was of lesser area, accepted the same
without any protest and without agitating a right to a larger area in the light
of the initial allotment of Plot No. 463, and their conduct in depositing
24,350/- thereafter, implying receipt of the compensation amount for the
₹
shortfall area of 974 sq. mts. @ 25/- per sq. mt., foreclosed their right, if
₹
any, to either challenge the allotment of a plot of lesser area or to seek
more compensation. In this regard, we may also note that Section 52 deals,
not only with the allotment of plots, but also the amount to be paid as
compensation. Section 52(3)(x) states that the Town Planning Officer shall
estimate, with reference to the claims made before him after notice has
been given by him in the prescribed manner and form, the compensation to
be paid to the owner of any property or right injuriously effected by the
making of the Town Planning Scheme in accordance with the provisions of
Section 82. Further, Section 54 provides an appellate remedy to the person
41

aggrieved by any decision of the Town Planning Officer under Section 52(3)
(x). In effect, the quantification of compensation @ 25/- per sq. mt. for the
₹
shortfall area of 974 sq. mts., which is relatable to the power of the Town
Planning  Officer  under  Section  52(3)(x),  was  a  decision  which  was
amenable to appellate review under Section 54. However, it is an admitted
fact that the plaintiffs did not avail such remedy.
40.
We may also note that the plaintiffs’ main prayer in their suit was
for quantified compensation, which they had calculated on the strength of
the area of Final Plot No. 463 which could not be allotted to them, i.e., 3890
sq. yds., but their prayer, in the alternative, was for allotment of an extent of
land of 974 sq. yds., which was the shortfall in area when they were allotted
Final Plot No. 187 in the second varied scheme. In effect, the value of 3890
sq. yds. in Final Plot No. 463 in the original Town Planning Scheme was
equated by them to an extent of 974 sq. yds. in any Town Planning Scheme
in the western zone of Ahmedabad. Significantly, no evidence was led as to
the values of the two final plots, viz., Final Plot No. 463, admeasuring 3890
sq. yds., and Final Plot No. 187, admeasuring 2724 sq. yds. The monetary
value of these two plots would depend upon their situation, development,
proximity and access to the main road or highway, etc., and cannot be
surmised or estimated without relevant material being produced. It cannot
42

even be assessed as to  whether they were of  equal monetary value.
Therefore, the prayer of the plaintiffs for allotment of an extent of land
equivalent to the shortfall area of Final Plot No. 463 may not have been
logical  as  their  values  may  not  necessarily  be  commensurate  or
comparable.
41.
To sum up, having sought quantified damages of 1,63,97,673/-, it
₹
was incumbent upon the plaintiffs to adduce evidence in support of their
claim for this pre-determined sum. However, no evidence whatsoever was
produced by them in support of the land values relevant to any point in
time, be it of the original final plot or the final plot that was ultimately given
to them. In the absence of such crucial material, the plaintiffs’ prayer for
compensation necessarily had to be negated. Further, as there was never
any guarantee that a plot owner who surrendered his land pursuant to a
Town Planning Scheme would be allotted any land after reconstitution of
the plots, the plaintiffs cannot assert any vested right in that regard.
42.
On the above analysis, we are of the considered opinion that the
High  Court  was  fully  justified  in  allowing  the  first  appeal  filed  by  the
Corporation  and  non-suiting  the  plaintiffs  in  entirety.  The  impugned
judgment does not brook interference on any count.
43

The appeals are, therefore, bereft of merit and are accordingly
dismissed.
In the circumstances, parties shall bear their respective costs.
………………………..,J
(A.S. BOPANNA)
………………………..,J
(SANJAY KUMAR)
May 10, 2024;
New Delhi.
 
                                   
44