2024 INSC 408
 
     
Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021  
 
 
 
         Page 1 of 8 
 
NON REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6394 OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 4974 of 2021) 
 
 
M/S. EMBIO LIMITED                         …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
DIRECTOR GENERAL OF FOREIGN  
TRADE & ORS.  
 
 
 
  …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
1. 
The appellant filed a Writ Petition under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India before the Karnataka High Court, 
challenging the order imposing a penalty of Rs. 23,38,882/—
under the provisions of Section 11(2) of the Foreign Trade 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (for short, ‘the FT Act’). 
The said Writ Petition was dismissed. By the impugned 
judgment, a Writ Appeal against the order of the learned Single 
Judge was dismissed.  
2. 
The appellant was formerly known as Emmellen Biotech 
Pharmaceuticals Limited, which amalgamated with Karnataka 
Malladi Biotics Limited based on an order of the Bombay High 
Court dated 24th March 2009.  
 
 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.05.13
17:30:56 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
     
Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021  
 
 
 
         Page 2 of 8 
 
FACTUAL ASPECT   
3. 
A few factual aspects will have to be set out. Karnataka 
Malladi Biotics Limited (for short, ‘Karnataka Biotics’) obtained 
an Export Promotion Capital Goods Licence (for short, ‘the 
licence’), which enabled it to import certain capital equipment at 
a concessional rate of customs duty. Under the licence, 
Karnataka Biotics was permitted to import capital goods worth 
Rs. 23,38,882/- equivalent to US$ 64,987 CIF value, subject to 
the condition of the appellant exporting the finished goods worth 
US$ 2,59,948 and earning an equivalent amount in a freely 
convertible foreign currency within five years from the date of 
the licence. Karnataka Biotics imported goods as permitted 
under the licence and commenced commercial production. 
However, the Board for Industrial Finance and Reconstruction 
(for short, ‘BIFR’), in its meeting dated 11th August 1999, 
declared Karnataka Biotics as a sick unit under Section 3(1)(o) 
of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 
(for short, ‘SICA’). The said company submitted a rehabilitation 
proposal to the operating agency. As Karnataka Biotics had 
enjoyed the benefit of concessional duty, a demand notice was 
issued by the Commissioner of Customs on 3rd April 2002, 
making a demand for the differential duty of Rs. 5,38,525/- from 
Karnataka Biotics. As the said company could not pay the 
demanded amount, a sum of Rs. 4,86,800/- was recovered by 
enforcing the bank guarantee furnished by the said company.  
4. 
On June 3, 2003, the BIFR sanctioned Karnataka Biotics' 
rehabilitation scheme under Section 18 of SICA. On July 16, 
2004, the third respondent passed an Order-in-Original 
imposing a penalty of Rs. 23,38,882/— on Karnataka Biotics for 

 
     
Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021  
 
 
 
         Page 3 of 8 
 
non-fulfilment of export obligation under the licence. An appeal 
preferred before the appellate authority against the said demand 
was dismissed, and a review filed before the Central Government 
was rejected.  
5. 
In 2007, a Writ Petition was filed by the Karnataka Biotics 
before the High Court of Karnataka to challenge the demand for 
penalty. On 24th March 2009, Karnataka Biotics amalgamated 
with Emmellen Biotech Pharmaceuticals Limited under the 
orders of the High Court. Accordingly, a certificate of 
incorporation for the change of the name of Emmellen Biotech 
Pharmaceuticals Limited to M/s Embio Limited (appellant 
herein) was issued. The Writ Petition filed by Karnataka Biotics 
was allowed by a learned Single Judge of the Karnataka High 
Court. The respondents challenged the same by filing a Writ 
Appeal. A Division Bench of the High Court disposed of the 
appeal by granting permission to withdraw the Writ Petition with 
the liberty to file a fresh Writ Petition, presumably in view of the 
amalgamation.  
6. 
The present appellant filed a Writ Petition before the High 
Court of Karnataka. The learned Single Judge dismissed the 
Writ Petition by the order dated 14th November 2017. One of the 
grounds of dismissal was that Karnataka Biotics had withdrawn 
the earlier Writ Petition without reserving any liberty to reagitate 
the same issue. By the impugned judgment, a writ appeal 
preferred by the appellant against the order of the Single Judge 
was dismissed on the ground that Karnataka Biotics had 
withdrawn the earlier Writ Petition without reserving any liberty 
to reagitate the issues involved.  
 

 
     
Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021  
 
 
 
         Page 4 of 8 
 
SUBMISSIONS 
7. 
The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant has 
invited our attention to the rehabilitation scheme of Karnataka 
Biotics sanctioned by the BIFR, which provides for waiver of the 
custom duty of Rs. 33.30 lakhs on account of non-fulfilment of 
the export obligation on the part of the Karnataka Biotics and 
interest accrued thereon. He submitted that as there was a duty 
waiver, there was no question of imposing any penalty. 
Secondly, he submitted that both the learned Single Judge and 
Division Bench completely ignored that while Karnataka Biotics 
was permitted to withdraw the earlier Writ Petition, a liberty was 
granted to file a fresh one. He pointed out to the order of the 
Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in this regard. He 
invited our attention to the Order-in-Original passed by the 3rd 
respondent imposing a penalty of Rs. 23,38,882/- under Section 
11(2) of the FT Act. The learned senior counsel would submit 
that non-fulfilment of export obligation under the licence is not 
a ground under Section 11 (2) of the FT Act to impose a penalty. 
He submitted that the order imposing penalty under Section 11 
(2) of the FT Act was completely illegal. 
8. 
The learned counsel appearing for the respondents 
submitted that under the scheme of rehabilitation of Karnataka 
Biotics, there was no clause granting a waiver of penalty which 
could be imposed on the ground of non-fulfilment of export 
obligation under the license. Learned counsel submitted that 
there was a contravention of the terms of the licence, and 
therefore, the respondents were well within their powers to 
impose the penalty. Learned senior counsel appearing for the 

 
     
Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021  
 
 
 
         Page 5 of 8 
 
appellant relied upon various decisions of the High Courts of 
Gujarat and Delhi to support his contentions.  
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
9. 
At the outset, we may note that the first error committed 
by the Division Bench and learned Single Judge was by 
recording a finding that the first Writ Petition filed by Karnataka 
Biotics was withdrawn without seeking a liberty to file a fresh 
Writ Petition. We may note here that on 9th February 2007, the 
first Writ Petition was filed by Karnataka Biotics. On 24th March 
2009, there was an amalgamation of Karnataka Biotics. Even 
after the amalgamation, the Writ Petition filed in the name of 
Karnataka Biotics was prosecuted. The order dated 13th 
December 2013 passed by a Division Bench of Karnataka High 
Court records that an application was moved by the respondent 
in the appeal seeking permission to withdraw the Writ Petition 
by reserving liberty to file a fresh petition on the same cause of 
action by impleading proper parties. The Division Bench 
permitted withdrawal of the main Writ Petition by expressly 
granting liberty to file a fresh Writ Petition on the same cause of 
action within one week from receipt of a copy of the judgment. 
The grant of liberty has been recorded explicitly in paragraph 4 
of the order of the Division Bench. The present appellant filed a 
fresh Writ Petition not within one week but after six months of 
the said order. As liberty was reserved to file a fresh petition, the 
Writ Petition filed by the appellant could not have been 
dismissed on the ground that while withdrawing the earlier Writ 
Petition, liberty to file a fresh petition was not granted. Perhaps 
both the learned Single Judge and Division Bench have ignored 

 
     
Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021  
 
 
 
         Page 6 of 8 
 
clause 4 of the order of the Division Bench dated 13th December 
2013. 
10. 
The predecessor of the appellant was granted the licence 
for the import of capital goods under the concessional custom 
duty subject to the condition that they would export the final 
product and earn foreign exchange equivalent as mentioned in 
the licence within five years from the date of the licence. In view 
of the grant of the licence, Karnataka Biotics was allowed to 
clear the imported capital goods at a concessional rate of 15 per 
cent. For non-payment of the balance customs duty demand, 
the customs authorities issued a show cause notice. Pursuant 
to the said notice, the bank guarantee furnished earlier by 
Karnataka Biotics was encashed. We have carefully perused the 
sanctioned rehabilitation scheme of Karnataka Biotics under 
SICA. Various reliefs and concessions were noted in the scheme. 
It provided for a waiver of payment of specific amounts. The 
relevant waiver clause reads thus: 
“(ii) To waive the customs duty payable of 
Rs. 33.30 lakhs payable on account of non-
fulfillment of export obligation and Rs.44.40 
lakhs towards interest accrued up to May 
31st 2002.”    
Thus, on its plain reading, a customs duty waiver was granted.  
11. 
We have perused the Order-in-Original passed by the third 
respondent, which levied the impugned penalty of Rs. 
23,38,882/—. The Order-in-Original records that Karnataka 
Biotics did not comply with the export obligation under the 
license granted under the FT Act. Therefore, the penalty was 

 
     
Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021  
 
 
 
         Page 7 of 8 
 
imposed specifically under Section 11 (2). Thus, the waiver 
granted under the rehabilitation scheme is of no assistance to 
the appellant as it was only of the customs duty.  
12. 
Section 11 of the FT Act reads thus: 
“11. Contravention of provisions of this 
Act, rules, orders and foreign trade 
policy.—(1) No export or import shall be 
made by any person except in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act, the rules and 
orders made thereunder and the foreign 
trade policy for the time being in force. 
(2) Where any person makes or abets or 
attempts to make any export or import in 
contravention of any provision of this Act 
or any rules or orders made thereunder or 
the foreign trade policy, he shall be liable 
to a penalty of not less than ten thousand 
rupees and not more than five times the 
value of the goods or services or 
technology in respect of which any 
contravention is made or attempted to be 
made, whichever is more. 
……………………………………………………...
……………………………………………………” 
(emphasis added) 
Sub-Section (2) applies when any import or export is made in 
contravention of any provision of the FT Act, Rules, and orders 
made thereunder or the foreign trade policy.  
13. 
In the present case, there is no allegation made by the 
respondents against the appellant's predecessor of making or 
attempting to make any export or import in contravention of the 
FT Act, any Rules or orders made thereunder, or the foreign 

 
     
Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) 4974 of 2021  
 
 
 
         Page 8 of 8 
 
trade policy. Under the license granted to the appellant’s 
predecessor, there was an obligation to export finished goods by 
earning foreign exchange equivalent to USD 2,59,948 within a 
period of five years. The allegation is of the failure to abide by the 
obligation to export the finished goods within a period of five 
years. So, there is no allegation of attempting to make an export 
or import, which is covered by Section 11 (2). There is no 
allegation against the appellant or its predecessor of making an 
export or import in contravention of the export and import policy. 
Section 11 (2) is a penal provision. It must be strictly construed. 
Thus, the demand for penalty cannot be sustained. Hence, we 
set aside the impugned judgments and orders of the learned 
Single Judge and Division Bench. We also set aside the Order-
in-Original dated 16th July 2004 (Annexure P-3) by which the 
impugned penalty was imposed.  
14. 
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed with no orders as to 
costs. 
 
……………………..J. 
(Abhay S. Oka) 
 
……………………..J. 
(Ujjal Bhuyan) 
 
New Delhi; 
May 13, 2024.