2024 INSC 411
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5026 OF 2023 
  
 
 
BHIKCHAND S/O DHONDIRAM MUTHA (DECEASED) 
THROUGH LRS.  
  
 
 
 
 
…. APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS  
 
 
SHAMABAI DHANRAJ GUGALE (DECEASED) 
THROUGH LRS.  
   
 
 
 
      ...RESPONDENT 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J. 
 
 
1. 
The legal issue in this appeal, concerns restitution of a 
judgment debtor on a decree being varied, reversed, set aside 
or modified as it is statutorily recognised in Section 144 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.1 The decree passed by the Trial 
Court in the present case was varied by the appeal court. 
 
1 ‘CPC’ 
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2024.05.14
15:13:37 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
However, in the meantime, the decree was executed by sale of 
the judgment debtor’s property on 23.09.1985 in favour of the 
decree holders, including respondent Nos. 1 and 2. 
2. 
After the decree was varied by the Appellate Court, the 
appellant/judgment debtor applied for restitution by invoking 
Section 144 CPC. The Trial Court, Appellate Court and the 
second Appellate Court as well, under impugned judgment have 
rejected the appellant/Judgment debtor’s application for 
restitution inter alia on the ground that the original decree was 
modified to the extent of interest payable and the judgment 
debtor not having deposited any amount in the court after the 
original decree and the property was put in auction, is not 
entitled to restitution.  
3. 
Before proceeding to deal with the legal issue, few 
relevant facts need to be referred which are stated intra:  
3.1.  
Dhanraj, the husband of the original plaintiff - 
Shamabai Dhanraj Gugale advanced loan of Rs. 8,000/- to the 
original defendant – appellant/judgment debtor in the year 
1969. Upon his failure to repay the debt, the original plaintiff 
instituted a Special Civil Suit No. 255 of 1972 for recovery of 

3 
 
Rs. 10,880/- (Rs.8,000/- as principal amount + Rs. 2880/- as 
accrued interest) along with interest @ 12% per annum 
pendente lite and post decree and for other ancillary reliefs and 
costs.  On 15.02.1982, the 4th Joint Civil Judge, Senior Division, 
Pune partly decreed the suit by awarding the principal amount; 
pre-suit accrued interest; pendente lite and further interest at 
the rate of 12% per annum till realization of the principal 
amount and costs. The original plaintiff-decree holder preferred 
appeal against rejection of part of the claim. In this appeal 
(C.A. No. 1293 of 1986), the judgment debtor preferred cross 
objections. During the pendency of the above first appeal, the 
plaintiff-decree holder also preferred execution application 
which came to be transferred to the court of Civil Judge, Senior 
Division, Ahmednagar because the property belonging to the 
judgment debtor against which the decretal amount was to be 
recovered fell within the jurisdiction of Ahmednagar court. A 
special Darkhast No. 100 of 1982 came to be filed in the 
Ahmednagar 
court 
on 
20.09.1982. 
In 
these 
execution 
proceedings, the decree holder sought attachment and sale of 
the following properties of the judgment debtor for satisfaction 
of the decree: 

4 
 
(1). 
The land situate at Mauje Davtakli, Taluka 
Shevgaon, District Ahmednagar at Gut No. 72, 
admeasuring approximately 9 Hectares 55 Are. 
(approximately 24 acres); 
(2). 
 land 
situate 
at 
Mauje 
Davtakli, 
Taluka 
Shevgaon, District-Ahmednagar at Gut No. 280, 
admeasuring approximately 0 Hectare 48 Are.  
(3). 
Three House Property bearing nos. 13, 23 and 
8 situate at Mauje Devtakli, Taluka Shevgaon, District 
Ahmednagar.  
 
3.2.  
The civil appeal preferred by the original plaintiff 
came to be dismissed by the district court on 02.08.1988 and 
at the same time the defendant’s cross objections were allowed 
to the extent of interest and cost. The appellate court reduced 
the interest from 12% per annum to 6% per annum for both 
pre-suit and pendente lite/future interest and further directed 
the parties to bear their own costs. As a result, the appellate 
decree, while retaining the principal decretal amount of Rs. 
8,000/-, reduced the pre-suit interest from Rs. 2880/- to Rs. 
1440/- and the pendente lite interest from Rs. 15360/- to Rs. 
7680/- and denied costs of Rs. 1454/- altogether.  The total 
decretal amount of Rs.27694/- thus stood reduced to Rs. 
17120/-.  
3.3.  
Before the decision rendered by the appellate court 
reducing the decretal amount, as above, the plaintiff/decree 

5 
 
holder executed the decree and the properties of the 
defendant/judgment debtor as mentioned (supra) were put to 
auction and were purchased by the original plaintiffs/decree 
holders themselves for a sum of Rs. 34000/- in the auction 
dated 09.08.1985 which was confirmed by the Executing Court 
i.e. 2nd Joint Civil Judge, Senior Division, Ahmednagar in Special 
Darkhast No. 100 of 1982 on 23.09.1985. The first property in 
auction admeasuring 24 acres was subsequently sold by the 
plaintiff in favour of respondent no. 3 herein vide registered 
sale deed dated 17.07.2009 for a sum of Rs.3.9 Lakhs. 
3.4.  
on 29.01.1990, the present appellant/judgment 
debtor moved an application for restitution under Section 144 
CPC on the ground that the original decree having been varied, 
substantially, the execution sale deserves to be set aside and 
reversed by way of restitution. The appellant/judgment debtor 
also deposited the entire decretal amount (as finally decreed by 
the appeal court) in the Trial Court.  As noted above, the courts 
below have concurrently rejected the appellant/judgment 
debtor’s application for restitution basing the reasoning that he 
had not deposited any amount in court, when the suit was 

6 
 
originally decreed and the decree was put in execution, and not 
even a part of the amount which was finally decreed by the 
appeal court was deposited, hence, the principle of restitution is 
not invokable.  
4. 
 
Mr. 
D.N. 
Goburdhan, 
learned 
senior 
counsel 
appearing for the appellant/judgment debtor has strenuously 
urged that the auction purchaser, being the decree holder, in 
the present case, is not entitled to any equity, which a bona 
fide auction purchaser with no knowledge of the litigation, or 
the pending appeal would have in such matter. Reliance is 
placed on Binayak Swain vs. Ramesh Chandra Panigrahi & 
Anr2. & Chinnamal & Ors. Vs. Arumugham & Anr3. It is 
further argued that even an assignee of a decree holder/auction 
purchaser (respondent no. 3 herein) cannot be equated with a 
bona fide purchaser for value without notice. Reference is made 
to the decision of this Court in  Padanathil Rugmini Ama Vs. 
P.K. Abdulla4. It is then argued that where a decree holder 
himself is an auction purchaser, the sale cannot stand not only 
in the case of reversal of a decree but also on any variation or 
 
2 AIR 1966 SC 948 
3 AIR 1990 SC 1828 
4 (1996)  7 SCC 668 

7 
 
modification of it. It is submitted that the judgment debtor’s 
right under Section 144 CPC is ignited immediately after 
reversal or modification of the decree. Referring to South 
Eastern Coalfields Ltd. Vs. State of M.P. & Ors.5, it is 
argued that the principles enshrined in Section 144 CPC have to 
be given the widest possible meaning, therefore, even in case 
of variation or modification of decree, restitution must follow. 
Reference is also made to Chinnamal (supra).  
5. 
Learned senior counsel for the appellant would highlight 
that the decree holder in the present case enjoyed harvesting 
24 acres of land for over 25 years and then sold the said land 
for a sum of Rs. 39 lakhs on 17.07.2009 to respondent no. 3 
who was gambling on the litigation. He had full knowledge of 
the litigation which is reflected from the recital in the sale deed 
(in para 4 of the sale deed) wherein he agreed that if the 
decree holder loses the litigation, Rs. 39 lakhs would be paid 
back to him (to the purchaser) without interest. This crucial 
point was not noticed by the courts below as probably, the said 
information was not made available to the court. Such 
subsequent purchaser can never be treated as bona fide 
 
5 (2003) 8 SCC 648 

8 
 
purchaser as held in the matter of Chinnamal (supra), 
Gurjoginder Singh vs. Jaswant Kaur & Anr.6 &  Padanathil 
(supra).  
6. 
Per contra, Mr. Vinay Navare learned senior counsel 
appearing for respondent nos. 1 and 2 would submit that even 
assuming that the modified decree was for Rs. 17120/-, auction 
sale by the Executing Court was inevitable and the appellant 
cannot claim for setting aside the sale and his only right is to 
recover the amount of difference i.e. Rs. 10574/- under Section 
144 CPC. It is argued that the appellant/defendant remained 
absent during the proceedings, and he entered into two 
agreements to defraud the respondent/plaintiff which has been 
noted by the Executing Court while rejecting his objections to 
the attachment and sale of the said property. Insofar as the 
valuation of the property mentioned in the attachment 
Panchanama under Rule 54 of Order XXI it is argued that the 
rule itself does not contemplate valuation at the time of 
attachment. It is then argued that the contention regarding 
hurried auction cannot be raised in the proceedings under 
Section 144 CPC for which there are various provisions in Order 
 
6 (1994) 2 SCC 368 

9 
 
XXI CPC which can be invoked in the course of the execution 
proceedings. The appellant having not invoked any such 
provisions, the same cannot be raised in proceeding under 
Section 144 CPC. It is also submitted that Order XXI is a self-
contained code and Principal of Estoppel would apply because 
the appellant, having accepted the conclusion of auction 
proceedings and choosing not to challenge the same, is now 
estopped from questioning the validity of the auction.  
7. 
Learned counsel would further submit that the judgments 
referred by the appellant in the matter of South Eastern Coal 
Field (supra) has no application in the facts of the present 
case. It is further put forth that difference in the value of the 
property in the year 1985 and 2009 also cannot be allowed to 
be raised, as it is alien to jurisprudence under Section 144 CPC. 
According to the learned counsel, the provisions contained in 
Section 144 CPC need to be read in correct perspective and 
restitution can be ordered in appropriate case, when decree is 
set aside, but restitution is not the only way of compensating 
the party under Section 144 CPC. Laying emphasis on the 
words “restitution or otherwise” in Section 144 CPC, it is 

10 
 
vehemently argued that the wordings clearly show such 
legislative intention that restitution is not the only way of 
compensating the party and the judgment debtor can be 
granted relief by way of compensation or interest, in 
appropriate case.  
8. 
Mr. K. Parameshwar learned counsel appearing for 
respondent no. 3 would submit that the said respondent had 
purchased 
the 
subject 
property 
vide 
sale 
deed 
dated 
17.07.2009 as a bona fide purchaser for value. He would refer 
to the conduct of the appellant throughout the litigation 
including the execution proceedings wherein he did not prefer 
any appeal against the trial court’s decree nor against the 
confirmation of sale by the Executing Court. It is argued that 
the cases relied upon by the appellant/judgment debtor are in 
respect of reversal of decree whereas the present is one of 
variation of the decree and not of reversal.  
9. 
Mr. 
Parameshwar 
would 
submit 
that 
the 
appellant/judgment debtor is not entitled for restitution, and he 
had no means to pay the reduced decretal amount, therefore, 
the sale was inevitable. Reference is made to Kuppa Sankara 

11 
 
Sastri & Ors. Vs. Kakumanu Varaprasad & Anr.7  so also 
Lal Bhagwant Singh vs. Sri Kishen Das8 &  South Eastern 
Coalfields Ltd. (supra).  
10. It 
is 
next 
argued 
by 
Mr. 
Parameshwar 
that 
the 
appellant/judgment debtor is not entitled to restitution against 
respondent no. 3 who purchased the property from the decree 
holder. Reference is made to Chinnamal (supra) & Padanathil 
(supra). Alternatively, it is argued by Mr. Parameshwar that 
extent of variation in the decree/order is an important factor to 
be considered by the Court in view of the language employed in 
Section 144 CPC providing restitution will be made “so far as 
may be ”in the context of“ insofar as a decree is varied or 
reversed”. It is argued that the restitution to the judgment 
debtor shall be in proportion to the variation/modification made 
in the decree so that equitable justice is done to subsequent 
purchaser as well. The conduct of the party and lapse of time 
from the date of variation of decree and when the restitution is 
going to be ordered as well as the third-party interest are other 
factors which need to be considered while ordering restitution.  
 
7 AIR 1948 MAD.12 
8 (1953) SCR 559 

12 
 
ANALYSIS 
11.  
The statutory mandate for restitution is contained in 
Section 144 CPC which is reproduced hereunder:  
“144. Application for restitution.—(1) Where and in so far 
as a decree  [or an order] is  [varied or reversed in any 
appeal, revision or other proceeding or is set aside or 
modified in any suit instituted for the purpose, the Court 
which passed the decree or order] shall, on the 
application of any party entitled in any benefit by way of 
restitution or otherwise, cause such restitution to be 
made as will, so far as may be, place the parties in the 
position which they would have occupied but for such 
decree  [or order] or [such part thereof as has been 
varied, reversed, set aside or modified]; and, for this 
purpose, the Court may make any orders, including 
orders for the refund of costs and for the payment of 
interest, damages, compensation and mesne profits, 
which are properly  [consequential on such variation, 
reversal, setting aside or modification of the decree or 
order]. 
 [Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section (1) the 
expression “Court which passed the decree or order” shall 
be deemed to include,— (a) where the decree or order 
has been varied or reversed in exercise of appellate or 
revisional jurisdiction, the Court of first instance; (b) 
where the decree or order has been set aside by a 
separate suit, the court of first instance which passed 
such decree or order; (c) where the Court of first instance 
has ceased to exist or has ceased to have jurisdiction to 
execute it, the Court which, if the suit wherein the decree 
or order was passed were instituted at the time of making 
the application for restitution under this section, would 
have jurisdiction to try such suit.]  
(2) No suit shall be instituted for the purpose of obtaining 
any restitution or other relief which could be obtained by 
application under sub-section (1).”  
 
 

13 
 
 
The principle behind the order of restitution made after the 
original decree is reversed or varied or modified has been 
explained by this Court in the matter of South Eastern Coal 
Fields (supra) in the following words in paras 26, 27 & 28: 
“26. In our opinion, the principle of restitution takes care of 
this submission. The word “restitution” in its etymological 
sense means restoring to a party on the modification, 
variation or reversal of a decree or order, what has been lost 
to him in execution of decree or order of the court or in 
direct consequence of a decree or order (see Zafar 
Khan v. Board of Revenue, U.P. [1984 Supp SCC 505 : AIR 
1985 SC 39] ) In law, the term “restitution” is used in three 
senses: (i) return or restoration of some specific thing to its 
rightful owner or status; (ii) compensation for benefits 
derived 
from 
a 
wrong 
done 
to 
another; 
and 
(iii) 
compensation or reparation for the loss caused to another. 
(See Black's Law Dictionary, 7th Edn., p. 1315). The Law of 
Contracts by John D. Calamari & Joseph M. Perillo has been 
quoted by Black to say that “restitution” is an ambiguous 
term, sometimes referring to the disgorging of something 
which 
has 
been 
taken 
and 
at 
times 
referring 
to 
compensation for injury done: 
 
“Often, the result under either meaning of the 
term 
would 
be 
the 
same. 
… 
Unjust 
impoverishment as well as unjust enrichment is 
a ground for restitution. If the defendant is 
guilty of a non-tortious misrepresentation, the 
measure of recovery is not rigid but, as in other 
cases of restitution, such factors as relative 
fault, the agreed-upon risks, and the fairness of 
alternative risk allocations not agreed upon and 
not attributable to the fault of either party need 
to be weighed.” 
 
The principle of restitution has been statutorily recognized in 
Section 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Section 
144 CPC speaks not only of a decree being varied, reversed, 
set aside or modified but also includes an order on a par 
with a decree. The scope of the provision is wide enough so 
as to include therein almost all the kinds of variation, 

14 
 
reversal, setting aside or modification of a decree or order. 
The interim order passed by the court merges into a final 
decision. The validity of an interim order, passed in favour of 
a party, stands reversed in the event of a final decision 
going against the party successful at the interim stage. 
Unless otherwise ordered by the court, the successful party 
at the end would be justified with all expediency in 
demanding compensation and being placed in the same 
situation in which it would have been if the interim order 
would not have been passed against it. The successful party 
can demand (a) the delivery of benefit earned by the 
opposite party under the interim order of the court, or (b) to 
make restitution for what it has lost; and it is the duty of 
the court to do so unless it feels that in the facts and on the 
circumstances of the case, the restitution far from meeting 
the ends of justice, would rather defeat the same. Undoing 
the effect of an interim order by resorting to principles of 
restitution is an obligation of the party, who has gained by 
the interim order of the court, so as to wipe out the effect of 
the interim order passed which, in view of the reasoning 
adopted by the court at the stage of final decision, the court 
earlier would not or ought not to have passed. There is 
nothing wrong in an effort being made to restore the parties 
to the same position in which they would have been if the 
interim order would not have existed. 
 
27. Section 144 CPC is not the fountain source of 
restitution, it is rather a statutory recognition of a pre-
existing rule of justice, equity and fair play. That is why it is 
often held that even away from Section 144 the court has 
inherent jurisdiction to order restitution so as to do 
complete 
justice 
between 
the 
parties. 
In Jai 
Berham v. Kedar Nath Marwari [(1922) 49 IA 351: AIR 1922 
PC 269] Their Lordships of the Privy Council said: (AIR p. 
271) 
 
“It is the duty of the court under Section 144 of the 
Civil Procedure Code to ‘place the parties in the 
position which they would have occupied, but for 
such decree or such part thereof as has been varied 
or 
reversed’. Nor indeed does this duty or 
jurisdiction arise merely under the said section. It is 
inherent in the general jurisdiction of the court to 
act rightly and fairly according to the circumstances 
towards all parties involved.” 
 

15 
 
Cairns, L.C. said in Rodger v. Comptoir D'Escompte de 
Paris [(1871) 3 PC 465: 7 Moo PCC NS 314: 17 ER 120]: 
(ER p. 125) 
 
“[O]ne of the first and highest duties of all courts 
is to take care that the act of the court does no 
injury to any of the suitors, and when the 
expression, ‘the act of the court’ is used, it does 
not mean merely the act of the primary court, or of 
any intermediate court of appeal, but the act of the 
court as a whole, from the lowest court which 
entertains jurisdiction over the matter up to the 
highest court which finally disposes of the case.” 
 
This is also on the principle that a wrong order should not 
be perpetuated by keeping it alive and respecting it (A. 
Arunagiri Nadar v. S.P. Rathinasami [(1971) 1 MLJ 220]). In 
the exercise of such inherent power the courts have applied 
the principles of restitution to myriad situations not strictly 
falling within the terms of Section 144. 
 
28. That no one shall suffer by an act of the court is not a 
rule confined to an erroneous act of the court; the “act of 
the court” embraces within its sweep all such acts as to 
which the court may form an opinion in any legal 
proceedings that the court would not have so acted had it 
been correctly apprised of the facts and the law. The factor 
attracting applicability of restitution is not the act of the 
court being wrongful or a mistake or error committed by the 
court; the test is whether on account of an act of the party 
persuading the court to pass an order held at the end as not 
sustainable, has resulted in one party gaining an advantage 
which it would not have otherwise earned, or the other party 
has suffered an impoverishment which it would not have 
suffered but for the order of the court and the act of such 
party. The quantum of restitution, depending on the facts 
and circumstances of a given case, may take into 
consideration not only what the party excluded would have 
made but also what the party under obligation has or might 
reasonably have made. There is nothing wrong in the 
parties demanding being placed in the same position in 
which they would have been had the court not intervened by 
its interim order when at the end of the proceedings the 
court pronounces its judicial verdict which does not match 
with and countenance its own interim verdict. Whenever 
called upon to adjudicate, the court would act in conjunction 

16 
 
with what is real and substantial justice. The injury, if any, 
caused by the act of the court shall be undone and the gain 
which the party would have earned unless it was interdicted 
by the order of the court would be restored to or conferred 
on the party by suitably commanding the party liable to do 
so. Any opinion to the contrary would lead to unjust if not 
disastrous consequences. Litigation may turn into a fruitful 
industry. Though litigation is not gambling yet there is an 
element of chance in every litigation. Unscrupulous litigants 
may feel encouraged to approach the courts, persuading the 
court to pass interlocutory orders favourable to them by 
making out a prima facie case when the issues are yet to be 
heard and determined on merits and if the concept of 
restitution is excluded from application to interim orders, 
then the litigant would stand to gain by swallowing the 
benefits yielding out of the interim order even though the 
battle has been lost at 
the end. This 
cannot be 
countenanced. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the 
successful party finally held entitled to a relief assessable in 
terms of money at the end of the litigation, is entitled to be 
compensated by award of interest at a suitable reasonable 
rate for the period for which the interim order of the court 
withholding the release of money had remained in 
operation.” 
 
12. The principle explained by this Court in South Eastern 
Coal Fields (supra) as extracted above is to the effect that 
Section 144 CPC statutorily recognises a pre-existing rule of 
justice, equity and fair play. That is why it is often held that 
even away from Section 144 the court has inherent jurisdiction 
to order restitution so as to do complete justice between the 
parties as held by Privy Council in Jai Berham vs. Kedar Nath 
Marwari9. It is also explained that the factor attracting 
applicability of restitution is not the act of the court being 
 
9 AIR 1922 PC 269 

17 
 
wrongful or a mistake or error committed by the court; the test 
is whether on account of an act of the party persuading the 
court to pass an order held at the end as not sustainable, has 
resulted in one party gaining an advantage which it would not 
have otherwise earned.  
13. In the matter of Binayak Swain (supra), this Court held 
that the obligation for restitution arises automatically on the 
reversal or modification of the decree and necessarily carries 
with it the right to restitution of all that has been done under 
the erroneous decree; and the Court in making restitution is 
bound to restore the parties, so far as they can be restored to 
the same position they were in at the time when the Court by 
its erroneous action had displaced them from.  
14. Drawing the distinction between a decree holder who 
himself is the auction purchaser and a third-party auction 
purchaser, this Court in Binayak Swain (supra) approved an 
earlier judgment of Privy Council in the matter of Zain-Ul-
Abdin Khan vs. Muhammad Asghar Ali Khan10 to reiterate 
that  “great distinction between the decree-holders who came 
 
10 (1888)ILR 10 ALL 166 (PC) 

18 
 
in and purchased under their own decree, which was afterwards 
reversed on appeal, and the bona fide purchasers who came in 
and bought at the sale in execution of the decree to which they 
were no parties, and at a time when that decree was a valid 
decree, and when the order for the sale was a valid order”. It is 
categorically held that where the decree holder is himself the 
auction purchaser, the sale cannot stand, if the decree is 
subsequently set aside.  
15.  
In the matter of Chinnamal (supra), this Court again 
dealt with the distinction between the decree holder who 
purchased the property in execution of his own decree, which is 
afterwards modified or reversed, and a person who is not a 
party to the decree. This Court held thus in paras 10 and 11: 
“10. There is thus a distinction maintained between the 
decree holder who purchases the property in execution of 
his own decree, which is afterwards modified or reversed, 
and an auction purchaser who is not party to the decree. 
Where the purchaser is the decree holder, he is bound to 
restore the property to the judgment debtor by way of 
restitution but not a stranger auction purchaser. The latter 
remains unaffected and does not lose title to the property 
by subsequent reversal or modification of the decree. The 
courts have held that he could retain the property since he 
is a bona fide purchaser. This principle is also based on the 
premise that he is not bound to enquire into correctness of 
the judgment or decree sought to be executed. He is thus 
distinguished from an eo nomine party to the litigation. 
 

19 
 
11. There cannot be any dispute on this proposition, and it 
is indeed based on a fair and proper classification. The 
innocent purchaser whether in voluntary transfer or judicial 
sale by or in execution of a decree or order would not be 
penalised. The property bona fide purchased ignorant of the 
litigation should be protected. The judicial sales in particular 
would not be robbed of all their sanctity. It is a sound rule 
based on legal and equitable considerations. But it is difficult 
to appreciate why such protection should be extended to a 
purchaser who knows about the pending litigation relating to 
the decree. If a person ventures to purchase the property 
being fully aware of the controversy between the decree 
holder and judgment debtor, it is difficult to regard him as a 
bona fide purchaser. The true question in each case, 
therefore, is whether the stranger auction purchaser had 
knowledge of the pending litigation about the decree under 
execution. If the evidence indicates that he had no such 
knowledge he would be entitled to retain the property 
purchased being a bona fide purchaser and his title to the 
property remains unaffected by subsequent reversal of the 
decree. The court by all means should protect his purchase. 
But if it is shown by evidence that he was aware of the 
pending appeal against the decree when he purchased the 
property, it would be inappropriate to term him as a bona 
fide purchaser. In such a case the court also cannot assume 
that he was a bona fide or innocent purchaser for giving him 
protection against restitution. No assumption could be made 
contrary to the facts and circumstances of the case and any 
such assumption would be wrong and uncalled for.” 
 
16. Whether a third-party auction purchaser who had the 
knowledge of the pending proceedings can resist restitution has 
been answered against such auction purchaser in paras 14, 16 
& 17 of Chinnamal (supra) 
 
“14. This proposition, we are, however, unable to accept. 
In our opinion, the person who purchases the property in 
court auction with the knowledge of the pending appeal 
against the decree cannot resist restitution. His knowledge 
about the pending litigation would make all the difference 

20 
 
in the case. He may be a stranger to the suit, but he must 
be held to have taken calculated risk in purchasing the 
property. Indeed, he is evidently a speculative purchaser, 
and, in that respect, he is in no better position than the 
decree holder purchaser. The need to protect him against 
restitution, therefore, seems to be unjustified. Similarly, 
the auction purchaser who was a name lender to the 
decree holder or who has colluded with the decree holder 
to purchase the property could not also be protected to 
retain the property if the decree is subsequently reversed. 
 
16. This is also the principle underlying Section 144 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure. It is the duty of all the courts as 
observed by the Privy Council “as aggregate of those 
tribunals” to take care that no act of the court in the 
course of the whole of the proceedings does an injury to 
the suitors in the court. The above passage was quoted in 
the majority judgment of this Court in A.R. Antulay v. R.S. 
Nayak [(1988) 2 SCC 602, 672: 1988 SCC (Cri) 372] . 
Mukharji, J., as he then was, after referring to the said 
observation of Lord Cairns, said: (SCC p. 672, para 83) 
 
“No man should suffer because of the mistake of 
the court. No man should suffer a wrong by 
technical procedure of irregularities. Rules or 
procedures are the handmaids of justice and not 
the mistress of the justice. Ex debito justitiae, 
we must do justice to him. If a man has been 
wronged so long as it lies within the human 
machinery of administration of justice that 
wrong must be remedied.” 
 
17. It is well to remember that the Code of Civil Procedure 
is a body of procedural law designed to facilitate justice 
and it should not be treated as an enactment providing for 
punishments and penalties. The laws of procedure should 
be so construed as to render justice wherever reasonably 
possible. It is in our opinion, not unreasonable to demand 
restitution from a person who has purchased the property 
in court auction being aware of the pending appeal against 
the decree.” 
17. In the matter of Padanathil Ruqmini Amma (supra), 
this Court while dealing with somewhat similar fact situation (as 

21 
 
in the case in hand) wherein a decree holder himself became 
the auction purchaser and later on leased out the property to a 
third party who in turn sold to another one and then this man 
again sold out to a fourth person, held thus in paras 10, 11, 14, 
15,16 and 17:  
“10. It is, however, contended by the respondent that he is 
a lessee from the decree-holder auction-purchaser. The 
appellant cannot seek restitution of properties leased to him 
by the decree-holder auction-purchaser. The lease in his 
favour is protected, he being a third party to the court 
proceedings and the auction sale. This contention has been 
upheld by the Kerala High Court and is challenged before us. 
Now, under Section 144 of the Civil Procedure Code where 
and insofar as a decree or an order is varied or reversed or 
is set aside, the court which passed the decree or order, 
shall, on the application of any party entitled to any benefit 
by way of restitution or otherwise, cause such restitution to 
be made as will, so far as may be, place the parties in the 
position which they would have occupied but for such decree 
or order. For this purpose, the court may make such orders 
including orders for the refund of costs and for the payment 
of interest, damages, compensation and mesne profits, 
which are properly consequential on such variation, 
reversal, setting aside or modification of the decree or order. 
 
11. In the present case, as the ex parte decree was set 
aside, the judgment-debtor was entitled to seek restitution 
of the property which had been sold in court auction in 
execution of the ex parte decree. There is no doubt that 
when the decree-holder himself is the auction-purchaser in 
a court auction sale held in execution of a decree which is 
subsequently set aside, restitution of the property can be 
ordered in favour of the judgment-debtor. The decree-holder 
auction-purchaser is bound to return the property. It is 
equally well settled that if at a court auction sale in 
execution of a decree, the properties are purchased by a 
bona fide purchaser who is a stranger to the court 
proceedings, the sale in his favour is protected and he 
cannot be asked to restitute the property to the judgment-
debtor if the decree is set aside. The ratio behind this 

22 
 
distinction between a sale to a decree-holder and a sale to a 
stranger is that the court, as a matter of policy, will protect 
honest outsider purchasers at sales held in the execution of 
its decrees, although the sales may be subsequently set 
aside, when such purchasers are not parties to the suit. But 
for such protection, the properties which are sold in court 
auctions would not fetch a proper price and the decree-
holder himself would suffer. The same consideration does 
not apply when the decree-holder is himself the purchaser 
and the decree in his favour is set aside. He is a party to the 
litigation and is very much aware of the vicissitudes of 
litigation and needs no protection. 
 
14. In the case of  Satis Chandra Ghose v. Rameswari 
Dasi [AIR 1915 Cal 363: 20 CWN 665], the Calcutta High 
Court relied upon these observations of the Privy Council 
and held that the decree-holders and those who claim under 
decree-holders will form one class as against strangers to 
the decree who purchase in a court auction sale. The title of 
a purchaser from one who has bought at the sale in 
execution of his own decree is liable to be defeated when 
the decree is subsequently set aside. The Calcutta High 
Court said: 
 
“The Court as a matter of policy has a tender 
regard for honest purchasers at sales held in 
execution of its decrees though the sales may be 
subsequently set aside, where those purchasers 
are not parties to the suit and the decree has not 
been passed without jurisdiction. But the same 
measure 
of 
protection 
is 
not 
extended 
to 
purchasers who are themselves the decree-
holders; nor can the purchasers from such decree-
holders claim that the Court owes them any 
duty….” 
 
The policy which prompts the extension of protection to the 
strangers who purchase at court auctions is based on a need 
to ensure that proper price is fetched at a court auction. 
This policy has no application to sales outside the court. The 
purchasers from a decree-holder auction-purchaser have 
bought from one whose title is liable to be defeated. The 
title acquired by the purchaser from the decree-holder is 
similarly defeasible. The Court further observed: “… the 
defeasibility of a decree-holder's title where the decree is ex 
parte is of such common occurrence that the plea of a 
purchaser for value without notice hardly applies”. 

23 
 
 
15. The same view has been reaffirmed by the Calcutta High 
Court in the case of Abdul Rahman v. Sarat Ali [AIR 1916 
Cal 710: 20 CWN 667] where it has been held that the 
assignee of a decree-holder auction-purchaser stands in no 
better position than his assignor. The special protection 
afforded to a stranger who purchases at an execution sale is 
not extended to an assignee of the decree-holder auction-
purchaser. 
 
16. The distinction between a stranger who purchases at an 
auction sale and an assignee from a decree-holder 
purchaser at an auction sale is quite clear. Persons who 
purchase at a court auction who are strangers to the decree 
are afforded protection by the court because they are not in 
any way connected with the decree. Unless they are assured 
of title; the court auction would not fetch a good price and 
would be detrimental to the decree-holder. The policy, 
therefore, is to protect such purchasers. This policy cannot 
extend to those outsiders who do not purchase at a court 
auction. When outsiders purchase from a decree-holder who 
is an auction-purchaser clearly their title is dependent upon 
the title of decree-holder auction-purchaser. It is a 
defeasible title liable to be defeated if the decree is set 
aside. A person who takes an assignment of the property 
from such a purchaser is expected to be aware of the 
defeasibility of the title of his assignor. He has not 
purchased the property through the court at all. There is, 
therefore, no question of the court extending any protection 
to him. The doctrine of a bona fide purchaser for value also 
cannot extend to such an outsider who derives his title 
through a decree-holder auction-purchaser. He is aware or is 
expected to be aware of the nature of the title derived by 
his seller who is a decree-holder auction-purchaser. 
 
17. The High Courts of Patna, Madras and Kerala, however, 
appear to have taken a different view. They have equated 
an assignee from a decree-holder auction-purchaser with a 
stranger auction-purchaser on the basis that an assignee 
from 
a 
decree-holder 
auction-purchaser 
has 
to 
be 
considered as a bona fide purchaser for value who should 
not be allowed to suffer on account of the mistakes or 
irregularities committed in a court of law. It is difficult to see 
how an assignee from a decree-holder auction-purchaser 
can be equated with a bona fide purchaser for value without 
notice. He is aware of the nature of the title of his seller or 
assignor. He is also aware that the title of his assignor or 

24 
 
seller is subject to the doctrine of restitution if the decree is 
ultimately set aside particularly in a case where the decree 
is an ex parte decree and there is a greater possibility of 
such a decree being set aside. The reasons which prompt 
the courts to protect strangers who purchase at court 
auction sales also do not apply to assignees or purchasers 
from a decree-holder auction purchaser. They purchase 
outside the court system and cannot expect any protection 
from the court. Their title is liable to be defeated if the title 
of their seller or assignor is defeated. The view, therefore, 
expressed by the Patna High Court in the case of Gopi 
Lal v. Jamuna Prasad [AIR 1954 Pat 36:1 BLJ 406] , the 
Madras High Court in S. Chokalingam Asari v. N.S. Krishna 
Iyer [AIR 1964 Mad 404 : ILR (1964) 1 Mad 923] and the 
cases cited therein as also by the Kerala High Court in the 
case 
of Parameswaran 
Pillai 
Kumara 
Pillai v. Chinna 
Lakshmi [1970 Ker LJ 450] is not the correct view. The High 
Court, therefore, was not right in protecting the lease 
created in favour of the respondent by Mohammed Haji who 
was a decree-holder auction-purchaser at the sale in 
execution of the ex parte decree which was subsequently 
set aside.” 
 
18.  
The judgment in Padanathil Ruqmini Amma 
(supra), completely answers the argument raised by Mr. K. 
Parameshwar, learned counsel for respondent no. 3 who has 
purchased the property from decree holder on 17.07.2009 with 
full knowledge of pending restitution proceedings as the same 
is contained in the recital in para 4 of the sale deed. Thus, the 
purchaser or the assignee from the decree holder is not entitled 
to object restitution on the ground that he is a bona fide 
purchaser.  

25 
 
19. We shall now deal with the arguments raised by Mr. 
Navare, learned senior counsel that the valuation of the 
attached properties as shown in the attachment panchanama 
cannot be the basis to hold that the property of the judgment 
debtor valued much more than the decretal sum has been sold 
in execution. According to him, Rule 54 of Order XXI CPC does 
not contemplate valuation at the time of attachment. This 
argument is raised in answer to court’s query that when only a 
sum of Rs. 27,694/- was to be realised why all the properties 
i.e. three houses approximately valued at Rs. 25,700/-, 9 H 55 
Are land valued at Rs. 75,000/- and third property admeasuring 
0 H 48 Are valued at Rs. 5,000/- were put to auction.  
20. The above stated three properties were attached under 
Order XXI Rule 54 CPC and thereafter the Executing Court vide 
its order dated 22.10.1982 (Annexure P/4) issued sale notice 
under Order XXI Rule 66 CPC for sale of the attached property 
by public auction. The object of attachment of immovable 
property in course of execution of decree is for realisation of 
the decretal amount by way of the sale of the attached property 
under Order XXI Rule 66 CPC. The said rule (Order XXI Rule 66 

26 
 
CPC) provides for proclamation of sale by public auction. Sub-
rule (2) of Rule 66 CPC needs reference which is reproduced 
hereinbelow:  
“(2) Such proclamation shall be draw up after notice to the 
decree-holder and the judgment-debtor and shall state the 
time and place of sale, and specify as fairly and accurately 
as possible- 
 
(a) the property to be sold or, where a part of the property 
would be sufficient to satisfy the decree, such part; 
 
(b) the revenue assessed upon the estate or part of the 
State, where the property to be sold is an interest in an 
estate or in part of an estate paying revenue to the 
Government; 
 
(c) any incumbrance to which the property is liable; 
 
(d) the amount for the recovery of which the sale is 
ordered; and 
 
(e) every other thing which the Court considers material for 
a purchaser to know in order to judge of the nature and 
value of the property: 
 
Provided that where notice of the date for settling the 
terms of the proclamation has been given to the judgement-
debtor by means of an order under rule 54, it shall not be 
necessary to give notice under this rule to the judgment-
debtor unless the Court otherwise directs: 
 
Provided further that nothing in this rule shall be 
construed 
as 
requiring 
the 
Court 
to 
enter 
in 
the 
proclamation of sale its own estimate of the value of the 
property, but the proclamation shall include the estimate, if 
any, given, by either or both of the parties.” 
 

27 
 
21. The above quoted provisions contained in sub-rule (2) of 
Rule 66 of Order XXI CPC clearly mandates that the sale 
proclamation should mention the estimated value of the 
property and such estimated value can also be given under Rule 
54 Order XXI CPC. The fact that the Court is also entitled to 
enter in the proclamation of sale its own estimate of the value 
of the property clearly demonstrates that whenever the 
attached immovable property is to be sold in public auction the 
value thereof is required to be estimated. In between Rule 54 
to Rule 66 of Order XXI CPC, there is no other provision 
requiring assessment of value of the property to be sold in 
auction.  
22. It is also important to bear in mind the provisions 
contained in Rule 54(1) Order XXI read with Rule 66 of Order 
XXI CPC wherein it is provided that either whole of the attached 
property or such portion thereof as may seem necessary to 
satisfy the decree shall be sold in auction. If there is no 
valuation of the property in the attachment Panchanama and 
there being no separate provision for valuation of the property 
put to auction, it is to be understood that the valuation of the 

28 
 
property mentioned in attachment Panchanama prepared under 
Rule 54 can always provide the estimated value of the property 
otherwise the provisions enabling the court to auction only a 
part of the property which would be sufficient to satisfy the 
decree would be unworkable or redundant. In the case in hand, 
the assessed value of all the attached properties is Rs. 
1,05,700/- whereas the original decretal sum was Rs. 27,694/- 
which is about 26.2% of the total value of the property. 
Therefore, when only one of the attached properties was 
sufficient to satisfy the decree there was no requirement for 
effecting the sale of the entire attached properties.  
23. In the matter of Balakrishnan vs. Malaiyandi Konar11 
this Court observed thus:  
“9. The provision contains some significant words. They are 
“necessary to satisfy the decree”. Use of the said expression 
clearly indicates the legislative intent that no sale can be 
allowed beyond the decretal amount mentioned in the sale 
proclamation. (See Takkaseela Pedda Subba Reddi v. Pujari 
Padmavathamma [(1977) 3 SCC 337: AIR 1977 SC 1789].) 
In all execution proceedings, the court has to first decide 
whether it is necessary to bring the entire property to sale 
or such portion thereof as may seem necessary to satisfy 
the decree. If the property is large and the decree to be 
satisfied is small the court must bring only such portion of 
the property, the proceeds of which would be sufficient to 
satisfy the claim of the decree-holder. It is immaterial 
 
11 (2006) 3 SCC 49 

29 
 
whether the property is one or several. Even if the property 
is one, if a separate portion could be sold without violating 
any provision of law only such portion of the property should 
be sold. This is not just a discretion, but an obligation 
imposed on the court. The sale held without examining this 
aspect 
and 
not 
in 
conformity 
with 
this 
mandatory 
requirement would be illegal and without jurisdiction. 
(See Ambati Narasayya v. M. Subba Rao [1989 Supp (2) 
SCC 693].) The duty cast upon the court to sell only such 
property or portion thereof as is necessary to satisfy the 
decree is a mandate of the legislature which cannot be 
ignored. 
Similar 
view 
has 
been 
expressed 
in S. 
Mariyappa v. Siddappa [(2005) 10 SCC 235]. 
10. In S.S. Dayananda v. K.S. Nagesh Rao [(1997) 4 SCC 
451] it was held that the procedural compliance with Order 
21 Rule 64 of the Code is a mandatory requirement. This 
was also the view expressed in  Desh Bandhu Gupta v. N.L. 
Anand [(1994) 1 SCC 131].” 
 
24. In Ambati Narasayya vs. M. Subba Rao12  this Court 
has held that in auction sale this is obligatory on Court that 
only such portion of property as would satisfy decree is sold 
and not the entire property. This court observed thus in paras 
6, 7 & 8: 
“6. The principal question that has been highlighted before 
us relates to the legality of the sale of 10 acres of land 
without considering whether a portion of the land could have 
been sold to satisfy the decree. It is said that the total sum 
claimed in the execution was Rs 2395.50. The relevant 
provision which has a bearing on the question is Rule 64 
Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure and it reads as 
follows: - 
“Order XXI Rule 64: Power to order property 
attached to be sold and proceeds to be paid to 
persons entitled.—Any court executing a decree 
may order that any property attached by it and 
 
12 1989 supp (2) SCC 693 

30 
 
liable to sale, or such portion thereof as may seem 
necessary to satisfy the decree, shall be sold, and 
that the proceeds of such sale, or a sufficient 
portion thereof, shall be paid to the party entitled 
under the decree to receive the same.” 
7. It is of importance to note from this provision that in all 
execution proceedings, the court has to first decide whether 
it is necessary to bring the entire attached property to sale 
or such portion thereof as may seem necessary to satisfy 
the decree. If the property is large and the decree to be 
satisfied is small, the court must bring only such portion of 
the property, the proceeds of which would be sufficient to 
satisfy the claim of the decree holder. It is immaterial 
whether the property is one, or several. Even if the property 
is one, if a separate portion could be sold without violating 
any provision of law only such portion of the property should 
be sold. This, in our opinion, is not just a discretion, but an 
obligation imposed on the court. Care must be taken to put 
only such portion of the property to sale the consideration of 
which is sufficient to meet the claim in the execution 
petition. The sale held without examining this aspect and 
not in conformity with this requirement would be illegal and 
without jurisdiction. 
8. In Takkaseela 
Pedda 
Subba 
Reddi v. Pujari 
Padmavathamma [(1977) 3 SCC 337, 340] this Court after 
examining the scope of Rule 64 of Order XXI CPC has taken 
a similar view: (SCC p. 340, para 3) 
“Under this provision the executing court derives 
jurisdiction to sell properties attached only to the 
point at which the decree is fully satisfied. The 
words ‘necessary to satisfy the decree’ clearly 
indicate that no sale can be allowed beyond the 
decretal 
amount 
mentioned 
in 
the 
sale 
proclamation. In other words, where the sale 
fetches a price equal to or higher than the amount 
mentioned 
in 
the 
sale 
proclamation 
and 
is 
sufficient to satisfy the decree, no further sale 
should be held, and the court should stop at that 
stage.” 
25. It is, thus, settled principle of law that court’s power to 
auction any property or part thereof is not just a discretion but 
an obligation imposed on the Court and the sale held without 

31 
 
examining this aspect and not in conformity with this 
mandatory 
requirement 
would 
be 
illegal 
and 
without 
jurisdiction. In the case at hand, the Executing Court did not 
discharge its duty to ascertain whether the sale of a part of the 
attached property would be sufficient to satisfy the decree. 
When the valuation of three attached properties is mentioned in 
the attachment Panchanama, it was the duty of the Court to 
have satisfied itself on this aspect and having failed to do so 
the Court has caused great injustice to the judgment debtor by 
auctioning his entire attached properties causing huge loss to 
the judgment debtor and undue benefit to the auction 
purchaser. The fact that the properties were sold for a sum of 
Rs. 34,000/- would further demonstrate that the decree holder 
who himself is the auction purchaser has calculatedly offered a 
bid at Rs. 34,000/- despite being aware that the value of the 
attached properties is Rs. 1,05,700/-.  
26. In view of the above discussion, we are satisfied that the 
present 
is 
a 
case 
where 
the 
decree 
is 
subsequently 
modified/varied, and the decretal amount was reduced from Rs. 
27,694/- to Rs. 17,120/-, the sale of all the three attached 

32 
 
properties was not at all required and further in the facts and 
circumstances of the case variation of the decree read together 
with the sale of the properties at a low price has caused huge 
loss to the judgment debtor where restitution by setting aside 
the execution sale is the only remedy available. It is not a case 
where the restitution can be ordered appropriately or suitably 
by directing the decree holder to make payment of some 
additional amount to the judgment debtor to compensate him 
for the loss caused due to sale of his properties. Doing so would 
perpetuate the injustice suffered by the judgment debtor.  
27. It has been argued that the execution sale cannot be set 
aside at this stage when the judgment debtor has not paid any 
amount to satisfy the original decree or the modified decree nor 
he has challenged the legality of the auction sale on any 
permissible ground as contemplated in Order XXI CPC. 
However, we are not convinced with this submission made on 
behalf of the learned counsel for the respondents for the reason 
that we are not per se setting aside the execution sale as if the 
present is the proceedings challenging the execution of the 
decree by way of sale of the attached immovable properties of 

33 
 
the judgment debtor. We are concerned herewith and we have 
confined ourselves to the core issue as to whether the present 
is a fit and suitable case for exercising power under Section 144 
CPC directing restitution in favour of the judgment debtor by 
placing the parties in the position which they would have 
occupied before such execution and for this purpose the Court 
may make any order, as provided under Section 144 CPC. It is 
in exercise of this power that we have considered the aspect of 
execution of the decree by attachment of whole property when 
part of the property could have satisfied the decree. This 
examination was necessary to ascertain the extent of injury the 
judgment debtor has suffered at the time of execution of the 
original decree for Rs. 27,694/- opposite to the modified decree 
for Rs. 17,120/-. The execution of a decree by sale of the entire 
immovable property of the judgment debtor is not to penalise 
him but the same is provided to grant relief to the decree 
holder and to confer him the fruits of litigation. However, the 
right of a decree holder should never be construed to have 
bestowed upon him a bonanza only because he had obtained a 
decree for realisation of a certain amount. A decree for 
realisation of a sum in favour of the plaintiff should not amount 

34 
 
to exploitation of the judgment debtor by selling his entire 
property.  
28. For the foregoing, the appeal is allowed. The order dated 
05.06.2017 passed by the High Court is set aside and the 
appellants’ application under Section 144 CPC is allowed and 
the sale of the attached properties belonging to the judgment 
debtor is set aside and the parties are restored back to the 
position where the execution was positioned before the 
attachment of the immovable properties of the judgment 
debtor. The execution of the modified decree, if not already 
satisfied, shall proceed in accordance with law.  
  
………………………………………J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(HRISHIKESH ROY) 
 
 
.......………………………………. J. 
 
 
 
 
 
      (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
NEW DELHI; 
May 14, 2024