2024 INSC 5
            Criminal Appeal 32 of 2024 
 
   Page 1 of 7 
 
Non-Reportable 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 32 OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) no.147 of 2017) 
 
Ajeet Singh 
 
 
 
 
 
      … Appellant  
 
versus 
 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.      
 
… Respondents 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
At the instance of the third respondent, a First 
Information Report (the FIR), being Case Crime no.106 of 2016, 
was registered at the Police Station Naka, District Lucknow, 
Uttar Pradesh, for the offences punishable under Sections 376 
and 506 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘IPC’) 
wherein the appellant was shown as an accused.  A writ 
petition was filed by the appellant before the High Court of 
Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench for quashing the FIR.  
By the impugned judgment dated 7th December 2016, the High 
Court declined to exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction under 
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. 
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.01.03
15:48:13 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

            Criminal Appeal 32 of 2024 
 
   Page 2 of 7 
 
2. 
In the complaint, on the basis of which the FIR was 
registered, the allegation of the third respondent was that his 
daughter (victim – name masked) was studying in Lucknow for 
coaching in Banking.  Her age was 25 years.  He stated that 
the appellant was running IIT coaching classes in Delhi.  They 
met and developed a love for each other.  The appellant assured 
the victim to marry her.  When the third respondent 
approached the appellant’s father and brother with the 
proposal of marriage, they declined the same.  Thereafter, 
under the pressure exerted by the victim, the appellant got 
prepared a certificate of marriage from Arya Samaj Mandir.  By 
playing fraud, the appellant maintained a physical relationship 
with the victim.  He stated that the relatives of the appellant 
threatened him.  He stated that after exploiting his daughter, 
the appellant came to Sitapur at his residence on 22nd April 
2015 and left the victim there.  The complaint was filed by the 
third respondent on 27th May 2015, on the basis of which the 
FIR was registered. 
3. 
The High Court vide order dated 18th October 2016 issued 
a notice on the writ petition and granted interim relief 
restraining the Police from taking the appellant into custody, 
subject to the condition that the appellant must join the 
investigation at 10 a.m. on 6th June 2016 at Police Station 
Sitapur, District Sitapur, Uttar Pradesh and thereafter, as and 
when required.   Shri Abhay Nath Tripathi filed an affidavit in 
terms of the order dated 18th October 2016 passed by the High 
Court.  He stated that he recorded the statements of both the 

            Criminal Appeal 32 of 2024 
 
   Page 3 of 7 
 
victim and the appellant, which showed that a marriage was 
solemnized between them.  However, he stated that the 
appellant did not fulfil his matrimonial obligations.  The 
allegation is that to avoid criminal proceedings, a petition for 
restitution of conjugal rights under Section 9 of the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955 (for short, ‘HMA’) was filed by the appellant.  
He 
stated 
that 
the 
concerned 
officer 
conducted 
the 
investigation in a fair manner.  He stated that the victim was 
ready to stay with the appellant, and therefore, the 
chargesheet, though ready, has not been filed to facilitate the 
amicable settlement of the dispute.  The successor of the said 
officer filed a counter affidavit to the writ petition on 11th 
August 2017 justifying the registration of the FIR, which also 
refers to the petition filed by the appellant under Section 9 of 
the HMA. 
SUBMISSIONS 
4. 
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant, invited 
our attention to Annexure P-2, which is a notice dated 1st May 
2015 issued by an advocate on behalf of the victim.  The 
learned counsel submitted that in the notice, the victim 
admitted that a marriage was solemnized between her and the 
appellant.  He pointed out that on 6th May 2015, a petition 
under Section 9 of the HMA was filed by the appellant against 
the victim for restitution of conjugal rights.  He submitted that 
within a few days thereafter, on 27th May 2015, the third 
respondent lodged the FIR.  He urged that the prosecution of 
the appellant is nothing but an abuse of the process of law.  

            Criminal Appeal 32 of 2024 
 
   Page 4 of 7 
 
Therefore, the High Court ought to have quashed it.  He pointed 
out that even the Investigating Officer filed an affidavit stating 
that as the appellant had married the victim, the allegation of 
rape may not be substantiated. 
5. 
The learned Additional Advocate General appearing for 
the respondent–State of Uttar Pradesh, supported the 
impugned judgment and submitted that the ingredients of the 
offences under Sections 376 and 506 of the IPC were made out. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
6. 
Shri Abhay Nath Tripathi, Circle Officer, Kaisarbagh, 
District Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh filed an affidavit on behalf of 
the State Government stating that the marriage certificate 
produced along with the writ petition was genuine and that the 
petition filed by the appellant for restitution of conjugal rights 
was pending.  He referred to the statements of both the 
appellant and the victim recorded by him and stated that the 
main grievance of the victim was that the appellant was not 
performing his matrimonial obligations.  However, in the 
counter affidavit filed subsequently by the successor of the 
Circle Officer, it was contended that the marriage ceremony 
between the appellant and the victim was a farce made only to 
enable the appellant to establish sexual relations with the 
victim. 
7. 
Annexure P-2 is the legal notice dated 1st May 2015 
issued by Shri Aftab Ahmed, Advocate, on behalf of the victim.  
In the notice, the victim has been described as the wife of the 

            Criminal Appeal 32 of 2024 
 
   Page 5 of 7 
 
appellant.  In the counter affidavit filed by the Circle Officer, 
the genuineness of Annexure P-2 is not disputed.  In 
paragraphs 1 and 2 of the notice, it is stated thus:  
“1. That through this notice I am 
informing Sri Satyendra Singh that on 
16.2.2001 (sic), your son Ajeet Singh has 
solemnized marriage according to Vedic 
rites and ceremonies in his own wish, 
willingly with my client XXXX (name 
masked) daughter of Ram Naresh at Arya 
Samaj Mandir. 
2. That from 16.2.2015 to 21.4.2015 
your son Ajeet Singh and XXXX (name 
masked) both had 
been 
living as 
husband and wife at Lucknow and 
Delhi.” 
8. 
Thereafter, in paragraphs 3 and 4, it is alleged that the 
victim was turned away from the matrimonial home by the 
appellant on the ground that his father wanted a sum of Rs.50 
lakhs.  By the said notice, the victim called upon the appellant 
to arrange “Vidai”.  Within five days of sending the notice, on 
6th May 2015, the appellant filed a petition for restitution of 
conjugal rights against the victim. 
9. 
The allegation in the FIR lodged at the instance of the 
third respondent is that the appellant maintained a physical 
relationship with the victim by giving her a false promise of 
marriage.  It is stated that a certificate of marriage was got 
prepared by the appellant from Arya Samaj Mandir to put 
pressure on the victim.  It is alleged that the appellant left the 
victim in her house on 22nd April 2015 and has never returned 
to take her back.  The notice dated 1st May 2015 issued by the 

            Criminal Appeal 32 of 2024 
 
   Page 6 of 7 
 
advocate for the victim clearly admits that the marriage 
between the appellant and the victim was solemnized on 16th 
February 2015.   A copy of the statement of the victim recorded 
on 23rd November 2016 by an officer of Police Station Naka, 
Lucknow, is placed on record, in which she stated that the 
appellant forced her to have a physical relationship with her in 
a hotel in Delhi on 4th December 2014.  Thereafter, the physical 
relationship was maintained by the appellant.  She stated that 
on 16th February 2015, the appellant took her to Arya Samaj 
Mandir and solemnized the marriage where no other person 
was present.  She stated that thereafter, they stayed in a hotel 
till 19th February 2015.  In March 2015, she stayed with the 
appellant for three to four days.  From the end of April 2015, 
the appellant stopped attending to her phone calls.  Thus, the 
relationship between the appellant and the victim was a 
consensual relationship which culminated in the marriage.  In 
the legal notice issued on behalf of the appellant, the factum of 
marriage was admitted.  Therefore, on the face of it, the 
allegation that the physical relationship was maintained due to 
false promise given by the appellant to marry, is without basis 
as their relationship led to the solemnization of marriage.  
Therefore, this is a case where the allegations made in the FIR 
were such that on the basis of the statements, no prudent 
person can ever reach a conclusion that there is sufficient 
ground for proceeding against the appellant.  Therefore, clause 
(5) of the decision of this Court in the case of State of Haryana 

            Criminal Appeal 32 of 2024 
 
   Page 7 of 7 
 
& Ors. v. Bhajan Lal & Ors.1 will apply.  Hence, a case was 
made out for quashing the FIR. 
10. 
Therefore, we set aside the impugned judgment of the 
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench dated 
7th December 2016 and quash the Case Crime no.106 of 2016 
registered against the appellant at Police Station Naka, District 
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh. 
11. 
The appeal is, accordingly, allowed. 
 
….…………………….J. 
    (Abhay S. Oka) 
 
…..…………………...J. 
     (Pankaj Mithal) 
New Delhi; 
January 03, 2024. 
 
1  1992 Supp (1) SCC 335