2024 INSC 43
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO 550-551 2024 
 
 
Sanjay Kundu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      … Petitioner 
 
 
Versus 
 
Registrar General, High Court of Himachal Pradesh & Ors 
                 … Respondents 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 
 
 
1 
Application for impleadment is allowed.  Mr Nishant Sharma, complainant, shall be 
added as a respondent to these proceedings.  Mr Rahul Sharma, counsel appears 
along with Ms Rashmi Malhotra, counsel on behalf of the newly added respondent. 
 
2 
These proceedings emanate from an order of a Division Bench of the High Court of 
Himachal Pradesh dated 9 January 2024.  
 
Criminal Writ Petition and proceedings before the High Court 
 
3 
The proceedings before the High Court were initiated on an email from Mr Nishant 
Kumar Sharma, addressed to the Chief Justice of the High Court through the 
Registrar General.  The complainant alleged in his email, that he was facing threats 
emanating from two persons - “X”, a former IPS officer and “Y”, a practicing 
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2024.01.18
14:56:45 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
 
advocate. 
 
4 
According to his email, the complainant is a resident of Palampur, in District Kangra 
of Himachal Pradesh. His family conducts a hotel in Palampur.  A relative of “Y” had 
invested in the company of the complainant.  He alleges that “Y” has been 
pressurizing him and his father through “X”to sell their shares in their company. “Y” 
was stated to have threatened the company’s auditors, and obstructed its 
functioning. The complainant alleged that he had escaped an assault on 25 August, 
2023 in Gurugram.  The allegation was that he was receiving phone calls from the 
office of the petitioner, who is the Director General of Police1, Himachal Pradesh at 
the behest of Y. Allegedly, the complainant received a WhatsApp message from the 
SHO, Palampur stating that the petitioner wished to speak to him and that he must 
call back on a particular phone number. When the complainant established 
contact, he was connected to the petitioner, who insisted that the complainant 
come to Shimla to meet him. The email detailed criminal complaints filed by him in 
Gurugram after an alleged attack on him, and subsequent instances of intimidation 
to compel him to withdraw them. No FIR was registered in respect of this complaint 
and a later complaint filed by the complainant in relation to an incident that 
transpired in Mcleodganj. 
 
5 
On 9 November 2023, the High Court suo motu registered a Criminal Writ Petition 
pursuant to the above email.  The State of Himachal Pradesh, Superintendent of 
Police, Kangra and Superintendent of Police, Shimla were arrayed as respondents.  
On 10 November 2023, the High Court issued notice, directed the two SPs (Kangra 
                                                
1 “DGP”. 

3 
 
 
and Shimla) to file status reports and appointed an amicus curiae   
6 
Status reports were filed on 16 November 2023 before the High Court. The Advocate 
General assured the High Court that an FIR would be registered on the complaint 
lodged by the complainant on 28 October, 2023.  On 16 November 2023, FIR No 
55/2023 was registered by the Mcleodganj Police Station for offences punishable 
under Sections 341, 504 and 506 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code2, 
after the registration of the criminal writ petition before the High Court.  
 
7  
The status report submitted by the SP Kangra indicated that the complainant had 
addressed an email to her on 06 November 2023 stating that he had received a 
phone call intimating him that an FIR (No. 98/2023) had been registered against him 
at Shimla. The status report submitted by SP, Shimla, stated that the said FIR 98/2023, 
under Sections 299, 469, 499 and 505 of the IPC was registered on a complaint made 
by the petitioner to the SHO, Police Station East, District Shimla. 
 
8 
The status report of the SP Shimla indicated that there were telephonic conversations 
between the petitioner and the complainant. Moreover, on 27 October 2023 which 
is the date on which the incident is alleged to have taken place at Mcleodganj, 
there were 15 missed calls from the office land line numbers of the petitioner to the 
complainant. Shortly after the complainant refused to come to Shimla at the 
instance of the petitioner, he was accosted by two persons at Mcleodganj who 
called upon him to withdraw the complaint at Gurugram.  The status report found 
prima facie evidence of extortion, use of criminal force to constrain the complainant 
                                                
2 “IPC”.  

4 
 
 
to settle a civil dispute between him and “Y” and abuse of the office of the 
petitioner, as DGP of Himachal Pradesh.   
 
9 
A subsequent status report filed by the SP Shimla stated that an Additional 
Superintendent of Police was placed in charge of investigating FIR No 55 of 2023 
filed by the complainant, in place of the DSP.  Another status report indicated that 
FIR No 350/2023 was registered on 27 November 2023 for offences under Sections 
323, 506 read with Section 34 of the IPC at Police Station, Sector 9, Gurugram on the 
complaint lodged on 25 August 2023 by the complainant.   
 
10 
On 21 December 2023, the Advocate General, appearing on behalf of the State of 
Himachal Pradesh, submitted that the investigation was being carried out 
uninfluenced by the office of the DGP.  The High Court flagged its concern at that 
stage in the following terms : 
 
“(i) 
there is material detected in the investigation, as pointed 
out in the status report of the respondent No.3, which 
showed that the Director General of Police had also 
been in continuous contact with Y, the alleged business 
partner of the complainant (with whom the complainant 
has disputes); 
 
(ii) 
the Director General of Police had put the complainant 
under surveillance; 
 
(iii) 
that Director General of Police also made missed calls on 
27.10.2023 (the date of incident on Mcleodganj alleged 
by the complainant) to the complainant’s mobile phone 
and also spoke to him on that day; and 
 
(iv) 
the Director General of Police had himself got registered 
an FIR No.98/2023 dt. 4.11.2023 under Sections 299, 469, 
499 and 505 IPC against the complainant.” 
 

5 
 
 
 
 
11 
The High Court observed that in the backdrop of the status report, the FIR registered 
at the behest of the petitioner, the surveillance of the complainant and 
communication between the petitioner and the complainant, the failure of the 
Police to act on the complaint was not explained by the SP, Kangra. It noted that 
the FIR was registered belatedly on 16 November 2023 only after the Court had 
entertained the Writ Petition.  The High Court then proceeded to observe that the 
material collected by the SP, Shimla indicated prima facie that the Director General 
of Police: 
 
(i) 
Had been in touch with “Y”, the alleged business partner of the complainant; 
(ii) 
Had made 15 missed calls in an effort to contact the complainant on 27 
October 2023; 
(iii) 
Had spoken to the complainant on 27 October 2023 and after he refused to 
come to Shimla, the complainant was threatened in an incident at 
Mcleodganj; 
(iv) 
Placed the complainant under surveillance; and 
(v) 
Lodged FIR No 98/2023 on 4 November 2023 against the complainant. 
 
12 
The High Court observed that there is a real possibility that the investigation would 
not be carried on fairly.  It accordingly directed that the petitioner, who is holding 
the post of DGP, and the SP, Kangra should be moved to any other post to ensure 
that a fair investigation takes place.  
 

6 
 
 
13 
The petitioner was neither impleaded in the proceedings nor was he heard before 
the above order was passed. On that ground, the petitioner challenged it in a 
Special Leave Petition before this Court.    
 
14 
The principal grievance urged before this Court was that the petitioner was directly 
affected by the order of the High Court dated 26 December 2023, but he was 
neither made a party to the proceedings nor was he furnished a notice of the 
proceedings.   
 
15 
This Court permitted the petitioner to move an application for recall of the High 
Court’s order dated 26 December 2023. The recall application was directed to be 
disposed of within a period of two weeks and until then, the directions of the High 
Court for transfer of the petitioner were stayed. This Court also stayed the order 
issued pursuant to the High Court’s directions posting the petitioner as Principal 
Secretary (Ayush), Government of Himanchal Pradesh.  
  
 
16 
This Court recorded that both petitioner and complainant had no objection if the 
investigation were to be transferred to the Central Bureau of Investigation3 so as to 
obviate any allegation of interference at the behest of the petitioner.   
 
The present Special Leave Petition:  
 
17 
The present SLP stems from the rejection of the petitioner’s recall application 
mentioned above. The High Court has dismissed it and has directed the State 
                                                
3 “CBI”. 

7 
 
 
Government to consider within a week, forming a Special Investigation Team4 
consisting of IG level officers to coordinate the investigation in all the FIRs and to 
advise the government on providing effective security to the complainant and his 
family. 
 
18 
By the impugned order, the High Court also rejected an application filed by the SP 
Kangra, to implead her and to recall its earlier order dated 26 December 2023 by 
which she was also directed to be moved out of the post.  Though the State 
Government had implemented the order of the High Court against the petitioner, it 
has not been implemented against SP, Kangra yet.  
 
19  
Before the High Court, it was admitted on behalf of the petitioner that he had 
requested the complainant to come to Shimla.  The case of the petitioner was that 
he was contacted by a senior advocate (referred to as “Y”) who had a dispute in 
regard to business transactions with the complainant.  Allegedly, the dispute had 
taken an ugly turn when scandalous allegations were made by the complainant 
against “Y”, following which, on 9 October 2023, an email was addressed by “Y” to 
the petitioner to take action against the complainant.  The petitioner admitted that 
in pursuance of the email, on 27 October 2023, he asked his Private Secretary to 
contact the complainant through his official land line.  The petitioner states that he 
was informed that the complainant could not be reached despite repeated 
attempts.  Eventually, on 27 October 2023, the complainant made a call to the 
petitioner and when he was requested to come to Shimla, he declined to do so on 
                                                
4 “SIT”. 

8 
 
 
the ground that he was travelling out of India. 
 
20 
On the other hand, it is the complainant’s case that “Y” has been using his 
connections so as to intimidate the complainant into selling his shares in his 
company. Having failed in the takeover bid, “Y” has resorted to threatening the 
complainant and his family, through the petitioner. 
 
21 
The High Court observed that while it could not decide on the rival contentions, the 
petitioner, who is a public servant, had overstepped his authority by intervening in 
what was clearly a private civil dispute.  The High Court noted that the status report 
submitted by the SP Shimla indicated the continuing contact of “Y” with the 
petitioner between September and November 2023 and that the SHO, Palampur 
had approached the complainant requiring him to call up the land line number of 
the petitioner. The High Court observed that the petitioner had admitted in his recall 
application to having placed the hotel run by the complainant under surveillance 
for alleged drug running activities in September 2023.   
 
22 
The status report filed by the SP Shimla on 4 January 2023 alleged that the petitioner 
was intimidating in his conduct towards the Investigating Officer handling the case 
initiated by FIR No. 98/2023 filed at the instance of the petitioner against the 
complainant.   The status report stated that the conduct of the petitioner raised 
suspicion about his role in the alleged offences against the complainant. When the 
petitioner was confronted with this status report of the SP, Shimla, the petitioner 
imputed mala fide intentions to the said officer.  
 

9 
 
 
23 
Before proceeding further, it is necessary to note the submissions which have been 
urged by Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, senior counsel appearing for the petitioner in relation to 
the imputations against the SP, Shimla.  A blast is alleged to have taken place on 18 
July 2023 in Shimla resulting in the loss of two lives and injury to several others.  The 
blast was investigated under the supervision of the SP Shimla who, according to the 
petitioner, sought to cover it up as an accidental blast of an LPG cylinder.  The 
petitioner is stated to have addressed a communication to the Additional Secretary 
in the Union Ministry of Home Affairs requesting an investigation by the National 
Bomb Data Centre of the National Security Guard.  In subsequent communications 
to the Chief Secretary on 10 August 2023 and 1 September 2023, the petitioner 
alleged negligence in the post-blast investigation by the SP Shimla and requisitioned 
the NSG for investigation, suspecting the use of an IED including RDX which was 
allegedly detected at the site of the blast. 
 
24 
In this backdrop, the petitioner has alleged that the SP Shimla was on inimical terms 
arising out of his communications to the State Government in regard to SP Shimla’s 
handling of the blast.   
 
25 
The Advocate General has opposed the plea of the petitioner for recalling the order 
and opposed the allegations levelled by the petitioner against the SP Shimla.   
 
26 
This court had noted in its previous order dated 3 January 2024, that counsel for both 
the complainant as well as the petitioner are agreeable to the transfer of the 
investigation to the CBI. The High Court noted that the Advocate General has 
opposed the transfer of the investigation. Bearing in mind the principles laid down by 

10 
 
 
this court - that the power to transfer an investigation to an outside agency is to be 
exercised with circumspection - the High Court rejected the plea for transfer of the 
investigation to the CBI.   
 
Analysis 
 
27 
The case has travelled to this Court once again arising out of the rejection of the 
application filed by the petitioner for recall of the earlier order of the High Court. 
 
28 
The consequence of the impugned order is that: 
 
(i) 
The earlier order of the High Court directing that the petitioner should be 
shifted out of the post of DGP, Himachal Pradesh stands revived; 
(ii) 
The State Government has been directed to consider forming a Special 
Investigation Team consisting of IG level officers to coordinate the investigation 
of all the FIRs; and 
(iii) 
The grant of protection to the complainant has been directed to be 
evaluated by the Government. 
 
29 
We have heard Mr Mukul Rohatgi, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the 
petitioner and Mr Rahul Sharma, counsel appearing on behalf of the newly added 
respondent-complainant.    
 
30 
At the outset, we must express our reservations about the manner in which the High 
Court took up the matter ex parte and issued directions transferring the petitioner 
out of the post of DGP in the first instance.  The proceedings were triggered by an 

11 
 
 
email addressed by the complainant to the Chief Justice imputing allegations of the 
misuse of his official position as DGP against the petitioner. The allegations which 
were levelled by the complainant are that the petitioner, in his official capacity, 
intervened in a civil dispute and attempted to used his office to intimidate the 
complainant. The allegations are apparently serious and evidently formed the basis 
of the order that the High Court originally passed on 26 December 2023.   
 
31 
Based on the status reports filed in the proceedings before it, the High Court came 
to a prima facie conclusion that the investigation into the FIRs could not be 
conducted fairly with the petitioner at the helm as the DGP. The High Court thus 
directed that the petitioner be moved to other posts to ensure a fair investigation. In 
doing so the High court has assumed disciplinary jurisdiction over the petitioner. This 
was clearly impermissible. As a serving police officer, the petitioner is subject to the 
disciplinary control which is wielded over him in terms of the rules governing service. 
The High Court has improperly assumed those powers to itself without considering the 
chain of administrative control in the hierarchy of the service. The State Government 
shifted the petitioner as Principal Secretary (Ayush) in compliance with the directions 
of the High Court.  The consequence of shifting out of an IPS officer has serious 
consequences. The order was passed without an opportunity to the petitioner to 
contest the allegations against him or to place his response before the Court.  There 
was thus a manifest miscarriage of procedural justice.  
 
32 
By this Court’s order dated 3 January 2024, the petitioner was relegated to the 
remedy of a recall application before the High Court since his grievance was the 

12 
 
 
denial of an opportunity to be heard before the High Court, before it passed the 
order dated 26 December 2023.   
 
33 
The correct course of action for the High Court would have been to recall its ex 
parte order dated 26 December 2023 and to commence the proceedings afresh so 
as to furnish both the petitioner and the complainant and other affected parties 
including the SP, Kangra, an opportunity to place their perspectives before it.  
Instead, the High Court, while deciding the recall application, heavily relied on the 
status report submitted by the SP, Shimla on 4 January 2024.  The High Court has, in 
the course of its order, also relied on the earlier status reports which were referred to 
in its order dated 26 December 2023.    
 
34 
The impugned order suffers from a patent error of jurisdiction. The order was passed 
without compliance with the principles of justice, especially, the principle of audi 
alteram partem.  The order dated 26 December 2023 had serious consequences, 
and it was passed without hearing the petitioner who stood to be affected by it. A 
post-decisional hearing of the kind conducted by the High Court lacks fresh and 
dispassionate application of mind to the merits of the recall application, and is for 
that very reason, likely to cause disquiet.  
 
35 
At this stage, we are desisting from expressing any opinion on the allegations which 
are made against the petitioner or, for that matter, the allegations that the petitioner 
has made against SP, Shimla.  The SP Shimla is not present before this Court.  It is, 
therefore, necessary to clarify that the submissions which have been made by the 
petitioner earlier, as recorded above, have not been commented upon in the 

13 
 
 
course of this judgment.   
36 
The High Court has directed the State Government to consider constituting an SIT so 
that an objective and fair investigation can take place.  The High Court has directed 
that the SIT shall consist of IG level officers who will probe all aspects of the matter 
including the FIRs which gave rise to the proceedings before it.  Likewise, the High 
Court has directed that the State Government should consider granting adequate 
protection to the complainant and his family.  We are not disturbing either of these 
two findings by the High Court.   
 
37 
However, it would be inappropriate to maintain the order of the High Court directing 
that the petitioner be shifted out of the post of DGP in pursuance of the earlier order 
dated 26 December 2023 which stands affirmed by the impugned order.  The above 
direction of the High Court directing the shifting out of the petitioner from the post of 
DGP is set aside. The petitioner shall exercise no control whatsoever in respect of the 
investigation which is to be carried out by the Special Investigation Team.  Instead of 
and in place of the direction of the High Court requiring the State Government to 
consider constituting an SIT, we issue a direction to the State Government to do so.  
The SIT shall consist of IG level officers who shall not report to the petitioner for the 
purpose of the investigation.  The State Government is directed to provide adequate 
security to the complainant and to the members of his family and to continue to do 
so based on its evaluation of the threat perception.  We clarify that since the 
investigation is to be carried out by the SIT, we are not expressing any opinion on the 
merits of the allegations which shall be duly investigated in accordance with law. 
 

14 
 
 
38 
The Special Leave Petitions are accordingly disposed of. 
 
39 
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 
 
 
……..….…...…...….......………………....…CJI. 
                                                         
                 [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………….…...…...….......………………....…..J. 
                             
      [J B Pardiwala] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
……...….…...…...….......………………....…..J. 
                             
      [Manoj Misra] 
 
New Delhi;  
January 12, 2024 
GKA