2024 INSC 422
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  2281  OF 2011 
 
RAJENDRA S/O RAMDAS KOLHE 
 
 APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                 
RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
UJJAL BHUYAN, J. 
 
 
Heard learned counsel for the parties. 
2. 
 
This appeal is directed against the judgment and order 
dated 15.11.2010 passed by the High Court of Judicature of 
Bombay, Bench at Aurangabad (hereinafter ‘the High Court’) 
dismissing Criminal Appeal No. 635 of 2008, Rajendra Ramdas 
Kolhe Vs. State of Maharashtra, filed by the appellant thereby 
confirming the judgment and order dated 23.07.2008 passed by 
the 3rd Ad Hoc Additional Sessions Judge, Ambajogai (‘trial court’ 
hereinafter) in Sessions Case No. 60/2006. 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.05.15
19:30:39 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
2.1.  
It may be mentioned that by the judgment and order 
dated 23.07.2008, the trial court had convicted the appellant for 
committing an offence punishable under Section 302 read with 
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) and sentenced to 
suffer life imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs. 25,000/- with a 
default stipulation. The appeal filed by the appellant against the 
aforesaid conviction and sentence was dismissed by the High 
Court. 
3. 
 
The prosecution case in brief is that wife of the appellant 
Rekha was a police constable and lived in the police colony at 
Ambajogai. Her husband i.e. the appellant was serving in the army. 
He had come home on leave. 
3.1.  
On 22.07.2002, at about 08:30 PM, Rekha had 
sustained burn injuries in the quarter where she was residing. 
According to the prosecution, she was subjected to cruelty by her 
husband Rajendra and brother-in-law Suresh. She was also 
subjected to sustained cruelty at the hands of her other in-laws 
including father-in-law, mother-in-law and sister-in-law. On the 
fateful day, Rekha was beaten by her husband Rajendra and 
brother-in-law Suresh. They tied her hands with a gamcha and her 
feet by a towel. Then the husband gagged her face. Brother-in-law 

3 
 
got a match box and a bottle of kerosene. Husband poured the 
kerosene on her person and lit the matchstick. In the process, she 
got completely burnt. She was taken to the hospital by the 
neighbours where her dying declaration was recorded by PW-6 
being Ex. 59 on the basis of which Ambajogai Police Station 
registered Crime No. 182/2002 under Sections 307, 498A, 342, 
323 and 504 read with Section 34 IPC. 
3.2.  
Investigation of the crime was conducted by PW-10. He 
broke open the locked room where the incident had taken place 
and seized partially burnt lady’s clothes, a bottle containing 
residue of kerosene, broken mangalsutra etc. Later on, another 
dying declaration of the victim was recorded by the Special 
Executive Magistrate being Ex. 65. On 24.07.2002, at about 11:00 
PM, Rekha expired due to the burn injuries. Following the same, 
Section 302 IPC was added to the FIR. 
3.3.  
On completion of investigation, chargesheet was 
submitted by the police. Appellant alongwith the father-in-law, 
mother-in-law and sister-in-law of the deceased were arrayed as 
accused. In so far brother-in-law Suresh is concerned, he was 
found to be a juvenile. Therefore, his case was segregated and sent 
to the Juvenile Justice Board. 

4 
 
3.4.  
In the trial of the appellant and the three others, 
prosecution examined in all 13 witnesses. Statements of the 
accused including the appellant were recorded under Section 313 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.PC). Stand of the 
defence was that it was not a case of homicide but a case of suicide. 
In addition to the above, appellant also tendered evidence of a 
doctor.  
3.5.  
After considering the evidence on record and the rival 
contentions, the trial court came to the conclusion that 
prosecution could not prove that the accused persons in 
furtherance of their common intention had subjected the deceased 
to harassment and cruelty and thereby committed an offence 
punishable under Section 498A IPC read with Section 34 thereof. 
The trial court also did not find any material against the father-in-
law, mother-in-law and sister-in-law of the appellant for 
committing murder of Rekha. However, the trial court accepted the 
contents of both the dying declarations Ex. 59 and Ex. 65 coupled 
with the evidence of the prosecution witnesses and held that death 
of Rekha was homicidal and not accidental. While acquitting the 
father-in-law, mother-in-law and sister-in-law of the appellant, the 
trial court held that prosecution had established beyond 

5 
 
reasonable doubt that accused No. 4 i.e. the appellant alongwith 
his minor brother Suresh had in furtherance of their common 
intention committed murder of Rekha. Therefore, the trial court 
held the appellant guilty of the offence punishable under Section 
302 IPC. After a separate hearing, the trial court sentenced the 
appellant as above. 
4. 
 
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of conviction and 
sentence, appellant preferred appeal before the High Court. By the 
judgment and order dated 15.11.2010, the High Court relied upon 
the written dying declaration of the deceased Ex. 59 recorded by 
PW-6 and also the oral dying declarations of the deceased made 
before PW-2, PW-3, PW-4, PW-7 and PW-8 and thereafter upheld 
the judgment of conviction of the trial court. Holding that the trial 
court judgment warranted no interference, the appeal was 
dismissed. 
5. 
 
This Court by order dated 16.08.2011 had issued 
notice. Thereafter vide order dated 02.10.2011, leave was granted. 
However, prayer for bail was rejected at that stage. 
6. 
 
By order dated 30.06.2016, this Court noted that 
appellant had already undergone about nine years of sentence. 

6 
 
Therefore, the sentence was suspended and bail was granted to 
the appellant. 
7. 
 
Learned senior counsel for the appellant strenuously 
argued that there are material contradictions in the evidence of the 
prosecution witnesses. That apart, the High Court had rightly not 
relied upon Ex. 65 i.e. the dying declaration recorded by the 
Special Executive Magistrate as that was not proved. In so far Ex. 
59 dying declaration is concerned, he submits that PW-12, the 
doctor, had given the time of recording the dying declaration as 
11:45PM, both as the starting point as well as the time of 
conclusion which is a significant lacuna. It casts a serious doubt 
about the credibility of the declaration. He submits that since the 
courts below had discarded the theory of domestic violence, there 
could be no other reason for the appellant to commit murder of his 
wife. As a matter of fact, it has come on record that the appellant 
had tried to save the deceased and in the process had got burnt on 
his right hand. He had taken the deceased alongwith his brother 
to the hospital. That being the position, the conviction and 
sentence is liable to be interfered with. 
7.1.  
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent 
supports the conviction and sentence of the appellant. He submits 

7 
 
that the evidence on record clearly establishes beyond any 
reasonable doubt the guilt of the appellant. Prosecution could 
successfully prove the guilt of the appellant beyond any reasonable 
doubt. The dying declaration Ex. 59 is too significant to be 
overlooked. Minor discrepancies here and there cannot impeach 
the prosecution case. Therefore, there is no reason to interfere with 
the judgment of conviction as affirmed by the High Court. The 
appeal should be dismissed. 
8. 
 
Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties 
have received the due consideration of the Court. 
9. 
 
At the outset, it would be apposite to dilate on the 
evidence tendered by the material prosecution witnesses before we 
proceed to the written dying declaration Ex. 59. 
10.  
PW-2 is Rajendra, a police constable. In his examination 
in chief, he stated that the deceased was serving as a lady police 
constable at Ambajogai Police Station. She was residing in a 
quarter in the police colony in front of his quarter. On the date and 
time of the incident, he saw many ladies residing in the police 
colony standing near the quarter of the deceased alongwith a few 
police constables. PW-2 went there and made enquiries. One 
constable Rajgire, who was his neighbour, told him that husband 

8 
 
and brother-in-law of Rekha had set her on fire by pouring 
kerosene. She was taken to the S.R.T.R. Hospital at Ambajogai for 
treatment. Thereafter PW-2 alongwith Sayyed Aslam went to the 
hospital and saw Rekha taking treatment in the OPD. Police 
constable Sayyed Chand was present in the OPD. He asked Rekha 
in the presence of PW-2 and his friend as to how she had sustained 
the burn injuries. Rekha told that her husband and brother-in-law 
had set her on fire by pouring kerosene. According to her, she got 
married about two years ago. She was treated properly for about 
15 days. Thereafter, her father-in-law, mother-in-law, sister-in-law 
and brother-in-law used to instigate her husband whenever he 
used to come home on leave from the army. They used to tell him 
that she was retaining her entire salary instead of handing over 
the same to her in-laws. They also raised questions on her 
character which was cited as the reason for not handing over her 
salary to them. On such instigation, the husband used to abuse 
and assault her. 
10.1.  
Though she was selected for the police sports 
competition at Beed on 14.07.2002, her husband did not allow her 
to participate in the sports competition. On the day of the incident, 
she was not allowed to come out of the house for the whole day. 

9 
 
Between 08:30PM to 09:00PM, her husband and brother-in-law 
tied her hands with a gamcha; they also tied her legs with a towel. 
The brother-in-law brought a bottle of kerosene and a matchbox 
and gave to the husband. Thereafter, her husband gagged her 
mouth by one hand and poured kerosene on her person by the 
other hand. The husband then lighted the matchstick from the 
matchbox and set her on fire. 
10.2.  
PW-2 stated that when he had gone to the hospital, the 
husband and brother-in-law of Rekha were not present. 
10.3.  
In his cross-examination, PW-2 stated that in his 
statement before the police, it was not recorded that the in-laws of 
Rekha had told her husband that she was not paying the salary 
for which Rekha was abused and assaulted. In the statement 
under Section 161 Cr.P.C., it was also not recorded that Rekha 
was selected for the police sports competition on 14.07.2022. The 
statement made by him that Rekha’s husband i.e. the appellant 
had closed her mouth by one hand and poured kerosene by the 
other hand, was also found not mentioned in the Section 161 
statement. However, he stated that PW-6 Assistant Sub Inspector 
Dake had recorded the statement of Rekha in detail in the hospital 
when PW-2 was present. 

10 
 
11.  
PW-3 Kausalyabai is the mother of the deceased Rekha. 
She stated that after marriage, Rekha was properly treated by her 
husband and other in-laws for about 15 days. Thereafter, they 
started ill-treating her on the ground that she did not part with her 
salary. Her elder daughter Shyamla had telephoned her and told 
her that Rekha was set on fire by her husband Rajendra and her 
brother-in-law Suresh. She came to the hospital at Ambajogai 
along with her son and daughter-in-law and met Rekha. Rekha 
told PW-3 that her husband and brother-in-law had poured 
kerosene and set her on fire. At that time, her mother-in-law, 
father-in-law and sister-in-law were present. Rekha had told her 
that her neighbours had shifted her to the hospital while her 
husband and in-laws fled away.  
11.1.  
In her cross-examination, she stated that police had 
recorded her statement after the death of Rekha. She 
acknowledged that police had not recorded in her Section 161 
statement that her daughter Rekha was subjected to cruelty by her 
husband and in-laws; and on the day of the incident, she was 
confined to the house. It was also not recorded that accused 
Rajendra and Suresh had set her on fire by pouring kerosene. She 
had not stated before the police when Rekha’s husband and 

11 
 
brother-in-law had set her on fire; that father-in-law and sister-in-
law were also present and that all of them ran away. According to 
her, though she had stated before the police that all the accused 
were present in the house and after setting Rekha on fire, all of 
them fled from the house, the same was not recorded. 
12.  
Brother of the deceased, Milind, is PW-4. In his 
examination-in-chief, he stated that the in laws, brother-in-law 
and sister-in-law of deceased Rekha had suspected her character. 
They used to incite the appellant about the character of the 
deceased and non-sharing of her salary with them. He stated that 
husband and brother-in-law of Rekha had killed her by setting her 
on fire. When he came to know about the incident, he alongwith 
his wife, children and mother came to Ambajogai on the same night 
i.e. on 22.07.2002 and met Rekha in the hospital. When he made 
enquiries with her, she told him that her husband and brother-in-
law had set her on fire. In the hospital, none of her in-laws were 
present. On their arrival in the hospital, PW-4 found his sister 
Shyamla near Rekha. While taking treatment, Rekha died on 
24.07.2002. 
12.1.  
In his cross-examination, he stated that when he had 
gone to the hospital, his sister (the deceased) was completely burnt 

12 
 
and was groaning. He stated that the police had recorded his 
statement as per his say. Though he had stated before the police 
that in the hospital, his sister Rekha had informed him that her 
husband and brother-in-law had set her on fire, he could not 
assign any reason why the police did not record the same. 
13.  
We may now turn to the evidence of PW-7, Sayyed 
Chand, who was also a policeman serving in the Ambajogai Police 
Station and residing in the police colony. In his evidence-in-chief, 
he stated that at about 09:00 PM, he heard hue and cry in the 
colony. When he came out of his house, he saw people gathered 
near the quarter of lady police constable Dhokne i.e. the deceased. 
Police head constable Rajgire and women members in the crowd 
informed him that lady police constable Dhokne was set on fire by 
her husband and her brother-in-law. He and Rajgire entered into 
the house of Dhokne and extinguished the fire. Both the hands of 
Rekha were tied by a towel. Rajgire untied the hands. At that time, 
the husband and brother-in-law were present in the house. 
Somebody brought an auto-rikshaw in which Dhokne, her 
husband and brother-in-law went to the hospital. He went to the 
hospital on the motorcycle of another person whose name he did 
not know. But when he reached the hospital, the husband and 

13 
 
brother-in-law were not present. He got Dhokne (Rekha) admitted 
in the hospital. When he enquired with Dhokne (Rekha), she told 
him that her mother-in-law and father-in-law had told her 
husband that she was not behaving properly and was not sharing 
her salary with them. Therefore, her husband and brother-in-law 
set her on fire. 
13.1.  
In his cross-examination, PW-7 stated that police had 
recorded his statement on 23.07.2002 in the morning at the police 
station. According to him, though he had stated before the police 
that he and Rajgire had entered the house of Dhokne where they 
found her hands and legs were tied by a towel, whereafter they had 
extinguished the fire while Rajgire untied the hands and legs of 
Rekha, the same was not reduced to writing by the police. He had 
also stated that at that time, the husband and brother-in-law of 
Rekha were present in the house but this was also not recorded by 
the police. His statement that Rekha’s mother-in-law and father-
in-law used to inform her husband that she was not behaving 
properly, was also not recorded by the police. 
14.  
Police head constable Rajgire is PW-8. In his 
examination-in-chief, he stated that as he was serving in the 
Ambajogai Police Station, he used to reside in the police colony. 

14 
 
22.07.2002 was his weekly holiday. Therefore, he was at home. 
The quarter of Rekha Dhokne, lady police constable, was in front 
of his quarter in the police colony. On 22.07.2002, between 
08:30PM to 09:00PM, he heard cries of a lady from the house of 
Dhokne. On hearing the cries, he and his wife came out of his 
house and entered the house of Dhokne. At that time, Dhokne was 
completely burnt. He and his wife poured water on her person and 
extinguished the fire. At that time, husband and brother-in-law of 
Rekha Dhokne were standing near the door of the house. Rekha 
was saying loudly that her husband and brother-in-law had set 
her on fire. When somebody brought an auto-rikshaw, her 
husband and brother-in-law took her to the S.R.T.R. Hospital in 
the said auto rikshaw. On 24.07.2002, Rekha Dhokne died while 
taking treatment in the hospital. His supplementary statement 
was recorded by the police on 25.07.2002. According to him, he 
had learnt that the in-laws of Rekha were demanding that she 
should part with her salary and since she was unwilling to do that, 
she was set on fire. 
14.1.  
In his cross-examination, PW-8 stated that though he 
had told the police that when he and his wife had extinguished the 
fire, the husband and brother-in-law of Rekha were present near 

15 
 
the door of the house, this is not reflected in his police statement. 
However, his statement that when his wife was pouring water on 
the person of Dhokne, husband Rajendra and brother-in-law 
Suresh were standing nearby, was recorded in his statement under 
Section 161 Cr.P.C. 
15.  
PW-10 is Uttam, the police inspector, who had 
investigated the case. He stated that he had visited the crime scene 
alongwith two panchas. He had seized half burnt parker petticoat, 
gown, one water bottle smelling of kerosene, one half burnt stick, 
broken mangalsutra, lock etc. The seizure list was prepared by him 
and signed by the panchas. 
15.1.  
In his cross-examination, he stated that on receiving 
information from the medical officer of the hospital that Rekha 
Dhokne had sustained burn injuries, he had directed PW-6 to 
record the dying declaration of her, entry of which was made in the 
station diary. In so far the Section 161 statement of PW-2 is 
concerned, he stated that PW-2 did not state before him that 
Rekha had told him that her husband had gagged her mouth by 
one hand and had poured kerosene on her person by the other 
hand. Regarding the Section 161 statement of PW-3, he stated that 
PW-3 did not say that the accused were demanding money from 

16 
 
Rekha and that they were subjecting her to cruelty by not 
providing her food, confining her to the house and on the day of 
the incident, accused Rajendra and Suresh had set her on fire by 
pouring kerosene. He further stated that PW-3 Kausalyabai had 
not stated in her Section 161 statement that Shyamla had 
informed her that accused Rajendra and his brother Suresh had 
killed Rekha by setting her on fire. Further, PW-3 did not say 
before him that all the accused ran away from the house after 
setting Rekha on fire. Regarding PW-4, he stated that PW-4 in his 
Section 161 statement did not mention that his sister Rekha had 
told him that her husband and brother-in-law had set her on fire.  
As regards PW-7 Sayyed Chand, PW-10 stated that PW-7 did not 
state in his Section 161 statement that he and Rajgire had entered 
into the house of Dhokne, that both her legs and hands were tied 
by a towel and that they had extinguished the fire. PW-7 did not 
say that Rajgire had untied the legs and hands of Rekha and at 
that time her husband and brother-in-law were present. PW-7 also 
did not state that Rajgire and the women members in the crowd 
had informed him that Rekha’s husband and brother-in-law had 
set her on fire. PW-8 in her Section 161 statement, also did not say 

17 
 
that the husband and brother-in-law were present at the time 
when Rekha was burning. 
16.  
Dr. Prashant Mohan Kedari is PW-12. On 22.07.2002, 
he was on duty as a resident medical officer in the S.R.T.R. Medical 
College and Hospital at Ambajogai having completed his MBBS 
that year with one year internship. He was incharge of burn ward 
No. 14 that day. PW-9 Bilkis Kachhi, the Special Executive 
Magistrate, came to the hospital to record the dying declaration of 
the patient Rekha who was being treated there. On her enquiry, 
PW-12 examined the patient and found that she was conscious 
and able to give statement. Statement of the patient in Ex. 65 was 
recorded by PW-9 (however, we need not go into this aspect of the 
matter as the High Court did not accept Ex. 65 as a valid piece of 
evidence). Thereafter, he was shown Ex. 59 which is another dying 
declaration of the deceased. He stated that there are two 
endorsements and signatures in Ex. 59. The signatures below the 
endorsements at both the places were of Dr. Kiran Kurkure i.e. 
PW-13. 
16.1.  
In his cross-examination, he stated that he had not 
made any endorsement regarding his examination of the patient 
on 22.07.2002 in any document. At about 11:30PM, he started 

18 
 
clinical examination of the patient which went on for about 10 
minutes. 
17.  
Dr. Kiran Kurkure is PW-13. At the relevant point of 
time, he was serving as medical officer in the S.R.T.R. Medical 
College and Hospital at Ambajogai. At about 10:15PM on 
22.07.2002, a patient by the name Rekha, wife of Rajendra Kolhe, 
was brought to the hospital by the police. Though she was having 
99% burns, she was conscious. Her statement was recorded at 
11:45PM. At that time, he was present. He stated that at the time 
of recording of her statement, the patient Rekha was conscious 
and was in a position to give statement. He further stated that he 
had put an endorsement on the statement (Ex. 59). It also bore his 
endorsement to the effect that the patient was fit for giving 
statement at present which was signed by him. He stated that the 
contents of Ex. 59 were correct. He proved his endorsements and 
the signatures on Ex. 59. He also stated that he had put an 
endorsement before recording the statement and another 
endorsement after recording the statement; the endorsement date 
and time was in his handwriting. Regarding the second 
endorsement after recording of the statement, he stated that the 
endorsement was his but by mistake he had mentioned the time 

19 
 
as 11:45PM. He also stated that at the time of admission of the 
patient, he had recorded the history narrated by her. The patient 
had informed him that her husband had set her on fire. He 
asserted that he had correctly recorded the history as narrated by 
the patient. It was in his own handwriting, the contents of which 
were proved by him (Ex. 117). 
17.1.  
Though 
PW-13 
was 
extensively 
cross-examined, 
nothing inconsistent or contradictory to what he had stated in his 
evidence-in-chief could be extracted. 
18.  
We will analyze the evidence of PW-12 and PW-13 at the 
time of examination of Ex. 59. Before proceeding to Ex. 59, let us 
briefly analyze the evidence of the prosecution witnesses discussed 
thus far.  
19.  
In his evidence-in-chief, PW-2 stated that constable 
Rajgire was in the crowd in front of the residence of Rekha and 
that he had told him that the husband and brother-in-law of Rekha 
had set her on fire by pouring kerosene on her person. While Rekha 
was undergoing treatment in the hospital, constable Sayyed 
Chand asked her in the presence of PW-2 as to how she had 
sustained the burn injuries. In response, Rekha stated that her 
husband and brother-in-law had set her on fire by pouring 

20 
 
kerosene. She had further stated that her in-laws used to instigate 
her husband whenever he used to come home on leave from the 
army, raising question marks over her character and citing that as 
the reason for not parting with her salary. This would be enough 
for the husband to abuse and assault her which ultimately led to 
the incident in question. However, in his cross-examination, PW-2 
admitted that police had not included in his Section 161 statement 
that the in-laws of Rekha had told her husband that she was not 
handing over her salary to them for which Rekha was abused and 
assaulted. It was also not mentioned in the statement under 
Section 161 Cr.P.C. that the appellant had gagged the mouth of 
Rekha by one hand and poured kerosene on her person by the 
other hand. However, he stated that he was present in the hospital 
when PW-6 had recorded the statement of Rekha in detail (Ex. 59). 
19.1.  
Likewise, in her cross-examination, PW-3 admitted that 
it was not mentioned in her statement recorded under Section 161 
Cr.P.C. that her daughter Rekha was subjected to cruelty by her 
husband and in-laws. It was also not recorded that Rekha was 
confined to the house on the day of the incident. She had also not 
stated before the police that Rekha’s husband and brother-in-law 
had set her on fire.  

21 
 
19.2.  
Similarly, in the statement of PW-4 recorded under 
Section 161 Cr.P.C., there was no mention that Rekha had 
informed him that her husband and brother-in-law had set her on 
fire.  
19.3.  
There was also no mention in the statement of PW-7 
before the police that he and Rajgire had entered the house of 
Rekha where they found her legs and hands were tied by a towel 
whereafter they had extinguished the fire and untied her. The said 
statement also did not contain that husband and brother-in-law of 
Rekha were present in the house while she was burning. It was 
also not recorded that the mother-in-law and father-in-law used to 
inform the husband that Rekha was not behaving properly.  
19.4.  
In his cross-examination, PW-8 admitted that he did not 
mention in his statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. that when   
PW-8 and his wife had extinguished the fire, the husband and 
brother-in-law of Rekha were present near the door of the house. 
However, it was mentioned that when his wife was pouring water 
on the person of Rekha, her husband and brother-in-law were 
standing nearby.  
19.5.  
The above improvements in evidence by the prosecution 
witnesses were brought on record during the cross-examination of 

22 
 
PW-10, the investigating officer. Therefore, in addition to certain 
contradictions here and there, there is clear improvement in the 
version of the prosecution witnesses when they tendered evidence 
before the court. However, even in his cross-examination, PW-2 
stated that PW-6 had recorded the statement of Rekha in detail in 
the hospital. This now brings us to the statement of Rekha made 
in the hospital which was recorded by PW-6 i.e. Ex. 59. While 
examining Ex.59, we will also analyze the evidence of PW-12 and 
PW-13. 
20.  
In Ex.59, the deceased had stated that she was 
appointed as lady police constable in the police department on 
12.12.1996. About three months prior to the date of the incident, 
she got transferred to the Ambajogai Police Station. She had 
married the appellant about two years ago. Appellant was 
employed in the army and posted at Jodhpur. About eight days 
prior to the date of the incident, he had come home on leave of 
fifteen days. She used to stay alongwith her in-laws in a quarter in 
the police colony at Ambajogai. After marriage, she was treated well 
for only about fifteen days. Thereafter, her mother-in-law and 
brother-in-law accused her of bad behaviour and suspected her 
character. She was subjected to verbal and physical abuse. The in-

23 
 
laws demanded that she should handover her salary to them. 
When she declined, they would harass and abuse her as to why 
she needed her salary. The brother-in-law would instigate her 
other in-laws and her husband(appellant) as and when he was at 
home on leave that she was behaving badly for which the appellant 
should 
leave 
her. 
Because 
of 
such 
instigation, 
the 
husband(appellant) used to beat her. Though she was selected for 
the police sports competition at Beed, appellant refused to allow 
her to participate therein.  
20.1.  
On 22.07.2002, appellant and her brother-in-law  
Suresh did not allow the deceased to go out of the house. Confining 
her to the house, she was physically assaulted. In the evening, they 
tied her legs with a towel and her hands with a gamcha. While her 
husband gagged her mouth, the brother-in-law got a matchbox 
and a bottle of kerosene. The husband poured the kerosene all over 
her body and lit a matchstick which set her ablaze. Her gown got 
burnt and, in the process, she suffered severe burns. At that time, 
the right hand of her husband(appellant) also got burnt.  
20.2.  
When she screamed, the husband and brother-in-law 
opened the door and ran away. Somehow, she could come outside. 

24 
 
Then, people who had gathered outside her house extinguished the 
flames, put her in an auto and took her to the hospital.  
21.  
PW-6 was serving as Assistant Sub-Inspector in the 
Ambajogai Police Station. He was on duty on 22.07.2002. In his 
evidence, he stated that the Police Station Officer of the police 
station had asked him to record the statement of Rekha who was 
admitted in the S.R.T.R. Hospital for burns. He made inquiries 
with the nurses serving in the burn ward where Rekha was being 
treated. He had visited the hospital at about 11:30 PM. Within 5 to 
10 minutes, he started recording the statement of Rekha. Before 
recording the statement, he had requested the nurses to call the 
doctor whereafter Dr. Kiran Kurkure, PW-13, came. PW-13 
examined Rekha and certified that she was in a position to give her 
statement. Thereafter, PW-6 recorded the statement of Rekha. But 
before recording her statement, he ensured that Rekha was in a 
position to give the statement. In his evidence, he narrated what 
Rekha had told him and what he had recorded. He stated that he 
had correctly recorded the statement of Rekha as per her say. He 
had read over the contents of the statement narrated by her and 
recorded by him to Rekha and she said that those were correct. As 
she was unable to sign or put her thumb impression because she 

25 
 
was severely burnt, PW-6 obtained the toe impression of her right 
leg. PW-13 had put his endorsements with signatures both prior 
to recording her statement and at the conclusion of her statement. 
Thereafter, PW-6 put his signature on both the pages. In his 
evidence, he proved the statement of Rekha which was shown to 
him.  
22.  
PW-12 Dr. Prashant Kedari stated in his evidence that 
the two endorsements and signatures on Ex. 59 were that of Dr. 
Kiran Kurkure, PW-13.  
23.  
PW-13 in his evidence stated that the statement of 
Rekha was recorded at 11:45 PM and he was present. Rekha was 
conscious and was in a position to give her statement. He proved 
his two endorsements and signatures below the endorsements. He 
also proved the correctness of the contents of Ex. 59. He explained 
that in the second endorsement, he had mentioned the time as 
11:45 PM by mistake. He also asserted that at the time of 
admission of Rekha in the hospital, he had recorded the medical 
history narrated by Rekha. He proved the contents thereof (Ex. 
117).  
24.  
From the above, it is evident that in her dying 
declaration (Ex. 59) Rekha clearly stated about the role played by 

26 
 
the husband (appellant) and the brother-in-law in the incident 
which led to her burn injuries. The contents of the dying 
declaration have been proved by PW-6, PW-12 and PW-13. Though 
there are certain inconsistencies in their evidence, it is quite 
natural. Moreover, those are not material and do not affect the 
sub-stratum of her statement. The incident had occurred on 
22.07.2002 with the dying declaration recorded on the same day 
within a couple of hours whereas the evidence was tendered in 
court by the above witnesses after 5 years. Such inconsistencies 
are bound to be there. In fact, identical statements by the material 
witnesses may create doubt in the mind of the court about the 
credibility of such evidence, as being tutored. That being the 
position, we are inclined to accept the dying declaration of the 
deceased (Ex. 59) as a valid piece of evidence. 
25.  
The law relating to dying declaration is now well settled. 
Once a dying declaration is found to be authentic inspiring 
confidence of the court, then the same can be relied upon and can 
be the sole basis for conviction without any corroboration. 
However, before accepting such a dying declaration, court must be 
satisfied that it was rendered voluntarily, it is consistent and 
credible and that it is devoid of any tutoring. Once such a 

27 
 
conclusion is reached, a great deal of sanctity is attached to a dying 
declaration and as said earlier, it can form the sole basis for 
conviction.  
26.  
Section 32(1) of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 deals 
with dying declaration. Since the said provision is relevant, it is 
extracted hereunder:  
[32.] Cases in which statement of relevant fact by 
person who is dead or cannot be found, etc., is 
relevant. – Statements, written or verbal, of 
relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or 
who cannot be found, or who has become 
incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance 
cannot be procured without an amount of delay or 
expense which, under the circumstances of the 
case, appears to the Court unreasonable, are 
themselves relevant facts in the following cases:- 
(1) 
When it relates to cause of death. – When 
the statement is made by a person as to the cause 
of his death, or as to any of the circumstances of 
the transaction which resulted in his death, in 
cases in which the cause of that person’s death 
comes into question.  
      Such statements are relevant whether the 
person who made them was or was not, at the time 
when they were made, under expectation of death, 
and whatever may be the nature of the proceeding 
in which the cause of his death comes into 
question. 
 
26.1.  
Section 32 says that statements made by a person who 
is dead or who cannot be found etc., be it in written form or oral, 

28 
 
are themselves relevant facts. As per situation(1), when the 
relevant facts relate to the cause of death, such a statement would 
be relevant whether the person who made it was or was not at the 
time of making the statement under expectation of death. Such a 
statement would be relevant whatever may be the nature of the 
proceedings in which the cause of his death comes into question. 
The relevancy is not confined to the cause of his death but also to 
the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death.  
27.  
In Khushal Rao vs. State of Bombay1, this Court 
examined 
the 
principles 
governing 
acceptance 
of 
dying 
declaration. After examining the relevant provisions of the 
Evidence Act and various judicial pronouncements, this Court 
laid down the following conclusions:  
(i)  
it cannot be laid down as an absolute rule of 
law that a dying declaration cannot form the sole basis 
of conviction unless it is corroborated; 
(ii) 
each case must be determined on its own facts, 
keeping in view the circumstances in which the dying 
declaration was made; 
 
1 AIR 1958 SC 22 

29 
 
(iii) 
it cannot be laid down as a general proposition 
that a dying declaration is a weaker kind of evidence 
than other pieces of evidence; 
(iv) 
a dying declaration stands on the same footing 
as another piece of evidence. It has to be judged in the 
light of surrounding circumstances and with reference 
to the principles governing weighing of evidence; 
(v) 
a dying declaration which has been recorded 
by a competent Magistrate in the proper manner 
stands on a much higher footing than a dying 
declaration which depends upon oral testimony which 
may suffer from all the infirmities of human memory 
and human character; 
(vi) 
in order to test the reliability of a dying 
declaration, the court has to keep in view various 
circumstances including the condition of the person 
concerned to make such a statement; that it has been 
made at the earliest opportunity and was not the 
result of tutoring by interested parties.  

30 
 
28.  
The above conclusions were reiterated by this Court in 
Paniben (Smt.) vs. State of Gujarat2. This Court declared that there 
is neither any rule of law nor of prudence that a dying declaration 
cannot be acted upon without corroboration. However, the court 
has to scrutinize the dying declaration carefully and must ensure 
that the declaration is not the result of tutoring, prompting or 
imagination; the deceased should be in a fit and proper state to 
make the declaration. But once the court is satisfied that the 
dying declaration is true and voluntary, it can base conviction on 
it without corroboration.  
29.  
This Court highlighted the significance of a dying 
declaration in Kundula Bala Subrahmanyam vs. State of Andhra 
Pradesh3. The general rule is that hearsay evidence is not 
admissible. Unless the evidence tendered is tested by cross-
examination, it is not creditworthy. However, Section 32(1) of the 
Evidence Act is an exception to this general rule. This Court 
observed as under: 
18.  
* 
 
* 
 
* 
 
* 
      *          
A dying declaration made by person on the verge 
of his death has a special sanctity as at that 
solemn moment, a person is most unlikely to 
make any untrue statement. The shadow of 
 
2 (1992) 2 SCC 474 
3 (1993) 2 SCC 684 

31 
 
impending death is by itself the guarantee of the 
truth of the statement made by the deceased 
regarding the causes or circumstances leading to 
his death. A dying declaration, therefore, enjoys 
almost a sacrosanct status, as a piece of evidence, 
coming as it does from the mouth of the deceased 
victim. Once the statement of the dying person 
and the evidence of the witnesses testifying to the 
same passes the test of careful scrutiny of the 
courts, it becomes a very important and a reliable 
piece of evidence and if the court is satisfied that 
the dying declaration is true and free from any 
embellishment such a dying declaration, by itself, 
can be sufficient for recording conviction even 
without looking for any corroboration. * * * * * 
 
30.  
Elaborating further, this Court in Sher Singh vs. State 
of Punjab4 held that acceptability of a dying declaration is greater 
because the declaration is made in extremity. When a party is on 
the verge of death, one rarely finds any motive to tell falsehood. It 
is for this reason that the requirements of oath and cross-
examination are dispensed with in the case of a dying declaration.  
31.  
In Sudhakar vs. State of Madhya Pradesh5, this Court 
observed thus: 
20. The “dying declaration” is the last statement 
made by a person at a stage when he is in serious 
apprehension of his death and expects no chances 
of his survival. At such time, it is expected that a 
person will speak the truth and only the truth. 
Normally in such situations the courts attach the 
 
4 (2008) 4 SCC 265 
5 (2012) 7 SCC 569 

32 
 
intrinsic value of truthfulness to such statement. 
Once such statement has been made voluntarily, 
it is reliable and is not an attempt by the deceased 
to cover up the truth or falsely implicate a person, 
then the courts can safely rely on such dying 
declaration and it can form the basis of conviction. 
More so, where the version given by the deceased 
as 
dying 
declaration 
is 
supported 
and 
corroborated by other prosecution evidence, there 
is no reason for the courts to doubt the 
truthfulness of such dying declaration.  
 
32.  
When there are more than one dying declaration, this 
Court in Amol Singh vs. State of Madhya Pradesh6, clarified that it 
is not the plurality of the dying declarations that matter. On the 
contrary, it is the reliability of a dying declaration which is 
significant. If there are inconsistencies between one dying 
declaration and the other, the court has to examine the nature of 
the inconsistencies, i.e., whether those are material or not.  
33.  
In Lakhan vs. State of Madhya Pradesh7, this Court 
held that where there are multiple dying declarations with 
inconsistencies between them, the court would have to scrutinize 
the facts very carefully and, thereafter, take a decision as to which 
of the declarations is worth reliance.  
 
6 (2008) 5 SCC 468 
7 (2010) 8 SCC 514 

33 
 
34.  
Again, in Ashabai vs. State of Maharashtra8, this Court 
observed that when there are multiple dying declarations, each 
dying declaration has to be separately assessed and evaluated 
independently on their own merit as to the evidentiary value of 
each. One cannot be rejected merely because of certain variations 
in the other.  
35.  
As already discussed above, there is no reason for us to 
doubt the correctness of the dying declaration of the deceased (Ex. 
59) which has been proved in evidence. Attending doctor has 
certified that the deceased was capable of narrating her statement. 
The substance of the dying declaration is also borne out by the 
medical history of the patient recorded by the doctor which has 
also been proved in evidence. Further, though there are 
inconsistencies and improvements in the version of the prosecution 
witnesses, there is however convergence with the core of the 
narration of the deceased made in the dying declaration and the 
medical history recorded by the doctor. That being the position, the 
evidence on record, particularly Ex. 59, clearly establishes the guilt 
of the appellant beyond all reasonable doubt.  
 
8 (2013) 2 SCC 224 

34 
 
36.  
We are mindful of the fact that appellant is on bail since 
the year 2016. Nevertheless, having sieved through the evidence 
carefully, we have no hesitation in our mind that appellant is guilty 
of committing the offence and that the guilt has been proved 
beyond all reasonable doubt.  
37.  
In view of the above, the appeal is dismissed. Appellant 
is directed to surrender before the trial court within a period of two 
weeks from today to carry out his sentence.  
 
                                            
………………………………J.    
[ABHAY S. OKA] 
 
 
 
 
.……………………………J. 
   [UJJAL BHUYAN] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
MAY 15, 2024.