1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). ______OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP (Criminal) No(s). 1400 of 2024) 
 
SHIVENDRA PRATAP SINGH 
THAKUR @ BANTI                                         .…APPELLANT(S) 
  
 
VERSUS 
 
 
STATE OF CHHATTISGARH 
AND ORS. 
                                          ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The instant appeal by special leave has been filed by the 
appellant herein for assailing the order dated 2nd August, 2023 
passed by the learned Single Judge of the Chhattisgarh High Court 
dismissing Criminal Miscellaneous Petition No. 1675 of 2023 
preferred by the appellant seeking quashment of FIR No. 590 of 
2019 registered at the instance of respondent No. 5 at P.S. 
Sarkanda, District Bilaspur for the offences punishable under 
Sections 447, 427, 294, 506 read with Section 34 of the Indian 

2 
 
Penal Code, 1860(hereinafter being referred to as ‘IPC’) and the 
charge sheet filed as a consequence of investigation of the said FIR. 
3. 
The pith and substance of the allegations set out in the FIR is 
that respondent No. 5-Barkat Ali i.e. the complainant, had 
purchased 
the 
land 
bearing 
Survey 
No. 
559/1Chh/30 
admeasuring 21 decimals situated at Ashok Nagar, Khamtarai 
Bilaspur from one Geeta Rai, for a consideration of Rs. 25,00,000/. 
A registered sale deed for 10 decimals of the said land was executed 
on 20th December, 2017. The complainant came into possession of 
the said land.  The adjacent plot admeasuring 12 decimals, was 
purchased by one Sushma Kashyap, wife of Rajkumar Kashyap 
from the land owner Geeta Rai in the year 2016. The complainant 
and Sushma Kashyap were allegedly in possession of their 
respective plots and had raised construction of houses thereupon. 
The complainant alleged that he had built a boundary wall for the 
protection of his plot with a gate and grill and that he had stored 
cement, rods and other construction materials on the plot. It was 
alleged that accused Saurabh Pratap Singh Thakur and appellant-
Shivendra Pratap Singh Thakur @ Banti, in furtherance of their 
common intention prior to 20th May, 2019, trespassed into the land 
in possession of the complainant and demolished the under 

3 
 
construction house of Sushma Kashyap and the boundary wall of 
the complainant-Barkat Ali.  The accused also stole raw materials 
kept at the complainant’s land thereby, causing loss of Rs.4 lakhs 
and Rs. 6 lakhs to Sushma Kashyap and the complainant, 
respectively.   
4. 
The complainant confronted the accused about their criminal 
acts, on which the accused threatened the complainant of dire 
consequences in presence of witnesses Uma, Shankar Sahu, 
Vishnu Sahu and other labourers. On the basis of this report, an 
FIR No. 590 of 2019 came to be registered at P.S. Sarkanda, 
District Bilaspur for the offences punishable under Sections 447, 
427, 294, 506 read with Section 34 of the IPC. Upon conclusion of 
investigation, the Investigating Officer, proceeded to file a charge 
sheet for the offences punishable under Sections 447, 427, 294, 
506 read with Section 34 of the IPC against the accused persons 
showing them to be absconding.  
5. 
The co-accused-Saurabh Pratap Singh Thakur and appellant-
Shivendra Pratap Singh Thakur @ Banti initially filed a writ petition 
being WPCR No. 10 of 2020 seeking quashing of the aforesaid FIR 
and the criminal case registered in pursuance thereof. The said 
writ petition was, however, not pressed with liberty to take recourse 

4 
 
to the appropriate remedy against the charge sheet. Thereafter, the 
appellant and co-accused Saurabh Pratap Singh filed a petition 
under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973(hereinafter being referred to as ‘CrPC’) before the High Court 
of Chhattisgarh for quashing of the said FIR and the charge sheet 
which stands rejected vide order dated 2nd August, 2023. The said 
order is subjected to challenge in this appeal by special leave. 
6. 
Learned counsel representing the appellant urged that the 
entire case setup by the complainant in the FIR is false and 
fabricated. The land owner Sushma Kashyap whose under 
construction house was allegedly demolished/damaged by the 
appellant did not approach the police for lodging a complaint 
regarding the so called criminal act allegedly committed by the 
accused on her property. When the site inspection memo was 
prepared, the Investigating Officer did not find any damage to the 
boundary wall on Barkat Ali’s plot as had been alleged in the FIR. 
It was further contended that the impugned FIR and the charge 
sheet filed as a consequence thereof deserve to be quashed because 
on a plain reading of the charge sheet, the ingredients of the 
offences alleged are not made out.  

5 
 
7. 
Learned counsel urged that the appellant had lodged FIR No.  
227 of 2014 against one Satraj Ali who is the panchnama witness 
of the complainant and that the present FIR is nothing but a 
counterblast to the FIR registered at the instance of the appellant.  
8. 
Learned counsel further submitted that the incident is alleged 
to have taken place some time prior to 20th May, 2019 whereas, the 
FIR had been lodged on 29th June, 2019 and no explanation has 
been furnished for this gross delay in lodging of the FIR. He also 
pointed out that the complainant was not even sure of the date on 
which the offences were allegedly committed and that is why, the 
date of the incident has been mentioned in the FIR and the charge 
sheet as some time prior to 20th May, 2019 which clearly indicates 
that the allegations made by the complainant are totally vague and 
uncertain and unworthy of credence. 
9. 
Learned counsel thus, implored the Court to accept the 
appeal and quash the FIR and consequential charge sheet filed 
against the appellant. 
10. Per contra, learned counsel representing the State of 
Chhattisgarh vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions 
advanced by the appellant’s counsel. He urged that the 
complainant had no motive to falsely implicate the accused-

6 
 
appellant.  Investigation was conducted by the Investigating Officer 
and during the course of the collection of evidence, the statements 
of complainant-Barkat Ali, Sushma Kashyap and so also her 
husband-Rajkumar Kashyap were recorded wherein, they fully 
affirmed the allegations levelled in the FIR. 
11. He thus, urged that the appellant herein has failed to make 
out a case for interference in the impugned order and the charge 
sheet. 
12. No one has appeared to contest the matter on behalf of 
respondent No. 5 i.e., complainant-Barkat Ali. 
13. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the material 
placed on record. 
14.  A bare perusal of the impugned FIR would reveal that the 
same was lodged by complainant-Barkat Ali on 29th June, 2019 
with the allegation that the offences alleged were committed by the 
appellant and co-accused some time prior to 20th May, 2019. Thus, 
the complainant was not even sure of the date on which the alleged 
offences were committed. No reason whatsoever has been given in 
the FIR for huge delay of more than 39 days in approaching the 
police. The Investigating Officer prepared a site plan during the 

7 
 
course of investigation which has been made a part of the record. 
A perusal of the said site plan would reveal that so far as the plot 
of Purnima Begum, wife of Barkat Ali is concerned, it is fully 
encumbered by a boundary wall and no damage is shown to this 
structure. The site plan indicates that there is some damage to the 
under-construction house of Sushma Kashyap. In the FIR, the 
damage suffered by the complainant was quantified at Rs. 6 lakhs 
whereas the damage suffered by Smt. Sushma Kashyap was 
quantified as Rs. 4 lakhs owing to the demolition of her under 
construction house. However, admittedly, Smt. Sushma did not 
lodge any complaint to the police. 
15. On going through the contents of the FIR, we do not find any 
material therein which can justify invocation of the offence 
punishable under Section 294 IPC.  Except for the offence under 
Section 447 IPC, all the remaining offences are non-cognizable 
whereas the offence under Section 294 IPC is ex facie not made out 
from the allegations set out in the FIR and the charge sheet.  The 
allegation levelled by the complainant that the accused demolished 
the boundary wall constructed on the land in his possession has 
not been found to be substantiated during spot inspection.  

8 
 
16. Neither Sushma Kashyap nor her husband-Rajkumar 
Kashyap lodged any complaint regarding the so-called criminal 
activity committed by the appellant and the co-accused on their 
land. The site plan further indicates that the plot of the co-accused 
Saurabh Pratap Singh Thakur is immediately adjoining the plots 
of complainant-Barkat Ali and Sushma Kashyap. It is thus, 
apparent that there is an imminent possibility of animus between 
the complainant and the accused persons on this count. The FIR 
which was lodged after 39 days of the incident, does not indicate 
the date or time, when the accused trespassed into the house of 
the complainant and caused damage to his property and 
committed the other offences for which the FIR came to be 
registered. Therefore, we are of the view that the impugned FIR 
seems to be nothing but a tool to wreak vengeance against the 
appellant herein. 
17. In this background, we feel that it is a fit case warranting 
exercise of powers conferred upon this Court under Article 142 of 
the Constitution of India so as to quash the proceedings of the 
criminal case. 
 
 

9 
 
18. As a result, impugned FIR No. 590 of 2019 and all subsequent 
proceedings sought to be taken thereunder are hereby quashed 
and set aside. 
19. The appeal is allowed in these terms. 
20. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     .………………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
     (B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
 
                           ………..………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
     (SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    …………………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
            (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
May 15, 2024