2024 INSC 421
Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 1 of 15 
 
 
Non-Reportable  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2567 OF 2024 
  
State of Himachal Pradesh  
 
                          … Appellant 
 
versus 
 
Raghubir Singh & Ors. 
 
 
                   … Respondents 
 
with 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2568 OF 2024 
  
 
J U D G M E N T 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The respondents in Criminal Appeal No.2567 of 2024 have been 
convicted by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh at Shimla by the 
impugned judgment and order dated 2nd March 2017 for the offence 
punishable under clause (g) of sub-section (2) of Section 376 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘the IPC’).  They were sentenced to 
undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years and to pay a fine of 
Rs.50,000/- each.  They were sentenced to undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for six months on default of payment of fine.  The fine 
amount, if deposited, was ordered to be paid to the prosecutrix. 
2. 
PW-5 is the prosecutrix. The alleged incident is of 8th July 1989.  
Initially, the accused were prosecuted for the offences punishable under 
Section 376, read with Section 34 of the IPC.  Six accused were tried 
before the Sessions Court, namely, Raghubir Singh (Raghubir), Vijay 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.05.15
19:30:38 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 2 of 15 
 
 
Kumar (Vijay), Ravi Prakash (Ravi), Anil Kumar alias Bittu (Anil), Hari 
Ram (Hari) and Sunil Kumar (Sunil).  The Trial Court acquitted the 
accused on the ground that in the absence of any corroborating 
evidence of any struggle on the part of the prosecutrix or any 
corroborating injury on the person of the accused, the defence of the 
accused that the sexual intercourse was with the consent, cannot be 
ruled out.  The appellant–the State of Himachal Pradesh, appealed 
against the order of acquittal.  By the order dated 28th March 2008, the 
High Court set aside the judgment of the Sessions Court and remanded 
the case to the Sessions Court with a direction to try the accused for 
the offence of gang rape.  After the order of remand, the case was tried 
only against five accused as the accused Anil had died.  The prosecution 
adopted the evidence recorded before remand, and even the accused 
adopted their cross-examination. By the judgment and order dated 24th 
September 2008, the Sessions Court again passed an order of acquittal.  
By the impugned judgment and order, the High Court interfered in an 
appeal preferred by the State. It converted the acquittal of the accused 
into a conviction for the offence punishable under Section 376(2)(g) of 
the IPC.  Regarding the sentence, the High Court held that there were 
adequate and special reasons for imposing a sentence of imprisonment 
for a term of less than ten years.  The said power was exercised by the 
High Court in terms of the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 376 of 
the IPC as it existed on the statute book before Section 376 was 
substituted by Act No.13 of 2013. 
3. 
Criminal Appeal No.2567 of 2024 has been preferred by the State 
of Himachal Pradesh being aggrieved by that part of the impugned 
judgment, by which the accused were let off on the sentence of 
imprisonment for three years which is less than the minimum sentence 
of ten years as provided under Section 376(2), which was applicable on 
the date on which the alleged act of offence was committed. Criminal 

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 3 of 15 
 
 
Appeal No.2568 of 2024 has been preferred by accused Vijay for 
challenging his conviction. 
SUBMISSIONS 
4. 
The learned counsel appearing for accused-Vijay, in support of the 
appeal, urged that on the same evidence, there are two judgments of 
acquittal in favour of the accused.  He submitted that even in the appeal 
against the first order of acquittal, the High Court did not convert the 
order of acquittal into conviction and passed an order of remand.  He 
submitted that the finding recorded by the High Court was that on the 
date of occurrence of the alleged offence, the prosecutrix was more than 
sixteen years old.  Section 375 of the IPC, as was applicable on the 
relevant date, provided that consensual sexual intercourse with a 
woman who was more than sixteen years old was not an offence.  He 
invited our attention to the finding recorded in the impugned judgment 
by the High Court.  He submitted that the High Court held that the 
prosecutrix willingly accompanied accused Vijay, who was sitting beside 
her in the video parlour where the prosecutrix was watching a movie.  
He pointed out that the High Court held that the prosecutrix had 
acquaintance with accused Vijay, and he had shown interest in 
solemnising marriage with her.  He submitted that even going by the 
case made out by the prosecutrix, she walked ahead of the accused 
Vijay and reached a bridge in the town.  Thereafter, accused Vijay, along 
with two other accused, came there.  Her evidence shows that she had 
several opportunities to raise the alarm but failed to do so.  He 
submitted that the evidence of the prosecutrix cannot be believed 
considering her conduct.  He submitted that the Sessions Court, on two 
occasions, acquitted the accused after making detailed consideration of 
the evidence on record.  He pointed out that after the remand, the 
Sessions Court, after considering the evidence of the prosecutrix, 
concluded that there were contradictions in her testimony, and she 

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 4 of 15 
 
 
made improvements.  Moreover, her conduct on the date of occurrence 
does not support the theory of sexual intercourse without her consent.  
He submitted that the High Court should not have interfered only 
because another view was possible on the same evidence.   
5. 
The learned counsel appearing for the State urged that the 
judgment of the Sessions Court, after remand, is perverse.  He 
submitted that no reasonable person, after reading the testimony of the 
prosecutrix, would conclude that the sexual intercourse was with her 
consent.  He submitted that the approach of the Trial Court while 
dealing with such a serious case of gang rape was entirely uncalled for.  
He submitted that there was no reason for the High Court to show 
leniency and let off the accused on a sentence that was less than the 
minimum prescribed term. He urged that a minimum prescribed 
sentence be awarded by allowing the appeal by the State. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
6. 
A perusal of the impugned judgment shows that on consideration 
of the evidence, there is a finding recorded by the High Court that the 
guilt of the accused has been established.  According to the High Court, 
this was the only possible finding which could have been recorded based 
on the evidence on record.  Before we consider the evidence, we may 
note that in paragraph 12 of the judgment of the Sessions Court, after 
remand, it is recorded that in the statement of accused Vijay under 
Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘the 
Cr.PC.’), he stated that he had intimacy with the prosecutrix for one 
year. She had been charging money for that.  Accused Sunil in his 
statement under Section 313 of the Cr. PC. stated that the prosecutrix 
used to accompany him even before the alleged occurrence and used to 
charge money.  He stated that on the day of the incident, the prosecutrix 
demanded Rs.100/-, but he could pay only Rs.50/-.  The Sessions 
Court further recorded that accused Ravi, in his statement under 

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 5 of 15 
 
 
Section 313 of the Cr.PC., also stated that sexual intercourse with the 
prosecutrix was with her consent and as he did not pay any money to 
her, she made a false allegation.  The plea of accused Raghubir and Hari 
was that they were falsely implicated.  Accused-Raghubir, in his 
statement under Section 313 of the Cr. PC stated that since he had 
accompanied one Chunni Pradhan (discharged accused), false 
allegations have been made against him.  Accused Hari in his statement 
under Section 313 of the Cr. PC. stated that as he was an employee of 
Chunni Pradhan, he was also dragged into the case.  Thus, three out of 
five accused have come out with a case that they had sexual intercourse 
with the consent of the prosecutrix. They went to the extent of alleging 
that they used to pay her consideration.  Sub-section (4) of Section 313 
of the Cr.PC provides that the answers given by the accused in his 
examination under sub-section (1) of Section 313 of the Cr.PC may be 
taken into consideration in the trial.  This Court had an occasion to 
consider the scope of sub-section (4) of Section 313 of the Cr.PC in the 
case of Manu Sao v. State of Bihar1.  Paragraphs 14 to 17 of the said 
decision read thus: 
“14. The statement of the accused can be used to 
test the veracity of the exculpatory nature of the 
admission, if any, made by the accused. It can be 
taken into consideration in any enquiry or trial 
but still it is not strictly evidence in the case. The 
provisions 
of 
Section 
313(4) 
explicitly 
provides that the answers given by the 
accused may be taken into consideration in 
such enquiry or trial and put in evidence 
against the accused in any other enquiry or 
trial for any other offence for which such 
answers may tend to show he has committed. 
In other words, the use is permissible as per 
the provisions of the Code but has its own 
limitations. The courts may rely on a portion 
of the statement of the accused and find him 
guilty in consideration of the other evidence 
against him led by the prosecution, however, 
 
1  (2010) 12 SCC 310 

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 6 of 15 
 
 
such statements made under this section 
should not be considered in isolation but in 
conjunction with evidence adduced by the 
prosecution. 
15. Another important caution that courts have 
declared 
in 
the 
pronouncements 
is 
that 
conviction of the accused cannot be based merely 
on the statement made under Section 313 of the 
Code as it cannot be regarded as a substantive 
piece of evidence. In Vijendrajit Ayodhya Prasad 
Goel v. State of Bombay [(1953) 1 SCC 434 : AIR 
1953 SC 247 : 1953 Cri LJ 1097] , the Court held 
as under : (AIR p. 248, para 3) 
“3. … As the appellant admitted that he was 
in charge of the godown, further evidence was 
not led on the point. The Magistrate was in 
this situation fully justified in referring to the 
statement of the accused under Section 342 
as 
supporting 
the 
prosecution 
case 
concerning the possession of the godown. The 
contention that the Magistrate made use of 
the 
inculpatory 
part 
of 
the 
accused's 
statement and excluded the exculpatory part 
does not seem to be correct. The statement 
under Section 342 did not consist of two 
portions, 
part 
inculpatory 
and 
part 
exculpatory. It concerned itself with two facts. 
The accused admitted that he was in charge 
of the godown, he denied that the rectified 
spirit was found in that godown. He alleged 
that the rectified spirit was found outside it. 
This part of his statement was proved untrue 
by the prosecution evidence and had no 
intimate connection with the statement 
concerning the possession of the godown.” 
16. On similar lines reference can be made to a 
quite recent judgment of this Court in Ajay 
Singh v. State of Maharashtra [(2007) 12 SCC 341 
: (2008) 1 SCC (Cri) 371] where the Court held as 
under : (SCC p. 347, paras 11-13) 
“11. So far as the prosecution case that 
kerosene was found on the accused's dress is 
concerned, it is to be noted that no question 

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 7 of 15 
 
 
in this regard was put to the accused while he 
was examined under Section 313 of the Code. 
12. The purpose of Section 313 of the Code is 
set out in its opening words—‘for the purpose 
of enabling the accused personally to explain 
any circumstances appearing in the evidence 
against 
him’. 
In Hate 
Singh 
Bhagat 
Singh v. State of Madhya Bharat [1951 SCC 
1060 : AIR 1953 SC 468 : 1953 Cri LJ 1933] 
it has been laid down by Bose, J. (AIR p. 469, 
para 8) that the statements of the accused 
persons recorded under Section 313 of the 
Code ‘are among the most important matters 
to be considered at the trial’. It was pointed 
out that : (AIR p. 470, para 8) 
‘8. … The statements of the accused 
recorded by the committing Magistrate 
and the Sessions Judge are intended in 
India to take the place of what in 
England and in America he would be 
free to state in his own way in the 
witness box [and that they] have to be 
received in evidence and treated as 
evidence and be duly considered at the 
trial.’ ” 
This position remains unaltered even after the 
insertion of Section 315 in the Code and any 
statement under Section 313 has to be 
considered in the same way as if Section 315 
is not there. 
13. The object of examination under this 
section is to give the accused an opportunity 
to explain the case made against him. This 
statement can be taken into consideration in 
judging his innocence or guilt. Where there is 
an onus on the accused to discharge, it 
depends on the facts and circumstances of 
the case if such statement discharges the 
onus.” 
17. The statement made by the accused is 
capable of being used in the trial though to a 
limited extent. But the law also places an 

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 8 of 15 
 
 
obligation upon the court to take into 
consideration the stand of the accused in his 
statement and consider the same objectively 
and in its entirety. This principle of law has 
been stated by this Court in Hate Singh Bhagat 
Singh v. State of Madhya Bharat. [1951 SCC 
1060: AIR 1953 SC 468 : 1953 Cri LJ 1933]” 
                      (emphasis added) 
Therefore, the conviction cannot be based solely on the statements 
made by an accused under sub-section (1) of Section 313 of the Cr. PC. 
The statements of the accused cannot be considered in isolation but in 
conjunction with the evidence adduced by the prosecution. The 
statements may have more relevance when under a statute, an accused 
has burden of discharge. When the law requires an accused to discharge 
the burden, the accused can always do so by a preponderance of 
probability. But, while considering whether the accused has discharged 
the burden, the court can certainly consider his statement recorded 
under Section 313.  In this case, the accused has no burden to 
discharge.  In the present case, while appreciating the evidence adduced 
by the prosecution, the statements of the three accused that they 
maintained a physical relationship with the prosecutrix by paying her 
money will have to be considered.  Dr. Shashi Thakur (PW-4), who had 
examined the victim, noted inflammation in the private parts of the 
victim.  In the cross-examination, PW-4 opined that it is not necessary 
that in a case of forcible sexual intercourse, an injury should be there 
on the body of the victim.  Absence of injuries on the person of the 
prosecutrix is by itself no ground to infer consent on the part of the 
prosecutrix. 
7. 
At this stage, we may record here that the finding of the High 
Court in the impugned judgment is that the age of the prosecutrix was 
not less than sixteen years. In this case, we are concerned with the 
provisions of Sections 375 and 376 of the IPC, which were substituted 

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 9 of 15 
 
 
by Act No.43 of 1983 with effect from 25th December 1983.  Both 
sections were subsequently substituted by Act No.13 of 2013, effective 
from 3rd February 2013.  Therefore, in the present case, Sections 375 
and 376 of the IPC will apply as substituted with effect from 25th 
December 1983.  Considering ‘sixthly’ in Section 375, at the relevant 
time, sexual intercourse with a woman who was not less than sixteen 
years with consent did not constitute an offence of rape. 
8. 
As far as the law relating to appreciation of the testimony of the 
victim of rape is concerned, the law is well settled. In the decision of this 
Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh2, in paragraph 
8, this Court held thus: 
“8. .. .. .. … .. .. .. … .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 
The courts must, while evaluating evidence, 
remain alive to the fact that in a case of rape, 
no self-respecting woman would come forward 
in a court just to make a humiliating 
statement against her honour such as is 
involved in the commission of rape on her. In 
cases involving sexual molestation, supposed 
considerations which have no material effect 
on the veracity of the prosecution case or even 
discrepancies 
in 
the 
statement 
of 
the 
prosecutrix 
should 
not, 
unless 
the 
discrepancies are such which are of fatal 
nature, be allowed to throw out an otherwise 
reliable 
prosecution 
case. 
The 
inherent 
bashfulness of the females and the tendency 
to conceal outrage of sexual aggression are 
factors which the courts should not overlook. 
The testimony of the victim in such cases is 
vital and unless there are compelling reasons 
which necessitate looking for corroboration of 
her statement, the courts should find no 
difficulty to act on the testimony of a victim 
of sexual assault alone to convict an accused 
where her testimony inspires confidence and 
is found to be reliable. Seeking corroboration 
of her statement before relying upon the 
 
2  (1996) 2 SCC 384 

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 10 of 15 
 
 
same, as a rule, in such cases amounts to 
adding insult to injury. Why should the 
evidence of a girl or a woman who complains 
of rape or sexual molestation, be viewed with 
doubt, disbelief or suspicion? The court while 
appreciating the evidence of a prosecutrix 
may look for some assurance of her statement 
to satisfy its judicial conscience, since she is 
a witness who is interested in the outcome of 
the charge levelled by her, but there is no 
requirement 
of 
law 
to 
insist 
upon 
corroboration of her statement to base 
conviction of an accused. The evidence of a 
victim of sexual assault stands almost on a par 
with the evidence of an injured witness and to 
an extent is even more reliable. Just as a 
witness who has sustained some injury in the 
occurrence, which is not found to be self-inflicted, 
is considered to be a good witness in the sense 
that he is least likely to shield the real culprit, the 
evidence of a victim of a sexual offence is entitled 
to 
great 
weight, 
absence 
of 
corroboration 
notwithstanding. Corroborative evidence is not 
an imperative component of judicial credence in 
every case of rape. Corroboration as a condition 
for judicial reliance on the testimony of the 
prosecutrix is not a requirement of law but a 
guidance of prudence under given circumstances. 
It must not be overlooked that a woman or a girl 
subjected to sexual assault is not an accomplice 
to the crime but is a victim of another person's 
lust and it is improper and undesirable to test her 
evidence with a certain amount of suspicion, 
treating her as if she were an accomplice. 
Inferences have to be drawn from a given set of 
facts and circumstances with realistic diversity 
and not dead uniformity lest that type of rigidity 
in the shape of rule of law is introduced through 
a new form of testimonial tyranny making justice 
a casualty. Courts cannot cling to a fossil formula 
and insist upon corroboration even if, taken as a 
whole, the case spoken of by the victim of sex 
crime strikes the judicial mind as probable. In 
State 
of 
Maharashtra 
v. 
Chandraprakash 
Kewalchand Jain [(1990) 1 SCC 550 : 1990 SCC 
(Cri) 210] Ahmadi, J. (as the Lord Chief Justice 

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 11 of 15 
 
 
then was) speaking for the Bench summarised 
the position in the following words: (SCC p. 559, 
para 16) 
“A prosecutrix of a sex offence cannot be 
put on a par with an accomplice. She is in 
fact a victim of the crime. The Evidence Act 
nowhere says that her evidence cannot be 
accepted unless it is corroborated in material 
particulars. She is undoubtedly a competent 
witness under Section 118 and her evidence 
must receive the same weight as is attached 
to an injured in cases of physical violence. 
The same degree of care and caution must 
attach in the evaluation of her evidence as in 
the case of an injured complainant or witness 
and no more. What is necessary is that the 
court must be alive to and conscious of the 
fact that it is dealing with the evidence of a 
person who is interested in the outcome of 
the charge levelled by her. If the court keeps 
this in mind and feels satisfied that it can act 
on the evidence of the prosecutrix, there is 
no rule of law or practice incorporated in the 
Evidence Act similar to Illustration (b) to 
Section 114 which requires it to look for 
corroboration. If for some reason the court is 
hesitant to place implicit reliance on the 
testimony of the prosecutrix it may look for 
evidence which may lend assurance to her 
testimony short of corroboration required in 
the case of an accomplice. The nature of 
evidence required to lend assurance to the 
testimony 
of 
the 
prosecutrix 
must 
necessarily 
depend 
on 
the 
facts 
and 
circumstances of each case. But if a 
prosecutrix 
is 
an 
adult 
and 
of 
full 
understanding the court is entitled to base a 
conviction on her evidence unless the same 
is shown to be infirm and not trustworthy. If 
the 
totality 
of 
the 
circumstances 
appearing on the record of the case 
disclose that the prosecutrix does not 
have a strong motive to falsely involve the 
person 
charged, 
the 
court 
should 

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 12 of 15 
 
 
ordinarily have no hesitation in accepting 
her evidence.”   
                           (emphasis added) 
 
9. 
Now, we turn to the evidence of the prosecutrix (PW-5).  She stated 
that on the afternoon of the date of the incident, she had visited a video 
parlour in Manali, where she watched a movie.  Accused Vijay was 
sitting next to her.  She stated that accused Vijay suggested her to go 
to a particular place for taking bath.  She declined to do so.  Accused 
Vijay told her that he was interested in getting married to her.  Both 
came out of the video parlour, and she was taken to a bridge in Manali, 
where she was made to wait.  A Gypsy vehicle was brought, driven by 
accused Ravi and one Munna (absconding accused).  The prosecutrix 
was told to sit in the vehicle and was taken to Solang Nullah.  The 
vehicle halted there, and accused Vijay took her near the Nullah, where 
there was a giant boulder.  She alleged that at that place, accused Vijay 
had forcible sexual intercourse with her.  After that, a van arrived there, 
and the accused, Sunil, alighted from the van.  Thereafter, Sunil, Nanu 
(absconding accused), and Munna (absconding accused) committed 
forcible sexual intercourse with her.  After that, accused Sunil 
threatened the prosecutrix and told her to keep mum.  Around 06:00 
p.m., accused Raghu, accused Hari and Chunni Pradhan were sitting 
near Solang Nullah.  When the prosecutrix approached them, she was 
told to go home.  She stated that she was lifted and put in the Gypsy 
vehicle.  The accused boarded the vehicle and brought her to a place 
known as Kanchi Mod.  Thereafter, accused Raghu, accused Hari and 
Chunni Pradhan allegedly committed sexual intercourse against her 
wish.  She was left on the road, and the accused fled by the gypsy 
vehicle.  The prosecutrix took a lift and reached her home. 
10. 
We have carefully perused the cross-examination of the 
prosecutrix.  In the cross-examination, the case put to her was that she 
had voluntarily accompanied the accused Vijay.  There was no 

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 13 of 15 
 
 
suggestion given by the accused that the sexual intercourse with the 
prosecutrix was with her consent. The evidence of the prosecutrix in her 
examination-in-chief that the accused committed sexual intercourse 
with her has not been shaken.  The case of accused Vijay made out in 
his statement under Section 313 of Cr.PC was that he was in a 
relationship with the victim for one year and was paying money to the 
victim for maintaining a sexual relationship.  This case has not been 
put to the prosecutrix.  Even the case made out by accused Sunil and 
Ravi that they were keeping a physical relationship with the prosecutrix 
by paying money has not been put to the prosecutrix. 
11. 
If the relationship between accused Vijay and the prosecutrix was 
really continuing for one year, there was no reason for him to take the 
prosecutrix to a remote place near a Nullah and have sexual intercourse 
near a boulder.  The same is the case with the other two accused.  The 
manner in which the prosecutrix was taken initially near the Nullah and 
after that to another place establishes the case of the prosecutrix of 
forcible sexual intercourse.  Few insignificant contradictions have been 
brought on record in the cross-examination of the prosecutrix.  
However, the version of the prosecutrix about the acts of forcible sexual 
intercourse by the accused has been hardly tested in the cross-
examination. 
12. 
In this view of the matter, the High Court's conclusion was the 
only possible conclusion based on the evidence on record.  Therefore, 
we find no merit in the appeal preferred by the accused Vijay.   
13. 
Now, we come to the sentencing part.  For the offence punishable 
under sub-section (2) of Section 376 of the IPC, the minimum 
punishment of rigorous imprisonment for ten years was prescribed.  
However, at the relevant time, the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 
376 of the IPC read thus: 

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 14 of 15 
 
 
“376.……………………………………………………… 
(2)………………………………………………………….. 
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and 
special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment of either 
description for a term of less than ten years.” 
14. 
Hence, at the relevant time, the Court had the power, for adequate 
reasons mentioned in the judgment, to impose a sentence of 
imprisonment of either description for a term of less than ten years.  We 
have perused the sentencing part of the impugned judgment of the High 
Court.  The High Court has noted the following factors: 
a. The incident was of 8th July 1989; 
b. For the offences alleged under Section 376 of the IPC, by the 
judgment dated 30th September 1992, the accused were 
acquitted; 
c. Sixteen years after that, on 28th March 2008, the High Court 
interfered and remanded the case to the Trial Court to try the 
accused for the offence of gangrape under Section 376(2)(g) of 
the IPC; 
d. The Trial Court acquitted the accused by the impugned 
judgment dated 24th September 2008; 
e. While the High Court heard the appeal in 2017, the accused 
pleaded that their respective ages were in the range of 49 to 55 
and that they had their families. In paragraph 5 of the 
impugned judgment, the High Court noted the same and their 
family responsibilities. 
What was in the back of the mind of the learned judges of the High 
Court was that they were dealing with an incident that had taken place 

Criminal Appeal no.2567 of 2024 etc. 
 
   Page 15 of 15 
 
 
twenty-eight years back, and, in the meantime, the accused and their 
families had moved ahead in life.  Therefore, the High Court was of the 
view that there were adequate reasons which warranted the exercise of 
powers under the proviso. In the facts of the case, enhancement in 
sentence is not justified nearly 35 years after the incident.  
15. 
Therefore, we see no merit in the appeal preferred by the State and 
the appeal preferred by the accused Vijay.  Perhaps, except for the 
accused Vijay, others must have undergone the sentence of three years.  
In his appeal, Accused-Vijay was granted bail by the order dated 7th May 
2018.  He has not undergone the sentence of three years.  Considering 
the gravity of the offence, he cannot be shown further leniency. 
Therefore, the accused, Vijay, must undergo the remaining sentence.  
Hence, we pass the following order: 
a. Both the appeals are accordingly dismissed; 
b. We grant one month to the accused Vijay to surrender before 
the Trial Court to undergo the remaining sentence in terms of 
the impugned judgment of the High Court. 
 
 
 
 
….…………………….J. 
 
                                (Abhay S. Oka) 
 
 
…..…………………...J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (Ujjal Bhuyan) 
New Delhi; 
May 15, 2024.