2024 INSC 424
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
INHERENT JURISDICTION  
REVIEW PETITION (CIVIL) NO.526 OF 2023 
IN  
CIVIL APPEAL NO.6990 OF 2014  
 
KARNAIL SINGH  
 
 
 
 
    ...PETITIONER (S) 
  
VERSUS 
STATE OF HARYANA & ORS.  
 
 ...RESPONDENT (S) 
 
INDEX 
 
I. 
FACTUAL BACKGROUND…………………………...... 
 
Paras 1 to 3 
II. 
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES 
 
Paras 4 to 11 
III. 
CONSIDERATION 
ON 
THE 
SCOPE 
OF 
REVIEW 
JURISDICTION 
 
Paras 12 to 14 
IV. 
CONSIDERATION OF THE JUDGMENT OF THE FULL 
BENCH OF THE HIGH COURT IN JAI SINGH II 
 
Paras 15 to 21 
V. 
CONSIDERATION OF THE CONSTITUTION BENCH 
JUDGMENTS OF THIS COURT IN RANJIT SINGH, AJIT 
SINGH AND BHAGAT RAM 
 
Paras 22 to 58 
VI. 
CONSIDERATION OF THE JUDGMENT OF THE FULL 
BENCH OF THE HIGH COURT IN JAI SINGH II 
REFERRING ITS EARLIER JUDGMENT IN GURJANT 
SINGH AND SEVERAL OTHER JUDGMENTS 
 
 
Paras 59 to 65 
VII. 
CONSIDERATION OF THE JUDGMENT OF THE FULL 
BENCH OF THE HIGH COURT IN JAI SINGH II WITH 
REGARD TO DOCTRINE OF STARE DECISIS 
 
Paras 66 to 67 
VIII. 
CONCLUSION 
 
Para 68 to 69 
 
 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2024.05.16
12:43:10 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
I.  
FACTUAL BACKGROUND 
1. 
The present review petition has been filed by the original 
respondent No.28 in the Appeal, seeking review of the judgment 
of this Court passed on 7th April 2022, thereby allowing the Civil 
Appeal No. 6990 of 2014 filed by the State of Haryana against the 
judgement and order passed by the Full Bench of the High Court 
of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as 
“Full Bench of the High Court”) in Civil Writ Petition No. 5877 of 
1992 dated 13th March 2003 
2. 
The bare necessary facts giving rise to the present review 
petition are thus: 
2.1 The State of Haryana, by way of Government Gazette 
Notification dated 11th February 1992 (hereinafter referred to as 
“Haryana Act No. 9 of 1992”) inserted sub-clause (6) to Section 

3 
 
2(g) of the Haryana1 Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 
1961 (hereinafter referred to as “the 1961 Act”) along with an 
explanation to the said sub-clause which received the assent of 
the President on 14th January 1992. The sub-clause (6) to Section 
2(g) of the 1961 Act reads thus: 
“2. In this Act, unless the context 
otherwise requires –  
xxx  xxx  xxx 
(g) “shamilat deh” includes- 
xxx  xxx  xxx 
(6) lands reserved for the common 
purposes of a village under Section 18 of 
the East Punjab Holdings (Consolidation 
and Prevention of Fragmentation) Act, 
1948 (East Punjab Act 50 of 1948), the 
management and control whereof vests in 
the Gram Panchayat under section 23-A of 
the aforesaid Act.  
Explanation – Lands entered in the 
column of ownership of record of rights as 
“Jumla Malkan Wa Digar Haqdaran Arazi 
Hassab 
Rasad”, 
“Jumla 
Malkan” 
or 
 
1 For the word “Punjab” deemed to have been substituted w.e.f. 01.11.1966 vide Haryana 
Act No.15 of 2021, the Haryana Short Titles Amendment Act 2021 dated 05.04.2021.  

4 
 
“Mushtarka Malkan” shall be shamilat 
deh within the meaning of this section.”    
                 
2.2 Being aggrieved by the said amendment, the present review 
petitioner along with similarly situated landowners, holding land 
in villages, who contribute a share of their holdings to form a 
common pool of land called ‘shamilat deh’, meant exclusively for 
the common purposes of the village inhabitants filed a batch of 
Writ Petitions before the High Court. Considering the matter to 
be involving important questions of law, likely to arise in a large 
number of cases and involving a large chunk of land; the Hon’ble 
Division Bench, then seized of the matter vide Orders dated 01st 
June, 1993 directed the papers of the case to be placed before 
the Hon’ble Chief Justice for constituting a Full Bench of the High 
Court for determination of the vires of the Haryana Act No. 9 of 
1992 and the explanation thereof. The Full Bench of the High 
Court vide judgement dated 18th January 1995 allowed the batch 

5 
 
of Writ Petitions, wherein the judgement came to be recorded in 
CWP No. 5877 of 1992.  
2.3 The State of Haryana challenged the decision of the Full 
Bench of the High Court before this Court vide Civil Appeal No. 
5480 of 1995; wherein this Court held that certain essentials of 
Article 31-A of the Constitution of India were overlooked and 
remanded the matter back to the High Court for re-consideration 
of the issues in light of Article 31A of the Constitution of India.  
2.4 Accordingly, the Full Bench of the High Court vide 
judgement and order dated 13th March 2003, partly allowed the 
petition in terms of the following: 
“In view of the discussion made above, we 
hold that: 
 
(i) 
The sub-section (6) of Section 2(g) of 
the Punjab Village Common Lands 
(Regulation) 
Act, 
1961 
and 
the 
explanation appended thereto, is only 
an 
elucidation 
of 
the 
existing 
provisions of the said Act read with 
provisions contained in the East 
Punjab Holdings (Consolidation and 

6 
 
Prevention of Fragmentation) Act, 
1948. 
 
(ii) 
the un-amended provisions of the Act 
of 1961 and, in particular, Section 
2(g)(1) read with Sections 18 and 23-A 
of the Act of 1948 and Rule 16(ii) of the 
Rules of 1949 cover all such lands 
which 
have 
been 
specifically 
earmarked in a consolidation scheme 
prepared under Section 14 read with 
Rules 5 and 7 and confirmed under 
Section 
20, 
which 
has 
been 
implemented under the provisions of 
Section 24 and no other lands; 
 
(iii) the 
lands 
which 
have 
been 
contributed by the proprietors on the 
basis of pro-rata cut on their holdings 
imposed during the consolidation 
proceedings and which have not been 
earmarked for any common purpose 
in the consolidation scheme prepared 
under Section 14 read with Rules 5 
and 7 and entered in the column of 
ownership as Jumla Malkan Wa Digar 
Haqdaran Hasab Rasad Arazi Khewat 
and in the column of possession with 
the Gram Panchayat or the State 
Government, as the case may be, on 
the dint of sub-section (6) of Section 
2(g) and the explanation appended 

7 
 
thereto or any other provisions of the 
Act of 1961 or the Act of 1948; 
 
(iv) 
all such lands, which have been, as 
per 
the 
consolidation 
scheme, 
reserved 
for 
common 
purposes, 
whether utilized or not, shall vest with 
the State Government or the Gram 
Panchayat, as the case may be, even 
though in the column of ownership the 
entries may be Jumla Mustarka 
Malkans Wa Digar Haqdaran Hasab 
Rasad Arazi Khewat etc.” 
 
2.5 The Full Bench of the High Court also issued certain 
consequential directions with regard to certain mutation entries 
made by the Revenue Authorities.   
2.6 Being aggrieved thus, the State of Haryana filed a Civil 
Appeal No. 6990 before this Court, which came to be allowed by 
judgement and order under review dated 07th April 2022 
(hereinafter referred to as “JUR”); and the Writ Petition of the 
Original Writ Petitioners was consequently dismissed. 

8 
 
2.7 Seeking review, the present Review Petition has been filed 
by the review petitioner. This Court on 31st January. 2023 passed 
the following order in the present Review Petitions: 
“List this review petition for hearing in 
open Court.” 
 
2.8 Subsequently, this Court on 10th April, 2023 passed the 
following order: 
“1. Permission to file review petition(s) is 
granted. 
 2. Delay Condoned. 
 3. Issue Notice on the I.A. (Diary) Nos. 
69003 and 69005 of 2023 in Diary No. 
14941 of 2022, M.A. (Diary) No. 13972 of 
2023 and on the review petition(s), 
returnable on 24.04.2023.  
 
 4. In addition to normal mode of service, 
liberty is granted to serve the Standing 
Counsel for the State.” 
 
3. 
Accordingly, we have heard Shri Narender Hooda, learned 
Senior Counsel and Shri Pradeep Gupta, learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the review petitioner, Shri Pradeep Kant, 

9 
 
learned Senior Counsel and Shri B.K. Satija, learned Additional 
Advocate General appearing for the respondent-State of Haryana.   
II. 
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES 
4. 
Shri Narender Hooda submits that the JUR is totally 
contrary to the law laid down by the Constitution Bench of this 
Court in the case of Bhagat Ram & others vs. State of Punjab 
& others2 (hereinafter referred to as “Bhagat Ram”).  It is 
submitted that the JUR also does not correctly consider the law 
laid down by the Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of 
Ranjit Singh and others vs. State of Punjab and others3 
(hereinafter referred to as “Ranjit Singh”) so also another 
Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Ajit 
Singh vs. State of Punjab & another4 (hereinafter referred to 
as “Ajit Singh”).   
 
2 (1967) 2 SCR 165 : AIR 1967 SC 927  
3 (1965) 1 SCR 82 : AIR 1965 SC 632 
4 (1967) 2 SCR 143: AIR 1967 SC 856 

10 
 
5. 
Shri Hooda submits that after considering the provisions of 
Section 23-A and Section 24 of the East Punjab Holdings 
(Consolidation and Prevention of Fragmentation) Act, 1948 
(hereinafter referred to as “the Consolidation Act”), this Court in 
Bhagat Ram has clearly held that, till possession has changed 
under Section 24, the management and control does not vest in 
the Panchayat under Section 23-A.  It has also been held that the 
rights of the holders are not modified or extinguished till persons 
have changed possession and entered into the possession of the 
holdings allotted to them under the scheme.  He therefore 
submits that the Full Bench of the High Court in the case of Jai 
Singh & others vs. State of Haryana5 (hereinafter referred to 
as “Jai Singh II”) has correctly relying on Bhagat Ram held that 
the land which is reserved, but not earmarked for any common 
purpose, would not come under the purview of Section 2(g)(6) of 
the 1961 Act, as inserted by Haryana Act No.9 of 1992. 
 
5 2003 SCC OnLine P&H 409 

11 
 
6. 
Shri Hooda submits that the Constitution Bench of this 
Court in Ajit Singh was dealing with the lands which were 
reserved for common purposes such as khals, paths, khurrahs, 
panchayat ghars and schools etc.  It was held that in view of Rule 
16(ii) of the Punjab Holdings (Consolidation and Prevention of 
Fragmentation) Rules, 1949 (hereinafter referred to as “the 
Consolidation Rules”), the title still vests in the proprietary body, 
and the management of the said lands is done on behalf of the 
proprietary body.  It was further held that the land was used for 
the common needs and benefits of the estate or estates 
concerned.  This Court held that a fraction of each proprietor’s 
land was taken and formed into a common pool so that the whole 
may be used for the common needs and benefits of the estate as 
mentioned above.  It has been held that the proprietors naturally 
would also be entitled to a share in the benefits along with others.  
In the facts of the said case, this Court held that all such lands, 
which had been specifically earmarked in the Consolidation 

12 
 
Scheme for the purposes mentioned therein and were used for 
the purposes therein for the benefit of the proprietors among 
others, would not amount to acquisition, but a ‘modification’ of 
the rights.  It was held that, by such ‘modification’, the 
beneficiary was not the State and as such, would not be hit by 
the second proviso to Article 31-A of the Constitution of India.   
7. 
Shri Hooda further submits that even in Ranjit Singh, the 
Consolidation Scheme earmarked lands reserved under Section 
18(c) of the Consolidation Act for various common purposes.  The 
Constitution Bench of this Court held that the provisions for the 
assignment of lands to village Panchayat for the use of the 
general community, or for hospitals, schools, manure pits, 
tanning grounds etc. enures for the benefit of rural population 
and it must be considered to be an essential part of the 
redistribution of holdings and open lands. 
8. 
Shri Hooda further submitted that in a catena of judgments, 
this Court has held that the lands, though reserved but not 

13 
 
earmarked and put for any common purpose under the 
Consolidation Scheme prepared under Section 14 of the 
Consolidation Act read with Rules 5 and 7 of the Consolidation 
Rules and entered in the column of ownership as ‘Jumla 
Mustarka Malkan Wa Digar Haqdaran Hasab Rasad Arazi 
Khewat’ and in the column of possession with the proprietors, 
also known as Bachat lands, would not vest in the Gram 
Panchayat or the State Government.  Shri Hooda submits that 
based on such judgments, thousands of transactions have been 
entered into between the parties.   It is submitted that, though 
invoking the doctrine of stare decisis was not necessary, this 
Court in the JUR has not even touched that aspect of the matter.  
All the judgments which have been holding the field for decades 
and thousands of transactions which have been entered into 
between the parties, have been set at naught at the stroke of a 
pen by the JUR.   

14 
 
9. 
Shri Hooda further submits that in view of the JUR, the 
rights of the parties which were crystalized by the judgments of 
the High Court and which was affirmed by this Court by 
judgment dated 27th August, 20016 have also been adversely 
affected without such parties having been heard.  He therefore 
submits that the JUR needs to be recalled and the appeals filed 
by the State deserve to be dismissed.   
10. Per contra, Shri Pradeep Kant, learned Senior Counsel 
appearing on behalf of the respondent-State of Haryana submits 
that the present review petition itself is not maintainable.  It is 
submitted that the review applicant was a party respondent to 
the appeal and the JUR has been delivered after hearing the 
learned counsel for the parties.  It is submitted that the scope of 
review is very limited.  It is also submitted that under the guise 
of a review, a party cannot be permitted to reagitate and reargue 
 
6 2001 SCC OnLine SC 1488 [State of Punjab vs. Gurjant  Singh and others (CA Nos.5709-5714 of 2001 @ 
SLP(C) Nos.16173-16178 of 2000) 

15 
 
the questions which have already been addressed and decided.  
He placed reliance on the following judgments of this Court in 
support of his submissions: 
(i) 
Sow Chandra Kante and another vs. Sheikh Habib7 
(ii) 
Parsion Devi and others vs. Sumitri Devi and others8 
(iii) Kerala 
State 
Electricity 
Board 
vs. 
Hitech 
Electrothermics & Hydropower Ltd. and others9 
(iv) 
Kamlesh Verma vs. Mayawati and others10 
(v) 
Union of India vs. Sandur Manganese and Iron Ores 
Limited and others11 
(vi) 
Shanti Conductors Private Limited vs. Assam State 
Electricity Board and others12 
 
7 (1975) 1 SCC 674 
8 (1997) 8 SCC 715 
9 (2005) 6 SCC 651 
10 (2013) 8 SCC 320 
11 (2013) 8 SCC 337 
12 (2020) 2 SCC 677 

16 
 
(vii) Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) through legal representatives 
and others vs. Vinod Kumar Rawat and others13 
 
11. With the assistance of the learned counsel for the parties, 
we have scrutinized the material on record.  
III. CONSIDERATION 
ON 
THE 
SCOPE 
OF 
REVIEW 
JURISDICTION 
 
12. At the outset, we must reiterate that the scope of review by 
this Court is very limited.  The scope of review jurisdiction has 
been delineated by this Court in a catena of judgments.  We 
would not like to burden the present judgment by reproducing 
all those judgments.  This Court in the case of Kamlesh Verma 
vs. Mayawati and others (supra), after surveying the earlier law 
laid down by this Court has summarized the principles thus: 
“Summary of the principles 
20. Thus, in view of the above, the 
following 
grounds 
of 
review 
are 
maintainable as stipulated by the statute: 
  
 
13 (2021) 13 SCC 1 

17 
 
20.1. When 
the 
review 
will 
be 
maintainable: 
(i) Discovery of new and important 
matter or evidence which, after the 
exercise of due diligence, was not within 
knowledge of the petitioner or could not 
be produced by him; 
(ii) Mistake or error apparent on the 
face of the record; 
(iii) Any other sufficient reason. 
The words “any other sufficient reason” 
have 
been 
interpreted 
in Chhajju 
Ram v. Neki [(1921-22) 49 IA 144 : (1922) 
16 LW 37 : AIR 1922 PC 112] and approved 
by this Court in Moran Mar Basselios 
Catholicos v. Most 
Rev. 
Mar 
Poulose 
Athanasius [AIR 1954 SC 526 : (1955) 1 
SCR 520] to mean “a reason sufficient on 
grounds at least analogous to those 
specified in the rule”. The same principles 
have 
been 
reiterated 
in Union 
of 
India v. Sandur Manganese & Iron Ores 
Ltd. [(2013) 8 SCC 337 : JT (2013) 8 SC 275] 
  
20.2. When the review will not be 
maintainable: 
(i) A repetition of old and overruled 
argument is not enough to reopen 
concluded adjudications. 

18 
 
(ii) Minor mistakes of inconsequential 
import. 
(iii) Review proceedings cannot be 
equated with the original hearing of the 
case. 
(iv) Review is not maintainable unless 
the material error, manifest on the face 
of the order, undermines its soundness 
or results in miscarriage of justice. 
(v) A review is by no means an appeal 
in 
disguise 
whereby 
an 
erroneous 
decision is reheard and corrected but lies 
only for patent error. 
(vi) The mere possibility of two views 
on the subject cannot be a ground for 
review. 
(vii) The error apparent on the face of 
the record should not be an error which 
has to be fished out and searched. 
(viii) The appreciation of evidence on 
record is fully within the domain of the 
appellate court, it cannot be permitted to 
be advanced in the review petition. 
(ix) Review is not maintainable when 
the same relief sought at the time of 
arguing the main matter had been 
negatived.” 
 

19 
 
13. It is thus settled that the review would be permissible only 
if there is a mistake or error apparent on the face of the record or 
any other sufficient reason is made out.  We are also equally 
aware of the fact that the review proceedings cannot be equated 
with the original hearing of the case.  The review of the judgment 
would be permissible only if a material error, manifest on the face 
of the order, undermines its soundness or results in miscarriage 
of justice.  We are also aware that such an error should be an 
error apparent on the face of the record and should not be an 
error which has to be fished out and searched.   
14. In the light of the aforesaid principles, we will have to 
examine the present case.   
IV. CONSIDERATION OF THE JUDGMENT OF THE FULL 
BENCH OF THE HIGH COURT IN JAI SINGH II 
 
15. The background in which Jai Singh II has been decided 
has already been stated by us in the beginning.  In the first round 
of litigation, the High Court had held the provisions of Section 

20 
 
2(g)(6) of the 1961 Act to be unconstitutional being violative of 
second proviso to Article 31-A of the Constitution of India.   This 
Court in the first round has set aside the judgment of the Full 
Bench of the High Court and remanded the matter for deciding 
the factual aspect as to whether the lands in question were within 
the ceiling limit or not.   
16. As such, the scope of the dispute in the second round was 
very limited.  The Full Bench of the High Court, after coming to a 
finding of fact that the lands in question were within the ceiling 
limit, partly allowed the petition.  The operative part of the 
judgment of the Full Bench of the High Court has already been 
reproduced by us hereinabove in paragraph 2.4. 
17. The State was not aggrieved with the findings on issue nos. 
(i), (ii) and (iv).   
By clause (i), the Full Bench of the High Court held that 
sub-section (6) of Section 2(g) of the 1961 Act and the explanation 
appended thereto is only an elucidation of the existing provisions 

21 
 
of the said Act read with the provisions contained in the 
Consolidation Act.   
By clause (ii), it held that the unamended provisions of the 
1961 Act and, in particular, Section 2(g)(1) read with Sections 17 
and 23-A of the Consolidation Act and Rule 16(ii) of the 
Consolidation Rules cover all such lands which have been 
specifically earmarked in a consolidation scheme prepared under 
Section 14 read with Rules 5 and 7 and confirmed under Section 
20, which has been implemented under the provisions of Section 
24 and no other lands.   
By clause (iv), the Full Bench of the High Court held that, 
all such lands in the consolidation scheme which were reserved 
for common purposes, whether utilized or not, shall vest with the 
State Government or the Gram Panchayat, as the case may be; 
even though in the column of ownership the entries may be 
‘Jumla Mustarka Malkans Wa Digar Haqdaran Hasab Rasad 
Arazi Khewat’ etc. 

22 
 
18. The grievance of the State was only with regard to clause 
(iii), wherein it has been held that the lands which had been 
contributed by the proprietors on the basis of pro-rata cut on 
their holdings imposed during the consolidation proceedings and 
which have not been earmarked for any common purpose in the 
consolidation scheme prepared under Section 14 read with Rules 
5 and 7 and have been entered in the column of ownership as 
‘Jumla Malkan Wa Digar Haqdaran Hasab Rasad Arazi Khewat’, 
and in the column of possession with the Gram Panchayat or the 
State Government, would not vest in the Gram Panchayat or the 
State Government but continue to vest with the proprietors.   
19. This Court in the JUR has held that conclusion no.(iii) 
arrived at by the High Court was erroneous and not sustainable 
and accordingly set it aside.  It has been held that the unutilized 
land was not available for redistribution amongst the proprietors.  
This Court further held that the findings recorded by the different 
benches of the High Court were clearly erroneous and not 

23 
 
sustainable.  This Court held that the land reserved for common 
purposes cannot be re-partitioned amongst the proprietors only 
because at a particular given time, the land so reserved has not 
been put to common use.  This Court held that the ’common 
purpose’ is a dynamic expression as it keeps changing due to the 
change in requirement of the society and the passing times and 
therefore, once the land has been reserved for common purposes, 
it cannot be reverted to the proprietors for redistribution. 
20. The limited enquiry that would be permissible for us in 
these proceedings is as to whether the said finding is a material 
error, manifest on the face of the order, undermines its 
soundness or results in the miscarriage of justice or not.  
21. At the cost of repetition, we reiterate that it will not be 
permissible for us to hear the matter as if it was an appeal arising 
from the JUR.   
 

24 
 
V. 
CONSIDERATION OF THE CONSTITUTION BENCH 
JUDGMENTS OF THIS COURT IN RANJIT SINGH, AJIT 
SINGH AND BHAGAT RAM 
   
22. For considering the controversy, a reference to three 
Constitution Bench Judgments of this Court would be necessary.  
23. The first one is in the case of Ranjit Singh. In the said case, 
the Constitution Bench of this Court was concerned with the 
consolidation proceedings in which portions of land from those 
commonly owned by the appellants therein as proprietors, had 
been reserved for the village Panchayat and handed over to it for 
diverse purposes; whereas, other portions had been reserved 
either for non-proprietors or for the common purposes of the 
villages.  In the said case, in the village Virk Kalan, 270 kanals 
and 13 marlas had been given to the village Panchayat for 
management and realization of income, even though the 
ownership was still shown in village papers as Shamilat Deh in 
the names of the proprietors; 10 kanals and 3 marlas had been 
reserved for abadi to be distributed among persons entitled 

25 
 
thereto, and 3 kanals and 7 marlas had been reserved for manure 
pits.  Similarly, in village Sewana, certain lands were set apart 
for the village Panchayat for extension of the abadi and to enable 
grants of certain land to be made to each family of non-
proprietors and certain lands had been reserved for a primary 
school and some more for a phirni.  Similarly, in village Mehnd, 
land had been reserved for the village Panchayat, a school, 
tanning ground, hospital, cremation ground and for non-
proprietors.  The proprietors were not paid compensation for the 
lands and as such, taking away and allotment of the lands was 
the subject matter of challenge in those appeals in the said case.    
24. The appeals before this Court were heard and closed for 
judgment on 27th April 1964. The judgment had to be postponed 
till after the vacation.  However, before the Court could 
reassemble after the vacation on 20th July 1964, the Constitution 
(Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964 received the assent of the 
President i.e. on 20th June, 1964.  Vide the said Amendment, a 

26 
 
new sub-clause (a) in clause (2) of Article 31-A was substituted 
retrospectively and added a proviso to clause (1).  The appeals 
were set down to be mentioned on July 20/23, 1964, and counsel 
were asked if, in view of the amendment, they wished to say 
anything.  However, neither of parties wished to argue. The 
appeals were thus decided on the old arguments, though it was 
clear to the Court that the amendment of Article 31-A, which had 
a far-reaching effect, must have affected one or other of the 
parties.  The Constitution Bench upheld the judgment of the High 
Court which had held that the transfer of shamilat deh owned by 
the proprietors to the village Panchayat for the purposes of 
management and the conferral of proprietary rights on non-
proprietors in respect of lands in abadi deh was not ultra vires 
Article 31 inasmuch as, no compensation was payable.  
25. It must be noted that the judgment of the High Court was 
rendered by interpreting Article 31-A as it existed prior to the 
Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964.  This Court 

27 
 
though called upon the parties to address the Court on the effect 
of the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964, no 
arguments were advanced.  As such, in Ranjit Singh, this Court 
did not have the occasion to consider the effect of the 
Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964 by which the 
second proviso was added to Article 31-A of the Constitution of 
India.  In that view of the matter, the judgment of the 
Constitution Bench of this Court in Ranjit Singh will not have a 
bearing on the present matter.   
26. In the case of Ajit Singh (supra), again the challenge was 
to the scheme made under the provisions of the Consolidation 
Act.  One of the grounds raised before the High Court as well as 
this Court was that the compensation must be paid to the 
appellant for the land reserved in the scheme for various 
purposes in accordance with the second proviso to Article 31-A(1) 
inserted by the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 
1964.   

28 
 
27. It will be relevant to refer to the following paragraphs in Ajit 
Singh:  
“6. Coming now to the third point raised 
by Mr Iyenger, we may first mention that 
it was held by this Court in Ranjit 
Singh v. State of Punjab [(1965) 1 SCR 82] 
that the Act was protected from challenge 
by Article 31-A. It is necessary to set out 
the relevant constitutional provisions. The 
relevant portion of Article 31-A reads as 
under: 
“31-A. (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained 
in 
Article 
13, 
no 
law 
providing for— 
(a) the acquisition by the State of 
any estate or of any rights therein or 
the extinguishment or modification 
of any such rights………. 
shall be deemed to be void on the 
ground that it is inconsistent with, or 
takes away or abridges any of the 
rights conferred by Article 14, Article 
19 or Article 31: 
Provided that * * * 
Provided further that where any 
law makes any provision for the 
acquisition by the State of any estate 
and where any land comprised 

29 
 
therein is held by a person under his 
personal cultivation, it shall not be 
lawful for the State to acquire any 
portion of such land as is within the 
ceiling limit applicable to him under 
any law for the time being in force or 
any building or structure standing 
thereon or appurtenant thereto, 
unless the law relating to the 
acquisition of such land, building or 
structure, provides for payment of 
compensation at a rate which shall 
not be less than the market value 
thereof. 
(2)(b) the expression ‘rights’ in 
relation to an estate shall include any 
rights vesting in a proprietor, sub-
proprietor, under-proprietor, tenure-
holder, raiyat, under-raiyat or other 
intermediary and any rights or 
privileges in respect of land revenue.” 
Relevant portions of Articles 19 
and 31 may also be set out because 
the learned counsel have laid stress 
on the language employed therein. 
“19. (1) All citizens shall have the 
right— 
(f) to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property. 

30 
 
31. (1) No person shall be deprived 
of his property save by authority of 
law. 
(2) 
No 
property 
shall 
be 
compulsorily 
acquired 
or 
requisitioned 
save 
for 
a 
public 
purpose and save by authority of a 
law which provides for compensation 
for the property so acquired or 
requisitioned and either fixes the 
amount of the compensation or 
specifies the principles on which, 
and the manner in which, the 
compensation is to be determined 
and given; and no such law shall be 
called in question in any court on the 
ground 
that 
the 
compensation 
provided by that law is not adequate. 
(2-A) Where a law does not provide 
for the transfer of the ownership or 
right to possession of any property to 
the State or to a corporation owned 
or controlled by the State, it shall not 
be 
deemed 
to 
provide 
for 
the 
compulsory 
acquisition 
or 
requisitioning 
of 
property, 
notwithstanding that it deprives any 
person of his property.” 
 

31 
 
7. It would be noticed that Article 31-
A(1)(a) mentions four categories; first 
acquisition by the State of an estate; 
second, acquisition by the State of rights 
in an estate; third, the extinguishment of 
rights in an estate, and, fourthly, the 
modification of rights in an estate. These 
four categories are mentioned separately 
and are different. In the first two 
categories the State “acquires” either an 
estate or rights in an estate. In other 
words, there is a transference of an estate 
or the rights in an estate to the State. 
When there is a transference of an estate 
to the State, it could be said that all the 
rights of the holder of the estate have been 
extinguished. But if the result in the case 
of the extinguishment is the transference 
of all the rights in an estate to the State, it 
would properly fall within the expression 
“acquisition by the State of an estate”. 
Similarly, in the case of an acquisition by 
the State of a right in an estate it could 
also be said that the rights of the owner 
have been modified since one of the rights 
of the owner has been acquired. 
 
8. It seems to us that there is this 
essential difference between “acquisition 
by the State” on the one hand and 
“modification or extinguishment of rights” 

32 
 
on the other that in the first case the 
beneficiary is the State while in the latter 
case the beneficiary of the modification or 
the extinguishment is not the State. For 
example, suppose the State is the landlord 
of an estate and there is a lease of that 
property, and a law provides for the 
extinguishment of leases held in an estate. 
In 
one 
sense 
it 
would 
be 
an 
extinguishment of the rights of a lessee, 
but it would properly fall under the 
category of acquisition by the State 
because 
the 
beneficiary 
of 
the 
extinguishment would be the State. 
 
9. Coming now to the second proviso to 
Article 31-A, it would be noticed that only 
one category is mentioned in the proviso, 
the category being “acquisition by the 
State of an estate”. It means that the law 
must make a provision for the acquisition 
by the State of an estate. But what is the 
true 
meaning 
of 
the 
expression 
“acquisition by the State of an estate”. In 
the context of Article 31-A, the expression 
“acquisition by the State of an estate” in 
the second proviso to Article 31-A(1) must 
have the same meaning as it has in clause 
(1)(a) to Article 31-A. It is urged on behalf 
of the respondents before us that the 
expression “acquisition by the State of any 

33 
 
estate” in Article 31-A(1)(a) has the same 
meaning as it has in Article 31(2-A). In 
other words, it is urged that the expression 
“acquisition by the State of any estate” 
means transfer of the ownership or right 
to possession of an estate to the State. Mr. 
Iyengar on the other hand urges that the 
expression “acquisition by the State” has a 
very wide meaning and it would bear the 
same meaning as was given by this Court 
in State of West Bengal v. Subodh Gopal 
Bose [(1964) 
SCR 
587] 
, Dwarkadas 
Shrinivas of Bombay v. Sholapur Spinning 
& Weaving Co. Ltd. [(1953) 2 SCC 791 : 
(1954) SCR 674] Saghir Ahmad v. State of 
U.P. [(1955) 1 SCR 707] and Bombay 
Dyeing and Manufacturing Co. Ltd. v. State 
of Bombay [(1958) SCR 1122] . In these 
cases this Court had given a wide meaning 
to the word “acquisition”. In Dwarkadas 
Shrinivas of Bombay v. Sholapur Spinning 
& Weaving Co. Ltd. [(1953) 2 SCC 791 : 
(1954) SCR 674] Mahajan, J., observed at 
p. 704 as follows: 
“The word ‘acquisition’ has quite a 
wide concept, meaning the procuring of 
property or the taking of it permanently 
or temporarily. It does not necessarily 
imply the acquisition of legal title by the 
State in the property taken possession 
of.” 

34 
 
He further observed at p. 705: 
“I prefer to follow the view of the 
majority of the Court, because it seems 
to me that it is more in consonance with 
juridical principle that possession after 
all is nine-tenths of ownership, and 
once 
possession 
is 
taken 
away, 
practically everything is taken away, 
and that in construing the Constitution 
it is the substance and the practical 
result of the act of the State that should 
be considered rather than its purely 
legal aspect.” 
Bose, J., observed at p. 734 as follows: 
“In my opinion, the possession and 
acquisition referred to in clause (2) 
mean the sort of ‘possession’ and 
‘acquisition’ 
that 
amounts 
to 
‘deprivation’ within the meaning of 
clause (1). No hard and fast rule can be 
laid down. Each case must depend on 
its own facts. But if there is substantial 
deprivation, then clause (2) is, in my 
judgment, attracted. By substantial 
deprivation 
I 
mean 
the 
sort 
of 
deprivation that substantially robs a 
man of those attributes of enjoyment 
which normally accompany rights to, or 
an interest in, property. The form is 

35 
 
unessential. It is the substance that we 
must seek.” 
 
10. Let us now see whether the other part 
of the second proviso throws any light on 
this question. It would be noticed that it 
refers to ceiling limits. It is well known that 
under various laws dealing with land 
reforms, no person apart from certain 
exceptions can hold land beyond a ceiling 
fixed under the law. Secondly, the proviso 
says that not only the land exempted from 
acquisition should be within the ceiling 
limit but it also must be under personal 
cultivation. The underlying idea of this 
proviso seems to be that a person who is 
cultivating land personally, which is his 
source of livelihood, should not be 
deprived of that land under any law 
protected by Article 31-A unless at least 
compensation at the market rate is given. 
In various States most of the persons have 
already been deprived of land beyond the 
ceiling limit on compensation which was 
less than the market value. It seems to us 
that in the light of all the considerations 
mentioned above the words “acquisition 
by the State” in the second proviso do not 
have a technical meaning, as contended 
by the learned counsel for the respondent. 
If the State has in substance acquired all 

36 
 
the rights in the land for its own purposes, 
even if the title remains with the owner, it 
cannot be said that it is not acquisition 
within the second proviso to Article 31-A. 
 
11. But the question still remains whether 
even if a wider meaning is given to the 
word “acquisition” what has been done by 
the scheme and the Act is acquisition or 
not within the meaning of the second 
proviso. In other words, does the scheme 
only modify rights or does it amount to 
acquisition of land? The scheme is not part 
of the record, but it appears that 89B-18B-
11B (Pukhta) of land was owned by the 
Gram Panchayat prior to consolidation, 
which was used for common purposes. 
Some further area was reserved for 
common 
purposes 
as 
khals, 
paths, 
khurrahs, panchayat ghars and schools 
etc. 
after 
applying 
cut 
upon 
the 
rightholders on pro-rata basis. It does not 
appear that any land, apart from what was 
already owned by the Panchayat, was 
reserved for providing income to the 
Panchayat. Therefore, in this case we are 
not 
concerned 
with 
the 
validity 
of 
acquisition for such a purpose.” 
 

37 
 
28. A perusal of the aforesaid paragraphs would reveal that in 
paragraph 6, this Court reproduced the provisions of Article 31-
A, as amended.   
29. In paragraph 7, this Court carved out 4 categories covered 
by Article 31-A as under: 
(i) 
acquisition by the State of an estate; 
(ii) 
acquisition by the State of rights in an estate; 
(iii) the extinguishment of rights in an estate; and  
(iv) 
the modification of rights in an estate.   
30. Analyzing the said provision, the Constitution Bench held 
that, in the first two categories, the State “acquires” either an 
estate or rights in an estate i.e., there is a transference of an 
estate or the rights in an estate to the State.  The Constitution 
Bench held that when there is a transference of an estate to the 
State, it could be said that all the rights of the holder of the estate 
have been extinguished.  It further held that, if the result in the 
case of the extinguishment is the transference of all the rights in 

38 
 
an estate to the State, it would properly fall within the expression 
“acquisition by the State of an estate”.  It further held that, in the 
case of an acquisition by the State of a right in an estate it could 
also be said that the rights of the owner have been modified since 
one of the rights of the owner has been acquired. 
31. In paragraph 8, the Constitution Bench carved out the 
difference between “acquisition by the State” on the one hand and 
“modification or extinguishment of rights” on the other. It held 
that in the first case, the beneficiary is the State while in the 
latter case the beneficiary of the modification or the 
extinguishment is not the State.  
32. In paragraph 9, this Court recorded that in the second 
proviso to Article 31-A, only one category is mentioned i.e., 
“acquisition by the State of an estate”.  It observed that the law 
must make a provision for the acquisition by the State of an 
estate. It went on to analyze the true meaning of the expression 
“acquisition by the State of an estate”.  It was sought to be urged 

39 
 
before this Court, that the expression “acquisition by the State” 
has a very wide meaning and it would bear the same meaning as 
was given by this Court in a catena of judgments.   
33. In paragraph 10, this Court recorded that the second 
proviso to Article 31-A refers to ceiling limits.  It was further 
observed that the proviso provides that, not only the land 
exempted from acquisition should be within the ceiling limit but 
it also must be under personal cultivation.  The Court held that 
the underlying idea of this proviso was that a person who is 
cultivating land personally, which is his source of livelihood, 
should not be deprived of that land under any law protected by 
Article 31-A unless at least compensation at the market rate is 
given.  The Court held that the words “acquisition by the State” 
in the second proviso cannot be given a technical meaning, as 
was contended on behalf of the State. It held that, if the State has 
in substance acquired all the rights in the land for its own 
purposes, even if the title remains with the owner, it cannot be 

40 
 
said that it is not acquisition within the second proviso to Article 
31-A. 
34. In paragraph 11, this Court recorded the facts in the said 
case.  It recorded that some of the lands were owned by the Gram 
Panchayat prior to consolidation, which was used for common 
purposes.  Some further area was reserved for common purposes 
as khals, paths, khurrahs, panchayat ghars and schools etc. 
after applying a cut upon the rightholders on pro-rata basis. It 
observed that apart from what was already owned by the 
Panchayat, no other land was reserved for providing income to 
the Panchayat.  As such, the Court was not concerned with the 
validity of acquisition for such a purpose.   
35. It will also be relevant to refer to the following paragraphs 
of the said judgment in Ajit Singh: 
“12. Rule 16 (ii) of the Punjab Holdings 
(Consolidation 
and 
Prevention 
of 
Fragmentation) Rules, 1949, provides: 
“In an estate or estates where during 
consolidation 
proceedings 
there 
is 

41 
 
no shamlat Deh land or such land is 
considered inadequate, land shall be 
reserved for the Village panchayat and 
for other common purposes, under 
Section 18(c) of the Act, out of the 
common pool of the village at a scale 
prescribed by the Government from 
time to time. Proprietary rights in 
respect of land so reserved (except the 
area 
reserved 
for 
the 
extension 
of abadi of 
proprietors 
and 
non-
proprietors) shall vest in the proprietary 
body of estate or estates concerned and 
it shall be entered in the column of 
ownership of record of rights as (Jumla 
Malkan wa Digar Haqdaran Arazi 
Hasab Rasad Raqba). The management 
of such land shall be done by the 
Panchayat of the estate or estates 
concerned on behalf of the village 
proprietary body and the panchayat 
shall have the right to utilise the income 
derived from the land so reserved for the 
common needs and benefits of the 
estate or estates concerned.” 
It will be noticed that the title still vests in 
the property body, the management of the 
land is done on behalf of the proprietary 
body, and the land is used for the common 
needs and benefits of the estate or estates 
concerned. In other words a fraction of 

42 
 
each proprietor's land is taken and formed 
into a common pool so that the whole may 
be used for the common needs and 
benefits of the estate, mentioned above. 
The proprietors naturally would also share 
in the benefits along with others. 
 
13. In Attar Singh v. State of U.P. [(1959) 
Supp 1 SCR 928 at p 938] Wanchoo J., 
speaking for the Court, said this of the 
similar proviso in a similar Act, namely, 
the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act 
(U.P. Act 5 of 1954) as amended by the 
U.P. Act 16 of 1957: 
“Thus the land which is taken over is 
a small bit, which sold by itself would 
hardly fetch anything. These small bits 
of land are collected from various 
tenureholders and consolidated in one 
place and added to the land which 
might be lying vacant so that it may be 
used for the purposes of Section 
14(1)(ee). A compact area is thus 
created and it is used for the purposes 
of the tenure-holders themselves and 
other villagers. Form CH-21 framed 
under Rule 41(a) shows the purposes to 
which this land would be applied, 
namely, (1) plantation of trees, (2) 
pasture land, (3) manure pits, (4) 

43 
 
threshing floor, (5) cremation ground, 
(6) graveyards, (7) primary or other 
school, 
(8) 
playground, 
(9) 
Panchayatghar, and (10) such other 
objects. These small bits of land thus 
acquired 
from 
tenure-holders 
are 
consolidated 
and 
used 
for 
these 
purposes, which are directly for the 
benefit of the tenure-holders. They are 
deprived of a small bit and in place of it 
they are given advantages in a much 
larger area of land made up of these 
small bits and also of vacant land.” 
In 
other 
words, 
a 
proprietor 
gets 
advantages which he could never have got 
apart from the scheme. For example, if he 
wanted a threshing floor, a manure pit, 
land for pasture, khal etc. he would not 
have been able to have them on the 
fraction of his land reserved for common 
purposes. 
 
14. Does such taking away of property 
then amount to acquisition by the State of 
any land? Who is the real beneficiary? Is it 
the Panchayat? It is clear that the title 
remains in the proprietary body and in the 
revenue records the land would be shown 
as belonging to “all the owners and other 
right holders in proportion to their areas”. 

44 
 
The Panchayat will manage it on behalf of 
the proprietors and use it for common 
purposes; it cannot use it for any other 
purpose. 
The 
proprietors 
enjoy 
the 
benefits derived from the use of land for 
common purposes. It is true that the non-
proprietors also derive benefit but their 
satisfaction and advancement enures in 
the end to the advantage of the proprietors 
in the form of a more efficient agricultural 
community. The Panchayat as such does 
not enjoy any benefit. On the facts of this 
case it seems to us that the beneficiary of 
the modification of rights is not the State, 
and therefore there is no acquisition by the 
State within the second proviso. 
 
15. In the context of the 2nd proviso, 
which is trying to preserve the rights of a 
person holding land under his personal 
cultivation, it is impossible to conceive 
that such adjustment of the rights of 
persons holding land under their personal 
cultivation in the interest of village 
economy was regarded as something to be 
compensated for in cash.” 
 
36. In paragraph 12, after reproducing Rule 16(ii) of the 
Consolidation Rules, this Court observed that the title still vests 

45 
 
in the proprietary body.  However, the management of the land is 
done on behalf of the proprietary body, and the land is used for 
the common needs and benefits of the estate or estates 
concerned.   It further held that a fraction of each proprietor's 
land is taken and formed into a common pool so that the whole 
area may be used for the common needs and benefits of the 
estate, mentioned above. It further held that the proprietors 
naturally would also share in the benefits along with others. 
37. In paragraph 14, this Court held that it was clear that the 
title remains in the proprietary body and in the revenue records 
the land would be shown as belonging to “all the owners and 
other right holders in proportion to their areas”.  This Court held 
that the Panchayat would manage it on behalf of the proprietors 
and use it for common purposes and that it cannot use it for any 
other purpose.  This Court held that the proprietors also enjoy 
the benefits derived from the use of land for common purposes. 
It observed that the non-proprietors also derive benefit but their 

46 
 
satisfaction and advancement enures in the end to the advantage 
of the proprietors in the form of a more efficient agricultural 
community. The Panchayat as such does not enjoy any benefit. 
This Court held, in light of the facts of the said case, that the 
beneficiary of the modification of rights was not the State, and 
therefore there was no acquisition by the State within the 
meaning of the second proviso. 
38. In paragraph 15, this Court, referring to second proviso, 
held that it is impossible to conceive that such adjustment of the 
rights of persons holding land under their personal cultivation in 
the interest of village economy was regarded as something to be 
compensated for in cash. 
39. It can thus be seen that in Ajit Singh, this Court was 
considering the portion of lands which was taken from the 
proprietors; formed into a common pool and used for common 
needs and benefits of the estate or estates concerned.  It was held 
that the said land could not be used for any other purpose.  It 

47 
 
has further affirmed that the proprietors also enjoy the benefits 
derived from the use of land for common purposes.   
40. It is further pertinent to note that in Ajit Singh, this Court 
held that the words “acquisition by the State” in the second 
proviso cannot be given a technical meaning.  It has been held 
that if the State has in substance acquired all the rights in the 
land for its own purposes, even if the title remains with the 
owner, it cannot be said that it is not acquisition within the ambit 
of the second proviso to Article 31-A. 
41. Justice M. Hidayatullah (as his Lordship then was) in his 
minority judgment disagreed with the majority view. He held that 
when the State acquires almost the entire bundle of rights, it is 
acquisition within the meaning of the second proviso and 
compensation at market rates must be given.   
42. The third judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court 
is in the case of Bhagat Ram, which would be the most relevant 
for the present purpose.    

48 
 
43. It will be relevant to note that judgments in both Ajit Singh 
and Bhagat Ram were delivered on the very same day. 
44. In the said case (i.e. Bhagat Ram), the Court was 
considering the question, as to whether the reservation of land 
for income of the Panchayat is acquisition of land by the State 
within the ambit of the second proviso to Article 31-A? 
45. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of 
the Constitution Bench of this Court in Bhagat Ram in the 
judgment delivered by Hon. S.M. Sikri, J (as his Lordship then 
was): 
“2. The first question that arises is 
whether the scheme insofar as it makes 
reservations of land for income of the 
Panchayat is hit by the second proviso to 
Article 31-A. The scheme reserves lands 
for phirni, paths, agricultural paths, 
manure pits, cremation grounds, etc., and 
also reserves an area of 100 kanals 2 
marlas (standard kanals) for income of the 
Panchayat. We have already held in Ajit 
Singh case [(1967) 2 SCR 143] that 
acquisition for the common purposes such 
as phirnis, paths, etc., is not acquisition 

49 
 
by the State within the second proviso to 
Article 31-A. But this does not dispose of 
the question whether the reservation of 
land for income of the Panchayat is 
acquisition of land by the state within the 
second proviso to Article 31-A. We held in 
that case that there was this essential 
difference between “acquisition by the 
State” on the one hand and “modification 
or extinguishment of rights” on the other 
that in the first case the beneficiary is the 
State while in the latter case the 
beneficiary of the modification or the 
extinguishment is not the State. Here it 
seems to us that the beneficiary is the 
Panchayat which falls within the definition 
of the word “State” under Article 12 of the 
Constitution. The income derived by the 
Panchayat is in no way different from its 
any other income. It is true that Section 
2(bb) 
of 
the 
East 
Punjab 
Holdings 
(Consolidation 
and 
Prevention 
of 
Fragmentation) 
Act, 
1948, 
defines 
“common purpose” to include the following 
purposes: 
“… 
providing 
income 
for 
the 
Panchayat of the village concerned for 
the benefit of the village community.” 
Therefore, the income can only be used for 
the benefit of the village community. But 
so is any other income of the Panchayat of 
a village to be used. The income is the 
income of the Panchayat and it would 

50 
 
defeat the whole object of the second 
proviso if we were to give any other 
construction. The Consolidation Officer 
could easily defeat the object of the second 
proviso to Article 31-A by reserving for the 
income of the Panchayat a major portion 
of the land belonging to a person holding 
land within the ceiling limit. Therefore, in 
our opinion, the reservation of 100 kanals 
2 marlas for the income of the Panchayat 
in the scheme is contrary to the second 
proviso and the scheme must be modified 
by the competent authority accordingly.” 
 
46. It can thus be seen that, this Court held that there was an 
essential difference between “acquisition by the State” on the one 
hand and “modification or extinguishment of rights” on the other 
hand.  It was held that in the first case, the beneficiary was the 
State while in the latter case, the beneficiary of the modification 
or the extinguishment was not the State.  This Court held that 
since the Panchayat would fall within the definition of the word 
“State” under Article 12 of the Constitution, if the acquisition is 
for the purposes of providing income to the Panchayat, it would 
defeat the whole object of the second proviso.  This Court held 

51 
 
that the Consolidation Officer could easily defeat the object of the 
second proviso to Article 31-A by reserving for the income of the 
Panchayat a major portion of the land belonging to a person 
holding land within the ceiling limit.  
47. The second argument which was advanced before this Court 
in Bhagat Ram was that acquisition had already taken place 
before the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964 
came into force and therefore the scheme was not hit by the 
second proviso to Article 31-A.  It was sought to be argued that 
the requirements as contemplated under Sections 23, 24 and 
21(2) of the Consolidation Act were already complete and as such, 
the acquisition had already taken place before the Constitution 
(Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964. 
48. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of 
this Court in the majority judgment in Bhagat Ram while 
rejecting the aforesaid submissions: 

52 
 
“4. It is clear from this affidavit that 
possession has not been transferred in 
pursuance of the repartition. The learned 
Counsel for the petitioners relies on this 
fact and says that in view of Section 23-A 
and Section 24 the “acquisition” does not 
take place till all the persons entitled to 
possession of holdings under the Act have 
entered into possession of the holdings. 
Sections 23-A and 24 read as follows: 
“23-A. As soon as a scheme comes 
into force, the management and control 
of all lands assigned or reserved for 
common purposes of the village under 
Section 18, shall vest in the Panchayat 
of that village which shall also be 
entitled to appropriate the income 
accruing therefrom for the benefit of the 
village community, and the rights and 
interest of the owners of such lands 
shall stand modified and extinguished 
accordingly. 
24. (1) As soon as the persons 
entitled to possession of holdings under 
this Act have entered into possession of 
the holdings respectively allotted to 
them, the scheme shall be deemed to 
have come into force and the possession 
of the allottees affected by the scheme 
of consolidation, or, as the case may be, 
by 
repartition, 
shall 
remain 

53 
 
undisturbed until a fresh scheme is 
brought into force or a change is 
ordered in pursuance of provisions of 
sub-section (2), (3) and (4) of Section 21 
or an order passed under Section 36 or 
42 of this Act. 
(2) A Consolidation Officer shall be 
competent to exercise all or any of the 
powers of a Revenue Officer under the 
Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887 (Act 17 
of 1887), for purposes of compliance 
with the provisions of sub-section (1).” 
 
5. It seems to us clear from these 
provisions 
that 
till 
possession 
has 
changed 
under 
Section 
24, 
the 
management and control does not vest in 
the Panchayat under Section 23-A. Not 
only does the management and control not 
vest but the rights of the holders are not 
modified or extinguished till persons have 
changed possession and entered into the 
possession of the holdings allotted to them 
under the scheme. Mr Gossain, the 
learned Counsel for the State, tried to 
meet this point by urging that by virtue of 
repartition under Section 21, the rights to 
possession of the new holdings were 
finalised and could be enforced. This may 
be so; but this cannot be equivalent to 

54 
 
“acquisition” within the second proviso to 
Article 31-A. 
 
6. In the result we hold that the scheme is 
hit by the second proviso to Article 31 A 
insofar as it reserves 100 kanals 2 marlas 
for the income of the Panchayat. We direct 
the State to modify the scheme to bring it 
into accord with the second proviso as 
interpreted by us, proceed according to 
law. There would be an order as to costs.” 
 
49. It can thus clearly be seen that the Constitution Bench of 
this Court in Bhagat Ram held that, upon reading of Sections 
23-A and 24 of the Consolidation Act it was clear that, till 
possession has changed under Section 24, the management and 
control does not vest in the Panchayat under Section 23-A of the 
Consolidation Act. It further held that not only does the 
management and control not vest but the rights of the holders 
are not modified or extinguished till persons have changed 
possession and entered into the possession of the holdings 
allotted to them under the scheme.  Though the counsel for the 

55 
 
State tried to urge that, by virtue of repartition under Section 21, 
the rights to possession of the new holdings were finalized and 
could be enforced, this Court held that this cannot be equivalent 
to “acquisition” within the second proviso to Article 31-A of the 
Constitution of India.    
50. The Full Bench of the High Court in the case of Jai Singh 
II  has drawn a fine distinction between the land reserved for 
common purposes under Section 18(c) of the Consolidation Act 
which might become part and parcel of a scheme framed under 
Section 14, for the areas reserved for common purposes, though 
they have actually not been put to any common use and may be 
put to common use in a later point of time on one hand and the 
lands which might have been contributed by the proprietors on 
pro-rata basis but have not been reserved or earmarked for 
common purposes in the scheme.  It will be relevant to refer to 
the following observations of the Full Bench of the High Court: 

56 
 
“The land reserved for common purposes 
under Section 18(c), which might become 
part and parcel of a scheme framed under 
Section 14, for the areas reserved for 
common 
purposes, 
vests 
with 
the  
Government or Gram Panchayat, as the 
case may be, and the proprietors are left 
with no right or interest in such lands 
meant for common purposes under the 
scheme.  There is nothing at all mentioned 
either in the Act or the rules or the 
scheme, that came to be framed, that the 
proprietors will lose right only with regard 
to land which was actually put to any use 
and not the land which may be put to 
common use later in point of time.  In none 
of the sections or Rules, which have been 
referred to by us in the earlier part of 
scheme envisages only such lands which 
have been utilized.  That apart, in all the 
relevant sections and the rules, words 
mentioned are ‘reserved or assigned’.  
Reference in this connection may be made 
to sub-section (3) of Section 18 and 
Section 23-A.  The provisions of the 
statute, as referred to above, would, thus, 
further fortify that reference is to land 
reserved or assigned for common use, 
whether utilized or not. 
 
*** 
*** 
*** 
 

57 
 
The lands which, however, might have 
been contributed by the proprietors on 
pro-rata basis, but have not been reserved 
or earmarked for common purposes in a 
scheme, known as Bachat land, it is 
equally true, would not vest either with the 
State or the Gram Panchayat and instead 
continue to be owned by the proprietors of 
the village in the same proportion in which 
they contribute the land owned by them.  
The Bachat land, which is not used for 
common purposes under the scheme, in 
view of provisions contained in Section 22 
of the Act of 1948, is recorded as Jumla 
Mustarka Malkan Wa Digar Haqdaran 
Hasab Rasad Arazi Khewat but the 
significant differences is that in the 
column of ownership proprietors are 
shown in possession in contrast to the 
land which vests with the Gram Panchayat 
which is shown as being used for some or 
the other common purposes as per the 
scheme.   
 
 
 
We might have gone into this issue in 
all its details but in as much as the point 
in issue is not res-integra and in fact 
stands clinched by string of judicial 
pronouncements of this Court as well as 
Hon’ble Supreme Court, there is no 
necessity at all to interpret the provisions 
of the Act and the rules any further on this 
issue. 

58 
 
 
 
 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in 
Bhagat Ram and ors. Vs. State of Punjab 
and ors. AIR 1967 Supreme Court 927, 
dealt with reservation of certain area in the 
consolidation scheme for income of the 
Panchayat.  Brief facts of the case 
aforesaid would reveal that a scheme 
made in respect of consolidation of village 
Dolike Sunderpur was questioned on the 
ground that in as much as it makes 
reservation of land for income of the Gram 
Panchayat, it is hit by second proviso to 
Article 31-A of the Constitution of India.   
The scheme in question reserved lands for 
phirni, paths, agricultural paths, manure 
pits, cremation grounds etc. and also 
reserved an area of 100 kanals 2 marlas 
(standard kanals) for income of the 
Panchayat.  It was held as under: 
 
“The income derived by the Panchayat is 
in no way different from its any other 
income. It is true that Section 2(bb) of the 
East Punjab Holdings (Consolidation and 
Prevention of Fragmentation) Act, 1948, 
defines “common purpose” to include the 
following purposes: 
“… 
providing 
income 
for 
the 
Panchayat of the village concerned for 
the benefit of the village community.” 
 

59 
 
Therefore, the income can only be used for 
the benefit of the village community. But 
so is any other income of the Panchayat of 
a village to be used. The income is the 
income of the Panchayat and it would 
defeat the whole object of the second 
proviso if we were to give any other 
construction. The Consolidation Officer 
could easily defeat the object of the second 
proviso to Article 31-A by reserving for the 
income of the Panchayat a major portion 
of the land belonging to a person holding 
land within the ceiling limit. Therefore, in 
our opinion, the reservation of 100 kanals 
2 marlas for the income of the Panchayat 
in the scheme is contrary to the second 
proviso and the scheme must be modified 
by the competent authority accordingly.” 
 
The ratio of the judgment aforesaid 
would clearly suggest that it is the land 
reserved for common purposes under the 
scheme which would be saved, which, 
otherwise, would be hit by second proviso 
to Article 31-A of the Constitution of India.  
Surely, if the land, which has not been 
reserved for common purposes under the 
scheme and is Bachat or surplus land, i.e., 
the one which is still left out after 
providing the land in scheme for common 
purposes, if it is to vest with the State or 
Gram Panchayat, the same would be 
nothing but compulsory acquisition within 

60 
 
the ceiling limit of an individual without 
payment of compensation and would 
offend second proviso to Article 31-A of the 
Constitution of India.” 
 
51. As has been observed earlier, the Constitution Bench of this 
Court in Bhagat Ram, in no uncertain terms, held that till 
possession has changed under Section 24 of the Consolidation 
Act, the management and control does not vest in the Panchayat 
under Section 23-A of the said Act.  It further held that not only 
does the management and control not vest but the rights of the 
holders are not modified or extinguished till persons have 
changed possession and entered into the possession of the 
holdings allotted to them under the scheme.  Construing this, the 
Full Bench of the High Court in Jai Singh II held that, if the land 
which has not been reserved for common purposes under the 
scheme and is Bachat or surplus land, i.e., the land which is still 
left out after providing the land under the scheme for common 
purposes; if it is to vest with the State or Gram Panchayat, the 

61 
 
same would be nothing but compulsory acquisition of land within 
the ceiling limit of an individual without payment of 
compensation and would offend the second proviso to Article 31-
A of the Constitution of India. 
52. It can thus be seen that the judgment of the Full Bench of 
the High Court in Jai Singh II is based basically on the 
Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Bhagat 
Ram, which clearly held that, until possession has changed 
under Section 24, the management and control does not vest in 
the Panchayat under Section 23-A of the Consolidation Act.  It 
further held that, not only does the management and control not 
vest but the rights of the holders are not modified or extinguished 
till persons have changed possession and entered into the 
possession of the holdings allotted to them under the scheme. 
53. In the JUR, except a cursory reference to Bhagat Ram in 
paragraph 11, this Court held that there was no dispute about 
the said proposition in the present appeals.   

62 
 
54. With great respect, we may state that when the judgment of 
the Full Bench of the High Court rested on the law laid down by 
the Constitution Bench of this Court in Bhagat Ram, the least 
that was expected of this Court in the JUR was to explain as to 
why the Full Bench of the High Court was wrong in relying on 
Bhagat Ram.  However, leave aside the cursory reference in the 
JUR in paragraph 11, there is no reference in the entire judgment 
to Bhagat Ram.  Though this Court in the JUR has referred to 
the Constitution Bench judgments in Ranjit Singh and Ajit 
Singh, there is not even a whisper about the Constitution Bench 
judgment in Bhagat Ram, except in paragraph 11, though it had 
a direct bearing on the issue in question.   
55. The Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in Bhagat 
Ram in unequivocal terms held that the management and control 
does not vest in the Panchayat under Section 23-A of the 
Consolidation Act till possession has changed under Section 24 
of the said Act.  It further held that, the rights of the holders are 

63 
 
not modified or extinguished till persons have changed 
possession and entered into the possession of the holdings 
allotted to them under the scheme. In the said case, the specific 
contention raised by the State that the requirements as 
contemplated under Sections 23, 24 and 21(2) of the 
Consolidation Act were already complete and as such, the 
acquisition had already taken place before the Constitution 
(Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964, was specifically rejected by 
this Court.  Needless to state that, all these steps are subsequent 
to the assignment under Section 18(c) of the Consolidation Act.  
56. In the light of these findings of the Constitution Bench of 
this Court in Bhagat Ram, the finding of this Court in the JUR 
that the vesting in the Panchayat is complete on mere assignment 
under Section 18(c) of the Consolidation Act is totally contrary to 
the findings recorded in paragraph 5 of the Constitution Bench 
judgment in Bhagat Ram.   

64 
 
57. As already discussed herein above, except the cursory 
reference in paragraph 11 in the JUR, this Court has not even 
referred to the ratio laid down by the Constitution Bench of this 
Court in paragraph 5 in Bhagat Ram.  No law is required to state 
that a judgment of the Constitution Bench would be binding on 
the Benches of a lesser strength.   Bhagat Ram has been decided 
by a strength of Five Learned Judges, this Court having a bench 
strength of two Learned Judges could not have ignored the law 
laid down by the Constitution Bench in paragraph 5 in Bhagat 
Ram.   
58. We find that ignoring the law laid down by the Constitution 
Bench of this Court in Bhagat Ram and taking a view totally 
contrary to the same itself would amount to a material error, 
manifest on the face of the order.  Ignoring the judgment of the 
Constitution Bench, in our view, would undermine its 
soundness.  The review could have been allowed on this short 
ground alone.  However, the matter does not rest at that.   

65 
 
 
 
VI. CONSIDERATION OF THE JUDGMENT OF THE FULL 
BENCH OF THE HIGH COURT IN JAI SINGH II 
REFERRING ITS EARLIER JUDGMENT IN GURJANT 
SINGH AND SEVERAL OTHER JUDGMENTS 
 
59. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of 
the Full Bench of the High Court in Jai Singh II: 
“Division Bench of this Court, in which 
one of us (V.K. Bali, J.) was a member, 
after referring to case law on the subject 
from 1967 to 1997 in Bhagat Ram vs. 
State of Punjab, (1967) 69, PLR, 287, Des 
Raj vs. Gram sabha of Village Ladhot, 
1981 PLJ, 300, Chhajju Ram vs. The Joint 
Director, Panchayats, (1986-1) 89, PLR, 
586, Gram Panchayat, Gunia Majri vs. 
Director Consolidation of Holdings, (1991-
1) 99 PLR, 342, Gram Panchayat Sahara 
(formerly Dhuma) vs. Baldev Singh, 1977 
PLJ, 276, Baj Singh vs. State of Punjab 
(1992-1) 101 RLR, 10, Kala Singh vs. 
Commissioner, Hisar Division, 1984 PLJ, 
169, Joginder Singh vs. The Director 
Consolidation of Holdings (1997-2) 116 
PLR 116, Bhagwan Singh vs. The Director 
Consolidation of Holdings, Punjab, (1997-
2) 116 PLR, 472 and Gram Panchayat, 

66 
 
Village Bhedpura vs. The Additional 
Director, Consolidation, (1997-1) 115 PLR, 
391, held that the Bachat land, i.e., land 
which remains unutilized after utilizing 
the land for the common purposes so 
provided under the consolidation scheme 
vests with the proprietors and not with the 
Gram Panchayat”.  It was further held that 
“the unutilized land after utilizing the land 
earmarked for the common purposes, has 
to 
be 
redistributed 
amongst 
the 
proprietors according to the share in 
which they had contributed the land 
belonging to them for common purposes”.  
There is no need to give facts of the judicial 
precedents relied upon in Gurjant Singh’s 
case (supra) as the same stand mentioned 
already therein and reiteration thereof 
would necessarily burden this judgment. 
 
 
The decision of Division Bench of this 
Court in Gurjant Singh’s case (supra) was 
tested, at the instance of the State of 
Punjab, in Civil Appeal No. 5709-5714 of 
2001.  Only, the general directions given 
in the judgment recorded in Gurjant 
Singh’s case (supra) for distribution of 
land to the proprietors were set aside and 
that too on the concession of learned 
counsel, 
who 
represented 
the 
Respondents in the case aforesaid.  Order 
passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court on 
August 27, 2001, reads thus:- 
 

67 
 
“Leave granted. 
Mr. Harsh N. Salve, learned Solicitor 
General, submitted that the State of 
Punjab takes objection only in regard 
to the following observations made in 
the impugned judgment:- 
“This exercise, it appears, has 
not been done throughout the 
State of Punjab and Haryana 
and villages forming part of 
Union Territory, Chandigarh, 
even though there is a specific 
provision for doing that. 
This 
exercise 
be 
done 
as 
expeditiously as possible and 
preferably within six months 
proceedings 
for 
repartition 
must commence.  Liberty to 
apply in the event of non-
compliance 
of 
directions 
referred to above.” 
 
Learned counsel for the Respondent 
submits that they had no objection in 
deleting the aforesaid portions from 
the impugned judgment.  We allow 
these appeals to be extent of deleting 
of the above said passage from the 
impugned judgment. 
 
These 
appeals 
are 
disposed 
of 
accordingly.” 

68 
 
 
60. It is thus clear that the Full Bench of the High Court has 
referred to the judgment of the Division Bench of the said Court 
in the case of Gurjant Singh. 
61. It is pertinent to note that in the case of Gurjant Singh, the 
Division Bench of the High Court had noted a series of judgments 
delivered by the said High Court relying on the law laid down by 
the Constitution Bench of this Court in Bhagat Ram.  All these 
decisions had held that the land which remains unutilized after 
utilizing the land for the common purposes so provided under the 
consolidation scheme vests with the proprietors and not with the 
Gram Panchayat.  It was further held that the unutilized land 
i.e., the Bachat land, left after utilizing the land earmarked for 
the common purposes, has to be redistributed amongst the 
proprietors according to the share in which they had contributed 
the land belonging to them for common purposes.   

69 
 
62. It is to be noted that the JUR referred to the judgment in 
the case of Gurjant Singh and the order passed by this Court in 
Civil Appeal Nos.5709-5714 of 2001, wherein the State had 
objected only with regard to the observations wherein the time 
limit was provided for effecting redistribution of the Bachat land 
amongst the proprietors according to their share.   
63. It is thus clear that the State itself did not press the appeals 
with regard to the directions for redistribution of the Bachat land 
amongst the proprietors according to their share.  Its only 
grievance was with regard to the directions to do it within a 
specified period of time.  However, this Court in the JUR held 
that the doctrine of merger would not be applicable.  However, 
we do not wish to go into the correctness of that finding since we 
are sitting in review jurisdiction.   
64. The JUR referred to various judgments of the Punjab & 
Haryana High Court which took the view that the Bachat lands 
are entitled for redistribution.  The JUR cursorily observed in 

70 
 
paragraph 84 that the findings recorded by the different Benches 
of the High Court are clearly erroneous and not sustainable.  
When a catena of judgments were delivered by the various 
Benches of the High court relying on the judgment of the 
Constitution Bench of this Court in Bhagat Ram, the least that 
was expected in the JUR was a reasoning as to how the findings 
of the various Benches of the High Court including in Gurjant 
Singh, relying on the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this 
Court in Bhagat Ram, are erroneous. 
65. In our considered view, the non-consideration of the 
reasoning given by the Full Bench of the High Court in Jai Singh 
II,  which findings were given by relying on the judgment of the 
Constitution Bench of this Court in Bhagat Ram, and not 
showing as to how the findings therein were erroneous in law, 
would also amount to an error, apparent on the face of the record.   
VII. CONSIDERATION OF THE JUDGMENT OF THE FULL 
BENCH OF THE HIGH COURT IN JAI SINGH II WITH 
REGARD TO DOCTRINE OF STARE DECISIS 

71 
 
 
66. Thirdly, the Full Bench of the High Court in Jai Singh II  
in the alternative held that, a consistent view has been taken in 
more than 100 judgments by the Punjab & Haryana High Court 
and applying the doctrine of stare decisis, such a view cannot be 
upset.  While holding so, the Full Bench of the High Court has 
relied on various judgments of this Court as well as the various 
High Courts.  However, in the JUR, there is not even a reference 
to the reasoning given by the Full Bench of the High Court with 
regard to the applicability of the doctrine of stare decisis.  There 
are catena of judgments of this Court explaining the doctrine of 
stare decisis and its application.  However, we do not propose to 
go into them since the scope in review jurisdiction is limited.  We 
do not wish to go into the question as to whether the doctrine of 
stare decisis would be applicable in the facts of the present case 
or not.  However, the least that the JUR was expected was to 
consider the reasoning given by the Full Bench of the High Court 
and to consider as to how the said reasoning was not sustainable 

72 
 
in law.  However, the JUR does not even refer to the said 
discussion in its judgment.   
67. In our considered view, the non-consideration of the 
reasoning given by the Full Bench of the High Court in Jai Singh 
II, that on account of more than 100 decisions rendered by 
various Benches of the High Court, the doctrine of stare decisis 
is applicable, would also be an error apparent on the face of the 
record.   
VIII. CONCLUSION 
68. In that view of the matter, we are of the considered view that 
the JUR needs to be recalled on the aforesaid grounds mentioned 
by us.   
69. In the result, we pass the following order: 
(i) 
The Review Petition is allowed. 
(ii) 
The judgment and order of this Court dated 7th April 
2022 in Civil Appeal No. 6990 of 2014 is recalled and 
the appeal is restored to file. 

73 
 
 
(iii) The appeal is directed to be listed for hearing 
peremptorily on 7th August 2024 at Serial No.1.  
 
 
 
 
 
…….........................J.        
[B.R. GAVAI] 
 
 
 
…….........................J.        
[SANDEEP MEHTA] 
NEW DELHI; 
MAY 16, 2024