2024 INSC 429
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
 
 
REVIEW PETITION (C) No. 1025 of 2019 
IN 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6567 OF 2014 
  
 
 
LEHNA SINGH (D) BY LRS.   
 
      …. PETITIONER  
 
 
VERSUS  
 
 
GURNAM SINGH (D) BY LRS. & ORS.       ...RESPONDENTS 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
 
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J. 
 
 
  
The petitioner has preferred this Review Petition seeking 
review of the Order dated 13.03.2019 passed in Civil Appeal 
No. 6567 of 2014 wherein the present petitioner was the 
respondent.  In the Order under review, the Civil Appeal was 
allowed, and the judgment and decree passed by the High 
Court of Punjab and Haryana on 27.11.2007 in Civil Regular 
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2024.05.16
15:26:15 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Second Appeal No. 2191 of 1985 was set aside and the 
judgment and decree passed by the District Judge, Sangrur, on 
06.06.1985 in Civil Appeal No. 27 of 1983 has been restored.  
 
2. 
In the judgment under review, this Court held that the 
judgment and decree passed by the Punjab and Haryana High 
Court is beyond the scope and ambit of Section 100 of Code of 
Civil Procedure, 19081 on the ground that in exercise of such 
power, the High Court could not have reappreciated the entire 
evidence on record to unsettle the finding of facts recorded by 
the First Appellate Court, by substituting its own opinion for 
that of the First Appellate Court.  
 
3. 
Basing the judgment rendered in Pankajakshi (Dead) 
Through Legal Representatives & Ors. v. Chandrika & 
Ors.2, this Court directed that the review petition be listed 
before the open Court for hearing and subsequently on 
13.08.2019 notices were issued to the opposite parties, at the 
same time, directing the parties to maintain status quo.  
 
 
1. ‘CPC’ 
2.  (2016) 6 SCC 157 

3 
 
4. 
In substance, the main ground for review of the judgment 
is that the Constitution Bench of this Court in Pankajakshi 
(supra) have uphold the validity of Section 41 of Punjab Courts 
Act, 19183, overruling this Court’s earlier judgment in case of 
Kulwant Kaur & Ors. v. Gurdial Singh Maan (Dead) By 
Lrs. & Ors.4 holding that since Section 97(1) of the Code of 
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976 has no application to 
Section 41 of the Punjab Act, therefore, Section 41 of the 
Punjab Act would necessarily continue as a law in force and the 
second appeal before the High Court has to be heard within the 
parameters of Section 41 of the Punjab Act, and not under 
Section 100 CPC.  
 
5. 
Shri P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior counsel appearing for 
the petitioner would also refer to the subsequent judgments of 
this Court in Randhir Kaur v. Prithvi Pal Singh & Ors.5 and 
Gurbachan Sing (Dead) Through Lrs. v. Gurcharan Singh 
(Dead) Through Lrs. & Ors.6 wherein this Court relying upon 
Pankajakshi (supra) held that the scope of interference within 
 
3. ‘Punjab Act’ 
4. (2001) 4 SCC 262 
5. (2019) 17 SCC 71 
6. (2023) SCC Online SC 875 

4 
 
the jurisdiction of the Punjab and Haryana High Court would be 
the same as under Section 100 of CPC as it existed prior to the 
1976 amendment. The provisions of Section 41 of the Punjab 
Act and of Section 100 CPC, before its amendment in 1976, are 
in pari materia. Therefore, the questions of law are not required 
to be framed in second appeal before Punjab and Haryana High 
Court whose jurisdiction in second appeal is circumscribed by 
provision of Section 41 of the Punjab Act.  
 
6. 
Shri Patwalia would submit that this Court has set aside 
the Judgment of High Court terming it as beyond the power 
under Section 100 CPC which is not legally correct, in view of 
the law laid down in Pankajakshi (supra). It is further argued 
that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the petitioner 
was entitled to succeed to the property by way of natural 
succession and the finding of the High Court that the Will relied 
upon by the respondents has not been proved as it is 
surrounded by suspicious circumstances ought not to have 
been interfered by this Court. It is argued that a finding of fact 
erroneously or perversely recorded by the First Appellate Court 
can always be interfered by the High Court. Hence, there is no 

5 
 
infirmity in the Judgment rendered by the High Court and the 
same ought not to have been interfered by this Court while 
deciding the Civil Appeal No. 6567 of 2014 on an erroneous 
ground that the High Court has travelled beyond its jurisdiction 
and power under Section 100 CPC as it stands of the 1976 
amendment.  
 
7. 
Shri Manoj Swarup, learned senior counsel appearing for 
the respondents would not dispute the legal position as has 
been settled by this Court in the matter of Pankajakshi 
(supra).  However, he would submit that even in the case when 
the High Court would exercise the power under Section 41 of 
the Punjab Act, the finding of fact recorded by the First 
Appellate Court cannot be interfered on re-appreciation of 
evidence to substitute its own decision for that of the First 
Appellate Court.  According to him, the finding recorded by the 
First Appellate Court was borne out from the record. Therefore, 
the High Court erred in interfering with the said finding, and 
this Court rightly set aside the Judgment and decree of the 
High Court while deciding the Civil Appeal. According to Shri 
Swarup, the respondents had proved the Will, which was a 

6 
 
registered one, in accordance with law and that there were no 
suspicious circumstances accompanying the Will.  
8. 
When this Court rendered the judgment under review in 
Civil Appeal No. 6567 of 2014, the only ground which weighed 
with the Court was that the High Court exercised the power 
under Section 100 CPC erroneously and decided the second 
appeal by re-appreciating the evidence without even framing a 
substantial question of law.   
 
9. 
The second appeal in Punjab and Haryana High Court is 
heard under Section 41 of the Punjab Act, which is reproduced 
hereunder for ready reference: -  
“41. Second Appeals – (1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court 
from every decree passed in appeal by any court subordinate to 
the High Court on any of the following grounds, namely:  
 
(a) the decision being contrary to law or to some custom 
or usage having the force of law: 
 
(b) the decision having failed to determine some 
material issue of law or custom or usage having the 
force of law: 
 
(c) a substantial error or defect in the procedure 
provided by the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 (V of 
1908), or by any other law for the time being in force 
which may possibly have produced error or defect in 
the decision of the case upon the merits;  
 
[Explanation – A question relating to the existence or validity of 
a custom or usage shall be deemed to be a question of law 
within the meaning of this section:]  
 
(2) An appeal may lie under this section from an appellate decree 
passed ex parte.” 

7 
 
10. The provision contained in Section 41 of the Punjab Act, 
as reproduced above, does not mandate framing of a 
substantial question of law for entertaining the second appeal.  
Therefore, a second appeal under Section 41 of Punjab Act can 
be entertained by the Punjab and Haryana High Court even 
without framing a substantial question of law.  
 
11. It would be appropriate to refer to the provision contained 
in Section 41 of the Punjab Act in juxtaposition to Section 100 
CPC, before its amendment in 1976, to appreciate and 
understand the jurisdiction of Punjab and Haryana High Court 
in second appeal. The provisions are reproduced hereunder for 
ready reference: - 
“Section 41 of the Punjab Act 
Section 100 CPC 
41. Second appeals.—(1) An appeal 
shall lie to the High Court from 
every decree passed in appeal by 
any court subordinate to the High 
Court on any of the following 
grounds, namely: 
100. Second appeal.—(1) Save 
where 
otherwise 
expressly 
provided in the body of this Code 
or by any other law for the time 
being in force, an appeal shall lie 
to the High Court from every 
decree passed in appeal by any 
court 
subordinate 
to 
a 
High 
Court, on any of the following 
grounds, namely: 
(a) the decision being contrary to 
law or to some custom or usage 
having the force of law; 
(a) the decision being contrary to 
law or to some usage having the 
force of law; 
(b) the decision having failed to 
determine some material issue of 
law or custom or usage having the 
force of law; 
(b) the decision having failed to 
determine some material issue of 
law or usage having the force of 
law; 
(c) a substantial error or defect in 
the procedure provided by the Code 
(c) a substantial error or defect in 
the procedure provided by this 

8 
 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 
1908), or by any other law for the 
time being in force which may 
possibly have produced error or 
defect in the decision of the case 
upon the merits; 
Code or by any other law for the 
time being in force, which may 
possibly have produced error or 
defect in the decision of the case 
upon the merits. 
*               *               *                
  
(2) An appeal may lie under this 
section from an appellate decree 
passed ex parte. 
(2) An appeal may lie under this 
section from an appellate decree 
passed ex parte.” 
 
 
 
12. In Pankajakshi (supra), the Constitution Bench of this 
Court has held that substantial question of law may not be 
required to be framed in a second appeal before Punjab and 
Haryana High Court.  However, the finding of fact recorded, 
cannot be interfered with even in terms of Section 41 of Punjab 
Act.  The law laid down by this Court in Pankajakshi (supra) 
has been relied upon in Randhir Kaur (supra) to hold thus in 
paragraphs 10 to 12: - 
“10. The effect of the Constitution Bench judgment in Pankajakshi is 
that in second appeal, the scope of interference within the Punjab 
and Haryana High Court would be the same as the Code of Civil 
Procedure existed prior to the 1976 Amendment. The provisions of 
Section 41 of the Punjab Act and of Section 100 CPC are in pari 
materia. 
 
11. Some of the judgments of this Court dealing with the scope of 
the old Section 100 are required to be discussed. In a judgment 
in Deity Pattabhiramaswamy v. S. Hanymayya [AIR 1959 SC 57] —
 three Judges, while examining the scope of Section 100 CPC, held 
as under : (AIR p. 59, para 13) 
 
“13. The finding on the title was arrived at by the learned 
District Judge not on the basis of any document of title but on 
a consideration of relevant documentary and oral evidence 
adduced by the parties. The learned Judge, therefore, in our 

9 
 
opinion, clearly exceeded his jurisdiction in setting aside the 
said finding. The provisions of Section 100 are clear and 
unambiguous. As early as in 1891, the Judicial Committee 
in Durga Choudhrain v. Jawahir Singh Choudhri [1890 SCC 
OnLine PC 10 : (1889-90) 17 IA 122] stated thus : (SCC 
OnLine PC) 
‘There is no jurisdiction to entertain a second appeal on the 
ground of an erroneous finding of fact, however gross or 
inexcusable the error may seem to be.’ 
The principle laid down in this decision has been followed in 
innumerable cases by the Privy Council as well as by different 
High Courts in this country. Again the Judicial Committee 
in Midnapur Zamindary Co. Ltd. v. Uma Charan Mandal [1923 
SCC OnLine PC 31 : (1924-25) 29 CWN 131] further elucidated 
the principle by pointing out : (SCC OnLine PC) 
‘[If] the question to be decided is one of fact, it does not 
involve an issue of law merely because documents which were 
not instruments of title or contracts or statutes or otherwise 
the direct foundations of rights but were merely historical 
documents, have to be construed.’ 
Nor does the fact that the finding of the first appellate court is 
based upon some documentary evidence make it any the less a 
finding of fact (see Wali Mohammad v. Mohd. Bakhsh [1929 
SCC OnLine PC 115 : (1929-30) 57 IA 86 : ILR (1930) 11 Lah 
199]). But, notwithstanding such clear and authoritative 
pronouncements on the scope of the provisions of Section 100 
CPC, some learned Judges of the High Courts are disposing of 
second appeals as if they were first appeals. This introduces, 
apart from the fact that the High Court assumes and exercises 
a jurisdiction which it does not possess, a gambling element in 
the litigation and confusion in the mind of the litigant public. 
This case affords a typical illustration of such interference by a 
Judge of the High Court in excess of his jurisdiction under 
Section 100 CPC. We have, therefore, no alternative but to set 
aside the decree of the High Court on the simple ground that 
the learned Judge of the High Court had no jurisdiction to 
interfere in second appeal with the findings of fact given by the 
first appellate court based upon an appreciation of the relevant 
evidence. In the result, the decree of the High Court is set 
aside and the appeal is allowed with costs throughout.” 
 
12. Later, 
in 
a 
judgment, 
in Kshitish 
Chandra 
Bose v.  
Commr. [(1981) 2 SCC 103] — three Judges, of this Court held that 
the High Court has no jurisdiction to entertain second appeal on 
findings of fact even if it was erroneous. The Court held as follows : 
(SCC p. 108, para 11) 
“11. On a perusal of the first judgment of the High Court we 
are satisfied that the High Court clearly exceeded its 
jurisdiction under Section 100 in reversing pure concurrent 
findings of fact given by the trial court and the then appellate 

10 
 
court both on the question of title and that of adverse 
possession. In Kharbuja Kuer v. Jangbahadur Rai [AIR 1963 SC 
1203 : (1963) 1 SCR 456] this Court held that the High Court 
had no jurisdiction to entertain second appeal on findings of 
fact even if it was erroneous. In this connection, this Court 
observed as follows : (AIR pp. 1205-06, paras 5 & 7) 
‘5. It is settled law that the High Court has no jurisdiction to 
entertain a second appeal on the ground of erroneous finding 
of fact. … 
*** 
7. … As the two courts approached the evidence from a correct 
perspective and gave a concurrent finding of fact, the High 
Court had no jurisdiction to interfere with the said finding.’ 
To the same effect is another decision of this Court in V. 
Ramachandra Ayyar v. Ramalingam Chettiar [AIR 1963 SC 302 
: (1963) 3 SCR 604] where the Court observed as follows : 
(AIR p. 306, para 12) 
‘12. … But the High Court cannot interfere with the conclusions 
of fact recorded by the lower appellate court, however 
erroneous the said conclusions may appear to be to the High 
Court, because, as the Privy Council has observed, however 
gross or inexcusable the error may seem to be, there is no 
jurisdiction under Section 100 to correct that error.’ ” 
 
 
13. In a recent decision in the matter of Gurbachan Singh 
(supra), this court has reiterated the legal position vis-à-vis 
Section 41 of Punjab Act and the unamended Section 100 CPC 
holding thus in paragraphs 9 to 11: -    
“9. The Constitution bench in Pankajakshi (Dead) through LRs  
v. Chandrika had held Kulwant Kaur v. Gurdial Singh Mann which 
held section 41 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 to be repugnant to 
section 100, CPC to 
be 
bad 
in 
law, 
thereby 
implying 
that 
section 41 of the Punjab Court Act holds as good law. It was held as 
under: — 
“25. We are afraid that this judgment in Kulwant Kaur 
case [Kulwant Kaur v. Gurdial Singh Mann, (2001) 4 SCC 262] 
does not state the law correctly on both propositions. First and 
foremost, when Section 97(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 1976 speaks of any amendment made or 
any provision inserted in the principal Act by virtue of a State 
Legislature or a High Court, the said section refers only to 
amendments made and/or provisions inserted in the Code of 
Civil Procedure itself and not elsewhere. This is clear from the 

11 
 
expression “principal Act” occurring in Section 97(1). What 
Section 97(1) really does is to state that where a State 
Legislature makes an amendment in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, which amendment will apply only within the four 
corners of the State, being made under Schedule VII List 
III Entry 13 to the Constitution of India, such amendment shall 
stand repealed if it is inconsistent with the provisions of the 
principal Act as amended by the Parliamentary enactment 
contained in the 1976 Amendment to the Code of Civil 
Procedure. This is further made clear by the reference in 
Section 97(1) to a High Court. The expression “any provision 
inserted in the principal Act” by a High Court has reference to 
Section 122 of the Code of Civil Procedure by which High 
Courts may make rules regulating their own procedure, and the 
procedure of civil courts subject to their superintendence, and 
may by such rules annul, alter, or add to any of the rules 
contained in the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure.” 
10. Recently, a Bench of three learned Judges in Satyender 
v. Saroj while dealing with a property dispute arising out of the 
State of Haryana, held as under:— 
“16. We may also add here that we are presently concerned 
with the laws in the State of Haryana. All the same, the laws as 
applicable in Punjab in the year 1918, were also applicable to 
the present territory of Haryana since it was then a part of the 
State of Punjab. Later on, the creation of the new State of 
Haryana, under the provision given in Section 88 of the Punjab 
Re-organization Act, 1966, the laws applicable in the erstwhile 
State of Punjab continued to be applicable in the new State of 
Haryana. Furthermore, State of Haryana formally adopted the 
laws of the erstwhile State of Punjab, under Section 89 of 
the Punjab Re-Organisation Act, 1966. Therefore, in the State 
of Haryana a court in second appeal is not required to 
formulate a substantial question of law, as what is applicable in 
Haryana is Section 41 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 and not 
Section 100 of CPC. Consequently, it was not necessary for the 
High Court to formulate a substantial question of law.” 
 
11. In view of the above discussion, it is clear to this court that the 
judgment of the learned single Judge sitting in second appellate 
jurisdiction cannot be faulted for not having framed substantial 
questions of law under section 100, CPC”. 
 
 
14. Regard being had to the settled legal position in 
Pankajakshi (supra) reiterated in Randhir Kaur (supra) and 
Gurbachan Singh (supra), we are of the view that the 

12 
 
Judgment of this Court under review in Civil Appeal No. 6567 of 
2014 has been wrongly decided holding that the Punjab and 
Haryana High Court has travelled beyond the jurisdiction under 
Section 100 CPC by interfering with the finding of fact recorded 
by the First Appellate Court without framing a substantial 
question of law.   
 
15. Since there is an error apparent on the face of the record, 
in view of the law laid down in Pankajakshi (supra), we review 
our judgment in Civil Appeal No. 6567 of 2014 and recall the 
same for deciding the Civil Appeal on merits. The Review 
Petition is allowed. The Civil Appeal is restored to its original 
number and taken on board with the consent of the parties, 
and we proceed to decide the Civil Appeal afresh on merits.  
 
Civil Appeal No. 6567 of 2014 
16. This Civil Appeal is preferred by the defendants in the suit 
against whom the plaintiff brought a suit for perpetual 
injunction on the pleadings, inter alia, that he and his brother 
Bhagwan Singh alias Nikka Singh were owners in possession of 
the suit land.  Bhagwan Singh was issueless being unmarried.  

13 
 
Since the defendant No. 1 was trying to dispossess the plaintiff 
forcibly, the suit for perpetual injunction was filed. The 
defendants did not deny that plaintiff and Bhagwan Singh were 
real brothers.  However, he claimed to be the half-brother of 
Bhagwan Singh as they were given birth by same lady namely 
Mrs. Har Kaur who was earlier married to Sunder Singh but 
after his death, she was married to Mehar Singh and the 
defendant no. 1 was born out of the wedlock of Har Kaur with 
Mehar Singh.  The defendant’s case rested on a Will allegedly 
executed by Bhagwan Singh on 17.01.1980. Prior to this, 
Bhagwan Singh had executed an unregistered Will on 
17.08.1979.  However, the defendant admitted that during the 
lifetime of Bhagwan Singh, the suit land was cultivated jointly 
by the plaintiff and Bhagwan Singh.  In the alternative, the 
defendant pleaded that if plaintiff’s possession over the suit 
land is proved, the defendant nos. 2 to 6, the beneficiary of the 
Will, are entitled to joint possession of half share of the suit 
land.  
 
 
17. On the strength of evidence adduced by the parties in 
course of trial, it was held by the trial court that the defendants 

14 
 
have failed to prove the genuineness of the Will, therefore, the 
plaintiff is entitled to succeed by way of natural succession.  It 
was found that the Will relied by the defendants is surrounded 
by suspicious circumstances, therefore, it is not a validly 
executed Will. The trial court held that the defendants’ case 
that they served the deceased Bhagwan Singh during the 
lifetime and out of love and affection for the services rendered, 
he executed the Will in their favour as they were also related to 
the deceased, has not been believed by the trial court. There is 
evidence that it was plaintiff who admitted Nikka Singh in 
hospital on 02.08.1979 when he was ill and his address was 
also shown as care of Lehna Singh (the ‘plaintiff’).   
 
 
18. Upon careful marshalling of evidence, the trial court 
recorded a finding about active participation of Jagjit Singh 
(DW-3) in execution of the Will and the absence of mention in 
the Will as to why he disinherited his real brother, the plaintiff, 
from succeeding the property and more so when he was living 
with him and was attended to during his ill health. Since the 
defendant admit joint possession and cultivation of the land by 
Nikka Singh and plaintiff, a fact contrary to this mentioned in 

15 
 
the Will was also highlighted by the trial court.  Despite there 
being an earlier Will there was no mention that the said Will is 
cancelled and the name of father of Gurnam Singh was also 
wrongly mentioned.  The trial court also found that Nikka Singh 
was suffering from cancer and was also a patient of T.B.  
 
19. The trial court also found that the plaintiff is in possession 
of the suit land as the said fact has been admitted by one of 
the defendant’s witnesses namely Gurnam Singh.   
 
20. The First Appellate Court set aside the finding of the trial 
court holding that the trial court was wrongly persuaded by 
insignificant circumstances to hold that the Will in favour of the 
defendant nos. 2 to 6 is not genuine and that it is surrounded 
by 
suspicious 
circumstances. 
The 
First 
Appellate 
Court 
eventually passed a decree for joint possession in favour of 
defendant which was assailed by plaintiff Lehna Singh before 
the High Court by preferring an appeal under Section 41 of the 
Punjab Act. The High Court, under the impugned Judgment, 
allowed the appeal, set aside the appellate decree passed by 
the District Judge, Sangrur, restoring the Judgment and decree 
passed by the trial court.  

16 
 
21. The High Court has discussed the evidence threadbare and 
framed the following substantial questions of law: -  
     (i)  
Whether the Appellate Court can reverse the findings 
recorded by the learned trial court without adverting 
to the specific finding of the trial court? 
 
    (ii) 
 Whether the judgment passed by the learned lower 
Appellate Court is perverse and outcome of misreading 
of evidence? 
 
 
22. The High Court answered both the questions of law in 
favour of the plaintiff/respondent herein (in Civil Appeal) on the 
reasoning that when the person entitled to the property of the 
deceased by way of natural succession, is disinherited from the 
property without giving any reason and the covenants in the 
Will are also found to be factually incorrect, mere registration of 
the Will and proof of the same by attesting witnesses could not 
be treated to be sufficient to over-come the suspicious 
circumstances as has been done by the First Appellate Court. 
The High Court also observed that the propounders of the Will 
were earlier tried for murder of the deceased-testator and there 
being no evidence on record to show that the deceased had 
special love and affection with the defendants and when it is 
proved that the plaintiff is in possession of the land and the 
defendant and their witnesses actively participated in the 

17 
 
execution of the Will, there is glaring suspicious circumstances 
to hold that the Will is not genuine. It was also observed that 
the testator was residing with the plaintiff, and it was he who 
got him admitted in the hospital, it was proved that the plaintiff 
was taking care of the deceased at the time of his need.  Merely 
because the attesting witnesses had no enmity towards the 
plaintiff, 
it 
cannot 
dispel 
the 
suspicious 
circumstances 
surrounded around the Will. 
   
23. It is settled law that the First Appellate Court, while 
setting aside the Judgment and decree of the trial court, is 
required to meet the reasoning given by the trial court in 
rejecting the Will, which in the present case has not been done 
by the First Appellate Court. 
 
 
24. The requirement of exercise of jurisdiction by the First 
Appellate Court under Section 96 of CPC has been dealt with by 
this Court in Chintamani Ammal vs. Nandagopal Gounder 
and Anr.7, wherein after noticing the previous judgments of 
this Court, the following has been held in paragraphs 18, 19 
and 20 thus: -  
 
7. (2007) 4 SCC 163 

18 
 
“18. Furthermore, when the learned trial Judge arrived at a 
finding on the basis of appreciation of oral evidence, the first 
appellate court could have reversed the same only on assigning 
sufficient reasons therefor. Save and except the said statement 
of DW 2, the learned Judge did not consider any other materials 
brought on record by the parties. 
 
19. In Madholal Sindhu v. Official Assignee of Bombay, it was 
observed: (AIR p. 30, para 21) 
“It is true that a judge of first instance can never 
be treated as infallible in determining on which 
side the truth lies and like other tribunals he may 
go wrong on questions of fact, but on such 
matters if the 
evidence 
as 
a whole 
can 
reasonably 
be 
regarded 
as 
justifying 
the 
conclusion arrived at, the appeal court should not 
lightly interfere with the judgment.” 
(See also Madhusudan Das v. Narayanibai) 
 
20. In Rajbir Kaur v. S. Chokesiri and Co., this Court observed: 
(SCC pp. 39-41, paras 48-52) 
“48. Reference on the point could also usefully be made to A.L. 
Goodhart's article in which, the learned author points out: 
‘A judge sitting without a jury must perform dual 
function. The first function consists in the 
establishment of the particular facts. This may be 
described as the perceptive function. It is what 
you actually perceive by the five senses. It is a 
datum 
of 
experience 
as 
distinct 
from 
a 
conclusion. 
It is obvious that, in almost all cases tried by a 
judge without a jury, an appellate court, which 
has not had an opportunity of seeing the 
witnesses, must accept his conclusions of fact 
because it cannot tell on what grounds he 
reached them and what impression the various 
witnesses made on him.’ 
 
49. The following is the statement of the same principle in ‘The 
Supreme Court Practice’: 
‘Great weight is due to the decision of a judge of 
first 
instance 
whenever, 
in 
a 
conflict 
of 
testimony, the 
demeanour and manner of 
witnesses who have been seen and heard by him 
are material elements in the consideration of the 
truthfulness of these statements. But the parties 
to the cause are nevertheless entitled as well on 
questions of fact as on questions of law to 
demand the decision of the court of appeal, and 
that court cannot excuse itself from the task of 
weighing conflicting evidence, and drawing its 

19 
 
own conclusions, though it should always bear in 
mind that it has neither seen nor heard the 
witnesses and should make due allowance in this 
respect. (pp. 854-55) 
…Not to have seen witnesses puts Appellate 
Judges in a permanent position of disadvantage 
against the trial Judge, and unless it can be 
shown that he has failed to use or has palpably 
misused his advantage—for example has failed to 
observe inconsistencies or indisputable fact or 
material 
probabilities 
(ibid. 
and Yuill v. Yuill; Watt v. Thomas —the 
higher 
court ought not take the responsibility of 
reversing conclusions so arrived at merely as the 
result of their own comparisons and criticisms of 
the 
witnesses, 
and 
of 
their 
view 
of 
the 
probabilities of the case. … (p. 855) 
…But while the court of appeal is always reluctant 
to reject a finding by a judge of the specific or 
primary facts deposed to by the witnesses, 
especially when the finding is based on the 
credibility or bearing of a witness, it is willing to 
form an independent opinion upon the proper 
inference to be drawn from it. … (p. 855) 
 
50. A consideration of this aspect would be incomplete without a 
reference to the observations of B.K. Mukherjea, J., in Sarju 
Pershad Ramdeo Sahu v. Jwaleshwari Pratap Narain Singh [1950 
SCC 714 : AIR 1951 SC 120 : 1950 SCR 781] which as a succinct 
statement of the rule, cannot indeed be bettered: 
 
‘The question for our consideration is undoubtedly one 
of fact, the decision of which depends upon the 
appreciation of the oral evidence adduced in the case. 
In such cases, the appellate court has got to bear in 
mind that it has not the advantage which the trial 
Judge had in having the witnesses before him and of 
observing the manner in which they deposed in court. 
This certainly does not mean that when an appeal lies 
on facts, the appellate court is not competent to 
reverse a finding of fact arrived at by the trial Judge. 
The rule is— and it is nothing more than a rule of 
practice—that when there is conflict of oral evidence 
of the parties on any matter in issue and the decision 
hinges upon the credibility of the witnesses, then 
unless there is some special feature about the 
evidence of a particular witness which has escaped the 
trial Judge's notice or there is a sufficient balance of 
improbability to displace his opinion as to where the 
credibility lies, the appellate court should not interfere 
with the finding of the trial Judge on a question of 
fact. 

20 
 
51. The area in which the question lies in the present case is the 
area of the perceptive functions of the trial Judge where the 
possibility of errors of inference does not play a significant role. 
The question whether the statement of the witnesses in regard to 
what was amenable to perception by sensual experience as to 
what they saw and heard is acceptable or not is the area in which 
the well-known limitation on the powers of the appellate court to 
reappreciate the evidence falls. The appellate court, if it seeks to 
reverse those findings of fact, must give cogent reasons to 
demonstrate how the trial court fell into an obvious error. 
 
52. With respect to the High Court, we think, that, what the High 
Court did was what perhaps even an appellate court, with full-
fledged appellate jurisdiction would, in the circumstances of the 
present case, have felt compelled to abstain from and reluctant to 
do. Contention (c) would also require to be upheld.” 
(emphasis in original) 
 
 
 
25. In Jagannath v. Arulappa & Anr.8 and H.K.N. Swami 
v. Irshad Basith (Dead) By Lrs.9, this Court has opined that 
it would be wholly improper to allow first appeal without 
adverting to the specific findings of the trial court and that the 
First Appellate Court is required to address all the issues and 
determine the appeal upon assignment of cogent reasons.   
 
 
26. Having considered the evidence on record and the findings 
of the trial court, the First Appellate Court and the High Court, 
we are satisfied that the First Appellate Court wrongly set aside 
the Judgment, decree, and findings of the trial court without 
meeting the findings of the trial court which could not have 
 
8. (2005) 12 SCC 303 
9. (2005) 10 SCC 243 

21 
 
been done in exercise of power under Section 96 CPC.  
Therefore, the High Court has rightly set aside the Judgment 
and decree of the First Appellate Court to restore the Judgment 
and decree of the trial court.  On independent examination also, 
we have found that the findings recorded by trial court are 
borne out from the evidence on record and are neither perverse 
nor illegal.   
 
27. Therefore, we find no substance in this appeal which 
deserves to be and is hereby dismissed.  
 
 
28. The parties shall bear their own costs.  
 
   
 
 
 
…………………………………….. J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      (VIKRAM NATH) 
 
 
 
 
 
.......………………………………. J. 
 
 
 
 
 
        (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
NEW DELHI; 
May 16, 2024.