2024 INSC 428
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).            OF 2024 
Arising out of SLP (CIVIL) NO(S). 12842 OF 2018 
 
 
 
MUKATLAL                                                   .…APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
 
KAILASH CHAND (D) THROUGH LRS.  
AND ORS. 
 
                                   ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
 
1.     Leave granted. 
2. 
The instant appeal by special leave challenges the final 
judgment and order dated 2nd November, 2017 passed by learned 
Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court in D.B. Special Appeal 
(Writ) No. 1029 of 2006 whereby the appeal preferred by the 
appellant questioning the legality and validity of the judgment 
dated 21st July, 2006 passed by learned Single Judge of the 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2024.05.16
12:43:12 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Rajasthan High Court in S.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 1587 of 1993 
was dismissed.  
3. 
For the sake of convenience, the parties shall be referred to 
by their rank in the Revenue Court. 
4. 
In order to appreciate the controversy involved in the matter 
in the proper perspective, it would be beneficial to reproduce the 
genealogical table/pedigree of the families of the parties.
 
 
Kishan Lal
Mangilal (Died 1912)
Kanwarlal
(Died 1954)
Mukat Lal
(Appellant)
(on the basis of
will dated
09.02.1949)
Madho Lal (Died 
Issueless in 1929)
Widow-
Nandkanwarbai
(Died 1972)
Kailash Chand
(adopted by 
Nandkanwarbai on 
12.06.1959 after the 
death of Madho Lal)

3 
 
Chronological List of Events: - 
 
 
Dates  
Event 
After the death of Kishan Lal, Hindu Undivided Family(HUF) property 
devolved among his two sons, Mangilal and Madho Lal. 
1912 
Mangilal passed away. (Survived by his son, Kanwarlal) 
1929 
Madho Lal passed away (Issueless, survived by his widow- Smt. 
Nandkanwarbai) 
09.02.1949 Kanwarlal executed a will in favour of his son, Mukat Lal 
(appellant herein). 
1954 
Kanwarlal Passed Away. 
First Set of Legal Proceedings 
1958 
Smt. Nandkanwarbai filed Civil Suit No. 11of 1958 for 
declaration of title and possession in respect of the suit 
property.   
21.05.1959 
 
Civil Suit No. 11 of 1958 was dismissed however the Civil Judge 
held that Smt. Nandkanwarbai had the right to be maintained 
out of the suit property. 
12.06.1959 Smt. 
Nandkanwarbai 
adopted 
Kailash 
Chand(original 
respondent herein). 
12.07.1966 Mukat Lal preferred Appeal No. 64 of 1966 against order dated 
21.05.1959 passed in Civil Suit No. 11 of 1958.    
09.02.1968 Civil Judge allowed Appeal No. 64 of 1966 and set aside the 
order to the extent that it gave Smt. Nandkanwarbai the right 
to be maintained out of the suit property. 
 
Aggrieved, Smt. Nandkanwarbai preferred SB Civil Second 
Appeal No. 347 of 1968 
1972 
 
Smt. Nandkanwarbai passed away. Kailash Chand was 
substituted 
as 
legal 
representative 
of 
deceased 
Smt. 
Nandkanwarbai in 1973. 

4 
 
20.03.1973 
 
High Court allowed SB Civil Second Appeal No. 347 of 1968 
and held that Smt. Nandkanwarbai was entitled to the right of 
maintenance out of the suit property, she being the widow of 
the deceased coparcener in joint Hindu family property. 
Present Proceedings 
20.06.1979 
 
Revenue Suit No. 37 of 1979 under section 53 of Rajasthan 
Tenancy Act, 1956 was filed by Kailash Chand, for partition of 
the suit property, in the capacity of the legal heir of his adopted 
mother Smt. Nandkanwarbai.   
14.12.1983 
 
Revenue Suit No. 37 of 1979 was allowed and decreed by Sub 
Divisional Officer, Bundi wherein it was held that Kailash 
Chand being the sole legal heir of Smt. Nandkanwarbai has 
coparcenary rights over the lands belonging to Madho Lal.  
1984 
Mukat Lal preferred Appeal No. 12 of 1984 challenging order 
dated 14.12.1983 before Revenue Appellate Authority, Kota.  
31.01.1986 
 
Revenue Appellate Authority, Kota allowed Appeal No. 12 of 
1984 and decree passed by Sub Divisional Magistrate, Bundi 
dated 14.12.1983 was set aside.  
1986 
Kailash Chand preferred Second Appeal being S.A. 120 of 1986 
before Board of Revenue, Ajmer. 
12.03.1992 
 
Board of Revenue, Ajmer dismissed S.A. 120 of 1986 
1993 
 
Kailash Chand filed a Writ Petition being S.B. Civil Writ Petition 
No. 1587 of 1993 before High Court challenging the order 
passed by Board of Revenue, Ajmer dated 12.03.1992.  
21.07.2006 
 
Ld. Single Judge allowed S.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 1587 of 
1993 and set aside the judgments passed by Revenue Appellate 
Authority, Kota and Board of Revenue, Ajmer. 
2006 
 
Mukat Lal filed a Writ Appeal being DB Special Appeal (Writ) 
No. 1029 of 2006 before the Division Bench.  
02.11.2017 Ld. Division Bench dismissed DB Special Appeal (Writ) No. 
1029 of 2006 and upheld the order of the Ld. Single Judge 
dated 21.07.2006. 

5 
 
06.02.2018 Present SLP was filed.  
 
5. 
The core question of law involved in this appeal is as to the 
right of the plaintiff Kailash Chand being legal heir of Hindu widow 
Smt. Nandkanwarbai to enforce her right of succession in the 
unpartitioned Joint Hindu Family property by virtue of Section 
14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (hereinafter being referred 
to as ‘Succession Act’) by filing a suit in the Revenue Court. 
6. 
Few facts, most germane and relevant to the issue are 
required to be extracted from the chronology of dates and events. 
The suit property was owned by Kishan Lal who had two sons, 
namely, Mangilal and Madho Lal. Madho Lal was married to Smt. 
Nandkanwarbai. Mangilal had a son Kanwarlal. Mangilal died in 
the year 1912 whereas Madho Lal died issueless in 1929. Smt. 
Nandkanwarbai claims to have adopted plaintiff Kailash Chand on 
12th June, 1959 that is nearly after 30 years from the date of death 
of Madho Lal. Kanwarlal had executed a will of the entire 
unpartitioned estate in favour of defendant Mukat Lal(appellant 
herein) on 9th February, 1949. Shri Kanwarlal passed away in the 
year 1954. Thus, the suit property devolved upon defendant Mukat 
Lal under the will executed by late Shri Kanwarlal. 

6 
 
7. 
Smt. Nandkanwarbai, widow of late Madho Lal filed a Civil 
Suit No. 11 of 1958 seeking a declaration of title and possession 
over the suit property contending that the property in question was 
a joint Hindu family property and that the will allegedly executed 
by late Kanwarlal was illegal. It was further contended in the suit 
that defendant Mukat Lal was not entitled to any share in the HUF 
property by virtue of the will. The Civil Court dismissed the said 
suit vide judgment and decree dated 21st May, 1959 while 
recognizing the right of Smt. Nandkanwarbai only to the extent of 
receiving maintenance from the suit property.  
8. 
Smt. Nandkanwarbai, did not challenge the said judgment 
any further. However, defendant Mukat Lal on attaining majority, 
preferred an appeal against the judgment dated 21st May, 1959 
which was allowed by the learned Senior Civil Judge vide judgment 
dated 9th February, 1968 and the judgment and decree passed by 
the civil Court in favour of Smt. Nandkanwarbai to the extent of 
the right to receive maintenance from the suit property was set 
aside.  
9. 
Being aggrieved, Smt. Nandkanwarbai preferred a Second 
Appeal No. 347 of 1968 before the learned Single Judge of 
Rajasthan High Court. During the pendency of the said second 

7 
 
appeal, in the year 1972 Smt. Nandkanwarbai passed away and 
her legal heir i.e. plaintiff Kailash Chand was taken on record. 
Learned Single Judge of Rajasthan High Court, vide judgment 
dated 20th March, 1973 allowed the second appeal filed by Smt. 
Nandkanwarbai and restored the civil Court’s judgment to the 
extent of her right to be maintained from the suit property. 
Resultantly, the status of defendant Mukat Lal as being the 
beneficiary of the suit lands as being the legatee of the will made 
by his father Shri Kanwarlal stood crystallized. 
10. The plaintiff Kailash Chand filed Revenue Suit No. 37 of 1979 
for partition of the suit property before the Revenue Court claiming 
that Smt. Nandkanwarbai was entitled to a rightful share in the 
property by virtue of Section 14(1) of the Succession Act. 
11. The present appeal arises from the aforesaid Revenue Suit 
No. 37 of 1979 seeking partition which culminated in the 
impugned judgment dated 2nd November, 2017 passed by the 
learned Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court. 
12. It may be reiterated that the issue regarding title and 
possession over the suit property stands concluded against Smt. 
Nandkanwarbai(deceased widow) vide judgment and decree dated 
21st May, 1959 passed in Civil Suit No. 11 of 1958. The said Civil 

8 
 
Suit was dismissed by the competent Court qua the relief of 
possession and title while recognizing the right to Smt. 
Nandkanwarbai only to the extent of receiving maintenance from 
the estate.  Admittedly, Smt. Nandkanwarbai did not challenge the 
judgment and decree dated 21st May, 1959 and thus, it attained 
finality to the extent of possession and title.  Apropos, there is no 
dispute qua the fact that Smt. Nandkanwarbai was never in 
possession of the suit property. 
13. Shri Puneet Jain, learned counsel representing the appellant 
advanced the following pertinent submissions and urged that the 
Division Bench erred in law in dismissing the appeal preferred by 
the appellant affirming the judgment of the learned Single Judge 
and restoring the judgment and decree of the Revenue Court. 
(i) 
 That Smt. Nandkanwarbai had no interest, either 
limited or otherwise, in the suit land which could fructify into 
absolute ownership under section 14(1) of the Succession Act 
and the Division Bench erred in treating “Charge over property 
towards Maintenance” as possession over the property. 
(ii)  
It was contended that in order to attract Section 14(1) 
of the Succession Act, there must be a “Property possessed by 
the Hindu Women” but in the present case, the suit for 

9 
 
possession and title filed by Smt. Nandkanwarbai was 
dismissed and hence she was never in possession, either legal 
or actual, over the suit property. 
iii)  
That the civil suit for title and possession filed by Smt. 
Nandkanwarbai having been dismissed, the judgment of the 
civil Court operated as res judicata and hence the relief could 
not 
have 
been 
granted 
to 
her 
adopted 
son[Kailash 
Chand(plaintiff)] in the subsequent partition suit filed in the 
Revenue Court. 
iv)  
While placing reliance on the decision of this Court in 
Ram Vishal(dead) by LRs. And Others v. Jagannath and 
Another1, it was contended that since Smt. Nandkanwarbai 
was never in possession of the suit property which were 
agricultural lands’ either by inheritance or in lieu of 
maintenance, as a consequence, Section 14(1) of the 
Succession Act could not be applied so as to confer proprietary 
rights upon her adopted son[Kailash Chand(plaintiff)]. 
v) Learned counsel, Shri Jain further contended that reliance 
placed by the learned Single Judge on the decision of Vasant 
and Anr. v. Dattu & Ors.2, is ex-facie erroneous as the said 
 
1 (2004) 9 SCC 302 
2 (1987) 1 SCC 160 

10 
 
judgment deals with issues related to properties held by the 
joint Hindu family having several surviving coparceners and 
not that of a sole surviving coparcener. 
He thus, implored the Court to accept the appeal and set aside 
the impugned judgments.  
14. E-converso, Shri Bishwajit Bhattacharya, learned senior 
advocate representing the respondents, vehemently and fervently 
opposed the submissions advanced by learned counsel for the 
appellant and contended that the issue in the present case 
regarding the ambit of the rights of a female Hindu on the 
undivided joint Hindu family estate under Section 14(1) of the 
Succession Act has been settled by this Court in the case of Munni 
Devi alias Nathi Devi(Dead) Thr LRs & Ors. v. Rajendra alias 
Lallu Lal(Dead) Thr LRs & Ors.3 He placed reliance on the 
pertinent observations(reproduced infra) made by this Court in 
Munni Devi(supra) and implored the Court to dismiss the appeal 
and affirm the impugned judgments. 
15. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the 
impugned judgment and the material available on record. 
 
3 2022 SCC OnLine SC 643 

11 
 
16. The plank contention of Shri Puneet Jain, learned counsel 
representing the appellant for assailing the impugned judgments 
was that the deceased widow Smt. Nandkanwarbai was never in 
possession of the suit property and as a consequence, her adopted 
son, plaintiff Kailash Chand, was precluded from claiming 
partition of the suit property by virtue of succession and hence, 
the Revenue suit was not maintainable. He had placed reliance on 
the findings arrived at by the civil Court in the suit filed by Smt. 
Nandkanwarbai to buttress this contention. 
17. At the outset, it may be noted that in so far as the aspect that 
Smt. Nandkanwarbai(deceased widow) had never been in 
possession of the suit property is concerned, the same is virtually 
an admitted position from the record because she never challenged 
the judgment and decree dated 21st May, 1959 whereby the suit 
filed by her for declaration of title and possession was dismissed 
by the civil Court and she was held only entitled to receive 
maintenance from the undivided estate. Thus, indisputably 
neither Smt. Nadkanwarbai nor the plaintiff Kailash Chand were 
ever in possession of the suit land. 
18. In the case of Munni Devi(supra) which was heavily relied 
upon by the learned counsel for the respondent Shri Bhattacharya, 

12 
 
the admitted position was that Bhonri Devi, widow of Late 
Dhannalalji was actually residing in the suit property during the 
time the coparcener Shri Harinarayanji was alive and even after 
his death, she continued to reside in the said house and used to 
collect the rents from the tenants who were occupying the suit 
property till the date of filing of suit. 
19. A Bench of two Honourable Judges of this Court after 
considering the gamut of Section 14 of the Succession Act in the 
case of Munni Devi(supra) observed as below: -  
“14. In view of the above, there remains no shadow of doubt 
that a Hindu woman's right to maintenance was not and is not 
an empty formality or an illusory claim being conceded as a 
matter of grace and generosity. It is a tangible right against the 
property, which flows from the spiritual relationship between 
the husband and the wife. The said right was recognised and 
enjoined by pure Shastric Hindu Law, which existed even before 
the passing of the 1937 or the 1946 Acts. Those Acts merely 
gave statutory backing recognising the position as was existing 
under the Shastric Hindu Law. Where a Hindu widow is in 
possession of the property of her husband or of the husband's 
HUF, she has a right to be maintained out of the said property. 
She is entitled to retain the possession of that property in lieu 
of her right to maintenance. Section 14(1) and the Explanation 
thereto envisages liberal construction in favour of the females, 
with the object of advancing and promoting the socio-economic 
ends sought to be achieved by the said legislation. As explained 
in V. Tulasamma (supra) case, the words “possessed by” 
used in Section 14(1) are of the widest possible amplitude 
and include the state of owning a property, even though the 
Hindu woman is not in actual or physical possession of the 
same. Of course, it is equally well settled that the 
possession of the widow, must be under some vestige of a 
claim, right or title, because the section does not 
contemplate the possession of any rank trespasser without 
any right or title. 
 

13 
 
15. The undisputed facts in the instant case are that 
Dhannalalji, the husband of Bhonri Devi expired in 1936, 
Ganeshnarayanji, the father-in-law of Bhonri Devi expired in 
1938 and Harinarayanji, the brother of Ganeshnarayanji died 
on 11.11.1953. Daulalji was adopted by Sri Bakshji in the year 
1916. Harinarayanji, Ganeshnarayanji and Sri Bakshji had 
common ancestor Gopalji. It is also not disputed that the suit 
property was an ancestral property in the hands of 
Harinarayanji and Ganeshnarayanji. It is also not disputed 
that Bhonri Devi was staying in the suit property before the 
death of Harinarayanji, and after his death she was in 
possession and in charge of the said property, and was 
maintaining herself by collecting rent from the tenants who 
were occupying part of the suit property. 
 
16. Now it appears from the documents on record that the rent 
notes (Exhibit A-2 to A-11) executed during the period 1955 to 
1965 in respect of the part of the suit property, were executed 
in the name of Bhonri Devi. The concerned defendants in the 
suit had also filed their written statements, stating that they 
were paying rent to Bhonri Devi only. It further appears from 
the document (Exhibit A-13) that Daulalji had raised an 
objection against Bhonri Devi paying the house tax in respect 
of the suit property and that the Municipal Commissioner, 
Jaipur vide order dated 28.03.1957 had observed that Bhonri 
Devi was paying the tax in the past also. An appeal against the 
said order was preferred by Daulalji before the Administrator of 
Municipal Council, Jaipur however the same was also rejected 
vide the order dated 28.01.1959. It was observed therein that 
“In this case there is a dispute regarding ownership. Municipal 
Commissioner who is the reversing authority in his judgment 
dated 28.03.1957 held that Bhonri Devi who was paying tax to 
the municipality in the past, should pay the tax and for 
question of title the concerned party should seek remedy in the 
Civil Courts.” 
 
17. From the said documents it clearly emerges that Bhonri 
Devi was paying the house tax prior to 1956 and was collecting 
the rent from the tenants prior to and after 1956. Pertinently 
from the document Exhibit-54, it emerges that in 1940 Bhonri 
Devi, when she was staying with her in-laws, had no source of 
maintenance, and therefore she was granted Rs. 2.50 per 
month by way of maintenance, by the Punya Department of the 
Government. She claiming to be a PARDANASHEEN lady had 
authorised Daulalji to collect the said amount of maintenance. 
The said document clearly shows that Bhonri Devi was residing 
in the suit house since 1940. Be that as it may, it was well 
established that Bhonri devi was in possession of the suit 
house before and after the death of Harinarayanji in 1953 

14 
 
and had continued to remain in possession thereafter and 
was collecting rent from the tenants who were in 
occupation of part of the suit premises since 1955, till the 
date of filing of the suit in 1965 by the plaintiff Daulalji. 
 
18. 
The 
afore-stated 
facts 
and 
circumstances 
clearly 
established that Bhonri devi had long settled possession of the 
suit property, which she had acquired in lieu of her pre-existing 
right to maintenance, prior to the commencement of the Act of 
1956, which entitled her to become a full owner of the suit 
property by virtue of Section 14(1) of the said Act. Her exclusive 
possession of suit property after the death of Harinarayanji in 
1953 i.e., prior to coming into force of the said Act in 1956, was 
not only not disputed but was admitted by the plaintiff Daulalji 
in the plaint itself. Her pre-existing right to maintenance from 
the estate of the HUF of her husband was also well established. 
The submission of Mr. Jain for the appellants that mere right 
to maintenance would not ipso facto create any charge on the 
property and that for creating legal charge recognising right of 
Hindu women to maintenance required execution of a 
document, device or agreement, cannot be countenanced. Her 
pre-existing right to maintenance, coupled with her settled 
legal possession of the property, would be sufficient to 
create a presumption that she had a vestige of right or 
claim in the property, though no document was executed 
or specific charge was created in her favour recognizing her 
right to maintenance in the property. 
 
19. It may be noted that in the Will executed by Harinarayanji 
in favour of Daulalji, there was no mention of the suit property. 
What was stated in the Will was that whatever movable and 
immovable property, which belonged to Harinarayanji would be 
devolved upon Daulalji. It was only in the Probate proceedings 
filed by Daulalji in respect of the said Will, he had shown the 
suit property in the Schedule. It is true that the objections 
raised by Bhonri Devi against granting of Probate in favour of 
Daulalji were not accepted by the Probate Court, and the 
alleged Will executed by Harinarayanji in favour of Bhonri Devi 
was also not proved by her in the said proceedings. 
Nonetheless, 
in 
view 
of 
her 
pre-existing 
right 
to 
maintenance from the estate of the HUF of her husband and 
in view of her exclusive settled possession of the suit 
property prior to and after the commencement of the Act 
of 1956, the only conclusion which could be drawn, would 
be that Bhonri Devi had acquired the suit property in lieu 
of her pre-existing right to maintenance, and that she had 
held the suit property as the full owner and not limited 
owner by virtue of Section 14(1) of the said Act of 1956. 
 

15 
 
20. As stated earlier, Hindu woman's right to maintenance is a 
tangible right against the property which flows from the 
spiritual relationship between the husband and the wife. Such 
right was recognized and enjoined under the Shastric Hindu 
Law, long before the passing of the 1937 and the 1946 Acts. 
Where a Hindu widow is found to be in exclusive settled 
legal possession of the HUF property, that itself would 
create a presumption that such property was earmarked for 
realization of her pre-existing right of maintenance, more 
particularly when the surviving co-parcener did not 
earmark any alternative property for recognizing her pre-
existing right of maintenance. The word “possessed by” and 
“acquired” used in Section 14(1) are of the widest 
amplitude and include the state of owning a property. It is 
by virtue of Section 14(1) of the Act of 1956, that the Hindu 
widow's limited interest gets automatically enlarged into an 
absolute right, when such property is possessed by her whether 
acquired before or after the commencement of 1956 Act in lieu 
of her right to maintenance.”  
(emphasis supplied) 
 
20. Thus it is clear from the above observations and findings in 
the case of Munni Devi(supra) that this Court after taking into 
consideration the pre-existing right of Bhonri Devi to maintenance 
from the estate of the HUF of her husband and her exclusive 
settled possession over the suit property concluded that she had 
acquired the suit property in lieu of her pre-existing right to 
maintenance and that she had held the suit property as the full 
owner and not limited owner by virtue of Section 14(1) of the 
Succession Act. 
21. Thus, what we are required to adjudicate in the present case 
is as to whether in absence of even a semblance of possession 
either actual or legal over the suit property, plaintiff Kailash Chand 

16 
 
being the legal heir of Smt. Nandkanwarbai was entitled to 
institute a Revenue suit for partition of the suit property based on 
the succession rights of the widow on the joint Hindu family 
property. In this very context, we would like to gainfully refer to 
the judgments of this Court which were relied upon by Shri Puneet 
Jain, learned counsel for the appellant.  
22. In the case of Ram Vishal(supra) this Court held as under: - 
“16. In our view, the authority in Raghubar Singh case [(1998) 
6 SCC 314] can be of no assistance to the respondent. As has 
been held by this Court, a pre-existing right is a sine qua 
non for conferment of a full ownership under Section 14 of 
the Hindu Succession Act. The Hindu female must not only 
be possessed of the property but she must have acquired 
the property. Such acquisition must be either by way of 
inheritance or devise, or at a partition or “in lieu of 
maintenance or arrears of maintenance” or by gift or by her 
own skill or exertion, or by purchase or by prescription. In 
the present matter, it is nobody's case that Manki had got 
possession of the 1/4th share in lieu of maintenance or in 
arrears of maintenance. It was also not their case that there 
was a partition of the property and that in such partition, she 
had been given the property. A mere right of maintenance 
without actual acquisition in any manner is not sufficient to 
attract Section 14.” 
 
   
 
 (emphasis supplied) 
                                                                 
23. Further, in the case of M. Sivadasan (Dead) through Lrs. 
and Others v. A. Soudamini (Dead) through Lrs. and Others4, 
this Court held as under: - 
“4. This argument of the plaintiff was rejected by the Trial Court 
and the same was upheld by the First Appellate Court as well 
as by the Second Appellate Court on the reasoning that after 
the death of Sami Vaidyar, his son Sukumaran succeeded in 
the property in year 1942 itself. Thereafter, Sukumaran and 
later the children succeeding Sukumaran had the right over the 
 
4 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1078 

17 
 
property which undisputedly remained in their possession. 
Section 14 sub-Section (1) had no application in this case. The 
essential ingredient of Section 14 sub-Section (1) is 
possession over the property. Admittedly the plaintiff was 
never in possession of the property. The possession was 
always that of the defendant and therefore Section 14 sub-
Section (1) would not be applicable. In Ram Vishal (dead) by 
lrs. v. Jagan Nath. reported in (2004) 9 SCC 302 the position of 
possession being a pre-requisite to sustain a claim under sub-
section (1) of Section 14 of the 1956 Act was confirmed in Para 
16 which is quoted below: 
 
‘16. In our view, the authority in Raghubar Singh case 
[(1998) 6 SCC 314] can be of no assistance to the 
respondent. As has been held by this Court, a pre-
existing right is a sine qua non for conferment of 
a full ownership under Section 14 of the Hindu 
Succession Act. The Hindu female must not only 
be possessed of the property but she must have 
acquired the property. Such acquisition must be 
either by way of inheritance or devise, or at a partition 
or “in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance” 
or by gift or by her own skill or exertion, or by 
purchase or by prescription…’ 
 
5. As per the law as it existed at their relevant time the property 
which was an agricultural property would devolve upon the 
male child and daughters would get only a limited right to 
maintenance till, they were married and the widow would be 
entitled to maintenance from the income from the property till 
her death or remarriage. As per the family Settlement Deed 
dated 12.03.1938 which was relied upon by both the parties, 
the property in dispute was specifically allotted to Sami Vaidyar 
and his only son Sukumaran. Therefore, the widow of Sami 
Vaidyar i.e., Choyichi will not have any right over the property. 
The findings of all the courts below were that Choyichi was 
never in possession of the property and therefore she would not 
get the right, as claimed by her under Section 14(1) of the Hindu 
Succession Act, 1956.”          
                            (emphasis supplied) 
 
 
24. Seen in the light of the ratio of the above judgments, it is clear 
that for establishing full ownership on the undivided joint family 
estate under Section 14(1) of the Succession Act the Hindu female 

18 
 
must not only be possessed of the property but she must have 
acquired the property and such acquisition must be either by way 
of inheritance or devise, or at a partition or “in lieu of maintenance 
or arrears of maintenance” or by gift or be her own skill or exertion, 
or by purchase or by prescription.  
25. Even on going through the pleadings in the Revenue suit for 
partition filed by plaintiff Kailash Chand, it is clear that there is 
not even a whisper in the plaint that Smt. Nandkanwarbai or the 
plaintiff Kailash Chand himself were ever in possession of the suit 
property. As a matter of fact, the suit was filed by pleading that the 
suit property was a joint Hindu family property and defendant-
Mukat Lal(appellant  herein) had consented to give half share of 
the suit property to the plaintiff Kailash Chand on his demand. 
This assertion was denied by defendant-Mukat Lal.  
26. In this context, when we consider the effect of the earlier civil 
suit instituted by Smt. Nadkanwarbai(deceased widow), it becomes 
clear that she was never in possession of the suit property because 
the civil suit was filed by her claiming the relief of title as well as 
possession and the same was dismissed. This finding of the civil 
Court was never challenged. Since, Smt. Nadkanwarbai was never 
in possession of the suit property, as a necessary corollary the 

19 
 
Revenue suit for partition claiming absolute ownership under 
Section 14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act could not be maintained 
by her adopted son, plaintiff Kailash Chand by virtue of 
inheritance. 
27. On close scrutiny of the judgments rendered by the learned 
Single Judge and the learned Division Bench of the High Court, we 
find that there is no consideration in these judgments that the 
predecessor of the plaintiff Kailash Chand or the plaintiff himself 
were ever in possession of the suit property or had acquired the 
same in the manner as indicated in the judgment of M. 
Sivadasan(supra). 
28. As a consequence of the above discussion, the impugned 
judgments do not stand to scrutiny and cannot be sustained. 
29. Resultantly, the judgment dated 2nd November, 2017 
rendered by learned Division Bench and the judgment dated 21st 
July, 2006 rendered by the learned Single Judge are hereby 
reversed and set aside.  
30. Consequently, the Revenue Suit No. 37 of 1979 filed by the 
plaintiff is dismissed. 
31. The appeal is allowed in these terms.  No costs. 
 

20 
 
32. Decree be prepared accordingly. 
33. Pending application(s), if any, shall stands disposed of. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
May 16, 2024