2024 INSC 425
1 
 
                                                                     REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NO (S) .           OF 2024  
(arising out of Special Leave Petition(C) No(s).23441-23444 of 2022) 
 
MR. R.S. MADIREDDY   
          
      …. APPELLANT(S) 
AND ANR. ETC. 
 
VERSUS. 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. ETC.                  …. RESPONDENT(S) 
WITH 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).             OF 2024 
(arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No(s). 12221 of 2023) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).              OF 2024  
(arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No(s). 22777 of 2023)  
 
J U D G M E N T 
Mehta, J. 
1.     Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeals are filed challenging the common 
impugned judgment and order dated 20th September, 2022 passed 
by the Division Bench of the High Court of Bombay thereby 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2024.05.16
12:43:11 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
dismissing four writ petitions instituted by the appellants being 
the former employees of respondent No.3 i.e. Air India 
Limited(hereinafter referred to as ‘AIL’) as members of its cabin 
crew force.  Appellants came to be employed in AIL in the late 
1980s and all of them retired between 2016 and 2018. 
3. 
 Writ Petition Nos. 123 of 20141 and 844 of 20142  were filed 
for alleged stagnation in pay and non-promotion of the employees. 
Writ Petition No. 844 of 2014 additionally raised issues of 
anomalies in the fixation of pay arising out of and for 
implementation of the report of the Justice Dharmadhikari 
Committee3.  Writ Petition Nos. 1770 of 20114  and 1536 of 20135, 
pertained to the delay in payment of wage revision arrears and the 
withdrawal of eight out of the seventeen allowances already paid 
to the employees retrospectively. In each of the writ petitions, 
violation of Articles 14, 16, and 21 of the Constitution of India, 
1950, was pleaded. The Division Bench of Bombay High Court, 
vide common judgment and order dated 20th September, 2022 
disposed of the above writ petitions denying relief as claimed 
 
1 Filed on 30th August, 2013 
2 Filed on 09th October, 2014 
3 Constituted by the respondent No.1 i.e. Union of India(through its Ministry of Civil Aviation)   
to harmonize the differential service conditions of AIL and Indian Airlines Ltd, which came to 
be merged. 
4 Filed on 14th June, 2011 
5 Filed on 19th March, 2013 

3 
 
therein on the ground of non-maintainability of the writ petitions 
owing to the intervening event of privatisation of respondent No. 
3(AIL). Nevertheless, liberty was granted to the employee 
petitioners to seek their remedies in accordance with law.  
Brief Facts: - 
4. 
Air India was a statutory body constituted under the Air 
Corporations Act, 1953.  With the repeal of the Act of 1953 by the 
Air Corporations(Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1994, Air India 
merged with Indian Airlines and upon incorporation, respondent 
No. 3(AIL) became a wholly Government owned company and, 
thus, came under the category of ‘other authorities’ within the 
meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India. This status of 
Air India continued to subsist on the date when the subject batch 
of writ petitions(supra) under Article 226 of the Constitution of 
India were filed before the High Court invoking writ jurisdiction, 
against respondent No.3(AIL).  
5.  
However, on 08th October, 2021, the Government of India 
announced that it had accepted the bid of Talace India Pvt Ltd. to 
purchase its 100% shares in respondent No. 3 (AIL). Subsequently, 
on 27th January, 2022 pursuant to the share purchase agreement 
signed with Talace India Pvt. Ltd., 100% equity shares of the 

4 
 
Government of India in respondent No. 3(AIL) were purchased by 
the said private company and respondent No. 3(AIL) was privatised 
and disinvested. Therefore, the writ petitions were maintainable on 
the date of institution but the question that arose before the High 
Court was whether they continued to be maintainable as on the 
date the same were finally heard. 
6. 
Learned Judges of the Division Bench of the Bombay High 
Court, while placing reliance upon the decisions of Tarun Kumar 
Banerjee v. Bharat Aluminium Co. Ltd. and Another6 ; Mahant 
Pal Singh v. Union of India and Others7 ; Padmavathi 
Subramaniyan and Others v. Ministry of Civil Aviation 
Government of India rep by its Secretary and Others 8 ; and 
few more decisions of the Delhi High Court and Gujarat High Court 
concluded that with the privatisation of respondent No. 3(AIL), 
jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution 
of India to issue a writ to respondent No. 3(AIL), particularly in its 
role as an employer, did not subsist and disposed of the writ 
petitions vide common impugned judgment dated 20th September 
2022, which is assailed in the present appeals by special leave.  
 
6 2008 SCC OnLine Bom 1899 
7 2009 SCC OnLine Bom 2554 
8 2022 SCC OnLine Kar 1706 

5 
 
Submissions and contentions on behalf of the appellants: - 
7. 
Shri Sanjay Singhvi, learned senior counsel appearing on 
behalf of the appellants submitted that the right to seek remedy 
stands crystallised on the date of institution of proceedings and 
though subsequent events can be considered, it is a well settled 
tenet of law that such subsequent events can be looked at only to 
advance equity rather than to defeat it. Reliance in this regard was 
placed 
by 
learned 
senior 
counsel 
upon 
Pasupuleti 
Venkateswarlu v. Motor & General Traders9; Beg Raj Singh v. 
State of U.P. and Ors.10. He urged that different view is 
permissible only in exceptional circumstances and in no event can 
a party be divested of its substantive rights on account of such 
subsequent event as laid down in Rajesh D. Darbar and Others 
v. Narasingrao Krishnaji Kulkarni and Others11. The relevant 
extract of Rajesh D. Darbar(supra) as relied upon by the learned 
senior counsel for the appellants is extracted hereinbelow: - 
“4. The impact of subsequent happenings may now be spelt 
out. First, its bearing on the right of action, second, on the 
nature of the relief and third, on its importance to create or 
destroy substantive rights. Where the nature of the relief, as 
originally sought, has become obsolete or unserviceable or a 
new form of relief will be more efficacious on account of 
developments subsequent to the suit or even during the 
 
9 (1975) 1 SCC 770 
10 (2003) 1 SCC 726 
11 (2003) 7 SCC 219 

6 
 
appellate stage, it is but fair that the relief is moulded, varied 
or reshaped in the light of updated facts. Patterson v. State of 
Alabama [294 US 600 : 79 L Ed 1082 (1934)] (US at p. 607) 
illustrates this position. It is important that the party claiming 
the relief or change of relief must have the same right from 
which either the first or the modified remedy may flow. 
Subsequent events in the course of the case cannot be 
constitutive of substantive rights enforceable in that very 
litigation except in a narrow category (later spelt out) but may 
influence the equitable jurisdiction to mould reliefs. Conversely, 
where rights have already vested in a party, they cannot be 
nullified or negated by subsequent events save where there is a 
change in the law and it is made applicable at any 
stage. Lachmeshwar 
Prasad 
Shukul v. Keshwar 
Lal 
Chaudhuri [1940 FCR 84 : AIR 1941 FC 5] falls in this category. 
Courts of justice may, when the compelling equities of a case 
oblige them, shape reliefs — cannot deny rights — to make 
them justly relevant in the updated circumstances. Where the 
relief is discretionary, courts may exercise this jurisdiction to 
avoid injustice. Likewise, where the right to the remedy 
depends, under the statute itself, on the presence or absence of 
certain basic facts at the time the relief is to be ultimately 
granted, the court, even in appeal, can take note of such 
supervening facts with fundamental impact. This Court's 
judgment in Pasupuleti Venkateswarlu v. Motor & General 
Traders [(1975) 1 SCC 770 : AIR 1975 SC 1409] read in its 
statutory setting, falls in this category. Where a cause of action 
is deficient but later events have made up the deficiency, the 
court may, in order to avoid multiplicity of litigation, permit 
amendment and continue the proceeding, provided no 
prejudice is caused to the other side. All these are done only in 
exceptional situations and just cannot be done if the statute, 
on which the legal proceeding is based, inhibits, by its scheme 
or otherwise, such change in the cause of action or relief. The 
primary concern of the court is to implement the justice of the 
legislation. Rights vested by virtue of a statute cannot be 
divested by this equitable doctrine (see V.P.R.V. Chockalingam 
Chetty v. Seethai Ache [AIR 1927 PC 252 : 26 All LJ 371] ).”   
 
8. 
Reliance was also placed by the learned senior counsel on the 
judgment of Ashok Kumar Gupta & Ors. v. Union of India & 
Ors.12, wherein the Division Bench of Calcutta High Court, after 
 
12 (2007) SCC OnLine Cal 264 

7 
 
adverting to the extant principles concerning the maintainability 
of writ proceedings as on the date of the institution, held that an 
employer which had been privatised during the pendency of a writ 
appeal filed against the order rejecting the writ petition would 
continue to be amenable to writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of 
the Constitution of India.  The relevant portion of Ashok Kumar 
Gupta(supra) relied upon is extracted hereinbelow: - 
“32. It is nobody's case that the writ petition was not 
maintainable when it was filed. The cause of action for filing the 
writ petition crystallized at a point of time when the respondent 
authority was, admittedly, subject to the writ jurisdiction. The 
said cause of action confers a vested right to the writ petitioners 
to have their grievances adjudicated in a writ proceeding. No 
one can contend that the writ petitioners have brought the 
present 
situation 
by 
their 
conduct. 
The 
change 
of 
circumstances is not attributable to the petitioners. 
33. For the aforesaid reasons, we are of the opinion that the 
instant appeal is very much maintainable, and the preliminary 
objection raised on behalf of the respondent company cannot 
be sustained in the eye of law. Therefore, the said preliminary 
objection regarding maintainability of this appeal as raised by 
the respondent company is rejected.” 
 
9. 
Learned senior counsel further contended that the scope of 
issuing a writ, order, or direction under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India is much broader than the high prerogative 
writs issued by the British Courts and this position has been 
recognised by this Court in the case of Andi Mukta Sadguru 
Shree Muktajee Vandas Swami Suvarna Jayanti Mahotsav 

8 
 
Smarak Trust and Ors. v. V.R. Rudani & Ors.13, and following 
the said decision, Courts in India have consistently issued writs 
even to private persons performing public duties and this position 
has further been reiterated by the recent judgment of this Court in 
the case of Kaushal Kishor vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and 
Ors.14.  The relevant portions of Andi Mukta(supra) as relied upon 
by the learned senior counsel are extracted hereinbelow: - 
“16. The law relating to mandamus has made the most 
spectacular advance. It may be recalled that the remedy by 
prerogative writs in England started with very limited scope and 
suffered from many procedural disadvantages. To overcome the 
difficulties, Lord Gardiner (the Lord Chancellor) in pursuance 
of Section 3(1)(e) of the Law Commission Act, 1965, requested 
the Law Commission “to review the existing remedies for the 
judicial control of administrative acts and omissions with a view 
to evolving a simpler and more effective procedure”. The Law 
Commission 
made 
their 
report 
in 
March 
1976 
(Law 
Commission Report No. 73). It was implemented by Rules of 
Court (Order 53) in 1977 and given statutory force in 1981 by 
Section 31 of the Supreme Court Act, 1981. It combined all the 
former remedies into one proceeding called Judicial Review. 
Lord Denning explains the scope of this “judicial review”: 
“At one stroke the courts could grant whatever relief was 
appropriate. Not only certiorari and mandamus, but also 
declaration and injunction. Even damages. The procedure was 
much more simple and expeditious. Just a summons instead of 
a writ. No formal pleadings. The evidence was given by affidavit. 
As a rule no cross-examination, no discovery, and so forth. But 
there were important safeguards. In particular, in order to 
qualify, the applicant had to get the leave of a judge. 
The statute is phrased in flexible terms. It gives scope for 
development. It uses the words “having regard to”. Those words 
are very indefinite. The result is that the courts are not bound 
hand and foot by the previous law. They are to “have regard to” 
it. So the previous law as to who are — and who are not — 
 
13 (1989) 2 SCC 691 
14 (2023) 4 SCC 1 

9 
 
public authorities, is not absolutely binding. Nor is the previous 
law as to the matters in respect of which relief may be granted. 
This means that the judges can develop the public law as they 
think best. That they have done and are doing.” [ See The 
Closing Chapter by Rt. Hon. Lord Denning, p. 122] 
17. There, however, the prerogative writ of mandamus is 
confined only to public authorities to compel performance of 
public duty. The “public authority” for them means everybody 
which is created by statute — and whose powers and duties are 
defined by statute. So government departments, local 
authorities, police authorities, and statutory undertakings and 
corporations, are all “public authorities”. But there is no such 
limitation for our High Courts to issue the writ “in the nature 
of mandamus”. Article 226 confers wide powers on the High 
Courts to issue writs in the nature of prerogative writs. This is 
a striking departure from the English law. Under Article 226, 
writs can be issued to “any person or authority”. It can be 
issued “for the enforcement of any of the fundamental rights 
and for any other purpose.” 
 
10. He further submitted that equity should prevail over injustice 
and since the appellants have diligently pursued their case in the 
High Court for more than a decade, subsequent events can be 
accounted for only to support and not undermine equity. It was 
further contended that a private body that promises the sovereign 
to fulfill its obligations and liabilities as a public employer towards 
its employees under Articles 14 & 16, then performs a public duty 
to the extent of discharging such liabilities. It is not the form, but 
the nature of the duty imposed that is relevant for adjudging 
whether a writ petition would lie against a private body. Reliance 
in support of this contention was placed upon the following 

10 
 
extracts from the decision of this Court in Binny Ltd. and Anr. v. 
V. Sadasivan and Ors.15:- 
“23. The counsel for the respondent in Civil Appeal No. 1976 of 
1998 and for the appellant in the civil appeal arising out of SLP 
(Civil) No. 6016 of 2002 strongly contended that irrespective of 
the nature of the body, the writ petition under Article 226 is 
maintainable provided such body is discharging a public 
function or statutory function and that the decision itself has 
the flavour of public law element and they relied on the decision 
of this Court in Shri Anadi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee 
Vandas 
Swami 
Suvarna 
Jayanti 
Mahotsav 
Smarak 
Trust v. V.R. Rudani [(1989) 2 SCC 691] . In this case, the 
appellant was a Trust running a science college affiliated to the 
Gujarat University under the Gujarat University Act, 1949. The 
teachers working in that college were paid in the pay scales 
recommended by the University Grants Commission and the 
college was an aided institution. There was some dispute 
between the University Teachers Association and the University 
regarding the fixation of their pay scales. Ultimately, the 
Chancellor passed an award and this award was accepted by 
the State Government as well as the University and the 
University directed to pay the teachers as per the award. The 
appellants 
refused 
to 
implement 
the 
award 
and 
the 
respondents filed a writ petition seeking a writ of mandamus 
and in the writ petition the appellants contended that the 
college managed by the Trust was not an “authority” coming 
within the purview of Article 12 of the Constitution and 
therefore the writ petition was not maintainable. This plea was 
rejected and this Court held that the writ of mandamus would 
lie against a private individual and the words “any person or 
authority” used in Article 226 are not to be confined only to 
statutory authorities and instrumentalities of the State and 
they may cover any other person or body performing public 
duty. The form of the body concerned is not very much relevant. 
What is relevant is the nature of the duty imposed on the body. 
The duty must be judged in the light of positive obligation owed 
by the person or authority to the affected party. No matter by 
what means the duty is imposed, if a positive obligation exists, 
mandamus cannot be denied.”  
11. Learned senior counsel further contended that when a 
private employer steps into the shoes of a public employer i.e.  to 
 
15 (2005) 6 SCC 657 

11 
 
perform the same functions as had previously been performed to 
the same end and substantially in the same manner, then its 
actions are amenable to judicial review. Reliance in support of this 
contention was placed upon the decision of the United Kingdom 
Court of Appeal in Regina(Beer(trading as Hammer Trout 
Farm)) v. Hampshire Farmers’ Markets & Ltd.16.  
12. It was further contended that the writ petitions came to be 
instituted on behalf of the appellants herein way back in the year 
2011-2013 and at that point of time unquestionably the employer, 
i.e. respondent No. 3(AIL) was a ‘State’ within the ambit and 
purview of Article 12 of the Constitution of India. The writ petitions 
were filed with genuine and bona fide service-related issues of the 
appellant employees 
based on 
substantive allegations of 
infringement of fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 14 
and Article 16 of the Constitution of India. However, the writ 
petitions could not be taken up and decided for over a period of 
almost 10 years and thus, the appellants cannot be non-suited for 
the non-disposal of their bona fide lis in a timely manner. He thus 
urged that appellants herein are entitled to the relief, as claimed 
for in the writ petitions because the employer i.e. respondent No. 
 
16 [2004] 1 WLR 233 

12 
 
3(AIL), undisputedly was amenable to writ jurisdiction at the time 
the writ petitions were instituted and that it continues to discharge 
public duties even after privatisation. 
13. On these grounds, learned senior counsel for the appellants 
implored the Court to accept the appeals; set aside the impugned 
judgment and remand the writ petitions to the High Court for 
adjudication on merits.   
Submission and contentions on behalf of respondent No. 3-
AIL: - 
14. Shri Abhishek Manu Singhvi, learned senior counsel 
appearing on behalf of respondent No. 3(AIL) contended that a bare 
reading of Article 226 of the Constitution of India, would clearly 
show that the ‘test of jurisdiction’ is to be invoked/applied at the 
time of issuance of the writ by the High Court. It is at the stage of 
issuance of a writ that the High Court actually exercises its writ 
jurisdiction, and therefore, it is at that point of time, the High 
Court ought to be satisfied that the person to whom it is issuing a 
writ is amenable to the extraordinary writ jurisdiction.  
15. Learned senior counsel placed reliance upon the decision of 
the High Court of Gujarat in the case of Kalpana Yogesh Dhagat 

13 
 
through Legal Heirs v. Reliance Industries Ltd. 17, wherein a 
writ petition had been filed against Indian Petrochemical 
Corporation Ltd.(“IPCL”) in 2002 which came to be decided in the 
year 2016.  In the intervening period, the IPCL was privatized and 
taken over by Reliance Industries Limited(RIL) in 2007. The 
pertinent issue that cropped up for consideration was whether the 
writ petition filed against IPCL was maintainable even after its 
privatization. Learned Single Judge18 of the Gujarat High Court 
held that the writ petition was not maintainable. The relevant 
portion of Kalpana Yogesh Dhagat(supra) as relied upon is 
extracted hereinbelow:- 
“53. In the case in hand, before the writ application could be 
taken up for final hearing, the status of I.P.C.L. changed. The 
I.P.C.L. once a public sector enterprise is no longer in existence, 
the same has been taken over by the Reliance Industries 
Limited. At no point of time, the legality and validity of the 
amalgamation of the I.P.C.L. with the Reliance Industries 
Limited arose before any Court. In such circumstances, I find 
it extremely difficult to hold that this writ application is 
maintainable and that too by applying the provisions of Order 
22 Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Ultimately, the whole 
issue boils down as to how a writ can be issued against a private 
entity.” 
 
16. Learned senior counsel further placed reliance upon the 
decision of the High Court of Delhi in Asulal Loya vs. Union of 
 
17 2016 SCC OnLine Guj 10186 
18 HMJ J.B. Pardiwala (as his lordship then was) 

14 
 
India and Ors.19, wherein learned Single Judge20 arrived at the 
same conclusion, while dealing with a writ petition filed against 
the Bharat Aluminium Company Limited(BALCO) in the year 1991 
and decided in 2008 i.e., post-privatization of BALCO in 2001.  The 
relevant portions from the said judgment as relied upon are 
extracted hereinbelow: - 
“3. It is fairly well settled that a writ petition is not maintainable 
against a private limited company or a public limited company 
in which the State does not exercise all pervasive control. In 
Binny Limited v. V. Sadasivan, reported in (2005) 6 SCC 657, 
the Supreme Court has held that a writ petition under Article 
226 of the Constitution is normally issued against public 
authorities and can also be issued against private authorities 
when they are discharging public functions and the decision 
which is sought to be corrected or enforced must be in 
discharge of a public function. In the present case, the issues 
and questions involved do not relate to public functions. 
*** 
10. In these circumstances, the present writ petition is 
dismissed without going into the merits of the matter upholding 
the preliminary objection raised by the respondent company 
that it is not a State and, therefore, not amenable to writ 
jurisdiction. It is, however, observed that the petitioner is at 
liberty to approach any forum for redressal of his grievance, if 
so advised and the time spent by him in these proceedings shall 
be taken into consideration for the purpose of limitation. In the 
facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no order as 
to costs.” 
17. Learned senior counsel further submitted that this Court in 
the case of Kaushal Kishor(supra) has held that a writ cannot be 
issued against non-state entities that are not performing any 
 
19 ILR (2009) I Delhi 450 
20 HMJ Sanjeev Khanna (as his lordship then was) 

15 
 
‘Public Function’. He further pointed out that it is the conceded 
case of the appellants that post privatisation, respondent No. 
3(AIL) does not perform any ‘Public Function’ and in any case 
running a private airline with purely a commercial motive can 
never be equated to performing a ‘Public Duty’.  
18. He further submitted that the issue is not that of a ‘Right’ but 
of a ‘Remedy’ i.e. dismissal of a writ petition filed by the appellants 
on the ground of maintainability would not lead to extinguishment 
of the rights of the appellants and only the forum for adjudication 
of their dispute would change. Any alleged violations of Articles 14 
or 16 of the Constitution of India are simply grounds for claiming 
relief which can well be agitated before any other appropriate 
forum. 
19. Learned senior counsel further submitted that appellants’ 
rights, if any, are protected by the specific liberty granted to them 
by the High Court vide the impugned judgment and if a Court of 
competent jurisdiction was to hold in their favour, the same would 
be enforceable against the employer-respondent No. 3(AIL). 
20. He further contended that the appellants employees 
approached the writ Court after significant delay, since the cause 
of action arose between 2007 to 2010 and captioned writ petitions 

16 
 
came to be filed before the Division Bench of the Bombay High 
Court between 2011 to 2013 and implored the Court to dismiss 
the appeals. 
21. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced by learned counsel for the parties and have 
gone through the impugned judgment and the material placed on 
record. 
Questions of law posed for adjudication: - 
22. The questions of law presented for adjudication of this Court 
are: 
(i) 
Whether respondent No.3(AIL) after having been taken over 
by a private corporate entity could have been subjected to writ 
jurisdiction of the High Court? 
(ii) 
Whether the appellants herein could have been non-suited 
on account of the fact that during pendency of their writ petitions, 
the nature of the employer changed from a Government entity to a 
private entity? 
(iii) Whether the delay in disposal of the writ petition could be 
treated a valid ground to sustain the claim of the appellants even 
against the private entity? 

17 
 
Discussion and Conclusion: - 
23. The thrust of submissions of learned senior counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellants was based on the judgment 
of the Division Bench of Calcutta High Court in the case of Ashok 
Kumar Gupta(supra) wherein, it was held in para 32(reproduced 
supra) that the cause of action crystallized at a point of time when 
the authority was subjected to the writ jurisdiction. 
24. Ashok Kumar Gupta’s case(supra) was distinguished by the 
learned Single Judge of the Gujarat High Court in the case of 
Kalpana Yogesh Dhagat(supra). The relevant excerpts from the 
said judgment are reproduced hereinbelow for the sake of ready 
reference: - 
“50. There is no doubt that if the dictum, as explained by the 
Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court (Ashok Kumar Gupta 
vs. Union of India, (2007) SCC OnLine Cal 264) is applied in the 
case in hand, then probably, the writ application could be said 
to be maintainable. However, there are few distinguishing 
features, which, in my view, are important as they go to the 
root of the matter. First, in the case before the Calcutta 
High Court even at the time when the writ application was 
rejected, the company was a public sector undertaking; 
Secondly, even when the appeal was filed, the same was a 
public 
sector 
undertaking; 
and 
thirdly 
and 
most 
importantly, the issue as regards the propriety and legality 
of the privatisation was pending before the Larger Bench of 
the Supreme Court.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
25. In the case of Kalpana Yogesh Dhagat(supra), the learned 
Single Judge of the Gujarat High Court went on to uphold the 

18 
 
preliminary objection regarding the maintainability of the writ 
petition against Reliance Industries Limited(RIL).  The relevant 
excerpts from the said judgment are extracted hereinbelow: - 
“19. …..However, the scope of mandamus is determined by the 
nature of the duty to be enforced, rather than the identity of the 
authority against whom it is sought. If the private body is 
discharging public function, the pubic law remedy can be 
enforced. The duty cast upon a public body may be either 
statutory or otherwise and the source of such power is 
immaterial, but, nevertheless, there must be a public law 
element in such action. The respondent Reliance Petro 
Investment Limited has nothing to do with the public as 
such. It is a company engaged in the business of petroleum 
products. Neither the Union nor the ‘State’ has any control 
over the respondent company. Mere issue of a licence by 
the Union or State Government for the purpose of running 
the company by itself will not make it an instrumentality 
of a “State” or an agency of a “State”. 
*** 
21. The language of Article 226 is no doubt very wide. It states 
that a writ can be issued “to any person or authority” and “for 
enforcement of right conferred by Part III and for any other 
purpose”. However, the aforesaid language in Article 226 
cannot be interpreted and understood literally. The Court 
should not apply the literal rule of interpretation while 
interpreting Article 226. If we take the language of Article 226 
literally it will follow that a writ can be issued to any private 
person or to settle even the private disputes. If we interpret the 
word “for any other purpose” literally it will mean that a writ 
can be issued for any purpose whatsoever, e.g. for deciding 
private disputes, for grant of divorce, succession certificate etc. 
Similarly, if we interpret the words “to any person” literally it 
will mean that a writ can even be issued to the private persons. 
However, this would not be the correct meaning in view of the 
various decisions of the Supreme Court in which it has been 
held that a writ will lie only against the State or instrumentality 
of the State vide Chander Mohan Khanna v. N.C.E.R.T, (1991) 
4 SCC 578, Tekraj Vasandhi v. Union of India, (1988) 1 SCC 
236 : AIR 1988 SC 469, General Manager, Kisan Sahkari Chini 
Mills Ltd. v. Satrughan Nishad, (2003) 8 SCC 639, Federal Bank 
Ltd. v. Sagar Thomas & Co., (2003) 10 SCC 733, Pradeep 
Kumar Biswas v. Indian Institute of Chemical Biology ((2002) 5 
SCC 111) etc. In General Manager, Kisan Sahkari Chini Mills 

19 
 
Ltd. v. Satrughan Nishad (supra), the Supreme Court 
observed that a writ will lie against a private body only 
when it performed a public function or discharged a public 
duty. The ‘R.I.L.’ is not performing a public function nor 
discharging a public duty. It is only doing a commercial 
activity. Hence, no writ lies against it. 
*** 
58. Even if the aforesaid dictum of the Supreme Court is 
applied in the case in hand, it is difficult for this Court to 
take the view that as the writ applicant is not responsible 
for the change of circumstances and the writ application 
was maintainable at the time when it was filed, a writ can 
be issued to a private entity for the purpose of enforcing 
the fundamental rights of the writ applicant alleged to have 
been infringed by a company, a public sector undertaking 
at a point of time and now no longer in existence. It is also 
not legally permissible to take the view that since the I.P.C.L. 
was a Government of India undertaking, a writ could be issued 
against the Union of India. An employee of a public sector 
undertaking by itself will not be a civil servant or an employee 
of the Union of India. At best, he could be termed as an 
employee of a company owned by the Government. Therefore, 
even ignoring the I.P.C.L., no liability could be fastened even on 
the Government of India at this stage. 
59. I am not impressed by the submission of Mr. Bhatt that the 
writ applicant has no other alternative remedy, except invoking 
the writ jurisdiction of this Court. According to Mr. Bhatt, since 
the original writ applicant i.e. the employee has passed away, it 
will be legally impermissible for the legal heirs to file a civil suit 
for declaration for the purpose of challenging the order of 
dismissal from service. The legal heirs on record can definitely 
file a civil suit for declaration that the departmental inquiry was 
not conducted in a fair and transparent manner and the 
consequential order of dismissal is illegal. Section 14 of the 
Limitation Act would also save the situation. Section 14 of the 
Limitation Act itself is meant for the suits.” 
(emphasis supplied)  
 
26. The same controversy was also considered by a learned Single 
Judge of the Delhi High Court in the case of Asulal Loya(supra) 
which was a case involving the termination of services of the writ 

20 
 
petitioner-employee by the company Bharat Aluminium Company 
Limited(BALCO) which was previously a Government of India 
Undertaking and was privatized pursuant to the tripartite share 
purchase agreement. The employee-writ petitioner filed a writ 
petition before the Delhi High Court to challenge his termination 
wherein, 
a 
preliminary 
objection 
was 
raised 
regarding 
maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that during 
pendency of the proceedings, the company had changed hands 
and no longer retained the characteristic of a ‘State’ or ‘Other 
authority’ as defined under Article 12 of the Constitution of India. 
The assertion of the writ petitioner was that the petition was 
maintainable against the respondent on the date it was filed.  As 
per the writ petitioner, the rights and obligations of the parties 
stood crystallized on the date of commencement of litigation and 
thus, the reliefs should be decided with reference to the date on 
which the party entered the portals of the Court. The learned 
Single Judge in para 10(reproduced supra) upheld the preliminary 
objection raised against the maintainability of the writ petition and 
relegated the writ petitioner therein to approach the civil Court for 
ventilating the grievances raised in the writ petition.  

21 
 
27. The Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in the case of 
Tarun Kumar Banerjee(supra) also took a similar view observing 
as below: - 
“1. Both the petitions were filed against Bharat Aluminium Co. 
Ltd. when the petitions were filed, it was a Government of India 
enterprise. We are told by the Respondent that they had 
filed an affidavit on 22-3-1996 thereby pointing out that 
Bharat Aluminium Co. Ltd. has been privatized and share 
of more than 50% have been transferred to Sterlit 
Industries India Ltd. and as a consequence Bharat 
Aluminium Company Ltd. is not a state and is not amenable 
to writ jurisdiction of this Court. 
2. In view of this submission we dispose of both the petitions 
while granting the petitioner liberty to approach any other 
forum for redressal of their grievance if so advised. The time 
spent by the petitioners in prosecuting these proceeding shall 
be taken into consideration for the purpose of limitation in case 
the petitioner choose any such remedy where the question of 
limitation would be relevant.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
28. Further, in the case of Beg Raj Singh(supra), this Court 
observed as below: - 
“7. …. A petitioner, though entitled to relief in law, may yet 
be denied relief in equity because of subsequent or 
intervening 
events, 
i.e. 
the 
events 
between 
the 
commencement of litigation and the date of decision. The 
relief to which the petitioner is held entitled may have been 
rendered redundant by lapse of time or may have been 
rendered incapable of being granted by change in law. There 
may be other circumstances which render it inequitable to 
grant the petitioner any relief over the respondents because of 
the balance tilting against the petitioner on weighing inequities 
pitted against equities on the date of judgment….”  
(emphasis supplied)  
 

22 
 
29. It is thus, seen that various High Courts across the country 
have taken a consistent view over a period of time on the pertinent 
question presented for consideration that the subsequent event i.e. 
the disinvestment of the Government company and its devolution 
into a private company would make the company immune from 
being subjected to writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India, even if the litigant had entered the portals of 
the Court while the employer was the Government. The only 
exception is the solitary judgment of the Division Bench of Calcutta 
High Court in Ashok Kumar Gupta(supra), which was 
distinguished by the learned Single Judge of the Gujarat High 
Court in the case of Kalpana Yogesh Dhagat(supra) and rightly 
so, in our opinion, we have no hesitation in holding that the view 
taken in the judgments of Kalpana Yogesh Dhagat(supra)(by the 
High Court of Gujarat); Asulal Loya(supra)(by the High Court of 
Delhi) and Tarun Kumar Banerjee(supra)(by the High Court of 
Bombay) is the correct exposition on this legal issue and we grant 
full imprimatur to the said proposition of law.   
30. We would like to answer the three questions of law 
enumerated above as follows. 

23 
 
31. In order to be declared as “State” or “other authority” within 
the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India, it would have 
to fall within the well-recognised parameters laid down in a 
number of judgments of this Court. In this regard, we may refer to 
the case of Pradeep Kumar Biswas v. Indian Institute of 
Chemical Biology21 wherein this Court after taking into 
consideration the previous judgments on this point, observed as 
follows: 
“27.Ramana [(1979) 3 SCC 489 : AIR 1979 SC 1628] was noted 
and quoted with approval in extenso and the tests propounded 
for determining as to when a corporation can be said to be an 
instrumentality or agency of the Government therein were 
culled out and summarised as follows : (SCC p. 737, para 9) 
“(1) One thing is clear that if the entire share capital of 
the corporation is held by Government, it would go a long 
way towards indicating that the corporation is an 
instrumentality or agency of Government. (SCC p. 507, 
para 14) 
 
(2) Where the financial assistance of the State is so much 
as to meet almost entire expenditure of the corporation, 
it would afford some indication of the corporation being 
impregnated with governmental character. (SCC p. 508, 
para 15) 
 
(3) It may also be a relevant factor … whether the 
corporation enjoys monopoly status which is State-
conferred or State-protected. (SCC p. 508, para 15) 
 
(4) Existence of deep and pervasive State control may 
afford an indication that the corporation is a State agency 
or instrumentality. (SCC p. 508, para 15) 
 
 
21 (2002) 5 SCC 111  

24 
 
(5) If the functions of the corporation are of public 
importance 
and 
closely 
related 
to 
governmental 
functions, it would be a relevant factor in classifying the 
corporation 
as 
an 
instrumentality 
or 
agency 
of 
Government. (SCC p. 509, para 16) 
 
(6) ‘Specifically, if a department of Government is 
transferred to a corporation, it would be a strong factor 
supportive of this inference’ of the corporation being an 
instrumentality or agency of Government. (SCC p. 510, 
para 18)” 
 
40. The picture that ultimately emerges is that the tests 
formulated in Ajay Hasia [Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib 
Sehravardi, (1981) 1 SCC 722 : 1981 SCC (L&S) 258] are 
not a rigid set of principles so that if a body falls within any 
one of them it must, ex hypothesi, be considered to be a 
State within the meaning of Article 12. The question in 
each case would be — whether in the light of the cumulative 
facts as established, the body is financially, functionally 
and administratively dominated by or under the control of 
the Government. Such control must be particular to the 
body in question and must be pervasive. If this is found 
then the body is a State within Article 12. On the other 
hand, when the control is merely regulatory whether under 
statute or otherwise, it would not serve to make the body a 
State.” 
                                                                  (emphasis supplied) 
32. There is no dispute that the Government of India having 
transferred its 100% share to the company Talace India Pvt Ltd., 
ceased to have any administrative control or deep pervasive control 
over the private entity and hence, the company after its 
disinvestment could not have been treated to be a State anymore 
after having taken over by the private company. Thus, 
unquestionably, the respondent No.3(AIL) after its disinvestment 

25 
 
ceased to be a State or its instrumentality within the meaning of 
Article 12 of the Constitution of India.  
33. Once the respondent No.3(AIL) ceased to be covered by the 
definition of State within the meaning of Article 12 of the 
Constitution of India, it could not have been subjected to writ 
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. 
34. A plain reading of Article 226 of the Constitution of India 
would make it clear that the High Court has the power to issue the 
directions, orders or writs including writs in the nature of Habeas 
Corpus, Mandamus, Certiorari, Quo Warranto and Prohibition to 
any person or authority, including in appropriate cases, any 
Government within its territorial jurisdiction for the enforcement 
of rights conferred by Part-III of the Constitution of India and for 
any other purpose.  
35. This Court has interpreted the term ‘authority’ used in Article 
226 in the case of Andi Mukta(supra), wherein it was held as 
follows: 
“17. There, however, the prerogative writ of mandamus is 
confined only to public authorities to compel performance of 
public duty. The ‘public authority’ for them means everybody 
which is created by statute—and whose powers and duties are 
defined by statute. So government departments, local 
authorities, police authorities, and statutory undertakings and 
corporations, are all ‘public authorities’. But there is no such 

26 
 
limitation for our High Courts to issue the writ ‘in the nature of 
mandamus’. Article 226 confers wide powers on the High 
Courts to issue writs in the nature of prerogative writs. This is 
a striking departure from the English law. Under Article 226, 
writs can be issued to ‘any person or authority’. It can be issued 
‘for the enforcement of any of the fundamental rights and for 
any other purpose’. 
*** 
20. The term ‘authority’ used in Article 226, in the context, 
must receive a liberal meaning like the term in Article 12. 
Article 12 is relevant only for the purpose of enforcement 
of fundamental rights under Article 32. Article 226 confers 
power on the High Courts to issue writs for enforcement of 
the fundamental rights as well as non-fundamental rights. 
The words ‘any person or authority’ used in Article 226 are, 
therefore, not to be confined only to statutory authorities 
and instrumentalities of the State. They may cover any 
other person or body performing public duty. The form of 
the body concerned is not very much relevant. What is 
relevant is the nature of the duty imposed on the body. The 
duty must be judged in the light of positive obligation owed 
by the person or authority to the affected party. No matter 
by what means the duty is imposed. If a positive obligation 
exists mandamus cannot be denied.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
36. Further, in the case of Federal Bank Ltd. v. Sagar 
Thomas 22, this Court culled out the categories of body/persons 
who would be amenable to writ jurisdiction of the High Court 
which are as follows:  
“18. From the decisions referred to above, the position that 
emerges is that a writ petition under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India may be maintainable against (i) the State 
(Government); (ii) an authority; (iii) a statutory body; (iv) an 
instrumentality or agency of the State; (v) a company which is 
financed and owned by the State; (vi) a private body run 
substantially on State funding; (vii) a private body discharging 
public duty or positive obligation of public nature; and (viii) a 
person or a body under liability to discharge any function under 
any statute, to compel it to perform such a statutory function.” 
 
 
22 (2003) 10 SCC 733 

27 
 
 
37. The respondent No.3(AIL), the erstwhile Government run 
airline having been taken over by the private company Talace India 
Pvt. Ltd., unquestionably, is not performing any public duty 
inasmuch as it has taken over the Government company Air India 
Limited for the purpose of commercial operations, plain and 
simple, and thus no writ petition is maintainable against 
respondent No.3(AIL).  The question No. 1 is decided in the above 
manner. 
38. The question of issuing a writ would only arise when the writ 
petition is being decided. Thus, the issue about exercise of extra 
ordinary writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of 
India would arise only on the date when the writ petitions were 
taken up for consideration and decision. The respondent 
No.3(AIL)- employer was a government entity on the date of filing 
of the writ petitions, which came to be decided after a significant 
delay by which time, the company had been disinvested and taken 
over by a private player. Since, respondent No.3 employer had been 
disinvested and had assumed the character of a private entity not 
performing any public function, the High Court could not have 
exercised the extra ordinary writ jurisdiction to issue a writ to such 
private entity. The learned Division Bench has taken care to 

28 
 
protect the rights of the appellants to seek remedy and thus, it 
cannot be said that the appellants have been non-suited in the 
case. It is only that the appellants would have to approach another 
forum for seeking their remedy. Thus, the question No.2 is decided 
against the appellants. 
39. By no stretch of imagination, the delay in disposal of the writ 
petitions could have been a ground to continue with and maintain 
the writ petitions because the forum that is the High Court where 
the writ petitions were instituted could not have issued a writ to 
the private respondent which had changed hands in the 
intervening period. Hence, the question No.3 is also decided 
against the appellants. 
40. Resultantly, the view taken by the Division Bench of the 
Bombay High Court in denying equitable relief to the appellants 
herein and relegating them to approach the appropriate forum for 
ventilating their grievances is the only just and permissible view.  
41. We may also note that the appellants raised grievances by way 
of filing the captioned writ petitions between 2011 and 2013 
regarding various service-related issues which cropped up between 
the appellants and the erstwhile employer between 2007 and 2010. 
Therefore, it is clear that the writ petitions came to be instituted 

29 
 
with substantial delay from the time when the cause of action had 
accrued to the appellants. 
42.  It may further be noted that the Division Bench of Bombay 
High Court, only denied equitable relief under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India to the appellants but at the same time, rights 
of the appellants to claim relief in law before the appropriate forum 
have been protected.  
43. We may further observe that in case the appellants choose to 
approach the appropriate forum for ventilating their grievances as 
per law in light of the observations made by the Division Bench of 
the Bombay High Court, Section 14 of the Limitation Act, 1963 
shall come to the rescue insofar as the issue of limitation is 
concerned. 
44. In wake of the discussion made hereinabove, we do not find 
any reason to take a different view from the one taken by the 
Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in sustaining the 
preliminary objection qua maintainability of the writ petitions 
preferred by the appellants and rejecting the same as being not 
maintainable. 

30 
 
45. With the above observations, the appeals are dismissed.  No 
order as to costs. 
46. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
May 16, 2024