2024 INSC 431
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1496 OF 2023 
 
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. 
 
 
...Appellant(s) 
Versus 
M/s Hyundai Engineering & Construction  
Co. Ltd. & Ors.        
 
 
 
      …Respondent(s) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
The appellant, United India Insurance Co. Ltd., an insurance 
company, challenges the decision by the National Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Commission (hereinafter ‘the NCDRC’), which 
by its impugned order dated 16.01.2023 allowed the Consumer 
Complaint No.160 of 2019 and directed the appellant to release 
and pay an insurance claim of Rs. 39,09,92,828/-.  
2. 
Facts: The National Highway Authority of India (‘NHAI’), 
respondent no. 3 herein, awarded a contract for the design, 
construction and maintenance of a cable-stayed bridge across the 
river Chambal on NH-76 at Kota, Rajasthan to a joint venture 
company comprising of respondent no. 1 and respondent no. 2. 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.05.16
15:44:34 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
The value of the project under the contract was 
Rs. 
213,58,76,000/-. The contract provided that the construction 
work was to be completed within 40 months and the joint venture 
was thereafter assigned the task of maintaining the said bridge for 
a period of 6 years, of which, 2 years was the ‘defect-notification 
period’. NHAI also assigned consultancy services for design, 
construction and maintenance of the bridge to another joint 
venture of M/s Louis Berger Group Inc. (USA) and M/s COWI A/S 
(Denmark). 
3. 
The appellant issued a Contractor’s All Risk Insurance Policy 
covering the interest of NHAI as principal, and M/s Hyundai 
Engineering Infrastructure Co. Ltd. along with M/s Gammon India 
as 
JV 
Contractor 
under 
the 
policy 
bearing 
No. 
011900/44/07/03/60000001 for the period from 05.12.2007 to 
04.12.2011 for a total amount of Rs. 213,58,76,000/-. The 
relevant clauses of the policy are extracted as follows: 
“SECTION I - MATERIAL DAMAGE:  
 
1. The Company hereby agrees with the Insured 
(subject to the exclusions and conditions contained 
herein or endorsed hereon) that if, at anytime 
during the period of insurance stated in the 
Schedule, or during any further period of extension 
thereof the property (except packing materials of 
any kind) or any part thereof described in the 

3 
 
Schedule be lost, damaged or destroyed by any 
cause, other than those specifically excluded 
hereunder, in a manner necessitating replacement 
or repair, the Company will pay or make good all 
such loss or damage upto an amount not exceeding 
in respect of each of the items specified in the 
Schedule the sum set opposite thereto and not 
exceeding in the whole the total Sum Insured 
hereby. 
The Company will also reimburse the Insured for 
the cost of clearance and removal of debris 
following upon any event giving rise to an 
admissible claim under this Policy but not 
exceeding in all the sum (if any) set opposite thereto 
in the Schedule. The term debris only of the Insured 
property and the cost of clearance and removal of 
debris pertaining to property not Insured by the 
policy will not be payable.”  
 
“EXCLUSIONS TO SECTION - I  
The Company, shall not, however, be liable for;  
a) the first amount of the loss arising out of each 
and every occurrence shown as Excess in the 
Schedule; 
b) loss discovered only at the time of taking an 
inventory;  
c) normal wear and tear, gradual deterioration due 
to atmospheric conditions or lack of use or 
obsolescence or otherwise, rust, scratching of 
painted or polished surfaces or breakage of glass;  
d) loss by damage due to faulty design;  
e) the cost of replacement, repair or rectification of 
defective material and/or workmanship, but this 
exclusion shall be limited to the items immediately 
affected and shall not be deemed to exclude loss of 
or damage to correctly executed items resulting 
from an accident due to such defective material 
and/ or workmanship; 
f) the cost necessary for rectification or correction of 
any error during construction unless resulting in 
physical loss or damage  

4 
 
g) loss of or damage to files, drawings, accounts, 
bills, currency, stamps, deeds, evidence of debt, 
notes, securities, cheques, packing materials such 
as cases, boxes, crates;  
h) any damage or penalties on account of the 
Insured's non-fulfilment of the terms of delivery or 
completion under this Contract of construction or of 
any obligations assumed thereunder or lack of 
performance including consequential loss of any 
kind or description or for any aesthetic defects or 
operational deficiencies;  
i) loss of or damage to vehicles licensed for general 
road 
use 
or 
waterborne 
vessels 
or 
machinery/equipment mounted or operated or 
fixed on floating vessels/craft/barges or aircraft.” 
 
4. 
The construction project commenced in December, 2007. 
While the construction was in progress, a part of the constructed 
bridge collapsed on 24.12.2009, resulting in the death of 48 
workmen. On 26.12.2009, the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways, Government of India constituted a Committee of 
Experts (hereinafter, ‘Expert Committee’) under the chairmanship 
of the Director General (Road Development) and Special Secretary, 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. The task of this 
committee was to investigate and report the cause of the collapse. 
An FIR was also lodged against the respondents for offences under 
Sections 304/308 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. After 
investigation, a final report dated 19.03.2010 was filed wherein the 
officials of the respondent companies were charged under the said 

5 
 
provisions. It was found that they were liable for the loss of 48 lives 
due to several defects at the stage of design, construction and 
supervision.  
5. 
The NHAI intimated the appellant about the incident on 
29.12.2009 and requested the deputation of a surveyor to assess 
the damage caused due to the accident and also sought 
indemnification of the loss. A surveyor was appointed. He 
commenced his work and by a letter dated 06.01.2010, he called 
for certain details and clarifications from the respondents. While 
furnishing the details, the respondents made a claim of Rs. 
151,59,94,542/-. 
6. 
The Committee of Experts constituted by the Government of 
India submitted its report on 07.08.2010. Relevant parts of some 
of the important findings of the Committee are as follows: 
 “8.2.2 Views of the Committee 
8.2.2.1 The majority of failures in structures occur 
during construction stages when they are most 
vulnerable. The Chambal Bridge Accident was a 
sudden and catastrophic structural failure. It may 
be pointed out that the bridge was at one of its 
critical stages at the time of the accident. […] 
 
8.2.2.2  […] At this stage, as noted in para 5.8, the 
stabilizing moment would become less than the 
overturning moment. Uncontrolled rotation of the 
pylon about the base would take place which 

6 
 
would result in its gaining momentum as it fell. 
This is borne out by the fact that the catastrophic 
failure involved a catapult action wherein the 
span P3-P4 as a whole, (which was tied together 
by prestressing cables) was thrown some 100 m 
away. 
 
8.2.2.3 The serious distress in span P3-P4 
referred to para 8.2.2.2 could have been caused 
by shortfall in design, poor workmanship, 
unexpected 
load, 
sub-standard 
material 
or 
distress in foundation P4 or a combination of some 
of these. […] 
 
8.2.2.4 It can be seen that had there been 
additional stability devices in place (such as those 
mentioned in para 8.2.2.1) the cycle involving 
progressive loss of rotational restrain at the base 
of the pylon and accentuation of distress in P3-P4 
might not have been initiated and the collapse 
might not have occurred.” 
 
 
7. 
The final conclusions of the committee are relevant for this 
case, and are as follows: 
         “CONCLUSIONS 
 
9.1  From all the information made available by 
the various agencies as also the analysis and 
evaluation made by the Committee, it is felt that 
a combination of factors such as lack of stability 
and robustness in the partially completed 
structure, shortfalls in design and lack of quality 
of workmanship in the construction of span P3-
P4 have contributed to the collapse of this bridge. 
The trigger for initiation of the collapse appears 
to 
have 
been 
unpredictable 
and 
sudden 
additional loading due to failure of supporting 
arrangement of the form traveller.” 
 

7 
 
9.2 Since this is a design-build "Turnkey 
Contract" which covers planning, investigation, 
design, construction and maintenance of the 
cable stayed bridge, the primary responsibility 
for the collapse lies with the Contractor, M/s 
Hyundai — Gammon (JV). The Contractors are 
responsible for allowing the structure to reach a 
vulnerable 
stage 
without 
taking 
adequate 
precautions with respect 
to stability and 
robustness of the partially completed structure 
and the short fall in the design. They are also 
responsible for deficiency in workmanship in the 
construction of span P3-P4. 
 
9.3 The design for this bridge was prepared by 
M/s SYSTRA, the Design Consultants of the 
Contractor M/s Hyundai-Gammon (JV). Since 
there have been shortfalls in design, the 
responsibility for the same also lies with M/s 
SYSTRA. 
 
9.4 The Supervision Consultants for this Project 
are M/s LBG-COWI whose duties include 
construction supervision along with the proof-
checking of the design through M/s COWI While 
carrying out the proof-checking work M/s COWI 
have not highlighted the shortfalls in the design 
which have been observed subsequently by the 
Committee. Further, the Supervision Consultants 
have not been sufficiently proactive in preventing 
lapses in workmanship. They have also given 
tacit 
approval 
for 
major 
changes 
during 
construction without insisting on a proper review 
of the design by the Contractors / Design 
Consultants. 
As 
such, 
the 
Supervision 
Consultants are responsible for these lapses. 
 
9.5 M/s Freyssinet acted as specialist Agency to 
M/s Hyundai for supply, installation and 
operation of the form traveller equipment for 
cantilever construction, post - tensioning work 
and installation of stay cables. Since the trigger 

8 
 
for the collapse appears to be the failure of the 
Freyssibar and / or the supporting arrangement 
for the form traveller, the extent of their 
responsibility may be examined keeping in view 
the Contract Agreement between the concerned 
agencies. 
 
9.6 Apportioning of extent of responsibility to the 
various agencies for the collapse of the structure 
could be examined further by the Employer 
(NHAI) keeping in view the contracts for this 
Project entered into between various agencies 
with each other and with NHAI.” 
 
8. 
On 06.12.2010, NHAI issued a show-cause notice to the 
respondent nos. 1 and 2 calling upon them to justify as to why 
they should not be debarred. The respondents replied to the show 
cause notice, and after perusing the reply, the NHAI took a decision 
to permit them to carry out the remaining part of the contract. 
9. 
In the meanwhile, the surveyor appointed by the appellant 
submitted its final report on 28.02.2011. While assessing the net 
loss at Rs. 39,09,92,828/-, the surveyor recommended to the 
appellant that the insurance claim must be rejected as the 
respondents no. 1 and 2 had violated the conditions of the 
insurance policy. Based on the surveyor’s report and also the 
findings and conclusions of the Expert Committee, the appellant 
repudiated the insurance claim in its letter dated 21.04.2011. 

9 
 
10. By their letter dated 17.06.2011, respondents nos. 1 and 2 
requested the appellants to reconsider the decision of repudiation. 
In support of their contentions, the respondents relied on certain 
independent reports submitted by i) Mr. Jacques Combault; ii) M/s 
SETRA/CETE (French Ministry of Transportation Technical 
Department); iii) M/s Halcrow Group Ltd. and iv) AECOM Asia Co. 
Ltd. Relying on these reports, the respondents urged stated that 
there is no fault in the design of the bridge, and this is clearly 
reiterated by technical experts, who are specialists in the field.  
11. As the appellant agreed to reconsider the repudiation, 
respondents no. 1 and 2 submitted various documents in support 
of their claim. The appellant re-considered the claim, and by a 
letter dated 17.04.2017 informed the respondents that the original 
decision of repudiation is affirmed as they did not find any 
justifiable reason for accepting the claim. The relevant portion of 
the said communication dated 17.04.2017 is as follows: 
“We refer to your letter Ref: 17011/27/2006-
kota/CAR/RJ-05/3909, 
dt: 
18.01.2017 
and 
Contractor letter Ref: HZ-6718, dt: 04.02.2017 
and also the subsequent meeting held at our 
office-Chennai. On perusal of the documents 
provided, we find that no further points have 
emerged in support of the claim. 
In view of the above we regret our inability 
to reconsider the claim which was repudiated.” 

10 
 
 
12. In the meanwhile, respondents no. 1 and 2 completed the 
work under the contract by 31.07.2017. The bridge was 
inaugurated and put to public use from 29.08.2017, and it is said 
to be operating since then.  
13. Almost after 2 years of the rejection of the claim, on 
24.01.2019, respondents no. 1 and 2 filed a Consumer Complaint 
No. 160 of 2019 before the NCDRC alleging deficiency in the 
appellant’s service and unfair trade practice adopted by it. 
14. Decision of the NCDRC: At the outset, the NCDRC rejected 
the preliminary objection of the appellant that the summary 
jurisdiction under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (hereinafter, 
‘the CPA’) is not appropriate for dealing with complicated questions 
of law and fact. The objection relating to limitation in filing the 
complaint was also dismissed by holding that the period for 
calculating the limitation would commence from 17.04.2017 and 
not from 21.04.2011.  
14.1    On merits of the matter, the NCDRC held that the report of 
the Committee of Experts was inconclusive as it could not identify 
the precise reasons for the collapse of the bridge. On the other 
hand, the NCDRC placed reliance on the reports of i) Mr. Jacques 

11 
 
Combault, ii) the Halcrow Group, iii) SETRA and iv) AECOM Asia 
Co. Ltd., and came to the conclusion that there is no defect in the 
design of the bridge and that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 are not 
at fault.  
14.2    Finally, the NCDRC relied on the decision of the NHAI 
permitting the respondent nos. 1 and 2 to proceed with the 
construction of the remaining part of the bridge and held that if 
the NHAI found the respondents to be competent enough to 
continue with the contract, it can safely be concluded that they 
were not at fault.  
14.3    In this view of the matter, the NCDRC directed the 
appellant to pay the respondents no. 1 and 2 a sum of Rs. 
39,09,92,828/- with an interest at 9% p.a. from the first date of 
repudiation, i.e., 21.04.2011.  
14.4   Strangely, while the judgment of the NCDRC was 
pronounced on 16.01.2023, an addendum came to be added to the 
judgment. This addendum is undated and seeks to amend 
paragraphs 28 and 29 and directs payment of Rs. 151,59,94,542/- 
instead of Rs. 39,09,92,828/-. The relevant portion of the 
addendum is extracted here for ready reference:  

12 
 
“32. It will be relevant to mention here that though 
the 
Complainant 
No.1, 
vide 
letter 
dated 
27.02.2010 had submitted a detailed Claim 
Statement of ₹93,67,17,876 to the Surveyor but it 
was revised vide e-mail dated 07.03.2010 to the 
tune of ₹149,87,44,914/-. It was again revised 
vide letter dated 24.06.2010 (Serial No.2 of the 
Claim Statement - ₹8,29,15,604 to ₹10,01,65,232) 
to a final Claim of ₹151,59,94,542/-. The 
Surveyor had, however, assessed the total loss at 
₹39,09,92,828/- . Even though in the Written 
Submissions filed by the Learned Counsel for the 
Complainants they have claimed that at least a 
net loss of ₹39,09,92,828/- be payable towards 
the insurance claim but in my considered opinion 
the Complainants are entitled for the payment of 
entire loss of ₹151,59,94,542/- claimed by them.  
 
33. Consequently, the Complaint is partly allowed 
with a direction to the Insurance Company to pay 
a sum of ₹151,59,94,542/- to the Complainants 
along with interest @9% p.a. from the date of 
repudiation of the claim i.e. 21.04.2011 till the 
actual realization, within a period of 8 weeks from 
the date of passing of the order failing which the 
amount shall attract interest @12% p.a. for the 
said period. The Complainants shall also be 
entitled for a costs of ₹50,000/-.” 
 
15. Mr. Dama Seshadri Naidu, learned senior counsel appearing 
for the respondents has submitted that he is not in a position to 
support the judgment amending the paragraphs 28 and 29 and 
directing 
the 
payment 
of 
the 
revised 
amount 
of 
Rs. 
151,59,94,542/-. It is unimaginable as to how the NCDRC could 
unilaterally revise the claim from Rs. 39,09,92,828/- to Rs. 
151,59,94,542/-, 
without 
hearing 
the 
parties 
and 
more 

13 
 
surprisingly when respondent nos. 1 and 2 have themselves filed 
written submissions confining the claim to Rs. 39,09,92,828/-. Be 
that as it may, in view of the submission of the learned counsel for 
the respondent that he will confine the claim Rs. 39,09,92,828/-, 
this issue need not detain us any further.  
16. Analysis: Insurance is a contract of indemnification, being a 
contract for a specific purpose1, which is to cover defined losses2. 
The courts have to read the insurance contract strictly. 
Essentially, the insurer cannot be asked to cover a loss that is not 
mentioned. Exclusion clauses in insurance contracts are 
interpreted strictly and against the insurer as they have the effect 
of completely exempting the insurer of its liabilities.3  
17. In Texco Marketing P. Ltd. v. TATA AIG General Insurance 
Company Ltd.,4 while dealing with an exclusion clause, this Court 
has held that the burden of proving the applicability of an 
exclusionary clause lies on the insurer. At the same time, it was 
stated that such a clause cannot be interpreted so that it conflicts 
 
1 Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Sony Cheriyan, (1999) 6 SCC 451. 
2 United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Levis Strauss (India) (P) Ltd., (2022) 6 SCC 1. 
3 New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Rajeshwar Sharma, (2019) 2 SCC 671; 
Canara Bank v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd., (2020) 3 SCC 455; 
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Samayanallur Primary Agricultural Coop. Bank, 
(1999) 8 SCC 543. 
4 (2023) 1 SCC 428. 

14 
 
with the main intention of the insurance. It is, therefore, the duty 
of the insurer to plead and lead cogent evidence to establish the 
application of such a clause5. The evidence must unequivocally 
establish that the event sought to be excluded is specifically 
covered by the exclusionary clause.6 The judicial positions on the 
nature of an insurance contract, and how an exclusion clause is 
to be proved, shall anchor our reasoning in the following 
paragraphs. 
18. Seeking to justify their repudiation, the appellant relied on 
the affidavit of evidence by Mr. S. Anantha Padmanabhan, 
examined as RW 2. He produced the surveyor’s report as well as 
the Expert Committee’s report as Ex. RW 2/2. On the other hand, 
the reports of the independent experts relied upon by the 
respondents no. 1 and 2 were not marked as exhibits. They were 
not adduced in evidence as none of these experts was examined as 
a witness.  Under these circumstances, we have no hesitation in 
coming to a conclusion that the appellants have discharged the 
burden as enunciated in Texco (supra). 
 
5 National Insurance Company Ltd. v. Vedic Resorts and Hotels Pvt. Ltd., 2023 
SCC OnLine SC 648. 
6 National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Ishar Das Madan Lal, 2007 (4) SCC 105. 

15 
 
19. The Expert Committee was constituted by the Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways (‘MORTH’), Government of India. It 
was chaired by the Director General (Road Development) and 
Special Secretary, MORTH. The other members of the Committee 
were Mr. Ninan Koshi DG (RD) & AS (Retd.), Prof. Mahesh Tandon, 
Bridge Specialist, and Prof. A.K. Nagpal, Dept. of Civil Engineering, 
IIT Delhi. We have referred to the constitution as well as the 
expertise of the Committee only to assure ourselves that it 
comprised of experts in the field of civil engineering. It is also 
indicative of the fact that the members were independent and well-
qualified to examine and submit a report. We would, therefore, be 
justified in relying on the findings of the Expert Committee. In fact, 
the NCDRC’s opinion about the Expert Committee is not about 
lack of credibility, or lack of expertise, rather its opinion was only 
that the Committee was not conclusive in its findings.  
20. The proof of the pudding is in its eating - we will straight away 
refer to the relevant portions of the Expert Committee’s report.  
Referring to the variations introduced on-site without any approval 
by the design checker, the Committee held as follows: 
“5.1.2 Since this is a Design Build Contract, the 
Contractors M/s Hyundai-Gammon (JV) had 
appointed M/s SYSTRA of France as their Design 

16 
 
Consultant. The designs prepared by M/s 
SYSTRA were proof checked by M/s COWI, the 
Proof Check Consultant. During the course of 
presentations and discussions with various 
agencies, there were some contradictions in the 
stand taken by M/s SYSTRA and M/s COWI as 
regards the extent of proof checking of designs by 
the Proof Check Consultant. In fact, M/s COWI in 
their submission dated 28th May, 2010 (Annexure 
L-21) have stated as follows: “The Design Checker 
verified the Final Design prior to start of 
construction. The variations introduced on site 
were introduced by the BOT Contractor. We expect 
that all variations were subject to verification and 
approval of the Designer. The Design Checker was 
not requested to review any design verification 
following variations on site from the Final Design. 
[…]”  
(emphasis supplied) 
20.1    The Committee noted that each lateral span of the bridge 
was supposed to be a monolithic structure. A lateral span is the 
structure between two support pillars. However, the collapsed 
lateral span was cast in multiple parts, as noted in the following 
paragraph: 
“5.3.3 M/s SYSTRA have expressed vide their 
submission dated 17th April, 2010 (Annexure  
H-11, page 3) that they have envisaged “one go” 
(i.e. monolithic construction) for each lateral span 
during the development of the design. However, 
during actual construction the lateral span P3-P4 
was cast in seven parts. The lower part of the box 
girder (U-shaped section comprising bottom slab 
and webs upto about mid height) was concreted 
in four different stages with three vertical 
construction joints. The upper part of the box 
girder (comprising deck slab and top half of the 

17 
 
webs) was later concreted in three stages (with 
two vertical construction joints). It has been 
informed by M/s Hyundai-Gammon JV vide their 
letter HN-1656 dated 1st September, 2009 
(Annexure L-18, page 3) that M/s SYSTRA, the 
designer of the main bridge including lateral 
spans, were aware of this. In fact, Mr. J. Mirailles 
of M/s SYSTRA had visited the site in the month 
of July 2009 and stayed there for a couple of 
weeks to inspect the ongoing construction. The 
construction of lateral span P3- P4 in parts was 
being carried out at that time…” 
 
“5.3.5 The query of the Committee regarding 
position 
of 
M/s 
LBG-COWI 
in 
respect 
of 
applicability of Clauses of AASHTO relating to 
“Segmentally Constructed Bridges” to the design 
of lateral span P3-P4, was discussed with Mr. 
Nielsen of M/s COWI on 23rd June, 2010. Mr. 
Nielsen mentioned that as per his understanding, 
it was a case of segmental construction. […]”  
(emphasis supplied) 
 
20.2    The Committee noted that the point at which the cable was 
going to be suspended with the pylon was crucial. It observed that 
the height at which the suspension took place was 77 metres, 
whereas, it was supposed to be 40 metres. The relevant paragraph 
is as follows: 
“6.2 The drawing No.A104-DWG-MB-FD-1301 
REV. 1 dated 28th May, 2009 [Annexure H-01(ii)] 
shows that the lateral spans P3-P4 as well as P2-
P3, should have been completed and external 
tendons tensioned before the first stay cable was 
installed. The steel box for anchoring the first stay 
cable was to be placed in the pylon at the height 
of 33.30m. Also, the first cantilever segment 
towards the river side from P4 was to be 

18 
 
constructed only after the lateral spans P3-P4 and 
P2-P3 had been completed and fully prestressed. 
It is seen that this sequence was changed in the 
actual construction. Further, drawing No.A104-
DWG-MB-FD-846 REV. 2(c) dated (??)/07/09 
[Annexure H-01(ii)] specifically mentions that 
“tendons tensioning on span P2-P3 must be 
performed before pouring segment S10”. This 
requirement was also changed during actual 
construction. […]  
6.3 …This implies that the height of the pylon 
should have been about 40 m at the time of 
tensioning of first stay cable at cantilever segment 
S10. However, it is seen that at the time of casting 
of segment S10, the free-standing pylon had 
already been constructed to a height of 77 m.”  
   (emphasis supplied) 
 
20.3    The other relevant portions cited to us from the Committee’s 
Report include para 6.5, which speaks about the changes in the 
sequence of construction without consulting or informing the 
design consultants of the project. Para 6.8 was relied on to 
highlight further discrepancies between the approved drawing 
plans and the actual construction. Concrete batching plants 
involved were of a lower capacity, leading to delays in construction 
of the lateral spans. Para 8.1.2 (iii) was also brought to our notice, 
as it spoke about the changes which were brought about without a 
proper technical review. The conclusions of the committee have 
already been quoted by us in paragraph 7 above, and it was found 
that:  

19 
 
a) a combination of factors such as lack of stability and 
robustness in the structure, shortfall in design, lack of 
quality workmanship have all contributed to the 
collapse;  
b) the primary responsibility lies with the contractor, M/s 
Hyundai and Gammon (JV) who are responsible for 
allowing the structure to reach a vulnerable stage 
without taking adequate precautions and there is a 
shortfall in the design; 
c) there were shortcomings in the design for the bridge 
prepared by M/s SYSTRA and the responsibility for the 
design lies with M/s SYSTRA; 
d) M/S COWI, the supervision consultants have not 
highlighted the shortfall in the design. M/s COWI has 
not been sufficiently proactive in preventing lapses in 
workmanship. They have given tacit approvals for 
major changes without insisting on a proper review of 
the design; 
e) The trigger for the collapse appears to be the failure of 
M/s Freyssinet. Their responsibility must be examined 
in detail.  

20 
 
21. We are inclined to accept the appellant’s submission that 
there is sufficient evidence to justify repudiation of the claim on 
the basis of the exclusion clause. On the other hand, there is 
absolutely no evidence on behalf of the respondents. His argument 
is only that the Surveyor/Committee report is not clinching, it is 
open ended and does not hold that the respondents no. 1 and 2 
are responsible for the negligence.  
22. We will now refer to the surveyor’s report, the findings of 
which are as follows:  
“C) After a detailed study of the Insured’s 
submission vide their letter dt;27.02.2010 and 
several rounds of face to face interactions with the 
Insured’s Engineers at site, we derived the 
following inferences;  
 
1). The junction at Pylon P4, was the most critical 
and vulnerable in the entire construction and had 
to be handled with due care and diligence.  
 
2). It was clear and obvious, that, an unstable 
equilibrium has been created at this junction, 
(where, the over turning moment was in excess of 
resisting moment), due to the shearing of the slab 
in lateral span P3 -P4 at about 15 mts from the P4 
junction, which has caused the tilting of the Pylon, 
dragging with it, spans P3-P4, P3-P2 and Piers P4, 
P3. The shearing of the slab is purely a Design 
aspect.  
 
3). The restraints imposed on the movement of the 
Bearings at P4 were released by the Insured prior 
to completion of the main spans, which facilitated 

21 
 
movement of Pylon along with Lateral spans and 
this is one of the most significant factors, 
contributing to this massive failure.  
 
4). The sequence of operations in the construction 
of the Bridge were changed in actual construction 
to make up for the time lost and this has adversely 
affected the stability of the P4 joint.   
 
5). Raising Pylon P4 to an abnormal height of 77 
mts (out of 80 mts) without any lateral anchorage 
in the form of stringers, had left the Pylon P4 
exposed to heavy wind pressure and in a state of 
unstable equilibrium, ready to collapse at any 
time, with the application of a little external force 
in excess.  
 
6). We were informed that, the concreting of 
Lateral span P3-P4 was done in 7 stages, 
whereas, it should have been done at ONE GO. 
This leaves vertical joints which are vulnerable. 
We also noted that, the Insured had to resort to 
concreting in stages, due to insufficient Batching 
Plants.  
 
7). Change in allocation of works amongst the 
Joint Venture Partners also played a key role in 
the quality of workmanship. At several places, 
M/s.Gammon had to carryout the jobs, supposed 
to have been carried out by M.s,Hyundai. Even in 
the affected location of P4, the construction of Pier 
P4 was the responsibility of M/s. Hyundai, 
whereas, it was carried out by M/s Gammon.  
 
8). Lack of co-ordination and planning between 
proof checking consultant and design consultants 
could have been streamlined. 
 
[…] 
 

22 
 
11). The sequence of concreting carried out on the 
date of failure, as informed to us, was different 
from the versions of the Insured. […]”  
 
23. It is important to note that the surveyor was examined as 
RW-1 
and 
his 
evidence 
remained 
unrebutted. 
In 
National   Insurance   Company   Ltd.   v.   Hareshwar 
Enterprises (P) Ltd.7 and National Insurance Company Ltd. v. Vedic 
Resorts and Hotels Pvt. Ltd.,8 this court has held that the 
surveyor’s report is a credible evidence and the court may rely on 
it until a more reliable evidence is brought on record. In the 
present case, the surveyor’s report was the evidence tendered by 
the insurance company, and it has not been treated as unreliable 
by the NCDRC. 
24. Mr. Naidu, appearing on behalf of the respondents, 
commenced his submission by referring to certain portions of the 
judgment of this court in Texco (supra) to emphasise that 
exclusionary clauses place extraordinary burden on the insurance 
company. We have already answered this question by referring to 
the evidence adduced by the appellant, which we consider to be a 
sufficient discharge of the burden. On the Expert Committee’s 
 
7 (2021) SCC Online SC 628. 
8 2023 SCC OnLine SC 648. 

23 
 
report, Mr. Naidu has re-iterated the finding of the NCDRC that it 
is inconclusive apart from being a mere opinion. Even this 
submission stands answered by extracting specific and categorical 
findings of the Committee as well as the surveyor’s report.  
25. Mr. Naidu sought to draw support from the reports of 
independent experts on the issue of design to establish that the 
respondents are not at fault. Mr. Naidu sought to rely on reports 
by (i) Mr. Jacques Combault; (ii) M/s SETRA/CETE (French 
Ministry of Transportation Technical Department); (iii) M/s 
Halcrow Group Ltd.; and (iv) AECOM Asia Co. Ltd.  
26. At the outset, the concerned experts were never examined 
before the NCDRC. Further, these reports were not based on site-
inspection. They are all theoretical in nature. For example, the 
report Mr. Jacques Combault is based on: 
“The analysis reported in the following pages is 
based on:  
- 
The description of Bridge Concept as proposed 
by Systra  
- 
The Main characteristics of the Structural 
Concept as proposed by Systra  
- 
The State of the Art in the field of prestressed 
concrete cable stayed bridges  
- 
Examples of similar bridges successfully 
achieved in the past” 
 
 

24 
 
After a theoretical analysis, the following conclusion is drawn: 
“The structural concept of the Chambal Bridge as 
proposed by Systra is: -  
- 
perfectly fitting the site-conditions  
- 
conforming to the state of the art in the field of 
cable stayed bridges  
The construction methods, as proposed by Systra, 
are simple and proven processes well adapted to 
the structural concept.” 
 
 
27. 
A similar approach was adopted by the other experts. On the 
other hand, the surveyor has examined himself and adduced 
documents. Further, there is sufficient evidence to indicate that 
the surveyor has made site-visits and the proof of that was part of 
the pleadings filed before us.  
28. The submission that NHAI continuing the contract with 
respondent nos. 1 and 2 and they have, in fact, completed the 
contract does not impress us. The continuation of work by 
respondent nos. 1 and 2 could be due to various reasons. Even if 
the NHAI’s decision to continue is taken to be a valid economic 
decision, that by itself cannot be a reason for not applying the 
applicable clause of the contract if such applicability is otherwise 
proved by cogent evidence.   
29. For the reasons stated above, we are of the opinion that the 
NCDRC fell into a clear error of law and fact in allowing the 

25 
 
consumer complaint for multiple reasons. As we have not agreed 
with the preliminary objection of the appellant to reject the 
complaint and relegate the respondents to civil court, we made 
extra efforts to examine the facts in detail. It is for this reason that 
the evidentiary value of the reports, their scope and ambit, and 
their contents were examined by us in some detail.  
30. For the reasons stated above, we allow the appeal and set-
aside the impugned order dated 16.01.2023 passed by the NCDRC 
in Consumer Complaint No. 160 of 2019. 
31.   Pending applications, if any, shall be disposed of. 
32.   There shall be no order as to costs. 
 
……………………………….J. 
                               [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
……………………………….J. 
[ARAVIND KUMAR] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
May 16, 2024