2024 INSC 443
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.                 OF 2024 
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 4111 of 2020) 
  
 
BANO SAIYED PARWAZ  
 
 
       …. APPELLANT  
 
VERSUS  
 
 
CHIEF CONTROLLING REVENUE  
AUTHORITY AND INSPECTOR 
GENERAL OF REGISTRATION 
AND CONTROLLER OF STAMPS & ORS.    ...RESPONDENTS 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J. 
 
 
Leave granted.   
  
 
2. 
The instant appeal is directed against the judgment and 
order impugned dated 02.08.2019 passed by the High Court of 
Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition No. 281 of 2019 whereby 
the High Court, dismissed the appellant’s demand for refund of 
Stamp Duty paid towards an un-executed conveyance deed. In 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Joshi
Date: 2024.05.17
18:26:07 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
effect, the impugned order has upheld the orders of respondent 
nos. 1 and 2 dated 09.06.2015 & 25.02.2016 rejecting the 
aforesaid demand of the appellant.    
 
3. 
Briefly stated, the facts of the matter are that the appellant 
agreed to purchase the property bearing C.T.S. No.340.340/1 to 
340/14 of Kurla-1 Division situated lying and being Fitwalla 
Cottage, Fitwalla Compound Bazaar Ward, Old Agra Road, Kurla 
(West), Mumbai-400070 from the Vendor - Mohammed Hanif 
Ahmed Fitwala and to that effect, they prepared a deed of 
conveyance which was sent for adjudication to respondent no.1 
on 07.05.2014 for payment of stamp duty, which was assessed 
at Rs. Rs.25,34,350 (Rupees Twenty-Five Lakhs Thirty-Four 
Thousand Three Hundred Fifty Only). Accordingly, the appellant 
paid this sum and purchased the stamp duty on 13.05.2014 for 
registration of conveyance deed.  
 
4. 
Albeit, the stamp duty was paid by the appellant to 
respondent no.1 on 13.05.2014, said conveyance deed was not 
lodged for registration as the vendor of the appellant by playing 
fraud on the appellant had earlier sold the said property to a 
third party in 1992. However, before executing the said 

3 
 
conveyance deed, the appellant had given a public notice but 
nobody objected to the said transaction. Thereafter, in view of 
these facts, the appellant decided to cancel the said transaction, 
for which he tried to contact the said vendor but he was not 
available, compelling the appellant to file a complaint with the 
Police 
Authority. 
Thereafter, 
the 
Vendor 
executed 
the 
cancellation deed on 13.11.2014. However, the appellant had on 
22.10.2014 already applied online for refund of the said amount 
as per Section 48 of the Maharashtra Stamp Act, 19581 and had 
filed written application on 06.12.2014 along with the 
documents. The appellant’s case was rejected by respondent 
nos.1 & 2 on the ground that the application filed by her was 
beyond the limitation period as per Section 48 of the Act.  
 
5. 
The learned counsel for the appellant submits that the 
appellant’s case is squarely covered within the circumstances 
laid down in Section 47 (c) [1] and [5] of the Act and Rules 21 
and 22A of the Bombay Stamp Rules, 19392 which read as 
under:  
“47. (c) the stamp used for an instrument executed by any party 
thereto which—  
 
1. ‘Act’ 
2. ‘Rules’ 

4 
 
(1) has been afterwards found 1[by the party] to be 
absolutely void in law from the beginning; 2[1A] has been 
afterwards found by the Court, to be absolutely void from the 
beginning under section 31 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963; 
*** 
(5) by reason of the refusal of any person to act under the 
same, or to advance any money intended to be thereby 
secured, or by the refusal or non-acceptance of any office 
thereby granted, totally fails of the intended purpose;” 
 
 
“21. Evidence as to circumstances of claim to refund or 
renewal.  
 
The collector may require any person claiming a refund or 
renewal under chapter v of the Act, or his duly authorized 
agent, to make oral deposition oath or affirmation, or to file 
an affidavit, setting forth the circumstances under which 
the claim has arisen, and may also' if he thinks fit, call for 
the evidence of witnesses in support of the statement set 
forth in any such deposition or affidavit. 
NOTES 
Claim for refund of stamp duty.  
Under rule 21 where a claim for refund of stamp duty is 
made, the procedure laid down under the rule to take 
evidence by the Collector. Accordingly, the Collector may 
direct any person claiming a refund under Chapter v to 
make an oral deposition on oath or affirmation or to file an 
affidavit, setting forth the circumstances under which the 
claim has arisen and if he thinks fit call all evidence of 
witnesses in support of the statement set forth in any such 
deposition or affidavit. Rule 22A deals with matters relating 
deducting to deduction to be made from the amount of 
spoiled or misused or unused stamps. The word “spoiled 
stamps” is not expressly defined either in the Act or in the 
Rules but Section 47 describe instances of such spoiled 
stamps for the purpose of claiming refund.  
 
22A, Rule of deduction from the amount of stamps, 
allowance for spoiled, misused or unused etc.  
 
When any person is in possession of –  
(a) spoiled stamps, under section 47, misused stamps under 
section 50, or printed forms on- stamped paper no longer 
required under section 49 and he applies to the collector for 
making allowance in respect or the same.  
(b) a stamp or stamps which have not been spoiled or 
rendered unfit or useless for the purpose intended, but, for 
which he has no immediate use and he delivers up the same 
to the collector for cancellation, then the collector may, give 
in lieu thereof may repay to such person, the same, value in 
money of such stamp or stamps or printed forms on stamped 
papers, after deducting rupees ten for each stamp or printed 

5 
 
form on stamped paper or amount equal to (ten per cent) of 
the value of such stamp or such printed form, whichever is 
more”. 
 
 
6. 
The learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that 
the law of refund embodied in Sections 47 and 48 of the Act and 
Rules 21 and 22A of the Rules, envisages two separate and 
distinct stages for refund of stamp duty i.e., i) making of 
application for refund within six months and ii) holding of enquiry 
and leading of evidence as per Rules made by the State 
Government, to satisfy the Collector that case of refund is 
covered by one or more of the circumstances (a) (b) and (c) [1] 
to [8] set out in Section 47 of the Act. 
 
7. 
The learned counsel for the appellant would further submit 
that the respondent no. 2 and the High Court as well 
misconstrued the provisions of Sections 47 & 48 of the Act and 
has also overlooked Rules 21 and 22A of the Rules. In as much 
as, the appellant’s application was within time and the same 
could not have been rejected as barred by limitation.  
 
8. 
Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondents 
vehemently opposed the present appeal and submitted that in 

6 
 
the present proceeding though the appellant filed application for 
refund of stamp duty on 22.10.2014, but the cancellation deed 
executed between the appellant and the seller of the said 
property was dated 13.11.2014 i.e., beyond the limitation period 
of six months from the date of purchase of stamp duty, after 
cancellation of those documents, as prescribed under Section 48 
of the Act. As per Section 48 of the Act, the last date for applying 
for the refund was 12.11.2014, therefore, the application filed 
by the appellant was beyond the period of limitation.  
 
9. 
We have heard both the counsel for the parties and perused 
the pleadings.    
 
10. Admittedly, the appellant being a bonafide purchaser is a 
victim of fraud played upon her by the vendor.  She has paid a 
sum of Rs.25,34,400/- towards stamp duty for registration of 
conveyance deed. However, the conveyance deed was not lodged 
for registration as she become aware of the fraud played by the 
Vendor and thereafter, she immediately applied online on 
22.10.2014 for refund of the stamp duty. Her effort to contact 
the vendor to execute a cancellation deed did not fructify 

7 
 
immediately because of unavailability of the Vendor which Led 
to a police complaint and it is only at this point of time, due to 
intervention of the Police, the vendor could be traced, and a 
cancellation deed was executed on 13.11.2014. 
 
11. From the above admitted facts, prima facie it appears that 
the appellant herein was pursuing her remedies in law and she 
was not lax in her approach towards seeking refund of the said 
stamp duty paid by her and she has been denied the same only 
on the ground of limitation.  
 
12. The finding returned by the High Court in the impugned 
order that the appellant’s application for refund dated 
22.10.2014 is not maintainable in law as it has been filed before 
the cancellation of the conveyance deed dated 13.11.2014 is 
misplaced in so far as while submitting the online application 
there was no caution to the appellant that all of the documents 
and materials for the satisfaction of the Collector should be filed 
with the application- either online or hard copy- itself and the 
finding of the learned single judge is contrary to the 
requirements stipulated by Sections 47 & 48 which envisages 

8 
 
only the application for relief under Section 47 of the Act  to be 
made within six months of the date of the instrument which 
prima facie is appeared to have been done by the appellant in 
the present case.  
 
13. The evidence required and enquiry to be made in terms of 
Section 47 of the Act is a separate process altogether and 
apropos circumstances for refund under Section 47 (c) [1] & [5] 
of the Act, evidence is not required to be filed along with the 
application- either the online application or separately on the 
same day by way of hard copy. 
 
14. In Committee-GFIL v. Libra Buildtech Private Limited 
& Ors.3, wherein the issue of refund of stamp duty under the 
same Act was in question, this Court has observed and held inter 
alia as under:  
“29. This case reminds us of the observations made by M.C. 
Chagla, 
C.J. 
in Firm 
Kaluram 
Sitaram v. Dominion 
of 
India [1953 SCC OnLine Bom 39 : AIR 1954 Bom 50] . The 
learned Chief Justice in his distinctive style of writing observed 
as under in para 19: (Firm Kaluram case, SCC OnLine Bom) 
“19. … we have often had occasion to say that when the State 
deals with a citizen it should not ordinarily rely on 
technicalities, and if the State is satisfied that the case of the 
citizen is a just one, even though legal defences may be open 
 
3. (2015) 16 SCC 31 

9 
 
to it, it must act, as has been said by eminent Judges, as an 
honest person.” 
 
We are in respectful agreement with the aforementioned 
observations, as in our considered opinion these observations 
apply fully to the case in hand against the State because 
except the plea of limitation, the State has no case to defend 
their action. 
xxx  xxx  xxx 
32. In our considered opinion, even if we find that applications 
for claiming refund of stamp duty amount were rightly 
dismissed by the SDM on the ground of limitation prescribed 
under Section 50 of the Act yet keeping in view the settled 
principle of law that the expiry of period of limitation 
prescribed under any law may bar the remedy but not the 
right, the applicants are still held entitled to claim the refund 
of stamp duty amount on the basis of the grounds mentioned 
above. In other words, notwithstanding dismissal of the 
applications on the ground of limitation, we are of the view 
that the applicants are entitled to claim the refund of stamp 
duty amount from the State in the light of the grounds 
mentioned above.” 
 
15. The legal position is thus settled in Libra Buildtech (supra) 
that when the State deals with a citizen it should not ordinarily 
rely on technicalities, even though such defences may be open 
to it.  
 
 
16. We draw weight from the aforesaid judgment and are of the 
opinion that the case of the appellant is fit for refund of stamp 
duty in so far as it is settled law that the period of expiry of 
limitation prescribed under any law may bar the remedy but not 
the right and the appellant is held entitled to claim the refund of 

10 
 
stamp duty amount on the basis of the fact that the appellant 
has been pursuing her case as per remedies available to her in 
law and she should not be denied the said refund merely on 
technicalities as the case of the appellant is a just one wherein 
she had in bonafide paid the stamp duty for registration but fraud 
was played on her by the Vendor which led to the cancellation of 
the conveyance deed. 
 
17. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed, and we 
set aside the impugned order dated 02.08.2019 as well as orders 
of respondent nos.1 and 2 dated 09.06.2015 and 25.02.2016 
and direct the State to refund the said stamp duty amount of Rs. 
25,34,400/- deposited by the appellant. 
 
…………………………………….. J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           (B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
.......………………………………. J. 
 
 
 
 
 
        (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
NEW DELHI; 
May 17, 2024.