2024 INSC 439
 
Page 1 of 24 
        REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8978/2019 
 
M/S SUNDEW PROPERTIES LIMITED 
                        …APPELLANTS 
 
VERSUS 
 
TELANGANA STATE ELECTRICITY REGULATORY 
COMMISSION & ANR.                         
 
   …RESPONDENTS 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J. 
THE CHALLENGE 
1. 
This is a statutory appeal before us under section 125 of the Indian 
Electricity Act, 20031. It registers a challenge to the judgment and order 
dated 27th September, 2019 passed by the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity2 
 
1 Electricity Act  
2 APTEL 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Guglani
Date: 2024.05.17
17:58:00 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
Page 2 of 24 
dismissing an appeal carried under section 111 of the Electricity Act by the 
appellant from the judgment and order dated 15th February, 2016 passed 
by the Telangana State Electricity Regulatory Commission3. Consequently, 
the impugned judgment and order of the TSERC was upheld.  
BRIEF FACTS  
2. 
The basic facts giving rise to this appeal are not disputed. A brief 
overview of the facts and the trajectory of proceedings, relevant for a 
decision on the present appeal, are set out hereunder:  
a) The appellant was notified by the Ministry of Commerce & 
Industry (Department of Commerce), Government of India4 as 
a ‘Developer’, in terms of sections 3 and 4 of the Special 
Economic Zones Act, 20055, to establish a sector-specific 
Special 
Economic 
Zone6 
unit 
for 
Information 
Technology/Information Technology Enabled Services sector in 
Madhapur, Ranga Reddy District, Hyderabad, in the former 
State of Andhra Pradesh.  
b) MoCI, vide a Notification bearing No.SO 528(E) dated 3rd 
March, 20107 introduced a proviso to section 14(b) of the 
Electricity Act. The proviso accords upon the developer of a 
SEZ, the status of a deemed distribution licensee under the 
provisions of the Electricity Act. 
 
3 TSERC 
4 MoCI 
5 SEZ Act 
6 SEZ 
7 2010 Notification  

 
Page 3 of 24 
c) Pursuant to the 2010 Notification, the appellant filed an 
application8 before the erstwhile Andhra Pradesh Electricity 
Regulatory Commission seeking identification as a deemed 
distribution licensee, in terms of the proviso to section 14(b) of 
the Electricity Act read with regulation 13 and Schedule-2 of 
the 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Electricity 
Regulatory 
Commission 
(Distribution Licence) Regulations, 20139 and section 49 of the 
SEZ Act. Upon the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 
coming into force, the application was transferred to the 
TSERC. 
d) By its aforesaid judgment and order dated 15th February, 2016, 
the TSERC identified and accorded the status of a deemed 
licensee to the appellant. However, this grant of status was 
made 
conditional 
upon 
the 
appellant 
satisfying 
the 
requirements stipulated in rule 3 of the Distribution of 
Electricity 
Licence 
(Additional 
Requirements 
of 
Capital 
Adequacy, Creditworthiness and Code of Conduct) Rules, 
200510, compliance whereof was mandatory per regulation 12 
[which stipulates that an applicant for grant of distribution 
licence shall, in addition to regulations 4 to 11, comply with the 
2005 Rules] read with regulation 49 of the 2013 Regulations 
[which stipulates that all the general conditions applicable to a 
 
8 O.P. No. 10 of 2015 
9 2013 Regulations 
10 2005 Rules 

 
Page 4 of 24 
distribution licensee are also equally applicable to a deemed 
licensee]. The appellant was, therefore, directed to infuse an 
additional capital of Rs. 26.90 crore as equity share capital, 
contributed by its promoters, into its power distribution 
business via account payee cheques by 31st March, 2016. The 
relevant part of the judgment and order of the TSERC is 
extracted hereunder: 
“16. […] On a close reading of the provisions of section 14, 
we are of the view that the 'provisos' to section 14 are not 
applicable to a deemed licensee. The status of a deemed 
licence to a person under Section 14(b) of the Electricity 
Act, 2003 emanates from the Notification given under 
Section 49(1) of the SEZ Act to a developer of SEZ provided 
the deemed Licensee satisfies the other provisions of the 
Act. 
[…] 
18. We are of the view that the provisions contained in sub-
section (2), (3), (4), (5) & (6) of Section 15 of the Act are 
not applicable to a deemed licensee. Moreover, [A.P. 
Distribution Licence Regulations] contains the Rules 
relating to procedure for granting of a distribution licensee 
from Rules 4 to 11 […] The Rule 13 of the Regulation 
stipulates that Rules contained in 4 to 11 are not applicable 
to a deemed licensee and these Rules contain the 
procedure for granting of a distribution licence to a person. 
[…]  
19. The Rule 13 of the [A.P. Distribution Licence 
Regulations] stipulates that a deemed licensee shall make 
an application in the form specified in Schedule - 2 to the 
Commission to get identified as a deemed licensee and 
rules 4 to 11 in the Regulations are not applicable to a 
deemed licensee, Thus, the Rule 13 […] has excluded the 
application of Rules laid down from Rules 4 to 11 […] As 
observed earlier, the Rules 4 to 11 basically deal with the 
procedure to be followed by a person for obtaining a licence 
from the Commission. By implication, Rule 12 is applicable 
to a deemed licensee also […]  
20. We are not able to appreciate the argument of the 
petitioner that Rule 12 is not applicable to a deemed 
licensee. In our view, Rule 49 stipulates that all the general 

 
Page 5 of 24 
conditions applicable to a distribution licensee are also 
equally applicable to a deemed licensee. Thus, in our view, 
the Rule 12 is applicable to the petitioner.  
21. The next issue that arises is whether the petitioner has 
complied with the provisions of Rule 12? […] As a stand-
alone entity the petitioner does riot fulfil the. conditions laid 
down in Rule 3 of the Capital Adequacy Rules. However, 
the Rule 3(2) also stipulates that the net worth of the 
promoters of the petitioner can be considered for the 
purpose of computation of the Debt Equity ratio of 30:70 
[…].  
26(A). The [Commission], in exercise of the powers 
conferred under Section 14 (b) of the Electricity Act, hereby 
identifies and recognises M/s. Sundew Properties Ltd. […] 
as a deemed licensee.  
26(D).  […] the promoters have to contribute 30% of the 
total anticipated investment of Rs. 89.53 Crores which 
works out to Rs.26.9 Crores on or before 31.03.2016.” 
 
e) Aggrieved, the appellant carried an appeal11 from the aforesaid 
order of the TSERC to the APTEL. According to the appellant, 
the directions of the TSERC were in excess of jurisdiction. 
APTEL dismissed the appeal, as noticed above. It held that the 
TSERC was justified in ordering infusion of additional equity by 
the appellant to the tune of Rs.26.90 crore (being 30% of the 
total anticipated investment of Rs.89.53 crore) as a pre-
condition for being identified as a deemed distribution licence. 
The operative part of the judgment and order passed by the 
APTEL reads as follows: 
“8.14 […] while the Appellant is not required to apply for 
grant of license but being a deemed distribution licensee 
has to fulfil other technical and financial requirements as 
per prevailing rules and regulations of the State 
Commission which is mandated to regulate the Electricity 
business in the state whether it is a DISCOM or any other 
 
11 Appeal No.3 of 2017 

 
Page 6 of 24 
deemed distribution licensee as in the present case. 
Accordingly, we are of the opinion that the State 
Commission has passed the impugned order with careful 
consideration and proper interpretation of the statute and 
also considering the judgments passed by Hon'ble 
Supreme Court in Sesa Sterilite [sic] case (supra) […]” 
 
f) It is this judgment and final order that the appellant has 
subjected to challenge in this statutory appeal by invoking the 
appellate jurisdiction of this Court under section 125 of the 
Electricity Act. 
SUBMISSIONS 
3. 
Mr. Singh, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant, 
challenged the validity of the orders of the TSERC and the APTEL by 
advancing the following submissions: 
a) The TSERC and the APTEL erred in failing to recognize that 
under section 14(b) of the Electricity Act, a developer of an SEZ 
is ipso facto and unconditionally deemed to be a distribution 
licensee, thus eliminating the need for a separate licence 
application. Recognition of the status of a deemed distribution 
licensee is a ministerial act, effected automatically upon 
fulfilment of conditions laid down in the SEZ Act, independent 
of rule 3(2) of the 2005 Rules read with regulation 12 of the 
2013 Regulations.  
b) The status of deemed distribution licensee stands bestowed 
upon the appellant by virtue of the 2010 Notification, requiring 

 
Page 7 of 24 
no further action. This position has been recognized and 
approved by both the TSERC and the APTEL. 
c) Under the 2013 Regulations, there are two types of licensees: 
first, those who apply for a distribution licence under 
regulations 2(d) and 12, and secondly, those already deemed 
licensees, seeking recognition of their status as such, under 
regulations 2(h) and 13. The appellant belongs to the latter 
category. 
d) Regulation 12 of the 2013 Regulations applies to general 
applicants seeking a distribution licence, mandating compliance 
with both the 2005 Rules and the procedures prescribed in 
regulations 4 to 11. It cannot apply to a deemed licensee under 
regulation 13. The TSERC’s finding, as approved by the APTEL, 
that the 2005 Rules are in-built into the 2013 Regulations and 
therefore have to be satisfied by the appellant because of 
implied application of regulation 12 to deemed licensees, is 
contrary to the provisions of the Electricity Act and the very 
scheme of the 2013 Regulations. 
e) APTEL erred by agreeing with the TSERC’s reasoning that the 
requirement to infuse Rs. 26.90 crore in equity was imposed 
on the appellant under section 16 of the Electricity Act, despite 
recognising the appellant as a deemed distribution licensee. 
Conditions under section 16, whether general or specific, must 

 
Page 8 of 24 
be ‘specified’ by the Appropriate Commission through 
regulations according to section 2(62) of the Electricity Act.  
4. 
Resting on the aforesaid submissions, learned senior counsel 
urged this Court to allow the appeal and set-aside the orders of the TSERC 
and the APTEL to the extent requiring the appellant to comply with the 
conditions stipulated in rule 3 of the 2005 Rules and infuse additional capital 
to gain the status of a deemed licensee.  
5. 
Per contra, Mr. Vaidyanathan, learned senior counsel appearing 
for the second respondent (Southern Power Distribution Company of 
Telangana Limited), joined by Mr. Goud, learned counsel appearing for 
respondent no. 1 (TSERC), supported the impugned judgment and order 
and advanced the following submissions: 
a) No doubt, the appellant, a SEZ developer, may be granted the 
status of a deemed licensee; however, the 2005 Rules and the 
2013 Regulations will be applicable to the appellant as per the 
law laid down by this Court in Sesa Sterlite Limited. v. 
Orissa Electricity Regulatory Commission and others12.  
b) The appellant cannot be deemed to be a distribution licensee 
on its own without making an application under regulation 13.  
c) There is a necessity to harmoniously interpret the SEZ Act and 
the Electricity Act to uphold the provisions of both enactments. 
 
12 (2014) 8 SCC 444 

 
Page 9 of 24 
The appellant cannot argue that the 2005 Rules and the 2013 
Regulations do not apply to it, being a SEZ developer.  
d) TSERC is empowered to impose general and specific conditions 
at its discretion. The purpose of requiring the appellant to 
infuse an additional capital under the 2005 Rules was to assess 
the credit-worthiness of the appellant as it had accumulated 
losses at the end of the financial year 2013-2014 and more 
than 50% of its net-worth has been wiped-out, a fact which is 
reflected from the Statutory Auditor’s report.  
6. 
No case for interference having been set up by the appellant, 
learned counsel for respondents prayed for dismissal of the appeal. 
STATUTORY FRAMEWORK 
7. 
Before proceeding further, it is imperative to refer to certain 
statutory provisions.  
8. 
Section 14 of the Electricity Act deals with the grant of a licence: 
“14. Grant of Licence – The Appropriate Commission may, on 
an application made to it under section 15, grant a licence to any 
person –  
(a) to transmit electricity as a transmission licensee; or  
(b) to distribute electricity as a distribution licensee; or  
(c) to undertake trading in electricity as an electricity trader,  
in any area as may be specified in the licence:  
Provided that any person engaged in the business of 
transmission or supply of electricity under the provisions of the 
repealed laws or any Act specified in the Schedule on or before 
the appointed date shall be deemed to be a licensee under this Act 
for such period as may be stipulated in the licence, clearance or 
approval granted to him under the repealed laws or such Act 
specified in the Schedule, and the provisions of the repealed laws 
or such Act specified in the Schedule in respect of such licence 

 
Page 10 of 24 
shall apply for a period of one year from the date of 
commencement of this Act or such earlier period as may be 
specified, at the request of the licensee, by the Appropriate 
Commission and thereafter the provisions of this Act shall apply 
to such business:  
Provided further that the Central Transmission Utility or the 
State Transmission Utility shall be deemed to be a transmission 
licensee under this Act:  
Provided also that in case an Appropriate Government 
transmits electricity or distributes electricity or undertakes trading 
in electricity, whether before or after the commencement of this 
Act, such Government shall be deemed to be a licensee under this 
Act, but shall not be required to obtain a licence under this Act:  
Provided also that the Damodar Valley Corporation, 
established under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Damodar 
Valley Corporation Act, 1948, shall be deemed to be a licensee 
under this Act but shall not be required to obtain a licence under 
this Act and the provisions of the Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 
1948, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, shall continue to apply to that Corporation:  
Provided also that the Government company or the 
company referred to in sub-section (2) of section 131 of this Act 
and the company or companies created in pursuance of the Acts 
specified in the Schedule, shall be deemed to be a licensee under 
this Act:  
Provided also that the Appropriate Commission may grant 
a licence to two or more persons for distribution of electricity 
through their own distribution system within the same area, 
subject to the conditions that the applicant for grant of licence 
within the same area shall, without prejudice to the other 
conditions or requirements under this Act, comply with the 
additional requirements [relating to the capital adequacy, credit-
worthiness, or code of conduct] as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government, and no such applicant, who complies with all 
the requirements for grant of licence, shall be refused grant of 
licence on the ground that there already exists a licensee in the 
same area for the same purpose:  
Provided also that in a case where a distribution licensee 
proposes to undertake distribution of electricity for a specified 
area within his area of supply through another person, that person 
shall not be required to obtain any separate licence from the 
concerned State Commission and such distribution licensee shall 
be responsible for distribution of electricity in his area of supply:  
Provided also that where a person intends to generate and 
distribute electricity in a rural area to be notified by the State 
Government, such person shall not require any licence for such 
generation and distribution of electricity, but he shall comply with 

 
Page 11 of 24 
the measures which may be specified by the Authority under 
section 53:  
Provided also that a distribution licensee shall not require 
a licence to undertake trading in electricity.” 
 
9. 
To determine who qualifies as a deemed licensee under the 
Electricity Act, we may refer to the 2013 Regulations.  
10. 
Regulation 2(i)(h) of the 2013 Regulations defines “deemed 
licensee” as follows: 
“(h) ‘Deemed Licensee’ means a person authorised under sub-
section (b) of Section 14 and also under the first, second, third, 
and fifth provisos to section 14 of the Act to operate and maintain 
a distribution system for supply of electricity to the consumers in 
his area of supply.” 
11. 
Regulation 13 of the 2013 Regulations stipulates the procedure to 
get identified as a deemed distribution licensee. It reads: 
“13. The deemed licensees shall make application in the form 
specified in Schedule- 2 to the Commission to get identified as the 
deemed Licensee. Provided that nothing in Regulations 4 to 11 
shall apply to deemed licensees.” 
12. 
Insofar as a developer under the SEZ Act is concerned, a reference 
may be made to the scheme of the SEZ Act to ascertain its status as deemed 
distribution licensee.   
13. 
The policy for SEZs was introduced with an objective to create a 
competitive export environment and to attract foreign investment. It levels 
the playing field for domestic businesses globally and introduces favourable 
policies in investment, taxation, trade, customs, and labour regulations. In 
line with this, for the purpose of ensuring consistent and high-quality power 
supply to these SEZ units, the MoCI, vide the 2010 Notification [under 

 
Page 12 of 24 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 49 of the SEZ Act] has specified that 
the ‘developer’ of the SEZ shall be deemed to be a ‘distribution licensee’ 
under the provisions of the Electricity Act. The proviso inserted in clause (b) 
of section 14 of the Electricity Act, vide the 2010 Notification, reads as 
follows: 
“Provided that the Developer of a Special Economic Zone notified 
under sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the Special Economic Zones 
Act, 2005, shall be deemed to be a licensee for the purpose of this 
clause, with effect from the date of notification of such Special 
Economic Zone.” 
14. 
With the inclusion of the aforementioned proviso to section 14(b) 
of the Electricity Act, it is evident that a SEZ developer is deemed to be a 
distribution licensee.  
15. 
The main contention of the parties that whether the TSERC 
imposed condition to infuse additional capital per rule 3(2) of the 2005 Rules 
read with regulation 12 of the 2013 Regulations is justifiable or extraneous 
is deliberated at length in a later part of this judgment. Regulation 12 
provides that a person applying for a grant of a distribution licence shall, in 
addition to regulations 4 to 11, comply with the 2005 Rules. Regulation 12 
is extracted below: 
“12. Application for grant of Distribution Licence in the area 
of supply of an existing Distribution Licensee – A person 
applying for grant of a licence for distribution of electricity through 
his own distribution system within the same area of supply of an 
existing Distribution Licensee shall, in addition to the provisions of 
Regulation 4 to 11, comply with “Distribution of Electricity Licence 
(additional requirements of Capital Adequacy, Creditworthiness 
and Code of Conduct) Rules, 2005” issued by the Central 
Government.” 
 
16. 
Rule 3 is extracted hereunder: 

 
Page 13 of 24 
“3. 
Requirements 
of 
capital 
adequacy 
and 
creditworthiness. –  
(1) The Appropriate Commission shall, upon receipt of an 
application for grant of licence for distribution of electricity under 
sub-section (1) of section 15 of the Electricity Act, 2003, decide 
the requirement of capital investment for distribution network 
after hearing the applicant and keeping in view the size of the area 
of supply and the service obligation within that area in terms of 
section 43.  
(2) The applicant for grant of licence shall be required to satisfy 
the Appropriate Commission that on a norm of 30% equity on cost 
of investment as determined under sub-rule (1), he including the 
promoters, in case the applicant is a company, would be in a 
position to make available resources for such equity of the project 
on the basis of net worth and generation of internal resources of 
his business including of promoters in the preceding three years 
after excluding his other committed investments.” 
 
ISSUES 
17. 
Having noticed the relevant statutory framework, we are now 
tasked with deciding two short issues: 
a) Whether the designation of an entity as a SEZ developer by the 
MoCI ipso facto qualifies the entity to be a deemed distribution 
licensee, obviating the need for an application under section 14 
of the Electricity Act? 
b) Whether regulation 12 of the 2013 Regulations, and by 
implication rule 3(2) of the 2005 Rules, are applicable to a SEZ 
developer recognised as a deemed distribution licensee under 
the proviso to section 14(b) of the Electricity Act read with 
regulation 13 of the 2013 Regulations?  
 
 

 
Page 14 of 24 
ANALYSIS 
18. 
We have considered the submissions advanced by learned counsel 
for the parties and have also perused the materials on record. 
Issue (a) 
19. 
It would not be inapt to be reminded of what was stated by a 
Bench of two Hon’ble Judges of this Court in State of Bombay v. 
Pandurang Vinayak Chaphalkar13 nearly seventy years ago: 
“11. […] When a statute enacts that something shall be deemed 
to have been done, which in fact and truth was not done, the court 
is entitled and bound to ascertain for what purposes and between 
what persons the statutory fiction is to be resorted to and full 
effect must be given to the statutory fiction and it should be 
carried to its logical conclusion.” 
 
20. 
In view of the existing facts, we are inclined to the view that the 
very purpose of the deeming fiction in the proviso to section 14(b) of the 
Electricity Act is to confer upon an entity like the appellant a status which 
is otherwise available in accordance with the Electricity Act. In other words, 
as an effect of the 2010 Notification inserting the proviso to section 14(b), 
the appellant is entitled to the privilege of being acknowledged as a 
(deemed) distribution licensee under the Electricity Act for supply of power 
within its SEZ area. Once the appellant is a (deemed) distribution licensee, 
certain benefits and/or privileges do enure in its favour.  
21. 
The respondents have heavily relied on Sesa Sterlite Limited 
(supra) to assert that there has to be a harmonious construction of both 
 
13 (1953) 1 SCC 425 

 
Page 15 of 24 
the SEZ Act and the Electricity Act to give effect to the provisions of both 
the enactments, so long as they are not inconsistent with each other.  
22. 
A Bench of two Hon’ble Judges of this Court in Sesa Sterlite 
Limited (supra) held: 
“43. The reading of Section 49 of the SEZ Act would reveal that 
the Central Government has got the authority to direct that any 
of the provisions of a Central Act and the rules and regulations 
made thereunder would not apply or to declare that some of the 
provisions of the Central Acts shall apply with exceptions, 
modifications and adaptation to the special economic zone. So, 
under the scheme of the Special Economic Zones Act, the Central 
Government has to first notify as to what extent the provision of 
the other Acts are to be made applicable or applicable with 
modification or not applicable for the special economic zone area. 
It is in furtherance thereto, the Government of India, Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry through its Notification dated 21-3-2012, 
with regard to power generation in special economic zone, has 
declared that all the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003 and the 
Electricity Rules, 2005 shall be applicable to the generation, 
transmission and distribution of power, whether stand-alone or 
captive power. This notification would clarify that there is no 
inconsistency between the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 and 
the Electricity Act, 2003. 
[…] 
 
46. To recapitulate briefly, in the present case no doubt by virtue 
of the status of a developer in the SEZ area, the appellant is also 
treated as deemed distribution licensee. However with this, it only 
gets exemption from specifically applying for licence under Section 
14 of the Act.” 
 
23. 
The question in Sesa Sterlite Limited (supra), was whether the 
appellant - a deemed distribution licensee, being a developer of Special 
Economic Zone (SEZ) and having a unit in the SEZ, is liable to pay Cross-
Subsidy Surcharge (CSS). It was held that the appellant would be liable to 
pay CSS for several reasons, including on the facts that it was using 
dedicated transmission lines belonging to the distribution licensee for the 

 
Page 16 of 24 
area in question. This Court interpreted the expression 'open access' and 
the rationale behind CSS and additional surcharge to observe that the 
former was payable by a distribution licensee and the latter was to meet 
the fixed cost of the distribution licensee of the area. The provision of open 
access, it is observed, balances the right of the consumers to purchase from 
a source of their choice. The rationale and the ratio of the decision, 
therefore, is that a deemed distribution licensee is treated at par and not 
different from a distribution licensee. Accordingly, if CSS is payable by a 
distribution licensee, the deemed distribution licensee is equally liable to 
pay the same. This decision, in other words, equates deemed distribution 
licensee with the distribution licensee for the purpose of supply of electricity 
to the consumers. Sesa Sterlite Limited (supra) is not a decision for the 
proposition that deemed distribution licensee, to qualify as a deemed 
distribution licensee, must meet the criteria, including the capital 
requirements as applicable by regulations to a distribution licensee. 
24. 
Further, the provisos to section 14 of the Electricity Act distinguish 
between entities that are ipso facto deemed distribution licensees and those 
that are merely declared as deemed licensees without clarity on the 
necessity of making an application to obtain a licence. For instance, the 
third and fourth provisos to section 14 not only confer the status of deemed 
licensees to the State Government and the Damodar Valley Corporation, 
respectively, but also explicitly exempt them from the requirement to obtain 
a licence. Entities not covered by these specific provisos would, therefore, 
be required to obtain a licence. The requirement of obtaining a license has 
to be read into the other provisos to section 14 since, for instance, the 

 
Page 17 of 24 
second and fifth provisos to section 14 grant deemed licensee status to 
Central/State 
Transmission 
Utility 
and 
a 
government 
company, 
respectively, but neither specifies the requirement to obtain a license nor 
exempts them from obtaining license.  
25. 
As far as the 2010 Notification is concerned, the proviso to section 
14(b) introduced by the said Notification, confers deemed licensee status 
on SEZ developers. However, such conferment does not explicitly exclude 
the requirement of obtaining a licence. This lack of specificity, especially 
when compared with the clear provisions for other entities, suggests that 
the legislative intent was not to ipso facto grant SEZ developers the status 
of deemed distribution licensees, thereby obliging them to obtain a licence 
by making an application in terms of regulation 13. TSERC is, therefore, 
empowered to scrutinise such applications in accordance with law, however, 
only limited to the provisions which are applicable to deemed licensees. 
Verification and acceptance recognise their status as deemed licensees. 
Issue (b): 
26. 
Issue (b) revolves around rule 3(2) of the 2005 Rules, which per 
the TSERC and the APTEL, the appellant is bound to adhere by infusing 
additional capital in order to qualify as a deemed licensee. While the 
appellant contends that the 2010 Notification, by necessary consequence, 
grants upon the appellant the status of a deemed licensee, the respondents 
submit that the identification of the appellant as a deemed distribution 
licensee is conditional upon the appellant satisfying the other requirements 
of the Electricity Act, specifically the sixth proviso to section 14 of the 

 
Page 18 of 24 
Electricity Act which provides for compliance with additional requirements 
like capital adequacy which as per the respondents includes rule 3 of the 
2005 Rules read with regulation 12 of the 2013 Regulations.  
27. 
It is contended by the respondents that the application of 2005 
Rules to the appellant, a SEZ developer, stems from the sixth proviso to 
section 14 read with regulation 12 of the 2013 Regulations.  
28. 
Let us now deal with the provisos to section 14. Upon a bare 
reading of the provision, it becomes crystal clear that not only does the 
sixth proviso, but none of the nine provisos to section 14, apply to the 
appellant, a SEZ developer. Even the TSERC and the APTEL are ad idem 
with this view. The status of a SEZ developer as a deemed licensee 
emanates from the 2010 Notification, which introduced the proviso to 
section 14(b), conferring deemed licensee status to SEZ developers. 
Reading anything beyond this would defeat the very purpose of the proviso 
and the concept of the deemed licence. The sixth proviso does not pertain 
to deemed licensees and, therefore, the 2005 Rules are not applicable to 
the appellant.  
29. 
Upon closer examination of regulation 12, it becomes apparent 
that its application does not extend to applicants who are otherwise deemed 
licensees. The interpretation of regulation 12 as requiring additional capital 
infusion for an applicant for acceptance of a deemed licensee status appears 
to be at odds with the language and intent of the 2013 Regulations itself. 
TSERC has, in essence, interpreted regulation 12 by reading it up to mean 

 
Page 19 of 24 
that it also applies to a person who is a deemed licensee, and in doing so, 
the TSERC has aimed to achieve indirectly what it could not directly. 
30. 
Reading down and reading up are two principles often discussed 
in legal contexts, particularly in the realm of statutory interpretation. 
Reading down, which has been firmly ingrained in our jurisprudence, refers 
to the practice of interpreting a statute narrowly, limiting its scope or 
application to specific situations or individuals. This approach is commonly 
employed when the language of a statute is ambiguous or when there is a 
need to avoid potential conflicts with other laws or constitutional provisions. 
For example, if a law is unclear about whether it applies to certain types of 
businesses, a court may choose to read down the statute to only include 
those businesses explicitly mentioned in the text. On the other hand, 
reading up involves interpreting a statute broadly, extending its scope or 
application beyond what is expressly stated in the text. Reading up is a 
concept that is invoked with great caution within our legal framework 
because it can lead to judicial activism or judicial overreach, where courts 
expand the reach of laws beyond what the legislature intended. 
31. 
A Constitution Bench of this Court in B.R. Kapur v. State of 
Tamil Nadu14, while stating that reading up of a statute is not permissible, 
held thus:  
“39. Section 8(4) opens with the words ‘notwithstanding anything 
in sub-section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3)’, and it 
applies only to sitting members of Legislatures. There is no 
challenge to it on the basis that it violates Article 14. If there were, 
it might be tenable to contend that legislators stand in a class 
apart from non-legislators, but we need to express no final 
 
14 (2001) 7 SCC 231 

 
Page 20 of 24 
opinion. In any case, if it were found to be violative of Article 14, 
it would be struck down in its entirety. There would be, and is no 
question of so reading it that its provisions apply to all, legislators 
and non-legislators, and that, therefore, in all cases the 
disqualification must await affirmation of the conviction and 
sentence by a final court. That would be ‘reading up’ the provision, 
not ‘reading down’, and that is not known to the law.” 
 
32. 
The literal rule of interpreting a statute empowers courts to iron 
out the creases within legislation but without altering the very fabric of 
which it is made. The practice of reading up a provision can only be justified 
when it aligns with legislative intent, maintains the fundamental character 
of the law, and ensures that the resulting interpretation remains consistent 
with the original context to which the law applies. This holds especially true 
for subordinate legislation, which require greater scrutiny in this regard. 
Reading up a provision of subordinate legislation in a manner that it 
militates against the primary legislation is not permissible.  
33. 
The authority to craft subordinate legislation is derived from the 
enabling/primary legislation and it is imperative that such legislation 
harmonizes with the provisions outlined in the enabling/primary legislation. 
The Electricity Act has conferred power on the Central Government to make 
Rules [see section 175], and on the Central Electricity Authority and the 
Central Commission to make Regulations [see sections 176 and 177, 
respectively]. All such rules/regulations are to be made consistent with the 
Electricity Act. Section 181 of the Electricity Act confers power on the State 
Commissions to make Regulations but such regulations too must be 
consistent with the provisions of the primary enactment and the rules 
framed thereunder generally. Rules and Regulations are enacted to 

 
Page 21 of 24 
supplement the main provision, not to supplant it. They serve the crucial 
role of bridging potential gaps within the primary legislation, yet, their 
function is not to create webs and voids merely to clog and hamper their 
implementation. Any gaps addressed by Rules and Regulations must be 
discernible within the framework of the primary legislation. 
34. 
In the present case, the TSERC, in paragraph 19, asserted that 
regulation 12 applies implicitly to a deemed licensee as well. We do not 
agree with this reasoning, mainly for two reasons. First, the primary 
legislation, the Electricity Act, through the proviso inserted in section 14(b), 
confers deemed licensee status upon SEZ developers without imposing any 
specific conditions. Secondly, the 2013 Regulations make a clear distinction 
between an applicant seeking a licence [as defined under regulation 2(d)] 
and a deemed distribution licensee seeking recognition as such [as defined 
under regulation 2(h)]. Regulation 2(d) defines an “applicant” as “a person 
who has submitted an application to the Commission for the grant of a 
distribution licence”. In contrast, regulation 2(h) defines a “deemed 
licensee” as “a person authorized under sub-section (b) of Section 14, and 
also under the first, second, third, and fifth provisos to section 14 of the 
Act, to operate and maintain a distribution system for supplying electricity 
to consumers in their area of supply”. The 2013 Regulations clearly 
delineate distinct categories of licensees. Regulation 12 pertains solely to 
regular distribution licensees as defined under regulation 2(h), not to 
deemed licensees. ‘Reading up’ regulation 12 so as to expand its ambit to 
include within it deemed licensees, especially when the Electricity Act does 
not stipulate any such inclusion, runs counter to the subsequently inserted 

 
Page 22 of 24 
proviso to clause (b) of section 14 of the Electricity Act—an exercise which 
is impermissible and which we cannot approve. Therefore, the recognition 
of the status of a deemed distribution licensee cannot hinge on compliance 
with rule 3(2) of the 2005 Rules read with regulation 12 of the 2013 
Regulations.  
35. 
The language of regulation 12 merits careful scrutiny. It states 
that an applicant shall, “in addition to the provisions of Regulation 4 to 11”, 
comply with the provisions of the 2005 Rules. It is evident that it is a normal 
applicant [as defined under regulation 2(d)], which is tasked with complying 
with regulations 4 to 11, that has to comply with the 2005 Rules. However, 
the appellant herein, as discussed previously, is not a regular applicant but 
a deemed distribution licensee [as defined under regulation 2(h)], and is 
governed by regulation 13, the proviso to which specifically states that 
nothing in regulations 4 to 11 would apply to deemed licensees. Having thus 
been statutorily exempted from complying with regulations 4 to 11, we are 
of the opinion that the appellant, being a deemed licensee, would also be 
exempt from the concomitant obligation of complying with regulation 12, in 
view of the language of the provision, which imposes the burden of 
complying with regulation 12 only on those applicants who come within the 
purview of regulations 4 to 11. The appellant falling outside the scope of 
the latter, would thus necessarily fall outside the scope of the former too. 
36. 
TSERC’s reliance on regulation 49 of the 2013 Regulations to 
enforce the applicability of regulation 12 also appears to be flawed. 
Regulation 49, situated within Chapter-4 [General Conditions of Distribution 
Licence] of the 2013 Regulations, specifies that “these general conditions 

 
Page 23 of 24 
shall apply to distribution licensees and to all deemed distribution 
licensees”. A straightforward reading reveals that the term ‘general 
conditions’ in regulation 49 pertains exclusively to the general conditions 
outlined in Chapter-4. By no stretch of imagination could the scope of this 
provision be widened so as to include within its ambit regulation 12, which 
forms part of Chapter-3 [Procedure for Grant of Distribution Licence] of the 
2013 Regulations. 
CONCLUSION 
37. 
To sum up, being a SEZ developer in terms of the 2010 Notification 
does not ipso facto confer upon the appellant the status of a deemed 
licensee without any scrutiny and without being under any requirement to 
apply; it is required to make an application in accordance with the 2013 
Regulations. We have been apprised that this condition has been fulfilled as 
the status of the appellant as a deemed licensee has already been upheld 
pursuant to the application made in accordance with rule 13 of the 2013 
Regulations. The first issue is answered accordingly. As far as the second 
issue is concerned, the condition stipulated in rule 3(2) of the 2005 Rules, 
as imposed by the TSERC with a direction to infuse an additional capital of 
Rs. 26.90 crore is not justified and contrary to the statutory scheme as 
discussed aforesaid. The judgments and orders of the TSERC and the APTEL 
are set aside to this extent. The order of the TSERC, which grants the status 
of a deemed licensee to the appellant, however, subject to the condition 
that its promoters infuse additional capital is accordingly modified to the 
extent of excluding such condition.   

 
Page 24 of 24 
38. 
The appeal is partly allowed in the aforesaid terms. No costs.  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
………………………………J   
  
 
        (SANJIV KHANNA) 
    
       
 
 
………………………………J   
  
 
      (DIPANKAR DATTA) 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
17th May, 2024.