2024 INSC 54
1
NON-REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 4480-4481 OF 2023
ANSAL CROWN HEIGHTS FLAT BUYERS 
ASSOCIATION (REGD.)
          
 …...APPELLANT(S)
                                VERSUS
M/S. ANSAL CROWN INFRABUILD 
PVT. LTD. & ORS.                     
…...RESPONDENT(S)
WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 4247 OF 2023
JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.
The  impugned  orders  in  these  appeals  are  more  or  less
identical.  Therefore,  we  are  making  a  reference  to  the  factual
aspects  in  Civil  Appeal  Nos.  4480-4481  of  2023.  In  a  complaint
filed  by  the  homebuyers  before  the  National  Consumer  Disputes
Redressal  Commission  (for  short  ‘the  National  Commission’),  an
order was made by the National Commission directing the Developer
to complete the project in all respects and handover the possession
of the allotted flats/apartments to the members of the Association
of the homebuyers within the time specified. In the said order, a
direction  was  issued  giving  an  option  to  the  homebuyers,  which
reads thus: -
“...(vi)  If  the  Members  of  the  Complainant
Association are not interested to wait any more for
taking possession of the allotted Apartment and they
want  refund  of  the  their  deposited  amount,  the
Opposite  Party  Developer  shall  refund  the  entire
deposited amount along with interest @9% p.a. from
Digitally signed by
Neetu Khajuria
Date: 2024.01.24
10:32:35 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
the respective date of deposit till payment, within a
period  of  six  weeks  from  today  failing  which  the
amount shall carry interest @ 12% p.a. for the said
period. The Allottees shall also be entitled for a
sum of ₹ 25,000/- as costs.”
2.
It is this direction which was sought to be executed by the
appellants  by  filing  execution  applications.  The  developer  is  a
company against whom the National Commission issued the aforesaid
direction.  The  said  company  is  the  subject-matter  of  the
proceedings under Section 9 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
2016 (for short ‘the IBC’). The National Company Law Tribunal (for
short ‘the NCLT’) has admitted the petition filed under Section 9
of  the  IBC  against  the  said  company.  The  appellants  sought  to
execute  the  direction(s)  of  the  National  Commission  not  only
against the company but also against the several individuals.
3.
By the impugned orders, the National Commission held that the
decree cannot be executed against the company due to the operation
of  the  moratorium  under  Section  14  of  the  IBC.  Thereafter,  the
National Commission observed that in view of moratorium against the
company,  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  proceed  in  the  same
execution  against  the  opposite  party  Nos.  2  to  9.  Another
observation was made that other opposite parties (opposite party
Nos. 2 to 9 to the execution application) were not parties in the
main complaint. The appellant is the applicant/decree holder in the
execution applications.
4.
The submission in brief of the appellants is that under the
provisions  of  the  IBC,  there  is  no  prohibition  on  proceeding
against  the  directors/officers  of  the  company,  which  is  the
subject-matter of moratorium under Section 14 of the IBC.

3
5.
A reliance is placed by the appellant on the second proviso to
sub-Section (1) of Section 32A of the IBC and a decision of this
Court in the case of  P. Mohanraj vs. Shah Bros. Ispat (P) Ltd.1.
Our attention is also invited to another decision of this Court in
the  case  of  Anjali  Rathi  and  others  vs.  Today  Homes  and
Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. And Others2. Hence, the submission is that
the view taken by the National Commission is erroneous.
6.
Mr. Nikhil Nayyar, the learned senior counsel appearing for
the respondent Nos. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 and Mr. Pradeep Aggarwal,
the  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  respondent  Nos.  3  and  9
submitted  that  under  the  order  which  is  sought  to  be  executed,
there  is  no  liability  fastened  on  the  opposite  party  Nos.  2
to 9(the respondent Nos. 2 to 9). It is submitted that the National
Commission has held that opposite party Nos. 2 to 9(the respondent
Nos.  2  to  9)  were  not  parties  to  the  main  complaint.  Their
submission is that in the case of Anjali Rathi(supra), this Court
made a departure by permitting the appellants to proceed against
the promoters of the company, which was subject to moratorium only
because there was a settlement arrived at between them before this
Court. He further submitted that these opponents cannot be held
liable.
7.
We may note here that the National Commission has not made any
adjudication  on  the  question  whether  the  opposite  party  Nos.  2
to 9(the respondent Nos. 2 to 9) in the execution application were
under an obligation to abide by the directions issued against the
1 (2021) 6 SCC 258
2 (2021) SCC OnLine SC 729

4
company. This issue has not been considered at all by the National
Commission. There is no finding recorded by the National Commission
that in view of any particular provision of the IBC, moratorium
will apply to the directors/officers of the company.
8.
In the case of Anjali Rathi(supra), a Bench of three Hon’ble
Judges  has  quoted  with  approval  paragraph  ‘102’  of  its  earlier
judgment in the case of P. Mohanraj(supra). Paragraph ‘102’ in the
case of P. Mohanraj(supra), which reads thus:-
“102. Since the corporate debtor would be covered
by the moratorium provision contained in Section
14 IBC, by which continuation of Sections 138/141
proceedings  against  the  corporate  debtor  and
initiation of Sections 138/141 proceedings against
the  said  debtor  during  the  corporate  insolvency
resolution process are interdicted, what is staed
in paras 51 and 59 in Aneeta Hada [Aneeta Hada v.
Godfather Travels & tours (P) Ltd.,  (2012) 5 SCC
661 : (2012) 3 SCC (Civ) 350 : (2012) 3 SCC (Cri)
241]  would  then  become  applicable.  The  legal
impediment contained in Section 14 Ibc would make
it impossible for such proceedings to continue or
be instituted against the corporate debtor.  Thus,
for  the  period  of  moratorium,  since  no  Sections
138/141  proceeding  can  continue  or  be  initiated
against  the  corporate  debtor  because  of  a
statutory bar, such proceedings can be initiated
or  continued  against  the  persons  mentioned  in
Sections  141(1)  and  (2)  of  the  Negotiable
Instruments Act. This being the case, it is clear
that the moratorium provision contained in Section
14 IBC would apply only to the corporate debtor,
the  natural  persons  mentioned  in  Section  141
continuing to be statutorily liable under Chapter
XVII of the Negotiable Instruments Act.”
(Underline supplied)
9.
What is relevant is paragraph ‘18’ in the case of Anjali Rathi
(supra), which reads thus: -
“18. We thus clarify that the petitioners would not be
prevented by the moratorium under Section 14 of the IBC
from  initiating  proceedings  against  the  promoters  of
the first respondent Corporate Debtor in relation to
honoring  the  settlements  reached  before  this  Court.

5
However, as indicated earlier, this Court cannot issue
such a direction relying on a Resolution Plan which is
still  pending  approval  before  an  Adjudicating
Authority.”
10.
Thus, this Court approved the view taken in the case of  P.
Mohanraj(supra) that notwithstanding moratorium, the liability, if
any,  of  the  directors/officers  will  continue.  This  Court,
therefore, permitted the appellants to expressly proceed against
the promoters of the company though there was a moratorium under
Section 14 of the IBC affecting the company. 
11.
Therefore, we are of the view that only because there is a
moratorium  under  Section  14  of  the  IBC  against  the  company,  it
cannot be said that no proceedings can be initiated against the
opposite  party  Nos.  2  to  9(the  respondent  Nos.  2  to  9)  for
execution, provided that they are otherwise liable to abide by and
comply with the order, which is passed against the company. The
protection  of  the  moratorium  will  not  be  available  to  the
directors/officers of the company.
12.
Therefore, we set aside the impugned judgments and orders and
remit  the  execution  application  to  the  National  Commission.  The
execution will continue against the opposite party Nos. 2 to 9(the
respondent Nos. 2 to 9) in the execution application.
13.
It is open for the opposite party Nos. 2 to 9(the respondent
Nos. 2 to 9) to raise a contention that they are not bound to
implement the order sought to be executed. They are entitled to
file additional objections along with documents raising the issue
of executability as against them.

6
14.
We clarify that the issue whether opposite party Nos. 2 to
9(the  respondent  Nos.  2  to  9)  to  the  execution  are  otherwise
liable,  will  have  to  be  decided  by  the  National  Commission  in
accordance with law.
15.
The appeals are partly allowed on the above terms.
16. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…………………………...J.
                                                    [ABHAY S. OKA]
…………………………...J.
                                                    [UJJAL BHUYAN]
NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 17, 2024.