2024 INSC 448
1 
 
REPORTABLE  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 3924 OF 2023 
 
 
SUNITA DEVI 
 
 
 
 
 
 … APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
THE STATE OF BIHAR & ANR. 
 
    
 … RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
WITH 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 3926-3927 OF 2023 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 3925 OF 2023 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
M. M. Sundresh, J. 
1. Criminal Appeal No.3924 of 2023  has been filed by the informant, against 
the order of remittal passed by the Division Bench of the Patna High Court 
directing the Trial Court to conduct a de novo trial, while making certain 
observations against the Special Judge, disapproving his approach in the 
conduct of the trial.  Criminal Appeal Nos.3926-3927 of 2023  have been 
filed by the learned Special Judge who conducted the trial and thereafter 
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant
Date: 2024.05.17
18:57:27 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
delivered the judgment.  Criminal Appeal No.3925 of 2023 has been filed 
by the very same learned Judge, aggrieved over the remarks once again 
made by the High Court in an order of remittal, requesting the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice of the Patna High Court to consider whether the Judicial 
Officer should be assigned the function of holding sessions trial which have 
far reaching consequences, while sending him for fresh training to the State 
Judicial Academy.  
2. Heard Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Vikas Singh for the appellant and 
Learned Senior Counsel Mr. C. U. Singh for the respondents. We have 
perused the documents filed along with the written submissions made by 
the parties. 
3. Before going into the submissions on merit, we shall first deal with the 
provisions governing the legal position in conducting a trial. 
VIDEO CONFERENCING 
Rule 6 of the Rule for Video Conferencing for Courts, 2020 
“6. Application for Appearance, Evidence and Submission by Video 
Conferencing: 
6.1 Any party to the proceeding or witness, save and except where 
proceedings are initiated at the instance of the Court, may move a request 
for video conferencing. A party or witness seeking a video conferencing 
proceeding shall do so by making a request in the form prescribed in 
Schedule II. 
6.2 Any proposal to move a request to for video conferencing should first 
be discussed with the other party or parties to the proceeding, except 
where it is not possible or inappropriate, for example in cases such as 
urgent applications. 

3 
 
6.3 On receipt of such a request and upon hearing all concerned persons, 
the Court will pass an appropriate order after ascertaining that the 
application is not filed with an intention to impede a fair trial or to delay 
the proceedings. 
6.4 While allowing a request for video conferencing, the Court may also 
fix the schedule for convening the video conferencing. 
6.5 In case the video conferencing event is convened for making oral 
submissions, the order may require the Advocate or party in person to 
submit written arguments and precedents, if any, in advance on the 
official email ID of the concerned Court. 
6.6 Costs, if directed to be paid, shall be deposited within the prescribed 
time, commencing from the date on which the order convening 
proceedings through video conferencing is received.” 
Rule 8 of the Rule for Video Conferencing for Courts, 2020 
“8. Examination of persons.— 
8.3 Where the person being examined, or the accused to be tried, is in 
custody, the statement or, as the case may be, the testimony may be 
recorded through video conferencing. The Court shall provide adequate 
opportunity to the under-trial prisoner to consult in privacy with their 
counsel before, during and after the video conferencing.” 
 
 
Rule 11 of the Rule for Video Conferencing for Courts, 2020 
“11. Judicial remand, framing of charge, examination of accused and 
Proceedings under Section 164 of the CrPC.— 
11.1 The Court may, at its discretion, authorize detention of an accused, 
frame charges in a criminal trial under the CrPC by video conferencing. 
However, ordinarily judicial remand in the first instance or police remand 
shall not be granted through video conferencing save and except in 
exceptional circumstances for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
11.2 The Court may, in exceptional circumstances, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, examine a witness or an accused under Section 164 
of the CrPC or record the statement of the accused under Section 313 
CrPC through video conferencing, while observing all due precautions to 
ensure that the witness or the accused as the case maybe is free of any 
form of coercion, threat or undue influence. The Court shall ensure 
compliance with Section 26 of the Evidence Act.” 
 
4. The High Court of Patna, in exercise of the powers conferred under Articles 
225 and 227 of the Constitution of India, 1950, framed rules and 

4 
 
procedures relating to the use of video conferencing for Courts.  This was 
done with the concurrence of the State Government.  “Rules for Video 
Conferencing for Courts, 2020” delineate the general principles governing 
video conferencing.  Rule 6 provides for an application seeking video 
conferencing.  When such an application is made, it has to be put to the 
other party followed by an appropriate order by the court indicating its 
satisfaction for granting approval.  As per Rule 8, when the testimony of a 
person being examined is to be recorded through video conferencing, the 
court shall provide an adequate opportunity to the undertrial prisoner to 
consult in privacy with his counsel at different stages – before, during and 
after. Under Rule 11, an act of securing the presence of an accused through 
video conferencing at the time of judicial remand for the first time or police 
remand, is not a matter of course and, therefore, it is to be exercised only 
in exceptional circumstances for the reasons to be recorded in writing.  
Similar is the case qua recording of the statement of an accused under 
Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred 
to as the “CrPC, 1973”), in which case, it is obligatory on the part of the 
Court to make sure that the accused is free from any form of coercion, 
threat or undue influence.  
5. On a conjoint reading of the aforesaid rules, it is only appropriate that the 
accused has to be produced before the Court, rather than marking his 

5 
 
appearance through video conferencing, the latter being an exception.  
While applying its mind, the Court has to rule out the possibility of any 
misuse. 
WITNESS PROTECTION SCHEME, 2018 
6. Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 has been introduced in the interest of  the 
administration of justice, while enforcing a criminal law.  It is meant to 
take care of a situation where the witnesses are made to depose before the 
Court by completely abandoning the case of the prosecution, either by fear 
or favour. The scheme provides for a competent authority which is the 
Standing Committee headed by a District and Sessions Judge with the head 
of the Police in the District as a Member and the head of the Prosecution 
as its Member Secretary.  A witness is at liberty to seek protection before 
the competent authority.  The head of the police is expected to place before 
the competent authority a “Threat Analysis Report”.  The Scheme lays 
down in detail, the action proposed to be taken, once such an application is 
filed. 
FAIR TRIAL 
7. A fair trial would include due compliance of the procedure with adequate 
opportunities for all the stakeholders. Such procedural safeguards and 
compliance are to be kept in mind by the Court, as any deviation might 

6 
 
either impact the prosecution or the defence in a given case. In an 
adversarial system of criminal law, which is being followed in India, when 
an accused is prosecuted on behalf of the State, the interest of a victim 
cannot be ignored.  An offence is presumed to be against societal values 
and, therefore, any crime would constitute a deviant act by the accused.   
8. Every trial is a march towards the truth. It is the primary duty of the Court 
to search for the truth using the procedural law as its tool.  Such a 
procedural law may have a substantive part extending certain inalienable 
rights to both, the accused and the victim.  By non-compliance of the 
procedural law, justice cannot be allowed to derail.  Anyone, who 
complains of an unfair trial, is duty bound to satisfy the Court that he stands 
prejudiced by it.  This does not mean that a Court can be lackadaisical in 
following the rules and procedures meant to ensure justice.   
9. A fair trial is the heart and soul of criminal jurisprudence.  The principle of 
democracy lies in a fair trial.  It is not only a statutory right, but also a 
human right, which would be violated when the safeguards provided under 
the Statute are not followed.  The absence of a fair trial would seriously 
impair and violate the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14 and 
21 of the Constitution of India, 1950.  What is important to be seen is the 
existence of a failure of justice, which is obviously one of fact.  A mere 

7 
 
violation per se would not vitiate the trial, especially when the degree of 
substantivity exhibited in a statute is minimal.    
10. The right to fair hearing is a part of Article 21 of the Constitution of India, 
1950. A trial should be a real one and, therefore, not a mere pretence. There 
shall never be an impression over the decision of a Court that it has pre-
determined and pre-judged a case even before starting a trial, or else, such 
a trial would become an empty formality.  
Precedents 
J. Jayalalithaa v. State of Karnataka, (2014) 2 SCC 401 
“28. Fair trial is the main object of criminal procedure and such 
fairness should not be hampered or threatened in any manner. Fair 
trial entails the interests of the accused, the victim and of the society. 
Thus, fair trial must be accorded to every accused in the spirit of the 
right to life and personal liberty and the accused must get a free and 
fair, just and reasonable trial on the charge imputed in a criminal 
case. Any breach or violation of public rights and duties adversely affects 
the community as a whole and it becomes harmful to the society in 
general. In all circumstances, the courts have a duty to maintain public 
confidence in the administration of justice and such duty is to vindicate 
and uphold the “majesty of the law” and the courts cannot turn a blind 
eye to vexatious or oppressive conduct that occurs in relation to criminal 
proceedings. 
29. Denial of a fair trial is as much injustice to the accused as is to the 
victim and the society. It necessarily requires a trial before an 
impartial Judge, a fair prosecutor and an atmosphere of judicial 
calm. Since the object of the trial is to mete out justice and to convict 
the guilty and protect the innocent, the trial should be a search for 
the truth and not a bout over technicalities and must be conducted 
under such rules as will protect the innocent and punish the guilty. 
Justice should not only be done but should be seem to have been 
done. Therefore, free and fair trial is a sine qua non of Article 21 of 
the Constitution. Right to get a fair trial is not only a basic 

8 
 
fundamental right but a human right also. Therefore, any hindrance 
in a fair trial could be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. “No 
trial can be allowed to prolong indefinitely due to the lethargy of the 
prosecuting agency or the State machinery and that is the raison d'être in 
prescribing the time frame” for conclusion of the trial.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
Rattiram v. State of M.P., (2012) 4 SCC 516  
“39. The question posed by us fundamentally relates to the non-
compliance with such interdict. The crux of the matter is whether it is 
such a substantial interdict which impinges upon the fate of the trial 
beyond any redemption or, for that matter it is such an omission or 
it is such an act that defeats the basic conception of fair trial. 
Fundamentally, a fair and impartial trial has a sacrosanct purpose. 
It has a demonstrable object that the accused should not be 
prejudiced. A fair trial is required to be conducted in such a manner 
which would totally ostracise injustice, prejudice, dishonesty and 
favouritism. 
40. In Kalyani Baskar v. M.S. Sampoornam [(2007) 2 SCC 258 : (2007) 
1 SCC (Cri) 577] it has been laid down that “fair trial” includes fair 
and proper opportunities allowed by law to the accused to prove 
innocence and, therefore, adducing evidence in support of the 
defence is a valuable right and denial of that right means denial of 
fair trial. It is essential that the rules of procedure designed to ensure 
justice should be scrupulously followed and the courts should be 
zealous in seeing that there is no breach of them. 
41. In this regard, we may fruitfully reproduce the observations from 
Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi) [(2010) 6 SCC 1 : (2010) 2 SCC 
(Cri) 1385] wherein it has been so stated : (SCC pp. 79-80, para 197) 
“197. In the Indian criminal jurisprudence, the accused is placed in 
a 
somewhat 
advantageous 
position 
than 
under 
different 
jurisprudence of some of the countries in the world. The criminal 
justice administration system in India places human rights and 
dignity for human life at a much higher pedestal. In our 
jurisprudence an accused is presumed to be innocent till proved 
guilty, the alleged accused is entitled to fairness and true 
investigation and fair trial and the prosecution is expected to play 
balanced role in the trial of a crime. The investigation should be 
judicious, fair, transparent and expeditious to ensure compliance 

9 
 
with the basic rule of law. These are the fundamental canons of our 
criminal jurisprudence and they are quite in conformity with the 
constitutional mandate contained in Articles 20 and 21 of the 
Constitution of India.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
42. It would not be an exaggeration if it is stated that a “fair trial” is the 
heart of criminal jurisprudence and, in a way, an important facet of a 
democratic polity that is governed by rule of law. Denial of “fair trial” is 
crucifixion of human rights. It is ingrained in the concept of due process 
of law. While emphasising the principle of “fair trial” and the 
practice of the same in the course of trial, it is obligatory on the part 
of the courts to see whether in an individual case or category of cases, 
because of non-compliance with a certain provision, reversion of 
judgment of conviction is inevitable or it is dependent on arriving at 
an indubitable conclusion that substantial injustice has in fact 
occurred.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh v. State of Gujarat, (2004) 4 SCC 158  
“35. This Court has often emphasised that in a criminal case the fate of 
the proceedings cannot always be left entirely in the hands of the parties, 
crimes being public wrongs in breach and violation of public rights and 
duties, which affect the whole community as a community and are 
harmful to the society in general. The concept of fair trial entails 
familiar triangulation of interests of the accused, the victim and the 
society and it is the community that acts through the State and 
prosecuting agencies. Interests of society are not to be treated 
completely with disdain and as persona non grata. Courts have 
always been considered to have an overriding duty to maintain 
public confidence in the administration of justice — often referred to 
as the duty to vindicate and uphold the “majesty of the law”. Due 
administration of justice has always been viewed as a continuous 
process, not confined to determination of the particular case, 
protecting its ability to function as a court of law in the future as in 
the case before it. If a criminal court is to be an effective instrument in 
dispensing justice, the Presiding Judge must cease to be a spectator and 
a mere recording machine by becoming a participant in the trial evincing 
intelligence, active interest and elicit all relevant materials necessary for 
reaching the correct conclusion, to find out the truth, and administer 
justice with fairness and impartiality both to the parties and to the 
community it serves. Courts administering criminal justice cannot turn a 

10 
 
blind eye to vexatious or oppressive conduct that has occurred in relation 
to proceedings, even if a fair trial is still possible, except at the risk of 
undermining the fair name and standing of the judges as impartial and 
independent adjudicators. 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
39. Failure to accord fair hearing either to the accused or the 
prosecution violates even minimum standards of due process of law. 
It is inherent in the concept of due process of law, that condemnation 
should be rendered only after the trial in which the hearing is a real 
one, not sham or a mere farce and pretence. Since the fair hearing 
requires an opportunity to preserve the process, it may be vitiated 
and violated by an overhasty, stage-managed, tailored and partisan 
trial. 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
54. Though justice is depicted to be blindfolded, as popularly said, it 
is only a veil not to see who the party before it is while pronouncing 
judgment on the cause brought before it by enforcing law and 
administer justice and not to ignore or turn the mind/attention of the 
court away from the truth of the cause or lis before it, in disregard of 
its duty to prevent miscarriage of justice. When an ordinary citizen 
makes a grievance against the mighty administration, any indifference, 
inaction or lethargy shown in protecting his right guaranteed in law will 
tend to paralyse by such inaction or lethargic action of courts and erode 
in stages the faith inbuilt in the judicial system ultimately destroying the 
very justice-delivery system of the country itself. Doing justice is the 
paramount consideration and that duty cannot be abdicated or 
diluted and diverted by manipulative red herrings.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE AND SPEEDY TRIAL 
11. Unless a statute indicates otherwise, a criminal trial would commence with 
the presumption of innocence. This principle is of utmost importance as 
the Court embarks upon a trial in its quest for the truth.  Though an accused 

11 
 
is charged with an offence, it is the Court which has to satisfy its 
conscience, upon the prosecution proving the charges levelled beyond 
reasonable doubt.  For the aforesaid purpose, an accused will have to be 
given a decent setting to prove his innocence. Compliance with the 
procedural safeguard is meant for the aforesaid purpose.  However, such 
procedural safeguards would not only ensure a fair trial, but also help the 
prosecution in confirming that it did its part fairly. 
12. The concept of fair trial is not a vague idea, but a decisive one. While a 
speedy trial is in the best interest of everyone, including the society, the 
pace can only be set through the procedural mechanism, and it cannot be 
done at the mere dictate of the Court in ignorance of the procedural law.  
At the same time, care has to be taken with the aid of the law, to prevent 
the miscarriage of justice, when the delay is caused on purpose.  Thus, a 
speedy trial, being a facet of fair trial, cannot be permitted to destroy the 
latter by its recklessness.  Any anxiety on the part of the Court, either to 
expedite the trial in contravention of law, or delay it unnecessarily, would 
seriously impede fair trial.  In such a case, either the prosecution or the 
defence would bear the consequences.   
Precedents 
 
Mohd. Hussain v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi), (2012) 9 SCC 408  
 

12 
 
“40. “Speedy trial” and “fair trial” to a person accused of a crime 
are integral part of Article 21. There is, however, qualitative 
difference between the right to speedy trial and the accused's right 
of fair trial. Unlike the accused's right of fair trial, deprivation of the 
right to speedy trial does not per se prejudice the accused in 
defending himself. The right to speedy trial is in its very nature 
relative. It depends upon diverse circumstances. Each case of delay in 
conclusion of a criminal trial has to be seen in the facts and circumstances 
of such case. Mere lapse of several years since the commencement of 
prosecution by itself may not justify the discontinuance of prosecution or 
dismissal of indictment. The factors concerning the accused's right to 
speedy trial have to be weighed vis-à-vis the impact of the crime on 
society and the confidence of the people in judicial system. Speedy 
trial secures rights to an accused but it does not preclude the rights 
of public justice. The nature and gravity of crime, persons involved, 
social impact and societal needs must be weighed along with the right 
of the accused to speedy trial and if the balance tilts in favour of the 
former the long delay in conclusion of criminal trial should not 
operate against the continuation of prosecution and if the right of the 
accused in the facts and circumstances of the case and exigencies of 
situation tilts the balance in his favour, the prosecution may be 
brought to an end. These principles must apply as well when the 
appeal court is confronted with the question whether or not retrial of 
an accused should be ordered.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
State of Haryana v. Ram Mehar, (2016) 8 SCC 762  
“24. The decisions of this Court when analysed appositely clearly convey 
that the concept of the fair trial is not in the realm of abstraction. It is not 
a vague idea. It is a concrete phenomenon. It is not rigid and there cannot 
be any straitjacket formula for applying the same. On occasions it has the 
necessary flexibility. Therefore, it cannot be attributed or clothed with 
any kind of rigidity or flexibility in its application. It is because fair trial 
in its ambit requires fairness to the accused, the victim and the collective 
at large. Neither the accused nor the prosecution nor the victim which is 
a part of the society can claim absolute predominance over the other. 
Once absolute predominance is recognised, it will have the effect 
potentiality to bring in an anarchical disorder in the conducting of trial 
defying established legal norm. There should be passion for doing justice 
but it must be commanded by reasons and not propelled by any kind of 
vague instigation. It would be dependent on the fact situation; established 
norms and recognised principles and eventual appreciation of the factual 
scenario in entirety. There may be cases which may command 

13 
 
compartmentalisation but it cannot be stated to be an inflexible rule. Each 
and every irregularity cannot be imported to the arena of fair trial. There 
may be situations where injustice to the victim may play a pivotal role. 
The centripodal purpose is to see that injustice is avoided when the trial 
is conducted. Simultaneously the concept of fair trial cannot be allowed 
to such an extent so that the systemic order of conducting a trial in 
accordance with CrPC or other enactments get mortgaged to the whims 
and fancies of the defence or the prosecution. The command of the Code 
cannot be thrown to winds. In such situation, as has been laid down in 
many an authority, the courts have significantly an eminent role. A plea 
of fairness cannot be utilised to build castles in Spain or permitted to 
perceive a bright moon in a sunny afternoon. It cannot be acquiesced to 
create an organic disorder in the system. It cannot be acceded to manure 
a fertile mind to usher in the nemesis of the concept of trial as such.”      
                           
 
Talab Haji Hussain v. Madhukar Purshottam Mondkar, 1958 SCR 
1226 (at page 1232)  
 
“Now it is obvious that the primary object of criminal procedure is to 
ensure a fair trial of accused persons. Every criminal trial begins with the 
presumption of innocence in favour of the accused; and provisions of the 
Code are so framed that a criminal trial should begin with and be 
throughout governed by this essential presumption; but a fair trial has 
naturally two objects in view; it must be fair to the accused and must also 
be fair to the prosecution. The test of fairness in a criminal trial must be 
judged from this dual point of view. It is therefore of the utmost 
importance that, in a criminal trial, witnesses should be able to give 
evidence without any inducement or threat either from the prosecution or 
the defence. A criminal trial must never be so conducted by the 
prosecution as would lead to the conviction of an innocent person; 
similarly the progress of a criminal trial must not be obstructed by the 
accused so as to lead to the acquittal of a really guilty offender. The 
acquittal of the innocent and the conviction of the guilty are the objects 
of a criminal trial and so there can be no possible doubt that, if any 
conduct on the part of an accused person is likely to obstruct a fair trial, 
there is occasion for the exercise of the inherent power of the High Courts 
to secure the ends of justice. …” 
 
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 (CrPC, 1973) 
13. The CrPC, 1973, though a Code dealing with procedural law, is 
embellished 
with 
numerous 
substantive 
elements 
in 
it.                          

14 
 
The substantive elements give effect to Articles 14, 20, 21 and 22 of the 
Constitution of India, 1950. Any Court that deals with a criminal case, 
starting at the magisterial level, is duty-bound to give effect to the CrPC, 
1973 which would only mean the protection of rights conferred under the 
Constitution of India, 1950.  To put it differently, the CrPC, 1973 is a 
handbook introduced to maintain and uphold fair play in a criminal case, 
starting with the investigation and ending with the acquittal or a conviction 
leading to a sentence.   
SUPPLY OF DOCUMENTS 
Section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 
“173. Report of police officer.—  
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 (4) After forwarding a report under this section, the officer-in-charge of 
the police station shall, before the commencement of, the inquiry or trial, 
furnish or cause to be furnished to the accused, free of cost, a copy of the 
report forwarded under sub-section (1) and of the first information report 
recorded under Section 154 and of all other documents or relevant 
extracts thereof, on which the prosecution proposes to rely, including the 
statements and confessions, if any recorded under Section 164 and the 
statements recorded under sub-section (3) of Section 161 of all the 
persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses.” 
 
Section 207A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 
“207A. Procedure to be adopted in proceedings instituted on police 
report.  
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
(3) At the commencement of the inquiry, the Magistrate shall, when the 
accused appears or is brought before him, satisfy himself that the 
documents referred to in Section 173 have been furnished to the accused 

15 
 
and if he finds that the accused has not been furnished with such 
documents or any of them, he shall cause the same to be so furnished.” 
 
Section 251A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 
“251A. Procedure to be adopted in cases instituted on police report. 
(1) When, in any case instituted on a police report, the accused appears 
or is brought before a Magistrate at the commencement of the trial, such 
Magistrate shall satisfy himself that the documents referred to in Section 
173 have been furnished to the accused, and if he finds that the accused 
has not been furnished with such documents or any of them, he shall 
cause them to be so furnished.” 
 
Section 207 of the CrPC, 1973 
“207. Supply to the accused of copy of police report and other 
documents.- 
In any case where the proceeding has been instituted on a police report, 
the Magistrate shall without delay furnish to the accused, free of cost, a 
copy of each of the following:- 
(i)the police report; 
(ii)the first information report recorded under section 154; 
(iii)the statements recorded under sub-section (3) of section 161 of all 
persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses, 
excluding therefrom any part in regard to which a request for such 
exclusion has been made by the police officer under sub-section (6) of 
section 173; 
(iv)the confessions and statements, if any, recorded under section 164; 
(v)any other document or relevant extract thereof forwarded to the 
Magistrate with the police report under sub-section (5) of section 173 : 
Provided that the Magistrate may, after perusing any such part of a 
statement as is referred to in clause (iii) and considering the reasons 
given by the police officer for the request, direct that a copy of that part 
of the statement or of such portion thereof as the Magistrate thinks 
proper, shall be furnished to the accused :Provided further that if the 
Magistrate is satisfied that any document referred to in clause (v) is 
voluminous, he shall, instead of furnishing the accused with a copy 
thereof, direct that he will only be allowed to inspect it either personally 
or through pleader in Court.” 
 

16 
 
Section 208 of the CrPC, 1973  
“208. Supply of copies of statements and documents to accused in other 
cases triable by Court of Session.- 
Where, in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report, it appears to the 
Magistrate issuing process under section 204 that the offence is triable 
exclusively by the Court of Session, the Magistrate shall without delay furnish 
to the accused, free of cost, a copy of each of the following: 
(i) the statements recorded under section 200 or section 202, of all persons 
examined by the Magistrate; 
(ii) the statements and confessions, if any, recorded under section 161 or section 
164; 
(iii) any documents produced before the Magistrate on which the prosecution 
proposes to rely: 
Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any such document is 
voluminous, he shall, instead of furnishing the accused with a copy thereof, 
direct that he will only be allowed to inspect it either personally or through 
pleader in Court.” 
 
Section 209 of the CrPC, 1973  
 
“209. Commitment of case to Court of Session when offence is triable 
exclusively by it.- 
When in a case instituted on a police report or otherwise, the accused 
appears or is brought before the Magistrate and it appears to the 
Magistrate that the offence is triable exclusively by the Court of Session, 
he shall— 
 (a) commit, after complying with the provisions of Section 207 or Section 
208, as the case may be, the case to the Court of Session, and subject to 
the provisions of this Code relating to bail, remand the accused to custody 
until such commitment has been made; 
(b) subject to the provisions of this Code relating to bail, remand the accused 
to custody during, and until the conclusion of, the trial; 
(c) send to that Court the record of the case and the documents and articles, 
if any, which are to be produced in evidence; 
(d) notify the Public Prosecutor of the commitment of the case to the Court 
of Session.” 
 
 
 

17 
 
Section 238 of the CrPC, 1973  
“238. Compliance with Section 207. 
When, in any warrant-case instituted on a police report, the accused 
appears or is brought before a Magistrate at the commencement of the 
trial, the Magistrate shall satisfy himself that he has complied with the 
provisions of Section 207.” 
 
14. To understand these provisions, one has to go back to the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (hereinafter referred to as the “CrPC, 1898”).  Section 
173 of the CrPC, 1898 fixes the responsibility on the officer in charge of 
police station to serve a copy of the report of the Police Officer and of the 
First Information Report, along with the requisite documents, on the 
accused.  As per Section 207A of the CrPC, 1898 a Magistrate shall, after 
the commencement of the inquiry, satisfy himself that there was due 
compliance of Section 173 of the CrPC 1898 by furnishing all the requisite 
documents on the accused.  Thus, the Magistrate was expected to find out 
due compliance on the part of the investigating agency and, if not done, 
must direct it to do so.   A similar procedure was adopted under Section 
251A of the CrPC, 1898. 
15. Section 207 of the CrPC, 1973 has dispensed with the role of the 
investigating agency in serving the requisite copies on the accused,  
replacing it with that of the Magistrate. Additionally, the Magistratre is 
directed to make sure that due compliance is made at the earliest. Section 
208 of the CrPC, 1973 reiterates the aforesaid position in cases instituted 

18 
 
otherwise than on a police report and triable by the Court of Sessions.  It is 
only thereafter, that the commitment of the case to a Court of Sessions, 
regarding an offence exclusively triable by it, shall take place. 
16. Section 238 of the CrPC, 1973 mandates that while dealing with a warrant 
case instituted on a police report, the Magistrate shall satisfy himself that 
he has complied with the provisions of Section 207 of the CrPC, 1973.  In 
all these cases, due compliance is to be done when the accused is produced 
or appears before the Magistrate.  Therefore, Section 238 of the CrPC, 1973 
reiterates the bounden duty of a Magistrate and, if not done, to be complied 
with at the time of commencement of the trial. Such a reiteration would 
only reinforce a renewed emphasis on due compliance being a facet of fair 
play.  An accused shall be put to notice on the incriminating materials 
leading to the charges framed against him.  As stated, the obligation so 
imposed is not only on the supply of the relevant documents, but such 
compliance should be at the appropriate stage so that it does not brook any 
delay.  The idea is to enable an accused to face the trial by thoroughly 
understanding the case stated against him. However, a mere non-supply of 
a part of the documents would not lead to the trial being vitiated, unless an 
accused substantiates before the Court that it has caused prejudice to him. 
Obviously, it is ultimately for the Court to come to an appropriate 
conclusion by an adequate assessment of facts placed before it. 

19 
 
Precedents 
Naresh Kumar Yadav v. Ravindra Kumar, (2008) 1 SCC 632  
“13. The documents in terms of Sections 207 and 208 are supplied to 
make the accused aware of the materials which are sought to be 
utilised against him. The object is to enable the accused to defend 
himself properly. The idea behind the supply of copies is to put him 
on notice of what he has to meet at the trial. The effect of non-supply 
of copies has been considered by this Court in Noor Khan v. State of 
Rajasthan [AIR 1964 SC 286] and Shakila Abdul Gafar Khan v. 
Vasant Raghunath Dhoble [(2003) 7 SCC 749 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 1918]. 
It was held that non-supply is not necessarily prejudicial to the 
accused. The court has to give a definite finding about the prejudice or 
otherwise. Even the supervision notes cannot be utilised by the 
prosecution as a piece of material or evidence against the accused. If any 
reference is made before any court to the supervision notes, as has been 
noted above they are not to be taken note of by the court concerned. As 
many instances have come to light when the parties, as in the present 
case, make reference to the supervision notes, the inevitable conclusion 
is that they have unauthorised access to the official records.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
P. Gopalkrishnan v. State of Kerala, (2020) 9 SCC 161  
“21. Be that as it may, furnishing of documents to the accused under 
Section 207 of the 1973 Code is a facet of right of the accused to a fair 
trial enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution… 
22. Similarly, in V.K. Sasikala v. State [(2012) 9 SCC 771 : (2013) 1 SCC 
(Cri) 1010] , this Court held as under : (SCC p. 788, para 21) 
“21. The issue that has emerged before us is, therefore, somewhat 
larger than what has been projected by the State and what has been 
dealt with by the High Court [V.K. Sasikala v. State, 2012 SCC 
OnLine Kar 9209] . The question arising would no longer be one 
of compliance or non-compliance with the provisions of Section 
207 CrPC and would travel beyond the confines of the strict 
language of the provisions of CrPC and touch upon the larger 
doctrine of a free and fair trial that has been painstakingly built 
up by the courts on a purposive interpretation of Article 21 of the 
Constitution. It is not the stage of making of the request; the efflux 
of time that has occurred or the prior conduct of the accused that 
is material. What is of significance is if in a given situation the 

20 
 
accused comes to the court contending that some papers forwarded 
to the court by the investigating agency have not been exhibited 
by the prosecution as the same favours the accused the court must 
concede a right to the accused to have an access to the said 
documents, if so claimed. This, according to us, is the core issue 
in the case which must be answered affirmatively. In this regard, 
we would like to be specific in saying that we find it difficult to 
agree with the view [V.K. Sasikala v. State, 2012 SCC OnLine Kar 
9209] taken by the High Court that the accused must be made to 
await the conclusion of the trial to test the plea of prejudice that 
he may have raised. Such a plea must be answered at the earliest 
and certainly before the conclusion of the trial, even though it may 
be raised by the accused belatedly. This is how the scales of justice 
in our criminal jurisprudence have to be balanced.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
38. It is crystal clear that all documents including “electronic record” 
produced for the inspection of the court along with the police report and 
which prosecution proposes to use against the accused must be furnished 
to the accused as per the mandate of Section 207 of the 1973 Code. The 
concomitant is that the contents of the memory card/pen-drive must be 
furnished to the accused, which can be done in the form of cloned copy 
of the memory card/pen-drive. It is cardinal that a person tried for 
such a serious offence should be furnished with all the material and 
evidence in advance, on which the prosecution proposes to rely 
against him during the trial. Any other view would not only impinge 
upon the statutory mandate contained in the 1973 Code, but also the 
right of an accused to a fair trial enshrined in Article 21 of the 
Constitution of India.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
17. We make it clear that the right of an accused would arise, in getting the 
documents relied upon by the prosecution, after taking cognizance and 
before framing of the charges.  Therefore, between taking cognizance and 
framing of charges, an accused should have sufficient window to go 
through the documents supplied to him as he is entitled to be heard at a 
later stage. 

21 
 
DISCHARGE 
Section 227 of the CrPC, 1973 
“227. Discharge.- 
If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents 
submitted therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the accused and 
the prosecution in this behalf, the Judge considers that there is not 
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge 
the accused and record his reasons for so doing.” 
 
18.  Before the stage of framing of charges, the Judge is expected to discharge 
an accused, if he is of the considered view that there is no sufficient ground 
to proceed against the accused. This being a judicial exercise, his discretion 
must be supported by adequate reasons. In discharge of his powers, he has 
to consider the records and documents submitted by the prosecution vis-à-
vis the arguments adduced by both sides. The words “after hearing the 
submissions of the accused” would imply an effective and meaningful 
hearing.   It is not a mere procedural compliance.  A Judge has to satisfy 
himself that the accused had reasonable time to ponder over and prepare 
his arguments before seeking a discharge. At this stage, an accused gets a 
substantive right as there is a window of opportunity for him to get 
discharged, instead of facing a prolonged trial.  Such an opportunity can 
only be exercised by not only supplying the documents needed, but also 
giving adequate and sufficient time to the defence to place its case. 
Granting time for the aforesaid purpose is the sole discretion of the Court. 

22 
 
19. The duty of the Court is to see as to whether the materials produced by the 
prosecution are reasonably related to the offence attributed against the 
accused.   What is to be seen is the existence of a prima facie case.  The 
case is at a pre-framing stage and therefore, it cannot be a full-fledged pre-
trial. Adequacy and sufficiency are the relevant factors to be seen.  The test 
is one of the degree of probability. 
20. Section 227 of the CrPC, 1973, in fact, is a provision which gives effect to  
Article 22 of the Constitution of India, 1950.  The right of an accused to be 
heard is inalienable. For exercising this right, there has to be due 
consultation.  Such a right can never be termed as a procedural one.  It 
would be a ground to challenge the proceeding at that stage, but the same 
would not vitiate the trial.   Suffice it is to reiterate that it is the duty of the 
court to ensure that the accused is given sufficient opportunities to consult 
his lawyer. 
Precedents 
Anokhilal v. State of M.P., (2019) 20 SCC 196  
“22. The provisions concerned viz. Sections 227 and 228 of the Code 
contemplate framing of charge upon consideration of the record of 
the case and the documents submitted therewith, and after “hearing 
the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in that behalf”. 
If the hearing for the purposes of these provisions is to be meaningful, 
and not just a routine affair, the right under the said provisions stood 
denied to the appellant. 

23 
 
23. In our considered view, the trial court on its own, ought to have 
adjourned the matter for some time so that the Amicus Curiae could 
have had the advantage of sufficient time to prepare the matter. The 
approach adopted by the trial court, in our view, may have expedited 
the conduct of trial, but did not further the cause of justice. Not only 
were the charges framed the same day as stated above, but the trial 
itself was concluded within a fortnight thereafter. In the process, the 
assistance that the appellant was entitled to in the form of legal aid, 
could not be real and meaningful. 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
26. Expeditious disposal is undoubtedly required in criminal matters and 
that would naturally be part of guarantee of fair trial. However, the 
attempts to expedite the process should not be at the expense of the basic 
elements of fairness and the opportunity to the accused, on which 
postulates, the entire criminal administration of justice is founded. In the 
pursuit for expeditious disposal, the cause of justice must never be 
allowed to suffer or be sacrificed. What is paramount is the cause of 
justice and keeping the basic ingredients which secure that as a core idea 
and ideal, the process may be expedited, but fast tracking of process must 
never ever result in burying the cause of justice. 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
31. Before we part, we must lay down certain norms so that the 
infirmities that we have noticed in the present matter are not 
repeated: 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
31.3. Whenever any learned counsel is appointed as Amicus 
Curiae, some reasonable time may be provided to enable the 
counsel to prepare the matter. There cannot be any hard-and-
fast rule in that behalf. However, a minimum of seven days' time 
may normally be considered to be appropriate and adequate. 
31.4. Any learned counsel, who is appointed as Amicus Curiae 
on behalf of the accused must normally be granted to have 
meetings and discussion with the accused concerned. Such 
interactions may prove to be helpful as was noticed in Imtiyaz 

24 
 
Ramzan Khan [Imtiyaz Ramzan Khan v. State of Maharashtra, 
(2018) 9 SCC 160 : (2018) 3 SCC (Cri) 721] .” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Kewal Krishan v. Suraj Bhan, 1980 (Supp) SCC 499  
“11. The proposition that in cases instituted on complaint in regard to an 
offence exclusively triable by the Court of Session, the standard for 
ascertaining whether or not the evidence collected in the preliminary 
inquiry discloses sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused is 
lower than the one to be adopted at the stage of framing charges in a 
warrant case triable by the Magistrate, is now evident from the scheme 
of the new Code of 1973. Section 209 of the Code of 1973 dispenses with 
the inquiry preliminary to commitment in cases triable exclusively by a 
Court of Session, irrespective of whether such a case is instituted on a 
criminal complaint or a police report. Section 209 says: “When in a case 
instituted on a police report or otherwise the accused appears or is 
brought before the magistrate and it appears to the magistrate that the 
offence is triable exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall commit 
the case to the Court of Session.” If the Committing Magistrate thinks 
that it is not necessary to commit the accused who may be on bail to 
custody, he may not cancel the bail. This has been made clear by the 
words “subject to the provisions of this Code relating to bail” occurring 
in clause (b) of Section 209. Therefore, if the accused is already on bail, 
his bail should not be arbitrarily cancelled. Section 227 of the Code of 
1973 has made another beneficent provision to save the accused from 
prolonged harassment which is a necessary concomitant of a 
protracted trial. This section provides that if upon considering the 
record of the case, the documents submitted with it and the 
submissions of the accused and the prosecution, the judge is not 
convinced that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the 
accused, he has to discharge the accused under this section and 
record his reasons for so doing.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Hardeep Singh v. State Of Punjab, (2014) 3 SCC 92  
 
“100. However, there is a series of cases wherein this Court while 
dealing with the provisions of Sections 227, 228, 239, 240, 241, 242 
and 245 CrPC, has consistently held that the court at the stage of 

25 
 
framing of the charge has to apply its mind to the question whether 
or not there is any ground for presuming the commission of an 
offence by the accused. The court has to see as to whether the 
material brought on record reasonably connect the accused with the 
offence. Nothing more is required to be enquired into. While dealing 
with the aforesaid provisions, the test of prima facie case is to be 
applied. The court has to find out whether the materials offered by 
the prosecution to be adduced as evidence are sufficient for the court 
to proceed against the accused further. (Vide State of Karnataka v. L. 
Muniswamy [(1977) 2 SCC 699 : 1977 SCC (Cri) 404 : AIR 1977 SC 
1489] , All India Bank Officers' Confederation v. Union of India [(1989) 
4 SCC 90 : 1989 SCC (L&S) 627 : AIR 1989 SC 2045] , Stree Atyachar 
Virodhi Parishad v. Dilip Nathumal Chordia [(1989) 1 SCC 715 : 1989 
SCC (Cri) 285] , State of M.P. v. Krishna Chandra Saksena [(1996) 11 
SCC 439 : 1997 SCC (Cri) 35] and State of M.P. v. Mohanlal 
Soni [(2000) 6 SCC 338 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 1110 : AIR 2000 SC 2583] .) 
101. In Dilawar Balu Kurane v. State of Maharashtra [(2002) 2 SCC 135 
: 2002 SCC (Cri) 310] , this Court while dealing with the provisions of 
Sections 227 and 228 CrPC, placed a very heavy reliance on the earlier 
judgment of this Court in Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal 
[(1979) 3 SCC 4 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 609 : AIR 1979 SC 366] and held that 
while considering the question of framing the charges, the court may 
weigh the evidence for the limited purpose of finding out whether or not 
a prima facie case against the accused has been made out and whether the 
materials placed before the court disclose grave suspicion against the 
accused which has not been properly explained. In such an eventuality, 
the court is justified in framing the charges and proceeding with the trial. 
The court has to consider the broad probabilities of the case, the total 
effect of the evidence and the documents produced before the court but 
the court should not make a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the 
matter and weigh evidence as if it is conducting a trial.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Sajjan Kumar v. CBI, (2010) 9 SCC 368 
“Exercise of jurisdiction under Sections 227 and 228 CrPC 
21. On consideration of the authorities about the scope of Sections 227 
and 228 of the Code, the following principles emerge: 
(i) The Judge while considering the question of framing the charges 
under Section 227 CrPC has the undoubted power to sift and weigh 
the evidence for the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a 
prima facie case against the accused has been made out. The test to 
determine prima facie case would depend upon the facts of each 
case. 
(ii) Where the materials placed before the court disclose grave 
suspicion against the accused which has not been properly 

26 
 
explained, the court will be fully justified in framing a charge and 
proceeding with the trial. 
(iii) The court cannot act merely as a post office or a mouthpiece of 
the prosecution but has to consider the broad probabilities of the 
case, the total effect of the evidence and the documents produced 
before the court, any basic infirmities, etc. However, at this stage, 
there cannot be a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter 
and weigh the evidence as if he was conducting a trial. 
(iv) If on the basis of the material on record, the court could form an 
opinion that the accused might have committed offence, it can frame 
the charge, though for conviction the conclusion is required to be 
proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused has committed the 
offence. 
(v) At the time of framing of the charges, the probative value of the 
material on record cannot be gone into but before framing a charge 
the court must apply its judicial mind on the material placed on 
record and must be satisfied that the commission of offence by the 
accused was possible. 
(vi) At the stage of Sections 227 and 228, the court is required to 
evaluate the material and documents on record with a view to find 
out if the facts emerging therefrom taken at their face value disclose 
the existence of all the ingredients constituting the alleged offence. 
For this limited purpose, sift the evidence as it cannot be expected 
even at that initial stage to accept all that the prosecution states as 
gospel truth even if it is opposed to common sense or the broad 
probabilities of the case. 
(vii) If two views are possible and one of them gives rise to suspicion 
only, as distinguished from grave suspicion, the trial Judge will be 
empowered to discharge the accused and at this stage, he is not to 
see whether the trial will end in conviction or acquittal. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
24. At the stage of framing of charge under Section 228 CrPC or while 
considering the discharge petition filed under Section 227, it is not for 
the Magistrate or the Judge concerned to analyse all the materials 
including pros and cons, reliability or acceptability, etc. It is at the trial, 
the Judge concerned has to appreciate their evidentiary value, credibility 
or otherwise of the statement, veracity of various documents and is free 
to take a decision one way or the other.” 
 
Mohd. Ajmal Amir Kasab v. State of Maharashtra, (2012) 9 SCC 1  
“465. All this development clearly indicates the direction in which the 
law relating to access to lawyers/legal aid has developed and continues 
to develop. It is now rather late in the day to contend that Article 22(1) is 
merely an enabling provision and that the right to be defended by a legal 

27 
 
practitioner comes into force only on the commencement of trial as 
provided under Section 304 CrPC. 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
471. The resounding words of the Court in Khatri (2) [(1981) 1 SCC 627 
: 1981 SCC (Cri) 228] are equally, if not more, relevant today than when 
they were first pronounced. In Khatri (2) [(1981) 1 SCC 627 : 1981 SCC 
(Cri) 228] the Court also alluded to the reasons for the urgent need of the 
accused to access a lawyer, these being the indigence and illiteracy of the 
vast majority of Indians accused of crimes. 
472. As noted in Khatri (2) [(1981) 1 SCC 627 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 228] as 
far back as in 1981, a person arrested needs a lawyer at the stage of his 
first production before the Magistrate, to resist remand to police or jail 
custody and to apply for bail. He would need a lawyer when the charge-
sheet is submitted and the Magistrate applies his mind to the charge-sheet 
with a view to determine the future course of proceedings. He would need 
a lawyer at the stage of framing of charges against him and he would, of 
course, need a lawyer to defend him in trial. 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
474. We, therefore, have no hesitation in holding that the right to 
access to legal aid, to consult and to be defended by a legal 
practitioner, arises when a person arrested in connection with a 
cognizable offence is first produced before a Magistrate. We, 
accordingly, hold that it is the duty and obligation of the Magistrate 
before whom a person accused of committing a cognizable offence is 
first produced to make him fully aware that it is his right to consult 
and be defended by a legal practitioner and, in case he has no means 
to engage a lawyer of his choice, that one would be provided to him 
from legal aid at the expense of the State. The right flows from 
Articles 21 and 22(1) of the Constitution and needs to be strictly 
enforced. We, accordingly, direct all the Magistrates in the country 
to faithfully discharge the aforesaid duty and obligation and further 
make it clear that any failure to fully discharge the duty would 
amount to dereliction in duty and would make the Magistrate 
concerned liable to departmental proceedings. 
 
475. It needs to be clarified here that the right to consult and be defended 
by a legal practitioner is not to be construed as sanctioning or permitting 
the presence of a lawyer during police interrogation. According to our 
system of law, the role of a lawyer is mainly focused on court 
proceedings. The accused would need a lawyer to resist remand to 
police or judicial custody and for granting of bail; to clearly explain 
to him the legal consequences in case he intended to make a 
confessional statement in terms of Section 164 CrPC; to represent 
him when the court examines the charge-sheet submitted by the 

28 
 
police and decides upon the future course of proceedings and at the 
stage of the framing of charges; and beyond that, of course, for the 
trial. It is thus to be seen that the right to access to a lawyer in this 
country is not based on the Miranda [(1966) 16 L Ed 2d 694 : 384 US 
436] principles, as protection against self-incrimination, for which 
there are more than adequate safeguards in Indian laws. The right 
to access to a lawyer is for very Indian reasons; it flows from the 
provisions of the Constitution and the statutes, and is only intended 
to ensure that those provisions are faithfully adhered to in practice. 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
477. Every accused unrepresented by a lawyer has to be provided a 
lawyer at the commencement of the trial, engaged to represent him 
during the entire course of the trial. Even if the accused does not ask 
for a lawyer or he remains silent, it is the constitutional duty of the 
court to provide him with a lawyer before commencing the trial. 
Unless the accused voluntarily makes an informed decision and tells 
the court, in clear and unambiguous words, that he does not want the 
assistance of any lawyer and would rather defend himself personally, 
the obligation to provide him with a lawyer at the commencement of 
the trial is absolute, and failure to do so would vitiate the trial and 
the resultant conviction and sentence, if any, given to the accused 
(see Suk Das v. UT of Arunachal Pradesh [(1986) 2 SCC 401 : 1986 
SCC (Cri) 166] ). 
478. But the failure to provide a lawyer to the accused at the pre-trial 
stage may not have the same consequence of vitiating the trial. It may 
have other consequences like making the delinquent Magistrate 
liable to disciplinary proceedings, or giving the accused a right to 
claim compensation against the State for failing to provide him legal 
aid. But it would not vitiate the trial unless it is shown that failure to 
provide legal assistance at the pre-trial stage had resulted in some 
material prejudice to the accused in the course of the trial. That 
would have to be judged on the facts of each case.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
Section 228 of the CrPC, 1973 
“228. Framing of charge.- 
(1) If, after such consideration and hearing as aforesaid, the Judge is of 
opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has 
committed an offence which-- 
(a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session, he may, frame 
a charge against the accused and, by order, transfer the case for trial 
to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, [or any other Judicial Magistrate of 

29 
 
the first class and direct the accused to appear before the Chief 
Judicial Magistrate, or, as the case may be, the Judicial Magistrate 
of the first class, on such date as he deems fit, and thereupon such 
Magistrate] shall try the offence in accordance with the procedure 
for the trial of warrant-cases instituted on a police report; 
(b) is exclusively triable by the Court, he shall frame in writing a 
charge against the accused. 
 
(2) Where the Judge frames any charge under clause (b) of sub-section 
(1), the charge shall be read and explained to the accused and the accused 
shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of the offence charged or claims 
to be tried.” 
 
21. Under sub-section (2) of Section 228 of the CrPC, 1973, the Judge, while 
framing any charge, is ordained to read and explain it to the accused.   
Thereafter, the accused shall be asked as to whether he pleads guilty of the 
offence charged or claims to be tried.  As a matter of routine, video 
conferencing must be avoided, unless there are compelling reasons to do 
so.  This is an occasion where the Judge avoids the lawyer and keeps in 
touch with the accused directly.  He records the response of the accused.  
Under those circumstances, unless a situation so warrants otherwise, the 
presence of the accused shall be ensured. 
 
EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES 
Section 230 of the CrPC, 1973 
“230. Date for prosecution evidence .- 
If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead, or claims to be tried or 
is not convicted under section 229, the Judge shall fix a date for the 

30 
 
examination of witnesses, and may, on the application of the prosecution, 
issue any process for compelling the attendance of any witness or the 
production of any document or other thing.” 
 
Section 231 of the CrPC, 1973 
“231. Evidence for prosecution.-  
(1) On the date so fixed, the Judge shall proceed to take all such evidence 
as may be produced in support of the prosecution. 
(2) The Judge may, in his discretion, permit the cross-examination of any 
witness to be deferred until any other witness or witnesses have been 
examined or recall any witness for further cross-examination.” 
 
22. These two provisions are to be read in consonance with each other.  At this 
stage, the Court is concerned only with the prosecution’s evidence. To 
ensure fair play, as a normal practice, the Court has to fix a date for the 
examination of the witnesses. The idea is to complete the examination-in-
chief and cross examination, both at the same time. While fixing the date, 
the Court is expected to take into consideration the relative convenience of 
the parties, though the discretion lies with it.  Sub-section (1) of Section 
231 of the CrPC, 1973 fixes a responsibility on the Court, the prosecution 
and the defence to go ahead with the examination of witnesses on the date 
so fixed.  Therefore, even for this reason, the Court shall ascertain and then 
decide a convenient date for both sides, while being conscious about any 
attempt to drag the trial.  Completion of such examination is a matter of 
rule as any deferment can at best be an exception, to the discretion of the 
Court. Obviously, the use of such a discretion, being judicial in nature, has 

31 
 
to be on a case-to-case basis.  Suffice it is to state that a balance has to be 
struck between the competing interests. 
State of Kerala v. Rasheed, (2019) 13 SCC 297 
 
“22. There cannot be a straitjacket formula providing for the 
grounds on which judicial discretion under Section 231(2) CrPC can 
be exercised. The exercise of discretion has to take place on a case-
to-case basis. The guiding principle for a Judge under Section 231(2) 
CrPC is to ascertain whether prejudice would be caused to the party 
seeking deferral, if the application is dismissed. 
23. While deciding an application under Section 231(2) CrPC, a 
balance must be struck between the rights of the accused, and the 
prerogative of the prosecution to lead evidence. The following factors 
must be kept in consideration: 
(i) possibility of undue influence on witness(es); 
(ii) possibility of threats to witness(es); 
(iii) possibility that non-deferral would enable subsequent witnesses 
giving evidence on similar facts to tailor their testimony to 
circumvent the defence strategy; 
(iv) possibility of loss of memory of the witness(es) whose 
examination-in-chief has been completed; 
(v) occurrence of delay in the trial, and the non-availability of 
witnesses, if deferral is allowed, in view of Section 309(1) CrPC [ 
“309. Power to postpone or adjourn proceedings.—(1) In every 
inquiry or trial the proceedings shall be continued from day to day 
until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the 
court finds the adjournment of the same beyond the following day 
to be necessary for reasons to be recorded:”See also Vinod Kumar 
v. State of Punjab, (2015) 3 SCC 220 : (2015) 2 SCC (Cri) 226 : 
(2015) 1 SCC (L&S) 712; and S.J. Chaudhary v. State (UT of 
Delhi), (1984) 1 SCC 722 : 1984 SCC (Cri) 163.] . 
 
These factors are illustrative for guiding the exercise of discretion by a 
Judge under Section 231(2) CrPC. 
 
24. The following practice guidelines should be followed by trial 
courts in the conduct of a criminal trial, as far as possible: 
24.1. A detailed case-calendar must be prepared at the commencement of 
the trial after framing of charges. 

32 
 
24.2. The case-calendar must specify the dates on which the examination-
in-chief and cross-examination (if required) of witnesses is to be 
conducted. 
24.3. The case-calendar must keep in view the proposed order of 
production of witnesses by parties, expected time required for 
examination of witnesses, availability of witnesses at the relevant time, 
and convenience of both the prosecution as well as the defence, as far as 
possible. 
24.4. Testimony of witnesses deposing on the same subject-matter must 
be proximately scheduled. 
24.5. The request for deferral under Section 231(2) CrPC must be 
preferably made before the preparation of the case-calendar. 
24.6. The grant for request of deferral must be premised on sufficient 
reasons justifying the deferral of cross-examination of each witness, or 
set of witnesses. 
24.7. While granting a request for deferral of cross-examination of any 
witness, the trial courts must specify a proximate date for the cross-
examination of that witness, after the examination-in-chief of such 
witness(es) as has been prayed for. 
24.8. The case-calendar, prepared in accordance with the above 
guidelines, must be followed strictly, unless departure from the same 
becomes absolutely necessary. 
24.9. In cases where trial courts have granted a request for deferral, 
necessary steps must be taken to safeguard witnesses from being 
subjected to undue influence, harassment or intimidation.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Section 233 of the CrPC, 1973 
“233. Entering upon defence.-  
(1) Where the accused is not acquitted under section 232, he shall be 
called upon to enter on his defence and adduce any evidence he may have 
in support thereof. 
(2) If the accused puts in any written statement, the Judge shall file it with 
the record. 
 
(3) If the accused applies for the issue of any process for compelling the 
attendance of any witness or the production of any document or thing, 
the Judge shall issue such process unless he considers, for reasons to be 
recorded, that such application should be refused on the ground that it is 
made for the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of 
justice.” 
 

33 
 
23. At this stage, the accused will be called upon to enter on his defence and 
adduce any evidence.  If the accused applies for the issue of process to 
compel the attendance of any witnesses or production of document, the 
Judge shall issue such process.  It is only when he comes to the conclusion, 
that an application filed for the aforesaid purpose on behalf of the defence 
is vexatious or filed to delay the proceedings or for defeating the ends of 
justice, it has to be refused.  We have no hesitation in holding that when an 
application is moved invoking Section 233 of the CrPC, 1973 the Judge is 
duty bound to issue process, unless he is satisfied on the existence of the 
three elements as aforesaid.  Any denial would be an affront to the concept 
of a fair trial. 
 
Section 309 of the CrPC, 1973 
“309. Power to postpone or adjourn proceedings.— (1) In every 
inquiry or trial the proceedings shall be continued from day-to-day until 
all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court 
finds the adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be 
necessary for reasons to be recorded: 
Provided that when the inquiry or trial relates to an offence under 
Section 
376,  
Section 376A, 
Section 376AB, 
Section 376B, 
Section 376C, Section 376D, Section 376DA or Section 376DB of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the inquiry or trial shall be completed 
within a period of two months from the date of filing of the charge sheet. 
(2) If the Court after taking cognizance of an offence, or 
commencement of trial, finds it necessary or advisable to postpone the 
commencement of, or adjourn, any inquiry or trial, it may, from time to 
time, for reasons to be recorded, postpone or adjourn the same on such 
terms as it thinks fit, for such time as it considers reasonable, and may by 
a warrant remand the accused if in custody: 

34 
 
Provided that no Magistrate shall remand an accused person to 
custody under this section for a term exceeding fifteen days at a time: 
Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance, no 
adjournment or postponement shall be granted, without examining them, 
except for special reasons to be recorded in writing: 
Provided also that no adjournment shall be granted for the purpose 
only of enabling the accused person to show cause against the sentence 
proposed to be imposed on him: 
Provided also that— 
(a) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except where 
the circumstances are beyond the control of that party; 
(b) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court, shall not 
be a ground for adjournment; 
(c) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his pleader is not present 
or the party or his pleader though present in Court, is not ready to 
examine or cross-examine the witness, the Court may, if thinks fit, record 
the statement of the witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit 
dispensing with the examination-in-chief or cross-examination of the 
witness, as the case may be. 
Explanation 1.—If sufficient evidence has been obtained to raise a 
suspicion that the accused may have committed an offence, and it appears 
likely that further evidence may be obtained by a remand, this is a 
reasonable cause for a remand. 
Explanation 2.—The terms on which an adjournment or 
postponement may be granted include, in appropriate cases, the payment 
of costs by the prosecution or the accused.” 
 
24. This section places emphasis on the continuation of the trial as any 
obstruction and delay would hamper the process of justice.  In a criminal 
trial, continuity is of utmost importance, as it not only helps the court to 
concentrate, but ensures quality justice. However, the courts are not 
powerless in granting adjournments if the circumstances so warrant.  
Therefore, despite a bar under the second and fourth proviso to Section 
309, an adjournment can be granted, provided the party who seeks so, 

35 
 
satisfies the court.  After all, a speedy trial enures to the benefit of the 
accused.  
State of UP v. Shambu Nath Singh (2001) 4 SCC 667  
 
“11. The first sub-section mandates on the trial courts that the 
proceedings shall be held expeditiously but the words “as 
expeditiously as possible” have provided some play at the joints and 
it is through such play that delay often creeps in the trials. Even so, 
the next limb of the sub-section sounded for a more vigorous stance 
to be adopted by the court at a further advanced stage of the trial. 
That stage is when examination of the witnesses begins. The 
legislature which diluted the vigour of the mandate contained in the 
initial limb of the sub-section by using the words “as expeditiously as 
possible” has chosen to make the requirement for the next stage 
(when examination of the witnesses has started) to be quite stern. 
Once the case reaches that stage the statutory command is that such 
examination “shall be continued from day to day until all the 
witnesses in attendance have been examined”. The solitary exception 
to the said stringent rule is, if the court finds that adjournment 
“beyond the following day to be necessary” the same can be granted 
for which a condition is imposed on the court that reasons for the 
same should be recorded. Even this dilution has been taken away when 
witnesses are in attendance before the court. In such situation the court is 
not given any power to adjourn the case except in the extreme 
contingency for which the second proviso to sub-section (2) has imposed 
another condition, 
“provided further that when witnesses are in attendance, no 
adjournment or postponement shall be granted, without examining 
them, except for special reasons to be recorded in writing”. 
(emphasis supplied) 
12. Thus, the legal position is that once examination of witnesses started, 
the court has to continue the trial from day to day until all witnesses in 
attendance have been examined (except those whom the party has given 
up). The court has to record reasons for deviating from the said 
course. Even that is forbidden when witnesses are present in court, 
as the requirement then is that the court has to examine them. Only 
if there are “special reasons”, which reasons should find a place in 
the order for adjournment, that alone can confer jurisdiction on the 
court to adjourn the case without examination of witnesses who are 
present in court.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 

36 
 
Section 465 of the CrPC, 1973 
“465. Finding or sentence when reversible by reason of error, 
omission or irregularity.— 
(1) Subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained, no finding, sentence 
or order passed by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be reversed or 
altered by a Court of appeal, confirmation of revision on account of any 
error, omission or irregularity in the complaint, summons, warrant, 
proclamation, order, judgment or other proceedings before or during trial 
or in any inquiry or other proceedings under this Code, or any error, or 
irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution, unless in the opinion of 
that Court, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby. 
 (2) In determining whether any error, omission or irregularity in any 
proceeding under this Code, or any error, or irregularity in any sanction 
for the prosecution has occasioned a failure of justice, the Court shall 
have regard to the fact whether the objection could and should have been 
raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings.”  
 
25. This provision is meant to uphold the decision of the trial court, even in a 
case where there is an apparent irregularity in procedure.  If the evidence 
available has been duly taken note of by the Court, then such a decision 
cannot be reversed on account of a mere technical error.  This is based on 
the principle that a procedural law is the handmaid of justice.  However, 
the ultimate issue is as to whether such an error or omission has constituted 
a failure of justice, which is one of fact, to be decided on the touchstone of 
prejudice.  
26.  If the Appellate Court is of the view that there is a continued non-
compliance of the substantial provisions of the CrPC, 1973 then the rigour 
of Section 465 of the CrPC, 1973 would not apply and, in that case, an 
order of remand would be justified. 

37 
 
State of M.P. v. Bhooraji, (2001) 7 SCC 679  
“15. A reading of the section makes it clear that the error, omission or 
irregularity in the proceedings held before or during the trial or in any 
enquiry were reckoned by the legislature as possible occurrences in 
criminal courts. Yet the legislature disfavoured axing down the 
proceedings or to direct repetition of the whole proceedings afresh. 
Hence, the legislature imposed a prohibition that unless such error, 
omission or irregularity has occasioned “a failure of justice” the 
superior court shall not quash the proceedings merely on the ground 
of such error, omission or irregularity. 
 
16. What is meant by “a failure of justice” occasioned on account of 
such error, omission or irregularity? This Court has observed 
in Shamnsaheb M. Multtani v. State of Karnataka [(2001) 2 SCC 577: 
2001 SCC (Cri) 358] thus: (SCC p. 585, para 23) 
“23. We often hear about ‘failure of justice’ and quite often the 
submission in a criminal court is accentuated with the said 
expression. Perhaps it is too pliable or facile an expression which 
could be fitted in any situation of a case. The expression ‘failure 
of justice’ would appear, sometimes, as an etymological 
chameleon (the simile is borrowed from Lord Diplock in Town 
Investments Ltd. v. Deptt. of the Environment [(1977) 1 All ER 
813: 1978 AC 359: (1977) 2 WLR 450 (HL)]). The criminal court, 
particularly the superior court should make a close examination 
to ascertain whether there was really a failure of justice or 
whether it is only a camouflage.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Darbara Singh v. State of Punjab, (2012) 10 SCC 476  
 
 
21. “Failure of justice” is an extremely pliable or facile expression, 
which can be made to fit into any situation in any case. The court must 
endeavour to find the truth. There would be “failure of justice”; not 
only by unjust conviction, but also by acquittal of the guilty, as a result 
of unjust failure to produce requisite evidence. Of course, the rights of 
the accused have to be kept in mind and also safeguarded, but they 
should not be overemphasised to the extent of forgetting that the victims 
also have rights. It has to be shown that the accused has suffered some 
disability or detriment in respect of the protections available to him 
under the Indian criminal jurisprudence. “Prejudice” is incapable of 
being interpreted in its generic sense and applied to criminal 
jurisprudence. The plea of prejudice has to be in relation to 
investigation or trial, and not with respect to matters falling outside 
their scope. Once the accused is able to show that there has been serious 
prejudice caused to him, with respect to either of these aspects, and that 

38 
 
the same has defeated the rights available to him under criminal 
jurisprudence, then the accused can seek benefit under the orders of 
the court. (Vide Rafiq Ahmed v. State of U.P. [(2011) 8 SCC 300: (2011) 
3 SCC (Cri) 498: AIR 2011 SC 3114] , SCC p. 320, para 
36; Rattiram v. State of M.P. [(2012) 4 SCC 516 : (2012) 2 SCC (Cri) 
481] and Bhimanna v. State of Karnataka [(2012) 9 SCC 650] .)” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
Kottayya v. Emperor, AIR (34) 1947 Privy Council 67 
“[7] Even on this basis, Mr. Pritt for the accused has argued that a breach 
of a direct and important provision of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
cannot be cured, but must lead to the quashing of the conviction. The 
Crown, on the other hand, contends that the failure to produce the note-
book in question amounted merely to an irregularity in the proceedings 
which can be cured under the provisions of S. 537 Criminal P.C. if the 
court is satisfied that such irregularity has not in fact occasioned any 
failure of justice. There are, no doubt, authorities in India which lend 
some support to Mr. Pritt's contention, and reference may be made to 49 
ALL. 475 [(’27) 49 All. 475 : 14 A.I.R. 1927 All. 350 : 100 I.C. 371, 
Tirkha v Nanak], in which the court expressed the view that S. 537, 
Criminal P.C., applied only to errors of procedure arising out of mere 
inadvertence, and not to cases of disregard of, or disobedience to, 
mandatory provisions of the Code, and to 45 Mad. 820 [(’22) 45 Mad. 
820 : 9 A.I.R. 1922 Mad. 512 : 71 I.C. 252, In re Madura Muthu 
Vannian.], in which the view was expressed that any failure to examine 
the accused under S. 342, Criminal P.C., was fatal to the validity of the 
trial and could not be cured under S. 537. In their Lordships' opinion this 
argument is based on too narrow a view of the operation of S. 537. When 
a trial is conducted in a manner different from that prescribed by the 
Code as in 28 I.A. 257 [(’01) 28 I.A. 257 : 25 Mad. 61 : 8 Sar. 160 
(P.C.), Subrahmania Aiyar v. Emperor], the trial is bad, and no 
question of curing an irregularity arises; but if the trial is conducted 
substantially in the manner prescribed by the Code, but some 
irregularity occurs in the course of such conduct, the irregularity can 
be cured under S. 537, and none the less so because the irregularity 
involves, as must nearly always be the case, a breach of one or more 
of the very comprehensive provisions of the Code. The distinction 
drawn in many of the cases in India between an illegality and an 
irregularity is one of degree rather than of kind. This view finds 
support in the decision of their Lordships' Board in 5 Rang. 53 [(‘26) 5 
Rang. 53 : 14 A.I.R. 1927 P.C. 44 :54 I.A. 96 : 100 I.C. 227 (P.C.), Abdul 
Rahman v. Emperor], where failure to comply with Ss. 360, Criminal 
P.C., was held to be cured by Ss. 535 and 537. The present case falls 
under S. 537, and their Lordships hold the trial valid notwithstanding the 
breach of S. 162.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

39 
 
 
RE-TRIAL 
Section 386 of the CrPC, 1973 
“386. Powers of the Appellate Court.—After perusing such record and 
hearing the appellant or his pleader, if he appears, and the Public 
Prosecutor if he appears, and in case of an appeal under section 377 or 
section 378, the accused, if he appears, the Appellate Court may, if it 
considers that there is no sufficient ground for interfering, dismiss the 
appeal, or may—  
(a) in an appeal from an order of acquittal, reverse such order and direct 
that further inquiry be made, or that the accused be re-tried or committed 
for trial, as the case may be, or find him guilty and pass sentence on him 
according to law; 
 (b) in an appeal from a conviction—  
(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the 
accused, or order him to be re-tried by a Court of competent 
jurisdiction subordinate to such Appellate Court or committed for 
trial, or 
(ii) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or  
(iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the 
extent, or the nature and extent, of the sentence, but not so as to 
enhance the same—  
(c) in an appeal for enhancement of sentence— 
(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the 
accused or order him to be re-tried by a Court competent to try 
the offence, or  
(ii) alter the finding maintaining the sentence, or  
(iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the 
extent, or, the nature and extent, of the sentence, so as to enhance 
or reduce the same;  
(d) in an appeal from any other order, alter or reverse such order;  
(e) make any amendment or any consequential or incidental order that 
may be just or proper:  
Provided that the sentence shall not be enhanced unless the accused has 
had an opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement: 
Provided further that the Appellate Court shall not inflict greater 
punishment for the offence which in its opinion the accused has 

40 
 
committed, than might have been inflicted for that offence by the Court 
passing the order or sentence under appeal.” 
 
27. An Appellate Court has got ample power to direct re-trial.  However, such 
a power is to be exercised in exceptional cases.  The irregularities found 
must be so material that a re-trial is the only option.  In other words, the 
failure to follow the mandate of law must cause a serious prejudice vitiating 
the entire trial, which cannot be cured otherwise, except by way of a re-
trial.  Once such a re-trial is ordered, the effect is that all the proceedings 
recorded by the court would get obliterated leading to a fresh trial, which 
is inclusive of the examination of witnesses. 
Nasib Singh v. State of Punjab, (2022) 2 SCC 89  
“33. The principles that emerge from the decisions of this Court on 
retrial can be formulated as under: 
33.1. The appellate court may direct a retrial only in 
“exceptional” circumstances to avert a miscarriage of 
justice. 
33.2. Mere lapses in the investigation are not sufficient to 
warrant a direction for retrial. Only if the lapses are so grave 
so as to prejudice the rights of the parties, can a retrial be 
directed. 
33.3. 
A 
determination 
of 
whether 
a 
“shoddy” 
investigation/trial has prejudiced the party, must be based on 
the facts of each case pursuant to a thorough reading of the 
evidence. 
33.4. It is not sufficient if the accused/prosecution makes a 
facial argument that there has been a miscarriage of justice 
warranting a retrial. It is incumbent on the appellate court 
directing a retrial to provide a reasoned order on the nature 
of the miscarriage of justice caused with reference to the 
evidence and investigatory process. 

41 
 
33.5. If a matter is directed for retrial, the evidence and 
record of the previous trial is completely wiped out. 
33.6. The following are some instances, not intended to be 
exhaustive, of when the Court could order a retrial on the 
ground of miscarriage of justice: 
(a) The trial court has proceeded with the trial in the 
absence of jurisdiction; 
(b) The trial has been vitiated by an illegality or 
irregularity based on a misconception of the nature of 
the proceedings; and 
(c) The prosecutor has been disabled or prevented from 
adducing evidence as regards the nature of the charge, 
resulting in the trial being rendered a farce, sham or 
charade.” 
 
SENTENCING 
“If the criminal law as a whole is the Cinderella of 
jurisprudence, then the law of sentencing is Cinderella’s 
illegitimate baby” 
 Nigel Walker. 
 British criminologist 
Sentencing in a Rational Society 1 (1969) 
 
 
Section 235 of the CrPC, 1973 
“235. Judgment of acquittal or conviction.— 
(1) After hearing arguments and points of law (if any), the Judge shall 
give a judgment in the case.  
(2) If the accused is convicted, the Judge shall, unless he proceeds in 
accordance with the provisions of section 360, hear the accused on the 
questions of sentence, and then pass sentence on him according to law.” 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
Section 360 of the CrPC, 1973  
“360. Order to release on probation of good conduct or after 
admonition.- 
(1) When any person not under twenty-one years of age is convicted of 
an offence punishable with fine only or with imprisonment for a term of 
seven years or less, or when any person under twenty-one years of age or 
any woman is convicted of an offence not punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life, and no previous conviction is proved against the 
offender, if it appears to the Court before which he is convicted, regard 
being had to the age, character or antecedents of the offender, and to the 
circumstances in which the offence was committed, that it is expedient 
that the offender should be released on probation of good conduct, the 
Court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment, direct 
that he be released on his entering into a bond, with or without sureties, 
to appear and receive sentence when called upon during such period (not 
exceeding three years) as the Court may direct and in the meantime to 
keep the peace and be of good behaviour: 
Provided that where any first offender is convicted by a Magistrate 
of the second class not specially empowered by the High Court, and the 
Magistrate is of opinion that the powers conferred by this section should 
be exercised, he shall record his opinion to that effect, and submit the 
proceedings to a Magistrate of the first class forwarding the accused to 
or taking bail for his appearance before, such Magistrate, who shall 
dispose of the case in the manner provided by sub-section (2). 
(2) Where proceedings are submitted to a Magistrate of the first class as 
provided by sub-section (1), such Magistrate may thereupon pass such 
sentence or make such order as he might have passed or made if the case 
had originally been heard by him, and, if he thinks further inquiry or 
additional evidence on any point to be necessary, he may make such 
inquiry or take such evidence himself or direct such inquiry or evidence 
to be made or taken. 
(3) In any case in which a person is convicted of theft, theft in a building, 
dishonest misappropriation, cheating or any offence under the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) punishable with not more than two years' 
imprisonment or any offence punishable with fine only and no previous 
conviction is proved against him, the Court before which he is so 
convicted may, if it thinks fit, having regard to the age, character, 
antecedents or physical or mental condition of the offender and to the 
trivial nature of the offence or any extenuating circumstances under 
which the offence was committed, instead of sentencing him to any 
punishment, release him after due admonition. 
(4) An order under this section may be made by any Appellate Court or 
by the High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of 
revision. 

43 
 
(5) When an order has been made under this section in respect of any 
offender, the High Court or Court of Session may, on appeal when there 
is a right of appeal to such Court, or when exercising its powers of 
revision, set aside such order, and in lieu thereof pass sentence on such 
offender according to law: 
Provided that the High Court or Court of Session shall not under this 
sub-section inflict a greater punishment than might have been inflicted 
by the Court by which the offender was convicted. 
(6) The provisions of Sections 121, 124 and 373 shall, so far as may be 
apply in the case of sureties offered in pursuance of the provisions of this 
section. 
(7) The Court, before directing the release of an offender under sub-
section (1) shall be satisfied that an offender or his surety (if any) has a 
fixed place of abode or regular occupation in the place for which the 
Court acts or in which the offender is likely to live during the period 
named for the observance of the conditions. 
(8) If the Court which convicted the offender, or a Court which could 
have dealt with the offender in respect of his original offence, is satisfied 
that the offender has failed to observe any of the conditions of his 
recognizance, it may issue a warrant for his apprehension. 
(9) An offender, when apprehended on any such warrant, shall be brought 
forthwith before the Court issuing the warrant, and such Court may either 
remand him in custody until the case is heard or admit him to bail with a 
sufficient surety conditioned on his appearing for sentence and such 
Court may after hearing the case, pass sentence. 
(10) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of the Probation of 
Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958), or the Children Act, 1960 (60 of 1960), 
or any other law for the time being in force for the treatment, training or 
rehabilitation of youthful offenders.” 
 
Section 3 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 
“3. Power of court to release certain offenders after admonition.— 
When any person is found guilty of having committed an offence 
punishable under section 379 or section 380 or section 381 or section 404 
or section 420 of the Indian Penal Code, (45 of 1860) or any offence 
punishable with imprisonment for not more than two years, or with fine, 
or with both, under the Indian Penal Code or any other law, and no 
previous conviction is proved against him and the court by which the 
person is found guilty is of opinion that, having regard to the 
circumstances of the case including the nature of the offence, and the 
character of the offender, it is expedient so to do, then, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the court 
may, instead of sentencing him to any punishment or releasing him on 

44 
 
probation of good conduct under section 4, release him after due 
admonition.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, previous conviction 
against a person shall include any previous order made against him under 
this section or section 4.”  
 
Section 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 
“4. Power of court to release certain offenders on probation of good 
conduct.— 
(1) When any person is found guilty of having committed an offence not 
punishable with death or imprisonment for life and the court by which 
the person is found guilty is of opinion that, having regard to the 
circumstances of the case including the nature of the offence and the 
character of the offender, it is expedient to release him on probation of 
good conduct, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, the court may, instead of sentencing him at 
once to any punishment direct that he be released on his entering into a 
bond, with or without sureties, to appear and receive sentence when 
called upon during such period, not exceeding three years, as the court 
may direct, and in the meantime to keep the peace and be of good 
behaviour:  
 
Provided that the court shall not direct such release of an offender unless 
it is satisfied that the offender or his surety, if any, has a fixed place of 
abode or regular occupation in the place over which the court exercises 
jurisdiction or in which the offender is likely to live during the period for 
which he enters into the bond.  
(2) Before making any order under sub-section (1), the court shall take 
into consideration the report, if any, of the probation officer concerned 
in relation to the case. 
(3) When an order under sub-section (1) is made, the court may, if it is 
of opinion that in the interests of the offender and of the public it is 
expedient so to do, in addition pass a supervision order directing that the 
offender shall remain under the supervision of a probation officer named 
in the order during such period, not being less than one year, as may be 
specified therein, and may in such supervision order, impose such 
conditions as it deems necessary for the due supervision of the offender.  
(4) The court making a supervision order under sub-section (3) shall 
require the offender, before he is released, to enter into a bond, with or 
without sureties, to observe the conditions specified in such order and 
such additional conditions with respect to residence, abstention from 
intoxicants or any other matter as the court may, having regard to the 
particular circumstances, consider fit to impose for preventing a 

45 
 
repetition of the same offence or a commission of other offences by the 
offender.  
(5) The court making a supervision order under sub-section (3) shall 
explain to the offender the terms and conditions of the order and shall 
forthwith furnish one copy of the supervision order to each of the 
offenders, the sureties, if any, and the probation officer concerned.”
 
 
 
 
Section 6 of the Probation of Offenders Act 1958  
“6. Restrictions on imprisonment of offenders under twenty-one 
years of age.— 
(1) When any person under twenty-one years of age is found guilty of 
having committed an offence punishable with imprisonment (but not with 
imprisonment for life), the court by which the person is found guilty shall 
not sentence him to imprisonment unless it is satisfied that, having regard 
to the circumstances of the case including the nature of the offence and 
the character of the offender, it would not be desirable to deal with him 
under section 3 or section 4, and if the court passes any sentence of 
imprisonment on the offender, it shall record its reasons for doing so.  
(2) For the purpose of satisfying itself whether it would not be desirable 
to deal under section 3 or section 4 with an offender referred to in sub-
section (1), the court shall call for a report from the probation officer and 
consider the report, if any, and any other information available to it 
relating to the character and physical and mental condition of the 
offender.” 
 
28. Before passing the sentence on a convict, after rendering conviction, the 
Judge shall consider the feasibility of proceeding in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 360 of the CrPC, 1973 which speaks of releasing a 
convict on probation of good conduct or after admonition.  Being a 
beneficial provision dealing with a reformative aspect, it is the bounden 
duty of the Judge to consider the application of this provision before 
proceeding to hear the accused on sentence.  While doing so, the Judge has 

46 
 
to hear the accused and the prosecution. Similarly, the Court has to apply 
the salient provisions contained under Sections 3, 4 and 6 of the Probation 
of Offenders Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as “Act, 1958”).  If an 
offence is considered as an act against the society, the resultant action 
cannot be retributive alone, as equal importance is required, if not more,  to 
be given to the reformative part.  The ultimate goal is to bring the accused 
back on the rails, to once again be a part of society. Any attempt to ignore 
either Section 360 of the CrPC, 1973 or the provisions as mandated in the 
Act, 1958 would make their purpose redundant.  It looks as if these 
laudable provisions have been lost sight of while rendering a sentence.  The 
ultimate objective is to prevent the commission of such offences in future.  
It can never be done by a retributive measure alone, as a change of heart at 
the behest of the accused is the best way to prevent an act of crime.  
Therefore, we have absolute clarity in our mind, that a trial court is duty 
bound to comply with the mandate of Section 360 of the CrPC, 1973 read 
with Sections 3, 4 and 6 of the Act, 1958 before embarking into the 
question of sentence.  In this connection, we may note that sub-section (10) 
of Section 360 of the CrPC, 1973 makes a conscious effort to remind the 
Judge of the rigour of the beneficial provisions contained in the Act, 1958. 
29. Hearing the accused on sentence is a valuable right conferred on the 
accused. The real importance lies only with the sentence, as against the 

47 
 
conviction. Unfortunately, we do not have a clear policy or legislation 
when it comes to sentencing. Over the years, it has become judge-centric 
and there are admitted disparities in awarding a sentence. 
30. In a country like ours, sentencing accused persons pursuant to a conviction, 
on a uniform pattern, would also be prejudicial. When it comes to 
sentencing, there are various factors such as age, sex, education, home life, 
social background, emotional and mental conditions, caste, religion and 
community that constitute aggravating and mitigating circumstances. 
31. There is a distinction between knowledge and character. Knowledge is 
acquired, while character is formed. The formation of a person’s character 
depends upon various factors.  More often than not, a convict does not have 
control over the formation of his character. This leads to certain groups of 
people inheriting crime. In this connection, we can draw an analogy from 
nature itself. Before falling on the ground, rainwater remains the same.  It 
is the soil which changes the character of the water.  Rainwater partakes in 
the character of the soil, over which it does not have any control. The issues 
are extremely complex.   
32.  A decision of a Judge in sentencing, would vary from person to person.  
This will also vary from stage to stage.  It is controlled by the mind.  The 
environment and the upbringing of a Judge would become the ultimate 
arbiter in deciding the sentence. A Judge from an affluent background 

48 
 
might have a different mindset as against a Judge from a humble one.  A 
female Judge might look at it differently, when compared to her male 
counterpart.  An Appellate Court might tinker with the sentence due to its 
experience, and the external factors like institutional constraints might 
come into play.  Certainly, there is a crying need for a clear sentencing 
policy, which should never be judge-centric as the society has to know the 
basis of a sentence.   
33. Sentencing shall not be a mere lottery.  It shall also not be an outcome of a 
knee-jerk reaction.  This is a very important part of the Fundamental Rights 
conferred under Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India, 1950.  Any 
unwarranted disparity would be against the very concept of a fair trial and, 
therefore, against justice. 
34. Various elements such as deterrence, incapacitation and reformation 
should form part of sentencing.  There is a compelling need for a studied 
scrutiny of sentencing, to address in particular the reformative aspect, 
while maintaining equality between different groups. Perhaps, much study 
is also required on the occurence of repeat offences, which could be 
attributable to certain groups. The nexus between particular types of 
offences and the offenders forming their own groups has to be taken note 
of and addressed. 

49 
 
35. The concept of intuitive sentencing is against the rule of law. A Judge can 
never have unrestrictive and unbridled discretion, based upon his 
conscience formed through his understanding of the society, without there 
being any guidelines in awarding a sentence. The need for adequate 
guidelines for exercising sentencing discretion, avoiding unwanted 
disparity, is of utmost importance.  
36. Courts do take into consideration the mitigating and aggravating 
circumstances.  As we have dealt with illustratively, no research has been 
undertaken for constituting what are aggravating and mitigating 
circumstances.  While it would be appropriate to follow ‘beyond 
reasonable doubt’ standard in adjudicating aggravating circumstances, the 
‘balance of probability’ standard is required while construing mitigating 
circumstances.  Courts may also be guided by the conduct of the convict 
during pre-trial stage, either under incarceration or otherwise.  A report 
may well be called for from the designated authority.  The ultimate idea is 
to eliminate discretion on the part of the Court, which obviously leads to 
disparity. 
37. As we discuss the issue we have flagged, we understand that the issue is an 
extremely complex one and it is the duty of the States and the Union of 
India to deal with the situation by duly considering the three different 
modes discussed above. There has to be a conscious discussion and debate 

50 
 
over this issue which might require constituting an appropriate 
Commission on Sentencing consisting of various experts and stakeholders.  
We illustratively suggest “the members from the legal fraternity, 
psychologists, sociologists, criminologists, executives and legislators”.   
Societal experience would come handy in coming to a correct conclusion.  
What we have at present is an imposition of a sentence by way of a 
legislation.  There are obvious errors and lacunae, which have been pointed 
out in the preceding discussion. It may also be imperative for a court to 
have an assessment to be made by an independent authority on the conduct 
and behaviour of the accused for the purpose of deciding the sentence.  The 
guidelines which have been proposed by this Court may also be considered.  
This would include the creation of a competent authority tasked to give a 
report and its composition. 
Manoj v. State of M.P., (2023) 2 SCC 353  
“230. The strength of “precedent” and “consistency” is perhaps, 
therefore, lowest when it comes to matters of sentencing, as long as it is 
within the confines of legality and resulting in “principled sentencing”. 
In other words, the judicial incongruence when it relates to sentencing, 
would in fact be a positive indicator, rather than a negative one, provided 
it is still within the well-defined contours of “principled” sentencing. For 
sentencing in capital offences, discretion to arrive at individualised 
sentences is encouraged, but must be constrained by the “rarest of rare” 
principle, wherein the court considers aggravating circumstances of the 
crime, and mitigating circumstances of the criminal (a “liberal and 
expansive” construction of the latter), which in turn must inform their 
consideration of whether the option of life imprisonment is 
unquestionably foreclosed owing to an impossibility [ Held to be 
“probability” and not “impossibility” in Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik v. 

51 
 
State of Maharashtra, (2019) 12 SCC 460 : (2019) 4 SCC (Cri) 420] to 
reform. 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
233. Therefore, “individualised, principled sentencing” — based on both 
the crime and criminal, with consideration of whether reform or 
rehabilitation is achievable (held to be “probable” in Rajendra 
Pralhadrao Wasnik [Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik v. State of 
Maharashtra, (2019) 12 SCC 460 : (2019) 4 SCC (Cri) 420] ), and 
consequently whether the option of life imprisonment is unquestionably 
foreclosed — should be the only factor of “commonality” that must be 
discernible from decisions relating to capital offences. With the creation 
of a new sentencing threshold in Swamy Shraddananda (2) [Swamy 
Shraddananda (2) v. State of Karnataka, (2008) 13 SCC 767 : (2009) 3 
SCC (Cri) 113] , and later affirmed by a Constitution Bench in Union of 
India v. V. Sriharan [Union of India v. V. Sriharan, (2016) 7 SCC 1 : 
(2016) 2 SCC (Cri) 695] , of life imprisonment without statutory 
remission (i.e. Articles 72 and 161 of the Constitution are still 
applicable), yet another option exists, before imposition of death 
sentence. However, serious concern has been raised against this concept, 
as it was upheld by a narrow majority, and is left to be considered at an 
appropriate time. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
Practical guidelines to collect mitigating circumstances 
248. There is urgent need to ensure that mitigating circumstances are 
considered at the trial stage, to avoid slipping into a retributive response 
to the brutality of the crime, as is noticeably the situation in a majority of 
cases reaching the appellate stage. 
249. To do this, the trial court must elicit information from the 
accused and the State, both. The State, must—for an offence carrying 
capital punishment—at the appropriate stage, produce material which is 
preferably collected beforehand, before the Sessions Court disclosing 
psychiatric and psychological evaluation of the accused. This will help 
establish proximity (in terms of timeline), to the accused person's frame 
of mind (or mental illness, if any) at the time of committing the crime 
and offer guidance on mitigating factors (1), (5), (6) and (7) spelled out 
in Bachan Singh [Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 684 : 
1980 SCC (Cri) 580] . Even for the other factors of (3) and (4)—an onus 
placed squarely on the State—conducting this form of psychiatric and 
psychological evaluation close on the heels of commission of the offence, 
will provide a baseline for the appellate courts to use for comparison i.e. 
to evaluate the progress of the accused towards reformation, achieved 
during the incarceration period. 

52 
 
250. Next, the State, must in a time-bound manner, collect additional 
information pertaining to the accused. An illustrative, but not exhaustive 
list is as follows: 
(a) Age 
(b) Early family background (siblings, protection of parents, any 
history of violence or neglect) 
(c) Present family background (surviving family members, whether 
married, has children, etc.) 
(d) Type and level of education 
(e) Socio-economic background (including conditions of poverty or 
deprivation, if any) 
(f) Criminal antecedents (details of offence and whether convicted, 
sentence served, if any) 
(g) Income and the kind of employment (whether none, or temporary 
or permanent, etc.); 
(h) Other factors such as history of unstable social behaviour, or 
mental or psychological ailment(s), alienation of the individual (with 
reasons, if any), etc. 
This information should mandatorily be available to the trial court, at the 
sentencing stage. The accused too, should be given the same opportunity 
to produce evidence in rebuttal, towards establishing all mitigating 
circumstances. 
251. Lastly, information regarding the accused's jail conduct and 
behaviour, work done (if any), activities the accused has involved 
themselves in, and other related details should be called for in the form 
of a report from the relevant jail authorities (i.e. Probation and Welfare 
Officer, Superintendent of Jail, etc.). If the appeal is heard after a long 
hiatus from the trial court's conviction, or High Court's confirmation, as 
the case may be — a fresh report (rather than the one used by the previous 
court) from the jail authorities is recommended, for a more exact and 
complete understanding of the contemporaneous progress made by the 
accused, in the time elapsed. The jail authorities must also include a fresh 
psychiatric and psychological report which will further evidence the 
reformative progress, and reveal post-conviction mental illness, if any. 
252. It is pertinent to point out that this Court in Anil v. State of 
Maharashtra [Anil v. State of Maharashtra, (2014) 4 SCC 69 : (2014) 2 
SCC (Cri) 266] has in fact directed criminal courts to call for additional 
material : (SCC p. 86, para 33) 

53 
 
“33. … Many a times, while determining the sentence, the courts 
take it for granted, looking into the facts of a particular case, that the 
accused would be a menace to the society and there is no possibility 
of reformation and rehabilitation, while it is the duty of the court to 
ascertain those factors, and the State is obliged to furnish materials 
for and against the possibility of reformation and rehabilitation of 
the accused. The facts, which the courts deal with, in a given case, 
cannot be the foundation for reaching such a conclusion, which, as 
already stated, calls for additional materials. We, therefore, direct 
that the criminal courts, while dealing with the offences like Section 
302IPC, after conviction, may, in appropriate cases, call for a report 
to determine, whether the accused could be reformed or 
rehabilitated, which depends upon the facts and circumstances of 
each case.” 
                                                                              (emphasis supplied) 
We hereby fully endorse and direct that this should be implemented 
uniformly, as further elaborated above, for conviction of offences that 
carry the possibility of death sentence.” 
 
38. Our thought process has been ignited from a book titled “Discretion, 
Discrimination and the Rule of Law, Reforming Sentencing in India”, 
authored by Mr. Mrinal Satish, published by the Cambridge University 
Press, (2017). The learned author has drawn extensively from the 
sentencing policy in Israel.  Upon a thorough reading of the book, it 
presents an excellent insight into sentencing policy.  The Israeli model 
takes into consideration numerous factors compiled in the form of 
guidelines to the Judge, in sentencing an accused.   
39. We have also benefitted by looking into the policy adopted in other 
countries, such as in Canada, New Zealand and UK. 
 

54 
 
CANADA 
Criminal Code (Canada) 
Purpose and Principles of Sentencing 
Section 718 of the Criminal Code (Canada) 
“Purpose 
718 The fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and 
to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for 
the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by 
imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following 
objectives: 
(a) to denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or to the 
community that is caused by unlawful conduct; 
(b) to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences; 
(c) to separate offenders from society, where necessary; 
(d) to assist in rehabilitating offenders; 
(e) to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community; 
and 
(f) to 
promote 
a 
sense 
of 
responsibility 
in 
offenders, 
and 
acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or to the community.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Section 718.1 of the Criminal Code (Canada) 
“Fundamental principle 
718.1 A sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence 
and the degree of responsibility of the offender.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Section 718.2 of the Criminal Code (Canada) 
 
“Other sentencing principles 
718.2 A court that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration 
the following principles: 

55 
 
(a) a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any 
relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the 
offence or the offender, and, without limiting the generality of the 
foregoing, 
(i) evidence that the offence was motivated by bias, prejudice or hate 
based on race, national or ethnic origin, language, colour, religion, 
sex, age, mental or physical disability, sexual orientation, or gender 
identity or expression, or on any other similar factor, 
(ii) evidence that the offender, in committing the offence, abused the 
offender’s intimate partner or a member of the victim or the 
offender’s family, 
(ii.1) evidence that the offender, in committing the offence, abused 
a person under the age of eighteen years, 
(iii) evidence that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a 
position of trust or authority in relation to the victim, 
(iii.1) evidence that the offence had a significant impact on the 
victim, considering their age and other personal circumstances, 
including their health and financial situation, 
(iii.2) evidence that the offence was committed against a person 
who, in the performance of their duties and functions, was providing 
health services, including personal care services, 
(iv) evidence that the offence was committed for the benefit of, at 
the direction of or in association with a criminal organization, 
(v) evidence that the offence was a terrorism offence, 
(vi) evidence that the offence was committed while the offender was 
subject to a conditional sentence order made under section 742.1 or 
released on parole, statutory release or unescorted temporary 
absence under the Corrections and Conditional Release Act, and 
(vii) evidence that the commission of the offence had the effect of 
impeding another person from obtaining health services, including 
personal care services, 
shall be deemed to be aggravating circumstances; 
(b) a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar 
offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances; 
(c) where consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined sentence 
should not be unduly long or harsh; 
(d) an offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive 
sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances; and 

56 
 
(e) all available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable 
in the circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to 
the community should be considered for all offenders, with particular 
attention to the circumstances of Aboriginal offenders.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Procedure and Evidence 
Section 720 of the Criminal Code (Canada) 
“Sentencing proceedings 
720 (1) A court shall, as soon as practicable after an offender has 
been found guilty, conduct proceedings to determine the appropriate 
sentence to be imposed. 
Court-supervised programs 
(2) The court may, with the consent of the Attorney General and the 
offender and after considering the interests of justice and of any victim 
of the offence, delay sentencing to enable the offender to attend a 
treatment program approved by the province under the supervision of the 
court, such as an addiction treatment program or a domestic violence 
counselling program.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Section 721 of the Criminal Code (Canada) 
“Report by probation officer 
721 (1) Subject to regulations made under subsection (2), where an 
accused, other than an organization, pleads guilty to or is found 
guilty of an offence, a probation officer shall, if required to do so by 
a court, prepare and file with the court a report in writing relating 
to the accused for the purpose of assisting the court in imposing a 
sentence or in determining whether the accused should be discharged 
under section 730.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
NEW ZEALAND 
Sentencing Act 2002, New Zealand 

57 
 
Section 3 of the Sentencing Act, 2002 
“Part 1 Sentencing purposes and principles, and provisions of general 
application 
Preliminary provisions 
3 Purposes 
The purposes of this Act are— 
(a) to set out the purposes for which offenders may be sentenced or 
otherwise dealt with; and 
(b) to promote those purposes, and aid in the public’s understanding 
of sentencing practices, by providing principles and guidelines to be 
applied by courts in sentencing or otherwise dealing with offenders; 
and 
(c) to provide a sufficient range of sentences and other means of dealing 
with offenders; and 
(d) to provide for the interests of victims of crime.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
Section 7 of the Sentencing Act, 2002 
“Purposes and principles of sentencing 
7 Purposes of sentencing or otherwise dealing with offenders 
(1) The purposes for which a court may sentence or otherwise deal with 
an offender are— 
(a) to hold the offender accountable for harm done to the victim and 
the community by the offending; or 
(b) to promote in the offender a sense of responsibility for, and an 
acknowledgment of, that harm; or 
(c) to provide for the interests of the victim of the offence; or 
(d) to provide reparation for harm done by the offending; or 
(e) to denounce the conduct in which the offender was involved; or 
(f) to deter the offender or other persons from committing the same 
or a similar offence; or 
(g) to protect the community from the offender; or 
(h) to assist in the offender’s rehabilitation and reintegration; or 
(i) a combination of 2 or more of the purposes in paragraphs (a) 
to (h). 
(2) To avoid doubt, nothing about the order in which the purposes appear 
in this section implies that any purpose referred to must be given greater 
weight than any other purpose referred to.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 

58 
 
Section 8 of the Sentencing Act, 2002 
“8 Principles of sentencing or otherwise dealing with offenders 
In sentencing or otherwise dealing with an offender the court— 
(a) must take into account the gravity of the offending in the 
particular case, including the degree of culpability of the offender; 
and 
(b) must take into account the seriousness of the type of offence in 
comparison with other types of offences, as indicated by the maximum 
penalties prescribed for the offences; and 
(c) must impose the maximum penalty prescribed for the offence if the 
offending is within the most serious of cases for which that penalty is 
prescribed, unless circumstances relating to the offender make that 
inappropriate; and 
(d) must impose a penalty near to the maximum prescribed for the 
offence if the offending is near to the most serious of cases for which that 
penalty is prescribed, unless circumstances relating to the offender make 
that inappropriate; and 
(e) must take into account the general desirability of consistency with 
appropriate sentencing levels and other means of dealing with 
offenders in respect of similar offenders committing similar offences 
in similar circumstances; and 
(f) must take into account any information provided to the court 
concerning the effect of the offending on the victim; and 
(g) must impose the least restrictive outcome that is appropriate in the 
circumstances, in accordance with the hierarchy of sentences and orders 
set out in section 10A; and 
(h) must take into account any particular circumstances of the 
offender that mean that a sentence or other means of dealing with 
the offender that would otherwise be appropriate would, in the 
particular instance, be disproportionately severe; and 
(i) must take into account the offender’s personal, family, whanau, 
community, and cultural background in imposing a sentence or other 
means of dealing with the offender with a partly or wholly 
rehabilitative purpose; and 
(j) must take into account any outcomes of restorative justice 
processes that have occurred, or that the court is satisfied are likely to 
occur, in relation to the particular case (including, without limitation, 
anything referred to in section 10).” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 

59 
 
Section 9 of the Sentencing Act, 2002 
“9 Aggravating and mitigating factors 
(1) In sentencing or otherwise dealing with an offender the court must 
take into account the following aggravating factors to the extent that 
they are applicable in the case: 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
(2) In sentencing or otherwise dealing with an offender the court must 
take into account the following mitigating factors to the extent that 
they are applicable in the case: 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
(3) Despite subsection (2)(e), the court must not take into account by way 
of mitigation the fact that the offender was, at the time of committing the 
offence, affected by the voluntary consumption or use of alcohol or any 
drug or other substance (other than a drug or other substance used for 
bona fide medical purposes). 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
(4) Nothing in subsection (1) or subsection (2)— 
(a) prevents the court from taking into account any other aggravating or 
mitigating factor that the court thinks fit; or 
(b) implies that a factor referred to in those subsections must be given 
greater weight than any other factor that the court might take into 
account.” 
 
Section 9A of the Sentencing Act, 2002 
“9A Cases involving violence against, or neglect of, child under 14 
years 
(1) This section applies if the court is sentencing or otherwise dealing 
with an offender in a case involving violence against, or neglect of, a 
child under the age of 14 years. 
(2) The court must take into account the following aggravating 
factors to the extent that they are applicable in the case: 
(a) the defencelessness of the victim: 

60 
 
(b) in relation to any harm resulting from the offence, any serious or long-
term physical or psychological effect on the victim: 
(c) the magnitude of the breach of any relationship of trust between the 
victim and the offender: 
(d) threats by the offender to prevent the victim reporting the offending: 
(e) deliberate concealment of the offending from authorities. 
(3) The factors in subsection (2) are in addition to any factors the 
court might take into account under section 9. 
(4) Nothing in this section implies that a factor referred to in subsection 
(2) must be given greater weight than any other factor that the court might 
take into account.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
Section 24 of the Sentencing Act, 2002 
“24 Proof of facts 
(1) In determining a sentence or other disposition of the case, a 
court— 
(a) may accept as proved any fact that was disclosed by evidence 
at the trial and any facts agreed on by the prosecutor and the 
offender; and 
(b) must accept as proved all facts, express or implied, that are 
essential to a plea of guilty or a finding of guilt. 
(2) If a fact that is relevant to the determination of a sentence or other 
disposition of the case is asserted by one party and disputed by the 
other,— 
(a) the court must indicate to the parties the weight that it would 
be likely to attach to the disputed fact if it were found to exist, 
and its significance to the sentence or other disposition of the 
case: 
(b) if a party wishes the court to rely on that fact, the parties 
may adduce evidence as to its existence unless the court is 
satisfied that sufficient evidence was adduced at the trial: 
(c) the prosecutor must prove beyond a reasonable doubt the 
existence of any disputed aggravating fact, and must 
negate beyond a reasonable doubt any disputed mitigating fact 
raised by the defence (other than a mitigating fact referred to in 
paragraph (d)) that is not wholly implausible or manifestly false: 
(d) the offender must prove on the balance of probabilities the 
existence of any disputed mitigating fact that is not related to 
the nature of the offence or to the offender’s part in the offence: 
(e) either party may cross-examine any witness called by the other 
party. 
(3) For the purposes of this section,— 

61 
 
aggravating fact means any fact that— 
(a) the prosecutor asserts as a fact that justifies a greater penalty 
or other outcome than might otherwise be appropriate for the 
offence; and 
(b) the court accepts is a fact that may, if established, have that 
effect on the sentence or other disposition of the case 
mitigating fact means any fact that— 
(a) the offender asserts as a fact that justifies a lesser penalty or 
other outcome than might otherwise be appropriate for the 
offence; and 
(b) the court accepts is a fact that may, if established, have that 
effect on the sentence or other disposition of the case.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
Section 25 of the Sentencing Act, 2002 
 
“25 Power of adjournment for inquiries as to suitable punishment 
(1) A court may adjourn the proceedings in respect of any offence 
after the offender has been found guilty or has pleaded guilty and 
before the offender has been sentenced or otherwise dealt with for 
any 1 or more of the following purposes: 
(a) to enable inquiries to be made or to determine the most suitable 
method of dealing with the case: 
(b) to enable a restorative justice process to occur, or to be 
completed: 
(c) to enable a restorative justice agreement to be fulfilled: 
(d) to enable a rehabilitation programme or course of action to be 
undertaken: 
(da) to determine whether to impose an instrument forfeiture order and, 
if so, the terms of that order: 
(e) to enable the court to take account of the offender’s response to 
any process, agreement, programme, or course of action referred to in 
paragraph (b), (c), or (d). 
(2) If proceedings are adjourned under this section or under section 
10(4) or 24A, a Judge or Justice or Community Magistrate having 
jurisdiction to deal with offences of the same kind (whether or not the 
same Judge or Justice or Community Magistrate before whom the case 
was heard) may, after inquiry into the circumstances of the case, 
sentence or otherwise deal with the offender for the offence to which 
the adjournment relates.” 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 

62 
 
Section 26 of the Sentencing Act, 2002 
“26 Pre-sentence reports 
(1) Except as provided in section 26A, if an offender who is charged 
with an offence punishable by imprisonment is found guilty or pleads 
guilty, the court may direct a probation officer to prepare a report 
for the court in accordance with subsection (2). 
 
(2) A pre-sentence report may include— 
(a) information regarding the personal, family, whanau, community, 
and cultural background, and social circumstances of the offender: 
(b) information regarding the factors contributing to the offence, and 
the rehabilitative needs of the offender: 
(c) information regarding any offer, agreement, response, or 
measure of a kind referred to in section 10(1) or the outcome of any 
other restorative justice processes that have occurred in relation to 
the case: 
 
(d) recommendations on the appropriate sentence or other 
disposition of the case, taking into account the risk of further 
offending by the offender: 
(e) in the case of a proposed sentence of supervision, intensive 
supervision, or home detention, recommendations on the 
appropriate conditions of that sentence: 
(f) in the case of a proposed sentence of supervision, intensive 
supervision, 
or 
home 
detention involving 
1 
or 
more 
programmes,— 
 
(i) a report on the programme or programmes, including a 
general description of the conditions that the offender will 
have to abide by; and 
 
(ii) confirmation that the report has been made available to the 
offender: 
 
(g) in the case of a proposed sentence of supervision, intensive 
supervision, or home detention involving a special condition 
requiring the offender to take prescription medication, confirmation 
that the offender— 
 

63 
 
(i) has been fully advised by a person who is qualified to 
prescribe that medication about the nature and likely or 
intended effect of the medication and any known risks; and 
(ii) consents to taking the prescription medication: 
(h) in the case of a proposed sentence of community work,— 
(i) information regarding the availability of community work 
of a kind referred to in section 63 in the area in which the 
offender will reside; and 
(ii) recommendations on whether the court should authorise, 
under section 66A, hours of work to be spent undertaking 
training in basic work and living skills: 
(i) in the case of a proposed sentence of intensive supervision or 
possible release conditions for a proposed sentence of imprisonment 
for 24 months or less, the opinion of the chief executive of the 
Department of Corrections as to whether— 
(i) a condition that prohibits the offender from entering or 
remaining in specified places or areas at specified times or at 
all times (a whereabouts condition in this paragraph) would 
facilitate or promote the objective of reducing the risk of the 
offender reoffending while subject to the sentence or release 
conditions; and 
(ii) a whereabouts condition would facilitate or promote the 
objective of rehabilitating and reintegrating the offender; and 
(iii) a further condition requiring the offender to submit to 
electronic monitoring of his or her compliance with a 
whereabouts condition is warranted, having regard to the 
likelihood of non-compliance with the whereabouts 
condition. 
(3) The court must not direct the preparation of a report under subsection 
(1) on any aspects of the personal characteristics or personal history of 
an offender if a report covering those aspects is readily available to the 
court and there is no reason to believe that there has been any change of 
significance to the court since the report was prepared. 
(4) On directing the preparation of a report under subsection (1), the 
court may indicate to the probation officer the type of sentence or 
other mode of disposition that the court is considering, and may also 
give any other guidance to the probation officer that will assist the 
officer to prepare the report. 
(5) If a court has directed the preparation of a report under 
subsection (1), the probation officer charged with the preparation of 
the report may seek the further directions of the court on— 
(a) any particular item of information sought by the court; or 
(b) any alternative sentence or other mode of disposition that 
may be considered by the court if it appears that the sentence or 
other 
mode 
of 
disposition 
under 
consideration 
is 
inappropriate.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 

64 
 
Section 31 of the Sentencing Act, 2002 
 
“31 General requirement to give reasons 
(1) A court must give reasons in open court— 
(a) for the imposition of a sentence or for any other means of 
dealing with the offender; and 
(b) for the making of an order under Part 2. 
(2) The reasons may be given under this section with whatever level 
of particularity is appropriate to the particular case. 
(3) Nothing in this section limits any other provision of this or any other 
enactment that requires a court to give reasons. 
(4) The fact that a court, in giving reasons in a particular case, does 
not mention a particular principle in section 8 or a particular factor 
in section 9 or a consideration under section 10 or section 11 is not in 
itself grounds for an appeal against a sentence imposed or an order 
made in that case.” 
(emphais supplied) 
 
 
UNITED KINGDOM 
 
Coroners and Justice Act, 2009 (UK) 
PART 4 
SENTENCING 
CHAPTER 1 
Sentencing Council For England and Wales 
Section 118 of the Coroner and Justice Act, 2009 
“118 Sentencing Council for England and Wales 
(1) There is to be a Sentencing Council for England and Wales. 
(2) Schedule 15 makes provision about the Council.” 
 

65 
 
Schedule 15 
THE SENTENCING COUNCIL FOR ENGLAND AND WALES 
Constitution of the Council 
Schedule 15, Para 1 of the Coroner and Justice Act, 2009 
“1 The Council is to consist of— 
(a) 8 members appointed by the Lord Chief Justice with the 
agreement of the Lord Chancellor (“judicial members”); 
(b) 6 members appointed by the Lord Chancellor with the agreement 
of the Lord Chief Justice (“non-judicial members”).” 
 
Appointment of a person to chair the Council etc 
Schedule 15, Para 2 of the Coroner and Justice Act, 2009 
“2 The Lord Chief Justice must, with the agreement of the Lord 
Chancellor, appoint— 
(a) a judicial member to chair the Council (“the chairing member”), 
and 
(b) another judicial member to chair the Council in the absence of 
the chairing member.” 
 
Appointment of judicial members 
Schedule 15, Para 3 of the Coroner and Justice Act, 2009 
“3(1) A person is eligible for appointment as a judicial member if the 
person is— 
(a) a judge of the Court of Appeal, 
(b) a puisne judge of the High Court, 
(c) a Circuit judge, 
(d) a District Judge (Magistrates' Courts), or 
(e) a lay justice. 
(2) The judicial members must include at least one Circuit judge, one 
District Judge (Magistrates' Courts) and one lay justice. 

66 
 
(3) When appointing judicial members, the Lord Chief Justice must have 
regard to the desirability of the judicial members including at least one 
person who appears to the Lord Chief Justice to have responsibilities 
relating to the training of judicial office-holders who exercise criminal 
jurisdiction in England and Wales. 
(4) “Judicial office-holder” has the meaning given by section 109(4) of 
the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 (c. 4).” 
 
Appointment of non-judicial members 
Schedule 15, Para 4 of the Coroner and Justice Act, 2009 
“4(1) A person is eligible for appointment as a non-judicial member if 
the person appears to the Lord Chancellor to have experience in one or 
more of the following areas— 
(a) criminal defence; 
(b) criminal prosecution; 
(c) policing; 
(d) sentencing policy and the administration of justice; 
(e) the promotion of the welfare of victims of crime; 
(f) academic study or research relating to criminal law or 
criminology; 
(g) the use of statistics; 
(h) the rehabilitation of offenders. 
(2) The persons eligible for appointment as a non-judicial member by 
virtue of experience of criminal prosecution include the Director of 
Public Prosecutions.” 
Section 120 of the Coroner and Justice Act, 2009 
 
Guidelines 
“120 Sentencing guidelines 
(1) In this Chapter “sentencing guidelines” means guidelines relating to 
the sentencing of offenders. 
(2) A sentencing guideline may be general in nature or limited to a 
particular offence, particular category of offence or particular category 
of offender. 
(3) The Council must prepare— 

67 
 
(a) sentencing guidelines about the discharge of a court's duty 
under section 73 of the Sentencing Code (reduction in sentences for 
guilty pleas), and 
(b) sentencing guidelines about the application of any rule of law as 
to the totality of sentences. 
(4) The Council may prepare sentencing guidelines about any other 
matter. 
(5) Where the Council has prepared guidelines under subsection (3) or 
(4), it must publish them as draft guidelines. 
(6) The Council must consult the following persons about the draft 
guidelines— 
(a) the Lord Chancellor; 
(b) such persons as the Lord Chancellor may direct; 
(c) the Justice Select Committee of the House of Commons (or, if 
there ceases to be a committee of that name, such committee of the 
House of Commons as the Lord Chancellor directs); 
(d) such other persons as the Council considers appropriate. 
(7) In the case of guidelines within subsection (3), the Council must, after 
making any amendments of the guidelines which it considers appropriate, 
issue them as definitive guidelines. 
(8) In any other case, the Council may, after making such amendments, 
issue them as definitive guidelines. 
(9) The Council may, from time to time, review the sentencing guidelines 
issued under this section, and may revise them. 
(10) Subsections (5), (6) and (8) apply to a revision of the guidelines as 
they apply to their preparation (and subsection (8) applies even if the 
guidelines being revised are within subsection (3)). 
(11) When exercising functions under this section, the Council must have 
regard to the following matters— 
(a) the sentences imposed by courts in England and Wales for 
offences; 
(b) the need to promote consistency in sentencing; 
(c) the impact of sentencing decisions on victims of offences; 
(d) the need to promote public confidence in the criminal justice 
system; 
(e) the cost of different sentences and their relative effectiveness in 
preventing re-offending; 
(f) the results of the monitoring carried out under section 128.” 
 

68 
 
Section 121 of the Coroner and Justice Act, 2009 
“121 Sentencing ranges 
(1) When exercising functions under section 120, the Council is to have 
regard to the desirability of sentencing guidelines which relate to a 
particular offence being structured in the way described in subsections 
(2) to (9). 
(2) The guidelines should, if reasonably practicable given the nature of 
the offence, describe, by reference to one or more of the factors 
mentioned in subsection (3), different categories of case involving the 
commission of the offence which illustrate in general terms the varying 
degrees of seriousness with which the offence may be committed. 
(3) Those factors are— 
(a) the offender's culpability in committing the offence; 
(b) the harm caused, or intended to be caused or which might 
foreseeably have been caused, by the offence; 
(c) such other factors as the Council considers to be particularly 
relevant to the seriousness of the offence in question. 
(4) The guidelines should— 
(a) specify the range of sentences (“the offence range”) which, in the 
opinion of the Council, it may be appropriate for a court to impose 
on an offender convicted of that offence, and 
(b) if the guidelines describe different categories of case in 
accordance with subsection (2),  specify for each category the range 
of sentences (“the category range”) within the offence range which, 
in the opinion of the Council, it may be appropriate for a court to 
impose on an offender in a case which falls within the category. 
(5) The guidelines should also— 
(a) specify the sentencing starting point in the offence range, or 
(b) if the guidelines describe different categories of case in 
accordance with subsection (2), specify the sentencing starting point 
in the offence range for each of those categories. 
(6) The guidelines should— 

69 
 
(a) (to the extent not already taken into account by categories of case 
described in accordance with subsection (2)) list any aggravating or 
mitigating factors which, by virtue of any enactment or other rule of 
law, the court is required to take into account when considering the 
seriousness of the offence and any other aggravating or mitigating 
factors which the Council considers are relevant to such a 
consideration, 
(b) list any other mitigating factors which the Council considers are 
relevant in mitigation of sentence for the offence, and 
(c) include criteria, and provide guidance, for determining the weight 
to be given to previous convictions of the offender and such of the 
other factors within paragraph (a) or (b) as the Council considers to 
be of particular significance in relation to the offence or the offender. 
(7) For the purposes of subsection (6)(b) the following are to be 
disregarded— 
(a) the requirements of section 73 of the Sentencing Code (reduction 
in sentences for guilty pleas); 
(b) sections 74, 387 and 388 of the Sentencing Code (assistance by 
defendants: reduction or review of sentence) and any other rule of 
law by virtue of which an offender may receive a discounted sentence 
in consequence of assistance given (or offered to be given) by the 
offender to the prosecutor or investigator of an offence; 
(c) any rule of law as to the totality of sentences. 
(8) The provision made in accordance with subsection (6)(c) should be 
framed in such manner as the Council considers most appropriate for the 
purpose of assisting the court, when sentencing an offender for the 
offence, to determine the appropriate sentence within the offence range. 
(9) The provision made in accordance with subsections (2) to (8) may be 
different for different circumstances or cases involving the offence. 
(10) The sentencing starting point in the offence range— 
(a) for a category of case described in the guidelines in accordance 
with subsection (2), is the sentence within that range which the 
Council considers to be the appropriate starting point for cases within 
that category— 

70 
 
(i) before taking account of the factors mentioned in subsection (6), 
and 
(ii) assuming the offender has pleaded not guilty, and 
(b) where the guidelines do not describe categories of case in 
accordance with subsection (2), is the sentence within that range 
which the Council considers to be the appropriate starting point for 
the offence— 
(i) before taking account of the factors mentioned in subsection (6), 
and 
(ii) assuming the offender has pleaded not guilty.” 
 
 
Section 128 of the Coroner and Justice Act, 2009 
“128 Monitoring 
(1) The Council must— 
(a) monitor the operation and effect of its sentencing guidelines, and 
(b) consider what conclusions can be drawn from the information 
obtained by virtue of paragraph (a). 
(2) The Council must, in particular, discharge its duty under subsection 
(1)(a) with a view to drawing conclusions about— 
(a) the frequency with which, and extent to which, courts depart from 
sentencing guidelines; 
(b) the factors which influence the sentences imposed by courts; 
(c) the effect of the guidelines on the promotion of consistency in 
sentencing; 
(d) the effect of the guidelines on the promotion of public confidence 
in the criminal justice system. 
(3) When reporting on the exercise of its functions under this section in 
its annual report for a financial year, the Council must include— 
(a) a summary of the information obtained under subsection (1)(a), 
and 

71 
 
(b) a report of any conclusions drawn by the Council under 
subsection (1)(b).” 
 
Sentencing Act 2020 (UK) 
Section 3 of the Sentencing Act, 2020 
“DEFERMENT OF SENTENCE 
3 Deferment order 
(1) In this Code “deferment order” means an order deferring passing 
sentence on an offender in respect of one or more offences until the 
date specified in the order, to enable a court, in dealing with the 
offender, to have regard to— 
(a) the offender’s conduct after conviction (including, where 
appropriate, the offender’s making reparation for the offence), 
or 
(b) any change in the offender’s circumstances. 
(2) A deferment order may impose requirements (“deferment 
requirements”) as to the offender’s conduct during the period of 
deferment. 
(3) Deferment requirements may include— 
(a) requirements as to the residence of the offender during all or 
part of the period of deferment; 
(b) restorative justice requirements.” 
 
(emphais supplied) 
Section 5 of the Sentencing Act, 2020 
“5 Making a deferment order 
(1) A court may make a deferment order in respect of an offence only 
if— 
(a) the offender consents, 
(b) the offender undertakes to comply with any deferment 
requirements the court proposes to impose, 
(c) if those requirements include a restorative justice requirement, 
section 7(2) (consent of participants in restorative justice activity) is 
satisfied, and 

72 
 
(d) the court is satisfied, having regard to the nature of the offence 
and the character and circumstances of the offender, that it would be 
in the interests of justice to make the order. 
(2) The date specified under section 3(1) in the order may not be more 
than 6 months after the date on which the order is made. 
(3) A court which makes a deferment order must forthwith give a copy of 
the order— 
(a) to the offender, 
(b) if it imposes deferment requirements that include a restorative 
justice requirement, to every person who would be a participant in 
the activity concerned (see section 7(1)), 
(c) where an officer of a provider of probation services has been 
appointed to act as a supervisor, to that provider, and 
(d) where a person has been appointed under section 8(1)(b) to act 
as a supervisor, to that person. 
(4) A court which makes a deferment order may not on the same occasion 
remand the offender, notwithstanding any enactment.” 
(emphais supplied) 
 
Section 6 of the Sentencing Act, 2020 
“6 Effect of deferment order 
(1) Where a deferment order has been made in respect of an offence, 
the court which deals with the offender for the offence may have 
regard to— 
(a) the offender’s conduct after conviction, or 
(b) any change in the offender’s circumstances.” 
(emphais supplied) 
 
 
 

73 
 
Section 30 of the Sentencing Act, 2020 
“Pre-sentence reports 
30 Pre-sentence report requirements 
(1) 
This section applies where, by virtue of any provision of this 
Code, the pre-sentence report requirements apply to a court in 
relation to forming an opinion. 
(2) If the offender is aged 18 or over, the court must obtain and 
consider a pre-sentence report before forming the opinion unless, in 
the circumstances of the case, it considers that it is unnecessary to 
obtain a pre-sentence report. 
(3) If the offender is aged under 18, the court must obtain and consider a 
pre-sentence report before forming the opinion unless— 
(a) there exists a previous pre-sentence report obtained in respect of 
the offender, and 
(b) the court considers— 
(i) in the circumstances of the case, and 
(ii) having had regard to the information contained in that report 
or, if there is more than one, the most recent report, that it is 
unnecessary to obtain a pre-sentence report. 
(4) Where a court does not obtain and consider a pre-sentence report 
before forming an opinion in relation to which the pre-sentence 
report requirements apply, no custodial sentence or community 
sentence is invalidated by the fact that it did not do so.” 
 
(emphais supplied) 
 
Section 31 of the Sentencing Act, 2020 
“31 Meaning of “pre-sentence report” etc 
“Pre-sentence report” 
(1) In this Code “pre-sentence report” means a report which— 
(a) is made or submitted by an appropriate officer with a view to 
assisting the court in determining the most suitable method of 
dealing with an offender, and 
(b) contains information as to such matters, presented in such 
manner, as may be prescribed by rules made by the Secretary of 
State.” 
 
40. We find that an exhaustive and detailed exercise has been done by New 
Zealand. What we have discussed has already been substantially taken into 

74 
 
consideration by the aforementioned countries.  As it is an important aspect 
which has escaped the attention of the Government of India, we 
recommend the Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice, 
Government of India, to consider introducing a comprehensive policy, 
possibly by way of getting an appropriate report from a duly constituted 
Sentencing Commission consisting of experts in different fields for the 
purpose of having a distinct sentencing policy.  We request the Union of 
India to respond to our suggestion by way of an affidavit within a period 
of six months from today. 
41. In this connection, we would like to place on record the 47th Report of the 
Law Commission of India, Report by the Committee on Reforms of 
Criminal Justice, Chaired by Dr. Justice V.S. Malimath, (2003), Report by 
the Committee on Draft National Policy on Criminal Justice, Chaired by 
Dr. N.R. Madhava Menon and decisions rendered by this Court to indicate 
an emerging need for a distinct sentencing policy 
 
47th Report of the Law Commission of India  
CHAPTER 7 
DESIRABILITY OF AMENDMENTS – SUBSTANTIVE 
POINTS COMMON TO ALL THE ACTS CONSIDERED 
 
"7.44. A proper sentence is a composite of many factors, including the 
nature of the offence, the circumstances- extenuating or aggravating- of 
the offence, the prior criminal record, if any, of the offender, the age of 
the offender, the professional and social record of the offender, the 

75 
 
background of the offender with reference to education. home life, 
sobriety and social adjustment, the emotional and mental condition of the 
offender, the prospect for the rehabilitation of the offender, the possibility 
of a return of the offender to normal life in the community, the possibility 
of treatment or of training of the offender, the possibility that the sentence 
may serve as a deterrent to crime by this offender, or by others, and the 
present community need, if any, for such a deterrent in respect to the 
particular type of offence involved." 
 
Report by the Committee on Reforms of Criminal Justice System, 
Chaired by Dr. Justice V.S. Malimath, Vol. I March (2003) 
“14.4 NEED FOR SENTENCING GUIDELINES  
14.4.1 The Indian Penal Code prescribed offences and punishments for 
the same. For many offences only the maximum punishment is prescribed 
and for some offences the minimum may be prescribed. The Judge has 
wide discretion in awarding the sentence within the statutory limits. 
There is now no guidance to the Judge in regard to selecting the most 
appropriate sentence given the circumstances of the case. Therefore 
each Judge exercises discretion accordingly to his own judgment. 
There is therefore no uniformity. Some Judges are lenient and some 
Judges are harsh. Exercise of unguided discretion is not good even if 
it is the Judge who exercises the discretion. In some countries 
guidance regarding sentencing option and sentencing guideline laws 
are given in the penal code. There is need for such law in our country 
to minimise uncertainty to the matter of awarding sentence. There 
are several factors which are relevant in prescribing the alternative 
sentences. This requires a thorough examination by an expert statutory 
body. 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
14.4.5 Sometimes the courts are unduly harsh while at other times 
they are liberal. We have already adverted to aspects which Supreme 
Court said are relevant in deciding as to what are the rarest of the 
rare cases for imposing death sentence. However, even in such 
matters uniformity is lacking. In certain rape cases acquittals gave 
rise to public protests. Therefore in order to bring about certain 
regulation and predictability in the matter of sentencing, the 
Committee recommends a statutory committee to lay guidelines on 
sentencing under the Chairmanship of a former Judge of Supreme 
Court or a former Chief Justice of a High Court experienced in 
criminal law with other members representing the Prosecution, legal 
profession, Police, social scientist and women representative.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 

76 
 
Report of the Committee on Draft National Policy on Criminal Justice, 
Chaired by Prof. (Dr.) N.R. Madhava Menon, July, 2007 
 
“5.5 PUNISHMENTS AND SENTENCING  
5.5.1 Given the limited options in the choice of punishments now 
available in the statutes and the inadequate deterrence in the sentence 
often imposed, there has to be some serious rethinking on the philosophy, 
justification and impact of sentencing in criminal justice administration. 
The quantums of fines were prescribed more than a century ago. 
Imprisonment in practice is reduced to a much shorter period through a 
variety of practices even when it is for life. Equality in sentencing is not 
pursued vigorously and there is no serious attempt yet to standardize 
the sentencing norms and procedures. The objects of punishment are 
not served in many cases as a result of such incoherent sentencing 
practices.  
5.5.2 What are the policy choices in the matter of punishments and 
determination of its quantum to achieve the goals of criminal justice? Can 
community service be made an effective punishment and how is it to be 
organized? How to make probation a dominant part of disposition in 
criminal cases? How to achieve equality and fairness in sentencing? 
These and many related questions are not even raised in India seriously 
with the result the system seems to be functioning as an end in itself.  
There has to be a radical change in the law and practice of sentencing 
if punishment should serve the cause of criminal justice. A set of 
sentencing guidelines may be statutorily evolved to make the system 
consistent and purposeful. Fixing mandatory minimum sentences 
may not be a worthwhile solution. More importantly, the policy 
should be to increase the choices in punishment and make the other 
functionaries of the system (like probation service and correctional 
administration) to have a voice in the sentencing process and 
administration.  
In short, sentences and sentencing require urgent attention of policy 
planners if criminal justice is to retain its credibility in the public 
mind.  
5.5.3 A national policy on sentencing shall seek to address the following 
issues:  
(i) The need for criminal law to offer more alternatives in the matter 
of punishments instead of limiting the option merely to fines and 
imprisonment.  
(ii) In respect of the quantum of punishments, the need for constant 
review to ensure that it meets the ends of justice and disparity is 
reduced in similar situations.  

77 
 
(iii) A policy to avoid short-term imprisonments and to prevent 
overcrowding of jails and other custodial institutions, to be 
rigorously pursued at all levels. 
(iv) The need for specific sentencing guidelines to be evolved in 
respect of each punishment.  
(v) Also the need for an institutional machinery involving 
correctional experts for fixing proper punishment.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
Precedents 
Dhananjoy Chatterjee v. State of W.B., (1994) 2 SCC 220  
“14. In recent years, the rising crime rate — particularly violent crime 
against women has made the criminal sentencing by the courts a subject 
of concern. Today there are admitted disparities. Some criminals get 
very harsh sentences while many receive grossly different sentence 
for an essentially equivalent crime and a shockingly large number 
even go unpunished thereby encouraging the criminal and in the 
ultimate making justice suffer by weakening the system's credibility. 
Of course, it is not possible to lay down any cut and dry formula 
relating to imposition of sentence but the object of sentencing should 
be to see that the crime does not go unpunished and the victim of 
crime as also the society has the satisfaction that justice has been 
done to it. In imposing sentences in the absence of specific legislation, 
Judges must consider variety of factors and after considering all 
those factors and taking an overall view of the situation, impose 
sentence which they consider to be an appropriate one. Aggravating 
factors cannot be ignored and similarly mitigating circumstances 
have also to be taken into consideration. 
15. In our opinion, the measure of punishment in a given case must 
depend upon the atrocity of the crime; the conduct of the criminal and the 
defenceless and unprotected state of the victim. Imposition of appropriate 
punishment is the manner in which the courts respond to the society's cry 
for justice against the criminals. Justice demands that courts should 
impose punishment befitting the crime so that the courts reflect public 
abhorrence of the crime. The courts must not only keep in view the rights 
of the criminal but also the rights of the victim of crime and the society 
at large while considering imposition of appropriate punishment.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 

78 
 
Swamy Shraddananda (2) v. State of Karnataka, (2008) 13 SCC 767  
“48. That is not the end of the matter. Coupled with the deficiency of 
the criminal justice system is the lack of consistency in the sentencing 
process even by this Court. It is noted above that Bachan Singh 
[(1980) 2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 580] laid down the principle of 
the rarest of rare cases. Machhi Singh [(1983) 3 SCC 470 : 1983 SCC 
(Cri) 681] , for practical application crystallised the principle into 
five definite categories of cases of murder and in doing so also 
considerably enlarged the scope for imposing death penalty. But the 
unfortunate reality is that in later decisions neither the rarest of rare 
cases principle nor the Machhi Singh [(1983) 3 SCC 470 : 1983 SCC 
(Cri) 681] categories were followed uniformly and consistently. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
50. The same point is made in far greater detail in a report called 
“Lethal Lottery, The Death Penalty in India” compiled jointly by 
Amnesty International India and People's Union for Civil Liberties, 
Tamil Nadu & Puducherry. The report is based on the study of the 
Supreme Court judgments in death penalty cases from 1950 to 2006. 
One of the main points made in the report (see Chapters 2 to 4) is 
about the Court's lack of uniformity and consistency in awarding 
death sentence. 
51. The truth of the matter is that the question of death penalty is not free 
from the subjective element and the confirmation of death sentence or its 
commutation by this Court depends a good deal on the personal 
predilection of the Judges constituting the Bench. 
52. The inability of the criminal justice system to deal with all major 
crimes equally effectively and the want of uniformity in the 
sentencing process by the Court lead to a marked imbalance in the 
end results. On the one hand there appears a small band of cases in 
which the murder convict is sent to the gallows on confirmation of 
his death penalty by this Court and on the other hand there is a much 
wider area of cases in which the offender committing murder of a 
similar or a far more revolting kind is spared his life due to lack of 
consistency by the Court in giving punishments or worse the offender 
is allowed to slip away unpunished on account of the deficiencies in 
the criminal justice system. Thus the overall larger picture gets 
asymmetric and lopsided and presents a poor reflection of the system 
of criminal administration of justice. This situation is a matter of 
concern for this Court and needs to be remedied.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 

79 
 
Soman v. State of Kerala, (2013) 11 SCC 382  
“15. Giving punishment to the wrongdoer is at the heart of the criminal 
justice delivery, but in our country, it is the weakest part of the 
administration of criminal justice. There are no legislative or judicially 
laid down guidelines to assist the trial court in meting out the just 
punishment to the accused facing trial before it after he is held guilty of 
the charges. In State of Punjab v. Prem Sagar [(2008) 7 SCC 550 : (2008) 
3 SCC (Cri) 183] this Court acknowledged as much and observed as 
under: (SCC p. 552, para 2) 
“2. In our judicial system, we have not been able to develop legal 
principles as regards sentencing. The superior courts except 
making observations with regard to the purport and object for 
which punishment is imposed upon an offender, have not issued 
any guidelines. Other developed countries have done so. At some 
quarters, serious concerns have been expressed in this behalf. 
Some committees as for example Madhava Menon Committee and 
Malimath Committee have advocated introduction of sentencing 
guidelines.” 
 
Section 354 of the CrPC, 1973 
“354. Language and contents of judgment.— 
(1) Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Code, every judgment 
referred to in section 353,—  
(a) shall be written in the language of the Court;  
(b) shall contain the point or points for determination, the decision 
thereon and the reasons for the decision;  
(c) shall specify the offence (if any) of which, and the section of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or other law under which, the 
accused is convicted and the punishment to which he is sentenced;  
(d) if it be a judgment of acquittal, shall state the offence of which 
the accused is acquitted and direct that he be set at liberty.  
(2) When the conviction is under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and 
it is doubtful under which of two sections, or under which of two parts of 
the same section, of that Code the offence falls, the Court shall distinctly 
express the same, and pass judgment in the alternative.  
(3) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with death or, in the 
alternative, with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of 

80 
 
years, the judgment shall state the reasons for the sentence awarded, and, 
in the case of sentence of death, the special reasons for such sentence.  
(4) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with imprisonment 
for a term of one year or more, but the Court imposes a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term of less than three months, it shall record its 
reasons for awarding such sentence, unless the sentence is one of 
imprisonment till the rising of the Court or unless the case was tried 
summarily under the provisions of this Code.  
(5) When any person is sentenced to death, the sentence shall direct that 
he be hanged by the neck till he is dead.  
(6) Every order under section 117 or sub-section (2) of section 138 and 
every final order made under section 125, section 145 or section 147 shall 
contain the point or points for determination, the decision thereon and the 
reasons for the decision.” 
 
42. Section 354 of the CrPC, 1973  though merely deals with the language and 
contents of judgment, also sheds light on the fact that a judgment contains 
two distinct parts, wherein the first part deals with the conviction and the 
second deals with the sentence.  Sub-section (1)(c) of the aforesaid 
provision has to be understood to mean that a Judge is expected to consider 
the aggravating and mitigating circumstances. In such view of the matter, 
sub-section (3) of the aforesaid provision is more clarificatory, keeping in 
mind the nature of the offence committed.  As a convict is heard on 
sentence, it follows that any decision on sentence has to indicate the 
reasons for exercise of judicial discretion by the Judge. 
 
 
 

81 
 
ON FACTS 
Criminal Appeal No. 3924 of 2023 and Criminal Appeal Nos. 3926-
3927 of 2023.    
 
43. An FIR was registered in Crime No. 137 of 2021 for the occurrence that 
took place on 01.12.2021.  The said complaint was filed by the mother of 
the victim on 02.12.2021. Accordingly, the case was registered under 
Section 376AB of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as 
the “IPC, 1860”) and Section 4 of the Protection of Children from Sexual 
Offences Act, 2012 (hereinafter referred to as the “POCSO Act, 2012”) 
read with Section 3(2)(v) of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as “SC/ST 
Act, 1989”).  The case of the prosecution in nutshell is that the accused 
took advantage of a minor girl child and committed the offence of rape.   
44. The accused was arrested on 12.12.2021. He was produced before the 
concerned Judicial Magistrate on 13.12.2021 and remanded to judicial 
custody till 24.12.2021.  The remand was further extended by the orders 
dated 24.12.2021 and 05.01.2022 through video conferencing.  On 
12.01.2022, the charge-sheet was filed for the offences aforestated. The 
accused was once again produced through video conferencing on 
15.01.2022.  There was no advocate representing the accused, and the case 
was put up on 24.01.2022 for his production.     

82 
 
45. On 20.01.2022, without the FSL report, the charge-sheet filed was taken 
on record.  Accordingly, the cognizance was taken. The prosecutor was 
directed to ensure the presence of the accused through video conferencing.  
The accused feigned his inability to engage a lawyer as he was behind the 
bars.  The case was adjourned to 22.01.2022 for framing of charges and for 
the supply of documents. 
46. On that day i.e. 22.01.2022, the counsel appearing for the accused was 
provided with the documents, without being given any time and without 
ensuring that these documents were in fact shown to the accused, followed 
by due consultation with his lawyer, directly arguments were heard on 
framing of charges.  Thereafter, the charges were framed and explained to 
the accused through the virtual mode. On the very same date, an order was 
passed for summoning the prosecution witnesses. Strangely enough, an 
application was filed by the Investigating Officer to record the evidence of 
four witnesses in a single day, as a confidential information obtained, 
indicated that there was  pressure from the family members of the accused.  
No notice was served either on the accused or his counsel, and the order 
was apparently passed, without taking into consideration the Witness 
Protection Scheme, 2018.  In disregard of the provisions of the Rules for 
Video Conferencing for Courts, 2020, the statements of the witnesses were 
recorded. 

83 
 
47. After two days i.e. 24.01.2022, the remaining witnesses, including the 
Investigating Officer, were examined. There was no material to show that 
the accused was present at that point of time. The plea made by the counsel 
for the defence for deferment by one week was rejected, sans any 
substantial reason. For the purpose of questioning under Section 313 of the 
CrPC, 1973 alone, the accused was brought through video conferencing. 
In a hurried manner, the questioning was done.  The repeated plea of 
adjournment by one week made by the counsel for the defence was once 
again rejected, while ultimately facilitating a day’s adjournment. 
48. On the next day i.e. 25.01.2022, an application was filed by the defence 
praying for time for production of witnesses.  The matter was passed over, 
with a direction to produce the witnesses on that day itself.  Arguments 
were heard, during which time, the prosecution made submissions for 10 
minutes, whereas the defence argued for 3 hours. It was accordingly 
concluded at 6.30 p.m.  The judgment was delivered at about 7.00 pm, 
running into about 27 pages consisting of 59 paragraphs. It is not known as 
to how the copies of the witnesses statements were made ready and kept 
for perusal. Admittedly, even the counsel for the defence did not have those 
copies. 
49.  Two days thereafter i.e. 27.01.2022, the case was posted for sentencing. 
Upon hearing the accused, death sentence was imposed by the trial court. 

84 
 
The High Court, by the impugned judgment, called for the records and 
went through them thoroughly, finding that there is non-compliance of  
Sections 207, 226, 227 and 230 of the CrPC, 1973, set aside the conviction 
and sentence awarded by the trial Court, and ordered for a de novo trial.  
Incidentally, the approach adopted by the Trial Court was found fault with. 
50. Assailing the impugned judgment on merit, the informant has filed 
Criminal Appeal No. 3924 of 2023.  Aggrieved over the observations made 
by the High Court, the learned Trial Judge has filed Criminal Appeal Nos. 
3926-3927 of 2023.    
Criminal Appeal No. 3925 of 2023 
51. Criminal Appeal No. 3925 of 2023 has been filed by the very same learned 
Judge who rendered a similar conviction and sentenced the accused to life 
imprisonment for remainder of natural life, without any remission, against 
the observations  made by a Coordinate Bench of the High Court, which 
took note of the earlier judgment rendered by the Coordinate Bench.  It has 
been brought to our notice that the disciplinary proceedings initiated were 
dropped on the administrative side.  However, an application in I.A. No. 
29814 of 2023 has been filed by the learned Judge inter alia alleging that 
certain administrative work has been taken away from him, apparently on 

85 
 
the basis of the impugned judgments, and therefore, he should either be 
restored with the said power or transferred to some other place. 
52.  Insofar as the Criminal Appeal No. 3925 of 2023 is concerned, there is no 
appeal filed on behalf of the victim.  Therefore, the only question for 
consideration is as to whether the observation made against the appellant, 
is justified or not, especially when he has not been heard.  On facts, even 
in this case, the trial had commenced and concluded in a single day.    
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT 
Criminal Appeal No. 3924 of 2023 and Criminal Appeal Nos. 3926-
3927 of 2023.    
 
53. Mr. Vikas Singh, learned senior counsel appearing for both the informant 
and the learned Trial Judge, submitted that the procedure established by 
law has been followed. The appellant has kept in mind the rigour of Section 
309 of the CrPC, 1973 read with the provisions contained under the 
POCSO Act, 2012.  Even assuming that there is a procedural flaw, in view 
of the mandate contained under Section 465 of the CrPC, 1973 there is no 
need for remittal. During the course of trial, the counsel for the respondent-
accused has not raised any serious objection. 
 
 
 

86 
 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 3925 of 2023  
It is further submitted that the appellant has discharged his judicial function 
and, therefore, any action without hearing him is contrary to law.  Though 
the charges have been dropped, the observations made would be 
detrimental to his future career progression.  The accused had antecedents 
and, therefore, the Trial Court rightly exercised due caution. It is a case 
where no witness was produced on behalf of the defence. To buttress his 
submission, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant has relied 
upon the following decisions, 
• Munna Pandey v. State of Bihar, AIR 2023 SUPREME COURT 
5709. 
• Akil v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2013) 7 SCC 125. 
• Sakshi v. Union of India, (2004) 5 SCC 518. 
• State of Maharashtra v. Mahesh Kariman Tirki, (2022) 10 SCC 207. 
• Pradeep S. Wodeyar v. State of Karnataka, (2021) 19 SCC 62. 
 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT 
54. Per contra, Mr. C. U. Singh, learned senior counsel appearing for the High 
Court and the accused submitted that admittedly there are serious 
procedural violations. Prejudice was sufficiently demonstrated before the 
court. It would be impossible for a Judge to deliver the judgment within 
such a short span of time. No opportunity was given at every stage of the 

87 
 
trial to the accused.  It is a clear case of “justice hurried is justice buried”.  
There is no question of giving an opportunity to the appellant, the judicial 
officer, as no action is pending against him. In any case, the accused is still 
under incarceration.    
 
DISCUSSION 
55. On perusal, we find that the High Court, while passing both the impugned 
judgments, has not only called for the records and rendered findings of fact, 
but has also considered them in detail. At every stage, the accused was 
denied due opportunity to defend himself. The appellant judicial officer 
was obviously acting in utmost haste.  Every trial is a journey towards the 
truth and a Presiding Officer is expected to create a balanced atmosphere 
in the mind of the prosecution and the defence. It seems to us that the 
decision was rendered in utmost haste. It would be humanly impossible to 
deliver the judgment within half an hour’s time running into 27 pages 
consisting of 59 paragraphs in the first case and similarly in the other.  The 
lawyer for the defence cannot fight against the court.  It is the court which 
has to follow a balanced approach.  At every stage, including framing of 
charges, there was a constant denial of due opportunity and hearing. The 
accused was not able to consult his lawyer.  He was not even served with 
the copies, though his lawyer received the same before framing of the 

88 
 
charges.  Receiving of documents by his lawyer would not be sufficient 
compliance, unless there was sufficient time given for him to peruse them 
and thereafter have a consultation.  Admittedly, neither the provisions of 
the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 have been invoked nor the Rules for 
Video Conferencing for Courts, 2020 were followed.  The accused was 
merely shown the court’s proceedings and the writing was on the wall for 
him.  We are not willing to say anything on the merits of the case. On facts, 
even in Criminal Appeal No. 3925 of 2023, the trial had commenced and 
concluded in a single day.   Additionally, no lawyer could be engaged by 
the accused and, therefore, as per the recommendations of the prosecutor, 
another one was engaged.  Otherwise, the facts are more or less similar in 
both the cases and, therefore, we are not inclined to go into it in detail.  
When the charges are very serious, Courts should be more circumspect in 
discharging their solemn duty. 
56. We do not think that the decisions relied upon by the learned senior counsel 
for the appellant have any bearing on the present case. The appellant 
judicial officer is fortunate that no action was taken against him.  We do 
not wish to say anything more on this, except by stating that in the absence 
of any proposed action, there is no question of hearing the appellant.  Thus, 
we are not inclined to interfere on the merits of the case                          

89 
 
with respect to non-compliance of the mandatory provisions, as the accused 
is still under incarceration. 
57.  On the application filed seeking intervention over the action taken on the 
administrative side, it is for the appellant to approach the High Court. It is 
an administrative action taken and, therefore, the same does not require any 
interference on the judicial side by us, especially in light of the discussion 
made above.  Suffice it is to state that liberty is given to the appellant to 
approach the High Court on the administrative side.   
58. For the foregoing reasons, the appeals stand dismissed with the following 
directions : 
(1.) 
The trial court shall keep in mind the mandate of POCSO Act, 
2012 while recording the evidence of the victim. 
(2.) 
The trial court shall conduct and complete the trial expeditiously 
in view of Section 35 of the POCSO Act, 2012. 
(3.) 
The Government of India represented by the Secretary for the 
Ministry of Law and Justice shall file an affidavit on the 
feasibility of introducing a comprehensive sentencing policy and 
a report thereon, within a period of six months from today, as 
indicated above.  

90 
 
(4.) 
The Registry shall forward a copy of this judgment to the 
Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government 
of India. 
59. Consequently, IA No. 29814/2023 stands dismissed. 
60. Pending application(s), are allowed. 
 
 
..………………………..J.                          
(M. M. SUNDRESH ) 
 
 
 
…………………………..J. 
(S. V. N. BHATTI)  
NEW DELHI;  
MAY 17, 2024