2024 INSC 441
1 
 
 
 
 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
       CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 1833 OF 2024 
   
 
THE EMPLOYEES STATE INSURANCE 
CORPORATION LTD. 
 
 
 
        …APPELLANT(S) 
  
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
 
NAGAR NIGAM ALLAHABAD 
AND ANR. 
 
 
 
 
 
     ..RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
The instant appeal by special leave is directed against the 
impugned order dated 25th October, 2021 passed by the High 
Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Writ-C No. 14971 of 2009 
whereby the writ petition filed by respondent No. 1-Nagar Nigam, 
Allahabad was allowed.  
2. 
The learned Single Judge of the High Court vide impugned 
order held that the employees of respondent-Nagar Nigam are not 
covered 
under 
the 
Employees’ 
State 
Insurance 
Act, 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.05.17
18:07:35 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
1948(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘Act of 1948’) and as a 
consequence 
thereof, 
the 
notice 
dated 
3rd 
February, 
2009(hereinafter being referred to as ‘recovery notice’) issued by 
the Authorised Officer of the appellant-Corporation was quashed 
and amount already realized was directed to be refunded to the 
respondent-Nagar 
Nigam(subsequently 
designated 
as 
the 
Municipal Corporation) within three months.  
3. 
The appellant-Corporation herein has preferred the instant 
appeal with a pertinent plea that the respondent-Nagar Nigam 
operates a Central Workshop(hereinafter, ‘the workshop’), where 
activities of repairing and maintaining different types of vehicles 
are carried out. As per the appellant-Corporation, the workshop is 
covered by the definition of a ‘factory’ within the meaning of the 
Act of 1948. In the year 1964, respondent-Nagar Nigam was 
allotted Code No. 21-4404-74 under the Act of 1948. Recovery 
certificates were issued from time to time by the appellant-
Corporation to the respondent-Nagar Nigam on account of non-
payment of mandatory contributions under Section 40 of the Act 
of 1948, whereunder the principal employer is obligated to pay 
both employer’s and employee’s contribution in respect of every 
employee working in the factory. The respondent-Nagar Nigam 

3 
 
continued to make statutory contributions under the Act of 1948 
till the year 1978, whereafter it stopped paying without any reason. 
4. 
Owing to the non-payment of the statutory contributions by 
the employer, the Authorized Officer of the appellant-Corporation 
issued a notice dated 20th November, 2003 to respondent-Nagar 
Nigam under Section 45A of the Act of 1948 directing it to pay Rs. 
4,72,186/-, assessed on ad hoc basis pertaining to the 
contributions for the period commencing from June, 2002 to 
September, 2003 and called upon the respondent-Nagar Nigam to 
appear before it on 19th December, 2003. The respondent-Nagar 
Nigam, however, neither appeared before the Authorized Officer 
nor did it file any response to the notice, whereupon the Authorised 
Officer of the appellant-Corporation, vide letter dated 21st 
September, 2004 directed the Recovery Officer to recover the 
amount of contribution along with interest to the tune of Rs. 
5,88,227/- under Sections 45C to 45I of the Act of 1948 from the 
respondent-Nagar Nigam.  This amount subsequently came to be 
deducted by the appellant-Corporation from the bank account of 
respondent-Nagar Nigam i.e. UCO Bank, which has been arrayed 
as respondent No. 2 in the present appeal. 

4 
 
5. 
As the respondent-Nagar Nigam failed to make timely 
payments of the statutory contributions in the manner prescribed 
under the Employees’ State Insurance(General) Regulations, 1950, 
framed under the Act of 1948, a show cause notice dated 5th/6th 
June, 2006 was issued to the respondent-Nagar Nigam calling 
upon it to explain as to why damages under Section 85B of the Act 
of 1948, should not be levied upon it. The respondent-Nagar Nigam 
chose not to appear before the Authorized Officer and rather 
sought time to respond. On request being made on behalf of the 
respondent-Nagar Nigam, the hearing was adjourned on two 
occasions.  
6. 
The Authorised Officer of the appellant-Corporation, vide 
letter dated 30th January, 2009 directed the Recovery Officer to 
recover damages to the tune of Rs.3,52,670/- under Section 85B 
of the Act of 1948 from the respondent-Nagar Nigam. On the basis 
of above-mentioned letter, the Recovery Officer issued recovery 
notice dated 3rd February, 2009 to the respondent-Nagar Nigam for 
payment of the amount as determined under Section 85B of the 
Act of 1948.   
7. 
Being aggrieved by the recovery notice dated 3rd February 
2009, the respondent-Nagar Nigam filed the captioned Writ 

5 
 
Petition No. 14971 of 2009 before the Allahabad High Court 
challenging the said recovery notice and seeking a direction to 
restrain the appellant-Corporation from realising the amount.  
8. 
The learned Single Judge of the Allahabad High Court 
proceeded to allow the writ petition vide order dated 25th October, 
2021 holding that the writ petitioner-Nagar Nigam(respondent 
herein) was not covered under the Act of 1948 and as a 
consequence, recovery notice dated 3rd February, 2009 was 
quashed and the amount already realized by the appellant-
Corporation was directed to be refunded within three months. 
9. 
The order dated 25th October, 2021 is assailed in this appeal 
by special leave at the instance of the appellant-Corporation i.e. 
The Employees State Insurance Corporation Ltd. 
10. Learned counsel for the appellant has placed reliance on the 
judgment of this Court in the case of Employers’ State Insurance 
Corporation v. Kakinada Municipality and Others1 and urged 
that the controversy involved in the present appeal is fully covered 
by the said judgment wherein it has been clearly held that in 
respect of factory belonging to the local authority, unless power of 
exemption is exercised by the Government, it would be covered by 
 
1 (2022) 2 SCC 56 

6 
 
the provisions of Section 1(4) of the Act of 1948 and thus, liable to 
pay contribution. 
11. It was further contended that if at all, respondent- Nagar 
Nigam was desirous of getting the exemption from the operation of 
the Act of 1948, then it had to apply to the appropriate Government 
and procure an order of exemption and only thereafter, could it 
seek exemption from making payment of the employer’s 
contribution under Section 40 of the Act of 1948. 
12. Learned counsel further urged that the respondent-Nagar 
Nigam did not appear to defend the proceedings wherein it was 
called upon to pay the contributions for the period June, 2002 to 
September, 2003. It also failed to participate in proceedings for 
determination of damages under section 85B of the Act of 1948. 
The damages were determined by the appellant-Corporation vide 
recovery certificate dated 30th January, 2009, however, only the 
consequential recovery notice dated 3rd February, 2009 was 
assailed in the writ petition. His fervent contention was that since, 
the recovery certificate determining the damages not having been 
questioned, the respondent-Nagar Nigam was not entitled to 
challenge the subsequent recovery notice which is consequential 
to the determination of the damages. 

7 
 
13. Learned counsel further urged that though a ground was 
taken in the writ petition that the Act of 1948 is not applicable to 
the respondent-Nagar Nigam because the workshop of the 
respondent-Nagar Nigam is not covered under the definition of 
‘factory’ but the fact remains that in the proceedings for recovery 
of contribution, no such plea was taken that the workshop of the 
respondent-Nagar Nigam is not covered by the definition of ‘factory’ 
or that no manufacturing process is carried out in the workshop. 
14. He urged that the recovery certificate dated 22nd July, 1976, 
issued by the officials of the appellant-Corporation, demanding the 
contribution for period from 11th December, 1973 to 22nd July, 
1976 was satisfied by the respondent-Nagar Nigam which 
voluntarily deposited the contributions with the appellant-
Corporation for this period. However, compliance was stopped by 
the respondent-Nagar Nigam after the year 1978, without 
intimation to the appellant-Corporation. 
15. Learned counsel further urged that even otherwise, if at all 
the respondent-Nagar Nigam was desirous of contesting the 
recovery notice on the ground that it was not covered under the 
provisions of the Act, the remedy of filing an appeal to the 
Employees’ Insurance Court(hereinafter being referred to as 

8 
 
‘Insurance Court’) under Section 75 of the Act of 1948 was 
available to it.  Rather than availing the said statutory remedy, the 
respondent invoked the writ jurisdiction of the High Court without 
any justification.  He thus, implored the Court to accept the appeal 
and set aside the impugned order of the High Court. 
16. Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-
erstwhile Nagar Nigam and presently the Municipal Corporation, 
Allahabad, urged that there is no material on record to show that 
any manufacturing activity was being undertaken in the Workshop 
of the respondent-Nagar Nigam.  The employees of the respondent-
Nagar Nigam who were already being provided all possible 
amenities and facilities including the medical assistance etc., were 
being occasionally assigned the task of in-house repairs of the 
equipment and machinery of the respondent-Nagar Nigam and 
thus, by no stretch of imagination, can it be concluded that the 
workshop was a ‘factory’ within the meaning of the Act of 1948 
where any manufacturing process was being undertaken. 
17. He thus urged that the learned Single Judge of the High 
Court was justified in exercising the writ jurisdiction and quashing 
the impugned recovery notice dated 3rd February, 2009 which was 
ex-facie unsustainable in the eyes of law. He contended that the 

9 
 
impugned order does not suffer from any infirmity warranting 
interference of this Court and the appeal should be dismissed.  
18. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the material 
available on record. 
19. The core issues presented for consideration of this Court in 
this appeal are: -  
(i) Whether the workshop of respondent-Nagar Nigam 
was indulged in manufacturing process while carrying 
out repairs and maintenance of the tractors, trailers, 
loaders belonging to the respondent-Nagar Nigam by 
employing more than 20 workmen? 
(ii) Whether the workshop of respondent-Nagar Nigam 
was covered under the definition of ‘factory’ within the 
meaning of Act of 1948? 
20. The issue whether the workshop of the Municipality/local 
body where the job of repairs of the machinery, etc. are carried out 
is a ‘factory’ within the meaning of the Act of 1948 was examined 
in 
extenso 
by 
this 
Court 
in 
the 
case 
of 
Kakinada 
Municipality(supra).  Akin to the facts of the case at hand, in the 
said case also, the Municipality/local body, was covered under the 

10 
 
Act of 1948 since the year 1965 and statutory contributions were 
paid till 1996.  However, the Municipality stopped making the 
statutory contributions whereafter various orders and notices 
raising demands, as found due from the local body under the Act 
of 1948 were issued.  A speaking order under Section 45A was 
passed which was challenged by the local body by filing an 
application to the Insurance Court under Section 75(1)(g) of the 
Act of 1948 which rejected the same. The order passed by the 
Insurance Court was challenged by filing a statutory appeal to the 
High Court as provided under Section 82 of the Act of 1948.  The 
High Court allowed the appeal which led to the filing of the special 
leave petition in this Court.  After extensive consideration of the 
material available on record and detailed analysis of the statutory 
provisions, this Court came to a conclusion that the first 
respondent therein(Municipality/local body) was running a 
‘factory’ as defined under the Act of 1948. It was also held that the 
Act of 1948 applies to all factories including factories belonging to 
the Government other than the seasonal factories. The relevant 
extracts from the said judgment are reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“14. Considering Section 1(4) of the Act, it is clear as 
daylight, that the Act is to apply to all factories including 
factories belonging to the Government other than seasonal 
factories. 
 

11 
 
15. A factory is defined under Section 2(12) as follows: 
 
“2. (12) “factory” means any premises including the 
precincts thereof whereon ten or more persons are 
employed or were employed on any day of the 
preceding twelve months, and in any part of which a 
manufacturing process is being carried on or is 
ordinarily so carried on, but does not include a mine 
subject to the operation of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 
1952), or a railway running shed;” 
 
16. Section 2(14-AA) defines “manufacturing process”: 
 
“2. (14-AA) “manufacturing process” shall have the 
meaning assigned to it in the Factories Act, 1948 (63 
of 1948);” 
 
17. In the facts of this case, there is no dispute that the 
first respondent was running a factory within the meaning 
of the Act, insofar as it is undertaking manufacturing 
activities 
within 
the 
meaning 
of 
the 
expression 
“manufacturing process” as defined in Section 2(14-AA). 
The proviso to Section 1(4), undoubtedly, operates as an 
exception to the main provision. In other words, from the 
generality of factories that stand covered under the Act, the 
legislature has carved out an inroad by providing that the Act 
would not apply to the factory which belonged to the 
Government. It also makes it clear that the provisions of the Act 
will not apply to a factory under the control of the Government. 
This is however subject to the further condition in the proviso 
that the employees of such a factory, which is either owned or 
controlled by the Government, should be otherwise in receipt of 
benefits substantially similar or superior to the benefits 
provided under the Act. It is upon satisfaction of these 
conditions that even a factory which is owned or controlled by 
the Government would stand exempted from the purview of the 
Act. 
 
18. As far as the facts of this case is concerned, the first 
respondent does not have the case that the factory in question 
is a factory which is owned by the Government. As far as the 
question relating to control of the Government is concerned, the 
learned Senior Counsel for the first respondent has, in fact, 
upon being queried as to whether he has a case that it is under 
the control of the Government, he does not address us on the 
issue on the lines that the Government controls the factory. He 
very fairly does submit that the factory is under the control of 
the first respondent. The first respondent is a local body. It 
might be true that it is a creature of statute, being created 

12 
 
under the relevant Act. It also has a constitutional position after 
the amendment of the Constitution. But the words used in the 
Act are that the factory must be under the control of the 
Government. Any further doubt, in this regard, which we may 
entertain, is banished by the provisions of Section 90. 
 
19. Section 90 contemplates exemption of factories or 
establishments belonging to the local authority. Initially, the 
said provision contemplated power to exempt any factory or 
establishment belonging to the Government or any local 
authority. After the omission of the words “the Government or” 
by Act 29 of 1989 with effect from 20-10-1989, the said 
provision contemplates power with the appropriate Government 
after consultation with the Corporation (“ESI Corporation”) to 
exempt any factory or establishment belonging to any local 
authority from the provisions of the Act. It must be noticed that 
proviso to Section 1(4) was inserted by the very same 
amendment with effect from 20-10-1989. The results of this 
legislative exercise cannot be overlooked. The position, 
therefore, is that in respect of a factory, which is belonging 
to a local authority, unless power of exemption is exercised 
by the Government, it would be covered by provisions of 
Section 1(4) of the Act. In other words, it would be a factory 
like any other factory. It would have to be compliant with the 
provisions of the Act. This is for the reason that a factory or an 
establishment belonging to or under the control of the 
Government alone are within the purview of the proviso, which 
in turn is subject to the imperative condition or rather the 
indispensable requirement that the employees are in receipt of 
the substantially similar or superior benefits than provided 
under the Act.” 
(emphasis supplied)  
 
21. We feel that the facts of the case at hand are almost identical.  
Neither in the pleadings of the writ petition nor in the counter 
affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent-Nagar Nigam in this 
Court, is there any indication that the respondent ever sought for 
or was granted exemption by the appropriate Government by 
exercising powers under Section 90 of the Act of 1948. 

13 
 
22. In the case of J.P. Lights India v. Regional Director E.S.I. 
Corporation, Bangalore2, it has been laid down that the job of 
repairing the machinery is covered under the definition of 
“manufacturing process”. 
23. The appellant-Corporation had issued notices to respondent-
Nagar Nigam to show cause as to why the recovery of statutory 
contribution under Section 40 of the Act of 1948 should not be 
effected from it.  However, admittedly, no response was given by 
the respondent-Nagar Nigam to such notices. There is also no 
dispute that for the earlier periods, between 1964 to 1978, the 
respondent-Nagar Nigam made regular contributions under the 
Act of 1948 thereby conceding to the position that its workshop 
was covered under the definition of ‘factory’ where manufacturing 
process was being carried on.  If, at all, this situation had changed 
in the period subsequent to 1978 and before issuance of the notice 
under Section 45A of the Act of 1948, the respondent-Nagar Nigam 
would be required to demonstrate the same by providing 
appropriate evidence to the Authorized Officer in response to the 
said notice and establish that it was not covered under the 
definition of ‘factory’ and that no ‘manufacturing process’ was 
 
2 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1271 

14 
 
being undertaken in its premises. Examining such an issue would 
require the collection of evidence and the appreciation thereof. 
Hence, only the Insurance Court constituted under Section 74 of 
the Act of 1948 would be in a position to examine such disputed 
questions of facts.  
24. We thus feel that it was a fit case wherein, rather than 
interfering in the matter in exercise of the writ jurisdiction, the 
respondent-Nagar Nigam should have been relegated by the 
learned Single Judge to approach the Insurance Court by filing an 
application under Section 75(1)(g) of the Act of 1948. 
25. In the wake of the discussion made hereinabove, we are of 
the opinion that the learned Single Judge of the High Court clearly 
erred in entertaining the writ petition and interfering with the 
recovery notice dated 3rd February, 2009 while exercising the 
extraordinary writ jurisdiction conferred under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India. 
26. As a consequence, the appeal is allowed, and the impugned 
order is hereby quashed and set aside.  No costs. 
27. We, however, make it clear that above observations shall not 
prejudice the rights of the respondent No.1-Nagar Nigam to seek 

15 
 
benefit of exemption as contemplated under Section 90 of the Act 
of 1948. 
28. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
…………………………..J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(J.B. PARDIWALA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
…………………………..J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
NEW DELHI; 
May 17, 2024