2024 INSC 452
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 2715 - 2719 OF 2024 
(@ SLP (Crl.) Nos. 14036-14040 of 2023) 
                                             
UNION OF INDIA 
rep. by the Inspector of Police  
National Investigation Agency  
Chennai Branch  
 
                                           …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
BARAKATHULLAH ETC. 
 
 
                      …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
 
1. Leave granted.  
2. The Central Government in Ministry of Home Affairs, CTCR Division 
having received a credible information that the office bearers, members 
and cadres of Popular Front of India (PFI), an extremist Islamic 
organization have been spreading its extremist ideology across Tamil 
Nadu, by establishing State Headquarters at Purasaiwakkam, Chennai 
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2024.05.22
16:01:05 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
and also offices in various districts of Tamil Nadu and that through their 
frontal Organizations like Campus Front of India, National Women’s 
Front, Social Democratic Party of India etc., they conspire for committing 
terrorist acts, raise funds for committing terrorist activities and recruit 
members for furthering their extremist ideology, and that the frontal 
organizations and PFI were involved in the recruitment of members to 
various prescribed terrorist organizations, passed an order on 16th 
September 2022, in exercise of the powers conferred under sub-section 
(5) of Section 6 read with Section 8 of the National Investigation Agency 
Act, 2008 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘NIA Act’), directing the National 
Investigation Agency to take up investigation of the said case. In view of 
the said order, an FIR being RC-42/2022/NIA/DLI came to be registered 
on 19.09.2022 against the present respondents and other members and 
office bearers of PFI for the offences under Section 120(b), 153(A), 
153(AA) of IPC and Section 13,17,18,18(B), 38 and 39 of the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the “UAPA”).  
3.  During the course of investigation, the respondents-accused herein 
came to be arrested on 22.09.2022 for the alleged offences. They filed 
their respective bail applications before the Special Court under the NIA 
Act (Sessions Court for Exclusive Trial of Bomb Blast Cases). The 

3 
 
Special Court after considering the case diary, the documents and 
material produced before it, and after having been satisfied about the 
prima facie case made out against the respondents-accused as also 
considering the provisions of Section 43D of the UAPA in the light of the 
position of law settled by this Court in various decisions, dismissed the 
said bail applications filed by the respondents. 
4. Being aggrieved by the said orders, the respondents filed Criminal 
Appeals being CRLA Nos. 98, 114 and 116 of 2023 before the High 
Court of Judicature at Madras. It appears that some of the respondents-
accused had also filed Cr.L.M.P Nos. 11595 and 8094/2023 seeking 
interim bail pending the said appeals.  During the pendency of the said 
Appeals, the chargesheet came to be filed by the appellant-NIA against 
all the respondents alongwith other accused on 17.03.2023 for the 
offences under Sections 120B, 121A, 122, 153A, 505(1)(b), (c), (2) of 
IPC and Sections 13,18, 18A, 18B of UAPA.  The High Court after taking 
into consideration the submissions made by the learned Counsels for 
the parties and materials placed on record including the Chargesheet, 
allowed the said Appeals by the common impugned order dated 
19.10.2023, releasing the respondents on bail subject to the conditions 
mentioned therein. Being aggrieved by the said order, the present set of 

4 
 
appeals have been filed by the Union of India through NIA, Chennai 
Branch.   
5. At the outset, the learned counsels for the respondents raising 
preliminary objection had submitted that the appellant having failed to 
mention about the SLP (Crl.) No.9384/2023 which was preferred by the 
appellant against the co-accused for cancellation of the bail arising out 
of the same FIR, the present appeal was liable to be dismissed under 
Order XXII, Rule 2(3) of the Supreme Court Rules, 2013. The said 
submission cannot be accepted. Rule 2(2) of Order XXII mandates inter 
alia that no petition shall be entertained by the Registry unless it 
contains a statement as to whether the petitioner had filed any petition 
for special leave to appeal against the impugned judgment or order 
earlier, and if so with what result. Rule 2(3) thereof states that the Court 
shall, if it finds that the petitioner has not disclosed the fact of filing a 
similar petition earlier and its dismissal by the Court, dismiss the second 
petition if it is pending.  It may be noted that earlier no special leave to 
appeal has been filed against the impugned judgment and order dated 
19.10.2023 passed by the High Court and hence question of filing 
Second Petition does not arise. Though, the SLP (Crl.) No. 9384/2023 
was filed earlier by the appellant seeking cancellation of bail granted to 

5 
 
the co-accused in respect of the same FIR, the same has already been 
referred to in the impugned order by the High Court. This set of appeals 
cannot be treated as Second Petition as sought to be canvassed by the 
learned counsels for the respondents. 
6. So far as the merits of the Appeals are concerned, the learned advocate 
Mr. Rajat Nair for the appellant has vehemently submitted that the High 
Court had miserably failed to comprehend the correct import of Section 
18 read with the definition of terrorist act contemplated under Section 
15 of the UAPA for releasing the respondents on bail who have been 
charged with very serious offences. According to him, the High Court 
had fallen into patent and manifest error in not appreciating the overt 
acts and commission of alleged offences by the respondents, as stated 
by the listed witnesses/protected witnesses. Mr. Nair placing heavy 
reliance on the statements of the protected witnesses/listed witnesses 
had taken the court to the said statements to show the role and 
involvement of each of the respondents in the commission of the alleged 
offences under the IPC and UAPA. According to him, though some of 
the witnesses whose statements were recorded under Section 161/164 
Cr.P.C. and relied upon by the appellant, were the members of the PFI 
when it was not banned by the Government of India, they had not 

6 
 
participated in the alleged unlawful activities, and hence their 
statements till they are rebutted or contradicted could be relied upon. 
He further submitted that the High Court has committed grave error in 
trivializing the serious allegations made against the respondents by 
holding that except the witnesses having stated about respondents 
organizing weapon training for using knives and swords and to train 
members to throw beer bottles filled with water on targets, there is no 
material to suggest commission of any offence which falls under Section 
15 of UAPA, whereas all these alleged acts were part of the preparation 
of committing terrorist acts, particularly when the respondents were 
imparting training as to how to hurl bombs by using water filled beer 
bottles and how to use weapons like knives and swords to strike terror 
in the mind of people. Mr. Nair has also placed heavy reliance on the 
latest decision of this Court in case of Gurwinder Singh vs. State of 
Punjab and Another1 which has relied upon the earlier decision in 
National Investigation Agency vs. Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali2 to 
submit that the special provision of Section 43(D) of UAPA applies right 
from the stage of registration of FIR for the offences under Chapter IV 
 
1 (2024) SCC OnLine SC 109  
2 (2019) 5 SCC 1 

7 
 
and VI of the UAPA until the conclusion of the trial thereof, and that the 
court is merely expected to record a finding on the basis of broad 
probabilities regarding the involvement of the accused in the 
commission of the stated offences or otherwise. Terming the impugned 
order as perverse, he submitted that the High Court had failed to 
appreciate that the oral statements of the witnesses and the recoveries 
made during the course of investigation clearly made out a prima facie 
case against the respondents regarding their involvement of the alleged 
offences. 
7. The learned Senior Counsels, Mrs. Rebecca John appearing for 
respondent nos. 2, 3 and 4 (accused no. 1, 3 and 4), Mr. Devansh A. 
Mohta appearing for respondent No.1 (accused No.7), Mrs. Mukta 
Gupta appearing for respondent no. 5, 7 and 8 (accused No. 5, 8, 9) and 
Mr. S. Balakrishnan appearing for R-6 (accused no.6) had emphatically 
submitted that the reliance of  the appellant on the statements made by 
the protected/listed witnesses was highly improper as the said 
witnesses themselves had participated in the alleged commission of 
offences. According to them, the vague allegations made by the said 
witnesses, could not be relied upon, more particularly when there was 
no material brought on record to show any preparatory work done by 

8 
 
the respondents to prima facie make out the case against the 
respondents. They also relied upon the observations made by the High 
Court in the impugned order to submit that the High Court had in detail 
considered the evidence collected by the appellant during the course of 
the investigation and having not found substance in the same has 
released the respondents on bail which order should not be interfered 
with. Relying upon various decisions of this Court, they submitted that 
the impugned order having been passed by the High Court exercising 
its discretion, could neither be said to be illegal nor unjust. 
8. It is trite to say that the consideration applicable for cancellation of bail 
and consideration for challenging the order on the grant of bail on the 
ground of arbitrary exercise of discretion are different. While considering 
the application for cancellation of bail, the Court ordinarily looks for 
some supervening circumstances like tampering of evidence either 
during the investigation or during the trial, threatening of witness, 
accused likely to abscond and the trial getting delayed on that account 
etc. whereas in an order challenging the grant of bail on the ground that 
it has been granted illegally, the consideration would be whether there 
was improper or arbitrary exercise of discretion in the grant of bail or the 
findings recorded were perverse. The instant appeals have been filed 

9 
 
by the appellant challenging the impugned order passed by the High 
Court granting bail to the respondents- accused on the ground that not 
only the High Court has arbitrarily exercised the discretion in favour of 
the respondents, but also has recorded perverse findings while 
exercising such discretion. 
9. Before we appreciate the rival contentions raised by the learned counsel 
for the parties, it would be apt to refer to some of the provisions of the 
UAPA particularly with regard to the offences alleged against the 
respondents. As per the chargesheet, the offences alleged against the 
respondents are under Section 120B, 153A, 153AA of IPC and Section 
13, 17, 18, 18A,18B, 38 and 39 of UAPA. So far as the offences under 
the UAPA are concerned, Section 13 pertains to the punishment for 
unlawful activities, Section 15 defines what is “terrorist act” and Section 
16 prescribes punishment for the commission of the terrorist act. Section 
17 pertains to the punishment for raising funds for terrorist act, Section 
18 pertains to the punishment for conspiracy, etc. Section 18A pertains 
to the punishment for organizing terrorist camps and Section 18B 
pertains to the punishment for recruiting of person or persons for 
terrorist act. All these offences fall under Chapter IV of the Act. However, 
Section 38 which pertains to the offence relating to membership of a 

10 
 
terrorist organization and Section 39 which pertains to the offence 
relating to support given to terrorist organization, fall under Chapter VI 
of the said Act. Section 43D which was inserted by Act 35 of 2008, 
pertains to the modified application of certain provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure. Sub-section (5) of Section 43D being relevant for 
the purpose of these appeals, the same is reproduced hereunder: 
“43D. Modified application of certain provisions of the Code 
(1) to (4)…… 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person 
accused of an offence punishable under Chapters IV and VI of 
this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond 
unless the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity of 
being heard on the application for such release: 
Provided that such accused person shall not be released on bail 
or on his own bond if the Court, on a perusal of the case diary or 
the report made under section 173 of the Code is of the opinion 
that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the 
accusation against such person is prima facie true….” 
 
10. Since all offences alleged against the respondents are covered under 
Chapter IV and VI of the UAPA, the rigors and restrictions of sub-section 
(5) of Section 43D would apply to the facts of this case. It may be noted 
that this Court in case of National Investigation Agency vs. Zahoor 
Ahmad Shah Watali (supra), had an occasion to deal with the sub-
section (5) of Section 43D and in similar fact situation, after comparing 
the similar provisions under the Special enactments such as TADA, 
MCOCA, NDPS as also the earlier decisions of this court, had held as 
under: 

11 
 
“23. ……By its very nature, the expression “prima facie true” 
would mean that the materials/evidence collated by the 
investigating agency in reference to the accusation against the 
accused concerned in the first information report, must prevail 
until contradicted and overcome or disproved by other evidence, 
and on the face of it, shows the complicity of such accused in the 
commission of the stated offence. It must be good and sufficient 
on its face to establish a given fact or the chain of facts 
constituting the stated offence, unless rebutted or contradicted. 
In one sense, the degree of satisfaction is lighter when the Court 
has to opine that the accusation is “prima facie true”, as 
compared to the opinion of the accused “not guilty” of such 
offence as required under the other special enactments. In any 
case, the degree of satisfaction to be recorded by the Court for 
opining that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the 
accusation against the accused is prima facie true, is lighter than 
the degree of satisfaction to be recorded for considering a 
discharge application or framing of charges in relation to offences 
under the 1967 Act……” 
 
 
11. It was further observed: - 
“24. A priori, the exercise to be undertaken by the Court at this 
stage—of giving reasons for grant or non-grant of bail—is 
markedly different from discussing merits or demerits of the 
evidence. The elaborate examination or dissection of the 
evidence is not required to be done at this stage. The Court is 
merely expected to record a finding on the basis of broad 
probabilities regarding the involvement of the accused in the 
commission of the stated offence or otherwise. 
 
25. From the analysis of the impugned judgment [Zahoor Ahmad 
Shah Watali v. NIA, 2018 SCC OnLine Del 11185] , it appears to 
us that the High Court has ventured into an area of examining 
the merits and demerits of the evidence. For, it noted that the 
evidence in the form of statements of witnesses under Section 
161 are not admissible. Further, the documents pressed into 
service by the investigating agency were not admissible in 
evidence. It also noted that it was unlikely that the document had 
been recovered from the residence of Ghulam Mohammad Bhatt 
till 16-8-2017 (para 61 of the impugned judgment). Similarly, the 
approach of the High Court in completely discarding the 
statements of the protected witnesses recorded under Section 

12 
 
164 CrPC, on the specious ground that the same was kept in a 
sealed cover and was not even perused by the Designated Court 
and also because reference to such statements having been 
recorded was not found in the charge-sheet already filed against 
the respondent is, in our opinion, in complete disregard of the 
duty of the Court to record its opinion that the accusation made 
against the accused concerned is prima facie true or otherwise. 
That opinion must be reached by the Court not only in reference 
to the accusation in the FIR but also in reference to the contents 
of the case diary and including the charge-sheet (report under 
Section 173 CrPC) and other material gathered by the 
investigating agency during investigation.” 
 
26. ………. 
 
27. For that, the totality of the material gathered by the 
investigating agency and presented along with the report and 
including the case diary, is required to be reckoned and not by 
analysing individual pieces of evidence or circumstance. In any 
case, the question of discarding the document at this stage, on 
the ground of being inadmissible in evidence, is not permissible. 
For, the issue of admissibility of the document/evidence would be 
a matter for trial. The Court must look at the contents of the 
document and take such document into account as it is.” 
 
12. The ratio of the said judgment has been consistently followed by this 
Court in many cases, and recently in Gurwinder Singh vs. State of 
Punjab and Another (supra), in which this court has culled out following 
guidelines from Watali's Case: 
“34. 
In the previous section, based on a textual reading, we 
have discussed the broad inquiry which Courts seized of bail 
applications 
under 
Section 
43D(5) 
UAP 
Act 
r/w 
Section 439 CrPC must indulge in. Setting out the framework of 
the law seems rather easy, yet the application of it, presents its 
own complexities. For greater clarity in the application of the test 
set out above, it would be helpful to seek guidance from binding 
precedents. In this regard, we need to look no further than 
Watali's case which has laid down elaborate guidelines on the 
approach that Courts must partake in, in their application of the 
bail limitations under the UAP Act. On a perusal of paragraphs 

13 
 
23 to 29 and 32, the following 8-point propositions emerge and 
they are summarised as follows: 
• Meaning of ‘Prima facie true’ [para 23] : On the face of it, the 
materials must show the complicity of the accused in commission 
of the offence. The materials/evidence must be good and 
sufficient to establish a given fact or chain of facts constituting 
the stated offence, unless rebutted or contradicted by other 
evidence. 
• Degree 
of 
Satisfaction 
at 
Pre-Chargesheet, 
Post 
Chargesheet and Post-Charges - Compared [para 23] : Once 
charges are framed, it would be safe to assume that a very strong 
suspicion was founded upon the materials before the Court, 
which prompted the Court to form a presumptive opinion as to 
the existence of the factual ingredients constituting the offence 
alleged against the accused, to justify the framing of charge. In 
that situation, the accused may have to undertake an arduous 
task to satisfy the Court that despite the framing of charge, the 
materials presented along with the charge-sheet (report under 
Section 173 CrPC), do not make out reasonable grounds for 
believing that the accusation against him is prima facie true. 
Similar opinion is required to be formed by the Court whilst 
considering the prayer for bail, made after filing of the first report 
made under Section 173 of the Code, as in the present case. 
• Reasoning, necessary but no detailed evaluation of 
evidence [para 24] : The exercise to be undertaken by the Court 
at this stage--of giving reasons for grant or non-grant of bail--is 
markedly different from discussing merits or demerits of the 
evidence. The elaborate examination or dissection of the 
evidence is not required to be done at this stage. 
• Record a finding on broad probabilities, not based on proof 
beyond doubt [para 24]:“The Court is merely expected to record 
a finding on the basis of broad probabilities regarding the 
involvement of the accused in the commission of the stated 
offence or otherwise.” 
• Duration of the limitation under Section 43D(5) [para 26] 
: The special provision, Section 43-D of the 1967 Act, applies 
right from the stage of registration of FIR for the offences under 
Chapters IV and VI of the 1967 Act until the conclusion of the trial 
thereof. 
• Material on record must be analysed as a ‘whole’; no 
piecemeal analysis [para 27] : The totality of the material 
gathered by the investigating agency and presented along with 
the report and including the case diary, is required to be reckoned 
and not by analysing individual pieces of evidence or 
circumstance. 

14 
 
• Contents of documents to be presumed as true [para 27] 
: The Court must look at the contents of the document and take 
such document into account as it is. 
• Admissibility of documents relied upon by Prosecution 
cannot be questioned [para 27] : The materials/evidence 
collected by the investigation agency in support of the accusation 
against the accused in the first information report must prevail 
until contradicted and overcome or disproved by other 
evidence……. In any case, the question of discarding the 
document at this stage, on the ground of being inadmissible in 
evidence, is not permissible.” 
 
13. In the light of the above, let us consider whether from the perusal of the 
chargesheet and other material/documents produced against the 
respondents, there are reasonable grounds for believing that 
accusations against the respondents are prima facie true, as 
contemplated in the proviso to sub-section (5) of Section 43D of UAPA. 
It is quite well settled position of law that the chargesheet need not 
contain detailed analysis of the evidence*. It is for the concerned court 
considering the application for bail to assess the material/evidence 
presented by the investigating authority along with the report under 
Section 173 Cr.P.C. in its entirety, to form its opinion as to whether there 
are reasonable grounds for believing the accusation against the 
accused is prima facie true or not. 
 
* K. Veeraswami vs. Union of India and Others; (1991) 3 SCC 655 

15 
 
14. So far as the instant appeals are concerned, the chargesheet contains 
a narration of the organisational structure of PFI, the objective of the 
PFI, the activities of PFI and the identification of the physical education 
instructors and masters as identified by the protected witnesses / listed 
witnesses. For better appreciation, the relevant part of the chargesheet 
is reproduced as under: 
“17.10 The investigation disclosed that many Muslim youth were 
recruited as PFI Cadres (Categorized as "Protected witnesses) -
B" (LW-8) were sent to Periyapattinam, Ramanathapuram to 
attend beginners camp where he attended Tharbiya classes in 
which PFI functionaries/preachers sermonized that Muslims who 
were ruling India have been relegated as second grade citizens. 
The Indian Muslims were systematically and increasingly getting 
marginalized in their home land, the privileges earlier enjoyed by 
Muslims in terms of property rights, etc. were withdrawn and 
Government jobs were denied, trade facilities were restricted and 
the rights of Sharia were being denied. They preached that the 
Muslims were being attacked by Hindu right-wing leaders. During 
the camp, PE classes were conducted in the morning and 
evening in which they were taught to attack, assault, maim and 
murder with bare hands. During the camps, PFI leaders namely 
Adv. Kalith Mohammed and Barakatullah used to supervise the 
activities of weapons training in the camp. 
17.11 The investigation disclosed that the accused persons, A-1 
along with A-2, A-3, A-5 and A-6 had approached one witness 
categorized as "Protected witnesses -C & D” to expand the 
Mohalla committees through Masjids and recruit Muslim youth in 
to PFI organisation and impart weapons training to attack 
targeted persons and establish Islamic rule in India. A-1 told 
Protected Witness-C that Muslims should be united in order to 
attack the Hindu leaders and their organizations for which more 
young Muslims must join the PFI and they should equip 
themselves with weapons training provided by the PFI through 
Mohalla Committees. The PW-C also revealed that the objective 
of PFI is to establish Islamic Rule in India through an Islamic 
army. The Protected Witness-C also mentioned that A-4, A-8 later 
met Protected Witness-D to convince them about the Mohalla 

16 
 
committees. Further, Protected Witness-C also stated that he 
had opposed the move of PFI usurping the office of a body 
named, confederation of mosques in Madurai, an apex governing 
body of Muslims in Madurai in June 2022. Protected Witnesses 
also stated that the accused persons knowingly and intentionally 
wanted to control the confederation of mosques in Madurai, the 
initiative to spread Mohalla committee activities of imparting 
weapons training could easily sail through. Since Protected 
Witnesses did not agree with the accused persons and opposed 
them, he was being followed by some unknown persons. 
17.12 The investigation disclosed that the accused A-4 insisted 
on imparting weapons training to Muslim youth through mosques 
and indoctrinating them in order to establish Islamic rule by 2047. 
Further, investigation disclosed that A-8 mentioned that such 
training was being imparted in PFI Arivagam, Theni and at 
various parts of Ramanathapuram district so that the youth are 
in readiness to commit terrorist acts and unlawful activities and 
to disrupt the sovereignty and integrity of India and to establish 
Islamic rule as per Shariah law. The investigation also disclosed 
that NEC members including Adv. Md. Yusuf, AS Ismail and Md. 
Ali Jinnah had also come to request for imparting weapons 
training to Muslim youth through mosques. 
17.13 The investigation disclosed that during the months of 
November / December-2021, the accused persons A-1, A-2, A-3, 
A-5, A-6 recruited more Muslim youth through the mosques into 
PFI organisation and provided weapon training through Mohalla 
Committee to commit terrorist acts. The investigation also 
disclosed a three-pronged strategy of PFI organisation called 
"Trishul" to destroy all those who are against Islam, who attempt 
to destroy Islam and those who do not accept PFI organisation 
even if they are Muslims.  
17.14 The investigation disclosed that A-1 had explained in PFI 
guidance classes on the importance of weapon training through 
Mohalla Committee to target enemies of PFI who are against 
Islamic rule in India. The investigation also disclosed that Subject 
1, Subject 2 and Subject 3 are code words for training with 
knives, iron rods and swords. During the beginners camp, many 
Muslim youth who were recruited as PFI cadres were given 
unarmed physical training with bare hands and how to attack and 
neutralize targets. An introduction to weapons training was also 
imparted. The training of weapons is given during beginners 
camp, basic and secondary Physical training. Those who 
performed well were selected for attack teams. 

17 
 
17.15 The investigation disclosed that during the year 2012 and 
2020, criminal cases were registered when the PFI cadres had 
conducted weapon training by A-4, A-7 and other PFI 
leaders/cadres in Ramanathapuram to the PFI cadres including 
recruits from various other states. 
17.16 The investigation disclosed that the accused Ahamed 
Idhris @ AM Idris @ MA Idris (A-1) is the state level speaker of 
PFI and in charge of the Media team of PFI. He as a state level 
speaker used to deliver instigating speeches in the meetings 
organised by PFI. The accused had given speeches which were 
intended to instill perceived threat among Muslin community 
thereby making gullible Muslim youth to commit offences against 
the State and to commit offences against a particular community. 
To realize their larger conspiracy to make India an Islamic country 
by the year 2047 by striking terror on a section of people, thereby 
threatening the unity, integrity, security and sovereignty of India, 
he incited the cadres in the meetings organised by PF1. In the 
year 2022, PF1 organized a campaign called "Makkal 
Sangamam" for which Public meetings and exhibitions were 
organised all over Tamil Nadu, where the accused had given 
speeches at meetings held at K. Pudur, Madurai District 
Koothanallur, Tiruvarur District, and llayangudi, Sivanganga 
District. Further, as a media team in charge, he used to organize 
meetings of the team members. The primary duty of the media 
team is to collect alarming news, reports containing rumour, and 
spreading them among public and in the Masjids to create 
feelings of enmity on grounds of religion and to disrupt the public 
tranquility. With the same intent, he wrote articles for "Puthiya 
Vidiyal” such as Suthanthira Porattathil Parpaniya Throgam, 
Denial of justice (with regard to Babri Masjid Verdict). Further, 
while he organized camps such as Beginners Camp, Basic Camp 
and Secondary camps in which training to handle lethal 
weapons, attacking on the vulnerable parts of body to kill the 
enemy was imparted to PFI cadres as a preparation to wage a 
war against the Government of India to achieve their goal of 
establishing Islamic State in India by the year 2047. 
17.17 …… 
17.18 The investigation disclosed that the accused Mohammed 
Abutbahir (A-3) is the district president of PFI Madurai district, he 
organised terrorist camps in the name of PE to Muslim youth as 
a preparation to wage a war against the Government of India to 
achieve their goal of establishing Islamic State in India by the 
year 2047. He is one of the organizers of PFI's campaign called 
"Makkal Sangamam" for which Public meetings and exhibitions 
were organized by him and other accused persons. In the 

18 
 
meetings, he arranged the display of swords, guns, organized 
demonstration of lethal weapons to attract Muslim youth to join 
PFI and to get trained in the terrorist camps conducted by PFI in 
the name of PE classes and Mohalla Committee, and also to 
create fear among a section of people on the basis of religion. 
He is one of the PFI's core team members who created social 
disharmony on the basis of religion by spreading fake news on 
the Tiruparankundram hills or Sikkanthar Malai communal rift. He 
plotted to split and divide members belonging to a confederation 
of Muslim mosques in Madurai as the office bearers of the 
Jamath were not co-operative for the unlawful activities of PFI 
such as Sikkanthar Malai communal issue and for the Mohalla 
Committee. In this process, he conspired with another PFI cadre 
to murder a Muslim political leader (Protected witness) whose 
name is suspected to be in the red category of the list created by 
PFI. The accused also insisted that Muslim community members 
join PFI's Mohalla committee in a public protest meeting 
organized by PFI. 
17.19 The investigation disclosed that the accused Adv. Kalith 
Mohamed (A-4) is the State vice president of PFI Tamil Nadu. 
The accused used to give speeches which were intended to 
cause fear among Muslim community people and thereby making 
gullible Muslim youth to commit offenses against the State and 
to commit offences against a particular community. To achieve 
their larger conspiracy of making India as Islamic country by the 
year 2047 by striking terror on a section of people thereby 
threatening the unity, integrity, security and sovereignty of India, 
he gave speeches in the classes organized by PFI to its cadres. 
The accused was working for PFI to recruit and organize 
weapons training camps in the name of PE classes which were 
held to achieve their larger conspiracy to make India an Islamic 
country by the year 2047 by striking terror on a section of people 
thereby threatening the unity, integrity, security and sovereignty 
of India. Further, he actively engaged in the preparation to wage 
war against the government of India to establish the Islamic State 
in the year 2047. 
17.20 The investigation disclosed that accused Syed Ishaaq (A-
5) is the District Secretary, PFI Madurai District. He used to 
organize weapons training to PFI cadres in the guise of PE 
classes, Beginners camps, etc., where the PFI cadres were 
taught how to attack the vulnerable parts of the body and kill 
people, training with lethal weapons such as knives, swords, iron 
rods, etc. to achieve their goal to establish an Islamic State in 
India by the year 2047. He is one of the PFI's core team members 
which created social disharmony on the basis of religion by 

19 
 
spreading fake news about Tiruparankundram hills or Sikkanthar 
Malai communal rift. Further he motivated Muslim community 
youth to attend weapons training conducted by PFI in the guise 
of PE classes thereby making them as hit squads to attack, 
assault, maim and murder prominent persons even though they 
belonged to Muslim community for opposing PFI. 
17.21 The investigation disclosed that accused S Khaja 
Mohideen (A-6) is the State level speaker of PFI and in-charge 
for Mass Mobilization. Further, it is revealed that he used to 
deliver speeches in the PFI camps and in the PFI meetings on 
the materials / articles of ISIS which were published in the Voice 
of Hind and Voice of Khorasan magazine. Further, he used to 
preach about the Ghazwa-e-Hind ie., Battle against India to 
motivate Muslim community people to prepare for waging war 
against the Government of India and to establish an Islamic state 
by the year 2047. He was involved in furthering and supporting 
proscribed terrorist organizations. Further he motivated Muslim 
community youth to attend weapons training conducted by PFI in 
the guise of PE classes thereby making them as hit squads to 
attack, assault, maim and murder prominent persons even 
though they belong to Muslim community and oppose PFI. As in-
charge for Mass Mobilization, he used to make Muslim youth to 
join PFI and educate them about the ancient Muslim rule over 
India and the present situation of Muslim in India and make them 
ready for the Ghazwa-e-Hind, which is corroborated by the digital 
devices (MO-13) to (MO-17) seized from the accused and in the 
scrutiny report (D- 166) of the forensic report (D-155) received 
from NFSU. 
17.22 The investigation disclosed that accused S Barkathulla, (A-
7) associated himself with Manitha Neethi Pasarai (MNP), 
predecessor to PFI. He was the District president of PFI in the 
year 2014 and he organized PF1 marches / parades to create 
insecurity among a section of people on the basis of religion. He 
motivated Muslim community youth to attend weapon training 
conducted by PFI in the guise of PE classes thereby making 
them as hit squads to attack, assault, maim and murder 
prominent persons even though they belong to Muslim 
community who oppose PFI. He had personally supervised and 
conducted weapons training camps where PFI cadres were given 
training to attack their intended targets. 
17.23 The investigation disclosed that accused Yasar Arafat, (A-
8) is the Zonal Secretary of PFI Madurai Zone which consists of 
six districts. Earlier, he was the district president of PFI, Theni 
district. He coordinated weapons training in the districts that 
come under his zone in the name of PE classes where the 

20 
 
participants were taught to attack with knives, swords and petrol 
bombs. Further, he created an attack team in Theni district from 
the participants who attended the weapons training camp. He 
used to select PFI cadres who perform well in the weapons 
training classes as instructors who in turn would conduct secret 
training sessions in PFI offices and Arivagam, Theni. The training 
classes were conducted to achieve their goal to prepare for 
waging war against the Government of India and to establish an 
Islamic state by the year 2047. To terrorize the Hindu community, 
he 
organized 
recce 
of 
the 
Hindu 
leaders' 
business 
establishments. Further, documents seized from his residence 
during 
the 
search 
conducted 
on 
22-09-2022, 
contain 
incriminating materials like primary action plan of units, mohalla 
committees, where explanation was given in gruesome detail on 
how to attack, where to attack, etc. 
17.24 The investigation disclosed that the accused Fayas Ahmed 
@ Fayas, (A-9) is the district president of PFI Cuddalore District. 
To achieve their larger conspiracy in making India an Islamic 
country by the year 2047 by striking terror on a section of people 
thereby threatening the unity, integrity, security and sovereignty 
of India, he gave speeches in the classes conducted by PFI to 
their cadres. He motivated Muslim community youth to attend 
weapons training conducted by PFI in the guise of PE classes 
thereby making them hit squads to attack, assault, maim and 
murder prominent persons even though they belong to Muslim 
community and oppose PFI. During Ganesh Chaturthi, he 
attempted to instigate PFI cadres to create riots between Hindu 
& Muslim with intent to promote enmity between two groups. 
 
18.1   That, the investigation conducted by NIA revealed that A-
1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-5, A-6, A-7, A-8, A-9, A-13 and others have 
been parties to the criminal conspiracy in the matter of 
strengthening PFI, recruiting of persons to PFI, imparting weapon 
training to its (PFI) members, commission of unlawful acts, 
preparatory acts for commission of terrorist acts with the object 
of establishing Islamic rule in India by 2047. Investigation 
disclosed that Popular Front of India and its office bearers 
including the arrested accused persons, A-1 to A-9 and A-13 
conspired to wage a war against Government of India by 
threatening the unity, integrity, security and sovereignty of India 
in order to establish Islamic State in India. To inspire and incite 
the cadres of PFI, Islamic wars namely battles of AI Badr and 
battle of Uhud were compared with the war that the PFI and its 
cadres were to wage against India. The accused persons 
intentionally promoted enmity between different groups on 

21 
 
grounds of religion, intentionally planting a perceived threat in the 
minds of impressionable Muslim youth that they were imperilled 
by Kaffirs/non-believers and the Government and the Indian 
constitution were scheming against Muslims thereby instigating 
and inducing gullible Muslim youth to commit offence against the 
people belonging other religions/faith and to commit offence 
against the State thereby creating enmity against people of other 
religions. Further, the accused persons intended and caused 
alarm to the general public/section of the public by publishing 
statements in writing thereby inducing to commit offences against 
the State/general public tranquility. They recruited new cadres 
and organized weapons training including throwing petrol bombs 
to the new recruits to strike terror against India and among a 
section of people in India. Further, the PFI and its office bearers 
including an accused person; A-6 had professed and invited 
support to the ideologies of Islamic State and Lashkar-e—Taiba, 
both proscribed organizations as per the First Schedule under 
UA (P) Act, 1967, in the classes conducted by the PFI to its 
cadres.” 
 
15. As stated earlier, the chargesheet has been filed against the 
respondents-accused for the offences under Sections 120B, 121A, 12, 
153A, 505(1) (b), (c), (2) of IPC and Sections 13,18, 18A, 18B of UAPA, 
except the Accused-6, S. Khaja Maideen, who has been additionally 
implicated under Section 38 and 39 of UAPA. It may be noted that out 
of the alleged offences under UAPA, the offences under Sections 18, 
18A and 18B would fall under Chapter-IV, whereas the offences under 
Section 38 and 39 would fall under Chapter-VI of the Act. From the 
statements of witnesses and the incriminating documents collected 
during the course of investigation, as referred to in the charge-sheet, it 
is discernible that the PW-A, PW-C, PW-D, PW-E, and witnesses Syed 

22 
 
Abutaheer and Mohammed Satik have stated about the activities of PFI 
like radicalizing youth for recruitment, Arms training (knife, sword and 
use of petrol bombs/inflammable substances) and preparatory act for 
commissioning of terrorist activities. Similarly, PW-F has stated about 
the PFI’s ideal of an Islamic State and about providing support to ISIS. 
The PW-A, PW-B, PW-C, PW-D, PW-H and PW-I have stated about the 
conspiracy hatched by the members of the PFI and particularly the role 
of A-8 Yasar Arafat for creating an Islamic State by the year 2047 
through an armed struggle against the Government of India. From the 
relevant extracts of the statements of the protected witnesses and of the 
listed witnesses, the role of each of the respondents-accused has been 
sought to be made out, which can be tabulated as under: 
Accused 
No. 
Name  
Relevant 
statements 
of 
protected and listed witnesses 
A-1 
A.M. Idris @ Ahamed 
Idris 
The role and involvement of A-
1 Ahamed Idris is sought to be 
culled out from the statements 
of LW-68, LW-69, LW-89/PW-C, 
LW-93/PW-D, LW-92/PW-F and 
PW-114/PW-G.  
A-3 
Mohammed Abuthahir 
The role and involvement of A-
3 Mohammed Abuthahir is 
sought to be culled out from the 
statements 
of 
LW-62, 
LW-
89/PW-C, LW-93/PW-D, LW-
92/PW-F and LW-114/PW-G. 

23 
 
A-4 
Khalid Mohammed 
The role and involvement of A-
4 Khalid Mohammed is sought 
to be made out from the 
statements of LW-68, LW-69, 
LW-86/PW-B, 
LW-89/PW-C, 
LW-93/PW-D and LW-92/PW-F. 
A-5  
Syed Ishaaq  
The role ad involvement of A-5 
Syed Ishaaq is sought to be 
made out from the statements 
of LW-89/PW-C, LW-93/PW-D, 
LW-108/PW-E, 
LW-92/PW-F 
and LW-114/PW-G.  
A-6 
S. Khaja Maideen 
The role ad involvement of A-6 
S. Khaja Maideen is sought to 
be 
made 
out 
from 
the 
statements of LW-89/PW-C, 
LW-93/PW-D and LW-92/PW-F. 
A-7 
Barakathullah 
The role and involvement of A-
7 Barakathullah is sought to be 
made out from the statements 
of 
LW-86/PW-B 
and 
LW-
122/PW-H.  
A-8 
Yasar Arafat 
The role ad involvement of A-8 
Yasar Arafat is sought to be 
made out from the statements 
of LW-67, LW-68, LW-69, LW-
126/PW-A, LW-89/PW-C, LW-
93/PW-D and LW-108/PW-E. 
A-9 
Fayaz Ahmed 
The role ad involvement of A-9 
Fayaz Ahmed is sought to be 
made out from the statements 
of LW-81, LW-82, LW-83 and 
LW-88 
 
16. As transpiring from the material on record, the PFI was registered under 
the Societies Registration Act, having an organizational set up as 

24 
 
contained in its constitution. All the respondents-accused were the 
members or office bearers of the said organization at the relevant time. 
As alleged in the chargesheet, though the PFI was projecting itself as 
an organization fighting for the rights of minorities, Dalits and 
marginalized communities, it was pursuing a covert agenda to radicalize 
particular section of the society and to work towards undermining the 
concept of democracy and integrity of India. The investigation disclosed 
that the activities and undeclared objectives of PFI had strong 
communal and anti-national agenda to establish an Islamic rule in India 
by radicalization of Muslims and communalization of issues. After 
recruitment as members of PFI, they were motivated towards violent 
terrorist activities by providing training through beginners course and 
advanced training courses. During the training courses, physical 
education classes were conducted in which members were taught to 
attack, assault, maim and murder with bare hands. The training was also 
given as to how to use weapons like knives and swords and how to hurl 
bombs. It appears that within few days of the arrest of the respondents 
on 22.09.2022, the PFI was declared as an “unlawful association” and 
was banned by the Government of India under the UAPA. We need not 
elaborate on the allegations made by the protected/listed witnesses 

25 
 
stating the role and involvement of each of the respondents, who were 
either members or the office bearers of the PFI. Suffice it to say that, 
there is sufficient material in the form of statements of witnesses and 
other incriminating evidence in the form of digital devices, books, 
photographs etc. collected during the course of investigation and relied 
upon by the appellant as recorded in the chargesheet, to form an opinion 
that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accusations 
against the respondents-accused are prima facie true.  
17. As stated in Watali’s case, the material/evidence collated by the 
Investigating Agency in reference to the accusation against each of the 
accused concerned in the chargesheet would prevail until rebutted, 
contradicted and overcome or disproved by other evidence. The 
material collated and statements of witnesses recorded also show prima 
facie complicity of the respondents-accused in the commission of the 
alleged offences, which material/evidence is good and sufficient on its 
face to establish the facts constituting the alleged offences, till such 
material/evidence is rebutted or contradicted. The Court at the stage of 
considering the bail applications of the respondents-accused is merely 
required to record a finding on the basis of broad probabilities regarding 

26 
 
the involvement of the respondents in the commission of the alleged 
offences.  
18. In our opinion, the High Court has committed gross error in not 
considering the material/evidence in its right and proper perspective and 
in recording a perverse finding to the effect that there was no material 
to suggest the commission of any offence, which falls under Section 15 
of UAPA, and that the prosecution had not produced any material about 
the involvement of any of the respondents-accused in any terrorist act 
or as a member of a terrorist gang or organization or training terrorism. 
Such perverse findings of the High Court deserve to be strongly 
deprecated more particularly when the appellant has not alleged the 
offence under Section 15 of UAPA either in the FIR or in the chargesheet 
against the respondents. The alleged offences are under Section 18, 
18A, 18B etc. For the purpose of considering the offence under Section 
18, the commission of terrorist act as contemplated in Section 15 of 
UAPA is not required to be made out. What Section 18 contemplates is 
that whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or advocates, abets, 
advises or incites, directly or knowingly facilitates the commission of a 
terrorist act or any act preparatory to the commission of a terrorist act 
would be punishable under the said provision. Hence, if there is any 

27 
 
material or evidence to show that the accused had conspired or 
attempted to commit a terrorist act, or committed any act preparatory to 
the commission of a terrorist act, such material evidence would be 
sufficient to invoke Section 18. For attracting Section 18, the 
involvement of the accused in the actual commission of terrorist act as 
defined in Section 15 need not be shown. The High Court having 
miserably failed to comprehend the correct import of Section 18 read 
with the definition of terrorist act as contemplated in Section 15 of UAPA, 
in our opinion the High Court has fallen into a patent and manifest error. 
19. Though it was sought to be submitted by learned counsel appearing for 
the respondents that the material / evidence collected by the 
Investigating Agency and statements of witnesses relied upon by the 
prosecuting agency is not reliable, the said submission cannot be 
accepted. As held by this Court in Watali’s case, the question of 
discarding the material or document at the stage of considering the bail 
application of an accused, on the ground of being not reliable or 
inadmissible in evidence, is not permissible. The Court must look at the 
contents of the documents and take such documents into account as it 
is and satisfy itself on the basis of broad probabilities regarding the 
involvement of the accused in the commission of the alleged offences 

28 
 
for recording whether a prima facie case is made out against the 
accused.  
20. No doubt, in Union of India vs. K.A. Najeeb3, relied upon by the 
learned counsels for the respondents, it has been observed that a 
Constitutional court is not strictly bound by the prohibitory provisions of 
grant of bail in 1967 Act, and can exercise its constitutional jurisdiction 
to release the accused on bail who has been incarcerated for a long 
period of time relying upon Article 21 of the Constitution of India, the said 
observations may not be applicable to the facts of the present case. In 
the said case, this Court did not interfere with the order passed by the 
High Court granting bail to the accused in the said case, on the ground 
that the said accused had already spent 5 years and 5 months in 
custody, and the trial was likely to take long time. So far as the 
respondents in the instant appeals are concerned, they are in custody 
hardly for one and half years, apart from the fact that all the respondents 
are shown to have been involved in previous cases. There are about 8 
to 9 previous cases shown in the chargesheet against the respondents 
except accused no.1, 4 and 6 who are shown to have been involved in 
two cases. Considering the nature and gravity of the alleged offences 
 
3 (2021) 3 SCC 713 

29 
 
and considering their criminal antecedents, in our opinion High Court 
should not have taken a lenient view, more particularly when there was 
sufficient material to show their prima facie involvement in the alleged 
offences under the UAPA. 
21. Similarly, the decision in Vernon vs. State of Maharashtra and 
Another4,  relied upon by the learned counsels for the respondents also 
would be of hardly any help in as much in the said case this Court after 
considering allegations made against the accused and long incarnation 
of five years, did not think it proper to continue further detention of the 
appellants-accused in the said case. In Shoma Kanti Sen vs. State of 
Maharashtra and Another5, relied upon by the learned counsels for the 
respondents, this Court had deemed it proper to release the accused 
involved in the offences under the UAPA on bail, having considered the 
facts of the case and observing that Section 43(d)(5) of UAPA was not 
applicable.  
22. In the instant case, we are satisfied from the chargesheet as also the 
other material/documents relied upon by the appellant that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that the accusations against the 
 
4 2023 SCC OnLine SC 885 
5 (2024) 4 SCALE 709 

30 
 
respondents are prima facie true and that the mandate contained in the 
proviso to Section 43(D)(5) would be applicable for not releasing the 
respondents on bail. Having regard to the seriousness and gravity of the 
alleged offences, previous criminal history of the respondents as 
mentioned in the charge-sheet, the period of custody undergone by the 
respondents being hardly one and half years, the severity of punishment 
prescribed for the alleged offences and prima facie material collected 
during the course of investigation, the impugned order passed by the 
High Court cannot be sustained. We are conscious of the legal position 
that we should be slow in interfering with the order when the bail has 
been granted by the High Court, however it is equally well settled that if 
such order of granting bail is found to be illegal and perverse, it must be 
set aside. 
23. This Court has often interpreted the counter terrorism enactments to 
strike a balance between the civil liberties of the accused, human rights 
of the victims and compelling interest of the state. It cannot be denied 
that National security is always of paramount importance and any act in 
aid to any terrorist act – violent or non-violent is liable to be restricted. 
The UAPA is one of such Acts which has been enacted to provide for 
effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and 

31 
 
associations, and to deal with terrorist activities, as also to impose 
reasonable restrictions on the civil liberties of the persons in the interest 
of sovereignty and integrity of India.  
24. In that view of the matter, the impugned order passed by the High Court 
is set aside. The respondents shall forthwith surrender themselves 
before the appellant-NIA. Since, the chargesheet has already been 
submitted before the Special Court, it is directed that the Special Court 
shall proceed with the trial as expeditiously as possible and in 
accordance with law, without being influenced by any of the 
observations made by this Court in this order. 
25. The appeals are allowed accordingly. 
 
           ……………………………………J. 
            [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 
   
 
 
  
           
 
           ……………..……………………. J.     
                                                 
           [PANKAJ MITHAL] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
  
MAY  22nd, 2024.