2024 INSC 462
1 
 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 597 OF 2012 
 
SURENDER SINGH                         
 
…APPELLANT  
VERSUS 
 
STATE (NCT OF DELHI)  
 
 
 
…RESPONDENT 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J. 
 
1. The appellant before this Court has challenged the order of 
the High Court (dated 18.05.2011) which has dismissed his 
appeal while upholding his conviction and sentence by the 
Trial Court for offences under Sections 302 and 307 of the 
Indian Penal Code, for which he has been sentenced for life 
imprisonment and 7 years of rigorous imprisonment 
respectively.  
2. We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant as well 
as for the State at length. 
3. As the facts of the case would reveal the present case is of 
a brazen murder, committed inside a Police Station in Delhi.  
Digitally signed by
Jagdish Kumar
Date: 2024.07.03
16:14:33 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
 
 
The prosecution case is that the appellant, who was posted 
as a police guard at Mayur Vihar Police Station, Delhi, 
executed this murder inside the police station, while he was 
on duty!  
4. The deceased was married to the appellant’s first cousin 
and was also his neighbour. The prosecution case is that 
the deceased had an illicit relationship with the wife of the 
appellant.  There are more than one witnesses to the fact 
that the deceased and the appellant were last seen together 
in conversation with each other inside the police station 
even minutes before these witnesses saw the appellant 
killing the deceased with his official 9 m.m. carbine.  
5. An FIR was lodged at Police Station Mayur Vihar, New Delhi 
on 30.06.2002 at 2:30 pm, under Sections 302/307 IPC on 
the narration of PW-2 who was posted at the Police Station, 
Mayur Vihar, New Delhi as Head Constable at the relevant 
point of time.  PW-2 states that on the date of the incident 
she reached the Police Station at around 11.30 am and saw 
the appellant talking to the deceased. She further states 
that at around 11.40 am, she heard sounds of fire and then 
saw the deceased running towards the Duty Officer’s room; 

3 
 
 
 
he was bleeding with his hands held up in the air. The 
appellant was seen firing at the deceased from his Carbine. 
When the firing stopped, the deceased was seen lying 
outside the duty officer's room, bleeding profusely. The 
appellant was apprehended along with his carbine by the 
police staff, and PW-2 who was also injured in the firing was 
taken to the LBS Hospital where she received medical aid, 
and later lodged the FIR. 
6. The police after its investigation filed chargesheet and the 
case was committed to Sessions, where charges were 
framed under Sections 302/307 of IPC against the present 
appellant. The prosecution examined as many as 27 
witnesses. The accused, after giving his statement under 
Section 313 CrPC, had also examined a witness as DW-1. 
The Trial Court ultimately convicted and sentenced the 
appellant under Sections 302 and 307 IPC as already stated 
above.  
7. Strangely, and for reasons best known to the prosecution, 
it examined PW-6 who is the brother of the appellant and 
PW-25 who is wife of the appellant, as prosecution 
witnesses. Although these two witnesses have supported 

4 
 
 
 
the case of the prosecution to the extent that they establish 
that the deceased was having an extra marital affair with 
the appellant’s wife, yet both of them added in their 
testimony that it was the deceased who was determined to 
kill the appellant! 
8. PW-25, who is the wife of the appellant, says that, minutes 
prior to the incident, the deceased had come to her place 
and had warned her that he was going to the Police Station 
to kill her husband!  PW-6 is also a witness to this 
expression on the part of the deceased.  
9. The accused/appellant who as we shall see, has neither 
denied the incident nor the fact that he killed the deceased. 
His argument is that he did it as a matter of self-defence, 
and in the alternative if self-defence is not accepted by the 
Court, then it was a case of grave and sudden provocation 
at best, which led to the death of the deceased at the hands 
of the appellant. In other words, if at all, the appellant can 
be punished only for culpable homicide not amounting to 
murder. 
      It has been argued before us that on the fateful day        
(i.e. 30.06.2002), it was the deceased who had come to the 

5 
 
 
 
police station to kill the appellant and the appellant used 
his weapon only in self defence, but unfortunately the 
deceased was killed.  
      The evidence of PW-25 and PW-6 which we have just 
referred apparently supports this theory, to the extent that 
the deceased was determined to kill the appellant.  The 
appellant states in his Section 313 Cr.P.C. statement as 
under :-   
"…I was doing my duty as a santari. At 
about11.40 Satish (deceased) who was my 
relative came there. I had half closed the doors 
of PS as per directions of SHO. He opened the 
doors by hitting car against these. He parked 
his car inside the PS. He started shouting at 
me. I took him towards near police quarters. He 
pounced at me. I forbade him from doing so. I 
took him towards duty officer's room. I tried to 
snatch my carbine from his hand. In that 
process firing took place. Magazine fell down. 
I tried to pick it up and fit in the carbine. In that 
process it fired four-five times in air. Satish 
tried to snatch said carbine from me and in 
that process was hit by bullets. The carbine 
fired in rapid action from gate of PS up to police 
quarters. When we were near duty officer’s 
room the carbine was set at automatic mode. It 
fired which hit deceased Satish as well as 
walls, tube lights and windows of duty 
officer’s room.” 
 
        The entire case of the defence is built on the above 
statement of the accused appellant, which is that it was the 

6 
 
 
 
deceased who had come rushing to the Police Station on that 
fateful day knowing very well that the appellant was posted 
there as a guard.  He then tried to snatch the weapon from 
the appellant and in this scuffle, shots were fired from the 
weapon, which was an accident, which ultimately led to the 
death of the deceased. This, in short is the case of the 
defence. 
       All the same, this trumped up story did not find favour 
with the trial court and the appellate court and 
understandably so as the prosecution has an overwhelming 
evidence to the contrary, which only points towards a 
dastardly murder at the hands of the present appellant.  
       The prosecution case is primarily based on the 
statement of the eye witnesses present in the Police Station 
itself and mainly PW-2 who is a lady head constable and also 
the complainant. This witness has remained steadfast to her 
version of the incident, which was given in the first 
information report lodged by her; and later in her 
examination-in-chief and cross-examination, during the 
trial.  She is an extremely credible and trustworthy witness 
and the veracity of her statement and deposition establishes 

7 
 
 
 
the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, and has 
its corroboration with other evidences, including ocular 
evidences of PW-1, PW-14 and PW-17, who were also 
constables or head Constables posted at Police Station 
Mayur Vihar, New Delhi, and were present at the Police 
Station at the relevant time. Additionally, this is also 
confirmed by the forensic evidence which was gathered by 
the Police during investigation from the site itself, to which 
we shall refer in a while. 
       PW-2 was put to a lengthy cross-examination by the 
defence. In the cross-examination the defence made every 
possible attempt to cast doubt on the presence of this 
witness at the Police Station, but this was all in vain since 
there are more than one witnesses in this case which clearly 
establish the presence of PW-2 at the Police Station. Her 
presence is established by the other witnesses such as PW-
1, PW-14 and PW-17, who were also Police constables posted 
at the same Police Station. Most importantly her presence is 
established by the fact that this witness (PW-2) is also an 
injured witness as she had sustained bullet injuries on her 
left shoulder. Her medical examination was done on the 

8 
 
 
 
same day and the following injuries were found :  
1. Lacerated wound 2x2 cm over left (L) 
shoulder near lateral end of clavicle, 
penetrating anterior aspect, fresh, oozing of 
blood. 
2. Lacerated wound left (L) shoulder, posterior 
aspect near lateral end of clavicle, 3x3 cm, 
fresh, oozing of blood. 
 
PW-11, Head Constable Jai Prakash, is the one who took 
PW-2 to the LBS hospital and also testified before the court 
in this regard. PW-27, the SHO of the police station who 
investigated the case, also testified that he reached the 
police station right after the incident and then rushed to the 
hospital where he recorded the statement of PW-2.  
10. In her examination-in-chief PW-2 says that on 30.06.2002, 
she was posted at Police Station, Mayur Vihar where she 
was to work as duty officer from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., but as 
she had some personal work in the morning that day, she 
had taken prior permission from the SHO to arrive late.  
She hence reached the P.S. at 11.35 a.m. and at the 
gate, she saw the appellant-Surender (whom she identifies 
in the court), and who was posted as guard in the same 
Police Station, talking to a stranger near a corner of the 
premises. She then went straight to her duty room and 

9 
 
 
 
while she was talking to the Head Constable Om Pal (PW-1) 
from whom she had to take the charge, and where 
constable Vinod (PW-17) and DHG Jai Singh (PW-5) were 
also present along with Munshi Gulzari Lal, she suddenly 
heard sounds of bullet shots in the compound of the Police 
Station.  Then she saw the person with whom the appellant 
was having a conversation (i.e. the deceased) rushing 
towards the duty officers’ room with his hands up in the 
air; and he was bleeding. She also saw Constable Surender 
(i.e. the appellant before this Court), chasing this person from 
behind, still firing from his 9mm carbine, aiming at the 
deceased. She as well as the head Constable Om Prakash, 
Constable Vinod and DHG Jai Singh bent down and took 
shield in order to avoid stray bullets. She then saw the 
deceased lying outside the room, bleeding profusely. By this 
time, she had realized that she too had received bullet 
injuries on her left shoulder. She was then taken to LBS 
Hospital by Head Constable Jai Prakash. It was in the 
hospital that she was informed that the deceased (Satish) 
was a relative of Surender and that he is now dead, due to 
the bullet injuries sustained in the firing.  

10 
 
 
 
 
11. The defence did not cross-examine this witness immediately 
after her examination-in-chief, but sought that the cross 
examination be deferred, which was done and she was 
cross-examined only on 30.11.2004, which is more than 
two months after her examination-in-chief.  We may just 
stop here for a while only to sound a note of caution.  Such 
long adjournment as was given in this case after 
examination-in-chief, should never have been given.  
Reasons for this are many, but to our mind the main reason 
would be that this may affect the fairness of the trial and 
may even endanger, in a given case, the safety of the 
witness.  As far as possible, the defence should be asked to 
cross examine the witness the same day or the following 
day.  Only in very exceptional cases, and for reasons to be 
recorded, the cross examination should be deferred and a 
short adjournment can be given after taking precautions 
and care, for the witness, if it is required. We are 
constrained to make this observation as we have noticed in 
case after case that cross examinations are being adjourned 
routinely which can seriously prejudice a fair trial. 

11 
 
 
 
 
12. This Court had, on more than one occasion, condemned 
this practice of the trial court where examinations are 
deferred without sufficient reasons. We may refer here to 
some cases, which are State of U.P v. Shambhu Nath 
Singh (2001) 4 SCC 667; Ambika Prasad v. State (Delhi 
Admn.) (2000) 2 SCC 646; Mohd. Khalid v. State of W.B. 
(2002) 7 SCC 334. 
13. As we have said cross examination can be deferred in 
exceptional cases and for reasons to be recorded by the 
Court, such as under sub-section 2 of Section 231 of CrPC1 
but even here the adjournment is not to be given as a matter 
of right and ultimately it is the discretion of the Court.  In 
State of Kerala v. Rasheed (2019) 13 SCC 297, this Court 
has 
set 
certain 
guidelines 
under 
which 
such 
an 
adjournment can be given.  The emphasis again is on the 
fact that a request for deferral must be premised on 
sufficient reasons, justifying the deferral of cross-
 
1 231. Evidence for prosecution.—(1) On the date so fixed, the Judge shall proceed to take 
all 
such 
evidence 
as 
may 
be 
produced 
in 
support 
of 
the 
prosecution. 
 
(2) The Judge may, in his discretion, permit the cross-examination of any witness to be 
deferred until any other witness or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness 
for further cross-examination. 

12 
 
 
 
examination of the witness.   
As we could see from the records in the present case the 
cross examination of PW-2 was deferred precisely on 
grounds referred in sub-section (2) of Section 231 of CrPC.  
The defence requested to examine PW-2 with another 
prosecution witness (Vinod-PW-17).  Yet the records of the 
case also reveal that though the cross-examination was 
deferred yet the other witness (PW-17) was examined much 
later, nearly a year after the cross examination of PW-2.  We 
only wanted to record this cautionary note to make our 
point that this practice is not a healthy practice and the 
Courts should be slow in deferring these matters. The 
mandate of Section 231 of Cr.PC and the law laid down on 
the subject referred above must be followed in its letter and 
spirit. 
       Thankfully, in the case at hand, the deferred cross-
examination of PW-2 has not affected the course of the trial.  
This witness has remained consistent.   
14. PW-19 is Dr. S.B. Jangpangi, Casualty Medical Officer 
posted at LBS Hospital Delhi, who had examined PW-2 as 
she had received bullet injuries on that fateful day. PW-19 

13 
 
 
 
in his statement mentions that two injuries were found on 
Panwati’s (PW-2) body.  PW-19 had also examined the 
deceased who was declared dead by him and found his body 
riddled with bullet injuries. 
15. PW-1, Ompal Singh, who was posted as head constable in 
P.S. Mayur Vihar is another key prosecution witness.  He 
says that he was working as duty officer on 30.06.2002 in 
place of WHC Panwati (PW2). After PW-2 reported for her 
duties Constable Vinod (PW-17), DHG Jai Singh and PW-1 
were also in the duty officers’ room. He recounts that on the 
day of the incident he heard sounds of firing at about 11.35 
a.m. and saw a person with blood-stained clothes (i.e.  the 
deceased) trying to reach the duty officers’ room.  He was 
being chased by the appellant, who was identified by this 
witness in court. He states that the police staff tried to save 
their own life in the duty officer’s room and then saw the 
deceased lying on the ground.  Constable Panwati (PW-2) 
also sustained bullet injuries in this firing.  He then gave a 
wireless message of the incident to the SHO. This witness 
was cross examined later but again nothing has come in the 
cross to doubt the statement of this witness.  

14 
 
 
 
16. PW-11 and PW-17 were again, Head Constable and 
Constable respectively, who were posted at this police 
station on that fateful day of June 30, 2002.  They were also 
witness to the crime and their deposition states similar facts 
as narrated by PW-1 and PW-2.  
17. The post-mortem was conducted on 01.07.2002 by Dr. 
Vinay Kumar Singh (PW18) of LBS Hospital. He found 17 
ante mortem injuries on the body of the deceased. He 
confirms his post-mortem report, in his deposition, where 
in his opinion the cause of death was shock resulting from 
fire arm injuries. He states that the injuries on the chest 
and on the back of the deceased were sufficient to cause his 
death. He also mentions that bullets were also recovered 
from the chest cavity of the deceased and one bullet was 
recovered from the right side of the back. There were 6 fire-
arm entry wounds corresponding to 6 fire-arm exit wounds. 
At least one fire-arm entry wound has a blackening at the 
entry point which shows that this was fired at a point-blank 
range. 
18. In all, the deceased had received 8 to 9 shots from the 
carbine of the appellant which are spread all over his body. 

15 
 
 
 
Entry wounds exist on the front as well as on the back of 
the deceased’s body, which makes it clear that the deceased 
was shot not only from the front but also from the back, 
while he was trying to escape. The nature of these injuries 
corroborates with the ocular testimony of PW-2. It is PW-2 
who had said that when she came to the Police Station, she 
had seen the deceased talking to the appellant at the gate 
of the police station and that the appellant was armed with 
a carbine. PW-21, Constable Devender Kumar who had to 
take the charge of ‘sentry’/guard at 12 noon, also states 
that he saw the appellant talking to the deceased before the 
incident. PW-2 heard the sound of firing few minutes later 
and then saw the deceased (who was bleeding) rushing 
towards the duty room with his hands in the air, and the 
appellant was seen firing at him from behind.  
19. Taken together, all these evidences are unassailable.  The 
case of the prosecution stands secured on these evidences.  
It is a clear case of murder. The motive for the appellant 
(admittedly the deceased was having an affair with the 
appellant’s wife), and the execution of the crime at the Police 
Station, all point towards the murder committed inside the 

16 
 
 
 
police station by the present appellant.  The one fire arm 
injury with blackening at the entry point also explains that 
the deceased was first shot from a close range.  The 
remaining injuries also correlate with the testimony of the 
eye witnesses referred above. 
20. The plea of self-defence and in the alternative the plea of 
grave and sudden provocation taken by the appellant is 
based on the theory that it was the deceased who came to 
the police station in full speed in his car thereby first hitting 
the gate of the police station and then making an attempt 
to snatch the weapon from the appellant in order to kill him.  
But these arguments do not hold any ground and most 
importantly there is not even an iota of evidence to sustain 
this bizarre line of defence.   
21. Under Section 105 of the Indian Evidence Act2, the burden 
of proof that the accused’s case falls within the general 
exception is upon the accused himself. This Court in State 
 
2 105. Burden of proving that case of accused comes within exceptions.—When a 
person is accused of any offence, the burden of proving the existence of circumstances 
bringing the case within any of the General Exceptions in the Indian Penal Code (XLV of 
1860), or within any special exception or proviso contained in any other part of the same 
Code, or in any law defining the offence, is upon him, and the Court shall presume the 
absence of such circumstances. 

17 
 
 
 
of M.P. v. Ramesh, (2005) 9 SCC 705 observed that: 
“Under 
Section 
105 
of 
the 
Indian 
Evidence 
Act, 
1872 
(in 
short 
“the 
Evidence Act”), the burden of proof is on 
the accused, who sets up the plea of self-
defence, and, in the absence of proof, it is 
not possible for the court to presume the 
truth of the plea of self-defence. The court 
shall presume the absence of such 
circumstances……Where 
the right of 
private defence is pleaded, the defence 
must be a reasonable and probable 
version satisfying the court that the harm 
caused by the accused was necessary for 
either warding off the attack or for 
forestalling 
the 
further 
reasonable 
apprehension from the side of the 
accused.” 
 
 This burden of proof though is not as onerous as the 
burden of proof beyond all reasonable doubts which is on 
the prosecution, nevertheless some degree of reasonable 
satisfaction has to be established by the defence, when this 
plea is taken. (See : Salim Zia v. State of U.P., (1979) 2 
SCC 648).           
22. In the case at hand, the defence has not been able to 
establish a case of private defence by any evidence. There is 
no evidence on this aspect and therefore this plea was 
rightly rejected by the Trial Court as well as the Appellate 
Court. 

18 
 
 
 
23. In 
fact, 
the 
plea 
of 
self-defence 
taken 
by 
the 
accused/appellant is childish to say the least, in the light of 
the facts of the case, and on the weight of the evidence of the 
prosecution. The case of the defence that the deceased 
came to the Police Station “ unarmed” to kill the appellant 
knowing very well that the appellant was armed with a 
weapon is an awkward attempt to present the deceased as 
the aggressor. It does not make any sense.  What is most 
important here is the eye-witness accounts of PW-2, PW-1, PW-
11 & PW-17, which prove that the appellant did not stop at the 
initial firing of the shot, which he had fired from a close range 
(the entry wound of gun shot with blackening).  Instead, he 
continued to spray bullets on the deceased even when he was 
trying to escape.  The eye witness accounts of four police 
personnels who were all present at the Police Station at that 
point of time, establish a case of murder beyond any reasonable 
doubt.  
24. The defence again has not even been able to discharge its 
burden by showing that it is a case of grave and sudden 
provocation, though an attempt has been made by the 
defence to bring the case under Exception I to Section 300 

19 
 
 
 
IPC. There is however, nothing on record to show that the 
deceased hit the car at the gate of the Police Station, which 
was found parked inside that Police Station with no   
scratch on its body, thus disproving that it had hit the gate 
as was the case of the defence. Moreover, all the facts which 
have been placed before the Court show that it was the 
appellant who had a motive to kill the deceased as the 
deceased was having an illicit relationship with his wife. In 
spite of best efforts by the family members of the appellant 
and the deceased, the deceased continued with this 
relationship with the wife of the appellant. This was hence 
the motive for the appellant to kill the deceased.  
25. The appellant would argue that the Act attributable to him 
would fall under Exception 1 to Section 300 of the Indian 
Penal Code, which reads as under: 
“Exception 1.—When culpable homicide is not 
murder.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the 
offender, whilst deprived of the power of self-
control by grave and sudden provocation, causes 
the death of the person who gave the provocation 
or causes the death of any other person by 
mistake or accident.  
 
The above exception is subject to the following 
provisos:— 
 
First.—That the provocation is not sought or 

20 
 
 
 
voluntarily provoked by the offender as an 
excuse for killing or doing harm to any person.  
 
Secondly.—That the provocation is not given by 
anything done in obedience to the law, or by a 
public servant in the lawful exercise of the 
powers of such public servant. 
 
Thirdly.—That the provocation is not given by 
anything done in the lawful exercise of the right 
of private defence. 
 
Explanation.—Whether the provocation was 
grave and sudden enough to prevent the offence 
from amounting to murder is a question of fact.” 
 
 
According to the defence, the death of the deceased was 
caused by the appellant when the appellant was deprived of 
his power of self-control due to grave and sudden 
provocation caused by the deceased which resulted in his 
death by accident. 
         This court has reiterated in more than one cases right 
from K.M. Nanavati v. State of Maharashtra AIR 1962 
SC 605 onwards that provocation itself is not enough to 
reduce the crime from murder to culpable homicide not 
amounting to murder. In order to convert a case of murder 
to a case of culpable homicide not amounting to murder, 
provocation must me such that would temporarily deprive 
the power of self-control of a “reasonable person”.  What has 

21 
 
 
 
also to be seen is the time gap between this alleged 
provocation and the act of homicide; the kind of weapon 
used; the number of blows, etc. These are again all questions 
of facts. There is no standard or test as to what 
reasonableness should be in these circumstances as this 
would again be a question of fact to be determined by a 
Court. Nanavati (supra) answers this question as follows: 
 
“84. Is there any standard of a reasonable man 
for the application of the doctrine of “grave and 
sudden” provocation? No abstract standard of 
reasonableness can be laid down. What a 
reasonable man will do in certain circumstances 
depends upon the customs, manners, way of 
life, traditional values etc.; in short, the cultural, 
social and emotional background of the society 
to which an accused belongs. In our vast 
country there are social groups ranging from the 
lowest to the highest state of civilization. It is 
neither possible nor desirable to lay down any 
standard with precision : it is for the court to 
decide in each case, having regard to the 
relevant circumstances. It is not necessary in 
this case to ascertain whether a reasonable 
man placed in the position of the accused would 
have lost his self-control momentarily or even 
temporarily when his wife confessed to him of 
her illicit intimacy with another, for we are 
satisfied on the evidence that the accused 
regained his self-control and killed Ahuja 
deliberately. 
 
85. The Indian law, relevant to the present 
enquiry, may be stated thus : (1) The test of 
“grave and sudden” provocation is whether a 

22 
 
 
 
reasonable man, belonging to the same class of 
society as the accused, placed in the situation 
in which the accused was placed would be so 
provoked as to lose his self-control. (2) In India, 
words and gestures may also, under certain 
circumstances, 
cause 
grave 
and 
sudden 
provocation to an accused so as to bring his act 
within the First Exception to Section 300 of the 
Indian Penal Code. (3) The mental background 
created by the previous act of the victim may be 
taken 
into 
consideration 
in 
ascertaining 
whether the subsequent act caused grave and 
sudden provocation for committing the offence. 
(4) The fatal blow should be clearly traced to the 
influence 
of 
passion 
arising 
from 
that 
provocation and not after the passion had 
cooled down by lapse of time, or otherwise 
giving room and scope for premeditation and 
calculation.” 
 
 
 
In the present case on every possible count the case is 
nothing but a case of murder.  The nature of weapon used; 
the number of gun shots fired at the deceased; the part of the 
body where gun shots are fired, all point towards the fact that 
the appellant was determined to kill the deceased.  
Ultimately, he achieved his task and made sure that the 
deceased is dead.  By no stretch of logic is it a case of any 
lesser magnitude, and definitely not culpable homicide not 
amounting to murder. 
       The facts of the present case do not even remotely make 

23 
 
 
 
out any case under Exception 1 to Section 300 of the IPC, or 
under any other Exception(s) to Section 300 of IPC. 
26. In view of the above, we are not inclined to interfere with the 
findings of the Trial Court and the High Court. Accordingly, 
this appeal is dismissed. The interim order dated 02.04.2012 
granting bail to the appellant, hereby, stands vacated and the 
appellant is hereby directed to surrender before the trial court 
within four weeks from today. A copy of this Judgment shall be 
sent to the Trial Court to ensure that the appellant surrenders 
and undergoes the remaining part of his sentence. 
 
 
…………………………..J. 
[SUDHANSHU DHULIA] 
 
 
 
..…………………………J. 
                                                        [RAJESH BINDAL] 
 
 
New Delhi  
July 3,  2024