2024 INSC 470
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 143-147 OF 2010
Commissioner of Central Excise, 
Jaipur -II                   
      … Appellant
versus
M/s Miraj Products Pvt. Ltd. 
                  ... Respondent
J  U  D  G  M  E  N  T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL DETAILS
1.
These appeals take exception to the judgment and order
dated 7th November 2008 passed by the Customs, Excise and
Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (for short, ‘the Tribunal’). The
issue involved, in short, is whether the goods sold by the
respondent-assessee are covered by Section 4 or Section 4A of
the Central Excise Act, 1944 (for short, ‘The Excise Act’).  The
proceedings  commenced  based  on the  show cause  notices
issued  to  the  respondent-assessee.   The  first  show  cause
notice issued on 22nd April 2004, pertains to a brief period in
April 2003. The second show cause notice is of 31st May 2004
Civil Appeal Nos.143-147 of 2010     
                    
Page 1 of 13
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.07.08
17:39:20 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

covering the period from May 2003 till December 2003.  By a
notification dated 1st March 2002 issued under sub-section (1)
of  Section  4A  of  the  Excise  Act,  tobacco  was  notified  by
including the same at Sr.no.24A in the Notification with effect
from 1st March 2003.  The allegations made in both the show
cause notices are similar.  The show cause notice dated 22nd
April 2004 was supplemented by an addendum dated 10th
June 2004.  The allegation against the respondent-assessee in
the show cause notices was that the assessee was packing 33
pouches of 6 gms each of chewing tobacco and one pouch of
15 gms of chewing tobacco in a larger poly pack.  It is alleged
that  MRP  (maximum  retail  price)  of  Rs.  1  per  pouch  is
mentioned on the pouches carrying a quantity of 6 gms, and
MRP of Rs. 3 was mentioned on the pouch carrying 15 gms
quantity.  It is alleged that on the larger poly pack, a weight of
213 gms and MRP of Rs. 36 was mentioned.  It is alleged in
the show cause notice that the larger poly packs are group
packages as defined in Rule 2(g) of the Standards of Weight &
Measures (Packaged Commodity) Rules, 1977 (for short, ‘the
said Rules’).  It is alleged that the group package made by the
respondent was intended for retail sale.  Further allegation in
the  show  cause  notice  is  that  the  weight  of  each  group
package exceeds 10 gms. Therefore, the group packages of the
respondent-assessee are not covered by the exemption under
Rule  34(b)  of  the  said  Rules.   Reliance  was  placed  on  a
decision of the Madras High Court in the case of M/s.Varnica
Herbs v. Central Board of Excise & Customs, New Delhi1.
1 2004 (163) ELT 160 (Madras)
Civil Appeal Nos.143-147 of 2010     
                    
Page 2 of 13

Therefore, the respondent-assessee was called upon to pay
duty on the  poly pack sold by  the  assessee in the manner
provided under Section 4A of the Excise Act.  Apart from the
differential duty, a demand was made for interest and penalty.
2.
The  respondent  replied  to  the  show  cause  notice  by
contending that 100 poly packs, each containing 33 small
pouches of 6 gms each, and one pouch of 15 gms are being
put into one HDPE bag (High-Density Polyethylene Bag).  The
quantity of 15 gms is kept in a zipper pouch, on which duty is
paid under Section 4A of the Excise Act on MRP.  A factual
contention was raised in the reply by the respondent-assessee
that it is not selling poly packs of 33 small pouches directly to
the customers.  It is stated that the assessee is clearing only
HDPE bags containing 100 poly packs, and HDPE bags are
being sold to distributors or dealers.  Therefore, the assessee
did not make a retail sale.  It is contended by the respondent
that poly packs containing 33 pouches of 6 gms quantity are
not group packages within the meaning of Rule 2(g) of the
said  Rules,  and  the  said  poly  packs  and  HDPE  bags  are
wholesale packages as defined in Rule 2(x) of the said Rules.
Therefore,  the  contention  is  that  Section  4A  will  have  no
application.  
3.
After hearing the respondent, the order-in-original was
passed by the Commissioner.  By the said order dated 19th
July 2005, the contentions raised by the respondent-assessee
were rejected,  and  the  demand  made  in  the  show  cause
notices was confirmed.  The Commissioner referred to the
Civil Appeal Nos.143-147 of 2010     
                    
Page 3 of 13

declarations made on poly pack and held that it was in terms
of Rule 16 of the said Rules, and Rule 16 is a part of Chapter
II of the said Rules, which deals with retail sales.  It was held
that a declaration on the poly packs confirms the requirement
of Rule 6 and Rule 16 of  Chapter II of the said Rules, and
therefore, poly packs were intended for retail sale.  The order
further records that the sale price was mentioned on the poly
pack, which was not the requirement of Rule 29 of the said
Rules, which  deals  with  declarations  on  the  wholesale
packages. However, the Commissioner held that the assessee's
HDPE bags, which contain 100 larger poly pack packages and
do not declare the sale price, would be  wholesale packages.
The Commissioner rejected the  respondent's contention that
the poly packs were not sold in retail by holding that whether
the manufacturer sold them in retail or not is relevant and
what is material is whether the goods were intended for retail
sale.
4.
By the impugned judgment, the Tribunal held that the
decision of the Madras High Court in the case of  Varnica
Herbs1 was not a binding precedent. The Tribunal relied upon
a decision  of this  Court  in the  case of  Commissioner of
Central  Excise,  Vapi  v.  Kraftech  Products  Inc.2.  The
Tribunal proceeded to set aside the Commissioner's order.
2 (2008) 12 SCC 321.
Civil Appeal Nos.143-147 of 2010     
                    
Page 4 of 13

SUBMISSIONS
5.
The  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  appellant
submitted  that  the  decision  of  this  Court  in  the  case  of
Commissioner of Central Excise, Vapi2, has no application
as the assessee in the said case was selling three sachets of 3
gms of hair dye in one pack.  Learned counsel pointed out
that thus the total weight of the pack was 9 gms, which was
covered  by  the  exemption  under  Section  34(b)  of  the  said
Rules.  The learned counsel pointed out that  the weight of
poly packs and HDPE bags is much more than 10 gms in the
present  case.   Learned  counsel  submitted  that  what  was
being sold by the respondent was a group package meant for
retail sale, and therefore, Section 4A was rightly applied by
the  Commissioner.  Learned  counsel  submitted  that  even
otherwise,  as  the  poly  packs  are  not  sold  by  weight  or
measure, Rule 34 (b) of the said Rules  has no application.
Learned  counsel  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  had not
considered  the  factual  position  in  this  case,  which  the
Commissioner considered in detail. Learned counsel further
submitted that one pouch of 15 gms quantity of chewable
tobacco forms part of the poly pack on which the respondent
was admittedly paying duty in accordance with Section 4A of
the Excise Act.  Learned counsel has taken us through the
relevant provisions of the said Rules. 
6.
The  learned  counsel  representing  the  respondent
supported  the  impugned  judgment  and  urged  that  the
principles  laid  down  by  this  Court  in  the  case  of
Civil Appeal Nos.143-147 of 2010     
                    
Page 5 of 13

Commissioner of Central Excise, Vapi2, will squarely apply.
It was submitted that HDPE bags containing 100 poly packs
containing  34  pouches  was  not  meant  for  retail  sale;
therefore, it cannot be treated as a group package, and it has
to be a wholesale package that is not meant for retail sale.
Learned counsel submitted that there is no need to interfere
with the impugned judgment, which takes the correct view.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
7.
It is not in dispute that the respondent is dealing with
chewing tobacco.  From 7th April 2003, the respondent started
the practice of packing together 33 pouches of 6 gms each
and one pouch of 15 gms of chewing tobacco in a larger poly
pack. The Revenue contends that as the larger poly pack has
weight and MRP printed on it, the same was a group package
intended for retail sale.  The case made out in the show cause
notices is that the poly pack contains a quantity of more than
10 gms of chewing tobacco, and therefore, exemption under
Rule 34(b) of the said Rules will not apply.  As can be seen
from Clause (b) of Rule 34 of the said Rules, the exemption
will apply to any package containing a commodity if the net
weight of the commodity is 10 gms or less and if the same is
being sold by weight.  The stand of the respondent-assessee in
reply to the show cause notices is that though the poly packs
may have MRP printed on it, it was never intended for retail
sale.  Moreover, the respondent was packing 100 poly packs
in  one  HDPE  bag,  and  the  HDPE  bags  were  sold  to
distributors.  The weight of the chewing tobacco in one poly
Civil Appeal Nos.143-147 of 2010     
                    
Page 6 of 13

pack or HDPE bag is more than 10 gms.  Therefore, Rule
34(b) of the said Rules has no application. 
8.
As  far  as  facts  are  concerned,  even  in  the  order-in-
original passed by the Commissioner, which was impugned
before the Tribunal and in particular, clause (d) of paragraph
16, it is accepted that  the respondent is packing 100 poly
pack packages in one HDPE bag.
9.
The real controversy is whether the commodity sold by
the respondent will attract Section 4A of the Excise Act.  Sub-
section (1) of Section 4A of the Excise Act reads thus: 
“Section 4A.  Valuation  of  excisable
goods with reference to retail sale price.
– 
(1)  The  Central  Government  may,  by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify
any  goods,  in  relation  to  which  it  is
required,  under  the  provisions  of  the
Standards of Weights and Measure (PC)
Rules,  1976  (60  of  1976) or  the  rules
made thereunder or under any other law
for the time being in force, to declare on
the package thereof the retail sale price
of such goods, to which the provisions of
sub-section (2) shall apply.”
                      (emphasis added)
10.
In  the  facts  of  the  case,  chewable  tobacco  has  been
notified under sub-section (1) of Section 4A. The question is
whether the provisions of the said Rules framed under the
Standards of Weights and Measure (PC) Rules, 1977, require a
declaration of retail sale on the packages of the respondent.
Civil Appeal Nos.143-147 of 2010     
                    
Page 7 of 13

In short, the controversy is whether the packages made by the
respondent-assessee are such that under the said Rules, there
is a requirement to declare the retail price of the goods on the
packages. 
11.
Now, we turn to the said Rules.  Chapter II of the said
Rules  deals  with  the  provisions  applicable  to  packages
intended for retail sale.  Retail sale is defined in Rule 2(q) of
the said Rules, which reads thus: 
“(q) “retail  sale” in  relation  to  a
commodity, means the sale, distribution
or delivery of such commodity through
retail  sales  agencies  or  other
instrumentalities for consumption by an
individual or group of individuals or any
other consumer;”
Therefore, to attract the definition of retail sale, a commodity
has to be sold, distributed, or delivered for consumption by an
individual,  a group  of  individuals,  or  any  other  consumer.
Thus, the sale or distribution of a commodity to a dealer who,
in turn, sells the commodity to retail dealers will not be a
retail sale.
12.
Rule 2(g) defines group package which reads thus: 
"2(g) 
“group  package” 
means  a
package  intended  for  retail  sale,
containing  two  or  more  individual
packages,  or  individual  pieces,  of
similar,  but  not  identical  (whether  in
quantity or size), commodities; 
Explanation.-  Commodities  which  are
generally the same but differ in weight,
Civil Appeal Nos.143-147 of 2010     
                    
Page 8 of 13

measure  or  volume,  appearance  or
quality  are  similar  but  not  identical
commodities;”
Therefore, a package can become a group package, provided it
is intended for retail sale. In this case, there is no dispute that
the respondent's poly packs and HDPE bags contain more
than 2 individual packages of similar commodities but are not
identical in quantity.  The question is whether the package
made by the respondent was intended for retail sale.  
13.
Rule 2(x) of the said Rule defines “wholesale package”,
which reads thus: 
“(x)  “wholesale  package” means  a
package containing- 
(i) a number of retail packages, where
such  first  mentioned  package  is
intended  for  sale,  distribution  or
delivery to an intermediary and is not
intended  for  sale  direct  to  a  single
consumer; or
(ii) a commodity sold to an intermediary
in bulk to enable such intermediary to
sell,  distribute  or  deliver  such
commodity to the consumer in smaller
quantities; or 
(iii)  packages  containing  ten  or  more
than ten retail packages provided that
the  retail  packages  are  labelled  as
required under the rules." 
14.
Now, we turn to the order-in-original and the findings
recorded therein.  The Commissioner held that Rules 6 and 16
Civil Appeal Nos.143-147 of 2010     
                    
Page 9 of 13

form a part of Chapter II of the said Rules and, therefore,
apply  to  the  packages  intended  for  retail  sale.  The
Commissioner  found  that  the  poly  packs  contained a
declaration  in  terms  of  both  Rule  6  and  Rule  16.   The
Commissioner referred to the format of declaration to be made
under Rule 29, which is a part of Chapter IV of the said Rules,
which did not apply to packages intended for retail sale.  The
Commissioner held that Rule 29 does not require a declaration
of sale price on the wholesale package.  The  Commissioner
found  that  the  poly  pack  containing  33  plus  one  small
packages contained a declaration of the price.  Therefore, the
Commissioner held that the poly packs were intended for retail
sale.  Otherwise, there was no reason to mention MRP on the
poly packs. The Commissioner held that the intention to make
retail sale of the poly packs was clear, and, therefore, whether
poly packs were sold by way of retail sale was irrelevant. 
15.
As noted earlier, in view of sub-section (1) of Section 4A,
the question is whether there is any requirement in the said
Rules to declare the retail sale price of the commodity on the
package.  What is relevant is whether the package is of such
nature  that attracts any of the provisions of the said Rules,
which mandatorily require the mention of retail price on the
package.  In case of a package that does not attract provisions
of the said Rules regarding mentioning the retail price, even if
the retail price is mentioned on the package, that itself will not
attract sub-section (1) of Section 4A of the Excise Act.
Civil Appeal Nos.143-147 of 2010     
                    
Page 10 of 13

16.
However, on facts, we may not be required to deal with
the issue of whether a poly pack containing 33 plus one small
package was intended for retail sale. The reason is that the
specific case made out by the respondent in reply to the show
cause notices was that the respondent was selling HDPE bags
containing  100  poly  packs containing  33 plus one smaller
pack has not been rejected by the Commissioner.  In fact, the
Commissioner seems to have accepted the contention, as seen
from Clause (d) of paragraph 16 of the order-in-original.  In
clause (d), the Commissioner held thus: 
“(d) Further  the  intentions  of  the
assessee that HDPE bag is a wholesale
package  and  the  larger  polypack
packages are group packages intended
for retail sale is also expressed from the
fact that there is no requirement under
Rule 29 of the Standards of Weights &
Measures  (Packaged  Commodities),
Rules, 1977 of mentioning sale price or
unit  sale  price  or  the  MRP  on  a
wholesale package whereas their larger
polypack
 package  
contains
 
the
declaration  "MAX  UNIT  SALE  PRICE"
and they are not declaring sale price on
HDPE bag (it has also been admitted by
them in the reply to Show Cause Notice
that  their  HDPE  bag  is  a  wholesale
package),  therefore,  this  larger  polypack
package containing the declaration "MAX
UNIT SALE PRICE" cannot be considered
as  a  wholesale  package  but  can  be
considered only a group package intended
for retail sale. Only the HDPE bag of the
assessee,  which  contains  100  larger
polypack  packages  and  does  not
Civil Appeal Nos.143-147 of 2010     
                    
Page 11 of 13

contain declaration of sale price, would
be a wholesale package.”
                                                                       (emphasis added)
17.
In so many words, the Commissioner held that an HDPE
bag containing 100 poly packs does not contain a declaration
of selling price and therefore, it would be a wholesale package.
There is no finding recorded that what is distributed or sold by
the respondent is a poly pack containing 33 plus one small
pack. The respondent’s case that 100 poly pack packages are
being  put  in  one  HDPE  bag  has  been  accepted  by  the
Commissioner.   Therefore,  the  respondent  is  selling  HDPE
bags containing 100 poly packs each to the distributors and
dealers.  The said Rules do not require the display of price on
such HDPE bags.  Even assuming that 100 poly packs were
retail packages, HDPE bags would be covered by the definition
of ‘wholesale package’ as defined in clause (iii) of Rule 2(x) of
the said Rules.  Thus, the HDPE bags are not group packages
within the meaning of Rule 2(g).
18.
Though  the  impugned  judgment  is  not  satisfactorily
worded,  for  the  reasons  which  were  recorded  above,  the
ultimate conclusion recorded in the impugned judgment that
Section 4A(1) of the Excise Act was not applicable to the goods
subject matter of the show cause notices, cannot be faulted
with.    Hence,  there  is  no  reason  to  interfere  with  the
impugned judgment.
Civil Appeal Nos.143-147 of 2010     
                    
Page 12 of 13

19.
Accordingly, the appeals are dismissed with no order as
to costs.
….…………………….J.
(Abhay S. Oka)
…..…………………...J.
(Pankaj Mithal)
New Delhi;
July 08, 2024.
Civil Appeal Nos.143-147 of 2010     
                    
Page 13 of 13