2024 INSC 475
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 3524 OF 2023
LAL MOHAMMAD MANJUR ANSARI             …APPELLANT
VERSUS
THE STATE OF GUJRAT
        …RESPONDENT
J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.
The   appellant­accused   has   been   convicted   for   the
offence  punishable  under  Section  302  of  the  Indian  Penal
Code (for short, ‘IPC’) by the Sessions Court. By the impugned
judgment,   the  High   Court   has   confirmed   the   appellant's
conviction. The appellant has been sentenced to undergo life
imprisonment. 
FACTUAL ASPECT
2.
The appellant raised a plea of juvenility. By the order
dated 10th April 2023, this Court directed the Trial Court to
hold an inquiry into the plea of juvenility. Accordingly, an
order was made by the learned Trial Judge on 8th April 2023.
The learned Trial Judge held that the appellant was not a
juvenile in conflict with the law on the date of the commission
             Criminal Appeal No. 3524 of 2023
Page 1 of 12
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.07.08
17:55:15 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

of the offence. After that, leave was granted, and the appeal
was heard on merits. 
3.
The   incident  occurred  on   6th  September   2004.   The
accused was staying in room no. 3 rented to him by PW­3 ­
Alimuddin Amiruddin Shaikh. According to the prosecution,
the   deceased   –   Mohmed   Akhtar   Gafur   Ansari,   was   also
staying in the room no. 3, along with the appellant. There was
a dispute between them about playing music. The dispute led
to   an   altercation   in   which   the   appellant   attacked   the
deceased. The injuries sustained by the deceased caused his
death.    The  prosecution case is based  on  the evidence of
eyewitnesses PW­3 to PW­9, extra­judicial confession by the
appellant   made   to   PW­19   ­   Mohammad   Afroz   and   dying
declaration made by the deceased to PW­24 ­ Mohd. Rafiq.
Though PW­3 to PW­9 were declared hostile, the Trial Court
and   High   Court   have   relied   on   certain   parts   of   their
testimony. The High Court has believed the testimony of PW­
19 and PW­24.
SUBMISSIONS
4.
The   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the   appellant   has
taken us through the testimony of hostile eyewitnesses. By
pointing out the findings of the High Court, he submitted
that, firstly, certain statements made by the eyewitnesses out
of   context   could   not   be   relied   upon   by   the   prosecution.
Secondly,   the   testimony   of   the   said   witnesses   does   not
support the prosecution. Pointing out the evidence of PW­19,
he   submitted   that   according   to   the   witness,   he   was   the
             Criminal Appeal No. 3524 of 2023
Page 2 of 12

appellant's employer. According to him, the appellant made a
phone call to him at 3.30 p.m. on the date of the incident and
informed   him   that   he   had   murdered   his   roommate.   He
pointed out that no investigation has been made about the
phone from which this call was made. Moreover, he pointed
out that though PW­19 claims that he informed PSI Mishra of
Limbayat Police Station about the confession and called him
to Central Bus Station, PSI Mishra has not been examined as
a witness. He pointed out that according to the prosecution’s
case,   even   at   Central   Bus   Sation,   the   appellant   allegedly
made the second extra­judicial confession in the presence of
PSI Mishra. Therefore, the omission to examine PSI Mishra
becomes fatal to the prosecution case. He pointed out that the
prosecution case was that it was PSI Mishra who took the
appellant   into   custody   and   produced   before   PW­25.   The
version   of   PW­25,   the   Investigating   Officer,   appears   to   be
doubtful.   He   submitted   that   the   entire   prosecution   case
cannot be believed. 
5.
The learned counsel appearing for the State submitted
that   though   the   eyewitnesses   were   declared   hostile,   their
testimony cannot be entirely discarded. She submitted that
the evidence of the said witnesses brings on record the fact
that at the time of the murder of the deceased, he, along with
the  appellant,  were  staying   together  in  room  no.  3  of  the
building owned by PW­3. Learned counsel pointed out the
evidence   of   PW­4   (Salehabanu).   In   the   cross­examination
made by the learned public prosecutor, the witness stated
that she first saw the appellant running towards the stairs
             Criminal Appeal No. 3524 of 2023
Page 3 of 12

from the lobby, and immediately after that, the deceased was
found in a heavily bleeding condition. She pointed out that
the  witness's   evidence  proved   that   the   appellant   and   the
deceased were quarrelling. The witness heard shouts of “save,
save” from the appellant's room. She also pointed out that
even the evidence of PW­7 ­ Najma brings on record that she
had seen the deceased bleeding in the gallery of the building
and was shouting “save, save” at that time. The witness saw
the appellant coming down from the building and was seen
cleaning blood stains from his shirt. She pointed out that
even the evidence of PW­14 – Sagufta Parvin shows that the
deceased was murdered in room no. 3 where the deceased,
along with the appellant, were staying together. She further
submitted   that   PW­19   was   the   appellant's   employer;
therefore, it was natural that the appellant would confide with
his employer about his guilt. She submitted that there is no
reason to discard the testimony of PW­19, which proves extra­
judicial confession. Similarly, there is no reason to discard
the testimony of PW­24 before whom a dying declaration was
made by the deceased that the appellant murdered him. The
learned counsel submitted that there is no reason to interfere
with   the   impugned   judgments,   which   contain   elaborate
findings   recorded   after   making   a   detailed   analysis   of   the
evidence of the prosecution witnesses. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
6.
We   have   minutely   scanned   the   testimony   of   the
prosecution witnesses. Firstly, we will deal with evidence of
             Criminal Appeal No. 3524 of 2023
Page 4 of 12

PW­19, who claims that the deceased made an extra­judicial
confession before him. Even though this witness was declared
hostile, the prosecution relied upon a part of his testimony.
We are summarising the statements made by PW­19 in his
examination­in­chief, in his cross­examination made by the
learned public prosecutor after he was declared hostile and in
the cross­examination made by the learned counsel appearing
for the appellant. The summary of his version is as follows: 
a) The appellant worked in his textile store for five
months in 2004 till the first week of September
2004;
b) In September 2004, he received a call from the
appellant around 3.30 p.m. and on the phone, the
appellant   informed   him   that   he   had   killed   his
room partner;
c) The   appellant   called   PW­19   to   the   Central   Bus
Station near Surat Railway Station;
d) Thereafter,   PW­19   made   a   phone   call   to   PSI
Mishra of Limbayat Police Station and called him
to the Central Bus Station;
e) PSI Mishra came to the Central Bus Station, where
they   met   the   appellant.   The   appellant   again
reiterated that there was a quarrel between him
and his room partner over playing a tape recorder,
and that he had murdered his room partner;
             Criminal Appeal No. 3524 of 2023
Page 5 of 12

f) PW­19 stated that though the appellant had told
him the name of the person who was murdered, he
was unable to recollect the name;
g) In   the   cross­examination   by   the   learned   public
prosecutor, he was confronted with the relevant
part of his statement recorded under Section 161
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short,
‘CrPC’). He accepted of having made the statement.
He stated that the appellant had told him that he
had murdered Mohmed Akhtar Gafur Ansari;
h) In the cross­examination made by learned counsel
appearing   for   the   appellant,   he   stated   that   PSI
Mishra   took   the   appellant   with   him,   and   there
were two or three policemen with him;
i) He  did  not  remember  whether he stated  to  the
police the phone number from which he made a
phone call to PSI Mishra; and
j) He admitted that he did not disclose  the phone
number from which the appellant called him.
7.
The normal rule of human conduct is that a person
would confess the commission of a serious crime to a person
in whom he has implicit faith. The appellant had worked in
PW­19’s shop only for five months in 2004. The appellant was
otherwise not known to PW­19.   Therefore, it is unnatural
that the appellant would call the deceased on the phone and
confess. Moreover, PW­19 stated that the appellant called him
             Criminal Appeal No. 3524 of 2023
Page 6 of 12

to the Central Bus Station after confessing on the phone.
Even   this   conduct   is   very   unnatural.  Furthermore,  PW­19
admittedly   did   not   disclose   to   the   police   the   telephone
number   from   which   he   allegedly   received   a   call   from   the
appellant.   As   can   be   seen   from   the   testimony   of   PW­25,
Investigating Officer, no investigation was made to ascertain
the phone number on which PW­19 received a call from the
appellant and the phone number from which PW­19 called
PSI Mishra.   It was necessary for the prosecution to collect
evidence   on   these   aspects   and   place   it   before   the   Court.
Though PW­19 stated that the appellant again made extra­
judicial confession at the Central Bus Station in the presence
of PSI Mishra, the prosecution has not examined PSI Mishra
as a witness. According to the testimony of PW­25, statement
of PSI Mishra was not recorded during the investigation.  In
any   event,   the   alleged   confession   made   by   the   appellant
before PSI Mishra cannot be proved against the appellant in
view of Section 25 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Hence,
the prosecution's evidence regarding extra­judicial confession
cannot be believed.
8.
PW­19 stated that  PSI Mishra and two to three other
constables took the appellant away. Thus, it was PSI Mishra
who took the appellant into custody. Hence, PSI Mishra was a
crucial witness. A vital prosecution witness has been withheld
from the Court. Nothing is placed on record to show that PSI
Mishra made any official record to show that he had taken the
appellant   into   custody.   PW­25,   the   Investigating   Officer,
stated   that   PSI   Mishra   and   other   police   personnel   were
             Criminal Appeal No. 3524 of 2023
Page 7 of 12

tracing the appellant in the market as he was working there.
He further  noted  that PSI Mishra produced the appellant at
the police station and was shown as arrested at 9.30 p.m. on
that day. Thus, PW­25 did not state that PSI Mishra went to
the Central Bus Station upon receiving a phone call from PW­
19, and that he nabbed the appellant at the Bus Station. The
version   of   PW­25   is  entirely  different.   In   the   cross­
examination,   PW­25   specifically   admitted   that   he   did   not
record the statement of PSI Mishra. He stated that he arrested
the appellant when PSI Mishra produced him. Further, in the
cross­examination, PW­25 stated that in the panchnama of
arrest,   it   is   not   mentioned   that   PSI   Mishra   produced   the
appellant before him. He stated that he had no information
about the time, in whose presence and from which place PSI
Mishra arrested the appellant. In further cross­examination,
he stated that he was not aware that PSI Mishra met the
appellant   at   Central   Bus   Station   in   the   presence   of   the
appellant’s   employer.   He   denied   that   PSI   Mishra   kept   the
appellant in custody and produced the appellant before him.
Thus, it is impossible to believe the testimony of PW­19 that
he conveyed the  appellant's extra­judicial confession  to PSI
Mishra.  Moreover, the manner in which the appellant was
taken into custody becomes highly suspicious as it is not even
recorded in the arrest panchnama that  PSI Mishra arrested
the appellant. Apart from the fact that it is very difficult to
believe that the appellant confessed before PW­19, the further
part of the testimony of PW­19 makes his testimony extremely
doubtful as the prosecution has withheld PSI Mishra from the
             Criminal Appeal No. 3524 of 2023
Page 8 of 12

Court. Therefore, it is not possible to rely upon the evidence of
PW­19.
9.
Now, we come to the theory of dying declaration made
by the deceased before PW­24. In the examination­in­chief,
PW­24 stated that after he heard that his friend (deceased)
was   injured,   he   rushed   to   the   site   and   found   that   the
deceased was fully covered in blood, and he disclosed that the
appellant   was   the   author   of   the   injuries.   In   the   cross­
examination   by   the   learned   public   prosecutor,   he   denied
having made such a statement before the police. In the cross­
examination by the learned public prosecutor, the witness
was   confronted   with   his   prior   statement   recorded   by   the
police. The relevant part of the cross­examination reads thus: 
“Such has not happened and been dictated
by   me   in   my   statement   before   police   that,
‘Therefore,   when   I   was   coming   downstairs,   I
saw Lal Mohammad, staying with Mohammad
Akhtar, running on the road towards Limbayat
Police Station.
…Therefore,   I   called   rickshaw   and   landlord
Alimuddin   Shaikh   and   I   took   Mohammad
Akhtar for treatment in the rickshaw and at
that   time,   I   saw   Mohammad   Akhtar   had
sustained injuries on throat and head and it
was   bleeding   continuously.   At   that   time,   I
asked  Mohammad   Akhtar  and   he   told   me,   I
had   an   altercation   and   quarrel   with   Lal
Mohammad, staying with me, regarding playing
a tape recorder and therefore, Lal Mohammad
caused injuries to me using a knife and ran
away.”
             Criminal Appeal No. 3524 of 2023
Page 9 of 12

…………………………………………………………..”
Thus, the witness stated that he did not dictate to the police
the statement with which he was confronted. In the cross­
examination by the advocate for the appellant, he admitted
that when he informed Limbayat Police Station, a policeman
came in an auto­rickshaw. The policeman, along with two or
three other persons, brought the deceased down and put him
in the auto­rickshaw. The police personnel and the other two
to three persons were not examined as witnesses. He stated
that the deceased was unconscious at that time.   So, when
the deceased was put in the auto­rickshaw, he was not in a
position to speak.
10.
At this stage, we may also refer to the testimony of PW­
3, who was the complainant and landlord of the appellant. He
stated that when he went to the place where the deceased was
lying in a heavily bleeding condition, the deceased did not
disclose   anything   to   him,   and   there   was   no   conversation
when the deceased was taken by him by an auto­rickshaw to
the hospital. Therefore, the prosecution story regarding the
dying declaration made to PW­24 does not inspire confidence
at all. 
11.
Now, we turn to the evidence of the eyewitnesses who
were declared hostile.  PW­3, according  to the  prosecution,
was  the witness before whom  the deceased made  a  dying
declaration while he was being carried in an auto­rickshaw.
PW­3 did not support the prosecution on this aspect, and PW­
24   claimed   that   when   the   deceased   was   put   in   an   auto­
             Criminal Appeal No. 3524 of 2023
Page 10 of 12

rickshaw, he was not conscious. PW­3 stated that he heard a
quarrel between the appellant and the deceased. When the
witness was confronted with his police statement in the cross­
examination, he denied having made such a statement.   PW­
4 was declared as hostile.   When he was confronted with
relevant part of his police statement, he denied to have made
the statement. 
12.
The High Court has relied upon the testimony of PW­7,
who   was   again   declared   hostile.   In   the   cross­examination
made   by   the   public   prosecutor,   PW­7   accepted   that   she
informed the police that she saw the appellant going down,
and   while   going   down,   he   was   cleaning   the   blood   off   his
clothes.   However,   in   the   cross­examination   made   by   the
advocate for the accused, she stated that except for seeing the
deceased in injured condition, she had not seen anything else
and that she was not aware of the persons who were involved
in the incident. 
13.
The High Court held that the evidence of PW­9 Kalu
Shaikh,   another   hostile   witness,   proves   the   appellant's
presence at the time of the incident. In cross­examination by
the advocate for the accused, PW­9 stated that he did not
know the appellant and the deceased before the incident. He
stated that he was unable to identify the appellant. He stated
that   except   for   hearing   the   shouts   “save,   save,”   he   knew
nothing. 
             Criminal Appeal No. 3524 of 2023
Page 11 of 12

14.
Therefore, after having carefully perused the evidence of
the hostile prosecution witnesses (PW­3 to PW­9), we find that
there is nothing in the evidence which could be relied upon by
the prosecution for connecting the appellant with the murder
of the deceased. 
15.
Thus, the appellant's conviction cannot be sustained for
the above reasons. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. The
conviction and sentence of the appellant  are set aside, and
the appellant is acquitted of the offence alleged against him in
Sessions Case No. 80 of 2005, decided by the 3rd Fast Track
Court, Surat arising out of CR No. I/142/2004 of Limbayat
Police Station.  The appellant shall be set at liberty unless he
is required to be detained in connection with any other case.
……………………..J.
(Abhay S. Oka)
……………………..J.
(Ujjal Bhuyan)
New Delhi;
July 08, 2024
             Criminal Appeal No. 3524 of 2023
Page 12 of 12