2024 INSC 485
1 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3780-3781 OF 2020 
 
SHASHIDHAR AND OTHERS 
                                       …APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
ASHWINI UMA MATHAD AND ANOTHER                       …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
S.V.N. BHATTI, J. 
 
1. 
These Civil Appeals are filed against the judgment dated 16.10.2019 in 
R.F.A. No.3052 of 2010 and Cross-objection No. 103 of 2011, on the file of the 
High Court of Karnataka, Dharwad Bench. 
2. 
The Respondents filed O.S. No.73 of 2004 in the Court of the Additional 
Civil Judge, Hubli, for partition of suit properties and allot half of one-third to 
each of the Respondents in all the suit properties. The suit properties are stated 
thus: 
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2024.07.09
10:02:10 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
2 
 
Sl. No. 
Sy. No./CTS No. & 
Ward No. 
Extent 
Village 
Remarks 
1.  
CTS No.290 
- 
Mantur 
Residential 
2.  
CTS No.1108  Ward 
No.III1 
87 Sq. 
Yds. 
Hubli 
-do- 
3.  
CTS No.92A 5A, 
Ward No.III 
616.2/- Hubli 
-do- 
4.  
CTS No.92A 5A, 
Ward No.III 
200.2/- Hosur 
Hubli 
-do- 
5.  
Block No.168/4 
13A-
03 Gs. 
Shiraguppi 
Bhandlwad 
Village, 
Tq.Hubli 
Agricultural 
land 
 
 
3. 
The family genealogy of the parties is reproduced hereunder: 
 
 
 
1 Sl. No. 2 depicts one survey number and a small extent of 87. sq. yds. But the parties admit 
that Sl. No. 2 covers more than one survey number as detailed in the judgment of the Trial 
Court. 

 
 
3 
4. 
The Respondents are the daughters of Appellant No. 1 through his first 
wife, Uma. It is an admitted case that Appellant No. 1 and the said Uma got 
divorced, and thereafter, Appellant No. 1 married Appellant No. 2.  Appellant 
Nos. 3 and 4 are the daughters of Appellant Nos. 1 and 2. The case of the 
Respondents is that the parties to the suit constitute a Hindu coparcenary, and 
the suit properties are held by the coparcenary. Therefore, the Respondents, 
being coparceners, are entitled to a share in the suit properties. The demand of 
the Respondents for the partition of ancestral properties made to Appellant No. 
1 either has been postponed or avoided. Therefore, the Respondents, by filing 
O.S. No.73/2004, claimed half of the one-third share in the suit properties and 
prayed for passing a preliminary decree to that effect. Defendant No. 1 
contested the suit for partition. Among other things, the objections to the claim 
for partition are that Appellant No. 1, while admitting the paternity of the 
Respondents, joins the issue of whether the suit properties are ancestral 
properties and whether the Respondents have a share in it. The Defendant No. 
1 admits that Sl. Nos. 1 and 5 alone are ancestral properties. The propositus 
died on 21.07.1991, leaving Appellant Nos. 1 to 3 and the propositus’s daughter, 
Rajeshwari, as heirs.  On the demise of the propositus, the property covered by 
Sl. Nos. 1 and 5 are notionally partitioned into three shares. Appellant No. 1, his 
mother and his sister are entitled to one share each. Appellant No. 1, either by 
gift deed or will executed by his siblings, acquired the share inherited by them 
from the common propositus. Therefore, the properties/shares acquired by 

 
 
4 
Appellant No. 1 by way of gift, will, etc., do not belong to or become coparcenary 
property in which the Respondents can claim a share. In other words, the 
admissible share is to be worked out in the one-third share inherited by 
Appellant No. 1 in the notional partition of Sl. Nos. 1 and 5. The property 
described in Sl. No. 4 in the schedule is the self-acquired property of Appellant 
No. 2, having received the said property from his sister, Rajeshwari. The 
property in Sl. No. 2 belongs to the paternal aunt of the propositus, and the 
paternal aunt gifted the property in favour of the propositus. The propositus, in 
turn, gifted the property in favour of his daughter, Rajeshwari, who died on 
18.02.2003, and before her demise, Rajeshwari bequeathed the property in Sl. 
No. 2 in favour of Appellant No. 1. The claim of the Respondents for a share in 
Sl. No. 2, as coparcenary property, is misconceived and untenable.   
5. 
The Trial Court, on a full-fledged trial, decreed the suit in part and granted 
a preliminary decree as follows: 
    “The suit of plaintiffs is decreed in part with costs. 
     The plaintiffs are entitled for partition and separate possession of 
their 1/6th share each in the properties bearing CTS No.290, land block 
no.168/4, CTS No.92A5A and CTS No.92A5B. So also they are 
entitled for 1/10th shares each in the properties bearing CTS No.1100 
to 1105, 1108, 1098 and 1099. 
    The partition in the landed properties has to be effected under 
section 54 of C.P.C. and in other properties the division has to be 
made through court commissioner. 
    Draw preliminary decree accordingly”. 
 
6. 
The judgment and the decree of the Trial Court have been questioned by 
both sides, thus resulting in the filing of R.F.A. No. 3052 of 2010 at the instance 
of Appellants herein, and R.F.A Cross-objection No.103 of 2011 at the instance 

 
 
5 
of the Respondents. The High Court, through the impugned judgment, modified 
the judgment and decree of the Trial Court as follows: 
“i) The plaintiffs are entitled to 1/3rd share each in 5/6th share in the 
suit properties bearing CTS No.290 and Block No.168/4. 
ii) The plaintiffs are entitled to 1/3rd share each out of 1/3rd share of 
defendant 
No.1 
in 
properties 
bearing  
CTS Nos.1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, 1104, 1105, 1106, 1098 and 
1099. 
iii) The plaintiffs are also entitled to 1/9th share each  
in the properties bearing CTS No.92A5A and CTS No.92A5B. 
iv) The plaintiffs are also held entitled to mesne profits”. 
 
Hence, these Civil Appeals. 
7. 
By the judgment dated 06.12.2012, at the first instance, the High Court 
modified the judgment dated 10.02.2010 of the Trial Court. The Appellant filed 
Civil Appeal No. 324 of 2015 in this Court challenging the judgment dated 
06.12.2012 of the High Court of Karnataka. By the judgment dated 13.01.2015, 
this Court allowed the appeal and remanded the matter to the High Court for 
adjudication of Regular First Appeal and the cross-objections. 
8. 
We have heard the Learned Senior Counsel, Shri Basava Prabhu S. Patil 
and Shri S. N. Bhatt, for the parties and perused the record. 
9. 
Considering the arguments on both sides, we find it convenient to decide 
the Civil Appeals on the entitlement to a share in the suit property.   
10. 
Shri Basava Prabhu S. Patil, Learned Senior Counsel for the Appellants, 
contends that the Respondents are entitled to a share in Sl. Nos. 1 and 5 of the 

 
 
6 
suit schedule. However, the share claimed by the Respondents is more than 
what they are entitled to in law. The propositus died in 1991, leaving behind him 
Appellant No. 1, his wife Shantakka and daughter Gayatri, who are arrayed as 
Defendant Nos. 2 and 3 in the Suit. The mother and sisters of Appellant No. 1 
died between 2003 and 2005. Upon notional partition, the share they derived in 
the estate of Basavanthaiah was either gifted or bequeathed in favour of 
Appellant No. 1. There is a need for drawing a subtle distinction between the 
one-third share Appellant No. 1 succeeded by devolution and the share of the 
property Appellant No. 1 has derived from his mother and sisters in the family 
property. Therefore, claiming partition in the property succeeded by Appellant 
No. 1, either intestate or testate, is illegal. Thus, the judgment of the Appellate 
Court, to the extent of granting an enhanced share to the Respondents, is 
illegal. Adverting to suit schedule item-wise, it is argued that Sl. No. 2 was not 
part of the ancestral property held by the coparcenary headed by the late 
Basavanthaiah. The propositus got the property by way of a gift from his sister. 
Therefore, at the first instance, the said property was the separate/self-acquired 
property of the propositus, who had validly executed deeds in favour of his 
wife/daughter, who, in turn, has transferred the right to Appellant No. 1.  
Appellant No. 1, therefore, is the exclusive owner, and in the absence of 
pleading and proof on Sl. No. 2 as coparcenary, the share claimed is illegal and 
untenable. The findings of the Appellate Court, to the extent of including Sl. No. 
2, for passing a preliminary decree in favour of the Respondents, are liable to 

 
 
7 
be set aside. It is, at the cost of repetition, narrated that Sl. No. 2, in the table 
(supra), refers to one survey number. The Counsel appearing for both sides 
states that the said item has more than one survey number, and there is no 
dispute between the parties on the number of properties covered by Sl. No. 2. 
The matter can be proceeded with by accepting the position set out in the 
judgment of the Trial Court. 
11. 
Sri S.N. Bhatt contends that the Respondents, to the extent required by 
law, have pleaded and proved that Sl. No. 2 stood mutated in revenue records 
in the name of the propositus. The propositus was at the helm of affairs, and, 
therefore, being the karta of the family, it cannot be gainsaid that the properties 
in Sl. No. 2 are self-acquired properties of the propositus. 
12. 
The crux of consideration is Sl. No. 2 is whether the properties, more fully 
described by the Trial Court, form part of ancestral property held by coparcenary 
or are, from the beginning, separate and self-acquired property of the propositus 
and his successors-in-interest by deed of transfer. 
13. 
We have taken note and examined the stand taken in the plaint and the 
reply given by the Appellants in the written statement. In our view, the plaint has 
made a sweeping averment on all the properties described in the suit schedule, 
including those covered by Sl. No. 2 in the table (supra). Assuming that a 
coparcenary with ancestral property existed between the parties, the properties 
covered by Sl. No. 2, whether can be included as forming part of the ancestral 
property is the question. The Respondents desire to extend the flair of ancestral 

 
 
8 
property to Sl. No. 2. We consider that the plaint averments are inadequate on 
this behalf. There is no reply or rejoinder to the categorical stand taken by 
Appellant No. 1 vis-à-vis Sl. No. 2 in the table. The flow of title finally into the 
hands of Appellant No. 1 would clearly show that the properties covered by Sl. 
No. 2 cannot be treated as coparcenary property. Therefore, in our view, 
directing division of Sl. No. 2, by preliminary decree, is illegal and unsustainable 
in fact and law. We are going by the first principle and consideration in a dispute. 
Therefore, for the above reasons and discussion, we hold that Sl. No. 2, 
described in detail in the operative portion of the judgment of the Trial Court, is 
not available for partition and, accordingly, must be excluded from the 
preliminary decree impugned in the Civil Appeals. 
14. 
The Appellants challenged the inclusion of Sl. Nos. 3 and 4 in the 
preliminary decree on the grounds that these two serial numbers do not form 
part of the coparcenary and, therefore, need to be excluded. 
15. 
We refer to the findings recorded by the Trial Court in Paragraph 18, which 
read as under:  
“18. The defendant no.4 has not produced any registered sale deed of 
CTS No.92A5B standing in the name of defendant no.1 to show that 
this property is the self-acquired property of the defendant No.1. Even 
all the defendants have not produced any sale deed of these two 
properties either standing in the name of the defendant No.1 or in the 
name of the defendant no.2. The defendants are claiming exclusive title 
over these properties and therefore, the title deeds are necessary and 
those have to be proved in accountancy with law, which are not 
produced. In Ex.D.8 the name of the defendant No.4 is appearing on 
the basis of gift deed executed by the defendant no.2 in her favour of 
the year 2005 during pendency of this suit to the extent of 31 feet and 
the name of the defendant no.1 is appearing on the basis of the will 

 
 
9 
deed executed by Gayatri and Rajeshwari. Similar entries are made in 
Ex.D.12 CTS No.92A5B. No revenue records have been produced by 
either of the parties to show that previously these two properties are 
standing in the name of the defendant No.2 alone. These revenue 
entries effected during the pendency of the suit will not prove that these 
two properties are self-acquired properties either of the defendant no.1 
or of the defendant no.2. Basing on these entries, the defendant no.2 
executed the gift deed at Ex.D.16 on 4.5.2005 in the name of defendant 
no.4 gifting the property measuring 31 feet x 42 feet in CTS No.92A/5/7. 
This gift is based on revenue entries and in the absence of absolute 
title of the defendant no.2 over these properties in cannot be held that 
the done has acquired the title over the part of the property in CTS 
No.92A5A and CTS No.92A5B, Absolutely there is no documentary 
evidence to prove the self-acquisition of these properties by the 
defendant No.1 or by the defendant No.2”. 
Paragraphs 22 and 23 of the Trial Court judgement are equally useful 
and are excerpted hereunder: 
“22.  The defendant no.4 has taken a plea that the defendant no.2 who 
was holding CTS No. 92A5A, has gifted her share in favour of the 
defendant no.4 through gift deed produced at Ex.D.17 dated 4.5.2005. 
She has also taken a contention that part of CTS.No.92A5A has been 
gifted to her by the defendant no.2 through gift deed at Ex.D.16. 
23.  First of all the defendants have failed to prove that CTS No.92A5A 
shown in Ex.D.16 Gift deed was exclusively belonging to the defendant 
no.2. Now the court has to see whether the primary evidence at 
Ex.D.16 and D.17 about the gift made by the defendant no.2 in favour 
of the defendant no.4 have been proved in accordance with law. The 
done under these gift deeds that is the defendant no.4 has not entered 
into witness box. These gift deeds are required compulsory attestation 
as per section 12 of transfer of property act and therefore to prove these 
deeds examination of attesting witness as required under section 68 of 
Evidence Act is must. But the defendants have not examined any of 
the attesting witnesses to Ex.D.16 and D.17. It is not the case of the 
defendants that none of the attesting witnesses are available for 
examination. Even the defendants have not proved that the signatures 
of attesting witnesses shown in Ex.D.16 and 17 are in their handwriting. 
So non-examination of attesting witnesses as required under section 
68 of evidence act it has to be held that these deeds have not been 
proved in accordance with law. Therefore, I hold accordingly. No rights 
have been acquired by the defendant no.4 under Ex.D.16 and D.17 in 
any of the suit properties”.  
16. 
These findings are findings of fact, and the impugned judgment affirmed 
these findings. From the evidence adduced by the Appellants, no ground is 

 
 
10 
made to change the character of these items as self-acquired properties of 
either Appellant No. 1 or Appellant No. 4. Therefore, the argument fails and is, 
accordingly, rejected. We have perused the pleadings and the evidence on 
record.  In the case on hand, we deem it inappropriate to examine the extent to 
which Sl. Nos. 1 and 5 must be included in the share of Appellant No. 1, i.e., 
whether the share is limited to the share notionally acquired in the partition upon 
the demise of the propositus or the share succeeded is also included. Appellant 
No. 1 admitted these items as ancestral properties, and the Respondents 
claimed a share, treating them as ancestral property.  
17. 
The Appellants argued that in Sl. Nos. 1 and 5, the Respondents are 
entitled to a share in the property allotted at the first instance in the notional 
partition to Appellant No. 1. The share enhanced through succession from 
mother, etc., cannot be included for partition. The argument presents two facets: 
(i) that the widow or propositus is entitled to a share in the notional partition. (ii) 
that the share succeeded by Appellant No. 1 cannot be treated as coparcenary 
property. The Appellants rely on Gurupad Khandappa Magdum v. Hirabai 
Khandappa Magdum & others2, Additional Commissioner of Income Tax 
v. M. Karthikeyan3 and Shyam Narayan Prasad v. Krishna Prasad & 
others4.  The Respondents replying to the said argument rely on State of 
 
2 (1978) 3 SCC 383. 
3 (1994) Supp (2) SCC 112.  
4 (2018) 7 SCC 646.  

 
 
11 
Maharashtra v. Narayan Rao Sham Rao Deshmukh & others5  and argue 
that the principle laid down in Gurupad Khandappa Magdum (supra), does not 
apply to the facts of the case and reliance is placed on the following paragraph: 
“10. We have carefully considered the above decision and we feel that 
this case has to be treated as an authority for the position that when a 
female member who inherits an interest in the joint family property 
under Section 6 of the Act files a suit for partition expressing her 
willingness to go out of the family she would be entitled to get both the 
interest she has inherited and the share which would have been 
notionally allotted to her, as stated in Explanation I to Section 6 of the 
Act. But it cannot be an authority for the proposition that she ceases 
to be a member of the family on the death of a male member of the 
family whose interest in the family property devolves on her without 
her volition to separate herself from the family. A legal fiction should 
no doubt ordinarily be carried to its logical end to carry out the 
purposes for which it is enacted but it cannot be carried beyond that. 
It is no doubt true that the right of a female heir to the interest inherited 
by her in the family property gets fixed on the death of a male member 
under Section 6 of the Act but she cannot be treated as having ceased 
to be a member of the family without her volition as otherwise it will 
lead to strange results which could not have been in the contemplation 
of Parliament when it enacted that provision and which might also not 
be in the interest of such female heirs...” 
 
18. 
We are not inclined to delve into the question of applicability of the 
Bombay School of Mitakshara to the instant facts or thereby prolong the period 
of litigation by remanding the case to the High Court. The core consideration in 
applying its ratio of the Gurupad Khandappa Magdum (supra) would be the 
applicability of the Bombay School of Mitakshara to the case of parties. In other 
words, the question is whether the Bombay School of Mitakshara is attracted to 
the facts of this case or not. An attempt, though not feeble, has been made by 
Learned Counsel, Mr. Patil, to convince us that the Bombay School of 
 
5 (1985) 2 SCC 321. 

 
 
12 
Mitakshara is attracted to the facts of this case. This argument needs to be 
appreciated in light of the Respondents' basic objection, i.e., this contention 
lacks pleadings, evidence and the argument cannot be treated as a straight 
legal question.  Further, the entitlement in a share ascertained after the partition 
is different from the share determined in a notional partition. The case was 
remanded once and is now in appeal again before this Court. For good reasons, 
we prefer to avoid one more remand and extend the life of litigation between the 
parties. Therefore, the ratio of Gurupad Khandappa Magdum (supra), M. 
Karthikeyan (supra), Shyam Narayan Prasad (supra) is not applied to the 
facts and circumstances of the case on hand. We are convinced that the 
judgments relied on, viz., Gurupad Khandappa Magdum (supra), M. 
Karthikeyan (supra), Shyam Narayan Prasad (supra), are distinguishable and 
hence, ought not to be relied on to decide the controversy i.e., the extent of 
share concerning Sl. Nos. 1 and 5 to the Respondents. The shares allotted by 
the impugned judgment in Sl. Nos. 1 and 5 in favour of Respondents do not 
warrant interference. 
19. 
From the above discussion, it is concluded that the inclusion of the 
properties described in Sl. No. 2 (supra) as forming part of the coparcenary is 
untenable and illegal. The record discloses that these properties are separate 
and are self-acquired by Appellant No. 1 through succession or transfer from 
the mother or sister. Therefore, the Appeal is allowed by excluding Sl. No. 2 
from partition, and thus, the preliminary decree stands modified to that extent. 

 
 
13 
In other words, the preliminary decree, in so far as SI. No. 1, 3, 4 and 5, is 
confirmed. 
20. 
The Appeals are allowed in part as indicated above. The rest of the 
findings of the Appellate Court are confirmed. There is no order as to costs. 
 
...……….………….J. 
                                                                                    [ M.M. SUNDRESH ]              
 
 
 
 
.....………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               [ S.V.N. BHATTI ] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
JULY 8, 2024.