2024 INSC 495
Non­Reportable
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2132 OF 2011
Thatireddigari Maheswara Reddy  
            … Appellant
versus
State of Andhra Pradesh     
 
  ... Respondent
J  U  D  G  M  E  N  T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.
The appellant­accused no.2 has been convicted for the
offences punishable under Sections 148 and 302 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘the IPC’).   There were eleven
accused   who   were   charged   with   the   murder   of   one   Shiva
Prasad Reddy (for short, ‘the deceased’) by hacking him with
hunting   sickles.     The   accused   were   charged   with   offences
punishable under Sections 120­B, 148 and 302 of the IPC.
Accused nos.5 and 9 died during the pendency of the trial.
The Trial Court found that the charge under Section 120­B of
the IPC has not been proved against any accused.  The Trial
Court also found that accused nos.6, 7 and 8 were not guilty
Criminal Appeal No.2132 of 2011     
                   Page 1 of 7
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.07.09
16:39:09 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

of any offence and were acquitted.  The Trial Court convicted
accused   nos.1   to   4   and   accused   nos.10   and   11   for   the
offences punishable under Sections 148 and 302 of the IPC.  
2.
Apart   from   the   present   appeal,   there   were   appeals
preferred   by   the   co­accused   bearing   Criminal   Appeal   nos.
2130 and 2131 of 2011.  By the order of this Court dated 13th
July   2023,   the   appeals   were   disposed   of   as   the   learned
counsel representing the appellants therein made a statement
that the appellants have been granted permanent remission.
Therefore, they were not pressing the appeals.  The appellant,
in this appeal, was enlarged on  bail.   However, the order
dated 13th  July 2023 records the statement of the learned
counsel for the appellant that the appellant­accused no.2 has
decided to surrender so that his application for permanent
remission can be considered.  Therefore, this Court directed
that   after   surrendering,   if   an   application   is   made   by   the
appellant­accused no.2 for a grant of permanent remission,
the same shall be decided within six weeks from the date of
making the application.  However, the order dated 4th October
2023 records that the appellant­accused no.2 has changed
his mind and decided not to surrender.  In the said order, it is
recorded that the learned counsel appearing for the appellant­
accused no.2 stated that the appellant­accused no.2 wants to
prosecute the appeal on merits.
3.
PW­1 and PW­3 are brothers of the victim of the offence,
who are the eye­witnesses.  Apart from PW­1 and PW­3, PW­2
Criminal Appeal No.2132 of 2011     
                   Page 2 of 7

was also an eye­witness.  The prosecution's case is that the
deceased was a practising lawyer at Gooty.  The deceased and
his brothers were residing in Peddavadugur village.   Every
day, the deceased used to travel from his residence to the
Court   at   Gooty   by   his   motorcycle.     The   deceased   had
contested the election for the post of President of the Water
Users   Association   of   Peddavadugur   village   against   the
appellant­accused   no.2.     The   election   was   won   by   the
appellant­accused no.2.  The allegation is that accused no.1
and   other   communist   party   leaders   helped   the   appellant­
accused no.2.   A couple of months after the election, the
Excise Police raided the house of the appellant­accused no.2
and   seized   illicit   brandy   and   accordingly,   a   case   was
registered against accused no.2.  According to the prosecution
case, the appellant­accused no.2 suspected that the deceased
was   responsible   for   the   raid   and   seizure.     The   incident
occurred on 26th  July 1997.   Twenty days before the said
incident, the Congress party had convened a meeting in the
village,   and   the   deceased   was   elected   as   convenor   of   the
Congress party.   It is the case of the prosecution that the
Excise Police also booked a case against accused no.1, who
carried an impression that the deceased was responsible for
the action taken by the Excise Police.   On the date of the
incident, the deceased left the village between 9:00 am and
9:30 am and proceeded to the Court at Gooty.  On the same
day,   PW­1   to   PW­3   had   visited   Pamidi   village.     After
completing   the   work,   at   5:00   pm,   the   three   prosecution
Criminal Appeal No.2132 of 2011     
                   Page 3 of 7

witnesses boarded a truck at Pamidi, which gave them a lift to
Miduthuru crossroads.   After getting down from the truck,
they were waiting for a conveyance to reach their village.  In
the meanwhile, they saw the deceased coming from Gooty
side on his motorcycle.  While he was negotiating a curve near
Miduthuru at 6:00 pm, PW­4, by raising his hand, requested
the deceased to stop his motorcycle.   The deceased stopped
the motorcycle and told PW­4 that he could not accommodate
him.  After that, the deceased went some distance ahead and
the accused persons, armed with hunting sickles, came from
nearby   bushes  and  attacked  and  hacked  the  deceased  on
various parts of his body.  When PW­1 to PW­3 rushed to help
the deceased, the accused threatened them and ran away.
Though PW­1 to PW­3 shifted the deceased to a Government
hospital at Gooty, he was declared dead before admission.
PW­1 to PW­3 supported the prosecution.  However, PW­4 to
PW­6   did   not   support   the   prosecution   and   were   declared
hostile.   The Trial  Court and the High Court believed the
testimony of PW­1 to PW­3.
SUBMISSIONS
4.
The   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the   appellant­
accused no.2 submitted that PW­1 and PW­3 were interested
witnesses, being the deceased's brothers.  They were chance
witnesses.   Admittedly, PW­1 to PW­3 were together.   The
learned counsel submitted that the evidence of PW­1 to PW­3
cannot be treated as a gospel truth.  PW­4 to PW­6 did not
Criminal Appeal No.2132 of 2011     
                   Page 4 of 7

depose   before   the   Trial   Court   about   the   presence   of   the
appellant­accused   no.2   at   the   time   of   the   incident.     The
learned   counsel   submitted   that   the   prosecution   did   not
establish the motive for the murder.  He, therefore, submitted
that once the testimony of PW­1 to PW­3, who were interested
witnesses, is discarded, it is a case of no evidence against the
appellant­accused no.2.   The learned counsel appearing for
the respondent­State supported the impugned judgment.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
5.
We have carefully perused the prosecution witnesses'
evidence, and especially the evidence of PW­1 to PW­3.  PW­1
knew the accused.  In his evidence, he has ascribed a specific
role to the accused.   He stated that his deceased brother
initially received injuries on his left elbow dorsum part at the
hands   of   accused   no.1   by   use   of   hunting   sickles.     The
appellant­accused no.2 attacked his deceased brother on the
head.  Accused no.11 assaulted the deceased on the left hand
below the wrist on the dorsum part and also attacked his lips.
Accused no.10 assaulted the deceased on the left side of the
neck.  Accused no.3 assaulted the deceased on his left thigh
below the hip. Accused No. 4 assaulted the deceased on the
left side of the back.   Both PW­2 and PW­3 have assigned
similar roles to the accused.   Their examination­in­chief is
very consistent on this part.   After carefully perusing their
cross­examination, we find that no material contradictions or
omissions have been brought on record.     As far as PW­4,
Criminal Appeal No.2132 of 2011     
                   Page 5 of 7

PW­5   and   PW­6   are   concerned,   they   did   not   support   the
prosecution   by   stating   that   at   the   time   of   incident,   the
deceased was attacked by some unknown persons.  PW­5 is
the owner of a hotel.   PW­1 to PW­3 were sitting near the
hotel just before the incident.  PW­6 was running a tea stall
near the hotel of PW­5.  
6.
As PW­1 and PW­3 are closely related to the deceased,
we have meticulously examined their testimony.  We find their
testimony is reliable.  No material contradictions or omissions
have   been   brought   on   record   in   their   cross­examination.
Only because an eye witness is a member of the deceased's
family,  per   se,  the  evidence   of   such   a   witness   cannot   be
discarded.   If the evidence of an eyewitness who is a close
relative of the deceased is cogent, reliable and credible, it can
always   be   relied   upon.     Regarding   the   role   of   appellant­
accused no.2, the evidence of PW­1 to PW­3 is consistent.  All
three of them have ascribed a clear role to the appellant­
accused   no.2   of   assaulting   the   deceased   with   a   hunting
sickle. In this case, even the evidence of PW­2 is very reliable,
who is not related to the deceased.
7.
Apart   from   the   testimony   of   these   three   witnesses,
which   is   very   consistent,   there   is   no   dispute   about   the
identity of the accused as accused nos.1 to 4, 10 and 11 were
known to these three prosecution witnesses.   There was a
recovery of hunting sickles at the instance of accused nos.1 to
4.   The handles of the hunting sickles were found stained
Criminal Appeal No.2132 of 2011     
                   Page 6 of 7

with human blood.  Moreover, there is no delay in lodging the
complaint by PW­1. 
8.
The evidence of PW­19, Dr Ranganna, who conducted
the post­mortem, shows that the deceased suffered a total of
16   injuries.     The   cause   of   death   is   due   to   shock   and
haemorrhage due to multiple injuries.   The medical officer
opined that the injuries could be caused by hunting sickles.
He gave this opinion after the seized hunting sickles were
shown to him.   In the circumstances, there is no reason to
disturb the judgments of the Trial Court and the High Court. 
9.
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.  We grant time of
one month  to  the appellant­accused no.2 to surrender for
undergoing   the   remaining   sentence.     After   the   appellant­
accused no.2 surrenders, we direct the respondent­State to
consider the case of the appellant­accused no.2 for grant of
permanent remission in accordance with the applicable policy
after taking into consideration the fact that the co­accused
have been granted the benefit of permanent remission.  The
respondent   state   shall   take   appropriate   decision   within   a
period of two months from the date on which the appellant­
accused no.2 surrenders.
..…………..………J.
(Abhay S. Oka)
..…………..………J.
      (Pankaj Mithal)
New Delhi;
July 08, 2024.
Criminal Appeal No.2132 of 2011     
                   Page 7 of 7