2024 INSC 484
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2168 OF 2007 
 
THE EXCISE COMMISSIONER  
KARNATAKA & ANR.    
 
 
 
 
APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
MYSORE SALES INTERNATIONAL 
LTD. & ORS. 
 
 
 
 
 
RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
UJJAL BHUYAN, J. 
 
 
 
Heard learned counsel for the parties. 
2. 
 
This appeal has been preferred against the judgment 
and order dated 13.03.2006 passed by the Division Bench of the 
High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru (briefly “the High Court” 
hereinafter) in Writ Appeal No. 7926/2003. By the aforesaid 
Digitally signed by
satish kumar yadav
Date: 2024.07.08
18:40:03 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
judgment and order, the Division Bench had dismissed the writ 
appeal filed by the appellant as well as other writ appeals filed by 
Mysore Sales International, State of Karnataka and Mysore Sugar 
Company Limited assailing the common judgment and order dated 
27.10.2003 passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court, 
dismissing Writ Petition Nos. 6869-6874 of 2001 filed by the 
appellant and other writ petitions filed by the above parties against 
the orders dated 17.01.2001 passed by the Deputy Commissioner 
of Income Tax (TDS)–1, Bengaluru (referred to hereinafter as “the 
assessing officer” or “the revenue”) under Section 206C(6) of the 
Income tax Act, 1961 (referred to hereinafter as “the Income Tax 
Act”) for the assessment years 2000-2001, 1999-2000, 1998-1999, 
1997-1998, 
1996-1997 
and 
1995-1996 
as 
well 
as 
the 
consequential demand notices of even date issued under Section 
156 of the Income Tax Act. By the orders dated 17.01.2001, the 
assessing officer held that the appellant is a “seller” and the liquor 
vendors are “buyers” in terms of Section 206C of the Income Tax 
Act and hence the appellant was under a legal obligation to collect 
income tax at source from the liquor vendors (contractors) for the 
financial years relevant to the aforesaid assessment years. 

3 
 
Accordingly, the assessing officer declared certain sums as income 
tax collectible at source by the appellant which it failed to do. 
Therefore, the appellant was directed to deposit the amounts so 
quantified as income tax deductible at source. Further, interest 
was also levied on the aforesaid amounts. This was followed by the 
demand notices. As noticed above, the challenge to the said orders 
dated 17.01.2001 by the appellant was negatived first by the 
learned Single Judge and then by the Division Bench of the High 
Court. 
3. 
 
The short point for consideration in this appeal is 
whether provisions of Section 206C of the Income Tax Act is 
applicable in respect of the appellant and whether the liquor 
vendors (contractors) who bought the vending rights from the 
appellant on auction, can be termed as “buyer” within the meaning 
of Explanation(a) to Section 206C of the Income Tax Act or 
excluded from the said definition of “buyer” as per clause (iii) of 
Explanation (a) to Section 206C of the said Act. Relatable to the 
above core issue is the question as to, whether, the High Court was 
justified in rejecting the challenge to the said orders made by the 
appellant. 

4 
 
4. 
 
Before attempting to answer the question(s) so framed 
above, it would be apposite to briefly narrate the relevant facts of 
the case. Mysore Sales International Limited (also referred to 
“Mysore 
Sales” 
hereinafter) 
is 
a 
Karnataka 
Government 
undertaking, inter alia, engaged in the business of manufacturing 
arrack. Mysore Sales is an assessee under the Income Tax Act. 
Appellant had entered the arrack trade in July, 1993 in terms of 
the excise laws of the State of Karnataka. Prior to 1993, there were 
several private bottling units in the State of Karnataka and they 
were manufacturing and selling arrack. Auctions were conducted 
periodically for the purpose of conferring lease right for retail 
vending of arrack. It was conducted with reference to designated 
areas. Successful bidders were entitled to procure arrack from the 
bottling units and then to sell it in retail trade within their 
respective allotted areas. The arrack trade is controlled by the state 
government. 
4.1.  
The Karnataka Excise Act, 1965 (briefly “the Excise Act” 
hereinafter) has been enacted to provide for a uniform excise law 
in the State of Karnataka. Preamble to the Excise Act says that it 
is expedient to provide for a uniform law relating to production, 

5 
 
manufacture, possession, import, export, transport, purchase and 
sale of liquor and intoxicating drugs and the levy of duties of excise 
thereon in the State of Karnataka and for certain matter related 
thereto. Under the Excise Act, several rules have been framed for 
appropriate enforcement of the excise law. These rules, inter alia, 
are: 
(i) The Karnataka Excise (Arrack Vend Special 
Conditions of Licenses) Rules, 1967 (“the 1967 Rules” 
hereinafter); 
(ii)  The Karnataka Excise (Lease of the Right of Retail 
Vend of Liquors) Rules, 1969 (briefly “the 1969 Rules” 
hereinafter); 
(iii)  The Karnataka Excise (Manufacture and Bottling 
of Arrack) Rules, 1987 (“the 1987 Rules” hereinafter). 
4.2.  
In the year 1993, the state government discontinued 
private bottling units from engaging in the manufacture or bottling 
of arrack and instead decided as a policy to restrict those 
operations in the hands of state government companies or 
undertakings, such as, Mysore Sales and Mysore Sugar Company 
Limited (appellant in Civil Appeal No. 2169/2007 which was 
dismissed for non-prosecution by this Court on 12.10.2023). Thus, 
Mysore Sales and Mysore Sugar were entrusted with the task of 

6 
 
bottling arrack and marketing it on behalf of the state government. 
Mysore Sales was entrusted with the above task for the northern 
districts of the State of Karnataka while for the rest of the state, 
Mysore Sugar was entrusted with the responsibility. It is the case 
of the appellant that the job entrusted i.e. bottling of arrack and 
marketing it on behalf of the state was in the nature of works 
contract. 
4.3.  
Once arrack is manufactured and bottled, it becomes 
the property of the State of Karnataka in as much as the property 
vests with the state. The Excise Commissioner determines the 
amount realizable by the appellant from the excise (liquor) vendors 
or contractors taking into consideration the cost incurred by the 
appellant. The excise contractors are required to remit the 
requisite amount of excise duty into the state government treasury 
and then secure permit on production of which, appellant delivers 
arrack to them. The State of Karnataka controls the entire 
operation including the amount realizable by the assessee in terms 
of the Excise Act. 
4.4.  
Successful excise contractors secure arrack from 
Mysore Sales and Mysore Sugar depending upon the areas allotted 

7 
 
to them. The lease for the right to retail vend of liquor provides 
auctioning of such right with reference to a designated area. The 
retail sale price is fixed by the state government in terms of the 
1967 Rules. The margin would depend upon various factors. 
4.5.  
Section 206C was inserted in the Income Tax Act by the 
Finance Act, 1988 with effect from 01.06.1988. It casts an 
obligation on the “seller” of alcoholic liquor etc. of deducting tax at 
source (TDS) at the time of payment by the “buyer”. As per 
Explanation(a), certain persons were not included within, rather 
excluded from, the definition of “buyer”. 
4.6.  
A circular 
came to be issued by the 
Excise 
Commissioner of Karnataka on 16.06.1998 to which an addendum 
was also issued. The circular clarified that since arrack was not 
obtained through auction and since the selling price of arrack was 
fixed by the Excise Commissioner, there was no question of 
recovery of TDS from the excise (liquor) vendors or contractors. 
4.7.  
In view of the above, appellant did not deduct any TDS 
from the liquor vendors. 

8 
 
4.8.  
Assessing officer issued notices dated 26.10.2000 
calling upon the assessee to show cause as to why it should not 
pay the requisite TDS amount which it had failed to collect from 
the “buyers” i.e. the excise contractors for the financial years 
relevant to the assessment years under consideration. It appears 
that the assessee had submitted its reply to such notice. 
Thereafter, the assessing officer passed orders dated 17.01.2001 
under Section 206C(6) of the Income Tax Act for the assessment 
years under consideration. As pointed out earlier, by the aforesaid 
orders, the assessee was directed to pay certain sums of money as 
TDS which it had failed to collect from the liquor vendors or 
contractors. Following such orders, consequential demand notices 
for the respective assessment years under Section 156 of the 
Income Tax Act were also issued to the assessee by the assessing 
officer. 
4.9.  
Mysore Sales filed writ petitions before the High Court. 
While the main contention was that Section 206C(6) of the Income 
Tax Act was not applicable to it, a corollary issue raised was that 
before passing the order under Section 206C(6) of the Income Tax 
Act, no opportunity of hearing was given to it. Therefore, there was 

9 
 
violation of the principles of natural justice. Learned Single Judge 
vide the judgment and order dated 27.10.2023 dismissed the writ 
petitions confirming the orders passed under Section 206C(6) of 
the Income Tax Act. 
4.10.  
Thereafter, Mysore Sales and others preferred writ 
appeals before the Division Bench. However, by the judgment and 
order dated 13.03.2006, the writ appeals were dismissed by 
affirming the orders passed by the assessing officer and also that 
of the learned Single Judge. 
5. 
 
Aggrieved by the aforesaid, SLP(C) No. 12524 of 2006 
was preferred. After leave was granted on 23.04.2007, the same 
came to be registered as Civil Appeal No. 2168 of 2007. 
6. 
 
Sh. Avishkar Singhvi, learned AAG appearing for the 
appellant submits that Section 206C of the Income Tax Act is not 
applicable in respect of Mysore Sales which is a public sector 
undertaking controlled by the Government of Karnataka. In fact, 
it is a government company. It is engaged in the manufacture of 
arrack. Arrack is bottled under the supervision of the Excise 
Commissioner. Whatever arrack is manufactured, the same 
belongs to the state government alone. Excise buyers i.e. liquor 

10 
 
contractors do not obtain any arrack in auction. They only obtain 
the right/licence to carry out retail vending of arrack. Therefore, 
such contractors are not “buyers” as defined in the Explanation 
under Section 206C of the Income Tax Act. 
6.1.  
Learned AAG argued that what is disposed of in the 
auction is the retail or vending right of arrack and not auctioning 
of the arrack itself. The final sale of arrack is carried out by the 
contractors at the retail price fixed by the government. He, 
therefore, submits that Section 206C is not applicable to a public 
sector undertaking like Mysore Sales. Both Explanations (a)(ii) and 
(iii) clearly exclude retail vendors from the ambit and purview of 
“buyers” as defined under the Explanation. 
6.2.  
Elaborating further, he submits that “buyers” falling in 
the above exception were exempted from paying income tax at 
source at the time of obtaining licence for retail vending of arrack 
in their respective assigned areas as per the price fixed by the state 
government. The auction is only regarding transferring the right or 
privilege which is vested in the state to the liquor contractors who 
would thereafter operate the retail business of vending in arrack. 
Therefore, there is no sale involved in the auction transaction. 

11 
 
6.3.  
Assessing officer had wrongly relied upon the decision 
of the Supreme Court in Union of India Vs. A. Sanyasi Rao1. In the 
said decision, the constitutional validity of Section 206C of the 
Income Tax Act was challenged and the same was negatived by 
this Court. However, the judgment clarifies that there are just 
exceptions carved out in Section 206C in which cases, income tax 
is not required to be collected at source. 
6.4.  
Learned counsel further submits that the objective 
behind introduction of Section 206C in the Income Tax Act was to 
ensure proper tax collection in matters relating to profits and gains 
from the business of trading in alcoholic liquor etc. However, a 
taxing statute has to be interpreted strictly. It cannot be 
interpreted in an overly expansive and wide manner so as to bring 
persons within the tax net who are otherwise exempted from 
paying tax. Both the Single Bench and the Division Bench had 
erred in adopting such an interpretation and wrongly holding that 
Section 206C was applicable in respect of Mysore Sales and since 
it had not deducted TDS, the same was required to be recovered. 
Both the Benches had erred in taking the view that purchase of 
 
1 (1996) 3 SCC 465 

12 
 
arrack was by way of public auction only and not in any other 
manner and that the “seller” (Mysore Sales) had an obligation to 
collect income tax at source from such “buyers” who would be 
further vending the same in retail. 
6.5.  
Even if the view taken by the revenue and affirmed by 
the High Court is accepted, it cannot be said that there was sale of 
arrack by Mysore Sales to the licence holders. Such sale, if at all it 
can be said so, was at the price fixed by the state government 
under the Excise Act and the Rules framed thereunder. The sale 
was wholly for the purpose of retail vending and not a sale within 
the meaning of Section 206C of the Income Tax Act; moreover, 
under the aforesaid provision, a sale must be made to a “buyer” 
defined under the Explanation to                     Section 206C of the 
Income Tax Act. As a matter of fact, it is the contention of the 
appellant that there is no sale between Mysore Sales and the excise 
contractors. 
6.6.  
The revenue has wrongly taken the view that the act of 
auction and purchase of arrack by the successful liquor 
contractors is inextricably intertwined and is part of one collective 
action. In the auction, the excise contractors are granted 

13 
 
permits/licences for retail sale of arrack by the successful excise 
contractors in their allotted areas. It is thereafter that sale of 
arrack is affected by the excise contractors at a price fixed by the 
government between a minimum floor value and maximum ceiling 
value. Therefore, such a transaction cannot be said to be a sale or 
purchase through auction.  
6.7.  
Learned counsel also submitted that the assessing 
officer was not conferred the jurisdiction to pass the orders under 
Section 206C(6) of the Income Tax Act. Jurisdiction was conferred 
upon the Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax (TDS)-1, 
Bengaluru. This contention of the appellant regarding jurisdiction 
was rejected by the learned Single Judge as being merely a 
technical one. 
6.8.  
Learned counsel also submits that orders dated 
17.01.2001 passed by the assessing officer under Section 206C(6) 
of the Income Tax Act were in breach of the principles of natural 
justice. No opportunity of hearing was given to the assessee. 
Without such hearing, the aforesaid orders were passed. Such 
orders being in violation of the principles of natural justice are void 

14 
 
ab initio. This aspect was overlooked by the Single Bench as well 
as by the Division Bench of the High Court. 
6.9.  
He therefore submits that both the orders of the learned 
Single Judge and the Division Bench are liable to be set aside. 
Orders dated 17.01.2001 passed by the assessing officer under 
Section 206C(6) of the Income Tax Act for the assessment years 
under consideration are also liable to be set aside and quashed. 
The civil appeal may be allowed accordingly. 
6.10.  
In support of his submissions, learned counsel for the 
appellant has placed reliance on the following decisions: 
(i) 
Gian Chand Ashok Kumar and Company Vs. Union 
of India2; 
(ii) 
K.K. Mittal Vs. Union of India3;  
(iii)  State of Bihar Vs. Commissioner of Income Tax4; 
(iv) 
M/s Naresh Kumar and Company Vs. Union of 
India5; 
(v) 
Saini and Company Vs. Union of India6; 
(vi) 
Chandigarh Distillers and Bottlers Ltd. Vs. Union of 
India7;                
 
2  (1991) 187 ITR 188 (HP) 
3  (1991) 187 ITR 208 (P&H) 
4  (1993) 202 ITR 535 (PAT) 
5  ILR (2000) 2 P&H 
6  (2000) 246 ITR 762 (HP) 
7  (2002) 253 ITR 205 (P&H) 

15 
 
(vii) Union of India Vs. Om Parkash S.S. and Company8. 
7. 
 
Learned senior counsel for the revenue at the outset 
submits that the impugned order of the Division Bench of the High 
Court does not suffer from any error or infirmity to warrant 
interference. The civil appeal is misconceived and is, therefore, 
liable to be dismissed. 
7.1.  
Learned senior counsel submits that the assessing 
officer had issued notices to the assessee and had also verified 
relevant materials. Thereafter, the assessing officer held that the 
sale price of liquor was not fixed. What was fixed was only the 
range of minimum and maximum selling price. As per the gazette 
notification furnished by the Excise Department of the State of 
Karnataka for the year 2000, the minimum and maximum selling 
price was fixed at Rs. 55/- and Rs. 85/- per bulk litre respectively. 
Nowhere did it mention that liquor had to be sold at a specific fixed 
price. The contractors were at liberty to sell the liquor at any rate 
between the minimum and maximum price. There being a wide 
range within which the sale of liquor could be affected, the 
 
8 (2001) 3 SCC 593 

16 
 
assessing officer has rightly held that the sale price of liquor was 
not fixed.  
7.2.  
Learned senior counsel further submits that the 
assessing officer was right in taking the view that the excise 
vendors had obtained goods by way of auction because the 
goods(arrack) were obtained only on production of permits which 
were available on successful bidding in the auction.  
7.3.  
Thus, the liquor contractors clearly came within the 
ambit of the meaning of “buyer” under Explanation(a) to Section 
206C of the Income Tax Act. Therefore, Mysore Sales was under 
an obligation to deduct income tax at source(TDS) from the liquor 
contractors. Since it failed to do so, the assessing officer was fully 
justified in passing the orders dated 17.01.2001 under Section 
206C(6) of the Income Tax Act.  
7.4.  
Learned Single Judge had elaborately examined the 
entire gamut of the issues and rightly affirmed the orders dated 
17.01.2001. Similarly, the Division Bench also made a threadbare 
examination of the entire issues and, thereafter, came to the 
conclusion that the assessing officer was fully justified in passing 
the orders dated 17.01.2001. That being the position, there is no 

17 
 
reason why, at this stage, the concurrent findings of the assessing 
officer as affirmed by the Single and Division Benches of the High 
Court should be disturbed. As such, the civil appeal should be 
dismissed. 
8. 
 
Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties 
have received the due consideration of the Court.    
9. 
 
Before we proceed to Section 206C of the Income Tax 
Act, we may have a broad overview of the excise law framework in 
the State of Karnataka relevant for the purpose of the present lis. 
As already noted above, the parent enactment is the Excise Act 
which is an Act to provide for an uniform excise law in the State of 
Karnataka. It covers the entire spectrum from production to sale 
of liquor and intoxicating drugs and the levy of excise duty thereon. 
Section 2 defines various words and expressions used in the Excise 
Act. Section 2 (2) defines the expression “to bottle” to mean 
transferring liquor from a cask or other vessel to a bottle, jar, flask, 
polythene sachet or similar receptacle for the purpose of sale, 
whether any process of manufacture be employed or not and 
includes re-bottling. “Manufacture” is defined in Section 2 (19) to 
include every process whether natural or artificial, by which any 

18 
 
fermented, spirituous or intoxicating liquor or intoxicating drug is 
produced or prepared and also redistillation and every process for 
the rectification of liquor. As per Section 3(1), the state government 
may appoint, by notification, an officer not below the rank of 
Deputy Commissioner as the Excise Commissioner in the State of 
Karnataka. He shall be the chief controlling authority in all matters 
connected with the administration of the Excise Act. Powers of the 
Excise Commissioner are dealt with in sub-section (2) of Section 3. 
He shall have the overall control of the administration of the Excise 
Department.  
9.1.  
Section 17 deals with the power to grant lease of right 
to manufacture etc. Sub-section (1) thereof says that the state 
government may grant lease to any person on such conditions and 
for such period, as it may think fit, the exclusive or other right- 
(a) 
of manufacturing or sale by wholesale or of 
both; or 
(b)  of selling by wholesale or by retail; or 
(c) 
of 
manufacturing 
or 
supplying 
by 
wholesale, or of both and of selling by 
retail,  
any Indian liquor or intoxicating drug within any specified area. 

19 
 
9.2.  
Though sub-section (1A) provides that no lease granted 
under sub-section (1) shall be transferred, the proviso thereto 
empowers the state government to grant permission to the lessee 
to transfer the lease or a part thereof in favour of any other person. 
As per sub-section (2), the licencing authority may grant to a lessee 
under sub-section (1) or to a transferee under sub-section (1A), a 
licence in terms of his lease. Sub-section (3) deals with 
determination of a lease for violation of the conditions mentioned 
therein. Under sub-section (4), when a lease is determined in terms 
of sub-section (3), the state government may direct the Deputy 
Commissioner to take over the right under his management and to 
lease it again by resale or otherwise.  
9.3.  
Section 71 confers power on the state government to 
make rules to carry out the purposes of the Excise Act.  
10.  
The Karnataka Excise (Arrack Vend Special Conditions 
of Licenses) Rules, 1967 (already referred to “the 1967 Rules” 
hereinabove) have been framed by the Government of Karnataka 
in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 71 of the Excise Act. 
Rule 2 of the 1967 Rules deals with selling of arrack of prescribed 
strength etc. by the licensee. Rule 2(1) says that every licensee 

20 
 
licensed to vend arrack by retail sale shall sell only arrack of 
prescribed strength. As per sub-rule (2), no arrack except in sealed 
bottles or in sealed polythene sachets obtained from a warehouse 
or depot shall be kept for sale or sold in the licensed premises. 
Rule 3 provides for construction of counter. As per Rule 3, the 
licensee to vend arrack shall construct a counter in the shop which 
is not more than one metre high. Rule 4 deals with retail price. It 
says that subject to such minimum and maximum price fixed by 
the Deputy Commissioner or by the Excise Commissioner, the 
licensee may vend arrack on such rates as he may deem fit. 
Heading of Rule 5 is, licensee to buy arrack only from warehouse, 
etc. As per sub-rule (1), the licensee to vend arrack by retail shall 
purchase the required quantity of arrack for sale only from the 
warehouse or depot authorized by the Excise Commissioner, on 
payment of issue price fixed by the Excise Commissioner from time 
to time. This provision, being relevant, is extracted hereunder: 
5. Licensee to buy arrack only from 
Warehouse, etc.: - 
(1) The licensee to vend arrack by retail shall 
purchase the required quantity of arrack for sale 
only from the warehouse or depot authorized by 
the Excise Commissioner, on payment of issue 

21 
 
price fixed by the Excise Commissioner from 
time to time.  
10.1.  
Rule 5(2) clarifies that no arrack except in sealed bottles 
of the approved sizes with the excise labels or in sealed polythene 
sachets obtained from the authorized warehouse or depot shall be 
sold in the licenced premises. 
10.2.  
Rule 6 says that the consignment of arrack should be 
under seal. All the consignments of arrack issued from the 
warehouse or depot shall be sealed by the officer-in-charge of the 
warehouse or depot in such a manner that the letters of the seal 
are distinct. The licensees shall be responsible for any breakage of 
seal in transit. The arrack so transported may be packed by the 
licensee at his own cost for the purpose of sale in such containers 
as may be approved by the Excise Commissioner and under 
supervision of the officer-in-charge of the warehouse.  
11.  
Government of Karnataka has also framed the 
Karnataka Excise (Lease of the Right of Retail Vend of Liquors) 
Rules, 1969 (already referred to as “the 1969 Rules” hereinabove) 
exercising powers under Section 71 of the Excise Act. As per Rule 
2(c), the expression “right of retail vend of liquors” means the lease 
of the right of retail vend of liquors. Rule 3 deals with lease of retail 

22 
 
vend. As per Rule 3(1), the right of retail vend of liquors may be 
disposed of either by tender or by auction or by tender-cum-
auction or in any other manner as the state government may by 
order specify. Rule 3(3) provides that the right of retail vend of 
arrack shall be the exclusive right but in such districts as may be 
specified by the government and only bottled arrack or arrack in 
polythene sachet shall be sold to consumers. Rule 3A deals with 
grant of lease to government companies etc. As per sub-rule (1), 
notwithstanding anything contained in the 1969 Rules, the state 
government may, if it is considered expedient in the interest of 
government revenue or for any other reasons to be recorded in 
writing, grant the lease of right of retail vend of liquor in favour of 
any company or agency owned or controlled by the state 
government or a state government department on such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit.  
11.1  
Registration of excise contractors is provided for in Rule 
4A. As per sub-rule (1), every application for registration as excise 
contractor shall be made to the Excise Commissioner in the 
prescribed format. After following the procedure prescribed in sub-
rules (2) to (4), the Excise Commissioner under sub-rule (5) may 

23 
 
register such an applicant as an excise contractor and grant a 
certificate of registration in the prescribed format which is not 
transferable. Sub-rule (8) clarifies that the registration certificate 
so issued shall be valid for participation in tender/auction for the 
disposal of the right of retail vend of liquor for the excise year 
specified in such certificate.  
11.2.  
As per Rule 10(1), where the right of retail vend of liquor 
within a district is to be disposed of by auction, the Deputy 
Commissioner of that district and where the disposal of the right 
is in more than a district in a Division, the Divisional 
Commissioner of that Division shall hold the auction on the date, 
time and place as may be notified. The procedure to be followed in 
the auction is laid down in Rule 11.  
12.  
Under Section 71 of the Excise Act, Government of 
Karnataka has framed another set of rules called the Karnataka 
Excise (Manufacturing and Bottling of Arrack) Rules, 1987 (already 
referred to as “the 1987 Rules” hereinabove). Rule 2(b) defines 
“arrack” to mean the spirit manufactured by blending or reducing 
the spirit and includes spiced arrack, but does not include Indian 
or foreign liquor. “Blending” is defined in Rule 2(c) to mean the 

24 
 
mixing of spirits with other spirits of the same or different 
strengths. As per Rule 2(e), “commissioner” means the Excise 
Commissioner. Rule 2(n) defines “warehouse” to mean any 
distillery or other place where spirit is stored, blended, matured, 
fortified, diluted or flavoured to produce arrack and also a place 
for bottling such arrack, but does not include a manufactory where 
wine or Indian liquor, beer or toddy is manufactured.  
12.1.  
As per Rule 3(1), a licence may be granted by the Excise 
Commissioner for the manufacture and bottling of arrack for any 
specified area or areas. Sub-rule (2) of Rule 3 was inserted 
subsequently w.e.f. 01.07.1993. Sub-rule (2) of Rule 3 clarifies that 
a licence under Rule 3 shall be issued only to a company or agency 
owned or controlled by the state government or to a state 
government department. This provision, being important, is 
extracted as under: 
3. Licence to be granted only to a company 
etc : - 
(1) 
A 
licence 
shall 
be 
granted 
by 
the 
Commissioner, whenever necessary for any 
specified area or areas for the manufacture and 
bottling of arrack.  
(2) The licence under this rule shall be issued 
only to a company or agency owned or controlled 

25 
 
by the state government or to a state 
government department. 
 
12.2.  
Rule 8 provides that in case where a warehouse serves 
more than one district, the warehouse shall be deemed to be a 
depot for storing bottled arrack and for supply of arrack to the 
person holding a licence to sell arrack in retail. Under Rule 9, the 
Commissioner may fix the number of warehouses, the area to be 
served by each of the warehouse and their location. Removal of 
arrack from the warehouse is provided for in Rule 16. As per sub-
rule (1), no arrack shall be removed from the warehouse without 
payment of excise duty. Sub-rule (2) says that arrack shall not be 
issued from the warehouse or depot except in bottles or in 
polythene sachets of approved capacity and design. As per sub-
rule (3), the same shall be issued from the warehouse or depot only 
to the persons holding a licence to sell arrack in retail. Rule 17 
says that the price to be paid by the government to the distillery 
for the rectified spirit supplied by the distillery to the warehouse, 
the price to be paid by the government to the warehouse for 
manufacture and bottling of arrack and the price to be paid by the 
lessees for the right of retail vend of arrack to the government for 
the supply of bottled arrack shall be fixed by the Excise 

26 
 
Commissioner from time to time with prior approval of the 
government. Rule 17, being relevant, is extracted hereunder: 
17. Fixation of price: - 
The price to be paid by government to the 
distillery for the rectified spirit supplied by the 
distillery to the warehouse, the price to be paid 
by the government to the warehouse for 
manufacture and bottling of arrack and the 
price to be paid by the lessees for the right of 
retail vend of arrack to the government for the 
supply of bottled arrack shall be fixed by the 
Commissioner from time to time with prior 
approval of the government and the same shall 
be communicated to the persons concerned.  
 
13.  
From the above conspectus, we find that under Section 
17 of the Excise Act, the state government grants lease of right to 
any person for manufacture etc. of liquor, arrack in this case. The 
licencing authority i.e. Excise Commissioner may grant to the 
lessee a licence in terms of his lease. In supplement to the above 
provision, Rule 3(1) of the 1987 Rules provides that the Excise 
Commissioner shall grant a licence for any specified area or areas 
for the manufacture or bottling of arrack. From 01.07.1993, sub-
rule (2) of Rule 3 has come into force as per which provision the 
licence under Rule 3 of the 1987 Rules shall be issued only to a 
company or agency owned or controlled by the state government 
or to a state government department. This is how Mysore Sales 

27 
 
was granted licence for manufacture and bottling of arrack. 
Through a process of auction, excise contractors are shortlisted 
who are thereafter granted licence or permits to vend arrack by 
retail in their respective area(s). They are required to procure the 
arrack from the warehouse or depot on payment of the issue price 
fixed by the Excise Commissioner as per Rule 5(1) of the 1967 
Rules. Rule 2 makes it very clear that no arrack in retail vend shall 
be sold except in sealed bottles or in sealed polythene sachets 
obtained from either a warehouse or a depot. For such retail 
vending, Rule 3 of the 1967 Rules requires the excise contractor to 
construct a counter in the shop. The right to retail vend of liquor 
is granted either by tender or by auction or by a combined process 
of tender-cum-auction etc. As per Rule 17 of the 1987 Rules, the 
price to be paid by the lessee for the right of retail vend of arrack 
to the government for the supply of bottled arrack shall be fixed by 
the Commissioner with prior approval of the government. In so far 
the retail price is concerned, Rule 4 of the 1967 Rules says that 
the excise contractor can sell the arrack at a price within the range 
of minimum floor price and maximum ceiling price that may be 
fixed by the Excise Commissioner. 

28 
 
14.  
Having broadly surveyed the statutory framework of the 
business of arrack in the State of Karnataka, let us now deal with 
Section 206C of the Income Tax Act. For ready reference, the said 
provision is extracted hereunder: 
206-C. Profits and gains from the business of 
trading in alcoholic liquor, forest produce, scrap, 
etc.—(1) Every person, being a seller shall, at the time 
of debiting of the amount payable by the buyer to the 
account of the buyer or at the time of receipt of such 
amount from the said buyer in cash or by the issue of 
a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is 
earlier, collect from the buyer of any goods of the 
nature specified in column (2) of the Table below, a 
sum equal to the percentage, specified in the 
corresponding entry in column (3) of the said Table, of 
such amount as income tax: 
TABLE 
SI. 
No. 
Nature of Goods 
Percentage 
(i) 
Alcoholic 
liquor 
for 
human 
consumption (other than India-
made foreign liquor) and tendu 
leaves 
Ten per 
cent 
(ii) 
Timber obtained under a forest 
lease 
Fifteen per 
cent 

29 
 
(iii) Timber obtained by any mode 
other than under a forest lease 
Five per 
cent 
(iv) 
Any other forest produce not being 
timber or tendu leaves 
Fifteen per 
cent 
 
Provided that where the Assessing Officer, on an 
application made by the buyer, gives a certificate in 
the prescribed form that to the best of his belief any of 
the goods referred to in the aforesaid Table are to be 
utilized for the purposes of manufacturing, processing 
or producing articles or things and not for trading 
purposes, the provisions of this sub-section shall not 
apply so long as the certificate is in force. 
(2) The power to recover tax by collection under sub-
section (1) shall be without prejudice to any other 
mode of recovery. 
(3) Any person collecting any amount under sub-
section (1) shall pay within seven days the amount so 
collected to the credit of the Central Government or as 
the Board directs. 
(4) Any amount collected in accordance with the 
provisions of this section and paid under sub-section 
(3) shall be deemed as payment of tax on behalf of the 
person from whom the amount has been collected and 
credit shall be given to him for the amount so collected 
on the production of the certificate furnished under 
sub-section (5) in the assessment made under this Act 

30 
 
for the assessment year for which such income is 
assessable.  
(5) Every person collecting tax in accordance with the 
provisions of this section shall within ten days from 
the date of debit or receipt of the amount furnish to 
the buyer to whose account such amount is debited or 
from whom such payment is received, a certificate to 
the effect that tax has been collected, and specifying 
the sum so collected, the rate at which the tax has 
been collected and such other particulars as may be 
prescribed. 
(5A) Every person collecting tax in accordance with the 
provisions of this section shall prepare half yearly 
returns for the period ending on 30th September and 
31st March in each financial year, and deliver or cause 
to be delivered to the prescribed income-tax authority 
such returns in such form and verified in such manner 
and setting forth such particulars and within such 
time as may be prescribed. 
(5B) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, a return filed on a 
floppy, diskette, magnetic cartridge tape, CD-ROM or 
any other computer readable media as may be 
specified by the Board (hereinafter referred to as the 
computer media) shall be deemed to be a return for the 
purposes of sub-section (5A) and the rules made 

31 
 
thereunder and shall be admissible in any proceedings 
thereunder, without further proof of production of the 
original, as evidence of any contents of the original or 
of any fact stated therein. 
(5C) A return filed under sub-section (5B) shall fulfill 
the following conditions, namely:- 
(a) while receiving returns on computer media, 
necessary checks by scanning the documents 
filed on computer media will be carried out and 
the media will be duly authenticated by the 
Assessing Officer; and 
(b) the Assessing Officer shall also take due care 
to preserve the computer media by duplicating, 
transferring, mastering or storage without loss of 
data. 
(6) Any person responsible for collecting the tax who 
fails to collect the tax in accordance with the 
provisions of this section, shall, notwithstanding such 
failure, be liable to pay the tax to the credit of the 
Central Government in accordance with the provisions 
of sub-section (3). 
(7) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section 
(6), if the seller does not collect the tax or after 
collecting the tax fails to pay it as required under this 
section, he shall be liable to pay simple interest at the 
rate of one and one-fourth percent per month or part 

32 
 
thereof on the amount of such tax from the date on 
which such tax was collectible to the date on which 
the tax was actually paid. 
(8) Where the tax has not been paid as aforesaid, after 
it is collected, the amount of the tax together with the 
amount of simple interest thereon referred to in sub-
section (7) shall be a charge upon all the assets of the 
seller. 
(9) Where the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the 
total income of the buyer justifies the collection of the 
tax at any lower rate than the relevant rate specified 
in sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer shall, on an 
application made by the buyer in this behalf, give to 
him a certificate for collection of tax at such lower rate 
than the relevant rate specified in sub-section (1). 
(10) Where a certificate under sub-section (9) is given, 
the person responsible for collecting the tax shall, 
until such certificate is cancelled by the Assessing 
Officer, collect the tax at the rates specified in such 
certificate. 
(11) The Board may, having regard to the convenience 
of assessees and the interests of revenue, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
specifying the cases in which, and the circumstances 
under which, an application may be made for the grant 
of a certificate under sub-section (9) and the 

33 
 
conditions subject to which such certificate may be 
granted and providing for all other matters connected 
therewith. 
Explanation. – For the purposes of this section,- 
(a) “buyer” means a person who obtains in any sale, 
by way of auction, tender or any other mode, goods 
of the nature specified in the table in sub-section 
(1) or the right to receive any such goods but does 
not include, - 
(i)  a public sector company, 
(ii) a buyer in the further sale of such goods     
obtained in pursuance of such sale, or  
(iii)  a buyer where the goods are not obtained by 
him by way of auction and where the sale 
price of such goods to be sold by the buyer is 
fixed by or under any State Act;     
(b)  “seller” means the Central Government, a State 
Government or any local authority or corporation 
or authority established by or under a Central, 
State or Provincial Act, or any company or firm or 
co-operative society. 
 
14.1.  
Sub-section (1) of Section 206C says that every person 
who is a seller shall collect from the buyer of the goods specified in 
the table, a sum equal to the percentage specified in the corresponding 
entry of the table.  The collection is to be made at the time of debiting 

34 
 
of the amount payable by the buyer to the account of the buyer or at 
the time of the receipt of such amount from the said buyer, be it in 
cash or by way of cheque or by way of draft etc. In so far alcoholic 
liquor for human consumption (other than India made foreign 
liquor i.e., IMFL), the amount to be collected is 10 percent. Sub-
section (3) provides that any person collecting such amount under 
sub-section (1) shall pay the said amount within 7 days of the 
collection to the credit of the central government or as the Central 
Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) directs. Sub-section (4) clarifies that 
any amount so collected under Section 206C(1) and paid under 
sub-section (3) shall be deemed as payment of income tax on 
behalf of the person from whom the amount has been collected 
and credit shall be given to such person for the amount so collected 
and paid at the time of assessment proceeding for the relevant 
assessment year. Sub-section (5) says that every person collecting 
such tax shall issue a certificate to the buyer within 10 days of 
debit or receipt of the amount. Sub-section (5A) requires the 
person collecting tax to prepare half yearly returns for the periods 
ending on 30th September and 31st March for each financial year 

35 
 
and submit the same in the prescribed form before the competent 
income tax authority. 
14.2.  
Sub-section (6) is relevant. Sub-section (6) says that any 
person responsible for collecting the tax but fails to collect the 
same shall notwithstanding such failure be liable to pay the tax 
which he ought to have collected to the credit of the central 
government in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3). 
Sub-section (7) deals with a situation where such tax is not 
collected in which event the seller is liable to pay interest at the 
prescribed rate. Sub-section (8) on the other hand deals with a 
situation where the seller does not deposit the amount even after 
collecting the tax. In such an event also, he would be liable to pay 
interest. 
14.3.  
That brings us to the Explanation to Section 206C of the 
Income Tax Act. The Explanation defines “buyer” and “seller” for 
the purposes of Section 206C. While Explanation(a) defines 
“buyer”, (b) defines “seller”. As per Explanation(a), “buyer” means 
a person who obtains in any sale by way of auction, tender or by 
any other mode, goods of the nature specified in the table in sub-

36 
 
section (1) or the right to receive any such goods but “buyer” would 
not include: 
(i)  a public sector company; 
(ii) a buyer in the further sale of such goods obtained 
in pursuance of such sale; 
(iii)  a buyer where the goods are not obtained by him 
by way of auction and where the sale price of such 
goods to be sold by the buyer is fixed by or under any 
State Act. 
14.4.  
On the other hand, “seller” has been defined to mean 
the central government, a state government or any local authority 
or corporation or authority established by or under a central, state 
or provincial act or any company or firm or cooperative society. 
14.5.  
Adverting to the definition of “buyer”, Explanation (a) 
says that a person who obtains in any sale by way of auction, 
tender or by any other mode, goods of the nature specified in the 
table in sub-section (1) or the right to receive any such goods is a 
buyer. But as we have seen above, there is an exclusion clause to 
the definition of “buyer”. If the buyer is a public sector company or 
it has obtained the goods in further sale or if the goods are not 
obtained by him by way of auction and where the sale price of such 

37 
 
goods to be sold by the buyer is fixed by or under any state 
enactment, then such a person would not come within the ambit 
of “buyer” as per the definition in Explanation(a). Since much 
emphasis has been placed on Explanation(a)(iii), we may extract 
the same again to understand the significance thereof: a buyer 
where the goods are not obtained by him by way of auction and 
where the sale price of such goods to be sold by the buyer is fixed 
by or under any State Act. Thus, Explanation(a)(iii) visualizes two 
conditions for a person to be excluded from the meaning of “buyer” 
as per the definition in Explanation(a). The first condition is that 
the goods are not obtained by him by way of auction. The second 
condition is that the sale price of such goods to be sold by the 
buyer is fixed under a state enactment. These two conditions are 
joined by the word ‘and’. The word ‘and’ is conjunctive to mean 
that both the conditions must be fulfilled; it is not either of the two. 
Therefore, to be excluded from the ambit of the definition of “buyer” 
as per Explanation(a)(iii), both the conditions must be satisfied. 
15.  
In view of the above, let us examine the position of an 
excise contractor. In the scheme under consideration which we 
have discussed above, would such an excise contractor be 

38 
 
construed as a “buyer” within the meaning of Explanation(a) to the 
Section 206C of the Income Tax Act? Going back to the Excise Act 
and the rules framed thereunder, it is seen that Mysore Sales is 
the licensee for the manufacture and bottling of arrack for specified 
area(s). By a process of auction or tender or auction-cum-tender 
etc., excise contractors are shortlisted who are thereafter granted 
permits to vend arrack by retail in their respective area(s). These 
retail vendors i.e. excise contractors have to procure the arrack 
from the warehouse or depot maintained by Mysore Sales on 
payment of the issue price fixed by the Excise Commissioner. The 
arrack is procured in sealed bottles or in sealed polythene sachets. 
Pausing here for a moment, what is discernible is that by a process 
of auction etc., excise contractors are shortlisted. Thereafter, they 
are provided permits. On the strength of the permits, they obtain 
arrack in bottled condition (or in sealed polythene sachets) from 
the warehouse or depot on payment of issue price fixed by the 
Excise Commissioner. Such arrack either in sealed bottled 
condition or in sealed polythene sachets are then sold in retail by 
the excise contractors in the area or areas allotted to them. 
Therefore, by the process of auction etc., the excise contractors are 

39 
 
only shortlisted and conferred the right to retail vend of arrack in 
their respective areas. It cannot be said that by virtue of the 
auction, certain quantities of arrack are purchased by the excise 
contractors. Thus, at this stage there are two transactions, each 
distinct. The first transaction is shortlisting of excise contractors 
by a process of auction etc. for the right to retail vend. The second 
transaction, which is contingent upon the first transaction, is 
obtaining of arrack for retail vending by the excise contractors on 
the strength of the permits issued to them post successful 
shortlisting following auction. Therefore, it is evidently clear that 
arrack is not obtained by the excise contractors by way of auction. 
What is obtained by way of auction is the right to vend the arrack 
on retail on the strength of permits granted, following successful 
shortlisting on the basis of auction. Thus, the first condition under 
clause (iii) is satisfied. 
15.1  
In Om Parkash (supra), this Court considered the issue 
of tax collection at source in respect of the liquor trade under 
Section 206C of the Income Tax Act and as to whether a licensee 
who is issued a licence by the government permitting him to carry 
on the liquor trade would be a “buyer” as defined in Explanation 

40 
 
(a) to Section 206C (11) of the Income Tax Act. This Court held that 
“buyer” would mean a person who by virtue of the payment gets a 
right to receive specific goods and not where he is merely 
allowed/permitted to carry on business in that trade. On licences 
issued by the government permitting the licensee to carry on liquor 
trade, provisions of Section 206C are not attracted as the licensee 
does not fall within the concept of “buyer” referred to in that 
section. This Court emphasized that a buyer has to be a buyer of 
goods and not merely a person who acquires a licence to carry on 
the business. 
15.2.  
After the arrack is obtained in the above manner by the 
excise contractor, the requirement of the second condition under 
Explanation(a)(iii) is that he has to sell the same in the area(s) 
allotted to him at the sale price fixed as per Rule 4 of the 1967 
Rules. The language of the second condition is that the sale price 
of such goods to be sold by the buyer is fixed by or under any state 
statute. As already noted above, Rule 4 of the 1967 Rules enables 
the excise contractor to sell the arrack in retail at a price within 
the range of minimum floor price and maximum ceiling price which 
is fixed by the Excise Commissioner. A minimum price and a 

41 
 
maximum price are fixed within which range the arrack has to be 
sold by the excise contractor. Thus, the price of arrack to be sold 
in retail is not dependent on the market forces but pre-determined 
within a range. Therefore, though price range is provided for by the 
statute, it cannot be said that because there is a price range 
providing for a minimum and a maximum, the sale price is not 
fixed. The sale price is fixed by the statute but within a particular 
range beyond which price, either on the higher side or on the lower 
side, the arrack cannot be sold by the excise contractor in retail. 
Therefore, the arrack is sold at a price which is fixed statutorily 
under Rule 4 of the 1967 Rules and thus the second condition 
stands satisfied.  
16.  
Since both the conditions as mandated under 
Explanation(a)(iii) are satisfied, the excise contractors or the liquor 
vendors selling arrack would not come within the ambit of “buyer” 
as defined under Explanation(a) to Section 206C of the Income Tax 
Act. 
17.  
We have perused the orders dated 17.01.2001 passed 
by the assessing officer under Section 206C(6) of the Income Tax 
Act. From a perusal of the said orders, more particularly the order 

42 
 
in respect of the assessment year 2000-2001 which is the main 
order passed by the assessing officer followed in other assessment 
proceedings, it is seen that the same was passed under Section 
206C(6) of the Income Tax Act. By the said order dated 17.01.2001 
for the assessment year 2000-01, the assessing officer declared 
that Mysore Sales had failed to collect and deposit an amount of 
Rs. 3,90,57,516.00 as TDS from the excise contractors and, 
therefore, directed the appellant to deposit the said amount to the 
credit of the central government. That apart, interest was also 
charged and levied under Section 206C(6) following which demand 
notice of even date under Section 156 of the Income Tax Act was 
issued. Before passing the said order, it is seen that the assessing 
officer had considered Section 206C of the Income Tax Act and the 
reply submitted by Mysore Sales to the show cause notice issued. 
18.  
We have already analysed the various sub-sections of 
Section 206C of the Income Tax Act. As per sub-section (3), any 
person collecting TDS under sub-section (1) shall have to pay the 
same to the credit of the central government within seven days. 
Requirement under sub-section (5A) is that every person collecting 
TDS in terms of Section 206C (1) shall prepare half yearly returns 

43 
 
for the periods ending on 30th September and 31st March 
respectively for each financial year and thereafter to submit the 
same before the competent assessing officer. Sub-rule (6) 
mandates that if any person responsible for collecting TDS fails to 
collect the same, he shall have to deposit the said amount to the 
credit of the central government notwithstanding failure to deduct 
TDS. 
19.  
Though there is no express provision in sub-section (6) 
or any other provision of Section 206C of the Income Tax Act 
regarding issuance of notice and affording hearing to such a 
person before passing an order thereunder, nonetheless, it is 
evident that an order passed under Section 206C(6) of the Income 
Tax Act, as in the present case, is prejudicial to the person 
concerned as such an order entails adverse civil consequences. It 
is trite law that when an order entails adverse civil consequences 
or is prejudicial to the person concerned, it is essential that 
principles of natural justice are followed. In the instant case, 
though show cause notice was issued to the assessee to which 
reply was also filed, the same would not be adequate having regard 
to the consequences that such an order passed under Section 

44 
 
206C(6) of the Income Tax Act would entail. Even though the 
statute may be silent regarding notice and hearing, the court 
would read into such provision the inherent requirement of notice 
and hearing before a prejudicial order is passed. We, therefore, 
hold that before an order is passed under Section 206C of the 
Income Tax Act, it is incumbent upon the assessing officer to put 
the person concerned to notice and afford him an adequate and 
reasonable opportunity of hearing, including a personal hearing.  
20.  
In view of the discussions made above and the 
conclusions reached, it is not necessary for us to delve into other 
contours of the lis. Thus, the question framed in paragraph 3 
above, is answered in the negative by holding that Section 206C of 
the Income Tax Act is not applicable in respect of Mysore Sales and 
that the liquor vendors(contractors) who bought the vending rights 
from the appellant on auction cannot be termed as “buyers” within 
the meaning of Explanation(a) to Section 206C of the Income Tax 
Act. We also hold that the High Court was not justified in 
dismissing the writ petitions and consequently, the writ appeal 
challenging the orders dated 17.01.2001. 

45 
 
21.  
Having regard to the discussions made above, we are of 
the view that the appeal should be allowed. Accordingly, we pass 
the following order: 
(i) 
judgment and order dated 13.03.2006 
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of 
Karnataka at Bengaluru in Writ Appeal No. 
7926/2003 and connected writ appeals, is hereby 
set aside; 
(ii) 
judgment and order dated 27.10.2003 
passed by the learned Single Judge of the High 
Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru in Writ Petition 
Nos. 6869-6874 of 2001 and other connected writ 
petitions, is hereby set aside; and 
(iii) 
orders dated 17.01.2001 passed by the 
Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax (TDS)–1, 
Bengaluru under Section 206C(6) of the Income 
Tax Act for the assessment years 2000-2001, 
1999-2000, 1998-1999, 1997-1998, 1996-1997 
and 1995-1996 as well as the consequential 
demand notices of even date issued under Section 
156 of the Income Tax Act, are hereby set aside 
and quashed. 
 
 

46 
 
 
22.  
Civil Appeal accordingly stands allowed. However, there 
shall be no order as to cost. 
                                  
.………………………………J. 
    [B. V. NAGARATHNA] 
 
 
 
 …………………………………J. 
    [UJJAL BHUYAN] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
JULY 08, 2024.