2024 INSC 51
Reportable
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
Civil Appeal Nos 3736-3737 of 2023
State Bank of India and Ors
.... Appellant(s)
Versus
The Consortium of Mr Murari Lal Jalan and
Mr Florian Fritsch and Anr
....Respondent(s)
WITH
Civil Appeal Nos 4131-4134 of 2023
Civil Appeal Nos 6427-6428 of 2023
J U D G M E N T
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI
1
This batch of appeals arises from three orders of the National Company Law
Appellate Tribunal1.  A Resolution Plan was submitted under the Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Code, 20162 by a consortium of Murari Lal Jalan and Florian
Fristch in respect of the Corporate Debtor (Jet Airways Limited).  The Plan was
voted upon and approved by the Committee of Creditors on 17 October 2020.
The Resolution Professional then filed an application before the Adjudicating
Authority to seek approval of the Resolution Plan. The Plan received the
imprimatur  of  the  Adjudicating  Authority  –  the  National  Company  Law
1 “NCLAT”
2  “IBC”
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2024.01.23
15:19:36 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
Tribunal3 - on 22 June 20214. 
2
Clause 7.6 of the Resolution Plan stipulates conditions for implementation.
Clause 7.6.1 spells out the “conditions precedent”:
“7.6.1.  Conditions  Precedent  -  The  obligation  of  the  Resolution
Applicant  to  re-commence  operations  as  an  aviation
company, being the business proposed to be acquired is
subject to the fulfilment of the following conditions after the
Approval Date ("Conditions Precedent"):
(a)
Validation of AOP of the Corporate Debtor by DGCA & MoCA
-  The  AOP  of  the  Corporate  Debtor  shall  have  been
validated by the DGCA, the MoCA and any other relevant
Government  Authority  and  grant  of  all  other  mandatory
approvals  to  the  Corporate  Debtor  to  enable  it  to  re-
commence flying operations (including commercial/ cargo
operations) and related on-ground services.
(b) 
Submission and approval of the Business Plan to DGCA &
MoCA The Business Plan of the Resolution Applicant shall
have been submitted after the Approval Date to the DGCA
and MoCA for their review, and approval. The Resolution
Applicant agrees to modify its business plan to incorporate
all reasonable changes required by the DGCA/ MoCA, which
otherwise  does  not  make  the  business  unviable  for  the
Resolution Applicant.
(c) 
Slots Allotment Approval The DGCA and MoCA shall have
approved  the  reinstatement  of  all  the  suspended  slots
(including the bilateral rights and traffic rights) back to Jet
Airways/  Corporate  Debtor.  The  slots  (along  with  related
bilateral  rights  and  traffic  rights)  can  be  allotted  to  the
Corporate Debtor gradually as per its Business Plan with
immediate  slots  allotment  approval  (along  with  related
bilateral rights and traffic rights) for sectors on which Jet 2.0
proposes  to  recommence  operations  after  the  Effective
Date.
(d) 
International Traffic Rights Clearance The Corporate Debtor
shall  have  received  the  International  Traffic  Rights
Clearance in compliance with Applicable Laws.
(e) 
Demerger - The Scheme filed as part of this Resolution Plan
shall have been approved under Applicable Laws and the
Demerged  Employees  shall  have  demerged  from  the
Corporate Debtor to AGSL along with all their past dues,
liabilities and outstanding's with effect from the Approval
Date, without the requirement of any further consent or
approval  of  any  other  stakeholder  of  AGSL  (since  we
understand that AGSL currently does not have any creditor)
or  any  stakeholder  of  the  Corporate  Debtor  (including
existing or past employee or workmen or employees' unions
of the Corporate Debtor).”
3
Clause 7.6.4 contains a stipulation for “automatic withdrawal”:
3 “NCLT”
4 “Plan Approval Order” 

3
“Automatic Withdrawal - The Resolution Applicant is confident of
completing all the Conditions Precedent (as set out in Clause 7.6.1
above)  within  90  (ninety)  days  from  the  Approval  Date.  In  the
unlikely event that all the Conditions Precedent cannot be fulfilled
within  90  (ninety)  days,  the  Resolution  Applicant  takes  the
responsibility of completing the outstanding Conditions Precedent
at  the  earliest  and  seeks  to  extend  the  Conditions  Precedent
fulfilment period by another term of maximum 180 (one hundred
and eighty) days. If all the Conditions Precedent are not fulfilled
within such period (i.e. 270 (two hundred and seventy) days from
the Approval Date), then this Resolution Plan shall automatically
stand withdrawn without any further acts, deeds, or things. On such
withdrawal,  the  members  of  the  Resolution  Applicant  in  the
Monitoring Committee shall resign, and the remaining members of
the  Monitoring  Committee  shall  assume  absolute  control  of  the
Corporate Debtor.”
4
In terms of Clause 7.6.1 of the Resolution Plan, the SRA is obligated to re-
commence operations as an aviation company subject to the fulfilment of five
conditions precedent, namely- (i) Validation of Airline Operator Permit of the
Corporate Debtor by the Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) and Ministry of
Civil Aviation (MoCA); (ii) Submission and Approval of Business Plan by DGCA
and  MoCA,  (iii)  Slot  Allotment  Approval,  (iv)  International  Traffic  Rights’
Clearance; and (v) Approval of Demerger of ground handling business into a
company, namely AGSL. The date of completion of the Conditions Precedent was
defined as the 'Effective Date'. Given the uncertainty surrounding the Effective
Date,  the  NCLT,  in  its  Plan  Approval  Order,  mandated  the  completion  of
Conditions Precedent and the attainment of the Effective Date within the first 90
days from the Approval Date. The Order also granted the flexibility to request an
extension of the 180-day timeline, allowing for an outer limit of 270 days, in
accordance with the provisions outlined in the Resolution Plan.
5       These conditions precedent had to be fulfilled, in any event, within an outer limit
of  270  days  failing  which  the  Resolution  Plan  would  automatically  stand
withdrawn. Upon this eventuality taking place, the members of the Resolution
Applicant  in  the  Monitoring  Committee  are  to  resign,  and  the  remaining
members of the committee are to assume absolute control over the Corporate
Debtor. Following the Effective Date, the SRA is then required to infuse funds and

4
fulfil specified payments to stakeholders, including disbursements to Employees,
Workmen, and other Operational Creditors, within 180 days from the Effective
Date.
6 
The Successful Resolution Applicant5 and the consortium of lenders represented
by  the  State  Bank  of  India6 were  not  ad  idem on  whether  the  conditions
precedent were fulfilled.  The SRA took the position that all conditions precedent
had been duly fulfilled. Consequently, on May 20 2022, the DGCA reissued an Air
Operation Certificate, confirming the authorization for the Corporate Debtor to
engage in commercial air operations. The SRA communicated via email to the
Lenders, affirming compliance with all prerequisites and proposing that May 20
2022, should be recognized as the effective date under the Resolution Plan.
However, the lenders took a position to the contrary. On 15th November 2022,
the SRA filed I.A. No. 3398 of 2022 (Implementation Application) and I.A. No.
3508 of 2022 (Exclusion Application) before the NCLT seeking a determination in
accord with its position. 
7      By an order dated 13 January 2023, the NCLT came to the conclusion that the SRA
was compliant with the conditions  precedent.  It allowed the Implementation
Application,  thereby  inter  alia permitting  the  SRA  to  take  control  and
management  of  the  Corporate  Debtor.  The  period  of  six  months  for
implementation  would  commence  from  16  November  2022.   The  tribunal
reasoned that: 
(i) 
On  21  October  2022,  the  NCLAT  confirmed  SRA's  compliance  with
necessary conditions precedent (CPs) to the satisfaction of MC. Despite
the lenders seeking clarification through IA 4771 of 2022, the NCLAT's
findings were reaffirmed on 20 December 2022;
5 “SRA”
6 “SBI”

5
(ii) 
There is no dispute regarding compliance with CPs at serial no. (i) and (v)
as per the approved plan, including the validation of the Air Operator
Certificate by DGCA and MoCA, and the approval of the demerger of the
ground handling business into AGSL;
(iii) 
Concerning  CP  at  serial  no.  (ii),  the  business  plan's  submission  and
approval to DGCA and MoCA were deemed as complete, with the issuance
of the Air Operator Certificate (AOC), considered as implicit approval;
(iv) 
Regarding slot allotment approval, aligned with the plan approval order,
confirming slots were granted as per the plan;
(v) 
For International Traffic Right Clearance, the requirement was deemed
satisfied  after  successfully  recommencing  operations,  adhering  to
applicable  laws,  and  plan  approval  order  conditions.  Consequently,  all
Conditions Precedent were duly complied with; and 
(vii) 
Regarding the Exclusion Application, it was deemed appropriate to grant
an exclusion for 180 days until November 16, 2022, in the interest of
justice and to achieve the primary objective of maximizing assets and
resolving the insolvency of the Corporate Debtor.
The order of the NCLT has been challenged by SBI in appeal.  The appeal is
pending before the NCLAT.  
8
On 3 March 2023, the NCLAT declined to stay the order of the NCLT, which has
given rise to the first in the three sets of appeals being Civil Appeal Nos 3736-
3737 of 2023.  By a subsequent order dated 26 May 2023, the NCLAT allowed an
extension commencing from 3 March 2023 until 31 August 2023.  This order has
given rise to the second in the batch of appeals being Civil Appeal Nos 4131-
4134 of 2023. 

6
9
The Resolution Plan envisaged that with an intent to settle the total outstanding
claims made by domestic banks, foreign banks and financial institutions, the
assenting financial creditors would be entitled to the benefit of payments and
securities. This is described as “Summary of payments and security package”.
Clause 6.4.4 of the Resolution Plan is titled as “Treatment of Financial Creditors”
and is reproduced below, insofar as it is relevant:
“Head
Amount payable
Security Offered
Value of Security
Date  of  Creation  of
Security
Date  of  Release  of
Security
Cash payment
Up to Rs.185 crores
PBG  of  Rs.  47.5
crores
Rs.  393.5  cr  (with
BKC)
or
Rs. 147.5 Cr (without
BKC)
Effective Date
PBG adjusted
BKC  Property  (if
given)
To  be  released  on
sale of BKC
Mortgage over Dubai
Property No. 1 valued
at more than Rs. 100
crores
Year
 
5
 
or
 
on
complete  payment,
whichever is earlier
Cash payment
Rs. 195 Crores
BKC  Property  (if
given)
Rs. 445 Cr (with BKC)
or
Rs.  200  Cr  (without
BKC)
Effective Date
To  be  released  on
sale of BKC
Mortgage over Dubai
Property No. 1 valued
at more than Rs. 100
crores
Effective Date
Year
 
5
 
or
 
on
complete  payment,
whichever is earlier
Mortgage over Dubai
Property No. 2 valued
at more than Rs. 100
crores
Effective Date
Cash payment
NPV of Rs. 391 Crores
(using  the  discount
rate specified in the
Evaluation Matrix)
Mortgage over Dubai
Property No. 1 valued
at more than Rs. 100
crores
Rs. 600 Crores
Effective Date
Year
 
5
 
or
 
on
complete  payment,
whichever is earlier”
Mortgage over Dubai
Property No. 2 valued
at more than Rs. 100
crores
Effective Date
Mortgage over Dubai
Property No. 1 valued
at more than Rs. 50
crores 
Effective Date

7
10
In an effort to resolve the imbroglio, on 16 August 2023, an affidavit was filed on
behalf of SBI, by its Chief Manager.  The affidavit stated that the lenders were
agreeable to a certain course of action.  In other words, the lenders had agreed
that if SRA satisfies particular criteria, including infusing Rs. 350 Crores by 31
October 2023, adhering to the resolution plan terms, and meeting employee
payment obligations in accordance with the NCLAT order dated 21 October 2022,
they  would  abstain  from  challenging  exclusion/extension  of  time  issues.
However,  the  inability  to  meet  these  conditions  necessitates  directing  the
Corporate  Debtor  into  liquidation,  as  stipulated  in  Paragraphs  8(a)  to  (c).
Paragraph 8 is reproduced below:
“8.
In the present appeal, the lenders are agreeable that in case;
a) 
SRA infuses Rs. 350 Crores by 31.08.2023, the date by which
said payment is to be made as per the Resolution Plan, read
with Order dated 26.05.2023 passed by this Hon'ble Tribunal;
and 
b) 
SRA Undertakes to scrupulously follow the other terms and
conditions of the resolution plan and 
c) 
SRA complies with the liabilities relating to payment to the
employees as per order of NCLAT dated 21.10.2022 which
has been upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its order
dated 30.01.2023,
the Lenders would not contest the issues relating to granting
of exclusion/extension of time (in terms of the orders  dt.
13.01.2023 passed by NCLT and order dt. 26.05.2023 passed
by this Hon'ble Tribunal) as well as on the issue relating to
compliance  of  condition  precedent  by  the  SRA  and
accordingly undertakes  to withdraw the present Company
Appeal  (AT)  Ins  129-130  of  2023  which  is  pending
adjudication  before  this  Hon'ble  Tribunal  along  with  Civil
Appeal Nos. 4131-34 of 2023 & 3736-37 of 2023 filed before
the Hon'ble Supreme Court, on the said two issues. In other
words, lenders would not contest the granting of exclusions
as  well  as  on  the  issue  regarding  the  compliance  of
Conditions Precedent, in case the aforesaid steps are taken
by SRA without any further delay. Failing to comply with the
conditions  mentioned  in  Para  8(a)  to  (c)  above,  the
Corporate Debtor should be directed to go into liquidation.”
11
Following the affidavit, which was filed by SBI, an application was moved by the
SRA on 18 August 2023 seeking liberty to pay the amount of Rs 350 crores as
envisaged in the affidavit of SBI in the following manner:

8
(i)
The first tranche of Rs 100 crores by 31 August 2023;
(ii)
The second tranche of Rs 100 crores by 30 September 2023; and
(iii)
The balance of Rs 150 crores by the adjustment of the Performance Bank
Guarantee7 issued by the SRA in favour of the lenders.
12
Permission to do so was granted by the NCLAT on 28 August 2023 extending
time until 31 August 2023 for the payment of Rs 100 crores; till 30 September
2023 for the payment of Rs 100 crores and for the balance of Rs 150 crores by
adjusting the payment against the PBG issued by the SRA.
13
The reference to the PBG was contained in the tabulated statement in clause
6.4.4 of the Resolution Plan, which is set out above.  Apart from the above
stipulations, it would be material to make a reference, at this stage, to certain
provisions  of  the  Request  for  Resolution  Plans8.   Clause  3.13  of  the  RFRP
provides for performance security. It stipulates that (i) the SRA must furnish an
unconditional and irrevocable PBG, either INR 150 Crores or 10% of the upfront
amount, within seven days of declaration; (ii) The PBG, following Format VIII-A,
remains valid for 180 days or until Resolution Plan completion, extendable by
SRA as directed by the CoC; (iii) Failure to provide the Performance Security upon
accepting the Letter of Intent may lead to its cancellation at the discretion of the
CoC : 
“3.13 
Performance Security
3.13.1 The Successful Resolution Applicant shall furnish or cause to
be furnished, an unconditional and irrevocable performance
bank guarantee or a demand draft, issued by any scheduled
commercial  bank  in  India  or  a  foreign  bank  which  is
regulated by the central bank of a jurisdiction outside India
which  is  compliant  with  the  Financial  Action  Task  force
Standards  and  is  a  signatory  to  the  International
Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions  Multilateral
Memorandum  of  Understanding,  provided  that  it  is
acceptable to the Resolution Professional (acting for the CoC)
(“PBG  Bank”),  of  an  amount  of  INR  150  Crores  (Indian
Rupees Hundred and Fifty Crores only) or 10% of upfront
amount (payable as per the resolution plan by the Successful
7 “PBG”
8 “RFRP”

9
Resolution Applicant), whichever is higher in favour of “State
Bank of India, (that is, SBI) (in its capacity as an agent of the
CoC (and acting on behalf of the Company), within 7 (seven)
days of declaration of the Successful Resolution Applicant, or
by way of a direct deposit by way of the real time gross
settlement system into a bank account held by the SBI Bank,
the  details  of  which  shall  be  shared  separately  with  the
Successful Resolution Applicant (“Performance Security”)
3.13.2 If  the  Performance  Security  is  being  provided  as  a
performance bank guarantee, it shall be in accordance with
Format VIII-A of this RFRP (“PBG”). The PBG shall be valid, till
the later of (i) a period of 180 days from the date of the PBG;
and (ii) the date of completion of the implementation of the
Resolution Plan (as determined by the RP and the (CoC) and
shall  be  subject  to  re-issuance  or  extension  by  the
Successful Resolution Applicant as may be required by the
CoC  (as  assisted  by  the  Resolution  Professional)  (“PBG
Validity”).
3.13.3 It is hereby clarified that non-submission of the Performance
to  permit  the  Resolution  Applicant,  along  with  the
acceptance of the Letter of Intent, shall lead to cancellation
of  Letter  of  Intent  issued  by  the  CoC,  unless  otherwise
determined by the CoC at its sole discretion...”
14
Clause 3.13.7 empowers SBI as an agent of the Committee of Creditors to invoke
the performance security on the occurrence of certain eventualities:
“3.13.7 SBI, in its capacity as an agent of the CoC (and acting on
behalf of the Company), shall have the right to invoke the
Performance  Security  on  behalf  of  the  CoC  (and  upon
receiving approval from the CoC), (by issuance of a written
demand to the Bank to invoke the Performance Security, if
provided  as  a  PBG).  The  Performance  Security  can  be
invoked and appropriated at any time, upon occurrence of
any of the following conditions, without any reference to the
Resolution Applicant.
i 
any  of  the  condition  under  the  Letter  of  Intent  or  the
Successful Resolution Plan are breached;
ii 
if  the  Resolution Applicant  fails  to  re-issue or extend the
Performance Security (if provided as a PBG), in accordance
with the terms of this RFRP; or
iii 
failure of the Successful Resolution Applicant to implement
the Approved Resolution Plan to the satisfaction of the CoC,
and in accordance with the terms of the Approved Resolution
Plan.”
15
Clause 3.13.9 specifies that the performance security shall not be set off against
or used as part of the consideration which the SRA proposes to offer in relation
to the company:

10
“3.13.9  The  Performance Security shall  not be  set-off  against or
used  as  part  of  the  consideration  that  the  Successful
Resolution  Applicant  proposes  to  offer  in  relation  to  the
Company,  even  if  expressly  indicated  as  such  by  the
Successful Resolution Applicant in the Successful Resolution
Plan.”
16
Clause 9.4 of the Resolution Plan specifically contemplates that the performance
guarantee provided by the Resolution Applicant can be invoked in terms of RFRP.
NCLAT has permitted the SRA to adjust the last tranche of Rs 150 crores by
adjusting the PBG of Rs 150 crores.  This forms the subject matter of appeal in
this Court. 
17
Mr N Venkataraman, Additional Solicitor General appearing on behalf of SBI,
submitted that: 
(i)
By  its  affidavit  dated  16  August  2023,  SBI  had  clearly  stipulated  three
conditions, among them being that the SRA must infuse Rs 350 crores by 31
August 2023;  
(ii)
 The plain meaning of the expression “infuse” is that the SRA was liable to
pay three tranches of a total amount of Rs 350 crores and the NCLAT was not
justified at the interim stage in permitting an adjustment of the PBG of Rs 150
crores against the obligation to deposit the last tranche;
 
(iii)
The SRA had to undertake to comply with the other terms and conditions of
the  Resolution  Plan  besides  complying  with  the  liabilities  relating  to  the
payment to the employees.  As regards the payment to the employees, an
appeal filed by the SRA before this Court against the order of the NCLAT
dated 21 October 2022 was dismissed on 30 January 2023.  Yet there is no
compliance towards the employees and staff; and
(iv)
There has  been a default on the part  of the SRA  in complying with the
conditions precedent spelt out in clause 7.6 and on various other aspects,
including the payment of workmen’s dues, airport dues and other matters.

11
18
The  submission  which  has  been  urged  on  behalf  of  the  lenders  has  been
opposed on behalf of the SRA by Mr Krishnendu Datta, senior counsel.  On behalf
of the SRA, it has been submitted that: 
(i)
The  Resolution  Plan  specifically  contemplates  the  adjustment  of  the  PBG
(originally of Rs 47.5 crores, subsequently enhanced to Rs 150 crores). In
support of this submission, reliance has been placed on the summary of
payments  and  security  package  forming  a  part  of  clause  6.4.4  of  the
Resolution Plan;
(ii)
The SRA was in the first tranche required to pay an amount of up to Rs 185
crores against the creation of securities, namely, (i) PBG of Rs 47.5 crores; (ii)
BKC Property (if given); and (iii) Mortgage over Dubai Property No 1 valued at
over Rs 100 crores.  In the last column of the table, it has been stipulated
that the securities would be released, as indicated; 
(iii)
The PBG was liable to be adjusted against the cash payment of the first
tranche of Rs 185 crores; 
(iv)
No specific date for the release of the security in relation to the PBG has been
mentioned; 
(v)
Moreover, in respect of the second tranche comprising of Rs 195 crores, there
was no requirement to furnish any security in the form of a PBG; 
(vi)
The securities, in other words, were of a revolving nature, but significantly on
the release of the PBG against a cash payment of Rs 185 crores, the PBG is
not required to be renewed as a fresh security for the following tranches; and
(vii)
As regards the creation of security in respect of the Dubai property, at all
material times, the SRA has been ready and willing to effect the security and,
as a matter of fact, this is evident in the 37th Meeting of the Monitoring
Committee of the Corporate Debtor held on 9 October 2023.

12
19
While considering the rival submissions, it must be noted, at the outset, that the
appeal, stemming from the NCLT's January 13 2023 order holding that the SRA is
compliant  with  the  conditions  precedent  is  pending  before  the  NCLAT.
Hence,  the  observations  in  the  present  judgment  are  confined  to  the
arrangement which must operate during the pendency of the appeal without this
Court expressing a final view on the merits of the appeal, which will fall for
consideration before the NCLAT.  
20
The occasion for an extension of time to the SRA for the deposit of Rs 350 crores
arose as a consequence of the affidavit which was filed by SBI before the NCLAT
on 16 August 2023.  SBI’s affidavit envisaged that the lenders would not contest
the issues pertaining to (a) the grant or exclusion of time; or (b) extension in
terms of the orders which were passed by the NCLT on 13 January 2023 and 26
May 2023; and (c) compliance of the conditions precedent by the SRA.  SBI’s
offer was, however, subject to the fulfillment of three conditions.  The three
conditions were:
(i)
The SRA must infuse an amount of Rs 350 crores by 31 August 2023 (the
date by which the payment was to be made in terms of the Resolution
Plan read with the order dated 26 May 2023 of NCLT);
(ii)
The  SRA  must  undertake  to  scrupulously  follow  the  other  terms  and
conditions of the Resolution Plan; and
(iii)
The SRA must comply with the liabilities in regard to the payment to the
employees in terms of the order of the NCLAT dated 21 October 2022
which has been upheld by this Court on 30 January 2023.

13
21     Conditional on compliance with the three conditions set out above, SBI stated
that  it would be willing to  withdraw  both the company  appeals  which were
pending before the NCLAT as well as the Civil Appeals which were pending
before this Court, details of which were set out in the affidavit.  The offer which
was made by SBI on behalf of the lenders had to be complied with as it stood in
the event that the SRA sought the benefit of the offer.  According to the SRA, the
PBG was liable to be released on adjustment in terms of the Resolution Plan.
This is a matter which would have to await an adjudication by NCLAT in the
pending appeal.  The impugned order of the NCLAT, on the other hand, allowed
the plea of the SRA for adjustment and consequential release of the PBG at the
interlocutory stage.  This prima facie would not be in accordance with the tenor
of paragraph 8 of the affidavit which was filed by SBI in which it stated that the
lenders  would  not  contest  the  issues  in  the  pending  appeal  conditional  on
compliance  with  the  three  conditions  which  were  set  out  in  the  affidavit.
Infusion of Rs 350 crores, as envisaged in the affidavit, could not have been
substituted with a direction for adjustment of the PBG, at that stage.  Infusion
meant that the third tranche has to be paid in the same manner.  Adjustment of
the PBG was not permissible. 
22
In the circumstances, we have come to the conclusion that NCLAT was not
justified in holding, in its order dated 28 August 2023, that the last tranche of Rs
150 crores which was to be paid would be adjusted against the PBG.   The SRA
having deposited the first two tranches each of Rs 100 crores must comply with
the  remaining  obligation  of  depositing  Rs  150  crores  (to  make  up  a  total
payment of Rs 350 crores).  Having by its conduct accepted the terms set up by
SBI it must be obligated to comply with the entirety of its obligations.  It must do
so in strict compliance with the time schedule set out hereafter.  

14
23
The lenders have submitted that:
(i)
The admitted claim of the Financial Creditors is Rs 7800 crores, while the
package  offered  by  the  SRA  in  the  Resolution  Plan  is  Rs  4783  crores
payable in tranches in five years;
(ii)
Instead of infusing Rs 350 crores, being the first tranche of payment,
which was to be paid in 180 days, the SRA has infused a sum of Rs 187
crores after two years, in addition to Rs 13 crores paid by a third party;
and
(iii)
The lenders have already incurred Rs 386.72 crores during the CIRP and
after the approval of the Plan towards maintaining the Corporate Debtor,
excluding airport dues.  In addition, the lenders are incurring Rs 22.26
crores on a monthly basis towards expenses/carrying cost for maintaining
the Corporate Debtor.
24
SBI  has  stated  that  the  lenders  have  been  saddled  with  huge  recurring
expenditure  every  month  to  maintain  the  remaining  airline  assets  of  the
Corporate Debtor.  The lenders have been embroiled in litigation before the NCLT
and  NCLAT  with  little  progress  on  this  ground  towards  implementing  the
resolution  plan.   Such  a  state  of  affairs  cannot  be  permitted  to  continue
interminably as it defeats the very object and purpose of the provisions of and
timelines under the IBC. The timely resolution of insolvency cases is vital for
sustaining  the  effectiveness  and  credibility  of  the  insolvency  framework.
Therefore, concerted efforts and decisive actions are imperative to break the
deadlock and ensure the expeditious implementation of the resolution plan.
25
The lenders have argued in the appeals that there has been a failure on the part
of the SRA to comply with the conditions precedent.  If the SRA were to comply
with the terms as envisaged in SBI’s affidavit dated 16 August 2023, evidently

15
issues pertaining to compliance with the conditions precedent were not to be
pressed thereafter. In order to furnish this SRA a final opportunity to comply and
consistent with the above position, we issue the following directions:
(i)
The  SRA  shall  peremptorily  on  or  before  31 January  2024, deposit  an
amount of Rs 150 crores into the designated account of SBI, failing which
the consequences under the Resolution Plan shall follow;
(ii)
The PBG of Rs 150 crores shall continue to remain in operation and effect,
pending the final disposal of the appeal before NCLAT, and shall abide by
the final outcome of the appeal and the directions that may be issued by
NCLAT; and 
(iii)
Whether or not the SRA has been compliant with all the conditions of the
Resolution Plan as well as of the conditions set out in paragraph 8 of the
affidavit dated 16 August 2023 shall be decided by the NCLAT in the
pending appeal.
26
The order dated 28 August 2023 of the NCLAT is modified in part in terms of the
above directions and, hence, the permission which was granted to the SRA to
adjust the last tranche of Rs 150 crores against the PBG shall stand substituted
by the above directions.
27
The NCLAT is requested to endeavour an expeditious disposal of the appeal by
the end of March 2024.
28
The appeals are accordingly disposed of.

16
29
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
..…..…....…........……………….…........CJI.
                                                                  [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                             [J B Pardiwala]
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                             [Manoj Misra]
New Delhi; 
January 18, 2024
-S-