2024 INSC 469
                    REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CIVIL) NO. 17403 OF 2023
The State of West Bengal
 ….Petitioner(s)
versus
Dr. Sanat Kumar Ghosh and Ors. 
         ….Respondent(s)
ORDER
SURYA KANT, J.
There are approximately [35] state­aided Universities in the State
of   West   Bengal.   The   appointment   of   their   Vice­Chancellors   is   the
hallmark of this controversy. It seems that the Petitioner­State of West
Bengal   appointed   24   Vice­Chancellors   in   the   year   2022.   These
appointments,   along   with   the   West   Bengal   University   Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2012 and the West Bengal Laws (Amendment) Act,
2014,   were   challenged   before   the   High   Court   in   a   Public   Interest
Litigation. The High Court vide judgement dated 14.03.2023 held that
the Search Committee constituted by the State Government for the
Page 1 of 24
Digitally signed by
satish kumar yadav
Date: 2024.07.08
17:15:18 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

selection   of   those   24   Vice­Chancellors   did   not   have   any   Member
nominated   by   the   Chairman   of   the   University   Grants   Commission
(UGC) and since the said Search Committee was in violation of the
UGC’s Act, the appointment of 24 Vice­Chancellors was unsustainable
in law. The Division Bench judgment was upheld by this Court.
2.
It further seems that the State of West Bengal thereafter made
certain amendments in the State Universities Act in tune with the
UGC’s   Regulations,   2018.   However,   instead   of   resorting   to   the
statutorily   prescribed   procedure   for   appointment   of   regular   Vice­
Chancellors,   the   Minister­in­charge   of   the   Department   of   Higher
Education,   Government   of   West   Bengal,   sent   a   proposal   on
18.05.2023 to the Chancellor for extending the tenure of 27 Vice­
Chancellors whose tenure was about to expire. The Chancellor, on the
other hand, appointed ‘Interim Vice­Chancellors’ and as many as 28
professors were given such assignments. The appointments of these
interim/ad­hoc/caretaker Vice­Chancellors came to be challenged by
Respondent No. 1  through a Public Interest Litigation, which the High
Court not only dismissed vide impugned judgment dated 28­06­2023
but also conferred perks and other monetary benefits on its own to
these acting Vice­Chancellors, a benefit which the Chancellor himself
had not granted to them.
Page 2 of 24

3.
  The   Division   Bench   order,   to   the   extent   of   granting   pay,
allowance, perks or facilities admissible to a regular Vice­Chancellor,
was consequently stayed by this Court vide order dated 06.10.2023.
4.
The rift between the State Government, on the one hand, and the
Governor of West Bengal, who happens to be the Chancellor of subject
Universities,   on   the   other,   is   the   root   cause   of   stalemate   in   the
appointment of regular Vice­Chancellors. To elaborate further, there is
no consensus between the two sets of authorities in the matter of
constitution and composition of Search Committees for shortlisting
the candidates for appointment as Vice Chancellors. 
5.
Since we,  prima facie, disapproved the Chancellor's action of
appointing   interim   Vice­Chancellors   without   consulting   the   State
Government, all such further appointments were stayed vide order
dated 06.10.2023.
6.
The chaos has further deepened as neither there are regular
Vice­Chancellors nor interim or ad­hoc Vice­Chancellors are permitted
to be appointed. Regardless thereto, the Chancellor has assigned the
powers of Vice­Chancellors to various persons — not necessarily all of
them   are   academicians.   The   State   of   West   Bengal   has   strongly
protested   against   such   a   recourse.   We,   however,   do   not   deem   it
Page 3 of 24

necessary to dwell on that issue at this stage for the reasons stated
hereinafter:   
(I)
On 15­09­2023, the learned Senior Counsel for the State of
West Bengal, as well as learned counsel for the Chancellor, very
fairly suggested that, pending multiple controversies, the Search
Committee may be constituted by this Court. In order to explore
that   possibility,   this   Court   on   27.09.2023   directed   the   learned
senior counsel/counsel for the parties to submit, in a tabulated
chart,   the   details   of   the   Universities,   the   description   of   their
subjects/disciplines, existing provisions for constitution of Search
Committees, as well as the new provision which the State of West
Bengal had proposed in the Bill awaiting assent of the Governor.
Counsel for the intervenors were also granted liberty to suggest the
names   of   renowned   scientists,   technocrats,   administrators,
educationists, jurists or any other eminent person for the purpose
of nomination to the Search Committee.
(II)
On 06.10.2023, the parties sought time to replace certain
names earlier suggested by them for nomination to the Search
Committees.
(III)
On   20.11.2023,   learned   senior   counsel   for   the   parties
agreed to submit a consolidated list of the names proposed by the
Page 4 of 24

State   Government/Chief   Minister/Chancellor/UGC   and   other
prescribed   authorities   for   the   purpose   of   constituting   Search
Committees.
(IV)
On 01.12.2023, learned Attorney General for India entered
appearance on behalf of the Chancellor. He assured that the names
to be suggested by the Chancellor for the constitution of Search
Committees   will   be   shared   with   counsels   for   the
petitioner/intervenors.   Besides granting time in this regard, we
also impressed upon the learned Attorney General to use his good
offices to explore an amicable mode of appointment of the Vice­
Chancellors,   in   conformity   with   the   Statutes   governing   such
appointments.
(V)
It seems that pursuant to the initiative taken by learned
Attorney   General,   some   meetings   were   held   on   04.12.2023,
13.03.2024   and   14.03.2024.   These   meetings,   however,   did   not
yield the desired results.
(VI)
On   16.04.2024, learned Attorney General, however, very
fairly stated that six posts of the Vice­Chancellors will be filled up
out of the list recommended by the State Government. Eventually,
on 17.05.2024, we were informed that the State Government had
sent a list of 15 names for appointment of Vice­Chancellors in 15
Page 5 of 24

Universities. The learned Chancellor found 07 of them unsuitable
and apparently had no objection against the remaining 08 persons.
We, therefore, directed that those 08 names be appointed within 10
days. In order to instill confidence on both sides, it was observed
that the Chief Minister of the State may send names of some more
eminent persons to fill up the 07 vacancies of Vice­Chancellors.
(VII)
We have no reason to doubt that the Chief Minister must
have   sent   a  few  more   names   of   eminent   personalities   and   the
Chancellor   hopefully   has   accorded   his   approval   for   their
appointment. As regard to the left­out Universities, we agreed on
17.05.2024, on the joint request of learned senior counsel for the
parties,   that   a   Search­cum­Selection   Committee   shall   be
constituted by this Court before the next date of hearing.
7.
This   is   how   we   are   tasked   to   constitute   the   Search­cum­
Selection Committees.
8.
Learned senior counsel/counsel for the parties are ad idem that
the   appointment   of   Vice­Chancellors   in   all   the   Universities   are
regulated by different Statutes. The academic qualification, teaching
experience, and some other distinct features also vary from university
to   university,   depending   upon   the   speciality   of   the   subjects   being
taught   thereby.   The   (i)   names   of   the   University   Acts;   (ii)   existing
Page 6 of 24

provision for appointment of Vice­Chancellors; (iii) amended provision
for appointment of Vice­Chancellor under the ordinance of 2023; and
(iv) subjects/disciplines which are being taught in a University, have
been consequently provided to us in a tabulated form. On a cursory
look, we find that every statute, broadly speaking, provides that the
Vice­Chancellor   shall   be   appointed   by   the   Chancellor   on   the
recommendations   of   a   Search­cum­Selection   Committee,   who   shall
hold the  office upto  the  age of 65 years  and  should  be  a  person
possessing   the   highest   level   of   competence,   integrity,   morals   and
institutional   commitment.   The   Vice­Chancellor   must   also   be   a
distinguished academician with 10 years of experience as a Professor
in a University or a well­reputed research/academician organization. 
9.
On an illustrative basis, we deem it appropriate in this regard to
reproduce Section 8 of the Calcutta University Act, 1979, which reads
as follows:
“8. (1) The Vice­Chancellor shall be appointed by the
Chancellor on the unanimous  recommendation of the
Senate.   If   the   Senate   fails   to   make   any   such
recommendation, the Vice­Chancellor shall be appointed
by the Chancellor in consultation with the Minister from
a panel of three persons to be elected by the Senate in
accordance   with   the   system   of   proportional
representation by means of the single transferable vote.
(2) (a) The Vice­Chancellor shall hold office for a period
of four years or till he attains the age  of 65 years,
whichever is earlier, and shall, subject to the provisions
Page 7 of 24

of   this   section,   be   eligible   for   re­appointment   for   a
period not exceeding four years. 
(b) The Chancellor may, notwithstanding the expiration
of the term of the office of the Vice­Chancellor or his
attaining the age of 65 years, allow him to continue in
office till a successor assumes office, provided that he
shall not continue as such for any period exceeding one
year. 
(3) The Vice­Chancellor shall be a whole­time officer of
the University and shall be paid from the University
Fund   a   salary   of   three   thousand   and   five   hundred
rupees   per   month   and   such   allowances   as   the
Chancellor may decide.
(4) The Vice­Chancellor may resign his office by writing
under his hand addressed to the Chancellor. 
(5) If— 
(a)  the Vice­Chancellor is, by reason of leave, illness or
other cause, temporarily unable to exercise the powers
and perform the duties of his office, or 
(b)  a vacancy occurs in the office of the Vice­Chancellor
by reason of death, resignation or expiry of the term of
his office, removal or otherwise, 
then, during the period of such temporary inability or
pending the appointment of a Vice­Chancellor, as the
case   may   be,   the   Pro­Vice­   Chancellor   for   Academic
Affairs shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
of the Vice­Chancellor. 
(6)   The   vacancy   in   the   office   of   the   Vice­Chancellor
occurring by reason of death, resignation or expiry of
the term of his office, removal or otherwise shall be
filled   up   by   appointment   of   a   Vice­Chancellor   in
accordance with the provisions of sub­section (1) within
a period of six months from the date of occurrence of the
vacancy.” 
10.
We may hasten to add at this stage that notwithstanding some
variance in the provisions of the Acts under which Vice­Chancellors
are   to   be   appointed,   especially   with   regard   to   composition   of   the
Page 8 of 24

Search­cum­Selection Committee, we deem it appropriate to invoke
our   powers   under   Article   142   of   the   Constitution   to   do   complete
justice in this matter and pass this common order for constitution of
Search­cum­Selection   Committee   for   all   the   subject   Universities.
Hence, we resolve to constitute Search­cum­Selection Committee(s) of
the same composition so as to avoid any confusion, irrespective of the
fact   that   the   relevant   provision   of   the   Statute   of   the   concerned
University may contain slight variations. Our endeavour is to infuse
transparency, independence, fairness, and impartiality so as to ensure
that   the   persons   possessing   the   highest   level   of   competence   and
integrity and are capable of leading the University by example are
shortlisted. In this regard, we have made an effort to shortlist experts
who are eminent scientists, educationists, jurists, subject experts, and
administrators in their own right. We have further attempted to set
out   that   nominees   of   the   Chancellor,   Chief   Minister,   UGC,   State
Government, the Higher Education Department of West Bengal the
intervenors etc. are adequately represented.
11.
While shortlisting the experts for composition of the Search­cm­
Selection Committee, we have been further guided by the nature of
subjects   and   disciplines   in   which   education   is   being   imparted   in
different Universities. We find that, broadly, all the Universities can be
categorized as follows:
Page 9 of 24

i) Universities with faculties predominantly in arts and science:
a) West Bengal State University
b) Sidho Kanhi Birsha University
c) Burdwan University
d) Jadavpur University
e) Gour Banga University
f) Bankura University
g) Presidency University
h) Cooch Behar Panchanan Barma University
i) Sadhu Ram Chand Murmu University of Jhargram
j) Alipurduar University
k) Raiganj University
l) Diamond Harbour Women’s University
m)Murshidabad University
n) Mahatma Gandhi University
o) Dakshin Dinajpur University
ii) Universities with faculties predominantly in commerce and science:
a) North Bengal University
b) Kalyani University
iii) Universities with faculties predominantly in arts:
a) Kanyashree University
b) Rabindra Bharati University
c) Harichand Guruchand University
d) Hindi University
Page 10 of 24

e) Biswa Bangla Biswabidyalaya
f) Darjeeling Hills University
iv) Universities with faculties predominantly in science:
a) Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad University of Technology
b) Aliah University
c) West Bengal University of Health Sciences
d) West Bengal University of Animal and Fishery Sciences
e) Kazi Nazrul University
f) Rani Rashmoni Green University
v) Other miscellaneous and multi­disciplinary universities:
a) Calcutta University
b) Sanskrit College and University
c) Baba Saheb Ambedkar Education University
d) Vidyasagar University
e) Netaji Subhas Open University
f) Uttar Banga Krishi Vishwavidyalaya
g) Bidhan Chandra Krishi Vishwavidyalaya
12.
We  hereby   appoint  Hon’ble   Mr.   Justice   Uday   Umesh   Lalit,
Former Chief Justice of India  as Chairperson of the Search­cum­
Selection Committees for all the Universities.
Page 11 of 24

13.
Following is the list of eminent educationists, scientists, jurists,
subject experts and administrators etc. who have been short­listed for
the purpose of empanelment on Search­cum­Selection Committee(s):
(i)
Arts & Humanities
a) Prof. Sabyasachi Basu Ray Chaudhury, Ex. V.C., Rabindra
Bharti University. Address: 56A, BT Road, Kolkata ­ 700500.
b) Prof. Siuli Sarkar, Principal, Lady Brabourne College.
c) Prof.   Sibaji   Pratim   Basu,   Professor,   Vidyasagar   University.
Address:   Department   of   Political   Science   with   Rural
Administration, Vidyasagar University, Midanpore – 721102.
d) Professor   Ujjwal   K   Singh,   Department   of   Political   Science,
University   of   Delhi.   Email:  ujjwalksingh@gmail.com;   Phone
no:  8800788862.
(ii)
History
a) Prof. Tapati Guha Thakurta, Prof. in Social Sciences, Centre
for Studies in Social Sciences. Address: C D 157, Salt Lake,
Sector I, Kolkata – 700064.
b) Prof. Amit De, Ashutosh Chair Professor of History, Calcutta
University.
c) Prof. Sajal Nag, Retd. Professor, Assam University.
Page 12 of 24

d) Prof. Rajat Kanta Roy, Former VC, Visva Bharati.
e) Prof.   Raghuvendra   Tanwar,   Chairman,   Indian   Council   for
Historical Research. Email:  chairman@ichr.ac.in; Phone no:
9896219909.
(iii)
Sociology & Anthropology
a) Prof. Ramanuj Ganguly, Professor, WBSU. Address: Flat: A­
106, Mall Enclave, 13, KB Sarani, Kolkata – 700080. 
b) Prof.   Tanka   Bahadur   Subba,   Ex   VC,   Sikkim   Central
University.
c) Prof. Ravinder Kaur, Professor of Sociology, IIT Delhi, email:
ravinder.iitd@gmail.com. 
(iv)
Economics
a) Prof. Abhirup Sarkar, Professor, Indian Statistical Institute,
Calcutta. Address: 10 Mandeville Gardens, Flat 802, Kolkata –
700019.
b) Prof. Saibal Kar, RBI Chair Professor of Economics, Centre for
Studies   in   Social   Sciences.   Address:   R1,   BP   Township,
Kolkata – 700094.
c) Prof. (Dr.) Ram Singh, Director, Delhi School of Economics,
University   of   Delhi,   Delhi.   Email:  ramsingh@econdse.org;
Phone number: 9971863030. 
(v)
Law
Page 13 of 24

a) Prof. Rathin Bandyopadhyay, Professor of Law, Department of
Law, NBU. Address: Department of Law, University of North
Bengal, Siliguri – 734013.
b) Justice G. Raghuram, former Judge, Andhra Pradesh High
Court and former Director, National Judicial Academy.
(vi)
English
a) Prof.   Debnarayan   Bandyopadhyay,   Ex   VC   Bankura
University.   Address:   20   Chandranath   Chatterjee   Street,
Kolkata 700025.
b) Prof. Anindyo Roy, Associate Professor Emeritus, Department
of English, Colby College, Waterville. Email: aroy@colby.edu.
c) Prof.   (Dr.)   Meena   T.   Pillai   –   Dean,   Faculty   of   Arts   and
Professor,   Institute   of   English   and   Director,   Centre   for
Cultural Studies of University of Kerala.
(vii)
Hindi
a) Prof. T.V. Kattimani, VC, Central Tribal University, Andhra
Pradesh.
b) Dr. Chander Trikha, Director, Urdu Cell, Sahitya Academy,
Haryana, R/o of House No.345, Sector 22A, Chandigarh (Mob.
No.09417004423).
Page 14 of 24

(viii) Bengali
a) Prof. Mir Rejaul Karim, Professor, Aliah University. Address:
Department   of   Bengali,   Aliah   University,   Park   Circus
Campus, 17 Gorachand Road, Kolkata­700014
b) Prof. Tapadhir Bhattacharya, former VC, Assam University.
(ix)
Chemistry
a) Prof. Abhijit Chakrabarti, Retired Professor, Saha Institute of
Nuclear Physics. Email: abhijit1960@gmail.com.
b) Prof.   Dhrubajyoti   Chattopadhyay,   VC,   Sister   Nibedita
University.
c) Prof.   Uday   Maitra,   FNA   Deprtment   of   Organic   Chemistry,
Indian   Institute   of   Sciences,   Bangalore.   Email:
maitra@iisc.ac.in.
d) Prof.   Ramesh   Chandra,   VC,   Maharaja   Surajmal   Brij
University, Bharatpur. Email: acbrdu@hotmail.com.
e) Prof. Siva Umapathy, Physical Chemistry, Indian Institute of
Sciences, Bangalore. Email: umapathy@iisc.ac.in
(x)
Physics
a) Swami   Atmapriayanand,   VC,   Ramakrishna   Mission
Vivekananda Educational and Research Institute.
b) Prof. Amitava Mukhapadhyay, Professor, NBU.
Page 15 of 24

c) Prof. Amitabha Roy Chaudhuri, Deptt of Physics, CU.
d) Prof. A.N. Basu, former VC, JU and distinguished Professor of
Physics.
(xi)
Biology
a) Prof.   Subhra   Chakraborty,   Director,   Genomics   Research
Centre, Delhi.
b) Prof. B.A. Chopade, VC – AKS University, Satna, Former VC,
Dr.   Babasaheb   Ambedkar   Marathwada   University,
Aurangabad.
c) Prof. (Dr.) Navin Sheth – former VC, Gujarat Technological
University.
d) Prof. Emeritus. Prof. V. S. Chauhan, Ph.D., D.Phil. (Oxon),
FNA,   FNASc,   TWAS,   Former     UGC   Chairman.   Email:
viranderschauhan@gmail.com. Phone No.: 9811292058.
(xii)
Botany and Zoology
a) Prof. Subhas Chandra Roy, Professor, NBU
b) Prof. Dipak Kumar Kar, ex VC, SKB University. Address: 409
Lake Gardens, Kolkata 700045; Phone No.: 7044577044
(xiii) Mathematics
a) Prof.   Kallol   Paul,   Professor,   Jadavpur   University.   Address:
188 Raja SC Mallik Road, Kolkata 700032.
b) Prof. Suparna De Sarkar, Senior Professor, NBU.
Page 16 of 24

c) Prof. Tarun Das, Department of Mathematics, University of
Delhi. Email: tarukd@gmail.com; Phone No.: 9911854923.
(xiv) Computer Science
a) Prof. Amlan Chakraborty, Calcutta University.
b) Prof. Anupam Basu, Director NIT, Durgapur.
c) Shri Raj Shekhar Joshi, Group Head (Digital Technology &
Transformation), Joint President, Aditya Birla Group.
(xv)
Electrical Engineering
a) Prof.   Bhaskar   Gupta,   Professor,   Jadavpur   University.
Address: 19C/1, Kalibari Lane, Kolkata ­ 700032.
b) Prof. Ajoy Roy, IIT Kharagpur.
c) Dr. Prith Banerjee, Chief Technology Officer of Ansys.
(xvi) Chemical and Biochemcal Engineering
a) Prof. Chiranjib Bhattacharya, ex Pro­VC, JU
b) Prof. S.E. Hasnain, Padma Shree Awardee, National Science
Chair,   SERB,   Department   of   Biochemical   Engineering   and
Biotechnology, IIT Delhi.
c) Prof.  RC Kuhad, Former Vice­Chancellor, Central University
of Haryana, and retired Professor of Bio­Chemistry. Email:
kuhad85@gmail.com; Phone no.: 9817813027.
(xvii) Civil and Mechanical Engineering 
a) Prof.   Deepankar   Choudhury,   T.   Kant   Chair   Professor   and
Head of Civil Engineering department at IIT Bombay.
Page 17 of 24

b) Prof.   Sunil   Kumar,   VC­   Rajiv   Gandhi   Proudyogiki
Vishwavidyalay, Bhopal.
(xviii)  Minerals and Agricultural Engineering 
a) Prof. Indranil Manna, JC Bose Fellow, FTWAS, FNA, FNAE,
FNASc, FASc, MAPAM, FIE(I), FEMSI, FAScT, Professor, IIT
Kharagpur, Former Director, CSIR­ Central Glass & Ceramic
Institute, VC Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra.
b) Prof. (Dr.) Virendra Kumar Tiwari, Director, IIT Kharagpur.
(xix) International Relations
a) Prof. Om Prakash Mishra, ex PVC, IGNOU & ex VC, NBU
(xx)
Statistics & Information Science
a) Prof.   Sabuj   Kumar   Chodhury,   Professor,   Department   of
Library & Information Science. Address: Third Floor, Asutosh
Building, 87/1, College Street, Kolkata – 700073.
b) Prof. Bimal Kumar Roy, Head, RC Bose Centre for Cryptology
and Security, ISI Kolkata.
(xxi)  Physiology
a) Prof. Gautam Pal, Pro VC, Kalyani University
(xxii) Geology
a) Prof.   S.K   Tandon,   former   Pro   Vice­Chancellor   and   retired
Professor   University   of   Delhi.   Email:  sktand@iiser.ac.in;
Phone no: 9810437365.
Page 18 of 24

(xxiii)Business and Management
a) Prof. Sujit Kumar Basu, former VC, Visva Bharati University.
b) Professor   Errol   D’Souza   (former   Director   IIMA),   Indian
Institute
 
of
 
Management,
 
Ahmedabad.
 
Email:
errol@iimahd.ernet.in Phone No.:  9558820604
(xxiv) Environment and Climate
a) Prof.   Jayanta   Bandopadhya,   Retd.   Professor,   IIM   Kolkata
Environmental Studies.
b) Mr. Anirban Ghosh, Eminent Technocrat & Head, Centre for
Sustainability, Mahindra University.
(xxv) Human Resource
a) Mr. Saptarshi Roy, Technocrat & Director (HR) NTPC Ltd.,
New Delhi. 
(xxvi) Miscellaneous
b) Dr.   S.K.   Pattanayak,   IAS   (Retd.),   Former   Secretary,
Deparment of Agriculture, GOI, New Delhi.
c) Mr. Parimal Rai, IAS (Retd.), Former Chief Secretary, Goa.
Address:   60,   Poorvi   Marg,   Third   Floor,   Vasant   Vihar,   New
Delhi. Phone no: 09779866666/09810533311.
Page 19 of 24

14.
The   learned   Chairperson   is   hereby   authorized   to   constitute
separate or joint Search­cum­Selection Committees for one or more
Universities,   keeping   in   view   the   nature   of   subjects/disciplines   in
which education is being imparted in such pooled Universities. The
Chairperson is requested to nominate 4 persons out of the empaneled
experts, whom he finds capable of short­listing suitable names for
appointment as Vice­Chancellors. Learned Chairperson shall preside
over every Search­cum­Selection Committee and thus, composition of
each   such   Committee   shall   be   five.     The   Search­cum­Selection
Committee shall prepare a panel of at least 03 names (alphabetically
and not in order of merit) for each University.    
15.
The learned Chairperson is requested to constitute the Search­
cum­Selection Committees for the group or the individual Universities
as early as possible and preferably within two weeks. The Department
of Higher Education, Government of West Bengal is hereby nominated
as   the   nodal   department   of   the   State   Government   to   issue
advertisements giving vide publicity to invite applications for the posts
of Vice­Chancellors. Such advertisements shall contain the details of
the   requisite   qualification   and   other   eligibility   conditions,   with   a
specific reference to this Court’s order so as to infuse  confidence,
leaving no uncertainty in the minds of the meritorious aspirants in
submitting  their  claims.  The  advertisements  shall  give  four   weeks’
Page 20 of 24

time to submit the applications. Such applications shall be scrutinized
by the concerned department of the State Government within one
week and shall thereafter the entire set of all applications be placed
before   the   learned   Chairperson   of   the   Search­cum­Selection
Committee,   who   in   turn,   will   get   the   dossier   of   each   candidate
prepared for consideration of the Search­cum­Selection Committee.
The Search Committee may endeavour to complete their task within
three months from today.
16.
The learned Chairperson shall be paid an honorarium of Rs. 3
lakhs for every effective day of proceedings of the Search Committee,
until   the   entire   process   is   completed.   The   State   Government,   in
addition to honorarium, provide the Chairperson with a suitable office
and full secretarial assistance, along with transit accommodation at
Kolkata.   The   learned   Chairperson   shall   also   be   provided   with   an
official vehicle and necessary paraphernalia forthwith, commensurate
to the constitutional position held by him in the past. 
17.
The members of the Search­cum­Selection Committee shall be
entitled to such allowance, perks, and facilities as may have been
prescribed under the Statutes or by the State Government.  If nothing
has been prescribed, in that case, the petitioner­State shall apprise
this Court of the status on the next date of hearing to enable us to
Page 21 of 24

pass appropriate order in this regard. Meanwhile, State Government is
directed   to   reimburse   their   air   fare   (economy   class)   lodging   and
boarding expenses within one week of submission of such claims.
18.
The   recommendations   made   by   the   Search­cum­Selection
Committee, duly endorsed by the learned Chairperson, shall be put up
before   the   Chief   Minister   (and   not   the   Minister­in­charge   of   a
Department) for necessary consideration. In case the Chief Minister,
State   of   West  Bengal   has   reasons   to   believe   that   any   short­listed
person is unsuitable for appointment as Vice­Chancellor, the remarks
to this effect along with supporting material and the original record of
the recommendation made by the Search­cum­Selection Committee,
shall be put up before the learned Chancellor within two weeks. The
Chief Minister shall be entitled to recommend the shortlisted names in
order of preference for appointment as Vice­Chancellors.
19.
The learned Chancellor on the receipt of record from the Chief
Minister of the State, shall appoint the Vice­Chancellors out of the
empaneled names, in the same order of preference as recommended
by the Chief Minister of the State. In case the learned Chancellor has
any reservation against the empaneled names and/or the remarks
made   by   the   Chief   Minister   of   the   State   against   any   short­listed
Page 22 of 24

candidate, the learned Chancellor shall be entitled to put up his own
opinion on file, duly supported with reasons and relevant material.
20.
The   learned   Chancellor   shall   accord   his   approval   (save   and
except when  there  is  a difference  of  opinion) within two  weeks  of
receipt of file from the Chief Minister of the State. The Department of
Higher Education, Government of West Bengal or any other concerned
Department of the State Government are hereby directed to notify the
appointment within one week from the date of receipt of approval from
the learned Chancellor of the University.
21.
In the case(s) where the Chief Minister of the State has objected
to the inclusion of any name in the panel and such objection is not
acceptable to the Chancellor or where the Chancellor has an objection
against   empanelment   of   any   particular   name   for   which   he   has
assigned his own reasons, all such files shall be put up before this
Court. We make it clear that a final decision in this regard shall be
taken by this Court after giving reasonable opportunity of being heard
to the objectors.      
22.
The State of West Bengal shall file the Status Report in respect
to compliance of the directions issued here­in­above before the next
date of hearing. We make it clear that since the constitution and
composition   of   Search­cum­Selection  Committee  is  at   the  instance
Page 23 of 24

and with the consent of the parties, we will not entertain any objection
from any side for non­compliance.
………………………………J.
(SURYA KANT)
………………………………J.
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)
NEW DELHI
DATED: 08.07.2024
Page 24 of 24