2024 INSC 482
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 129 OF 2012 
 
 
 
VISHWANATHA 
 
 
                        …APPELLANT  
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF KARNATAKA  
BY THE SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT   …RESPONDENT 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J. 
 
1. The appellant in this Criminal Appeal challenges judgement 
and order dated 06.06.2009 passed by the High Court of 
Karnataka which has allowed the Criminal Appeal of the 
State; thereby reversing the order of acquittal of the Trial 
Court, thus convicting the present appellant of offences 
under Sections 302 and 450 read with Section 34 of the 
Indian Penal Code and sentenced him, inter alia, to life 
imprisonment, under Section 302 of IPC.  
Digitally signed by
Jagdish Kumar
Date: 2024.07.08
18:27:40 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
2. The case of the prosecution is that Rohini (PW-1) and 
Rohithaksha (PW-3) were residing with their mother Devaki 
(deceased; aged 86 y/o) at Kudupu, Mangalore.  Devaki was 
strangulated to death by the present appellant and co-
accused Ravikumar. On 26.12.2000 when PW-1, PW-3 and 
PW-4 (wife of PW-3) were not present in their home, and their 
86-year-old mother was alone, the present appellant and the 
co-accused broke into their house with the intention to 
commit robbery and killed Devaki.  A written complaint was 
filed before the police at 2:30 p.m. by PW-1 which formed the 
basis of the FIR which was registered at PS: Mangalore Rural 
Circle at approximately 3:00 p.m, in which the two accused 
Ravikumar and the present appellant Vishwanatha were 
named.  
3. In the FIR, it was mentioned that on that fateful day 
(26.12.2000), she (i.e. PW-1/Complainant), had gone out for 
some work and when she returned home at about 12:30 in 
the afternoon, she heard some sound coming from inside her 
house which alerted her, but she could not enter the room as 
it was locked from inside.  PW-1 then raised an alarm and as 
a result PW-2, who is a neighbour came for her help. Then 

3 
 
both PW-1 and PW-2 managed to peep through the window of 
the bedroom, where they saw that the accused had twisted a 
cloth around the neck of the deceased (PW-1’s 86-year-old 
mother), which they were pulling at the two ends, each 
holding one end of the rope.  PW-1 recognised the first 
accused as Ravikumar as he was the nephew of PW-4 (the 
daughter-in-law of the deceased). PW-1 called Ravikumar by 
name which alerted the two and they escaped.  
4. The police submitted its chargesheet on 05.03.2001 against 
both the accused, who were caught the same day. The case 
was committed to Sessions and ultimately assigned to the 
Court of IInd Additional Sessions Judge, Mangalore who 
framed charges against the accused on 20.09.2001 under 
sections 450 and 302 read with 34 of IPC. The prosecution 
examined 18 witnesses and 11 documents as exhibits placed 
by the prosecution. The Sessions Judge passed its order on 
18.12.2001 acquitting both the accused.  
5. What weighed with the Sessions Court was the apparent 
contradictions between the oral testimony and autopsy 
report.  PW-1 and PW-2 who were eye-witnesses to the crime 
and had identified both the accused and had deposed that 

4 
 
the two had committed the murder of Devaki.  Dr. Bhaskar 
Alva, (PW-6) Sr. Specialist in Wedlock District Hospital, 
Mangalore who conducted the post-mortem of deceased-
Devaki on 26.12.2000 had given his opinion that the cause of 
death was asphyxia as a result of strangulation. The 
Sessions Court observed that PW-1 and 2 had deposed that 
cloth was tied around the neck of the deceased which was 
used to strangulate her, however, PW-6 had deposed there 
were no ligature marks on the back of the neck of the 
deceased. Under these circumstances, the Sessions Court 
discredited the two eye-witnesses, PW-1 and PW-2 and also 
noted the discrepancies in the deposition of PW-1 as regards 
the identity of the appellant and consequently his role in the 
crime. 
6. The appeal of the State against this acquittal was allowed by 
the High Court on 06.06.2009, which reversed the order of 
acquittal, and found both the accused guilty of offences 
under Sections 302 and 450 read with Section 34 of IPC and 
sentenced them to Rigorous Imprisonment for 5 years and 
Rigorous Imprisonment for life along with fine of Rs. 5,000/- 
respectively. The High Court held that the contradictions in 

5 
 
the case of prosecution were minor and not material enough 
to warrant acquittal of the accused persons. These were the 
observations made by the High Court at paragraph 27 of the 
Impugned Judgement: 
“27. Test Identification Parade not being 
conducted for the identification of accused No. 
2 is also not fatal to the prosecution because 
by 6’O clock in the evening both accused Nos. 
1 and 2 were apprehended and produced 
before the investigating officer P.W.18. It is 
also apparent on record that when accused 
No. 1 uttered the name of accused No. 2 both 
P.Ws. 1 and 2 learnt the name and they had 
seen exactly what was happening inside the 
bedroom. Therefore, question of mistaking in 
identifying accused Nos. 1 and 2 does not 
arise. However, both P.Ws. 1 and 2 identified 
accused Nos. 1 and 2 before the Court. The 
time gap between the date of crime and the 
evidence being only 10 months, we are of the 
opinion that it was quite possible for any who 
witnesses and especially P.W.1 to remember 
the details of the assailants who took the life 
of her mother. Therefore, this discrepancy also 
would 
not 
come 
in 
the 
way 
of 
the 
prosecution.”  
 
7. Shortly after the Judgement was passed by the High Court, 
Ravikumar, who was accused no. 1 passed away. The 
present criminal appeal thus has been filed on behalf of the 
remaining accused Vishwanatha.  
8. The learned counsel on behalf of the appellant would argue 
that PW-1 and PW-2 are not credible witnesses pointing 

6 
 
again towards the contradictions in their testimony and 
autopsy report.  He would submit that there has been no test 
identification parade (hereinafter referred to as ‘TIP’) to 
establish the identity of the appellant who was a total 
stranger to the two witnesses and in the absence of TIP, the 
appellant cannot be convicted, as then it cannot be said that 
the prosecution has proved its case beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  
9. The learned counsel for the State would argue that the High 
Court has rightly observed that this is not a case of mistaken 
identity. Further, TIP is not a substantive piece of evidence 
and absence of TIP would not be fatal for the prosecution 
case as PW-1 & PW-2 had already identified the accused 
before the court. As far as discrepancies in the testimonies of 
the witnesses are concerned, they are minor in nature and do 
not affect the case of prosecution in any manner. 
10. We have heard the submissions of the learned counsel of the 
State and that of the State and also perused the material on 
record. 
11. In the present case, there are concurrent findings by both the 
courts below as to the death of the deceased Devaki, being a 

7 
 
homicidal death and these findings are corroborated by the 
testimony of PW-6, the doctor who conducted the autopsy 
and issued the post-mortem report on 26.12.2000. There 
cannot be any doubt that the death of the deceased was 
homicidal and the only question for determination before this 
Court is whether it is the accused persons who were 
responsible for this death?  
12. PW-1 and PW-2 are the star witnesses of the prosecution. 
They had deposed during the trial that the two accused had 
strangulated the deceased to death.  PW-1 had said that on 
the day of the incident, she left home at around 9:30 in the 
morning and when she returned at 12:30 in the afternoon 
she found that her room was bolted from inside and then she 
heard her mother screaming.  It was then that she called PW-
2 for help.   PW-1 further states that she saw through the 
window both the accused strangulating her mother by 
pulling the rope at the two ends.  She further states, that 
when PW-1 called one of the accused Ravikumar by name, 
who she immediately recognised being their relative, 
Ravikumar called the name of the other accused i.e., the 
present appellant and the two escaped. The relevant extract 

8 
 
of the deposition given by PW-1 on 22.10.2001 before the 
trial court is reproduced below: 
“…When I came to courtyard of our house I 
heard sound full of pain and scream. I found 
that both the bolts of the house was locked 
inside. Immediately I called my neighbour 
Rajesh. He came there. Since Northern side of 
window was kept opened my self and Rajesh 
peeped inside the room…………we saw in the 
western side of the room and found Accused 
Ravi, who is standing before the Court now 
and he used to twist the cloth rope and put 
round the neck and caught one end of rope. 
Another end of the rope was in the hands of 
another person. They were tightening the 
rope, which was round the neck of my mother. 
I made a big noise. I addressed Accused Ravi 
“what he is doing” (In Tulu ‘Dane Malpuva’). 
What is he doing, I asked. Immediately he 
(Accused Ravi) told Accused Vishwananth 
that “the work is spoiled”, you run (In Tulu 
‘KelasaKettand’). Said accused ran through 
the back door of the house, after unlocking 
bolts. My neighbour Rajesh followed them in 
the back of them……..when seeing my mother 
I found her right leg and right hand was in 
twisting condition and found no clothes on the 
body 
of 
my 
mother 
and 
found 
little 
temperature in the body. Immediately called 
Dr.K.B Shetty by phone…..After 10 minutes 
from my phone call, doctor came there. After 
coming to our house, said doctor examined my 
mother and told us that she was dead….” 
PW-2 also claimed to have seen the incident from the window 
along with PW-1 and he then narrates his unsuccessful 

9 
 
attempt to catch the accused persons. The relevant portion of 
PW-2’s examination-in-chief is as follows: 
“When seeing through the window we found 
mother 
of 
Rohini 
(PW-1), 
Smt. 
Devaki 
(deceased) was on the cot. On the right side of 
Devaki, Ravikumar was standing and in 
another side another accused was standing. 
We found cloth was rolled round neck of 
Devaki. The one end of cloth rope was found 
in the hands of 1st Accused and cloth ropes 
another end was found in the hands of 2nd 
Accused. Both accused were, found dragging 
the cloth rope on both sides…………Accused 
ran away through back door of the house.” 
 
13. The above evidence of PW-1 and PW-2, all the same, does 
not corroborate with the post mortem report, which shows 
that the ligature marks, though round the neck, but are 
missing on the back of the neck.  If the testimony of PW-1 
and PW-2 is to be believed then the ligature marks should 
have been all round the neck, including the back.  The ante 
mortem injuries in the post mortem report are as follows:  
 
“On examination, I found the following 
external injuries: 
(i) 
Ligature mark round the neck above the 
thyroid cartilage, extending from 1 angle of 
mandible to the other- size 8”× ¾” 
(ii) 
Finger nail marks over the tip of the 
nose. 
(iii) 
Fracture of both legs below the knee and 
fracture of right forearm below the elbow” 

10 
 
 
The report does suggest that the deceased was indeed 
strangulated to death.  But it could not be in the manner as 
seen by PW-1 and PW-2 (who had seen the two accused 
strangulating the 86 years old woman by pulling both ends 
of the rope) as the ligature mark extended only from one 
angle of the mandible to the other and no such mark was 
seen at the back of the neck.  Had the strangulation been in 
the manner as described by PW-1 and PW-2, the ligature 
marks would have been different.  
14. The aspect which perhaps weighed heavily in the mind of 
the Trial Court which had acquitted the two accused was 
the fact that the first complaint, inquest report, the ‘autopsy 
report’ and the ocular evidence of PW-1 (also of PW-2) did 
not match.  Having regard to the positioning of the bed on 
which the deceased was allegedly strangulated, the trial 
court has given a finding that it would be highly improbable 
for two persons to strangulate the deceased by pulling the 
two ends of the rope of cloth from behind, since the cot was 
touching the northern and western walls. Moreover, the fact 
that Dr. K.B Shetty, (who was the first doctor to examine the 

11 
 
deceased within 10 minutes of the incident), was never 
examined by the prosecution.  The absence of any 
reasonable explanation as to how PW-1 reached her house 
in a short span of time of 21/2 hours, after leaving home at 
10:00 AM1, creates doubt on the prosecution story.  Trial 
Court also expressed its doubt as to the involvement of the 
present appellant (Accused No.2), as no TIP was conducted. 
This aspect was argued at length before this Court as well, 
since it goes to the very root of any criminal trial. 
Admittedly, no TIP was conducted in the present case. This 
Court in Mulla v. State of U.P., (2010) 3 SCC 508 had 
emphasized the scope and object of TIP as follows: 
“55. The 
identification 
parades 
are 
not 
primarily meant for the court. They are meant 
for investigation purposes. The object of 
conducting a test identification parade is 
twofold. First is to enable the witnesses to 
satisfy themselves that the accused whom 
they suspect is really the one who was seen 
by them in connection with the commission of 
the 
crime. Second is 
to 
satisfy 
the 
investigating authorities that the suspect is 
the real person whom the witnesses had seen 
in connection with the said occurrence.” 
 
 
1 The complaint (Ex.P1) given by PW-1 to the PSI on the spot, mentions that she left her 
house at around 10.00 am, whereas in her deposition before the Trial Court, she mentions 
the time as 9.30 am. 

12 
 
15. This Court in Malkhansingh v. State of M.P (2003) 5 SCC 
7462 has held that: 
“The evidence of mere identification of the accused 
person at the trial for the first time is from its very 
nature inherently of a weak character. The 
purpose of a prior test identification, therefore, is 
to test and strengthen the trustworthiness of that 
evidence. It is accordingly considered a safe rule 
of prudence to generally look for corroboration of 
the sworn testimony of witnesses in court as to the 
identity of the accused who are strangers to them, 
in the form of earlier identification proceedings.”   
 
In the case at hand, it is an admitted position that the 
Appellant was not known to any of the witnesses and more 
pertinently, the two eyewitnesses, PW1 and PW2.  
16. Coming back to the facts and circumstances of the present 
case, it is an admitted fact that Ravikumar (Accused No.1, 
now deceased) was known to the eyewitnesses and was also 
related to the complainant. Hence, there was no requirement 
of TIP as regard to Ravikumar (accused no.1).  But the case 
of appellant- Vishwananth stands on a different footing. He 
was a total stranger to the two eye witnesses i.e. PW-1 and 
PW-2. The name ‘Vishwanath’ came to their knowledge, only 
after Ravikumar (Accused no. 1) called his co-accused, by 
name exhorting him to run.  In a case where the identity of 
 
2Para 7. 

13 
 
the accused is not known and TIP has not been conducted, 
the court has to see if there was any description of the 
accused either in the FIR or in any of the statement of 
witness recorded during the investigation. There is none in 
the present case. 
The identification of an accused in court is acceptable 
without a prior TIP and absence of TIP may not be fatal for 
the prosecution. It would depend on facts of each case. In the 
case at hand, though the appellant was identified in court by 
PW-1 and PW-2, the Trial Court did not attach much weight 
to it, as no identification proceedings were conducted, and 
the Court found it unsafe to acknowledge the identity merely 
on the basis of identification in the Court. 
In the present case, where there are six persons by the name 
of ‘Vishwanatha’ in the locality and where this Court has 
doubts on the presence of the two star witnesses PW-1 and 
PW-2 (who have identified the accused), we are of the opinion 
that the identity of the present appellant remained in doubt.  
17. Another fact which casts a doubt on the identity of the 
present appellant, is that there is no description in the FIR of 
‘Vishwanatha’ except that his name is mentioned. He then 

14 
 
becomes the first of the two to be arrested by the police. 
Learned counsel of the appellant would submit that there 
were six persons by the name of ‘Vishwanantha’ in Kudupu 
village at the relevant point of time, a fact which was placed 
by the defence during trial, which has not been confronted. 
In such a situation, it was the duty of the prosecution to 
show as to how and on what basis, the appellant came to be 
apprehended by the police. The Sub-Inspector, PS-Mangalore 
Rural (PW-19), who apprehended the appellant, had also 
failed to explain how he came to apprehend the appellant 
without any information regarding his description. In his 
examination-in-chief, the Sub-Inspector (PW-19) explained 
the arrest of the appellant in the following manner: 
“2. In respect of this case, crime no.388-2000 
on 26.12.2000 my inspector instructed me to 
find out the accused. The same day myself 
and my staff taken into custody the accused 
Vishwananth at 4:30 PM near Goraksha 
Jnana Mandira, Near Kadri Park, Mangalore. 
Said accused is before the Court. I identify 
him. With the help of Vishwanath we had 
arrested another accused, Ravi Kumar at 5 
P.M in a ‘Galli’ near State Bank of Mysore, 
Silver gate, Kulashekara, Mangalore…” 
 
A perusal of the testimony of the Sub-Inspector/PW-19 
indicates that there is not even a whisper as to what formed 

15 
 
the basis of the appellant’s arrest. He was cross-examined 
and what was gathered from his cross-examination is that the 
appellant was arrested in absence of any independent 
witnesses and without preparing any arrest memo. All these 
facts combined together cast a doubt on the identity of the 
appellant. Thus, it is not safe to convict the appellant solely 
only on the basis of the testimony of PW1 and PW2, which 
itself. 
18. Another aspect which needs to be considered is that the 
prosecution case rests primarily on the evidence of PW-1 and 
PW-2, who were the star witnesses. The admitted case of the 
prosecution is that PW-1, who is the daughter of the deceased, 
had gone out for some household work and there was no one 
in the house when the crime was committed.  First, PW-1 had 
gone to a place named ‘Kulshekara’ and then to the Post 
Office, and in the end to her uncle’s house at ‘Ullal’. The 
distance between her residence at Kudupu and Ullal is about 
20 km. She first walks some distance and then catches a bus 
to reach Kulshekara and from there she went to the post 
office, and after attending to her work, she takes a bus to go to 
her uncle’s house at Ullal. Finally, she returned home in 

16 
 
Kudupu and all of this was done by her within a period of 2½ 
hours.  But this is not enough, as per the prosecution version, 
she also reached her house at the very moment when the 
deceased was being strangulated and then peeping through 
the window pane, she witnessed the two accused pulling the 
two ends of the rope.  She called Accused no. 1-Ravikumar by 
his name, which led to the two accused fleeing from the spot 
and PW-2 who is the neighbour, chased them but in vain. This 
whole story of the prosecution is unbelievable for more 
reasons than one. Even if it is assumed for the sake of 
argument that PW-1 had reached the house at the exact time 
when the crime was being committed, the testimony to the 
effect that her mother was strangulated to death by a rope-like 
material, in the manner narrated by her, is not corroborated 
by the post-mortem report where ligature marks on the neck 
were not found to be encircling the neck in a round manner, 
as it should have been in such a case of strangulation. There 
were no ligature marks on the back of the neck. As discussed 
earlier, the marks were only on the front side extending from 
one angle of the mandible to the other. We therefore conclude 

17 
 
that the prosecution has not been able to prove its case 
beyond reasonable doubt. 
19. In view of the above, we allow this appeal and acquit the 
appellant in this case by giving him the benefit of doubt. 
Consequently, the impugned judgment and order dated 
06.06.2009 is set aside as far as it relates to the conviction of 
the appellant, and the order of acquittal of the Trial Court is 
upheld qua the appellant.  The appellant, who is already on 
bail, need not surrender. His bail bonds and sureties stand 
discharged. 
       Pending application(s), if any, also stand(s) disposed of. 
 
 
………………………………..J. 
            [SUDHANSHU DHULIA] 
 
 
……...…………………………J. 
                                         [PRASANNA B. VARALE] 
 
New Delhi  
July 8,  2024