2024 INSC 493
 
 
Page 1  
        REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1188/2015 
 
G.M. SHAHUL HAMEED 
                         
        …APPELLANT 
VERSUS 
JAYANTHI R. HEGDE  
 
 
     …RESPONDENT 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J. 
1. 
The substantial question arising for decision in this civil appeal is 
whether upon admission of an instrument in evidence and its marking as 
an exhibit by a court (despite the instrument being chargeable to duty but 
is insufficiently stamped), such a process can be recalled by the court in 
exercise of inherent powers saved by section 151 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure1 for the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of the process of the 
court.    
 
1 CPC, hereafter 
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2024.07.09
16:45:12 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
Page 2  
2. 
Assail in this civil appeal is to the judgment and order dated 26th 
September, 20112 passed by a learned Single Judge of the High Court of 
Karnataka at Bengaluru3 whereby His Lordship set aside the order dated 
19th October, 2010 passed by the Court of Additional Senior Judge-III, 
Mangalore4 and allowed the petition5 preferred by the respondent under 
Article 227 of the Constitution.  
3. 
The facts, relevant for the disposal of the present appeal, are 
adverted to in brief hereunder: 
a. First Sale Agreement and Sale Deed: On 3rd October, 2003, a 
Sale Deed was executed regarding the suit property by one B. 
Ramesh Hegde in favour of his wife, who is the respondent here. 
This Sale Deed was executed on the strength of a General Power 
of Attorney6 dated 16th September, 2003, which was allegedly 
executed by one Praveen Shetty in favour of B. Ramesh Hegde in 
respect of the suit property, authorizing him with power to sell the 
suit property.  
b. Second Sale Agreement and Sale Deed: An agreement to sell 
the suit property was executed between the appellant and 
Praveen Shetty on 11th September, 2003. The appellant paid the 
consideration, and a Sale Deed was executed on 8th October, 2003 
between the appellant and Praveen Shetty. 
 
2 impugned order, hereafter 
3 High Court, hereafter 
4 Trial Court, hereafter 
5 Writ Petition No. 11653 of 2011 (GM-CPC) 
6 GPA, hereafter 

 
 
Page 3  
c. Civil Suit by the appellant: The appellant instituted a civil suit7 
against the respondent, B. Ramesh Hegde, and Praveen Shetty, 
seeking a declaration that the Sale Deed dated 3rd October, 2003 
was null and void, and not binding on the appellant.  
d. Civil Suit by the respondent: Conversely, the respondent also 
instituted a civil suit8 against the appellant and Praveen Shetty, 
seeking a declaration that the Sale Deed dated 8th October, 2003 
was null and void, and not binding on the respondent.  
e. Filing of GPA before the Trial Court: In the suit instituted by 
the respondent, witness action commenced. B. Ramesh Hegde, in 
whose favour the GPA was executed by the respondent, on 6th 
June, 2010 tendered the GPA in course of his examination-in-
chief. The appellant’s counsel was engaged in another court; 
hence, he was unable to appear. The junior counsel did not object 
that the GPA was insufficiently stamped and, thus, inadmissible in 
evidence. The Trial Court, in the absence of objection, admitted 
the GPA in evidence and marked it as an exhibit whereafter the 
matter stood adjourned for cross-examination.  
f. Interlocutory Applications: On the next hearing date, 25th 
June, 2010 to be precise, the appellant filed two interlocutory 
applications9 in the suit filed by the respondent. In I.A. No. IX, the 
appellant sought a review of the order dated 6th June, 2010, and 
 
7 O.S. No. 301 of 2003 
8 O.S. No. 134 of 2005 
9 I.A.s, hereafter 

 
 
Page 4  
in I.A. No. X, it was prayed that the GPA be impounded on the 
ground that it has been insufficiently stamped. The appellant 
contended that since the GPA was executed in favour of a third 
party with power to sell the property, article 41 of the Schedule 
to the Karnataka Stamp Act, 195710 was applicable, necessitating 
payment of requisite stamp duty based on the market value of the 
property. The GPA was prepared only on a stamp paper worth 
Rs.100, rendering it insufficiently stamped and in accordance with 
section 34 of the 1957 Act, an insufficiently stamped document 
had to be impounded and a penalty of ten times the duty value 
paid. 
g. The respondent objected to the I.A.s asserting that the appellant 
had to avail his remedy under section 58 of the 1957 Act and that 
being available, the appellant could not seek a review. Further, it 
was claimed that no proof had been furnished that the appellant’s 
counsel was otherwise engaged at that time. Lastly, it was 
contended that once a document had been admitted in evidence, 
the stamp duty could not subsequently be questioned on the 
ground that it has been insufficiently stamped, as per section 35 
of the 1957 Act.  
4. 
Vide order dated 19th October, 2010, the Trial Court allowed the 
I.A.s and directed the respondent to pay the deficit stamp duty, along with 
 
10 1957 Act, hereafter 

 
 
Page 5  
the penalty, as required for a power of attorney under article 41(eb) of the 
Schedule to the 1957 Act.  
5. 
Dissatisfied with the aforesaid order of the Trial Court, the 
respondent approached the High Court whereupon the petition was allowed 
by the impugned order, inter alia, recording that: 
“2. It is evident from the material that the document has been 
marked and admitted in evidence and exhibited. It is the 
contention of the respondent under order 13 rule 4 there should 
be a specific statement to the effect that the document has been 
so admitted and endorsement shall be signed and initialed by the 
Judge. In the absence of the said requirement, marking of 
document does not mean admission of document in evidence. The 
argument of the counsel for the respondent is untenable. In the 
normal procedure when the document is produced, it is marked 
and exhibit number has assigned and beneath the said exhibit 
Judge puts his initial. This procedure fully complies with the 
requirement under Order 13 Rule 4 of the Act. Therefore, the 
contention that the document has not been properly marked and 
it should be rejected in evidence on the ground of insufficiently 
stamped is untenable. The trial court will have no jurisdiction to 
reconsider the issue. The remedy available for the respondent is 
only under section 58 of the Stamp Act. Accordingly, the writ 
petition is allowed.” 
 
6. 
It is the legality of the impugned order that we are tasked to 
examine while answering the question formulated at the beginning of this 
judgment.  
7. 
Mr. Chaturvedi, learned counsel for the appellant, while laying a 
challenge to the impugned order argued that admission of an insufficiently 
stamped instrument in a casual manner by mechanically marking it as an 
exhibit, without any application of judicial mind, should not preclude the 
court seized of the proceedings from reconsidering whether such document 
is sufficiently stamped and could have at all been admitted in evidence. 

 
 
Page 6  
Various provisions of the 1957 Act were referred to by him for persuading 
us to hold that the view taken by the High Court was grossly erroneous. 
Accordingly, it was prayed by him that the impugned order be set aside and 
the civil appeal be allowed with liberty to the respondent to take steps in 
accordance with the order of the Trial Court.  
8. 
Mr. Guru, learned counsel for the respondent, defended the 
impugned order by asserting that it is correct both in law as well as on facts. 
It was argued that setting aside of the Trial Court’s order by the impugned 
order was indeed justified since the GPA having been admitted in evidence, 
such admission could not have been reviewed by the same court under any 
circumstance. Emphasis was placed on the need for an objection to the 
document's admissibility being raised when it was first tendered for being 
admitted and then marked as an exhibit. Citing section 35 of the 1957 Act, 
it was contended that once an instrument is admitted in evidence, the 
admission cannot be questioned by the trial court or any appellate or 
revisional court; and that the only remedy that the 1957 Act provides is a 
revision under section 58 thereof in the manner as provided. Thus, he 
submitted that the civil appeal being devoid of any merit deserved outright 
dismissal. 
9. 
A short but interesting question has engaged our consideration. 
There is no doubt that the GPA is insufficiently stamped. What we need to 
consider on facts and in the circumstances is, which of the two conflicting 
views taken by the Trial Court and the High Court is right. 

 
 
Page 7  
10. 
Despite the GPA having been admitted in evidence and marked as 
an exhibit without objection from the side of the appellant, we propose to 
hold for the reasons to follow that the Trial Court did have the authority to 
revisit and recall the process of admission and marking of the instrument, 
not in the sense of exercising a power of review under section 114 read with 
Order XLVII, CPC but in exercise of its inherent power saved by section 151 
thereof, and that the other remedy made available by the 1957 Act was not 
required to be pursued by the appellant to fasten the respondent with the 
liability to pay the deficit duty and penalty.  
11. 
We may refer to the statutory framework of the 1957 Act. Sections 
33, 34, 35 and 58, to the extent relevant for a decision on this appeal, read 
as follows: 
“33. Examination and impounding of instruments.-  
(1) Every person having by law or consent of parties authority 
to receive evidence, and every person in charge of a public office, 
except an officer of police, before whom any instrument, 
chargeable in his opinion, with duty, is produced or comes in the 
performance of his functions, shall, if it appears to him that such 
instrument is not duly stamped, impound the same.  
(2) For that purpose every such person shall examine every 
instrument so chargeable and so produced or coming before him, 
in order to ascertain whether it is stamped with a stamp of the 
value and description required by the law in force in the State of 
Karnataka when such instrument was executed or first executed:  
Provided that,—  
(a) ***  
(b) *** 
(3) For the purposes of this section, in cases of doubt, the 
Government may determine,—  
(a) what offices shall be deemed to be public offices; and  
(b) who shall be deemed to be persons in charge of public 
offices. 
 

 
 
Page 8  
34. 
Instruments 
not 
duly 
stamped 
inadmissible 
in 
evidence, etc.- No instrument chargeable with duty shall be 
admitted in evidence for any purpose by any person having by law 
or consent of parties authority to receive evidence, or shall be 
acted upon, registered or authenticated by any such person or by 
any public officer, unless such instrument is duly stamped:  
Provided that,—  
(a) *** 
(b) ***  
(c) ***  
(d) *** 
 
35. Admission of instrument where not to be questioned. – 
Where an instrument has been admitted in evidence such 
admission shall not, except as provided in section 58, be called in 
question at any stage of the same suit or proceeding on the 
ground that the instrument has not been duly stamped. 
58. Revision of certain decisions of Courts regarding the 
sufficiency of stamps. – 
(1) When any Court in the exercise of its Civil or Revenue 
jurisdiction or any Criminal Court in any proceeding under Chapter 
XII or Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, 
makes any order admitting any instrument in evidence as duly 
stamped or as not requiring a stamp, or upon payment of duty 
and a penalty under Section 34, the Court to which appeals lie 
from, or references are made by, such first mentioned Court may, 
of its own motion or on the application of the Deputy 
Commissioner, take such order into consideration. 
(2) If such Court, after such consideration, is of opinion that such 
instrument should not have been admitted in evidence without the 
payment of duty and penalty under Section 34, or without the 
payment of a higher duty and penalty than those paid, it may 
record a declaration to that effect, and determine the amount of 
duty with which such instrument is chargeable, and may require 
any person in whose possession or power such instrument then is, 
to produce the same, and may impound the same when produced. 
(3) When any declaration has been recorded under sub-section 
(2), the Court recording the same shall send a copy thereof to the 
Deputy Commissioner and, where the instrument to which it 
relates has been impounded or is otherwise in the possession of 
such Court, shall also send him such instrument. 

 
 
Page 9  
(4) The Deputy Commissioner may thereupon, notwithstanding 
anything contained in the order admitting such instrument in 
evidence, or in any certificate granted under Section 41, or in 
Section 42, prosecute any person for any offence against the 
stamp law which the Deputy Commissioner considers him to have 
committed in respect of such instrument. 
Provided that, -  
(a) 
no such prosecution shall be instituted where the amount 
(including duty and penalty) which, according to the 
determination of such Court, was payable in respect of the 
instrument 
under 
Section 
34, 
is 
paid 
the 
Deputy 
Commissioner, unless he thinks that the offence was 
committed with an intention of evading payment of the 
proper duty; 
(b) 
except for the purpose of such prosecution, no declaration 
made under this section shall affect the validity of any order 
admitting any instrument in evidence, or of any certificate 
granted under Section 41.” 
 
(emphasis ours) 
 
12. 
Read in isolation, a literal interpretation of section 35 of the 1957 
Act seems to make the position in law clear that once an instrument has 
been admitted in evidence, then its admissibility cannot be contested at any 
stage of the proceedings on the ground of it not being duly stamped. A 
fortiori, it would follow that any objection pertaining to the instrument’s 
insufficient stamping must be raised prior to its admission.  
13. 
However, section 35 of the 1957 Act is not the only relevant 
section. It is preceded by sections 33 and 34 and all such sections are part 
of Chapter IV, tiled “Instruments Not Duly Stamped”. Certain obligations 
are cast by section 33 on persons/officials named therein. Should the 
presiding officer of the court find the instrument to be chargeable with duty 
but it is either not stamped or is insufficiently stamped, he is bound by 

 
 
Page 10  
section 33 to impound the same. Section 34 places a fetter on the court’s 
authority to admit an instrument which, though chargeable with duty, is not 
duly stamped. The statutory mandate is that no such instrument shall be 
admitted in evidence unless it is duly stamped.  
14. 
The presiding officer of a court being authorised in law to receive 
an instrument in evidence, is bound to give effect to the mandate of sections 
33 and 34 and retains the authority to impound an instrument even in the 
absence of any objection from any party to the proceedings. Such an 
absence of any objection would not clothe the presiding officer of the court 
with power to mechanically admit a document that is tendered for admission 
in evidence. The same limitation would apply even in case of an objection 
regarding admissibility of an instrument, owing to its insufficient stamping, 
being raised before a court of law. Irrespective of whether objection is 
raised or not, the question of admissibility has to be decided according to 
law. The presiding officer of a court when confronted with the question of 
admitting an instrument chargeable with duty but which is either not 
stamped or is insufficiently stamped ought to judicially determine it. 
Application of judicial mind is a sine qua non having regard to the express 
language of sections 33 and 34 and interpretation of pari materia provisions 
in the Indian Stamp Act, 189911 by this Court. However, once a decision on 
the objection is rendered – be it right or wrong – section 35 would kick in 
to bar any question being raised as to admissibility of the instrument on the 
ground that it is not duly stamped at any stage of the proceedings and the 
 
11 1899 Act, hereafter 

 
 
Page 11  
party aggrieved by alleged improper admission has to work out its remedy 
as provided by section 58 of the 1957 Act.  
15. 
Profitable reference may be made to the decision of this Court in 
Javer Chand and others v. Pukhraj Surana12. There, provisions of 
section 36 of the 1899 Act, which is pari materia section 35 of the 1957 Act, 
came up for consideration. A Bench of four Hon’ble Judges of this Court held 
that when a document’s admissibility is questioned due to improper 
stamping, it must be decided immediately when presented as evidence. The 
relevant paragraph is extracted hereunder: 
“4. *** Where a question as to the admissibility of a document is 
raised on the ground that it has not been stamped, or has not 
been properly stamped, it has to be decided then and there when 
the document is tendered in evidence. Once the court, rightly or 
wrongly, decides to admit the document in evidence, so far as the 
parties are concerned, the matter is closed. Section 35 is in the 
nature of a penal provision and has far-reaching effects. Parties to 
a litigation, where such a controversy is raised, have to be 
circumspect and the party challenging the admissibility of the 
document has to be alert to see that the document is not admitted 
in evidence by the court. The court has to judicially determine the 
matter as soon as the document is tendered in evidence and 
before it is marked as an exhibit in the case. The record in this 
case discloses the fact that the hundis were marked as Exts. P-1 
and P-2 and bore the endorsement ‘admitted in evidence’ under 
the signature of the court. It is not, therefore, one of those cases 
where a document has been inadvertently admitted, without the 
court applying its mind to the question of its admissibility. Once a 
document has been marked as an exhibit in the case and the trial 
has proceeded all along on the footing that the document was an 
exhibit in the case and has been used by the parties in 
examination and cross-examination of their witnesses, Section 36 
of the Stamp Act comes into operation. Once a document has been 
admitted in evidence, as aforesaid, it is not open either to the trial 
court itself or to a court of appeal or revision to go behind that 
order. Such an order is not one of those judicial orders which are 
liable to be reviewed or revised by the same court or a court of 
superior jurisdiction.” 
 
12 (1962) 2 SCR 333 

 
 
Page 12  
(emphasis ours) 
16. 
Once again, addressing a matter concerning section 36 of the 
1899 Act, a Bench of three Hon’ble Judges of this Court in Ram Rattan v. 
Bajrang Lal13 held as follows: 
“6. When the document was tendered in evidence by the plaintiff 
while in witness box, objection having been raised by the 
defendants that the document was inadmissible in evidence as it 
was not duly stamped and for want of registration, it was 
obligatory upon the learned trial Judge to apply his mind to the 
objection raised and to decide the objects in accordance with law. 
Tendency sometimes is to postpone the decision to avoid 
interruption in the process of recording evidence and, therefore, a 
very convenient device is resorted to, of marking the document in 
evidence subject to objection. This, however would not mean that 
the objection as to admissibility on the ground that the instrument 
is not duly stamped is judicially decided; it is merely postponed. 
In such a situation at a later stage before the suit is finally 
disposed of it would none-the-less be obligatory upon the court to 
decide the objection. If after applying mind to the rival contentions 
the trial court admits a document in evidence, Section 36 of the 
Stamp Act would come into play and such admission cannot be 
called in question at any stage of the same suit or proceeding on 
the ground that the instrument has not been duly stamped. The 
court, and of necessity it would be trial court before which the 
objection is taken about admissibility of document on the ground 
that it is not duly stamped, has to judicially determine the matter 
as soon as the document is tendered in evidence and before it is 
marked as an exhibit in the case and where a document has been 
inadvertently admitted without the court applying its mind as to 
the question of admissibility, the instrument could not be said to 
have been admitted in evidence with a view to attracting Section 
36 (see Javer Chand v. Pukhraj Surana) [AIR 1961 SC 1655] . The 
endorsement made by the learned trial Judge that ‘Objected, 
allowed subject to objection’, clearly indicates that when the 
objection was raised it was not judicially determined and the 
document was merely tentatively marked and in such a situation 
Section 36 would not be attracted.” 
(emphasis ours) 
 
13 (1978) 3 SCC 236 

 
 
Page 13  
17. 
The pivotal aspect emerging for consideration on the terms of 
sections 33 and 34 of the 1957 Act, with which we are concerned, is that 
whether the Trial Court did judicially determine the question of 
admissibility. It is here that we need to ascertain the rationale behind the 
Trial Court’s approach to go behind admission of the GPA in evidence and 
marking thereof as an exhibit, leading to the order under challenge before 
the High Court. Relevant portions of the order of the Trial Court read thus:  
“2. *** There are two suits before this court, one is the present 
suit and another suit is OS No. 301/03. In the present suit, the 
GPA holder of plaintiff filed an affidavit by way of chief examination 
in the morning session and the documents were marked. While 
marking the documents he was held up in the court of Civil Judge 
(Jr. Dn.), Mangalore and hence no objection regarding the 
deficiency of stamp duty on GPA could be raised before this court. 
Accordingly the matter has been adjourned for cross examination 
of PW1. The alleged GPA is in favour of third party with power to 
sell the property and hence article 41 of the Karnataka Stamp Act 
1957 is applicable and stamp duty on the market value has to be 
paid on the same. The GPA is executed on a stamp paper of value 
of Rs.100/- only. As per Section 33 of the Karnataka Stamp Act, 
1957, the court shall impound the said GPA even without the 
objections by the advocate for 1st defendant. His absence at the 
time of chief examination of PW1 is not intentional but as he was 
held up in another court. 
 
3. The 1st defendant has also filed IA No. IX under Sec. 114, R/w. 
Sec. 151 of CPC to review the order of marking Ex.P2 which is 
insufficiently stamped and to hear the objections regarding 
inadequacy of stamp duty on the similar grounds. 
 
7.  The points that arise for consideration are:- 
1. Whether Ex.P2 GPA is insufficiently stamped and plaintiff is 
liable to pay deficit duty and penalty? 
2. Whether the order permitting the plaintiff to mark the 
document requires to be reviewed? 
 
8. The points are answered in affirmative for the following: 
Reasons 

 
 
Page 14  
9. *** The clauses are very specific that the power of attorney 
has been given powers to sell the properties and the power of 
attorney has acted upon the GPA and has execute the sale deed 
in favour of the plaintiff as per Ex.P3. Under Article 41(e), when 
the power of attorney is given for consideration and authorizing 
the attorney to sell the immovable property, the duty payable is 
same duty as a conveyance for a market value equal to the 
amount of the consideration. As stated above, no consideration 
has been mentioned in the GPA., but the GPA has been given 
authorizing to sell the immovable property. The GPA has been 
issued to a third party, … article 41(ab) is applicable. The learned 
counsel for plaintiff objected for considering these applications on 
the ground that document is already marked with out any 
objections and hence the question of reviewing the order 
considering the question of stamp duty at this stage does not 
arise. As seen from the order sheet, the plaintiff was examined on 
6.6.2010 and document was marked on same day. Immediately 
on the next date of hearing the counsel has filed IA No. IX and X 
to consider the aspect of payment of stamp duty and penalty i.e., 
on the day on which the matter was posted for cross examination 
of PW1. It is certain that the senior counsel appearing for the 
plaintiff was not present at the time of examination of PW1 in chief 
as the court remembers that the junior counsel was present and 
probably being unaware of the question of stamp duty has not 
raised any objections. The court has marked the document as an 
exhibit and has put the seal for having marked the document as 
to who has produced the document and admitted through which 
witness and marked for plaintiff. No doubt, there is mention that 
the document is admitted through PW1 and Ex.P2, but the court 
has not applied its mind while marking the document as to 
whether document is sufficiently stamped or insufficiently 
stamped. 
10. *** The circumstances under which the application is being 
filed and circumstances under which the document came to be 
marked, clearly show that the document was marked without 
application of the mind of the court and without objection of the 
other side and this court is of the view that the admissibility of the 
document could be considered at this stage.  
 
ORDER 
The IA Nos. IX and X are allowed.” 
 
18. 
On the face of such an order, it does not leave any scope for doubt 
that on the date the GPA was admitted in evidence and marked as an 
exhibit, the Trial Court did not deliberate on its admissibility, much less 

 
 
Page 15  
applied its judicial mind, resulting in an absence of judicial determination. 
In the absence of a ‘decision’ on the question of admissibility or, in other 
words, the Trial Court not having ‘decided’ whether the GPA was sufficiently 
stamped, section 35 of the 1957 Act cannot be called in aid by the 
respondent. For section 35 to come into operation, the instrument must 
have been “admitted in evidence” upon a judicial determination. The words 
“judicial determination” have to be read into section 35. Once there is such 
a determination, whether the determination is right or wrong cannot be 
examined except in the manner ordained by section 35. However, in a case 
of “no judicial determination”, section 35 is not attracted. 
19. 
In the light of the aforesaid reasoning of the Trial Court of 
admitted failure on its part to apply judicial mind coupled with the absence 
of the counsel for the appellant before it when the GPA was admitted in 
evidence and marked exhibit, a factor which weighed with the Trial Court, 
we have no hesitation to hold that for all purposes and intents the Trial 
Court passed the order dated 19th October, 2010 in exercise of its inherent 
power saved by section 151, CPC, to do justice as well as to prevent abuse 
of the process of court, to which inadvertently it became a party by not 
applying judicial mind as required in terms of sections 33 and 34 of the 
1857 Act. We appreciate the approach of the Trial Court in its judicious 
exercise of inherent power. 
20. 
Reference to section 58 of the 1957 Act by learned counsel for the 
respondent is without substance. The clear language of section 58 refers to 
a situation, where an order is passed admitting an instrument in evidence 
as duly stamped or as one not requiring a stamp, for its attraction. As 

 
 
Page 16  
evident from a bare reading of the order dated 19th October, 2010, the Trial 
Court did neither hold the GPA as duly stamped or as not requiring a stamp 
and, therefore, its applicability was not attracted. 
21. 
We may not turn a blind eye to the fact that the revenue would 
stand the risk of suffering huge loss if the courts fail to discharge the duty 
placed on it per provisions like section 33 of the 1957 Act. Such provision 
has been inserted in the statute with a definite purpose. The legislature has 
reposed responsibility on the courts and trusted them to ensure that 
requisite stamp duty, along with penalty, is duly paid if an unstamped or 
insufficiently stamped instrument is placed before it for admission in 
support of the case of a party. It is incumbent upon the courts to uphold 
the sanctity of the legal framework governing stamp duty, as the same are 
crucial for the authenticity and enforceability of instruments. Allowing an 
instrument with insufficient stamp duty to pass unchallenged, merely due 
to technicalities, would undermine the legislative intent and the fiscal 
interests of the state. The courts ought to ensure that compliance with all 
substantive and procedural requirements of a statute akin to the 1957 Act 
are adhered to by the interested parties. This duty of the court is 
paramount, and any deviation would set a detrimental precedent, eroding 
the integrity of the legal system. Thus, the court must vigilantly prevent 
any circumvention of these legal obligations, ensuring due compliance and 
strict adherence for upholding the rule of law. 
22. 
Having regard to the aforesaid discussion, we answer the 
substantial question in the affirmative. Finding no error in the order of the 
Trial Court dated 19th October, 2010, we set aside the impugned order of 

 
 
Page 17  
the High Court dated 26th September, 2011, meaning thereby that the order 
of the Trial Court is restored. Since proceedings of the civil suit remained 
stalled because of pendency of this appeal, we expect the Trial Court to 
proceed expeditiously and in accordance with law.   
23. 
The appeal is, accordingly, allowed without any order for costs.  
  
 
      ………………………………J   
  
 
            (DIPANKAR DATTA) 
 
 
 
 ………………………………J   
  
 
               (PANKAJ MITHAL) 
 
 
  
New Delhi. 
 
9th July, 2024