2024 INSC 488
 
1 
 
                                                                 REPORTABLE 
 
  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 696 OF 2010 
 
GAURAV MAINI 
 
 
                   .….APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
THE STATE OF HARYANA 
 
 
  …..RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WITH 
 
 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 695 OF 2010 
 
 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 1724 OF 2010 
 
 
 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 584 OF 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
The appellants were subjected to trial in the Court of learned 
Additional Sessions Judge, Panchkula(hereinafter being referred 
to as the ‘trial Court’) in Sessions Case No. 11 of 2003 for the 
offences punishable under Sections 364A, 392 and 120B of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860(hereinafter being referred to as ‘IPC’). 
Vide judgment and order dated 26th September, 2005, the learned 
Digitally signed by
geeta ahuja
Date: 2024.07.09
16:18:11 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
2 
 
trial Court held the appellants guilty for the above mentioned 
offences and sentenced them as below: - 
Provision under 
which convicted 
Sentence 
Section 364A IPC 
Life imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 10,000/- 
and in default, further undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for one year. 
Section 392 IPC 
Rigorous imprisonment for five years and a 
fine of Rs. 5,000/- and in default, further 
undergo rigorous imprisonment for six 
months. 
Section 120B IPC 
Life imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 10,000/- 
and in default, further undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for one year. 
 
2. 
Being aggrieved by the conviction and sentences awarded by 
the learned trial Court, the appellants preferred separate appeals 
before the Punjab and Haryana High Court. The Division Bench of 
the Punjab and Haryana High Court dismissed the appeals 
preferred by the appellants vide common judgment dated 19th 
January, 2009 affirming the judgment passed by the learned trial 
Court and upholding the conviction and sentences of the 
appellants. 
3. 
The aforesaid judgment rendered by the Division Bench of the 
Punjab and Haryana High Court is subjected to challenge in these 
four appeals. 

 
3 
 
4. 
Since all the appeals arise from common judgment dated 19th 
January, 2009, the same have been heard and are being decided 
together by this judgment.  
Brief Facts: - 
5. 
On 15th April, 2003 Jai Singh, SI(PW-27), Police Station, 
Sector-5, Panchkula, while being present near the market of Sector 
16, Panchkula along with the police team in connection with patrol 
duty and crime checking, claims to have received a secret 
information to the effect that a gang was operating in Panchkula 
which was indulged in demanding ransom from parents after 
kidnapping the children and in case of non-payment of ransom, 
threats were given to eliminate the kidnapped children. It was 
further divulged in the information that such type of incident had 
already occurred in Kothi No. 81-A, Sector 17, Panchkula.  
6. 
A ruqa(Exhibit-PAA) with these allegations was sent to the 
police station by Jai Singh, SI(PW-27) based whereupon a formal 
FIR No. 283 of 2003(Exhibit-PAAA/1) dated 15th April, 2003 came 
to be registered by Jai Raj, ASI(PW-25) for the offences punishable 
under Sections 387 and 507 IPC at Police Station, Sector-5, 
Panchkula. Investigation of the case was assigned to Surjit 
Kumar(Investigating 
Officer)(PW-37), 
Sub-Inspector, 
CIA, 

 
4 
 
Panchkula. He proceeded to Kothi No. 81-A on 15th April, 2003 
where one Shamlal Garg met him and informed that his grandson 
namely, Sachin Garg(PW-2) had been kidnapped. Shamlal Garg 
also alleged that they had received ransom calls from two mobile 
phones bearing Nos. 9815XXXXXX and 9815XXXXXX. Both the 
numbers were found to be of service provider Bharti Airtel 
Company. The Investigating Officer(PW-37) made enquires from 
the office of Bharti Airtel Company and received information that 
these mobile SIMs had been sold to Kohli Traders, Sector 26, 
Chandigarh. The Senior Manager of Bharti Airtel Company, Shri 
Rakesh Michael provided the call detail records of both the mobile 
numbers from 28th March, 2003 to 3rd April, 2003. On an inquiry 
made from Kohli Traders, it came to light that both the SIM cards 
had been sold to one Singla Traders, Sector-7, Chandigarh on 24th 
February, 2003. On an enquiry from the shop of Singla Traders, 
the Investigation Officer(PW-37) was provided information that 
these SIM cards had been purchased by two boys from Reena 
Singla, sister of the owner of Singla Traders. Based on the call data 
of the mobile numbers as provided by Bharti Airtel Company, it 
was found that mobile sets bearing IMEI(International Mobile 
Equipment Identity) Nos. 350179626659830, 350019563917100 

 
5 
 
and 350609807685060 had been used for operating these SIM 
cards. The statements of Sachin Garg[kidnapped boy(PW-2)] and 
Mahesh Garg[(Father of the kidnapped boy(PW-1)] were recorded 
by Investigating Officer(PW-37) on 20th April, 2003.  
7. 
Mahesh Garg(PW-1) stated that on 2nd April 2003, his son 
Sachin Garg had gone to play badminton at the playground of 
Sector 7, Panchkula, in a car, but he did not return till 9:00 pm. 
Thereupon, he along with his family members made efforts to trace 
Sachin Garg out. He received calls from Mobile Nos. 9815XXXXXX 
and 9815XXXXXX and the caller(s) informed them that Sachin 
Garg(PW-2) was in their custody and demanded ransom to the 
tune of Rs. 1 crore for his release. The caller(s) also threatened that 
in case, the ransom demand was not satisfied, Sachin Garg would 
be eliminated.  A threat was also given to eliminate the entire 
family in case any intimation was given to the police.  
8. 
Fearing for the life of his son, Mahesh Garg(PW-1) arranged 
money from his relatives, friends and his own bank accounts. He 
again received calls on 3rd April, 2003 threatening him not to 
inform the police. He was further directed to reach a designated 
place with the ransom amount and to wait for further instructions. 
Accordingly, he took the ransom amount to the address given by 

 
6 
 
the miscreants i.e. Sector 17, Chandigarh, thereafter, to Sector 8, 
Chandigarh and ultimately to PGI hospital. On reaching there, he 
received another call and was directed to leave the bag with the 
ransom amount in his car and to proceed to the emergency ward 
of the hospital and wait for further instructions. Accordingly, he 
left the briefcase containing the money in the car and proceeded to 
the emergency ward of PGI hospital.  However, he did not find 
anyone present there. After some time, he received another call 
asking him to leave the place and wait for another call with the 
assurance that his son would be released along with the car after 
the cash amount had been counted and verified. He received 
another call by which he was informed that his car was parked 
near the chowk of Sector 11/15, Chandigarh. Accordingly, he took 
the car and proceeded to his house. At about 10:30 pm, another 
call was received informing him that his son Sachin Garg(PW-2) 
was standing near the chowk of Sector 20, Panchkula. He brought 
Sachin Garg(PW-2) back home from that place. He again received 
a call threatening that if any attempt was made to inform the 
police, then the entire family would be eliminated. Thus, out of 
fear, they did not approach the police. 

 
7 
 
9. 
Sachin Garg(PW-2) in his statement(Exhibit-DB) recorded by 
the Investigating Officer (PW-37) on 20th April, 2003 under Section 
161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being 
after referred to as ‘CrPC’) stated that on 2nd April, 2003, he had 
gone to Sector 7, Panchkula in his car for playing badminton. 
While he was returning home, and had reached near Sector 17, 
Panchkula, a Maruti car obstructed his path. Three persons came 
out of the car from which one was carrying a pistol. The said 
assailant placed the pistol against his head and asked him to shift 
to the adjoining seat. The second assailant armed with a knife 
occupied the rear seat. He was then directed to shift to the rear 
seat. His wrist watch, ATM card, school card, gold chain and some 
money lying in his pocket were robbed at pistol and knife point.  In 
the meantime, the third assailant who was also armed with a knife 
took the driver’s seat and his car was driven towards the pulia 
where Sachin Garg(PW-2) was blindfolded and shifted into the 
Maruti car and was taken away to some unknown location. He was 
kept confined in a room during the intervening night of 2nd and 3rd 
April, 2003. A person named Gaurav Bhalla was present in the 
room and he was calling out names of the other accused as Sanjay, 
Mintu and Gaurav. He was again blindfolded in the evening and 

 
8 
 
was taken in a car and was dropped off at the market of Sector 20, 
Panchkula with the instruction to remove the blindfold(patti) after 
10 minutes and stand there and wait for his father. The accused 
threatened to eliminate his entire family in case intimation of the 
incident was given to the police. On returning home, he came to 
know that his father had paid an amount of Rs. 1 crore for securing 
his release.  
10. Further investigation revealed that Gaurav Maini was using 
Mobile No. 9814XXXXXX, Gaurav Bhalla was using Mobile No. 
9814XXXXXX and Sanjay @ Sanju was using Mobile No. 
9814XXXXXX.  
11. Based on the statements of Mahesh Garg(PW-1) and Sachin 
Garg(PW-2), offences punishable under Sections 392, 342, 364A 
and 506 IPC were added to the case on 20th April, 2003. 
12. The accused Pankaj Bansal, Gobind, Amit Verma and Gaurav 
Maini were arrested on 29th April, 2003. It is alleged that Gaurav 
Maini suffered a disclosure statement under Section 27 of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872(hereinafter being referred to as 
‘Evidence Act’) divulging that he, along with Gaurav Bhalla, Sanjay 
@ Sanju and Munish Bhalla had kidnapped Sachin Garg(PW-2), 
who was released after collecting an amount of Rs.1 crore as 

 
9 
 
ransom.  The accused Gaurav Bhalla was arrested on 1st May, 
2003 and he too suffered a disclosure statement under Section 27 
of the Evidence Act. Likewise, the accused Munish Bhalla and 
Sanjay @ Sanju also made disclosures to the Investigating 
Officer(PW-37) under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. 
13. Following items were allegedly recovered at the instance and 
in furtherance of the disclosures made by the accused appellants 
being Gaurav Maini(A1), Gaurav Bhalla(A2), Munish Bhalla(A3) 
and Sanjay @ Sanju(A4): -  
Name of Accused 
Recovered Articles 
Gaurav Maini 
(i) 
A wristwatch of Sachin. 
(ii) 
Currency notes to the tune of Rs. 17,00,000/-  
(iii) 
Cash amount to the tune of Rs. 3,50,000/- from 
his house 
(iv) 
A motorcycle along with papers. 
(v) 
One mobile phone marked Digital worth Rs. 
7500/- 
(vi) 
One gold kara  
(vii) 
Cash amount to the tune of Rs. 3,72,500/- from 
his house 
(viii) One mobile phone Panasonic bearing IMEI No. 
350179626659830 
Gaurav Bhalla 
(i) 
Cash amount to the tune of Rs. 18,50,000/- 
from his locker at Central Bank of India, Sector 
10, Panchkula.  
(ii) 
Receipt worth Rs. 27,300/- regarding the 
purchase of a Mobile phone. 
(iii) 
A mobile phone worth Rs. 27,000/- 
(iv) 
One L.G. Air Conditioner worth Rs. 23,500/- 
from Cabin No. 20, SCO No. 37, Sector 11, 
Panchkula 
(v) 
Cash amount to the tune of Rs. 5,80,000/- 
from Cabin No. 20, SCO No. 37, Sector 11, 
Panchkula 

 
10 
 
Munish Bhalla 
(i) 
Cash amount to the tune of Rs. 20,00,000/- 
from his locker at Ambala Central Cooperative 
Bank, Ambala. 
(ii) 
An ATM card and school card of Sachin. 
(iii) 
One Motorcycle bearing registration No. HR0lE-
4113 (Bullet) worth Rs. 35,000/-  
(iv) 
One Panasonic mobile 
(v) 
Cash amount to the tune of Rs. 4,55,500/- from 
his Battery shop in Mohar Market Ambala City.  
(vi) 
His Maruti Car bearing No. HR 35A-0012 used 
in Kidnapping. 
Sanjay @ Sanju 
(i) 
Rs. 22,000/- during his personal search. 
(ii) 
Rs.20,50,000/- 
currency 
notes 
in 
denomination of Rs. 500/- from the Almirah of 
his house. 
(iii) 
Rs. 1,28,000/- from a shop 
(iv) 
An Air pistol used in the offence. 
(v) 
One mobile phone marked Samsung IMEI No. 
350019563917100 
(vi) 
A gold chain of Sachin 
(vii) 
Amount to the tune of Rs. 40,000/- deposited 
in his bank account at HDFC bank, Sector 11, 
Panchkula.  
 
14. Upon completion of the investigation, a charge sheet came to 
be filed against seven accused persons in the Court of learned 
Chief Judicial Magistrate, 1st Class, Panchkula. The offence under 
Section 364A IPC being exclusively sessions triable, the case was 
committed to the Court of learned Additional Sessions Judge, 
Panchkula for trial. The learned trial Court framed charges against 
the accused Gaurav Maini(A1), Gaurav Bhalla(A2), Munish 
Bhalla(A3) and Sanjay @ Sanju(A4) for offences punishable under 
Sections 364A, 392 and 120B IPC. They denied the charges and 

 
11 
 
claimed trial. The remaining three accused namely Pankaj Bansal, 
Gobind and Amit Verma were discharged.  
15. The prosecution examined 37 witnesses and exhibited 125 
documents in order to bring home the charges. The accused were 
questioned under Section 313 CrPC. They denied the prosecution 
allegations and claimed to be innocent. Gaurav Maini(A1) made a 
pertinent assertion that he had no concern whatsoever with the 
alleged crime and the case was totally cooked up. Gaurav 
Bhalla(A2) stated that he was involved in a love affair with Shivani 
@ Kaku, daughter of Mahesh Garg(PW-1) since 3 to 4 years prior 
to the occurrence. Shivani @ Kaku used to send him greeting cards 
as an expression of love. She often used to ring him up from her 
mobile phone and landline numbers. On 1st April, 2003, Shivani @ 
Kaku approached him and pressurized him to elope with her. He 
tried to reason with her that it was not the right step and advised 
her to return home. Since, she was pressurizing him for marriage, 
he assured her that they would marry. He was illegally detained by 
the CIA officials on 26th April, 2003 and was kept confined and 
tortured in custody. No recovery was effected from him and all the 
recoveries were manipulated. The other accused also denied the 

 
12 
 
prosecution allegations and claimed to be innocent. Four 
witnesses were examined in defence.  
16. After hearing the arguments of both the sides and analysing 
the evidence, the learned trial Court proceeded to convict and 
sentence the accused appellants(A1, A2, A3 and A4) as above vide 
judgment and order dated 26th September, 2005. The appeals 
preferred by the appellants against the judgment rendered by the 
trial Court were rejected by the Division Bench of the Punjab and 
Haryana High Court vide judgment dated 19th, January, 2009 
which is subjected to challenge in these four appeals by special 
leave.  
Submissions of learned counsel for the appellants:- 
17. Ms. Kiran Suri, learned senior counsel representing the 
accused appellant Gaurav Bhalla(A-2), vehemently and fervently 
contended that the entire case setup by the prosecution is false 
and fabricated. For assailing the impugned judgments, learned 
senior counsel advanced the following pertinent submissions: - 
(i) 
That the alleged incident of kidnapping and demand of 
ransom took place on 2nd April, 2003. Even though the 
kidnapped boy, i.e., Sachin Garg(PW-2) had been released 

 
13 
 
on 3rd April, 2003, the family members took no steps 
whatsoever to report the matter to the police. This rank 
silence of the family members and their utter failure to 
report the matter to the police or the authorities casts a 
grave doubt on the truthfulness of the entire prosecution 
case. 
(ii) 
That the Investigating Officer(PW-37) went to the house of 
the kidnapped boy on 15th April, 2023, and recorded the 
statement of his grandfather Shamlal Garg on the very 
same day. However, no effort was made by the 
Investigating Officer(PW-37) to record the statement of 
Sachin Garg(PW-2) on the same day despite he being 
available in the house. Sachin Garg(PW-2), categorically 
stated to the Investigation Officer(PW-37) on 20th April, 
2003 that he had identified Gaurav Bhalla(A2) at the time 
of the incident.  Had there been an iota of truth in the 
prosecution case, identity of Gaurav Bhalla(A2) would 
definitely have been disclosed by Shamlal Garg to the 
Investigating Officer(PW-37), when his statement was 
recorded on 15th April, 2003.  

 
14 
 
(iii) That the entire process of recovery of money and other 
articles at the instance of the accused is totally fabricated 
and remained unsubstantiated because the arrest memos 
of the accused were never proved by the prosecution. The 
accused made pertinent assertion that the police had kept 
them illegally confined for almost seven days and thus 
proving of the arrest documents was imperative to arrive 
at the truth of the case. 
(iv) 
That the prosecution, did not tender any evidence 
regarding the fate of the currency notes allegedly recovered 
at the instance of the accused.  The Investigating 
Officer(PW-37) candidly admitted that he handed back the 
currency notes to Mahesh Garg(PW-1) of his own accord. 
As per the learned senior counsel, this action of the 
Investigating Officer in returning the mudammal currency 
notes to the complainant(PW-1) without any order of the 
Court, throws grave doubt on the truthfulness of the entire 
process of disclosures and discovery. 
(v) 
That the SIM cards in question were not issued in the 
name of the accused. The prosecution did not lead any 
evidence whatsoever to show that the accused had ever 

 
15 
 
acquired or were using the mobile numbers from which the 
ransom calls were allegedly made. 
(vi) 
That the secret information based whereupon FIR No. 283 
of 2003(Exhibit-PAA/1) was registered was not brought on 
record and thus it is a clear case of concealment of vital 
evidence warranting adverse inference against the 
prosecution.  
(vii) That there is no material to show as to when the special 
report reached the Magistrate concerned pursuant to the 
registration of the formal FIR No. 283 of 2003(Exhibit- 
PAA/1). 
(viii) That the accused other than Gaurav Bhalla(A2) were not 
known to the victim Sachin Garg(PW-2) from before. The 
Investigation Officer(PW-37) made no effort whatsoever to 
subject these accused to the Test Identification Parade(TIP) 
and thus, the dock identification of the accused namely 
Gaurav Maini(A1), Munish Bhalla(A3) and Sanjay @ 
Sanju(A4) for the first time in the Court by Sachin 
Garg(PW-2) is of no value whatsoever. Attention of the 
Court in this regard was drawn to the deposition of 
Mahesh Garg(PW-1) who stated that his son was never 

 
16 
 
asked to identify the accused by the police in any 
identification parade. Learned senior counsel also referred 
to the cross-examination of Sachin Garg(PW-2) wherein, 
he stated that once he had gone to CIA with his father and 
there, he saw the accused from some distance. The police 
did not record his statement regarding the identification of 
the accused. Sachin Garg(PW-2) also admitted that he had 
told his father Mahesh Garg(PW-1) and his grandfather 
Shamlal Garg that one of the accused was Gaurav Bhalla 
(A2) and that the other accused were calling out the names 
of each other. Thus, as per the learned senior counsel, the 
omission regarding the names of these accused in the 
previous statement of Sachin Garg(PW-2) recorded under 
Section 161 CrPC is fatal to the prosecution case.  
(ix) 
That the so-called disclosure statements of the accused as 
recorded by Munish Kumar, Sub-Inspector(PW-33) and 
Surjit Kumar, Investigating Officer(PW-37) were not proved 
as per law. The prosecution failed to prove that the 
recovered mudammal articles including the currency notes 
were kept securely at the malkhana of the police station. 
In this regard, attention of the Court was drawn to the 

 
17 
 
statement of Investigating Officer(PW-37), highlighting the 
fact that the said witnesses did not utter a single word 
regarding the fate of the currency notes after the purported 
seizure and his failure to explain as to how the same were 
dealt with after the seizures were allegedly made at the 
instance of the accused. 
(x) 
That the learned trial Court as well as the High Court failed 
to give due credence to the evidence of the defence 
witnesses.  Stress was laid by the learned senior counsel 
to the deposition of Manav Malhotra(DW-4) who stated 
that he often saw Gaurav Bhalla(A2) and Shivani @ Kaku, 
sister of the kidnapped boy-Sachin Garg(PW-2) together. It 
was contended that, as a matter of fact, the family 
members were aware about the ongoing affair between 
Gaurav Bhalla(A2) and Shivani @ Kaku and were opposed 
to it and hence, the case of kidnapping for demand of 
ransom was cooked up so as to put Gaurav Bhalla(A2) and 
his companions behind bars and sever the relationship. 
(xi) 
It was further contended that the defence witnesses, gave 
affirmative evidence for proving the plea of alibi raised by 
the accused.  However, neither the trial Court nor the High 

 
18 
 
Court gave due consideration to the evidence of the defence 
witnesses and brushed their testimonies aside in a totally 
perfunctory manner. 
18. The learned counsel representing the remaining accused 
appellants adopted the submissions of learned senior counsel Ms. 
Kiran Suri. 
19. The court was apprised that accused Gaurav Maini(A1), 
Gaurav Bhalla(A2), Munish Bhalla(A3) and Sanjay @ Sanju(A4) 
were in custody for 10 years 11 months(approx.); 9 years(approx.); 
7 years 2 months; 10 years 10 months(approx.), respectively. 
20. On these grounds, learned counsel for the appellants 
implored the Court to accept the appeals, set aside the impugned 
judgments, and acquit the accused appellants of the charges. 
Submissions on behalf of the respondent-State: -  
21. Per contra, learned counsel for the State, vehemently and 
fervently opposed the submissions advanced by learned senior 
counsel for the accused appellants.  It was contended that the 
prosecution case is founded on unimpeachable testimony of the 
minor boy Sachin Garg(PW-2) who was kidnapped by the accused 
appellants for demand of ransom.  The witness gave clinching 

 
19 
 
evidence identifying and implicating the accused appellants for his 
kidnapping and release after payment of ransom. The trivial 
contradictions appearing in the evidence of the witness rather 
establish that he is a truthful witness and has given a true picture 
of the incident.  The evidence of Sachin Garg(PW-2) finds due 
corroboration from the testimony of Mahesh Garg(PW-1), 161 CrPC 
statement of Shamlal Garg recorded by Investigating Officer(PW-
37) and the incriminating recoveries effected at the instance of the 
accused appellants.   
22. He contended that the recoveries having been effected 
proximate to the incident of kidnapping for ransom, the burden of 
explaining, as to how the incriminating articles including the huge 
sums of money came into their possession shifted on to the 
accused appellant by virtue of the presumption provided under 
Section 106 read with Section 114(a) of the Evidence Act. Since, 
the accused failed to offer any plausible explanation in this regard 
the prosecution is entitled to raise the statutory presumption 
against them.  
23. Learned counsel further urged that since the accused 
appellants had given a grave threat of evil consequences to Mahesh 
Garg(PW-1), he was justified in not approaching the police for 

 
20 
 
reporting the matter and his silence cannot be treated as an 
unnatural conduct. 
24. He further urged that the trivial contradictions in the 
evidence of the prosecution witnesses cannot be considered 
sufficient so as to discard the entire prosecution case which is 
based on unimpeachable direct as well as circumstantial evidence. 
He further contended that the trial Court and the High Court have 
recorded concurrent findings of facts in the impugned judgments 
after appreciating the evidence available on record and thus this 
Court should not feel persuaded to interfere in the conviction of 
the accused while exercising the jurisdiction under Article 136 of 
the Constitution of India. On these grounds, he implored the Court 
to dismiss the appeals and affirm the impugned judgments. 
25. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the 
impugned judgments and the evidence placed on record. 
Discussion and Conclusion: - 
26. At the outset, we are of the opinion that the very inception of 
the prosecution case is shrouded under a grave cloud of doubt and 
we shall record our reasons for the above conclusion while 

 
21 
 
discussing the prosecution evidence. It is undisputed that neither 
the victim Sachin Garg nor his family members ever reported the 
incident to the police.  Sachin Garg(PW-2) deposed that when he 
was driving on the road dividing Sectors 17 and 18, three 
miscreants obstructed his path.  They had come in a Maruti car.  
One of them placed a pistol against the head of Sachin Garg and 
asked him to shift to the adjoining seat.  The other assailant was 
armed with a knife and he directed Sachin Garg to shift to the rear 
seat of the car and snatched away his gold chain. The person 
holding the pistol came and sat beside him.  The third assailant 
who too was armed with a knife, occupied the driver’s seat and 
extended a threat. His wrist watch, ATM card, identity card and 
some cash amount were also snatched away by the same person 
who had taken the gold chain.  The miscreants then put a blindfold 
on his eyes and drove away the car. Sachin Garg(PW-2) admitted 
that while being blindfolded, he could identify the driver as Gaurav 
Bhalla(A2).  He was taken to an unknown location where they 
reached after driving for 45 minutes.  He was kept confined in a 
room for the entire night with the blind-fold. He overheard the 
accused appellants talking to each other and, thus, he managed 
to catch their names.  Then, he was taken in a car and accused 

 
22 
 
appellants told him that they would be releasing him at a place 
from where, his father would pick him up.  He was extended a 
threat that in case he disclosed about the occurrence to anyone, 
his entire family would be eliminated.  He was dropped off after 
some time. He opened the blind-fold(patti) and found himself 
standing in Sector 20, Panchkula. Ten to fifteen minutes later, his 
father arrived and took him home.  Thereafter, he came to know 
that his father had paid a sum of Rs. 1 crore as ransom for 
securing his release. 
27. In cross examination, Sachin Garg(PW-2) admitted that the 
gold chain which had been snatched by the accused appellants 
was returned to him at Sector 20, Panchkula and the ATM card 
was returned to him by the police officials.  The witness admitted 
that he was never called by the police officials to join any 
identification proceedings.  He had randomly gone to the CIA 
officer with his father where he saw the accused from some 
distance.  A pertinent admission was made by the witness that he 
had identified the accused appellants and had overheard them 
taking names of each other and that he had disclosed these facts 
to his father Mahesh Garg(PW-1) and grandfather Shamlal Garg.  
The witness also admitted that when the police officials recorded 

 
23 
 
his statement, he did not give the description about the features of 
the accused. 
28. A pertinent suggestion was given by the defence to the 
witness(PW-2) in cross examination that his sister Shivani @ Kaku 
was involved in a relationship with Gaurav Bhalla(A2) and that 
both of them eloped on 1st April, 2003. Shivani @ Kaku returned 
on 14th April, 2003, whereafter, the case was cooked up by 
concocting a story against Gaurav Bhalla(A2) and other accused 
who were his friends and relatives. However, he denied the said 
suggestion. The witness(PW-2) was confronted with his previous 
statement under Section 161 CrPC statement(Exhibit-DB) wherein 
he had named Gaurav Bhalla(A2) as the fourth accused.  He 
admitted that his statement was recorded by the police officials for 
the first time on 20th April, 2003 and that the police officials had 
visited his house once or twice earlier. 
29. Mahesh Garg(PW-1) testified that his son Sachin Garg(PW-2) 
had gone to play badminton on 2nd April, 2003 at around 6.00 pm. 
He did not return till 9:00 pm, on which efforts were made to trace 
his whereabouts, but he could not be located.  At 11:00 pm, a 
telephone call was received by the witness(PW-2) from an unknown 
person who demanded a ransom of Rs. 1 crore for the safe return 

 
24 
 
of his son.  A threat was given that if police was informed, his son 
would not remain alive.  Fearing for his son’s life, Mahesh Garg 
(PW-1) did not report the matter to the police.  However, he 
discussed the issue with his relatives and friends and collected an 
amount of Rs. 1 crore from various sources.  The next day, he 
received a second telephone call informing him the location of the 
car of Sachin Garg(PW-2) which he collected. He received a third 
telephone call on 3rd April, 2003 wherein again, the demand of 
ransom and the threat to kill Sachin Garg(PW-2) was repeated.  On 
the same day at about 7:00-7:30 pm, he received a call directing 
him to leave his house with the ransom amount.  Acting on the 
directions of the miscreant(s), the witness placed the ransom 
amount in his car and proceeded towards PGI hospital, 
Chandigarh.  As instructed by the caller, he left the cash in the car 
and went to the emergency ward of the hospital.  Sometime later, 
his car was seen lying abandoned at the crossing of Sector 11-
Sector 15, Chandigarh.  The suspects called and told him that 
Sachin Garg(PW-2) would be released after counting the ransom 
amount and, thus, he returned home.  On the same day, at about 
10:30 pm, he got a telephone call intimating that his son had been 
released in the market area of Sector 20, Panchkula. On receiving 

 
25 
 
this information, Mahesh Garg(PW-1) proceeded to Sector 20, 
Panchkula and brought his son Sachin Garg(PW-2) back home.  
One more call was received with a threat that if the police or 
anyone else was informed, the entire family would be eliminated. 
30. We find that there exist inherent improbabilities in the 
versions of these two star prosecution witnesses i.e. Mahesh 
Garg(PW-1) and Sachin Garg(PW-2) which go to the root of the 
matter.   
31. Neither of the witnesses stated that the kidnappers allowed 
Sachin Garg(PW-2) to talk to his family members so as to lend 
assurance about his safety.  In this background, it is hard to 
believe that Mahesh Garg(PW-1) would rely upon such an 
unverified telephone conversation and proceed to collect a huge 
sum of Rs. 1 crore and thereafter, leave it in an unsecured 
condition inside his car without having any assurance whatsoever 
regarding the safety of Sachin Garg(PW-2) for whose purported 
release the ransom amount had been demanded. This is a grave 
lacuna which brings the entire prosecution case under a cloud of 
doubt. In the natural course of human conduct, the family 
members of the kidnapped person would expect and require some 

 
26 
 
kind of assurance about the victim’s safety before agreeing to part 
with a huge sum of money as ransom. 
32. Admittedly, the police had visited the house of Mahesh 
Garg(PW-1) on two to three occasions before 20th April, 2003, but 
he never informed them about the incident.  Inspite of the 
statement of Shamlal Garg having been recorded by the police, the 
FIR was not registered regarding the alleged kidnapping of Sachin 
Garg(PW-2) and his release after payment of ransom. The 
FIR(Exhibit-PAA/1) was admittedly registered on the basis of the 
so-called secret information received by Jai Singh, SI(PW-27) 
which was also not brought on record.  
33. A perusal of the deposition of Mahesh Garg(PW-1) would 
reveal that he admitted that from the very ransom amount paid by 
him, he received back a sum of Rs. 95,08,000/- from the Court, 
but he could not remember the date of receiving the amount. It is 
however an admitted position as emerging from record that no 
such order was ever sought for or procured from the Court. 
Mahesh Garg(PW-1) also admitted that his son Sachin Garg(PW-2) 
was never asked to identify the accused by the police in any 
identification parade. 

 
27 
 
34. Jai Singh, SI(PW-27) deposed that he was on patrolling duty 
at the market of Sector-16, Panchkula when he received a secret 
information about a gang operating in Panchkula which was 
indulged in kidnapping children for ransom and if the amount was 
not paid, they would kill the victims and that such an incident had 
occurred in Kothi No. 81-A, Sector 17, Panchkula. The 
witness(PW-27) recorded a ruqa(Exhibit-PAA) dated 15th April, 
2003 on the basis of this information and forwarded the same to 
the Police Station, Sector 5, Panchkula for registration of a case. 
Acting on the ruqa(Exhibit-PAA) forwarded by Jai Singh(PW-27), 
FIR(Exhibit-PAA/1) came to be registered for the offences 
punishable under Sections 387 and 507 IPC by Jai Raj, ASI(PW-
25). Indisputably, the ruqa(Exhibit-PAA) was merely based on a 
source information and it is totally unacceptable that the police 
officials could register the FIR merely on the basis of such source 
information without even verifying the fact as to whether any such 
incident had actually occurred. The very fact that this FIR(Exhibit-
PAA/1) was registered by referring to an incident which took place 
in Kothi No. 81-A, Sector 17, Panchkula without making any 
verification from the aggrieved person/s clearly shows that the 
Investigating Agency right from inception had started plotting that 

 
28 
 
the case should proceed in a particular direction. This is a very 
suspicious circumstance that creates a grave doubt on the conduct 
of the Investigating Agency. 
35. After the FIR(Exhibit-PAA/1) had been registered on the basis 
of ruqa(Exhibit-PAA) received from Jai Singh, SI(PW-27), the 
investigation of the case was assigned to Surjit Kumar, 
Investigating Officer(PW-37). The Investigating Officer(PW-37) 
testified on oath that he proceeded to Kothi No. 81-A, Sector-17, 
Panchkula where Shamlal Garg met him and gave him two mobile 
Nos. being 9815XXXXXX and 9815XXXXXX alleging that these 
mobile numbers were of the kidnappers. The Investigating 
Officer(PW-37) then proceeded to the Bharti Airtel Company, 
Mohali to verify the ownership of these two mobile numbers. The 
administrative official of the Company informed the Investigating 
Officer(PW-37) that the mobile numbers had been sold to Kohli 
Traders, Sector-26, Chandigarh on which he proceeded to Kohli 
Traders and met the proprietor Yogesh Kohli who in turn provided 
information that the mobile numbers(SIM cards) had been sold to 
Singla Traders, Sector-8, Chandigarh. He thereupon went to Singla 
Traders, but could not find anyone there. He again went to Singla 
Traders on 17th April, 2003, where Niranjan Singla and Reena 

 
29 
 
Singla met him and gave him the details of the persons to whom 
the SIM cards had been sold. However, no record of this sale was 
maintained at Singla Traders. Pawan Kumar, Head Constable 
procured the call details of these two mobile numbers vide 
memo(Exhibit-PV). However, the Investigating Officer(PW-37) did 
not divulge anything about the identity of the person/s to whom 
the SIM Cards had been sold by Singla Traders.  
36. It is important to note here that as per the version of 
Investigating Officer(PW-37), Shamlal Garg’s statement was 
recorded on 15th April, 2003 wherein he gave details of the two 
mobile numbers alleging that these were the mobile numbers of 
the kidnappers. The Investing Officer(PW-37) did not state that 
Shamlal Garg complained to him that his grandson Sachin 
Garg(PW-2) had been kidnapped or that ransom money had been 
paid to the kidnappers for securing his release. It is not in dispute 
that Shamlal Garg was not examined as a witness in the case and 
that Section 161 CrPC statements of Mahesh Garg(PW-1) and 
Sachin Garg(PW-2) were recorded as late as on 20th April, 2003. 
Thus, there is a glaring omission manifest from the evidence of the 
Investigating Officer(PW-37) which shows that even after the police 
officials had contacted the family members of the kidnapped boy 

 
30 
 
on 15th April, 2003, no details were provided by them regarding the 
alleged incident of kidnapping of Sachin Garg(PW-2) on 2nd April, 
2003 or that he was got released after paying ransom to the tune 
of Rs. 1 crore. This manifest lacuna in the prosecution story is 
another indication that the entire case is nothing but a cock and 
bull story.  
37. The decision of Investigating Officer(PW-37) in abruptly 
proceeding to the Bharti Airtel Company, Mohali for verifying the 
mobile numbers without even requiring Shamlal Garg to file a 
formal complaint regarding the alleged incident of kidnapping and 
without recording the statement of the kidnapped boy-Sachin 
Garg(PW-2), brings the conduct of the Investigating Officer(PW-37) 
under a cloud of doubt.  Shamlal Garg’s statement should have 
put the Investigating Officer(PW-37) on a high degree of alert and 
his first reaction and lawful obligation would have been to 
immediately make enquiry from the allegedly kidnapped boy 
Sachin Garg(PW-2). However, the Investigating Officer(PW-37) 
delayed recording his statement for almost five days. 
38. The Investigating Officer(PW-37) stated that he again went to 
Kothi No. 81-A, Panchkula on 20th April, 2003 and on that day, 
he recorded the statements of Mahesh Garg(PW-1) and Sachin 

 
31 
 
Garg(PW-2) under Section 161 CrPC whereafter, offences 
punishable under Sections 342, 364A, 392 and 506 IPC were 
added to the case. This gross delay on part of the police officials in 
collecting tangible evidence regarding the so-called kidnapping 
and release of Sachin Garg(PW-2) after paying ransom amount is 
a grave indication of unnatural conduct which has to be kept in 
mind while appreciating the evidence of the star prosecution 
witness. In the later part of his examination-in-chief, the 
Investigating Officer(PW-37) stated about the further steps of 
investigation including the arrest of the accused, recording of their 
disclosure statements, recovery of currency notes and other 
incriminating articles in the sequence which have been narrated 
supra at Para No.13 of this judgment. 
39. In cross-examination, the Investigating Officer(PW-37) stated 
that after the investigation of the case was entrusted to him, he 
went to the house of Mahesh Garg(PW-1) on 15th April, 2003. A 
zimni was recorded in the case file to the effect that Jai Singh, 
SI(PW-27) had visited the house of Mahesh Garg(PW-1) on 15th 
April 2003 at about 8:00 pm to make enquiry about the case from 
Mahesh Garg(PW-1). Admittedly, the statement of Mahesh 
Garg(PW-1) was never recorded by Jai Singh(PW-27) under Section 

 
32 
 
161 CrPC. The Investigating Officer(PW-37) further stated that he 
reached the house of Mahesh Garg(PW-1) at about 10:00 pm on 
the very same day, the investigation of the case was assigned to 
him, but Mahesh Garg(PW-1) was not available at that time. 
Shamlal Garg, father of Mahesh Garg(PW-1) was found present 
and he made an enquiry about the incident from him. However, 
the witness did not record the statement of Shamlal Garg under 
Section 161 CrPC on the premise that Shamlal Garg seemed to be 
apprehensive and frightened because of old age. However, this 
seems to be nothing but a lame excuse. The Investigating 
Officer(PW-37) stated that he had recorded the statement of 
Shamlal Garg under Section 161 CrPC at a later date. He recorded 
the statements of Sachin Garg(PW-2) and Mahesh Garg(PW-1) on 
20th April, 2003 at about 12:00 noon.  Mahesh Garg(PW-1), 
divulged the names of accused as Gaurav, Sanjay, Munish @ 
Mintu and Gaurav Maini in his statement under Section 161 CrPC. 
Subsequently, the Investigating Officer(PW-37) resiled from this 
version and stated that names of the accused were not disclosed 
by Mahesh Garg(PW-1), but rather the same were stated by Sachin 
Garg(PW-2). The Investigating Officer(PW-37) was confronted with 
the special report(Exhibit-PEEE) prepared by the SHO of Police 

 
33 
 
Station, Sector 5, Chandigarh under Section 173 CrPC wherein, 
neither the names of the accused nor the title of the case were 
mentioned. The Investigating Officer explained that in spite of the 
statements of Mahesh Garg(PW-1) and Sachin Garg(PW-2), being 
available on the case file, he did not consider it essential to 
mention the names of the accused in the special report. This 
omission is again an indication of suspicious conduct of the 
Investigating Officer(PW-37). The Investigating Officer(PW-37) 
further admitted that on making enquiry from Niranjan Singla and 
Reena Singla, he could not gather any information regarding the 
identity of the person(s) to whom the SIM cards had been sold. The 
Investigating Officer(PW-37) also admitted that the cash amount 
recovered from the accused was not available in the Court. The 
recovered currency notes were deposited with CIA staff, i.e. Male 
Head Constable, Panchkula(hereinafter being referred to as 
‘MHC’). These currency notes were not in a sealed condition when 
they were deposited. The currency notes recovered at the instance 
of the accused were not produced before the Court as the same 
already been taken on superdari by the Superdar. He did not 
remember the name of the MHC. He also could not state whether 
the MHC had been cited as a witness in the case. A pertinent 

 
34 
 
suggestion was given to the witness(PW-37) that he was 
deliberately concealing the name of the MHC because amount 
recovered from Munish Bhalla and Gaurav Bhalla was never 
deposited with him.  
40. At this stage, it would be relevant to mention that the 
Investigating Officer(PW-37) claimed that the recovered currency 
notes had been handed over to the Superdar, but no order of the 
Court concerned directing/permitting handing over of the 
currency notes to anyone is available on record. Admittedly, the 
recovered currency notes were neither sealed at the time of 
recovery nor did the prosecution led any evidence to show that the 
currency notes allegedly seized from the accused were ever 
deposited in the malkhana of the police station. As a matter of fact, 
on going through the entire record and the evidence of the material 
prosecution 
witnesses 
viz. 
Mahesh 
Garg(PW-1) 
and 
the 
Investigating Officer(PW-37), we find that the prosecution has not 
given any evidence whatsoever to explain the fate of the currency 
notes allegedly recovered at the instance of the accused other than 
the bald version of Investigating Officer(PW-37) referred to above. 
No proceedings to prove the purported release of the currency 
notes on superdari were brought on record.  

 
35 
 
41. Mahesh Garg(PW-1) in his examination-in-chief did not state 
that he had received the recovered currency notes on superdari. 
Only during cross-examination, did he admit that he had received 
back an amount of Rs. 95,08,000/- from the Court but could not 
divulge the date of such receipt.  
42. Since the prosecution alleged demand of ransom amount of 
around Rs. 1 crore and the recovery thereof from the accused 
without any doubt, the recovered currency notes were in the 
nature of case property/mudammal. The disposal of the case 
property could only have been done by taking recourse to the 
procedure contained under Sections 451, 452 and 457 CrPC as 
the case may be. The Investigation Officer(PW-37) had no authority 
to release the currency notes without an order of the Court and his 
action to the contrary tantamounts to grave misconduct. At Para 
96 of its judgment, the trial Court causally brushed aside the 
contention of the defence counsel regarding the non-production of 
the case property(currency notes) in the Court observing that the 
recovered currency notes were released on superdari by the 
learned Magistrate. However, in the same para, the trial Court 
went on to note that the currency notes were never seen after the 
recovery and were not produced in the Court when the prosecution 

 
36 
 
witnesses were examined.  The fact remains that there is no 
indication in the judgment of the trial Court or for that matter of 
the High Court regarding the date of the order whereby, the 
currency notes were directed to be returned to Mahesh Garg(PW-
1). We further find that no order for final disposal of the currency 
notes was passed by the trial Court under Section 452 CrPC which 
is a mandatory requirement. The sheer indifference exhibited by 
the trial Court and the High Court to this extremely important 
aspect of the case is shocking, to say the least. Therefore, the entire 
process of recovery of the currency notes is clearly flawed, marked 
by procedural errors and grave lacuna which goes to the root of 
the matter. The trial Court and High Court fell in grave error by 
not pulling up the prosecution for flagrant disregard of legal 
procedures and failure to document key details which undermines 
the prosecution's case.  
43. The defence has come up with a pertinent theory that Gaurav 
Bhalla(A2) and Shivani @ Kaku, daughter of Mahesh Garg(PW-1) 
and sister of Sachin Garg(PW-2) were involved in a love affair and 
that Shivani had eloped from her house on 1st April, 2003. 
Immediately, thereafter, the complainant took steps to get caller 
IDs installed on the landline numbers operational in his house.  In 

 
37 
 
this regard the trial Court recorded its findings at Para 95 of the 
judgment dated 26th September, 2005 which are reproduced 
hereinbelow for the sake of ready reference: - 
“95. No doubt, the FIR in the present case was recorded on 
15.4.2003 on ruqa Ex. PAA sent by PW 27 Jai Singh SI whereas 
the occurrence took place on 2.4.2003. Ex. DD is a letter dated 
9.4.2003 written by S.P. Panchkula to the Spice Tele. Com. 
Mohali. Document Ex. DE is also a copy of same letter dated 
9.4.2003. Ex. DF is also a letter dated 9.4.2003 written by S.P. 
Panchkula to Bharti Mobile Ltd. Mohali. Letter Ex. DG is a letter 
written by Surjit Kumar SI to the Commercial Officer. 
Telephone, Panchkula for providing I.D. Caller facility on 
telephone nos. 566403 and 572139. Even if it is presumed that 
the above referred letters were issued by the police to the Mobile 
companies and telephone department prior to the lodging of 
FIR, even then the prosecution case cannot be dislodged reason 
being that his delay in lodging the FIR has been explained by 
the prosecution. It has also been explained why the FIR was not 
got lodged by the family members of Sachin Garg. PW 1 Mahesh 
Kumar Garg father of Sachin Garg has stated that the 
kidnappers after kidnapping his son gave threatening on the 
telephone repeatedly that in case ransom amount is not paid or 
police is informed, his son would be killed and due to this 
reason, he did not report the matter to the police. When a 
person under threat of life has paid ransom for release of his 
kidnapped son and if he does not report the matter to the police 
under constant fear of his and his family life, if the FIR was 
lodged by the police official, does not amount that it has created 
suspicion in the present case but in such a case, role of agency 
must be appreciated. It has also been proved in this case that 
from the call details of mobile No. 9815475291 and 
9815475360 that these were used for demanding ransom 
amount and calls were given on telephone nos. of Mahesh Garg 
2562954 and Mobile no. 9817208181. It has also proved form 
the record of Airtel Company that three mobile sets bearing 
IMEI 
nos. 
3501796266-59830, 
350019563917100 
and 
35060980768- 5060 were used for these two SIM Cards. From 
the evidence of PW 33 Manish Kumar SI, it is established from 
the record of Spice Communication Ltd. that other mobile Nos. 
9814783373, 
9814688843 
and 
9814735976 
were 
also 
registered on the above referred IMEI numbers and it was found 
that the above referred mobile numbers were pertaining to 
accused Gaurav Maini, Gaurav Bhalla and accused Sanjay 
@Sanju respectively. When there is cogent and convincing 

 
38 
 
evidence of the prosecution on record to prove the complicity of 
the accused persons in the commission of offence, then this 
delay in lodging the FIR and letters Ex. DD. Ex. DE and Ex. DF 
reflecting the date prior to the FIR do not create such doubt 
going in favour of the accused but indicting the serious efforts 
of the police agency to check the crime in the society. Even the 
name of the accused has not been mentioned in special report 
Ex. PEEE sent on 20.04.2003, does not make any difference 
because this special report was sent when offence under section 
364-A IPC was added and this was only the purpose for 
recording the special report. In judgment Ravindra @ Ravi 
Bansi Gohan's case (Supra), it was held by the Apex Court that 
FIR should not be on the basis of investigation but should be 
outcome of investigation. In the present case, FIR is not on the 
basis of investigation as it was only first information report 
given by PW 27 Jai Singh ASI when he was on patrolling duty 
and hence, this judgment does not help the accused in any 
manner.” 
44. We find that the aforesaid reasonings assigned by the trial 
Court are absolutely fanciful and unconvincing. The trial Court 
held that steps had been taken by the police to install Caller ID 
facilities on the telephone numbers installed at the house of 
Mahesh Garg(PW-1) on 9th April, 2003 in order to check the crime. 
It is not in dispute that the kidnapped boy had returned home on 
3rd April, 2003 itself and thus, there was no logical reason 
whatsoever for Mahesh Garg(PW-1) to have initiated steps for 
installing Caller ID facilities on the landline numbers thereafter.  
45. The delay in lodging of the FIR was sought to be overlooked 
by both the Courts with a bald observation that the complainant 
party was under the fear of the threats given by the accused. 
Indisputably, Sachin Garg had returned home on 3rd April, 2003. 

 
39 
 
Consequently, the complainant party could not be labouring under 
the fear of threats allegedly given by the accused after the victim 
had returned home.  
46. The Investigating Officer(PW-37) stated that Mahesh Garg 
(PW-1) was not present in the house on 15th April, 2003. However, 
it is not the case of the prosecution that even Sachin Garg(PW-2) 
was not present in the house when the Investigating Officer(PW-
37) visited Kothi No. 81-A and recorded the statement of Shamlal 
Garg. Hence, a further doubt is created on the truthfulness of the 
prosecution case on account of non-examination of Sachin Garg 
(PW-2) by the police, on the date on which the incident of 
kidnapping came into the knowledge of the police officials. Thus, 
the very core of the prosecution case is shaken to its foundation 
on account of the complainant party failing to inform the police 
about the incident, in spite of ample opportunities.  
47. Shamlal Garg, grandfather of the kidnapped boy-Sachin 
Garg(PW-2) was the first person who came into contact of the 
police officials on 15th April, 2003 and he admittedly disclosed 
about the incident to Investigating Officer(PW-37). In that 
background, Shamlal Garg would have been the most vital witness 
to unfurl the truth of the matter. However, for the reasons best 

 
40 
 
known to the prosecution, Shamlal Garg was not examined as a 
witness in the case. As a matter of fact, the trial Court should have 
remained vigilant and it was absolutely essential for the Court to 
have exercised powers under Section 311 CrPC so as to summon 
and examine Shamlal Garg in evidence because his evidence was 
essential for a just decision of the case.  Section 165 of the 
Evidence Act permits the Judge to ask any question as he pleases 
in any form, at any time, of any witness, or of the parties about 
any fact relevant or irrelevant or may order production of any 
document or thing. 
48. A conjoint reading of Section 311 CrPC and Section 165 of 
the Evidence Act makes it clear that the trial Court is under an 
obligation not to act as a mere spectator and should proactively 
participate in the trial proceedings, so as to ensure that neither 
any extraneous material is permitted to be brought on record nor 
any relevant fact is left out.  It is the duty of the trial Court to 
ensure that all such evidence which is essential for the just 
decision of the case is brought on record irrespective of the fact 
that the party concerned omits to do so.  

 
41 
 
49. This Court in the case of Pooja Pal v. Union of India and 
Others 1 examined the ambit of powers of the Courts under Section 
311 CrPC read with Section 165 of the Evidence Act and held as 
below: - 
“54. It was propounded in Zahira Habibulla case [Zahira 
Habibulla H. Sheikh v. State of Gujarat, (2004) 4 SCC 158] that 
in a criminal case, the fate of the proceedings cannot always be 
left entirely in the hands of the parties, crimes being public 
wrongs in breach and violation of public rights and duties, 
which affect the whole community and are harmful to the 
society in general. That the concept of fair trial entails the 
triangulation of the interest of the accused, the victim, society 
and that the community acts through the State and the 
prosecuting agency was authoritatively stated. This Court 
observed that the interests of the society are not to be treated 
completely with disdain and as persona non grata. It was 
remarked as well that due administration of justice is always 
viewed as a continuous process, not confined to the 
determination of a particular case so much so that a court 
must cease to be a mute spectator and a mere recording 
machine but become a participant in the trial evincing 
intelligence and active interest and elicit all relevant 
materials necessary for reaching the correct conclusion, to 
find out the truth and administer justice with fairness and 
impartiality both to the parties and to the community. 
57. It was underlined in Zahira Habibulla case [Zahira 
Habibulla H. Sheikh v. State of Gujarat, (2004) 4 SCC 158] that 
if ultimately the truth is to be arrived at, the eyes and ears of 
justice have to be protected so that the interest of justice do not 
get incapacitated in the sense of making the proceedings before 
the courts, mere mock trials. While elucidating that a court 
ought to exercise its powers under Section 311 of the Code 
and Section 165 of the Evidence Act judicially and with 
circumspection, it was held that such invocation ought to 
be only to subserve the cause of justice and the public 
interest by eliciting evidence in aid of a just decision and 
to uphold the truth. It was proclaimed that though justice is 
depicted to be blindfolded, it is only a veil not to see who the 
party before it is, while pronouncing judgment on the cause 
brought before it by enforcing the law and administer justice 
and not to ignore or turn the attention away from the truth of 
 
1 (2016) 3 SCC 135 

 
42 
 
the cause or the lis before it, in disregard of its duty to prevent 
miscarriage of justice. That any indifference, inaction or 
lethargy displayed in protecting the right of an ordinary citizen, 
more particularly when a grievance is expressed against the 
mighty administration, would erode the public faith in the 
judicial system was underlined. It was highlighted that the 
courts exist to do justice to the persons who are affected and 
therefore they cannot afford to get swayed by the abstract 
technicalities and close their eyes to the factors which need to 
be positively probed and noticed. The following statement in 
Jennison v. Baker [Jennison v. Baker, (1972) 2 QB 52 : (1972) 
2 WLR 429 : (1972) 1 All ER 997 (CA)] , was recalled : (QB p. 
66) 
“… ‘The law should not be seen to sit by limply, 
while those who defy it go free, and those who seek 
its protection lose hope.’”” 
    
 
 
 
 
 
          (emphasis supplied) 
50. We are fully satisfied that the trial Court failed to perform its 
lawful obligation under Section 311 CrPC read with Section 165 of 
the Evidence Act inasmuch as, the most vital witness whose 
deposition was imperative for arriving at the truth of the matter i.e. 
Shamlal Garg was not produced by the prosecution and the trial 
Court took no steps whatsoever to summon him by exercising its 
powers under Section 311 CrPC and Section 165 of the Evidence 
Act. The fact that the FIR was not registered on the first disclosure 
of the incident made by Shamlal Garg to Surjit Singh, Investigating 
Officer(PW-37) and non-examination of the said witness at the trial 
is a fatal lacuna which persuades this Court to draw an adverse 
inference against the prosecution. 

 
43 
 
51. The trial Court as well as the High Court placed reliance upon 
the call detail records, concluding that the suspected mobile 
numbers were in use of Gaurav Maini(A1), Gaurav Bhalla(A2) and 
Sanjay @ Sanju(A4). However, the fact remains that no convincing 
evidence was led by the prosecution to connect the accused 
persons with the afore-mentioned mobile numbers. Furthermore, 
the prosecution admittedly, did not prove the call detail records in 
accordance with the mandate of Section 65B of the Evidence Act 
and hence, the call detail records cannot be read in evidence. 
Reference in this regard may be made to the judgment of this Court 
in the case of Arjun Panditrao Khotkar v. Kailash Kushanrao 
Gorantyal and Ors.2 
52. In wake of the discussion made hereinabove, we summarise 
our conclusions as below: - 
 
i. 
That the entire prosecution story is totally concocted and 
does not inspire confidence. 
ii. 
The FIR(Exhibit-PAA/1) could not have been registered on 
the basis of the secret information received by Jai Singh, 
SI(PW-27) because the said information did not disclose 
 
2 (2020) 3 SCC 216 

 
44 
 
the commission of any cognizable offence. If at all, the FIR 
had to be registered, the same should have been done on 
the basis of the statement of Shamlal Garg recorded by the 
police officials on 15th April, 2003. However, no such steps 
were taken by the police officials, thereby, creating a grave 
doubt on the bona fides of the actions of the Investigating 
Agency. 
iii. 
That the complainant party failed to offer logical 
explanation for failing to file an FIR even after the 
kidnapped boy-Sachin Garg(PW-2) had returned home. It 
can safely be presumed that once the kidnapped boy had 
returned home, the threat perception at the hands of the 
offenders, if any, would have been diluted/disappeared. 
The delay in taking legal action creates a grave doubt on 
the truthfulness of the entire prosecution case. 
iv. 
That the kidnapped boy-Sachin Garg(PW-2) knew accused 
Gaurav Bhalla(A2) from before and claims to have 
identified him at the time of the incident but in spite 
thereof, the name of Gaurav Bhalla(A2) was not disclosed 
to the police officials up to 20th April, 2003 which 
completely demolishes the veracity of the prosecution case. 

 
45 
 
The omission of the names of the accused persons in the 
special report forwarded by Investigating Officer(PW-37) to 
his superior officials is also vital and creates further doubt 
on the conduct of the Investigating Agency. 
v. 
It is an admitted fact that the accused appellants other 
than Gaurav Bhalla(A2) were not known to the kidnapped 
boy-Sachin Garg(PW-2) and they were identified by him for 
the first time in the dock during deposition in the Court. 
This creates a doubt on the dock identification of these 
accused by Sachin Garg(PW-2) who also admitted in the 
cross-examination that the accused persons were shown 
to him and his father by the officers of the CIA. This 
admission lends further succour to the conclusion that the 
identification of the accused by the witness Sachin 
Garg(PW-2) is not free from doubt. 
vi. 
That the prosecution case failed to led trustworthy 
evidence to establish the recovery of the currency notes at 
the instance of the accused because the disclosure 
statements were not proved as per law. Furthermore, the 
currency notes were handed back to Mahesh Garg(PW-1) 
without any order of the Court which is an act of gross 

 
46 
 
misconduct on the part of the Investigating Officer(PW-37). 
Rather, this Court is compelled to observe that perhaps the 
entire exercise of recording disclosure statements and the 
recovery of the currency notes is totally sham and that is 
why, the currency notes were neither deposited in the 
malkhana of the police station/bank nor were the same 
produced in the Court thereby, creating strong doubt on 
the very factum of the recovery. 
vii. 
That the prosecution failed to examine the most relevant 
witness, namely, Shamlal Garg which compels the Court 
to draw an adverse inference against the prosecution. 
53. The High Court as well as the trial Court failed to advert to 
these important loopholes and shortcomings in the evidence 
available on record which are fatal and completely destroy the 
fabric of the prosecution case. 
54. As a consequence, this Court is of the firm opinion that entire 
story of the prosecution is nothing but a piece of fabrication and 
the accused were framed in the case for ulterior motive. There is 
no iota of truth in the prosecution story what to talk of proof 
beyond all manner of doubt which establishes the guilt of the 
accused. The fabric of the prosecution case is full of holes which 

 
47 
 
are impossible to mend. Thus, conviction of the accused appellants 
as recorded by the trial Court and affirmed by the High Court 
cannot be sustained. The impugned judgments do not stand to 
scrutiny.    
55. Resultantly, the judgment dated 26th September, 2005 
passed by the trial Court and the judgment dated 19th January, 
2009 passed by the High Court are hereby quashed and set aside 
and the appeals are accordingly allowed. 
56. The appellants are acquitted of the charges. They are on bail 
and need not surrender. Their bail bonds are discharged. 
57. Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
 
New Delhi; 
July 09, 2024