2024 INSC 496
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 353 OF 2008 
 
 
M/S DAIMLER CHRYSLER INDIA 
PVT. LTD.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   …APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
 
 
       
   VERSUS 
M/S CONTROLS & SWITCHGEAR  
COMPANY LTD. & ANR.                
 
 
 …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WITH 
 
C.A. NO. 19536-19537 OF 2017 
 
MERCEDES BENZ INDIA  
PVT. LTD. & ANR. 
 
 
 
 
 
   …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
CG POWER AND INDUSTRIAL  
SOLUTIONS LTD. & ORS.  
 
 
 
 …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
 
C.A. NO. 2633 OF 2018 
 
M/S. CG POWER AND INDUSTRIAL  
SOLUTIONS LTD.  
 
 
 
 
 
    …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
MERCEDES BENZ INDIA PVT. LTD. & ORS.  
 …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
Digitally signed by
RAVI ARORA
Date: 2024.07.09
17:23:33 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
 
1. Though factually different, these appeals involve common question 
of law - whether the purchase of a vehicle/good by a Company for the 
use/personal use of its directors would amount to purchase for 
“commercial purpose” within the meaning of Section 2(1)(d) of the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (now re-enacted as Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019)? 
2. The CA No. 353 of 2008 has been filed by the appellant - M/s Daimler 
Chrysler India Pvt. Ltd., now known as Mercedes Benz India Pvt. Ltd. 
(original opponent no. 1) arising out of the Original Petition No. 09 of 
2006 filed by the respondent no. 1 - M/s Controls and Switchgear 
Company Ltd. (original complainant), challenging the impugned 
judgment and order dated 17.09.2007 passed by the National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (hereinafter referred to 
as the National Commission), in the said O.P. No. 9/2006. 
3. The CA Nos. 19536-19537 of 2017 have been preferred by the 
appellant - Mercedes Benz India Pvt. Ltd. and Anr. (original opponent 
nos. 1 and 2) arising out of the Consumer Case No. 51 of 2006 filed 
by the respondent no. 1 - CG Power and Industrial Solutions Ltd. and 
Mr. Sudhir M. Trehan, M.D. of respondent no. 1, (original 

3 
 
complainants), challenging the impugned orders dated 08.07.2016 
and 11.09.2017 passed by the National Commission in the said C.C. 
No. 51/2006.  The cross appeal being no. CA No. 2633 of 2018 has 
been preferred by the appellant – M/s CG Power and Industrial 
Solutions Ltd. (original complainant no. 1) against the respondents - 
Mercedes Benz India Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. (original opponents) 
challenging the judgment and order dated 11.09.2017 passed in the 
said Consumer No. 51 of 2006 by the National Commission, in so far 
as it is against M/s. C.G. Power. 
4. At the outset, it may be noted that in Original Petition No. 09 of 2006 
(from which CA No. 353 of 2008 arises), the National Commission 
vide the impugned order dated 17.09.2007 after holding that the 
Complainant-Company being a legal entity, was entitled to file a 
Complaint, and that the cars purchased for the use of the directors of 
the Company, not used for any activity directly connected with 
commercial purpose of earning profit, could not be said to have been 
purchased by the complainant-company for “commercial purpose”, 
had directed the appellant (original opponent no. 1) to replace the Car 
no. DL-5CR-0333 with a new car of the same or similar model, or in 
the alternative refund its full purchase price, namely one half of the 
amount of Rs. 1,15,72,280/- which was paid by the complainant to 
the opposite parties for the purchase of the two vehicles in question, 

4 
 
and take back the vehicle. It may further be noted that vide the said 
impugned order dated 17.09.2007, the National Commission had 
also passed the order with regard to the second car being car no. DL-
9CV-5555, purchased by the complainant. In respect of that part of 
the order pertaining to the second car, the appellant had preferred an 
appeal being CA No. 6042 of 2007 before this Court. The said Appeal 
came to be disposed of vide the order dated 11.01.2008 by this Court. 
Hence, now, we are concerned with the impugned order dated 
17.09.2007 pertaining to the car no. DL-5CR-0333 only, so far as the 
CA No. 353 of 2008 is concerned. 
5. It is further pertinent to note that the findings recorded in the said 
judgment and order dated 17.09.2007 in Original Petition No. 09 of 
2006 with regard to the maintainability of the Complaint at the 
instance of the complainant-company in respect of the car purchased 
for the use/personal use of the director of the company, being in 
conflict with the findings recorded by an another two-member Bench 
of the National Commission in case of General Motors Pvt. Ltd. Vs. 
G.S. Fertilizers Pvt. Ltd.1 in which it was held inter alia that the 
vehicle purchased by a company for its Managing Director would 
amount to its purchase for a commercial purpose, the matter was 
 
1 II (2013) CPJ 72 (NC) 

5 
 
referred to the three-member Bench of the National Commission. The 
three-member Bench in the Consumer Complaint No. 51 of 2006 vide 
the impugned judgment and order dated 08.07.2016 held as under: 
“11(a) If a car or any other goods are obtained or any services 
are hired or availed by a company for the use/personal use of its 
directors or employees, such a transaction does not amount to 
purchase of goods or hiring or availing of services for a 
commercial purpose, irrespective of whether the goods or 
services are used solely for the personal purposes of the 
directors or employees of the company or they are used primarily 
for the use of the directors or employees of the company and 
incidentally for the purposes of the company. 
 
(b) The purchase of a car or any other goods or hiring or availing 
of services by a company for the purposes of the company 
amount to purchase for a commercial purpose, even if such a car 
or other goods or such services are incidentally used by the 
directors or employees of the company for their personal 
purposes.” 
 
6. The appellants - Mercedes Benz India Pvt. Ltd. (the original 
opponents in Consumer Complaint No. 51/2006) challenged the said 
Judgment and Order dated 08.07.2016 passed by the three-member 
Bench of the National Commission, before this Court by preferring an 
Appeal being C.A. No. 10410 of 2016. This Court disposed of the said 
Appeal by passing following order on 20.02.2017: - 
“Heard Mr. Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel along with Mr. 
Vineet Maheshwari, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner 
and Mr. Amir Singh Pasrich, learned counsel appearing for the 
1st respondent.  
The present appeal calls in question the legal propriety of the 
order dated 8.7.2016 passed by the National Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Commission, Bench No. 1, New Delhi (for short, 'the 
National Commission’) in Consumer Complaint No. 51 of 2006 

6 
 
repelling the submission of the appellant that the complaint 
before the said Commission is not maintainable.  
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, we are of the 
considered opinion that the National Commission should 
adjudicate the dispute finally and thereafter it will be open to the 
appellant to challenge the order of maintainability, i.e., the 
present order as well as the final order. The National Commission 
is requested to dispose of the Consumer Complaint No. 51 of 
2006 within three months hence.  
With the aforesaid observation and liberty, the civil appeal stands 
disposed of. There shall be no order as to costs.” 
 
7. Thereafter, the National Commission adjudicated the disputes 
between the parties on merits vide the impugned judgment and order 
dated 11.09.2017 and disposed of the Consumer Case No. 51 of 
2006 by giving following directions: 
“(i) The opposite parties No.1 & 2 shall pay a sum of Rs.5.00 lacs 
to complainant No.1 for the deficiency in the services rendered 
to it on account of the airbags of the car having not 
deployed/triggered; 
 
(ii) The opposite parties No.1 & 2 shall pay a sum of Rs.5.00 lacs 
as compensation to complainant No.1 for the unfair trade practice 
indulged into by them; 
 
(iii) The Opposite Parties No.1 & 2 shall, in the Owner’s Manual 
to be provided to the buyers of their E-class Cars, as well as on 
their website, provide adequate information with respect to the 
deployment triggering of the airbags of the vehicle, in 
consultation with AAUI. 
(iv)The opposite parties No.1 & 2 shall pay a sum of Rs. 25,000/- 
as the cost of litigation to complainant No.1. 
(v) The payment in terms of this order shall be made and the 
directions contained herein will be complied within three months 
from today.” 
 
8.  As stated earlier, the said two orders 08.07.2016 and 11.09.2017 
passed in Consumer case no. 51 of 2006 have been challenged by 

7 
 
the appellants-Mercedes Benz by way of C.A. No. 19536-19537 of 
2017. The Cross Appeal being C.A. No. 2633 has been preferred by 
M/s CG Power and Industrial Solutions Ltd. (original complainant), 
being aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 11.09.2017 passed 
by the National Commission. 
9. The common bone of contention raised by the learned counsels 
appearing for the appellants - M/s Daimler Chrysler India Pvt. Ltd., 
(now Mercedes Benz India Pvt. Ltd.) in their respective Appeals is 
that the purchase of car/vehicle by a company for the use/personal 
use of its directors could not be said to be the purchase of vehicle for 
self-employment to earn its livelihood, but it has to be construed as 
the purchase of vehicle for “commercial purposes”, and therefore 
such company would fall outside the purview of the definition of 
“consumer” within the meaning of Section 2(1)(d) of the said Act.  In 
this regard it would be apt to reproduce the relevant part of the 
definition of “Consumer” as contained in Section 2(1)(d) of the Act, 
which reads as under- 
“2(1)(d) “consumer” means any person who,— 
 
 (i) buys any goods for a consideration which has been paid or 
promised or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system 
of deferred payment and includes any user of such goods other 
than the person who buys such goods for consideration paid or 
promised or partly paid or partly promised, or under any system 
of deferred payment when such use is made with the approval of 
such person, but does not include a person who obtains such 
goods for resale or for any commercial purpose; or 

8 
 
(ii)…. 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “commercial 
purpose” does not include use by a person of goods bought and 
used by him and services availed by him exclusively for the 
purposes of earning his livelihood by means of self-employment;” 
 
10. From the bare reading of the said definition, it is discernible that the 
definition of “consumer” does not include a person who obtains any 
goods for “resale” or for “any commercial purpose”. Though what is 
“commercial purpose” has not been defined under the Act, it has been 
interpreted in catena of decisions by this Court. 
11. In Laxmi Engineering Works vs. P.S.G Industrial Institute2 this 
Court after discussing the earlier decisions concluded inter alia that 
whether the purpose for which a person has bought goods is a 
“commercial purpose” within a meaning of definition of expression 
“consumer” in Section 2(1)(d) of the Act, is always a question of fact 
to be decided in the facts and circumstances of each case. 
12. In Lilavati Kirtilal Mehta Medical Trust vs. Unique Shanti 
Developers and Others3, this Court culled out broad principles for 
determining whether an activity or transaction is for a “commercial 
purpose” or not, while holding that though no strait jacket formula 
could be adopted in every case. 
 
 
2 (1995) 3 SCC 583 
3 (2020) 2 SCC 265 
 

9 
 
“19. To summarise from the above discussion, though a strait 
jacket formula cannot be adopted in every case, the following 
broad principles can be culled out for determining whether an 
activity or transaction is “for a commercial purpose”: 
19.1. The question of whether a transaction is for a commercial 
purpose would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each 
case. However, ordinarily, “commercial purpose” is understood 
to include manufacturing/industrial activity or business-to-
business transactions between commercial entities. 
19.2. The purchase of the good or service should have a close 
and direct nexus with a profit-generating activity. 
19.3. The identity of the person making the purchase or the value 
of the transaction is not conclusive to the question of whether it 
is for a commercial purpose. It has to be seen whether the 
dominant intention or dominant purpose for the transaction was 
to facilitate some kind of profit generation for the purchaser 
and/or their beneficiary. 
19.4. If it is found that the dominant purpose behind purchasing 
the good or service was for the personal use and consumption of 
the purchaser and/or their beneficiary, or is otherwise not linked 
to any commercial activity, the question of whether such a 
purchase was for the purpose of “generating livelihood by means 
of self-employment” need not be looked into.” 
 
13. Further in the case of Shrikant G. Mantri vs. Punjab National 
Bank4, this Court observed thus-  
“50. It is thus clear, that this Court has held that the question, as 
to whether a transaction is for a commercial purpose would 
depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case. 
However, ordinarily, “commercial purpose” is understood to 
include manufacturing/industrial activity or business-to-
business transactions between commercial entities; that the 
purchase of the good or service should have a close and 
direct nexus with a profit-generating activity; that the 
identity of the person making the purchase or the value of 
the transaction is not conclusive for determining the 
question as to whether it is for a commercial purpose or not. 
What is relevant is the dominant intention or dominant 
purpose for the transaction and as to whether the same was 
to facilitate some kind of profit generation for the purchaser 
and/or their beneficiary. It has further been held that if the 
dominant purpose behind purchasing the good or service was for 
the personal use and the consumption of the purchaser and/or 
 
4  (2022) 5 SCC 42 

10 
 
their beneficiary, or is otherwise not linked to any commercial 
activity, then the question of whether such a purchase was for 
the purpose of “generating livelihood by means of self-
employment” need not be looked into.” 
 
14. In the case of National Insurance Company Limited vs. Harsolia 
Motors and Others5, this Court while relying and emphasizing on the 
principles laid down in Lilavati Kirtilal Mehta Medical Trust (supra) 
noted that what needs to be seen while determining whether the 
object purchased is being used for commercial purpose or not, is 
whether the dominant intention or dominant purpose for the 
transaction was to facilitate some kind of profit generation for the 
purchaser and/or their beneficiary. What needs to be determined is 
whether the object had a close and direct nexus with the profit 
generating activity and whether the dominant intention or dominant 
purpose for the transaction was to facilitate some kind of profit 
generation for the purchaser and/or their beneficiary. 
15. Further in the case Rohit Chaudhary and Another vs. Vipul 
Limited6, it was held as follows – 
“15. The expression “commercial purpose” has not been defined 
under the Act. In the absence thereof we have to go by its 
ordinary meaning. “Commercial” denotes “pertaining to 
commerce” (Chamber's Twentieth Century Dictionary); it means 
“connected” with or engaged in commerce; mercantile; 
“having profit as the main aim” (Collin's English Dictionary); 
 
5  (2023) 8 SCC 362 
6  (2024) 1 SCC 8 

11 
 
relate to or is connected with trade and traffic or commerce in 
general, is occupied with business and commerce. 
16. 
The 
Explanation 
[added 
by 
Consumer 
Protection 
(Amendment) Act 50 of 1993 replacing Ordinance 24 of 1993 
w.e.f. 18-6-1993] excludes certain purposes from the purview of 
the expression “commercial purpose” — a case of explanation to 
an exception to amplify this definition by way of an illustration 
would certainly clear the clouds surrounding such interpretation. 
For instance, a person who buys a car for his personal use would 
certainly be a consumer, but if purchased for plying the car for 
commercial purposes, namely, as a taxi, it can be said that it is 
for a commercial purpose. However, the Explanation clarifies that 
even purchases in certain situations for “commercial purposes” 
would not take within its sweep the purchaser out of the definition 
of expression “consumer”. In other words, if the commercial use 
is by the purchaser himself for the purpose of earning his 
livelihood by means of self-employment, such purchaser of 
goods would continue to be a “consumer”. 
17. This Court in Lilavati Kirtilal Mehta Medical Trust v. Unique 
Shanti Developers [Lilavati Kirtilal Mehta Medical Trust v. Unique 
Shanti Developers, (2020) 2 SCC 265 : (2020) 1 SCC (Civ) 320] 
, has held that a straitjacket formula cannot be adopted in 
every case and the broad principles which can be curled out 
for determining whether an activity or transaction is for a 
commercial 
purpose 
would 
depend 
on 
facts 
and 
circumstances of each case. 
18. Thus, if the dominant purpose of purchasing the goods or 
services is for a profit motive and this fact is evident from the 
record, such purchaser would not fall within the four corners of 
the definition of “consumer”. On the other hand, if the answer is 
in the negative, namely, if such person purchases the goods or 
services is not for any commercial purpose and for one's own 
use, it cannot be gainsaid even in such circumstances the 
transaction would be for a commercial purpose attributing profit 
motive and thereby excluding such person from the definition of 
“consumer”.” 
16. The sum and substance of the above decisions is that to determine 
whether the goods purchased by a person (which would include a 
legal entity like a company) were for a commercial purpose or not, 
within the definition of a “consumer” as contemplated in Section 

12 
 
2(1)(d) of the said Act, would depend upon facts and circumstances 
of each case. However ordinarily “commercial purpose” is understood 
to include manufacturing/industrial activity or business-to-business 
transactions between commercial entities. The purchase of the goods 
should have a close and direct nexus with a profit generating activity. 
It has to be seen whether the dominant intention or dominant purpose 
for the transaction was to facilitate some kind of profit generation for 
the purchaser and/or their beneficiary. If it is found that the dominant 
purpose behind purchasing the goods was for the personal use and 
consumption of the purchaser and/or their beneficiary, or was 
otherwise not linked to any commercial activity, the question of 
whether such a purchase was for the purpose of “generating 
livelihood by means of self-employment” need not be looked into. 
Again, the said determination cannot be restricted in a straitjacket 
formula and it has to be decided on case-to-case basis. 
I. 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 353 OF 2008 
17. So far as the CA No. 353/2008 is concerned, it appears that as per 
the case of the respondent no. 1 (original complainant), it had 
purchased two cars for the use by its Whole-time Executive Directors 
as part of their perquisites and the said high priced luxury cars were 
in fact being used by them for their personal use and for the use of 
their immediate family members. It was strenuously urged by the 

13 
 
learned senior counsel Ms. Arora for the appellant that if the car in 
question was purchased by the respondent no. 1 for the personal use 
of its Director, it must carry a requisite form attested by the Chartered 
Accountant along with the Income Tax returns of the concerned 
Director, and since such document or form having never been 
submitted and produced before the Commission, it was required to be 
presumed that the car was purchased by the respondent no. 1-
company for its commercial purpose. Such a submission could not be 
accepted. It is trite to say that when a consumer files a complaint 
alleging defects in the goods purchased by him from the opponent 
seller, and if the opponent-seller raises an objection with regard to the 
maintainability of the consumer complaint on the ground that the 
goods in question were purchased by the complainant-buyer for its 
commercial purpose, the onus to prove that they were purchased for 
“commercial purpose” and therefore, such goods would fall outside 
the definition of “consumer” contained in Section 2(1)(d) of the Act, 
would be on the opponent-seller and not on the complainant-buyer. 
In the instant case, it has been specifically asserted by the 
respondent-complainant that the car in question was purchased by it 
for the personal use of its Whole-time Director and for his immediate 
family members, and the dominant purpose of purchasing the car was 
to treat it as a part of the perquisite to the Director.  There is nothing 

14 
 
on record worth the name to show that the said car was used for any 
commercial purpose by the respondent-complainant. Even if it is 
presumed that the respondent-complainant company had taken 
benefit of deduction available to it under the Income Tax Act, 
nonetheless in absence of any material placed on record to suggest 
that such purchase of car had a nexus or was linked to any profit 
generating activity of the company, it could not be said that such a 
high-priced luxurious car was purchased by the respondent no. 1 for 
its “commercial purpose”.  
18. As regards the defects in the car, both the sides have heavily placed 
reliance upon the correspondence which took place between them 
after the purchase of the car by the respondent no. 1 and after the 
defects were detected in the car. The said correspondence has also 
been tabulated by National Commission in the impugned order from 
which  it appears that within a very short time after the purchase of 
the car in question on 31.03.2003, one of the directors of the 
respondent-company namely Mr. Ashok Khanna had taken the car 
out from Delhi for going to Chandigarh and Dehradun in April, 2003 
and found that “sitting at the back seat, the center  hump on the floor 
over the drive shaft of the vehicle was excessively heated and 
particularly so on the left side of the center hump". The said defect 
was immediately reported to the appellant and the respondent no. 2, 

15 
 
however after examining the vehicle they had reported that everything 
was fine and nothing unusual was observed. Since, the said 
complaint of heating persisted, the respondent-complainant again 
requested the appellant to rectify the defect. Thereafter, several 
correspondences ensued between the parties. It is pertinent to note 
that in the letter dated 21.08.2003, it was stated by the appellant that 
“although the area (center hump) was observed to be warm, it is not 
a defect”. In its letter dated 02.07.2004, the respondent no. 2 who 
happened to be the dealer of the appellant required the complainant-
company with regard to the center hump to keep it under observation 
over a longer distance and to report the matter in case of any 
abnormalities, had confirmed that the AC control unit was found to be 
defective. Thereafter, on the respondent-company having made the 
complaint of excessive heating on the center hump more prominently 
on long drives out of station, the car was once again inspected by the 
engineers of the appellant-company, who had informed the 
respondent-complainant vide letter dated 03.12.2004 that “on account 
of the catalytic converter fitted underneath the car, these cars do heat 
a lot”, and advised that “the matter could be resolved by adjusting the 
rear air-conditioning vents suitably”. It appears that thereafter 
repeated requests/complaints having been made by the respondent-
complainant, the respondent no. 2 wrote vide the letter dated 

16 
 
22.12.2004 that the exhaust pipe of the car needed replacement. The 
respondent-complainant again wrote to the appellant vide the letter 
dated 23.12.2004 that though they were offering to replace the 
exhaust pipe, it was not only the center portion which was heating up 
but the entire floor was heating up with excessive heat and therefore, 
the vehicle needed to be replaced. The respondent-complainant 
ultimately wrote a letter dated 21.03.2005 to the appellant reiterating 
the persisting problem of hump heating despite a catena of 
experiments carried out towards rectification of the malfunctioning of 
the car and requested for the replacement of the vehicle. The said 
request having been rejected by the appellant on 30.03.2005, the 
complaint was filed by the respondent-complainant before the 
National Commission. 
19. It appears that on the submission made on behalf of the appellant that 
it would call the concerned Engineer for examining the vehicle, the 
National Commission vide order dated 10.08.2006 directed that the 
vehicle would be examined by the Engineer of the appellant in 
presence of the respondent No.1 or its representative. Pursuant to the 
said order, Mr. Stephen Lobo, Manager Field Service working at Pune 
Office of the Appellant, conducted a test drive alongwith the 
representative of the respondent – complainant, and submitted his 
affidavit to the Commission. However, the temperature recorded by 

17 
 
the said Manager of the Appellant having been disputed by the 
respondent - complainant, the National Commission vide the order 
dated 25.09.2006 appointed one Joint Registrar and one Deputy 
Registrar of the Commission as Local Commissioners, further 
directing them to travel in the cars in question separately on 
07.10.2006 for more than 300 kms towards Rishikesh side. 
Accordingly, the Local Commissioners travelled and submitted their 
respective reports before the Commissioner. 
20. In view of the order dated 10.08.2006 passed by the National 
Commission the test drive was conducted by the engineers of the 
appellant in presence of the respondent-complainant on 21.08.2006 
and the result of the test drive of the car DL-5CA-0333 was as under: 
Chassis No. 
Time 
Kms 
Temp 
Gauge I 
Temp 
Gauge II 
Remark Ambient 
Temp 
WDB 
2201676A 
326003 
 
 
Provided 
by DCIPL 
Provided 
by C&S 
 
 
1 start 
11.45 
41523 
32.5 
39 
 
38 
2 
13.15 
41577 
19.7 
44 
 
36 
3 
14.35 
41632 
17.00 
51 
 
35.5 
4 
16.11 
41673 
19.1 
50 
 
34 
5 
17.22 
41723 
19.6 
53 
 
34.5 
6 
19.23 
41769 
19.4 
49 
 
36.5 
7 
20.18 
41823 
17.4 
48 
 
35 
 
21. Again, the National Commission having passed the order on 
25.09.2006, appointing the Local Commissioners for measuring the 
temperature of the hump of the car, in presence of representatives of 
both the parties, the Local Commissioners had travelled on 

18 
 
07.10.2006 in the car in question for more than 300 kms. towards 
Rishikesh side, and submitted the report regarding the temperature 
of the running car at a distance of every 50 kms. as under: 
S. No. 
Time 
Km. 
Temp. gauge 
1 of DCIPL 
(Degree) 
Temp. gauge 
2 of C & S 
(Degree) 
Ambient 
(Degree) 
1. 
8.30 AM 
43649 
33.2 
39 
25.5 
2. 
9.45 AM 
43699 
38.6 
46 
30.5 
3. 
10.45 AM 
43749 
38.6 
47 
32 
4. 
11.05 AM 
43759 
39.5 
47 
34 
5. 
12.40 PM 
43799 
38.6 
46 
32 
6. 
1.55 PM 
43850 
37.3 
47 
32 
 
Return Journey 
7. 
4.00 PM 
43866 
35.7 
39 
35 
8. 
5.00 PM 
43899 
37.3 
47 
33 
9. 
6.00 PM 
43950 
38.1 
46 
29 
10. 
7.50 PM 
44000 
38.1 
45 
29.5 
11. 
9.00 PM 
44050 
37 
44 
30 
12. 
10.00 PM 
44083 
38.2 
46 
29.5 
 
 
The Local Commissioner in his report dated 09.10.2006, had made 
following note with regard to the car in question: - 
 
“1. The sensor gauge fixed by the opposite party was 1 mm 
above while the sensor gauge provided by the complainant was 
fixed on the mat. The same can be seen with the help of 
photographs taken by the parties. 
 
2. While traveling in the car the temperature recorded by the 
sensor gauges generally showing the increasing tendency. 
 
3. There is a variation of 5 - 9 degree temperature between the 
temperatures noted down from the two sensor gauges provided 
by the parties. 
 
4. On perusing the temperature chart, it is found that the 
temperature recorded by both the sensor gauges is higher than 
ambient temperature throughout the journey.” 
 
 
22. It is further pertinent to note that pending the said proceedings before 
the National Commission, the appellant had made two applications, 

19 
 
one on 12.10.2006 seeking permission to make one more effort by 
providing additional insulation to address the concerns of the 
complainant in regard to the high temperature at the left hand side of 
the hump felt by it, and the other application seeking prayer to permit 
to test the complainant’s car by an appropriate laboratory, or in the 
alternative to dispose of the matter with direction to provide an 
additional insulation to the hump of the cars being used by the 
complainant or in the alternative to hold that the used car be resold 
by the complainant to the appellant (opponent no. 1) for present 
market value/book value. The respondent-complainant having not 
agreed to the said proposals made in the said applications, the 
National Commission vide the order dated 06.02.2007 had rejected 
the said applications. 
23. From the afore-discussed documents/applications produced on 
record before the National Commission, it was clearly established by 
the respondent-complainant that an excessive heat was generated in 
the car, and particularly, the center hump on the floor over the drive 
shaft was felt excessively heated as also the left side of the center 
hump. As rightly submitted by the learned counsel for the respondent-
complainant, after continuous trial and error method of rectification 
conducted to remove the defect of overheating, since the said 
complaint persisted, the appellant had moved the applications 

20 
 
seeking permission of the Commission to make one more effort by 
providing additional insulation, and also for permitting the appellant 
to repurchase the car in question for the market value/book value as 
it existed at the relevant time in 2007. The market value of the car in 
question as on 25.11.2006 was stated to be Rs. 34 lakhs, and the 
book value thereof as on 31.12.2006 was stated to be about Rs. 36 
lakhs. The appellant though not admitted specifically about the said 
defects in the car, had indirectly stated in the said application seeking 
permission to provide additional insulation to the effect that the warm 
surface of hump/tunnel was a natural physical characteristic of the 
car and hence could not be altered to a large extent and that the 
additional insulation could be fitted by a minor modification. The said 
statements in the said applications read with the other 
materials/documents on record as also the reports of the Local 
Commissioner appointed by the National Commission, has led us to 
come to an irresistible conclusion that the inherent defect of 
overheating of the car in question had persisted despite the appellant 
having provided the rectification measures like providing additional 
insulation in the car, which had caused great inconvenience and 
discomfort to the passengers seated in the car in question. The 
advice given by the technical expert of the appellants that the 
overheated portions of the rear cabin of the car should be cooled by 

21 
 
directing the draft from the air-conditioning vents towards the said 
portion, was not only an illogical advice but was an absolute improper 
advice given to conceal the defect in the car.  
24. Considering the affidavits, correspondences, reports and the other 
material on record, we have no hesitation in holding that such 
overheating of the surface of hump and the overall high temperature 
in the car was a fault, imperfection or shortcoming in the quality or 
standard which was expected to be maintained by the appellants 
under the contract with the respondent-complainant and therefore 
was a ‘defect’ within the meaning of Section 2(1)(f) of the said Act. 
25. People do not purchase the high-end luxurious cars to suffer 
discomfort more particularly when they buy the vehicle keeping 
utmost faith in the supplier who would make the representations in 
the brochures or the advertisements projecting and promoting such 
cars as the finest and safest automobile in the world. The respondent-
complainant having suffered great inconvenience, discomfort and 
also the waste of time and energy in pursuing the litigations, we are 
of the opinion that the impugned order passed by the National 
Commission of awarding the compensation by directing the 
appellants to refund the purchase price i.e., Rs. 58 lakhs approx. to 
the respondent-complainant, and take back the car (vehicle) as such 
does not warrant any interference. However, at this juncture, it may 

22 
 
be noted that the impugned order was passed on 17.09.2007 and 
before that pending the proceedings, the appellant had already made 
an offer in the year 2006 to repurchase the car in question as per the 
market value of the car as of November 2006 to be Rs. 34 lakhs or at 
the book value of the car as of December 2006 to be about Rs. 36 
lakhs, however the respondent had not agreed to the said proposal, 
and continued to use the said car for about seventeen years till this 
date. Therefore, having regard to the said offer made by the 
appellants, and having regard to the subsequent event of the 
respondent-complainant having retained and used the car in question 
for about seventeen years, we are of the opinion that the interest of 
justice and balance of equity would be met if the respondent-
complainant is permitted to retain the car in question and the 
appellant is directed to refund Rs. 36 lakhs instead of Rs. 58 lakhs as 
directed by the National Commission in the impugned order.  
II.  CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 19536-19537/2017 AND 2633/2018 
26. So far as C.A. No. 19536-19537/2017 filed by the appellants - 
Mercedes Benz India Private Ltd. and another (Original Opponents) 
and the cross Appeal being C.A. No.2633 of 2018 filed by M/s C.G. 
Power and Industrial Solutions Ltd., (Original Complainant No.1) 
arising out of Consumer Complaint No. 51/2006  are concerned, as 
stated hereinabove, after the challenge of the order dated 08.07.2016 

23 
 
passed by the National Commission in the said case, before this 
Court by way of filing C.A. No.10410/2016, this Court had disposed 
of the said Appeal by directing the National Commission to adjudicate 
the dispute between the parties finally, leaving it open for the 
appellant Mercedes Benz to challenge the order on maintainability as 
well as the final order. Accordingly, the final order having been passed 
by the Commission, the appellant has challenged the order dated 
08.07.2016 as well as the final order dated 11.09.2017 by way of 
instant appeals, and the cross appeal has been filed by the 
respondent-complainant against the order dated 11.09.2017. 
27. In the instant case, the respondent nos. 1 and 2 (Original 
Complainants) had filed the complaint being Consumer Complaint 
No. 51/2006 before the National Commission, alleging inter alia that 
in October 2002, the appellants (original opponents) had launched a 
new Mercedes Benz, E-Class - E 240 petrol version (hereinafter 
referred to as the car in question). At the time of launch of e-class 
model, the appellants had proclaimed and elaborated safety system 
of e-class inter alia that it included front airbags, side airbags, and 
window airbags, automatic child seat recognition and central locking 
with crash sensors, and that it was the safest place on the road etc. 
The correct operation of the airbags was also guaranteed by the 
appellants. Based on such representations and especially of the 

24 
 
safety features, the respondent no. 1 on 27.11.2002 had purchased 
the car in question bearing registration No. MH-01-GA-6245 from the 
appellants for its Managing Director-respondent No. 2 for a total 
consideration of Rs.45,38,123/-. 
28. It was further alleged in the complaint by the respondents that on an 
official trip on 17.01.2006 at 06:20 A.M, the respondent No.2 was 
returning from Nasik to Mumbai. At that time, the car in question was 
being driven by the company driver Mr. Madhukar Ganpat Shinde, 
while the respondent no. 2 was seated in the back seat of the car. On 
Nasik express, NH-3, a goods carrier coming from the opposite side, 
collided head-on with the car, and the impact of the collision was so 
high that the entire front portion of the car was smashed, however 
none of the airbags opened. As a result, thereof, the driver suffered 
the injuries on his neck, arms and forehead, whereas the respondent 
no. 2 suffered grievous injuries on his face, a deep gash on the 
forehead fracture at the nasal bone and nasal septum, fracture of the 
C1 vertebra at the anterior and posterior arches and fracture of C2 
vertebra. The respondent no. 2 had to be hospitalized for more than 
six weeks and even after the discharge he was advised strict bedrest 
at home. It took very long time for him to recover and resume the 
work. According to the respondents-complainants, if the airbags had 
opened at the right time, as represented by the appellants-

25 
 
opponents, the respondent no. 2 might have suffered less or no 
injuries. The complainants had also filed an FIR with the police station 
at Nasik on 17.01.2006. On 20.01.2006, the car was taken by the 
respondent No. 3 being authorized service centre and a detailed 
inspection and assessment of cost for the repairs was made. It was 
also alleged that in number of cases the airbags had failed to deploy 
at the time of accidents and people had suffered grievous injuries or 
had died also. Due to the said accident, not only that respondent no.2 
had suffered grave injuries, agony and mental trauma, his family 
members and the respondent-company itself, had suffered lot of 
inconvenience and 
financial 
loss. 
It 
appears 
that 
lot 
of 
correspondence had ensued between the parties, and ultimately the 
respondents-complainants 
had 
filed 
the 
complaint 
seeking 
compensation under the various heads. 
29. On the maintainability of the complaint, though the learned Senior 
Advocate Mr. Dhruv Mehta had strenuously urged that the purchase 
of the car by the respondent no. 1 company for the use of the 
respondent no.2 i.e., its director would tantamount to purchase for 
commercial purpose, the said submission cannot be accepted in view 
of the elaborate discussion and reasonings recorded by us 
hereinbefore while dealing with the issue in C.A. No. 353/2008. In this 
case also the appellants had failed to bring on record any material to 

26 
 
show that the dominant purpose or dominant use of the car in 
question was for commercial purpose or that the purchase of the car 
had any nexus or was linked with any profit generating activity of the 
respondent no. 1 company. We therefore confirm the finding recorded 
by the three-member Bench of the National Commission in the order 
dated 08.07.2016 on the maintainability of the complaint filed by the 
respondent-complainant company. 
30. On the merits of the claim made by the respondents – complainants, 
it was sought to be submitted by Learned Senior Advocate Mr. Dhruv 
Mehta for the appellants-original opponents that the complainants did 
not lead any expert evidence or any other evidence to establish that 
there was any defect in the front airbags of the car in question and in 
absence of any such evidence, the National Commission could not 
have concluded that the front airbags of the car were defective.  
According to him, the Commission had committed gross error in 
discarding the report of the expert produced by the appellants, who 
had stated as to why deployment of the driver’s airbag was not 
required in this case. According to him, since, the driver was 
sufficiently restrained by the seat belt, there was no need for the front 
airbag to deploy at the time of accident and the front passenger 
airbag would be triggered only if the front passenger seat was 
occupied, whereas in the instant case, the complainant no. 2 was 

27 
 
sitting at the rear left seat and therefore the front passenger’s airbag 
could not have deployed. In any case, runs the submission of Mr. 
Mehta, the complainants had already sold out the car during the 
pendency of the proceedings before the National Commission and 
thereby had created a situation where the Commission could not 
have inspected the car in question. He further submitted that there 
was no “unfair trade practice” practiced by the appellants and the 
damages/compensation awarded by the Commission was without 
any legal basis. 
31. The Senior Learned Advocate Mr. Prashanto Chandra Sen appearing 
on behalf of the respondents-complainants however vehemently 
submitted that admittedly neither the front airbags nor the side 
airbags of the car deployed as a result of the accident. The appellants 
had not produced on record the owner’s manual and the features of 
the airbags given in the owner’s manual on record produced by the 
complainants did not disclose as to what was the pre-determined 
level at which the airbags would deploy. According to him, the 
appellants had misrepresented that their car was the safest place on 
the road and that the provision of airbags was an additional safety 
measure not only for the front passengers but also for the rear 
passengers. According to him, since the owner’s manual did not 
contain accurate and complete information as regards the safety 

28 
 
measure of airbags, and the appellants having misrepresented about 
the safety measures at the time of the promotion of the car, it was 
rightly construed as an “unfair trade practice” on the part of the 
appellants by the Commission, however, the Commission had 
committed an error in not awarding exemplary damages to the 
respondents-complainants. 
32. In the instant case, there are certain undisputed facts as transpiring 
from the record, like that the purchase of the car was by the 
respondent no.1 for the respondent no. 2 its Managing Director. The 
occurrence of the accident on 17.01.2006 is not disputed. It is also 
not disputed that at the time of accident, the driver of the car was 
wearing the seat belt, whereas the respondent No. 2 who was sitting 
on the rear left side seat did not wear the seat belt. It is also not 
disputed that neither the airbags on the front side nor the airbags on 
the side of the respondent no. 2 had opened at the time of accident, 
as a result thereof, the respondent no. 2 sustained grievous injuries, 
and the driver sustained some minor injuries. It is also not disputed 
that neither the respondents nor the appellants had produced on 
record the owner’s manual of 2002 i.e. the year when the car in 
question was purchased by the respondents, though it was 
specifically directed by the Commission to produce the same by 
passing the order on 24.08.2017. Though subsequently, the 

29 
 
complainant had produced on record one owner’s manual, the same 
did not appear to be of the relevant year by the Commission. The 
appellants-opponents had produced on record certain photographs 
as also the reports of technical experts of the appellants. 
33. The National Commission after considering the material on record 
disposed of the complaint of the respondents - complainants directing 
the appellants to pay a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs to the complainant no. 1 
for the deficiency in the services rendered to it on account of the 
airbags of the car having not deployed/ triggered and further directed 
the appellants to pay a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs as compensation to the 
complainant no. 1 for the unfair trade practice indulged into by them, 
and a sum of Rs.25,000/- as cost of litigation.  
34. The National Commission after elaborately considering the Owner’s 
Manual produced by the complainants, as the appellants - opponents 
had failed to produce the owner’s manual of the relevant year 2002 
when the car was purchased by the complainants and the other 
material on record, observed in Para no. 9 and 10 of the impugned 
judgment dated 11th September, 2017 as under: - 
“9. It is evident from a perusal of the above referred extract from 
the Manual that the side airbags are triggered only on the side 
on which an impact occurs in an accident and that the said 
airbags are independent of the front airbags. Since, admittedly, 
there was no impact on the side of the car in which complainant 
no.2 was sitting at the time of the accident, the side airbag would 
obviously not have triggered. Even otherwise the airbags on the 

30 
 
side will not trigger in the event of frontal accident unless the 
airbags system is such as to trigger every airbag irrespective of 
the side on which the impact occurs in an accident. Similarly, 
window bags which are independent of the front airbags also 
trigger on the side on which the impact occurs. Therefore, the 
window airbags would not have triggered in this case since there 
was no impact on the sides on which the window bags were 
provided in the vehicle. 
10. As far as the front airbags are concerned, it is stated in the 
Manual that they are triggered if (i) a front-end impact occurs (ii) 
if collision happens at a force exceeding a ‘predetermined level.’ 
The Manual however, does not disclose as to what the said 
predetermined level was. If the front airbags were not to deploy 
in every accident resulting in front end impact, the opposite 
parties, in my view, ought to have disclosed to the buyers as to 
what the predetermined level necessary to trigger the front 
passenger airbag were. In the absence of such a disclosure in 
the Owner’s Manual, as far as the functioning of the front 
passenger airbags are concerned would be deficient, on account 
of its not providing the requisite information to the buyer.  
Section 2(1)(r) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 to the 
extent it is relevant provides that unfair trade practice means a 
trade practice which for the purpose of promoting the sale, use 
or supply of any goods adopts any unfair method or unfair or 
deceptive practice including that the goods are of a particular 
standard and quality. It is alleged in the complaint that the 
opposite parties at the time of launching E-Class Model 
highlighted its safety system, including airbags while proclaiming 
the vehicle to be the safest place on the road. Obviously, the 
opposite parties were seeking to encash upon the safety features 
of the vehicle, including the airbags provided therein, for the 
purpose of selling the vehicle. Therefore, it would be necessary 
for them to disclose to the buyers as to what the predetermined 
levels, necessary for triggering the front airbags of the vehicle 
were. Highlighting the safety features including the airbags for 
selling the vehicle, without such a disclosure, in my opinion, 
constituted an unfair and deceptive trade practice. It is only the 
opposite parties which knew what would be the level which would 
trigger the frontal airbags in the event of an accident. Therefore, 
the aforesaid material information ought not to have been 
withheld while selling the vehicle. The opposite parties therefore, 
indulged in unfair trade practice or the purpose or promoting the 
sale of their vehicle.” 
 

31 
 
35. The National Commission also considered the report of Mr. Lothar 
Ralf Schusdzarra, the Technical Expert and Senior Engineer working 
with the Appellant Company who had inspected the car after the 
accident, and the photographs forming part of the report of the 
technical expert, and observed that the vehicle that is the car in 
question, had frontal accidental with another vehicle stated to be a 
container truck which had a higher chassis, and that the front portion 
of the car was badly damaged as a result of the said accident. The 
said photographs also corroborated with the depositions of the driver 
Mr. Madhukar Shinde and the respondent-complainant no. 2 Mr. 
Mohan Trehan which established that the front portion of the vehicle 
was smashed when it was hit by the truck and the collision of car with 
the truck was quite impactful. 
36.  There was nothing on record produced by the appellants to show 
that they had disclosed either in the Owner’s Manual or in the 
Brochure about the limited functioning of the airbags, which 
according to them was an additional safety measure in the car. On 
the contrary, as per the case of the respondents-complainants a 
misrepresentation was made by the appellants at the time of 
promotion of the car in question that e-class car had a safety system 
which included front airbags, side-airbags and window airbags. Even 
if it is accepted that the airbags would deploy only when the seat belt 

32 
 
was fastened by the passenger, in the instant case admittedly, the 
frontal airbags of the car were not deployed though the driver had 
already fastened the seat belt. Thus, the defect in the car was clearly 
established so far as non-deployment of frontal airbags was 
concerned.  
37. Incomplete disclosure or non-disclosure of the complete details with 
regard to the functioning of the airbags at the time of promotion of the 
car, has rightly been considered by the National Commission as the 
“unfair trade practice” on the part of the appellants, and awarded a 
sum of Rs. 5 lakhs towards it. The National Commission has also 
rightly balanced the equity by awarding Rs. 5 lakhs only towards the 
deficiency in service on account of the frontal airbags of the car 
having not deployed at the time of accident. 
38. Since the National Commission has considered in detail the evidence 
and the material on record adduced by the both the parties, in our 
opinion the well-considered judgment dated 11th September 2017 
passed by the National Commission does not warrant any 
interference. 
39. It is needless to say that a trade practice which for the purpose of 
promoting the sale of any goods by adopting deceptive practice like 
falsely representing that the goods are of a particular standard, 

33 
 
quality, style or model, would amount to “unfair trade practice” within 
the meaning of Section 2(1)(r) of the said Act. 
40.  In that view of the matter, following order is passed: - 
I. 
C.A. No. 353/2008 
The respondent-complainant is permitted to retain the car 
bearing registration no. DL-9CV-5555. The appellant is directed 
to refund Rs. 36,00,000/- (Rupees thirty-six lakhs) to the 
respondent by way of compensation within three months from 
the date of this order, failing which the appellant shall pay 
interest at the rate of 9% per annum thereon from the date of 
this order till payment. The Appeal stands partly allowed. 
II. 
C.A. No. 19536 & 19537/2017 and C.A. No. 2633/2018  
All the three Appeals are dismissed.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                         ……………………………J. 
             
 
 
 
 
        (BELA M. TRIVEDI) 
 
 
 
 
        .………………………….. J. 
                                                                         (PANKAJ MITHAL) 
NEW DELHI; 
JULY 09, 2024.