2024 INSC 491
             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 1 of 24 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6782 OF 2013 
 
 
MAHARAJ SINGH & ORS.  
 
         …APPELLANTS 
 
 
VERSUS 
KARAN SINGH (DEAD)  
THR. LRS. & ORS. 
 
 
 
      …RESPONDENTS 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
1. 
This appeal is at the instance of the original third, 
second, and fourth defendants. The first and second 
respondents are the original plaintiffs. The third respondent is 
the mother of the deceased original first defendant. For 
convenience, we are referring to the parties according to their 
status in the suit.  
FACTUAL ASPECT 
2. 
Reference to a few factual aspects will be necessary. The 
first defendant executed a registered agreement for sale dated 
7th December 1981 by which he agreed to sell his Bhumidhari 
land measuring 2.90 acres of Khasra no. 48 (for short, ‘the suit 
property’) at village-Jauniwala, Tehsil-Kashipur, District-
Nainital in favour of the plaintiffs for the consideration of Rs. 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.07.09
16:14:55 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 2 of 24 
 
20,300/-. There was a recital in the registered agreement dated 
7th December 1981 (for short, ‘the suit agreement’) that the first 
defendant had received a sum of Rs. 7,000/- as advance and 
the balance consideration was payable at the time of execution 
of the sale deed. The first defendant agreed to execute the sale 
deed within three years from the date of the suit agreement. 
According to the plaintiffs' case, requests were made orally and 
by sending notices to the first defendant to execute the sale 
deed. It is pleaded in the plaint that the first defendant refused 
to accept notices. 
3. 
On 6th September 1983, the first defendant sold 1.60 
acres out of the suit property to the second and third 
defendants by a registered sale deed. By another sale deed 
dated 12th December 1983, the first defendant sold the 
remaining part of the suit property to the second to fourth 
defendants. We must note that the suit was filed on 17th 
December 1983, and the averments regarding the subsequent 
alienations were incorporated by the amendment made to the 
plaint in terms of the order dated 28th July 1984. The case 
made out in the plaint is that the subsequent sale deeds are 
collusive. The prayer in the suit was for specific performance of 
the suit agreement with a direction to the defendants to hand 
over possession of the suit property to the plaintiffs and to 
execute a sale deed in respect of the suit property in their 
favour. 
4. 
The defendants, including the legal representative (Smt. 
Bhagwati Devi) of the original first defendant, filed separate 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 3 of 24 
 
written statements. In the written statement filed by the legal 
representative of the first defendant, it was contended that the 
suit agreement was fictitious.  In the written statement filed by 
the second and third defendants, it was pleaded that the suit 
agreement is a forged document which was never to be acted 
upon. It is pointed out that the first plaintiff - Karan Singh, and 
the first defendant were relatives. The plaintiffs never paid any 
money to the first defendant.  
5. 
The first plaintiff was examined as a witness. The second 
plaintiff, Murari Singh, did not support the first plaintiff. He 
deposed in favour of the defendants. He stated on oath that the 
suit agreement was made only to ensure that the first 
defendant did not alienate the suit land. He stated that the first 
defendant was his relative.  He stated that the first plaintiff was 
related to him and was a well-known person.  The first 
plaintiff’s name was included as the purchaser in the suit 
agreement to deter the first defendant. He stated that he and 
the first plaintiff never demanded execution of the sale deed 
from the first defendant. The second plaintiff proceeded to state 
that he had not filed the suit, and the signature shown to him 
on the vakalatnama was of someone else. Subsequently, the 
second plaintiff filed an affidavit stating that the first defendant 
had several bad habits and, therefore, there was an 
apprehension that he would sell the suit property. 
FINDINGS OF THE COURTS 
6. 
The Trial Court held that the execution of the suit 
agreement was proved. Relying upon Section 92 of the Indian 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 4 of 24 
 
Evidence Act, 1872 (for short, ‘the Evidence Act’), the learned 
Trial Judge held that evidence contrary to the contents of the 
suit agreement could not be adduced and was not admissible 
in evidence. The learned Trial Judge held that in view of the 
provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Civil Laws (Reforms and 
Amendment) Act, 1976, which came into force on 31st 
December 1976, an agreement for sale was compulsorily 
registrable in the State at the relevant time. Therefore, the 
learned Trial Judge held that in view of the explanation to 
Section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (for short, ‘the 
TP Act’), the second to fourth defendants shall be deemed to 
have a notice of the execution of the suit agreement. The 
learned Judge held that it was a duty of the second to fourth 
defendants to take a search in the office of the Sub-Registrar 
to ascertain whether there was any prior transfer. Therefore, 
the learned Trial judge held that the second to fourth 
defendants could not be held to be bona fide purchasers for 
value received. The finding on the issue of readiness and 
willingness was also recorded in favour of the plaintiffs. 
Therefore, the Trial Court passed a decree for the specific 
performance, directing all the defendants to execute the sale 
deed and deliver possession of the suit property to the 
plaintiffs. In an appeal preferred by the second to fourth 
defendants, the Additional District Judge, Nainital, confirmed 
all the findings of the Trial Court.  The Additional District Judge 
dismissed the appeal. A second appeal was preferred by the 
second to fourth respondents. The second appeal has been 
dismissed by the impugned judgment.  

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 5 of 24 
 
ORDERS OF THIS COURT 
7. 
On 26th October 2010, this Court issued notice. The order 
of this Court reads thus:  
“Mr. K.B. Sinha, senior advocate appearing 
for the petitioners submits that after 
coming into force of the Uttaranchal (The 
Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and 
Land Reforms Act, 1950) (Adaptation and 
Modification Order, 2001) (Amendment) 
Act, 2003, the sale of the suit land in terms 
of the decrees of the Court would be 
violative of the provisions of the Act 
because the plaintiff is not an agriculturist.  
Issue notice. 
In the meanwhile, there shall be stay of 
operation of the impugned decree.”        
On 12th August 2013, leave was granted. This Court granted a 
stay to the operation of the impugned decrees on 26th October 
2010.  
SUBMISSIONS 
8. 
The learned senior counsel appearing for the second to 
fourth defendants submitted that the three Courts refused to 
consider the submission that the suit agreement was sham and 
bogus. By pointing out Sections 91 and 92 of the Evidence Act, 
he urged that the provisions did not prevent the defendants 
from leading evidence to show that the suit agreement was 
bogus or sham.  He relied on the Privy Council's decision in the 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 6 of 24 
 
case of Tyagaraja Mudaliyar and Anr. v. Vedathanni1. He 
submitted that Sections 91 and 92 of the Evidence Act do not 
exclude evidence on the question of whether the parties had 
agreed to contract on the terms set forth in the document. He 
also relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of 
Krishnabai Bhritar Ganpatrao Deshmukh v. Appasaheb 
Tuljaramarao Nimbalkar & Ors.2. He submitted that it was 
brought on record in the depositions of the second plaintiff who 
was the uncle of the first defendant, and Bhagwati Devi, the 
mother of the first defendant, that the first defendant had many 
vices. Bhagwati Devi was apprehensive that the first defendant 
would sell the property to fund his bad lifestyle. The second 
plaintiff, Murari Singh, was her brother; therefore, she 
approached Murari Singh to prevent the first defendant from 
selling the suit property. The second plaintiff, Murari Singh, 
brought his friend, the first plaintiff. Thereafter, the suit 
agreement was executed to deter the first defendant from 
selling the property. He submitted the specific contention that 
the suit agreement was a sham document which was not to be 
acted upon has been brushed aside by the three Courts.  
9. 
He submitted that the first plaintiff filed the suit within a 
few days after the first defendant executed a sale deed on 12th 
December 1983 in favour of the second to fourth defendants. 
The learned senior counsel further submitted that the second 
to fourth defendants are bona-fide purchasers as the suit 
 
1 ILR (1936) 59 Mad 446 : 1935 SCC OnLine PC 68 
2 (1979) 4 SCC 60 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 7 of 24 
 
agreement is sham and bogus. He submitted that the defence 
that the plaintiffs were not ready and willing to perform their 
part of the suit agreement is also available to the defendants 
claiming to be subsequent purchasers through the vendor.  The 
learned senior counsel relied upon a decision of this Court in 
the case of B. Vijaya Bharathi v. P. Savitri & Ors.3, and 
submitted that the plaintiffs are disentitled to relief of specific 
performance as they have not prayed in the plaint for setting 
aside or cancelling the subsequent sale deeds. Learned senior 
counsel also relied upon Section 154-B of the Uttaranchal (The 
Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 
1950) (Adaption and Modification order, 2001) (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 2003 (for short, ‘the Zamindari Abolition Act”). He 
submitted that as the 1st plaintiff is not an agriculturist within 
the meaning of Section 3(a) thereof, in view of Section 154-B, a 
sale deed cannot be executed in terms of the suit agreement. 
He also pointed out that the legal representatives of the first 
respondent (first Plaintiff) have not chosen to contest the 
appeal despite service of notice. Therefore, they are not 
interested in contesting the appeal.  
QUESTIONS FOR CONSIDERATION  
10. 
After having considered the submissions of the learned 
counsel appearing for the appellants, we find that the following 
questions arise: 
a) Can the contention that the suit agreement was sham 
and bogus and not intended to be acted upon be allowed 
 
3 (2018) 11 SCC 761 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 8 of 24 
 
to be raised notwithstanding Sections 91 and 92 of the 
Evidence Act? 
b) Was the suit agreement sham and bogus and not 
intended to be acted upon? 
c) Were the second to fourth defendants bona fide 
purchasers for value without notice of the suit 
agreement? 
d) Whether, in view of the decision of this Court in the case 
of B. Vijaya Bharathi3, the plaintiffs are not entitled to 
a decree of specific performance in the absence of any 
prayer for cancellation of the two subsequent sale deeds? 
e) Do the provisions of the Zamindari Abolition Act create a 
bar on the execution of the sale deed in terms of the suit 
agreement? 
f) Whether the plaintiffs are entitled to a decree of specific 
performance? 
FIRST TWO QUESTIONS – (a) AND (b) 
11. 
Now, we come to the first two questions. Right from the 
decision of the Privy Council in the case of Tyagaraja 
Mudaliyar1 the law is well settled. Section 91 of the Evidence 
Act excludes oral evidence of the terms of the written document 
by requiring those terms to be proved by the document itself. 
Section 92 excludes oral evidence for contradicting, varying, 
adding to or subtracting to such terms. These two sections do 
not prevent parties from adducing evidence on the issue of 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 9 of 24 
 
whether the parties to the documents had agreed to contract 
on the terms set forth in the document. 
12. 
Coming to the facts of the case, firstly, we must refer to 
the pleadings of the legal representative of the first defendant. 
In paragraph 11 of her written statement, she raised the 
following contention: 
“………………………………………………… 
11. That the real facts are that plaintiff 
Murari Singh is the brother of answering 
respondent and Karan Singh is his 
friend. So, under fear and making the 
pressure on Preetam Singh, a fictitious 
agreement was prepared by plaintiff 
Murari Singh without any consideration 
in order to deter late Preetam Singh, so 
that the should not sale the land. Neither 
this agreement was acted upon nor was 
disclosed any time. The said amount for 
consideration, written in the agreement, 
is shown at very low price from the 
market price. 
…………………………………………………” 
Thus, the legal representative of the first defendant did not 
plead that the first defendant was addicted to several vices and 
that to prevent him from selling the suit property for supporting 
his bad lifestyle, the suit agreement was executed. It is merely 
stated that the second plaintiff prepared a fictitious agreement 
without any consideration to deter the first defendant from 
selling the land. It is not pleaded that as the first plaintiff was 
an influential person, he was brought into the picture to deter 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 10 of 24 
 
the first defendant. The second and third defendants filed a 
written statement. The contention raised by them in the written 
statement is entirely different. In paragraph 12 of the written 
statement, they pleaded thus: 
“………………………………………………… 
12. That the alleged agreement to sale 
dated 17.12.1981 is a forged document 
and was never acted upon. The plaintiff 
no. 1 and Sh. Pritam Singh are relative 
to each other. The plaintiffs are the 
resident of some other districts. They 
never paid any money. They got prepared 
a forged documents colluding with some 
persons of their party. The agreement to 
sale is illegal and the plaintiffs are not 
entitled of any relief on the basis of this 
forged document. 
…………………………………………………” 
The legal representative of the first defendant did not dispute 
that the first defendant signed the agreement. However, the 
other defendants raised a contention that the suit agreement 
was a forged document. The second to fourth defendants did 
not plead anything about the object of getting the agreement 
for sale executed from the first defendant. The case that the 
first defendant was addicted to vices and that with a view to 
deter him from selling the suit property, the agreement for sale 
was executed, was pleaded for the first time by the mother of 
the first defendant in her evidence. Even the allegation that the 
first plaintiff was joined as a purchaser to put pressure on the 
deceased - the first defendant was made by her for the first time 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 11 of 24 
 
in her evidence. Thus, the contention that the deceased-first 
defendant was addicted to vices was never raised in the written 
statements and the same has come by way of an afterthought 
in the evidence of the mother of the first defendant. Moreover, 
the stand of the second to fourth defendants in their written 
statement is that the suit agreement was forged and was 
prepared by the plaintiffs and some persons of their party. 
Therefore, in the facts of the case, it is very difficult to accept 
the contention that the suit agreement was got executed from 
the first defendant with the object to deter him from selling the 
suit property to meet the demands of his bad lifestyle.  Hence, 
the suit agreement cannot be held as bogus or sham. 
ON QUESTION – (c) 
13. 
The three Courts concurrently found that under the Uttar 
Pradesh Civil Laws (Reforms and Amendment) Act 1976, clause 
(v) of Section 17(2) of the Registration Act 1908 was amended, 
which made an agreement for the sale of an immovable 
property, a compulsorily registerable document in the State. 
On this aspect, no arguments have been canvassed by the 
appellants. Therefore, in view of explanation 1 to Section 3 of 
the TP Act, the second to fourth defendants shall be deemed to 
have knowledge of the suit agreement, which was duly 
registered. It cannot be said that the second to fourth 
defendants had no knowledge of the suit agreement in view of 
the constructive notice. It is not their case that they took a 
search in the office of the Sub-Registrar before getting the sale 
deeds in their favour. Hence, it cannot be said that they paid 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 12 of 24 
 
money in good faith to the first Defendant. Therefore, the 
second to fourth defendants can never be held to be bona-fide 
purchasers who have paid consideration in good faith without 
the notice of the suit agreement.   
 
ON QUESTION (d) 
14. 
Now, we deal with another argument that the plaintiffs 
ought to have prayed in the suit to cancel the subsequent sale 
deeds executed by the first defendant. On this aspect, the law 
has been laid down by a Bench of three Hon’ble Judges of this 
Court in the case of Lala Durga Prasad & Ors. v. Lala Deep 
Chand & Ors.4,. Paragraphs 40 to 42 of the said decision read 
thus: 
“40. First, we reach the position that the title 
to the property has validly passed from the 
vendor 
and 
resides 
in 
the 
subsequent 
transferee. The sale to him is not void but only 
voidable at the option of the earlier “contractor”. 
As the title no longer rests in the vendor it 
would be illogical from a conveyancing point of 
view to compel him to convey to the plaintiff 
unless steps are taken to revest the title in him 
either by cancellation of the subsequent sale or 
by 
reconveyance 
from 
the 
subsequent 
purchaser to him. We do not know of any case 
in which a reconveyance to the vendor was 
ordered but Sulaiman, C.J. adopted the other 
course in Kali Charan Singh v. Janak Deo 
Singh [Kali Charan Singh v. Janak Deo Singh, 
AIR 1932 All 694 : 1932 SCC OnLine All 154] . 
He directed cancellation of the subsequent sale 
 
4 (1953) 2 SCC 509 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 13 of 24 
 
and conveyance to the plaintiff by the vendor in 
accordance with the contract of sale of which 
the plaintiff sought specific performance. But 
though this sounds logical the objection to it is 
that it might bring in its train complications 
between the vendor and the subsequent 
purchaser. There may be covenants in the deed 
between them which it would be inequitable to 
disturb 
by 
cancellation 
of 
their 
deed. 
Accordingly, we do not think that is a desirable 
solution. 
41. We are not enamoured of the next 
alternative either, namely, conveyance by the 
subsequent purchaser alone to the plaintiff. It 
is true that would have the effect of vesting the 
title to the property in the plaintiff but it might 
be inequitable to compel the subsequent 
transferee to enter into terms and covenants in 
the vendor's agreement with the plaintiff to 
which he would never have agreed had he been 
a free agent; and if the original contract is 
varied by altering or omitting such terms the 
court will be remaking the contract, a thing it 
has no power to do; and in any case it will no 
longer be specifically enforcing the original 
contract but another and different one. 
42. In our opinion, the proper form of decree 
is to direct specific performance of the 
contract between the vendor and the 
plaintiff 
and 
direct 
the 
subsequent 
transferee to join in the conveyance so as to 
pass on the title which resides in him to the 
plaintiff. He does not join in any special 
covenants made between the plaintiff and 
his vendor; all he does is to pass on his title 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 14 of 24 
 
to the plaintiff. This was the course followed 
by 
the 
Calcutta 
High 
Court 
in Kafiladdin v. Samiraddin [Kafiladdin v. 
Samiraddin, AIR 1931 Cal 67 : 1930 SCC 
OnLine Cal 46] and appears to be the English 
practice. See Fry on Specific Performance, 
6th 
Edn., 
p.90, 
Para207;also Potter v. Sanders [Potter v. Sa
nders, (1846) 6 Hare 1 : 67 ER 1057] . We 
direct accordingly.” 
(emphasis added) 
15. 
Reliance is placed by the appellants on the decision of 
this Court in the case of B. Vijaya Bharathi3. In paragraph 17 
of the said decision, this Court held thus:  
“17. It must also be noted that though 
aware of two conveyances of the same 
property, the plaintiff did not ask for 
their cancellation. This again, would 
stand in the way of a decree of specific 
performance for unless the sale made by 
Defendant 1 to Defendant 2, and 
thereafter by Defendant 2 to Defendant 
3 are set aside, no decree for specific 
performance could possibly follow. While 
Mr Rao may be right in stating that mere 
delay without more would not disentitle his 
client to the relief of specific performance, 
for the reasons stated above, we find that 
this is not such a case. The High Court was 
clearly right in finding that the bar of 
Section 16(c) was squarely attracted on the 
facts of the present case, and that 
therefore, the fact that Defendants 2 and 3 
may not be bona fide purchasers would not 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 15 of 24 
 
come in the way of stating that such suit 
must be dismissed at the threshold 
because 
of 
lack 
of 
readiness 
and 
willingness, which is a basic condition for 
the grant of specific performance.” 
               (emphasis added) 
A bench of two Hon’ble Judges has rendered this decision. 
Unfortunately, the attention of the Bench was not invited to 
binding precedent in the form of a decision of a larger bench in 
the case of Lala Durga Prasad & Ors.4. Hence, the decision 
in the case of B. Vijaya Bharathi3 is not a binding precedent.  
Therefore, there was no requirement to make a prayer in the 
plaint for cancellation or setting aside the subsequent sale 
deeds.  
16. 
Clause (a) to (c) of Section 19 of the Specific Relief Act 
read thus: 
“19. Relief against parties and persons 
claiming under them by subsequent title.—
Except 
as 
otherwise 
provided 
by 
this 
Chapter, 
specific 
performance 
of 
a 
contract may be enforced against— 
(a) either party thereto; 
(b) any other person claiming under him 
by a title arising subsequently to the 
contract, except a transferee for value 
who has paid his money in good faith 
and without notice of the original 
contract; 
(c) any person claiming under a title which, 
though prior to the contract and known to 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 16 of 24 
 
the plaintiff, might have been displaced by 
the defendant; 
(d)………………………………………………… 
(e)…………………………………………………” 
(emphasis added) 
In view of clause (b) of Section 19, the defendants who are 
claiming under the sale deeds executed after the execution of 
the suit agreement can be subjected to a decree of specific 
performance as the suit agreement can be enforced specifically 
against such defendants unless they are bona-fide purchasers 
without the notice of the original contract. When, in a given 
case, the defendants, who are subsequent purchasers, fail to 
prove that they entered into the sale deed in good faith and 
without notice of the suit agreement, in view of Section 19(b), 
a decree for specific performance can be passed against such 
defendants. Therefore, in such a case where Section 19(b) is 
applicable, under the decree of specific performance, the 
subsequent purchasers can be directed to execute the sale 
deed along with the original vendor. There is no necessity to 
pray for the cancellation of the subsequent sale deeds. 
ON QUESTION – (e) 
17. 
We have perused Section 154-B of the Zamindari 
Abolition Act. Sub-section (1) prohibits the sale or transfer of 
agricultural lands to a person who is not an agriculturalist.  
Clause (h) of sub-section (2) of Section 154-B permits the sale 
of agricultural land to a non-agriculturalist with the permission 
of the State Government for the purposes specified in clause (i) 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 17 of 24 
 
to (v) of clause (h). What is prohibited is the sale of agricultural 
land to a non-agriculturalist. In view of Section 54 of the TP 
Act, an agreement for sale does not transfer the property 
subject matter of the agreement to the purchaser. It does not 
create any interest in the property subject matter of the 
agreement. Therefore, the embargo created by sub-section (1) 
of Section 154-B will apply only to the execution of the sale 
deed and not to the execution of the agreement for sale. 
18. 
Now the question is whether the vendor and the persons 
claiming through him can be directed to apply for permission 
in accordance with clause (h) of sub-section (2) of Section 154-
B to sell and whether a decree for execution of the sale deed 
can be made contingent upon the grant of permission to sell. 
The law on this aspect is no longer res integra. In the case of 
Rojasara Ramjibhai Dahyabhai v. Jani Narottamdas 
Lallubhai and another5, in paragraphs 12 to 14, this Court 
held thus: 
“12. Although Rana Mohabat Singh having 
failed to fulfil the terms of his contract with 
the appellant and execute a sale deed in his 
favour might have rendered the contract 
between them incapable of performance, but 
with the extinction of the title of Rana 
Mohabat Singh and the conferral of the rights 
of an occupant on the appellant, the property 
became transferable subject, of course, to the 
express covenant on the part of the appellant 
to do all things necessary to give effect to the 
agreement. Here, the suit banakhat (Ex. 25) 
embodies an express covenant to that effect. 
 
5 (1986) 3 SCC 300 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 18 of 24 
 
There is always in such contracts an 
implied covenant on the part of the vendor 
to do all things necessary to give effect to 
the agreement, including the obtaining of 
the permission for the transfer of the 
property. The principles on which a term 
of this nature may be implied in contracts 
are well-settled. It is enough to refer to 
Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. 8, 3rd Edn., 
p. 121 where the principles are summarised 
as follows: 
“In construing a contract, a term or condition 
not expressly stated may, under certain 
circumstances be implied by the court, if it is 
clear from the nature of the transaction or 
from something actually found in the 
document that the contracting parties must 
have intended such a term or condition to be 
a part of the agreement between them. Such 
an implication must in all cases be founded 
on the presumed intention of the parties and 
upon reason, and will only be made when it 
is necessary in order to give the transaction 
that efficacy that both parties must have 
intended it to have, and to prevent such a 
failure of consideration as could not have 
been within the contemplation of the parties.” 
 
Chitty on Contracts Vol. 1, 23rd Edn., paras 
694-95 points out that a term would be 
implied if it is necessary in the business 
sense, to give efficacy to the contract. 
13. In this context, reference may be made to 
the decision of the Privy Council in Motilal v. 
Nanhelal [AIR 1930 PC 287 : (1930) 57 IA 
333] . There, the facts were these. In that 
case, the plaintiff Mst Jankibai entered into 
an agreement to purchase from Rajbahadur 
Seth Jiwandas of Jabalpur four annas 
proprietary 
share 
of 
Mauja 
Raisalpur 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 19 of 24 
 
together with the sir and khudkast lands 
appurtenant thereto, with cultivating rights 
in the sir lands. The property was subject to 
the provisions of the Central Provinces 
Tenancy Act, 1920. She filed a suit for 
specific performance of the said contract. The 
Privy Council held that the contract was for a 
transfer of the sir lands without reservation 
of the right of occupancy, and that the 
sanction of the Revenue Officer to the 
transfer was necessary under Section 50(1) of 
the Act, which was in these terms: 
“50. (1) If a proprietor desires to transfer the 
proprietary rights in any portion of his sir 
land without reservation of the right of 
occupancy specified in Section 49, he may 
apply to a revenue-officer and, if such 
revenue-officer is satisfied that the transferor 
is not wholly or mainly an agriculturist, or 
that the property is self-acquired or has been 
acquired within the twenty years last 
preceding, he shall sanction the transfer.” 
14. It was contended before the Privy Council 
that a decree for specific performance of the 
agreement of sale could not be made, because 
such performance would necessitate an 
application by or on behalf of the vendor to 
the Revenue Officer for sanction to transfer 
the cultivating rights in the sir land, and that 
the court had no jurisdiction to require the 
vendor to make such an application. In 
repelling the contention, the Privy Council 
observed that in view of their construction of 
the agreement, namely, that the vendor 
agreed to transfer the cultivating rights in the 
sir land: 
“There was, in Their Lordships' opinion, an 
implied covenant on the part of the vendor to 
do all things necessary to effect such 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 20 of 24 
 
transfer, which would include an application 
to the Revenue Officer to sanction the 
transfer.” 
 
It was further observed that it was not 
necessary for their Lordships to decide 
whether in that case the application for 
sanction to transfer must succeed, but that it 
was material to mention that no facts were 
brought to their Lordships' notice which 
would go to show that there was any reason 
why such sanction should not be granted. 
After making the said observations, the 
Privy 
Council 
held 
that 
in 
those 
circumstances the court had jurisdiction 
to enforce the contract under the Specific 
Relief Act, 1877 and Order 21, Rule 35 of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 by a 
decree ordering the vendor to apply for 
sanction and to execute a conveyance on 
receipt of such sanction. The decision of 
the Privy Council in Motilal v. Nanhelal 
[AIR 1930 PC 287 : (1930) 57 IA 333] 
therefore 
is 
an 
authority 
for 
the 
proposition that if the vendor agrees to 
sell the property which can be transferred 
only 
with 
the 
sanction 
of 
some 
government authority, the court has 
jurisdiction to order the vendor to apply 
to the authority within a specified period, 
and if the sanction is forthcoming to 
convey to the purchaser within a certain 
time. See also Chandnee Widya Vati 
Madden v. C.L. Katial [AIR 1964 SC 978 : 
(1964) 2 SCR 495] and R.C. Chandiok v. 
Chuni Lal Sabharwal [(1970) 3 SCC 140 : 
AIR 1971 SC 1238 : (1971) 2 SCR 573] 
where this Court following the Privy 
Council decision in Motilal v. Nanhelal 
case [AIR 1930 PC 287 : (1930) 57 IA 333] 
reiterated the same principle.” 
                        (emphasis added) 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 21 of 24 
 
 
Hence, a decree enjoining the defendants to obtain permission 
to sell the suit property can be passed as it is their implied 
obligation to do so. A decree for the specific performance can 
be passed contingent upon the grant of the permission. 
ON QUESTION – (f) 
19. 
Now, the question is whether the plaintiffs were entitled 
to a decree for specific performance. In his deposition, the first 
plaintiff has proved the service of notice of demand to the first 
defendant. The suit is filed within limitation, and the 
defendants did not raise a plea of delay and laches.  There are 
concurrent findings of the three Courts on the issue of the 
readiness and willingness shown by the first plaintiff.  There is 
no reason to disturb the said findings.  Now, the question is, 
what is the effect of the failure of the second plaintiff to support 
the first plaintiff and his conduct of supporting the defendants? 
In the facts of the case, the answer lies in the submissions 
made by the second to fourth defendants before the High Court. 
In paragraph 9 of the judgment, the High Court has recorded 
the following submissions made by the counsel for the second 
to fourth defendants: 
“9. 
The learned senior counsel for the 
appellants submitted that the plaintiff no.2 
Murari Singh did not file the suit nor had 
signed the vakalatnama and that the said 
plaintiff had admitted this fact in his 
deposition, consequently, the suit was not 
maintainable. It was further submitted that 
the percentage of share between the 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 22 of 24 
 
plaintiffs 
were 
not 
defined 
in 
the 
agreement to sell and, consequently, 
under Section 45 of the Transfer of 
Property Act, the plaintiffs would be 
deemed to have equal shares, namely, 50 
percent. The learned senior counsel for 
the appellants 
contended that 
since 
Murari Singh did not institute the suit, the 
decree for specific performance for the 
whole land, which was undivided could not 
have been decreed by the trial court and, 
consequently, to that extent, the decree 
passed by the trial court was erroneous. 
………………………………………………………” 
                (emphasis added) 
20. 
In our view, as the second plaintiff was not interested in 
getting the specific performance, the decree ought to have been 
restricted to the undivided one-half share in the suit property 
in favour of only the first plaintiff.  
21. 
Accordingly, we partly allow the appeal by passing the 
following order:  
(a) We modify the impugned decree by directing the legal 
representative of the first defendant and second to fourth 
defendants to execute a sale deed in favour of the first 
plaintiff (Karan Singh) only to the extent of one half 
undivided share in the suit property;  
(b) The defendants shall join the first plaintiff in applying to 
the State Government/Competent Authority for the grant 
of permission under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of 
Section 154-B of the Zamindari Abolition Act to sell the 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 23 of 24 
 
one half-undivided share in the suit land to the first 
plaintiff within two months from today. It shall be the 
obligation of the defendants to apply for the permission 
and to do all such things which are necessary to get the 
permission;  
(c)  If the defendants or any of them do not sign and file the 
application with relevant documents within the period 
mentioned above of two months, the executing Court 
shall appoint a Court Commissioner to sign and file the 
application on their behalf and to do all such things 
which are necessary to get the permission;  
(d) If the application for grant of permission is rejected, it will 
be open to the first plaintiff to challenge the order of 
rejection in accordance with law. If the application for 
grant of permission is finally rejected, there shall be a 
decree for refund of the sum of Rs. 7,000/- against the 
legal representative of the first defendant together with 
interest thereon at the rate of 8 per cent per annum from 
the date of filing of the suit till the realisation. However, 
her liability shall be restricted to the extent of the estate 
of the first defendant inherited by her; 
(e) If the State Government grants permission, the sale deed 
shall be executed in terms of clause (a) by all the 
defendants within three months from the date of grant of 
the permission; 

             Civil Appeal No. 6782 of 2013  
 
 
 
 
     Page 24 of 24 
 
(f) The suit stands dismissed as far as the second plaintiff is 
concerned; 
(g) The impugned decree stands modified accordingly;  
(h) Even if a sale deed is executed in favour of the first 
plaintiff in respect of the one-half undivided share in the 
suit property, he will not be entitled to seek possession in 
the execution of this decree as he will be at liberty to file 
a suit for general partition; 
(i) Accordingly, the appeal is partly allowed with no orders 
as to cost.  
  
……………………..J. 
(Abhay S. Oka) 
 
……………………..J. 
(Sanjay Karol) 
New Delhi; 
July 09, 2024.