2024 INSC 492
1 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
  
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
  
 CIVIL APPEAL NO.1957 OF 2011 
  
NASEEM KAHNAM AND OTHERS 
    
             … APPELLANT(S) 
  
  
VERSUS 
  
  
ZAHEDA BEGUM (DEAD) BY LR. AND OTHERS      … RESPONDENT(S) 
  
  
J U D G M E N T 
  
S.V.N. BHATTI, J. 
 
I. FACTUAL MATRIX 
  
1. 
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in Civil Appeal have filed O.S. No. 13/2000 
before the Court of Principal District Judge at Vishakhapatnam. The suit is 
for partition and possession of plaint schedule property. The prayer reads 
thus: 
“a)      
for partition of plaint schedule property and allot 
Western half portion of the house with the Western adjoining 
vacant site to the 2nd plaintiff and the remaining Eastern portion 
building with vacant site on Eastern side has to be partitioned into 
four equal shares and allot one such share i.e. 1/4th of the plaint 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Joshi
Date: 2024.07.09
16:44:48 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
schedule on Eastern side to the 1st plaintiff and for delivery of the 
same;” 
2. 
The plaint schedule consists of a residential house bearing door no. 
6.18.7 in East Point Layout, Plot No.10, LIG, T.S. No. 379, Block Nos. 22 
and 23 of Waltair Ward, Vishakhapatnam Municipal Corporation 
(hereinafter referred to as “the plaint schedule”). 
3. 
Late Ghouse Khan S/o late Assudula Khan entered into a lease-cum-
sale agreement concerning the plaint schedule with the Vishakhapatnam 
Urban Development Authority. Late Ghouse Khan, through a registered 
Sale Deed, after completing the agreed obligations, purchased the plaint 
schedule. Late Ghouse Khan, admittedly, remained unmarried and died on 
18.02.1988, leaving behind Plaintiff No. 1 - his sister and Defendant Nos. 1 
to 3 - his brothers as successors to the plaint schedule. Plaintiff No. 2 is the 
daughter of the late Mallika Begum who died in 1964. 
3.1 
On 07.02.1992, Exhibit-A6, an agreement for the settlement of family 
property was entered into between the parties to the suit. Defendant No. 2 
is contesting the execution and enforceability of Exhibit-A6. Exhibit-A6, by 
tenor and text, divides the Plaint Schedule into two half shares, and the 
western half share agreed to be allotted to Plaintiff No. 2 and the eastern 
half to Plaintiff No. 1 and Defendant Nos. 1 to 3. The plaintiffs, in substance, 

3 
 
pray for working out allotment of the shares accepted in the agreement 
dated 07.02.1992/Exhibit-A6 among the members of the family. 
II. PLAINT AVERMENTS 
4. 
The admitted relationship between the parties is set out, and for 
succession or inheritance to the estate of late Ghouse Khan, parties are 
governed by the Mohammedan Law. The successors in interest of late 
Ghouse Khan, together with Plaintiff no.2, who happens to be the niece of 
all the parties, arrived at an agreement (Exhibit-A6), whereunder, half 
portion of the plaint schedule on the western side is agreed to be given to 
Plaintiff No. 2 and the remaining half share on the eastern side is partitioned 
by one-fourth share among Plaintiff No. 1  and Defendants. As part of the 
agreement, Plaintiff No. 2 was allowed to reside, and the other half on the 
eastern side agreed to be partitioned among the brothers and lone surviving 
sister of the late Ghouse Khan at a later point in time.  Plaintiff No. 2 claims 
to be in possession of the western side house together with the vacant site 
on the western side. The plaint averred that the Defendants tried to alienate 
the plaint schedule and to protect the share agreed to be given to plaintiffs 
through Exhibit-A6 dated 07.02.1992, the plaintiffs issued legal notice dated 
06.11.1999 to all the Defendants, and Defendant No. 3 alone sent the reply 
notice dated 20.12.1999. The Plaintiffs issued a paper publication in 

4 
 
Eenadu Daily on 03.01.2000, asserting their share in the plaint schedule 
property. In view of the resistance to partition by Defendant No. 2, the suit 
for partition was filed by Plaintiff Nos. 1 and 2. 
5. 
Defendant 
Nos. 
1 
and 
3 
remained 
ex-parte, 
and                     
Defendant No. 2 contested the Suit. 
III. AVERMENTS IN THE WRITTEN STATEMENT FILED BY DEFENDANT NO. 2-
AMANULLA KHAN 
6. 
The relationship between the parties is admitted, and the first 
noteworthy objection in the written statement is that under the law of 
succession in Mohammedan law, Plaintiff No. 2 is not one of the heirs to 
the estate of the late Ghouse Khan. Plaintiff No. 2 is not in the same line of 
succession as the brothers and the surviving sister of the late Ghouse 
Khan. Without prejudice to the above, Defendant No. 2 introduced an 
independent plea by referring to the will dated 25.02.1985, said to have 
been executed by the late Ghouse Khan. The will, if is proved or established 
by Defendant No. 2, the said proof excludes intestate succession to the 
plaint schedule property and the apportionment or allotment of shares as 
said to have been agreed in the alleged agreement dated 07.02.1992 
(Exhibit-A6). The plea on the will dated 25.02.1985 is not seriously 
contested and further narrative hence is unnecessary. Defendant No. 2 

5 
 
denies the allegation in the plaint that the parties, though governed by the 
Mohammedan law, have entered into an agreement on 07.02.1992 on the 
succession to the plaint schedule property.  Defendant No. 2, having denied 
the execution of the agreement dated 07.02.1992, has set up the plea that 
the Plaintiffs and Defendant Nos. 1 and 3 have fabricated Exhibit-A6 to 
unlawfully gain from Defendant No. 2 who has got exclusive interest 
through the will dated 25.02.1985.  Plaintiff No. 2, it is alleged, was suffering 
from a psychological disorder, and she had come to Vishakhapatnam for 
treatment. Defendant No. 2, keeping in perspective the close relationship 
between them on humanitarian grounds, allowed Plaintiff No. 2 to stay in a 
portion of the plaint schedule. The permission to occupy was subject to the 
occupants paying the electricity and water consumption charges to local 
authorities.  Defendant No. 2 contends the claim for partition in all fours. 
The Trial Court, on the above pleadings, framed seven issues and, in the 
present consideration, we are of the view that the first two issues are 
relevant and read thus: 
“1.      
whether the plaintiffs and the defendants entered into 
agreement on 07.02.1992 as alleged by the plaintiffs? 
  
2.       
whether the said alleged agreement dated 07.02.1992 
is valid?” 
 

6 
 
7. 
The Trial Court has considered issue nos. 1 and 2 independently and, 
in the final analysis, held issue no.1 in favour of the plaintiffs and issue no.2 
against the plaintiffs. The Trial Court, having regard to the views taken on 
these two issues, decreed the suit, firstly, by denying any share to Plaintiff 
No. 2 and, secondly, by passing a preliminary decree dividing the plaint 
schedule into seven shares and allotting 1/7th share to Plaintiff No. 1 and 
2/7th share to each of the Defendants. The gist of consideration and findings 
on issue nos. 1 and 2 is summed up as follows: 
“(i) When Ghouse Khan died unmarried and issueless, his 
nearest relations were his brothers and sisters. When the first 
plaintiff and defendant Nos 1 to 3 became co-sharers of the plaint 
schedule property, they collectively entered into a transaction 
described as an “agreement for the settlement of family 
property”. (Exhibit A.6). 
 
(ii) Ex. A.6 is a typewritten document bearing the signatures of 
the First plaintiff and defendants. The second defendant during 
his cross-examination as D.W. 1, refuted the authenticity of both 
his signature in Vakalat and the affidavit supporting his petition. 
When such is the manner of denial, it is impossible to place much 
weight on his rejection of the signature in Ex. A.6. 
 
(iii) The Hindu Joint family's settlement concept is not applicable 
to the parties in this case, but legal heirs' settlements can only be 
treated or related to the adjustment of shares in the Mathruka 
property. So, plaintiffs 1 and 2 and defendants 1 to 3 could not 
enter into a settlement relating to a Mathruka property in which 
the second plaintiff is not a sharer. The transaction in Exhibit-A6 
must be considered a gift by all co-sharers in favor of the second 
plaintiff with regards to half a portion of the suit property. 
 
(iv) The restriction as regards the gift of an undivided share may 
not be applicable to the facts of the present case. Merely 
because the nature of the suit is one of the partitions, it cannot 
be said that an undivided share was given to the second plaintiff 
by the other parties to the suit.  The trial court has categorically 

7 
 
held that all the five executants of the document resolved to give 
the western half portion of the house to the second Plaintiff. 
Exhibit A.6 further reserved or postponed the division to a 
convenient date. Therefore, the gift cannot be considered 
mushaa, and the gift is pure and simple. 
 
(v) The second plaintiff came to Visakhapatnam in the year 1980 
whereas the first plaintiff came to Visakhapatnam in the year -
1985. Ghouse Khan died in the year 1988. From the material 
available it can be informed that by the date of Ex. A.6, plaintiffs 
were in occupation of the plaint schedule property. This prior 
occupation negates the delivery of the property as per Hiba, thus 
establishing the element of delivery of possession pursuant to 
alleged gift. 
 
(vi) Section 129 of the Transfer of Property Act exempts the 
application of Chapter VII on Mohammedan Law. Gift of property 
under Mohammedan law by Hiba need not necessarily be 
through a registered document. While the saving provision u/s 
129 of the Transfer of Property Act would save the validity of a 
gift other than under a registered deed, it does not exempt a 
document from registration and from levy of requisite stamp duty 
if there is the creation of interest in the immovable property in 
favour of the done. The non-registration of the document would 
make Exhibit-A6 inadmissible. Though the contents of an 
unregistered deed can be considered for collateral purposes, it 
cannot prove the transaction covered by it from the terms 
mentioned in the document. 
 
(vii) Exhibit-A6 is not executed on the requisite stamp paper so 
the contents even for collateral purposes cannot be looked into. 
Therefore, reliance on Exhibit- A6 to prove an earlier transaction 
of a gift cannot be accepted. 
 
(viii) With regard to the subsequent conduct, including enjoyment 
of the property concerned, it is to be noted that by the date of 
presenting the plaint, the second plaintiff was not residing in the 
suit schedule property.  Plaintiffs have failed to place any material 
except presenting themselves as witnesses.  There is no further 
corroboration to the evidence of PW1 P.W. 2. In fine it is recorded 
that the Trial Court has recorded that Exhibit-A6 was duly 
executed, and the plea of forgery and fabrication is not accepted. 
However, on the nature and scope of Exhibit-A6, the Trial court 
firstly examined Exhibit-A6, as a family settlement and secondly, 
held that Exhibit- A6 cannot be treated as a valid gift in favor of 
Second Defendant.”  

8 
 
 
8. 
Hence, the Plaintiffs were in appeal in A.S. No. 22 of 2007. The High 
Court, through the impugned judgment, allowed A.S. No. 22 of 2007 and 
passed a preliminary decree in terms of the agreement said to have been 
agreed between parties under Exhibit-A6. The High Court, inter alia, noted 
that: 
“(i) Section 24(2) of the Indian Stamps Act specifies that the 
settlement, particularly within a family need not be restricted to 
the members of the family up to a particular degree but includes 
persons outside the purview of succession.  
(ii) Any objection as to the admissibility of a document must be 
raised before the court takes it on record. Relevancy can be 
decided at a later stage, but not admissibility. If the trial takes 
place on the assumption that the document is admissible and if, 
at the end of the trial, the document is inadmissible, the whole 
trial receives a serious setback. The present record does not 
disclose that any objection was raised to the admissibility of Ex. 
A.6. Therefore, negating that receipt of the settlement deed in 
evidence does not amount to admission. 
(iii) Second appellant did not have any pre-existing right de hors 
Ex. A.6. She has specifically based her claim on that document. 
Ex. A.6 did not only have the effect of creating a right in the 
second appellant but also of re-defining shares or entitlement of 
the first appellant and respondents 1 to 3 vis-a-vis the property 
left by Ghouse Khan. A specific issue was framed as to the truth 
and validity of the document. Even while denying the relief to the 
appellants, the trial Court held the document to be true and valid. 
Being a party to the document, the second respondent cannot 
extricate himself from the consequences that flow out of it. In the 
absence of Ex. A.6, there would not have been any occasion for 
the appellants to claim rights, as they did, in relation to the 
property. Ex. A.6 has created a legal right in the parties and, in 
particular, the second appellant, and she is certainly entitled to 
seek partition on the strength of it.” 
 

9 
 
 
Hence, the Civil Appeal at the instance of legal representatives of 
Defendant No. 2. 
IV. SUBMISSIONS 
9. 
Mrs. Prabha Swami, Learned Counsel appearing for the legal 
representatives of Defendant No. 2, argues that the plaint schedule, upon 
the demise of late Ghouse Khan, as per the Rules of Succession under 
Mohammedan Law, was inherited by three brothers and one sister. During 
the subsistence of succession of nearest heirs, Plaintiff No. 2, the niece of 
the deceased, a distant heir, does not have interest, much less an interest 
is succeeded in the plaint schedule property. Therefore, Exhibit-A6, family 
agreement, even in the face of findings by both the Courts viz., Exhibit-A6 
was validly executed, cannot operate in law because Exhibit-A6 is not 
entered into among the individuals having a share or right in the plaint 
schedule. It is contended that Plaintiff No. 2 cannot and could not claim a 
share under an oral gift/Hiba in the plaint schedule as well. The oral 
evidence of PWs 1 to 3 is absent on the crucial aspect.  Plaintiff No. 2, since 
does not have antecedent or inherited title, cannot seek enforcement of a 
family settlement. Exhibit-A6 since professes to confer or create a right in 
favour of Plaintiff No. 2 and the valuation of the plaint schedule is more than 
a hundred rupees, the want of registration of Exhibit-A6 and the non-

10 
 
payment of stamp duty under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 would render 
Exhibit-A6 illegal and unenforceable. The claim for partition based on 
Exhibit-A6 is misconceived in law, and even assuming without admitting 
that Defendant No. 2 or his heirs allowed the finding on issue no. 1 to 
become final, despite such conduct, Defendant No. 2 /his legal 
representatives are not precluded from canvassing on the enforceability of 
Exhibit-A6. 
10. 
Mr. Tapesh Kumar Singh, Learned Senior Counsel appearing for 
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, argues that Defendant No. 2 introduced two 
pleas in opposition to the relief for partition as per Exhibit-A6. Firstly, 
Defendant No. 2 averred that Exhibit-A6 is fabricated and had been brought 
into existence by the concerted efforts of Plaintiffs, Defendant No. 1 and 
Defendant No. 3. Secondly, to efface the effect of obligation under Exhibit-
A6, Defendant No. 2 introduced a will dated 25.02.1985 of late Ghouse 
Khan. Both the objections have been overruled or disbelieved. Once the 
Will is not proved, and Exhibit-A6 is believed by both the Trial Court and the 
High Court, the arguments now canvassed are unavailable under Article 
136 of the Constitution of India. Therefore, the controversy is narrowed 
down to the enforceability of Exhibit-A6 as an agreement for settlement of 
family property by the parties to the suit. It is vehemently argued that on 

11 
 
18.02.1988, Ghouse Khan died. Assuming that by the Principle of 
Succession under Mohammedan Law, Plaintiff No. 1 and Defendant Nos. 
1 to 3 have succeeded to the plaint schedule property, still, Plaintiff No. 2, 
who is a member of the larger family, going by the common intention and 
wisdom of the parties, Exhibit-A6 was brought into existence and western 
side portion was agreed to be given to Plaintiff No. 2. The agreement 
Exhibit-A6 was enforced by filing the suit, and any objection, as a matter of 
fact, is incorrect. The interpretation and construction of Exhibit-A6 would 
decide the correctness of the findings recorded by the High Court.  Exhibit 
A-6 in nomenclature and content cannot be treated as a concluded act of 
partition between the sharers and/or a distant residuary sharer. Exhibit-A6 
is captioned as an agreement for the settlement of the family property. 
Therefore, the requirement that the executants of the document must have 
a subsisting interest is completely beside the point. The brothers and sister, 
being the elders of the family, can agree and settle the property in such a 
way that would otherwise take place as per Mohammedan law. The 
brothers and sister, by the time of execution of Exhibit-A6, are the sharers, 
and they can deal with the property the way the sharers agree. The 
underlying idea in the execution of Exhibit A6 was to deal with the plant 
schedule and have peace in the larger definition of family members. The 

12 
 
Courts lean in favor of giving effect to arrangements made by the members 
of a family, and the impugned judgment spoke the view of the majority 
shares of plaint schedule. 
V. ANALYSIS 
11.    We have perused the record and taken note of the rival contentions. 
At the cost of repetition, we refer to a few concluded circumstances, both 
by pleading and findings of the Courts below. The suit for partition is based 
on Exhibit A6. The frame of suit is to enforce the obligations agreed upon 
by the signatories to Exhibit-A6.  Plaintiff No. 1, as is discernible from the 
record and attending circumstances, appears to be taking care of or looking 
after Plaintiff No. 2. Going by the Rules of Succession under Mohammedan 
Law, only the brothers and surviving sister would come under the category 
of first entitled sharers to the estate of the late Ghouse Khan for he died 
unmarried and issueless. Plaintiff No. 2 comes as a residuary claimant. The 
sharers or siblings of the late Ghouse Khan have not settled the property 
through Exhibit-A6 among themselves. Plaintiff No. 2, who happens to be 
the niece of brothers and sister by blood relation, is one of the parties and 
executants to Exhibit-A6. Before we interpret Exhibit-A6, let us preface the 
following excerpt from Exhibit-A6. 
“AGREEMENT FOR SETTLEMENT OF FAMILY PROPERTY 
  

13 
 
Executed this 7th day of February 1992 by: 
  
1. Lal Ahmed Khan, son of Late Assudulla Khan, 53, Mosque 
Street, Arakkonam, Tamilnadu. 
2. XXX            XXX        
XXX 
  
  
3. XXX            XXX        
XXX 
4. XXX            XXX        
XXX 
5. XXX            XXX        
XXX 
  
Jointly for the mutual settlement of the property of Late M.G. 
Khan.” 
12.    The operative portion of the agreement refers to the property being 
left behind by the late Ghouse Khan. All the executants treat themselves as 
legal heirs of the deceased Ghouse Khan. The next important recital in 
Exhibit-A6 is on mutual consultation; the executants have resolved to give 
the western half portion of the house with the western adjoining vacant site 
to the fifth executant, i.e., Ms. Gousia Jasmine D/o late Mallika Khan. The 
agreement recites that Plaintiff No. 1 with absolute rights and, for the 
present, enjoys the eastern portion of the house along with the adjoining 
site surrounding it jointly retained by the first four parties and to divide it, 
i.e., eastern portion at a future date at the convenience. 
13.    It is a well-settled principle of interpretation that in the interpretation 
of a deed, the question is not what the parties to the deed may have 
intended to do by entering into that deed, but what is the meaning of the 
words used in the deed. The Court can understand the true intent of the 

14 
 
deed only by the words used in the deed. It does not matter what the parties, 
in their most state of mind, thought what the terms meant. They may have 
meant different things, but still the terms or the language used in the deed 
should bind them. It is for the court to interpret such terms or language used 
in the deed. 
14. 
In Ram Gopal v. Nandlal and Ors.1, it is held that in construing a 
document, the fundamental rule is to ascertain the intention from the words 
of the deed; the surrounding circumstances are to be considered but that is 
only for the purposes of finding out the meaning of the words which have 
been actually employed in the deed. It would be apposite to refer to the 
following para: - 
"11. In construing a document whether in English or in vernacular 
the fundamental rule is to ascertain the intention from the words 
used; the surrounding circumstances are to be considered, but 
that is only for the purpose of finding out the intended meaning 
of the words which have actually been..." 
 
15.    By applying the said rules of construction to the document, we notice 
that Exhibit-A6 is an agreement for the settlement. Exhibit-A6 does not 
create, transfer or confer a right in favour of Plaintiff No. 2. The 
understanding between parties from a plain reading is that the western 
portion is agreed to be given to Plaintiff No. 2, and brothers and sister of 
 
1 1950 SCC 702. 

15 
 
the late Ghouse Khan retain the eastern portion. All the formalities to create 
exclusive rights are deferred to a future date for performance at the 
convenience of the parties. We hasten to add that in the peculiar facts and 
circumstances of the case, the agreement for settlement of family property 
is entered into to give a right to Plaintiff No. 2 and avoid what would 
otherwise take place by the normal entitlement of sharers under 
Mohammedan law. The agreement made a provision in favour of Plaintiff 
No. 2 for the reasons noticed by the courts below, viz., that Plaintiff No. 2 
had a psychiatric problem and had taken treatment in Vishakhapatnam; 
Plaintiff No. 2 was in the care of Plaintiff No. 1 for whatever reason and to 
avoid acrimony in distributing the plaint schedule property. We record with 
approval that the Learned Judge in the impugned judgment has rightly 
found the just ground to carry forward the agreement arrived at in Exhibit-
A6 into execution and to give effect to the peace desired by the family 
members. As a court, once we notice that Exhibit-A6 is proved as duly 
executed by all the parties, we lean in favour of settlement of the rights as 
agreed upon by the parties. A few objections available in law and fact, i.e., 
frame of suit, payment of court fee, etc., are not taken by Defendant No. 2. 
The contentions, which are bereft of pleadings, are not entertained at this 
stage of litigation. The question is not whether Plaintiff No. 2, a residuary 

16 
 
sharer, can be a party to an alleged family settlement or not. The question 
is how the parties have settled the dispute or shares vis-a-vis the property 
left behind by the late Ghouse Khan and have peace in the family.  It is not 
the case of Defendant No. 2 that the personal law prohibits sharing by 
agreement with a distant heir. For the above reasons and discussion, the 
decisions relied on by the Appellants do not apply to the facts and 
circumstances of the case and are distinguishable in more than one sense. 
In our jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, we do not 
see any error of fact or an illegality warranting interference with the 
impugned judgment.  
16.    The consideration by the Trial Court on whether Exhibit-A6 can be 
viewed from the prospect of Hiba, or a Sale Deed is entirely out of context. 
The averments in the plaint are clear that the plaintiffs seek enforcement of 
an agreement among the family members. The consideration, in fact and 
law, would center around whether the agreement is proved and established 
and whether there is a legal impediment to giving effect to the agreement 
between the parties.  Defendant No. 2 failed to prove the existence of Will 
and also that Exhibit-A6 is a fabricated document. The circumstances in the 
appeal are peculiar and the decision is confined to the established and 
admitted circumstances of the case. The effect of the above is that 

17 
 
agreement among the parties is given effect. Precisely, the judgment 
impugned has done so. In our jurisdiction, particularly, bearing in mind the 
circumstances of the case, we are convinced that no case is made out for 
interference.  
17. 
Hence, the Civil Appeal fails and is dismissed. No order as to costs. 
 
  
     .……………………..J. 
[ C. T. RAVIKUMAR ] 
  
 
  
  
…..…………………J. 
           [ S.V.N. BHATTI ] 
  
New Delhi; 
July 9, 2024.