2024 INSC 489
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 660-661 OF 2015  
                    
 
STATE OF PUNJAB                                       .…APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
RANDHIR SINGH ETC. 
 
                    ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
 
1. 
These appeals by special leave have been preferred by the 
State of Punjab to assail the judgment dated 17th July, 2014 
rendered by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana in Criminal 
Appeal Nos. 580 of 2002 and 606 of 2002 whereby, the learned 
Division 
Bench, 
allowed 
the 
appeals 
preferred 
by 
the 
respondents(accused) and acquitted them while reversing the 
judgment dated 12th July, 2002 passed by the learned Additional 
Sessions Judge, Faridkot(hereinafter referred to as ‘trial Court’) in 
Sessions Case No. 118 of 1998. The learned trial Court had 
convicted and sentenced the accused as below: - 
Digitally signed by
geeta ahuja
Date: 2024.07.09
16:18:10 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Randhir Singh 
(Accused No. 
1)(A1) 
U/s 302 of the Indian Penal Code(hereinafter being referred to 
as ‘IPC’) and awarded rigorous imprisonment for life with fine 
amounting to Rs. 1000/- and in default of payment of fine to 
further rigorous imprisonment for two months, each.  
Surjit Kaur alias 
Seeto 
(Accused No. 
3)(A3) 
U/s 302 IPC and awarded rigorous imprisonment for life with 
fine amounting to Rs. 1000/- and in default of payment of fine 
to further rigorous imprisonment for two months, each.  
Baldev Singh 
(Accused No. 
2)(A2) 
U/s 302 r/w 34 IPC and awarded rigorous imprisonment for 
life with fine amounting to Rs. 1000/- and in default of 
payment of fine to further rigorous imprisonment for two 
months, each.  
Karamjit Kaur 
(Accused No. 
4)(A4) 
U/s 302 r/w 34 IPC and awarded rigorous imprisonment for 
life with fine amounting to Rs. 1000/- and in default of 
payment of fine to further rigorous imprisonment for two 
months, each.  
 
2. 
The case of the prosecution in nutshell is that Randhir 
Singh(A1) was married to the deceased-Smt. Kuldeep Kaur @ Raj 
Kaur(hereinafter being referred to as ‘victim’/‘deceased’) about 6 to 
7 years prior to the date of incident, i.e. 24th August, 1998.  
Randhir Singh(A1) and his elder brother Baldev Singh(A2) brought 
the victim to the Civil Hospital, Kotakpura in a seriously burnt 
condition(80% burns). The intimation regarding the arrival of a 
woman at the hospital in a burnt condition was sent to the 
concerned police station by the duty doctor vide ruqa(intimation) 
(Exhibit-PA) whereupon, Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-11) reached the 
hospital. In the intervening period, considering the serious 
condition of the victim, she was referred to Guru Gobind Singh 

3 
 
Medical College and Hospital, Faridkot(hereinafter being referred 
to as ‘GGSMC Hospital’). Thereupon, Surjit Singh(PW-11) 
proceeded to the GGSMC Hospital and made an enquiry from the 
doctor attending the victim about her fitness to give a statement. 
At 9:30 am, the doctor vide endorsement(Exhibit-PF), declared the 
victim to be ‘unfit’ to make a statement. On the same day, at 
around 
12:50 
pm, 
the 
duty 
doctor, 
vide 
another 
endorsement(Exhibit-PG) declared that the victim was ‘fit’ to give 
her statement. Thereupon, at 1:30 pm Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-11) 
claims to have recorded a statement(Exhibit-PM) of the victim. At 
2:00 pm, on the very same day, Ramesh Kumar Jain, Naib 
Tehsildar(PW-7) acting as the Executive Magistrate recorded the 
statement(Exhibit-PJ and PJ/1) of the victim under Section 164 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being referred to 
as 
‘CrPC’) 
and 
thereupon, 
a 
formal 
First 
Information 
Report(FIR)(Exhibit-PM/2) came to be registered.  
3. 
Investigation was carried out and the charge sheet was filed 
against Surjit Kaur @ Seeto(A3), mother-in-law of the deceased and 
Randhir Singh(A1), husband of the deceased for the offence 
punishable under Section 302 IPC and Babu Singh(A5), father-in-
law of the deceased, Karamjit Kaur @ Pappi(A4), sister-in-

4 
 
law(jethani) and Baldev Singh(A2), brother-in-law(jeth)) for the 
offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC. 
Since the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC was 
exclusively triable by the Sessions Court, the case was committed 
and made over to the Court of learned Additional Sessions Judge, 
Faridkot for trial. The trial Court framed charges against the five 
accused as per the charge sheet. The accused abjured their guilt 
and claimed trial. The prosecution examined 11 witnesses and 
exhibited 17 documents in the following order: - 
 
Prosecution Witness(‘PW’) 
Role/Position 
PW1- Dr. M.S. Sandhu 
Medical Officer, Civil Hospital Kotkapura 
PW2- HC Jarnail Singh  
Police Station Sadar Kotkapura 
PW3- Dr. Sarabjit Singh Sandhu  
Head Quarter Government Medical College, Patiala 
PW4- Guddi  
Sister of Kuldeep Kaur (Deceased) 
PW5- Thana Singh   
Brother of Kuldeep Kaur (Deceased) 
PW6- Mohinder Singh  
Member of Panchayat, Ajit Gill   
PW7- Ramesh Kumar Jain 
Naib Tehsildar, Faridkot  
PW8- Dharam Singh  
Draftsman, Faridkot  
PW9- Dr. Manjit Singh 
SMO, Registrar, Surgery, GGS Medical College, 
Faridkot  
PW10-Raj Rani 
Record Keeper, GGS Medical College & Hospital, 
Faridkot 
PW11- Surjit Singh  
ASI, CIA Staff, Moga  
 
 
 
Exhibit No.(s) 
Exhibit 
Exhibit PA  
Information regarding burn Case 

5 
 
Exhibit PB 
Affidavit  
Exhibit PC  
Postmortem Report  
Exhibit PC/1 
Pictorial Diagram of the Injuries 
Exhibit PD  
Police request for conducting PMR.  
Exhibit PE    
Inquest report & opinion signed by PW3  
Exhibit 
PF, 
and 
Exhibit PF/1  
Request to police and opinion of doctor  
Exhibit 
PG 
and 
Exhibit PG/1 
Request to the doctor In-Charge of G.G.G. Medical College and Hospital as 
to whether the patient is fit to make the statement or not.  
Ex.PJ & ExPJ/1  
Statement of Kuldeep Kaur(victim) 
Ex.PK  
Map  
ExPL 
Bed Head Ticket  
Ex.PL & ExPL1  
Request to Tehsildar & opinion of doctor regarding statement 
Ex.PM/Ex.PM/1  
Statement of Kuldeep Kaur  
Ex. PM/2 
Copy of FIR  
Ex.PN  
Map  
Ex. PO  
Recovery Memo  
Ex. D/1, ExD/2, ExD/3  Case entries of registrars, Ration card 
  
 
4. 
 The accused were questioned under Section 313 CrPC and 
upon being confronted with the circumstances appearing in the 
prosecution evidence, they denied the same and took a plea of 
innocence and false implication. Randhir Singh(A1) stated that the 
deceased had received burn injuries in an accidental fire whereas, 
Karamjit Kaur @ Pappi(A4) and Baldev Singh(A2) pleaded that they 
had been living separately from the deceased and her husband 
since long and had no role to play in the incident. Five witnesses 
were examined by the defence in the following order:  

6 
 
Defence Witness[s] (‘DW’) 
Role/Position  
DW-1 Ran Singh 
Head Teacher, Govt. Primary School, Kaleke, District 
Moga 
DW2- Manminder Kaur 
Teacher, Government Primary School, Kaleke  
DW3- Balwinder Singh 
Teacher, Adarsh Public School, Kaleke 
DW4- Kartar Singh  
Inspector Food Supply Grade I, Baghapurana  
DW5- Kewal Singh 
Labourer, Panj Grain Kalan 
 
5. 
The trial Court heard the arguments advanced by the learned 
Additional Public Prosecutor and the learned defence counsels, 
appreciated the evidence available on record, and vide  judgment 
dated 12th July, 2002, proceeded to convict Surjit Kaur @ Seeto(A3) 
and Randhir Singh(A1) for the offence punishable under Section 
302 IPC, whereas, Karamjeet Kaur(A4) and Baldev Singh(A2) were 
convicted for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC read 
with Section 34 IPC. Each accused was sentenced to undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for life and to pay the fine of Rs.1,000/- 
each, and in default of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for a period of two months. However, Babu 
Singh(A5) was acquitted by the trial Court on the reasoning that 
prosecution failed to produce any evidence regarding his 
participation in the commission of the alleged offence. 
6. 
The accused preferred two appeals referred to supra, before 
the High Court of Punjab and Haryana assailing the judgment of 

7 
 
the trial Court. The Division Bench of the High Court of Punjab 
and Haryana, vide common judgment dated 17th July, 2014, 
allowed the appeals, set aside the judgment rendered by the trial 
Court and acquitted the accused of the charges. The common 
judgment dated 17th July, 2014 rendered by the Division Bench of 
the Punjab and Haryana High Court is subjected to challenge by 
the State in these two appeals. 
Submissions on behalf of the Appellant-State: - 
7. 
Shri Vivek Jain, Deputy Advocate General, learned counsel 
appearing for the State of Punjab, vehemently and fervently 
contended that the judgment rendered by the High Court is 
unsustainable in facts as well as in law. He urged that there is 
unimpeachable evidence on record to show that the victim, Smt. 
Kuldeep Kaur @ Raj Kaur, was being harassed and humiliated by 
the respondents(accused) in the matrimonial home. He contended 
that husband, Randhir Singh(A1) was indulged in an illicit 
relationship with his sister-in-law, Karamjit Kaur(A4) and when 
the deceased raised objection to this illicit relationship, she was 
beaten up by her husband, Randhir Singh(A1). The deceased was 
also subjected to character assassination by her in-laws. She was 
set to fire by her in-laws in the matrimonial home with the 

8 
 
intention of eliminating her.  The burn injuries were so serious that 
the victim succumbed just three days after the incident i.e. on 27th 
August, 1998. He urged that two dying declarations of the 
deceased were recorded, first by Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-11) and the 
second by Ramesh Kumar Jain, Naib Tehsildar(PW-7) acting as an 
Executive Magistrate. In the first dying declaration(Exhibit-PM) 
recorded by Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-11), the deceased made 
categorical allegations that her husband, Randhir Singh(A1) and 
her in-laws, namely, Baldev Singh(Jeth)(A2), Babu Singh(father-in-
law)(A5), Surjit Kaur @ Seeto(mother-in-law)(A3), Karamjit 
Kaur(Jethani)(A4) subjected her to harassment, torture and often 
used filthy language towards her. The deceased also stated that in 
the morning of 24th August, 1998 at about 5:00 am, she overheard 
her Jeth(A2), husband(A1), father-in-law(A5) and Jethani(A4) 
talking to each other. She went to prepare tea for herself 
whereupon, her Jeth(A2) extorted that kerosene oil should be 
poured on her. Randhir Singh(A1) thereupon, immobilized her by 
catching hold of her hair and poured kerosene oil on her. Karamjit 
Kaur(A4) suggested that she should be set to fire whereupon, Surjit 
Kaur(A3) set her ablaze with a matchstick. She rushed outside and 
raised a hue and cry on which the neighbours came and 

9 
 
extinguished the fire. She also stated that the motive behind the 
incident was that her husband, Randhir Singh(A1) was indulged 
in an illicit relationship with her jethani Karamjit Kaur (A4), to 
which she had objected. Fuelled by this motive, the accused acting 
with common intention had set her on fire. The second dying 
declaration of the deceased(Exhibit-PJ) was recorded by Ramesh 
Kumar Jain, Naib Tehsildar(PW-7) acting as an Executive 
Magistrate and the same reads as below: - 
“I state that my marriage about seven years ago. No child 
born to me. My husband earns livelihood by doing labour work. 
In the morning at 4 am it was dark, the people of my house set 
me on fire but I do not know who had lit the match box and set 
me on fire. I was turned out from the house after giving me 
beating. I prepared tea on the stove. We used to prepare meals 
etc. on the stove. When I caught fire I raised alarm. Then the 
people of our house and neighbour extinguished the fire. My 
husband brought me to the hospital and got me admitted.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
8. 
Learned State counsel contended that there is no reason to 
doubt the dying declaration(Exhibit-PM) recorded by Surjit Singh, 
ASI(PW-11). His contention was that even otherwise, there are no 
significant contradictions in the two dying declarations i.e. 
Exhibit-PM and Exhibit-PJ, so as to discard one in preference to 
the 
other. 
He 
further 
urged 
that 
even 
in 
the 
dying 
declaration(Exhibit-PJ) recorded by the Executive Magistrate, the 
deceased categorically stated that the people of her house had set 

10 
 
her on fire. As per learned counsel, the respondents herein were 
the only persons present in the house when the incident took place 
and thus, it can safely be presumed that while referring to the 
people of her house, the victim was indicating about the accused-
respondents as her assailants. 
9. 
Learned counsel vehemently urged that the trial Court, upon 
a thorough appreciation of the evidence on record came to the only 
possible and logical conclusion that the dying declaration(Exhibit-
PM) was a reliable piece of evidence and that the conviction of the 
accused was justifiably based thereupon, by the trial Court. He 
urged that the High Court committed a grave error in holding that 
the first dying declaration(Exhibit-PM) recorded by Surjit Singh, 
ASI(PW-11) was suspicious and unreliable. He contended that the 
dying declaration(Exhibit-PM) was recorded after taking opinion 
regarding fitness of the victim, to give such statement, from the 
duty doctor(PW-9) and the FIR came to be promptly registered on 
the basis of said dying declaration and hence, there is no 
justification whatsoever to cast a doubt on the said dying 
declaration(Exhibit-PM).  He submitted that Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-
11) had no reason to falsely implicate the accused persons and 

11 
 
thus there was no reason as to why he could create a false dying 
declaration of the deceased. 
10. Learned counsel further urged that the witnesses Guddi(PW-
4), Thana Singh(PW-5) and Mohinder Singh(PW-6) gave reliable 
evidence regarding the oral dying declaration made by the victim 
at the hospital in their presence. The said oral dying declaration 
was almost on the same lines as the dying declaration(Exhibit-PM) 
recorded by the Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-11). He thus contended that 
the judgment rendered by the High Court is based purely on 
conjectures and surmises inasmuch as the most significant and 
unimpeachable evidence being the dying declaration(Exhibit-PM) 
admissible in evidence by virtue of Section 32 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 was brushed aside by the High Court without 
assigning cogent reasons. He further urged that the victim had 
categorically stated that she was being harassed in her 
matrimonial home by her in-laws for the reason that her husband, 
Randhir Singh(A1) was indulged in an illicit affair with her sister-
in-law Karamjit Kaur(A4). This illicit affair led to holding of a 
panchayat on a complaint by the victim’s maternal relatives and 
hence, it can safely be concluded that the accused had strong 
motive to eliminate the victim. 

12 
 
11. Learned counsel, thus, urged that the High Court committed 
an error apparent on the face of the record while accepting the 
appeals of the accused and acquitting them of the charges. His 
fervent plea was that the view taken by the trial Court is the only 
possible view of the matter and thus, the appeal deserves to be 
allowed and the respondents should be convicted while reversing 
the judgment rendered by the High Court. 
12. On these submissions, learned counsel for the State implored 
the Court to accept the appeals, reverse the judgment of the High 
Court and restore the conviction of the accused as recorded by the 
trial Court. 
Submissions on behalf of the respondents: - 
13. 
Learned counsel for the respondents, vehemently and 
fervently opposed the submissions advanced on behalf of learned 
counsel for the State. He urged that the High Court has rightly 
held that the dying declaration(Exhibit-PM) recorded by Surjit 
Singh, 
ASI(PW-11) 
was 
a 
post-investigation 
document 
manufactured with an aim to falsely implicate the accused acting 
at the behest of Thana Singh(PW-5), brother of deceased who was 
also a Police Officer. He urged that Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-11) did 
not make any effort to call the concerned Magistrate at that instant 

13 
 
moment, however, he himself recorded the statement of the 
deceased(Exhibit-PM) at 1:30 pm on 24th August, 1998. Later on, 
he moved an application to the SDO with a request to record the 
statement of the victim. However, he was surprisingly unavailable 
when Ramesh Kumar Jain(PW-7), Executive Magistrate recorded 
the victim’s statement(Exhibit-PJ). He further urged that in the 
dying declaration(Exhibit-PJ) made before Ramesh Kumar Jain, 
Naib Tehsildar(PW-7), the deceased did not specifically refer to any 
family member about who had set her on fire. She did not make 
any allegation about ill treatment being meted out to her at the 
matrimonial home. Rather, she stated that she had no idea about 
who lit the matchbox and set her on fire. She also stated that it 
was her husband, Randhir Singh(A1) who brought her to the 
hospital and got her admitted for treatment. Thus, the dying 
declaration(Exhibit-PM) made before Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-11) is 
apparently a subsequently created document and was rightly 
discarded by the High Court. He contended that the conviction of 
the accused was rightly interfered by the High Court and that the 
impugned judgment does not warrant any interference by this 
Court. On these grounds, learned counsel for the respondents 

14 
 
implored the Court to dismiss the appeals and affirm the impugned 
judgment.  
Discussion & Conclusions: - 
14. Since these are appeals against acquittal, a detailed and 
elaborate discussion of the evidence is not necessary because the 
law is well settled by a catena of judgments rendered by this Court 
that the scope of interference in an appeal against acquittal is very 
limited.  If two views are possible, one favourable to the accused 
and the other favourable to the prosecution, the former would 
prevail.  An interference with the judgment of acquittal is only 
permissible if the same suffers from patent illegality, perversity or 
misreading of the evidence available on record.  Reference in this 
regard may be made to the judgment of this Court in the case of 
Thakore Umedsing Nathusing v. State of Gujarat.1 
15. Keeping the above principles in mind, we shall now proceed 
to analyse the evidence available on record. 
16. At the trial, the prosecution examined Guddi(PW-4), the sister 
of the deceased, Thana Singh(PW-5), brother of the deceased and 
Mohinder Singh(PW-6), panchayat member in order to prove the 
 
1 2024 SCC OnLine SC 320 

15 
 
theory that the deceased was being maltreated in her matrimonial 
home. Guddi(PW-4) stated that her sister Smt. Kuldeep Kaur @ Raj 
Kaur(deceased) was married to Randhir Singh(A1) about 6 to 7 
years back and that she was the mediator who had arranged their 
marriage.  The witness(PW-4) stated that her sister had been 
complaining to her that the accused persons had been casting 
aspersions on her character. The witness(PW-4) also imputed that 
Randhir Singh(A1) was indulged in an illicit relationship with 
Karamjit Kaur(A4) and that her sister(deceased) was objecting to 
the same and resultantly, she was beaten up by her husband. The 
witness(PW-4) further stated that about an year ago, she along 
with her husband, Faqir Singh went to the village, Panj Grain 
Kalan to see her sister. When they reached the matrimonial home 
of her sister at about 7:00 am, they found that she had been burnt 
and was crying out. At that time, no other family member was 
present in the house. Her sister(victim) told that, at about 5:00 am, 
while she was preparing tea, all the five accused persons were 
planning to murder her and that on the paraenesis of Baldev 
Singh(A2) and Karamjeet Kaur(A4), Randhir Singh(A1) immobilized 
and poured kerosene oil on her and thereafter, Surjit Kaur(A3) set 
her ablaze with a matchstick. She rushed out of the house and 

16 
 
raised an alarm, whereupon the neighbours extinguished the fire. 
The witness(PW-4), admitted in her cross-examination that her 
brother Thana Singh(PW-5) was working in the police department. 
After seeing her sister in a burnt condition, she and her husband 
proceeded to the village, Ajit Gill, to inform her brothers. It took 
them about one and half hours to reach the said village. From 
there, she along with her brothers again returned to the village, 
Panj Grain Kalan, in the afternoon. At that time, her sister(victim) 
was not to be seen in the house. Thereafter, they went to the 
GGSMC Hospital where her sister(victim) was admitted and was 
writhing with pain. She stated that while her sister(victim) was 
admitted in the hospital, she was conscious and was narrating the 
incident to all present there, including her brothers. The 
witness(PW-4) feigned ignorance as to whether the police visited 
the hospital or not. She stated that her brothers and other relatives 
were present besides Smt. Kuldeep Kaur(victim) till her death. The 
witness(PW-4) further stated that it was after the death of her 
sister(deceased) that the police came to the hospital. She feigned 
ignorance about the place of posting of her brother, Thana 
Singh(PW-5) at the time of occurrence. 

17 
 
17. Thana Singh(PW-5) deposed that his sister(deceased) was 
married to Randhir Singh(A1) about 6-7 years ago. After the 
marriage, all the accused persons started maltreating his sister by 
casting aspersions on her character. He stated that her 
sister(deceased) often complained about these incidents of cruelty 
by her in-laws, when she came to the village. Thereupon, a 
panchayat was convened wherein the accused were advised not to 
maltreat his sister(deceased). The accused agreed to stop the 
maltreatment, but sometime later, they re-indulged in the acts of 
cruelty with his sister. He came to know from his sister Guddi(PW-
4) that Smt. Kuldeep Kaur(victim) had been set ablaze by the 
accused on which, he proceeded to the GGSMC Hospital and found 
her lying on the bed of the hospital in a burnt condition. The 
witness(PW-5) further stated that Smt. Kuldeep Kaur made an oral 
dying declaration holding the accused responsible for her 
condition. The witness admitted in his cross-examination that he 
was posted at the District Jail, Faridkot at the time of the incident 
and that the GGSMC Hospital is located just nearby. He also stated 
that in the preceding years, two panchayats had been convened. 
The last panchayat took place about 2-3 years, before the death of 
his sister(deceased) wherein an oral compromise had been arrived 

18 
 
among the deceased and her in-laws. The witness further stated 
that he was informed about the incident by his sister Guddi(PW-4) 
who came to his village, Ajit Gill, at about 9:00 am.  From there, 
they proceeded to the GGSMC Hospital. However, before reaching 
to the hospital, they went to the village, Panj Grain Kalan, and 
observed the place where the incident occurred. The witness(PW-
5) admitted in his cross-examination that accused Baldev 
Singh(A2) had been residing separately from his father and brother 
for the last 6-7 years and was running a separate kitchen. Baldev 
Singh(A2) was married to Karamjit Kaur(A4). The witness feigned 
ignorance to the suggestion that his sister(deceased) was got 
admitted to the GGSMC Hospital by her husband, Randhir 
Singh(A1).  
18. Mohinder Singh(PW-6), a resident of village, Ajit Gill deposed 
about the panchayat meetings held a few years ago to resolve the 
strife between the deceased and accused. The witness stated that 
he went to the GGSMC Hospital along with the other relatives of 
the victim on the date of incident where Smt. Kuldeep Kaur(victim) 
made an oral dying declaration in their presence.  
19. Ramesh Kumar Jain, Naib Tehsildar(PW-7) acting as the 
Executive Magistrate, deposed that he recorded the statement of 

19 
 
the deceased(Exhibit-PJ and PJ/1). In cross-examination, the 
witness stated that Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-11) had brought an order 
of the SDM for recording the statement of the victim. However, 
Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-11) did not tell him anything about the 
victim’s condition. The witness moved an application to the doctor 
to seek an opinion about the fitness of the victim to give the 
statement. He also stated that, many persons including the 
relatives of the victim were present beside her when he visited the 
GGSMC Hospital.  
20. Dr. Manjit Singh, SMO, Registrar Surgery posted in GGSMC 
Hospital was examined as PW-9. He stated that Smt. Kuldeep 
Kaur(victim) was admitted in the female surgical ward-I on 24th 
August, 1998 in a burnt condition having 85% burns.  At 12:50 
pm, upon police request, he certified that the victim was fit to give 
her statement. Thereafter, at 2:00 pm, upon a request by the 
Executive Magistrate, he gave another fitness certificate vide 
endorsement(Exhibit-P6) regarding the victim being fit to give 
statement. He stated that the victim expired on 27th August, 1998 
at 8:20 pm. 
21. Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-11) is the star witness of the 
prosecution. 
He 
testified 
that 
upon 
receiving 

20 
 
ruqa(intimation)(Exhibit-PA) from the hospital, he along with other 
officials went to the Civil Hospital, Kotkapura where information 
was provided that considering the gravity of the victim’s condition, 
she had been shifted to GGSMC Hospital. At 9:30 AM, he moved 
an application(Exhibit-PF/1) seeking certificate of fitness of the 
victim on which, the doctor(PW-9) gave an opinion that the victim 
was not in a condition to make a statement. He moved another 
application(Exhibit-PG/1) on which the doctor certified that the 
victim was fit to make a statement. Pursuant thereto, he recorded 
the statement of the victim(Exhibit-PM) which was read over to her 
and her thumb impression was appended thereupon. He 
forwarded the statement(Exhibit-PM) to the police station on the 
basis whereof, an FIR (Exhibit-PM/2) was registered by Joginder 
Singh, ASI. He submitted an application(Exhibit-PH) to the SDO 
for recording the statement of the burn victim whereupon, Ramesh 
Kumar Jain, Naib Tehsildar(PW-7) acting as the Executive 
Magistrate was deputed for the task.  
22. PW-11 further stated that Naib Tehsildar came to the 
hospital, and obtained the certificate of fitness from the doctor and 
thereafter, he recorded the statement of the victim(Exhibit-PJ). 
However, at the time of recording, PW-11 was not present at the 

21 
 
GGSMC Hospital. PW-11 also stated that he recorded the 
statement of the victim at 1:30 pm and at that time, all the relatives 
of the victim were present besides her. Initially, the victim was 
declared unfit for making statement by the doctor at 9:30 am, but 
later on, a certificate of fitness was given at 12:50 pm. He reached 
the office of the SDM, Faridkot at 1:35 pm. However, he did not 
narrate any facts to Ramesh Kumar Jain, Naib Tehsildar(PW-7). 
He gave him the application and the order of the SDM. Thereafter, 
he reached back to the hospital along with the Naib Tehsildar(PW-
7) at about 1:55 pm. 
23. Ran 
Singh, 
Head 
Teacher(DW-1), 
Manminder 
Kaur, 
Teacher(DW-2) and Balwinder Singh, Teacher(DW-3) were 
examined in defence to prove the fact that Navjot Kaur and 
Parbhjot Kaur[daughters of Baldev Singh(A2)] were studying in a 
Government school at village Kaleke.  
24. Kewal Singh(DW-5) stated that his house is situated on the 
southern side of the house of Randhir Singh(A1). He heard some 
cries and rushed to the house of Randhir Singh(A1) who was 
extinguishing his wife’s fire. The lady stated to him that she 
suddenly caught fire. He also stated that the deceased categorically 
spoke that nobody had set her to fire. No significant cross-

22 
 
examination was made from this witness(DW-5) by the prosecution 
and thus, his evidence virtually remained uncontroverted. 
25. The prosecution incipiently prophesies upon the two dying 
declarations made by the deceased, one recorded by Surjit Singh 
ASI(PW-11), i.e. Exhibit-PM and the other recorded by Ramesh 
Kumar Jain, Naib Tehsildar(PW-7) acting as Executive Magistrate, 
i.e. Exhibit-PJ  It may be stated that in the dying declaration, i.e. 
Exhibit-PJ, the victim did not take the names of any particular 
accused in the act of setting her on fire.  Rather, she made a 
general and vague allegation that the people of her house had set 
her on fire, but she could not say who had lit the match box and 
set her on fire.  On the contrary, in the dying declaration(Exhibit-
PM), detailed allegations were set out regarding the manner in 
which the accused caught hold of her, poured kerosene on her 
body and then set her on fire. 
26. Having taken note of the manifest contradictions in the two 
dying declarations, we now proceed to briefly recapitulate the 
consequential peculiarities as emerging from the evidence of the 
prosecution witnesses. 
27. Dr. 
M.S. 
Sandhu, 
Medical 
Officer, 
Civil 
Hospital, 
Kotakpura(PW-1) stated that the victim was brought to the civil 

23 
 
hospital on 24th August, 1998 at 7:30 am by Randhir Singh(A1) 
and Baldev Singh(A2) with 80% burns.  Apparently thus, it was the 
two accused who took the victim to the hospital in an attempt to 
get her treated for her burn injuries which is a strong circumstance 
pointing to their innocence. 
28. Dr. Sarabjit Singh Sandhu(PW-3), Head Quarter Government 
Medical College, Patiala who conducted post mortem upon the 
dead body of the deceased, stated in her cross-examination that 
there were no burn marks on the head and shoulders of the 
deceased, however, her hair were singed.  He admitted that if the 
victim was sitting and the assailants had poured kerosene oil on 
her body, then normally it would flow down from the head and 
shoulders downwards. 
29. Guddi(PW-4), being the elder sister of the deceased stated 
that the accused had been making allegations on the character of 
the deceased.  She also alleged that Randhir Singh(A1) was having 
illicit relations with his sister-in-law Karamjit Kaur(A4), wife of 
Baldev Singh(A2) and that the deceased had been admonishing 
Randhir Singh(A1) on that count upon which she was beaten by 
the accused Randhir Singh(A1).  Guddi(PW-4) tried to become a 
direct witness claiming that on the date of incident she, along with 

24 
 
her husband Faqir Singh had gone to the village Panj Grain Kalan 
to see her sister(victim).  They reached the matrimonial house of 
her sister at about 7:00 am and found that she was badly burnt 
and was crying.  At that time, no family member of the victim was 
present at the spot.  The witness(PW-4) also claimed that the victim 
made an oral dying declaration stating that at 5.00 am, while she 
was preparing tea, all the five accused persons were planning to 
murder her.  At that time, Baldev Singh(A2) extorted that kerosene 
oil should be poured on her.  Randhir Singh(A1) caught hold of her 
hair and poured kerosene oil on her and thereafter, Karamjit Kaur 
@ Pappi(A4) prompted that she should be burnt whereafter Surjit 
Kaur @ Seeto(A3) had put Smt. Kuldeep Kaur(victim) on ablaze 
with a matchstick.  The victim, thereafter, came out and raised an 
alarm on which the neighbours came and extinguished the fire.  
She stated in her cross-examination that immediately upon seeing 
the condition of her sister, she and her husband proceeded to the 
village Ajit Gill for informing her brothers.  It took them around 
one and half to two hours to reach the village Ajit Gill. She and her 
brother returned back to the village Panj Grain Kalan, but they did 
not find Smt. Kuldeep Kaur(victim) present at the spot.  Then, they 
went to GGSMC Hospital, Faridkot and found that Smt. Kuldeep 

25 
 
Kaur(victim) was in the hospital and was writhing in pain.  She 
admitted that her brother Thana Singh(PW-5) was working in the 
police department.  She further stated that her sister was 
conscious in the hospital and was narrating about the incident to 
all persons including her brothers.  She feigned ignorance 
regarding the visit by police to the hospital.  She admitted that she 
and her brothers remained present with the victim till her death 
and that the police came to the hospital only after her sister had 
expired. 
30. Apparently, the above version of Guddi(PW-4) is full of 
falsities and embellishments. Guddi(PW-4) claimed that she and 
her husband had visited the matrimonial home of the victim while 
she was still lying there in a burnt condition.  On the contrary, the 
statement of Dr. M.S. Sandhu, Medical Officer(PW-1) would clearly 
establish that the victim had already been brought to the Civil 
Hospital, Kotakpura by accused Randhir Singh(A1) and Baldev 
Singh(A2) at 7:30 am.  We feel that if at all Guddi(PW-4) and her 
husband had seen the victim lying abandoned at her matrimonial 
home in a burnt condition, the first reaction and natural conduct 
of these persons would have been to provide medical aid to the 
victim by taking her to the hospital. However, Guddi(PW-4) and her 

26 
 
husband neither made any effort to take the victim to a hospital 
nor did they call upon anyone to provide any first aid to the victim. 
They also didn’t inform the police about the incident. Instead, both 
chose to travel to the village Ajit Gill to inform the brothers about 
the said incident which almost consumed three hours of valuable 
time.  Apparently thus, the evidence of Guddi(PW-4) to the extent, 
she claimed to have seen the victim in a burnt condition at her 
matrimonial home is false and cooked up. 
31. Thana Singh(PW-5) being the brother of the Smt. Kuldeep 
Kaur(victim) stated that after the marriage of his sister to Randhir 
Singh(A1), all the accused persons started misbehaving with her 
casting aspersions on her character.  She tolerated the said ill 
behaviour for some time but later, made complaints to them.  
Thereupon, a panchayat meeting was convened wherein, the 
accused agreed that they would not quarrel with the victim, but 
soon thereafter, they re-indulged in the harassment and 
misbehaviour towards the victim.  He came to know from his sister, 
Guddi(PW-4) that Smt. Kuldeep Kaur(deceased) had been set on 
fire by the accused. On receiving this information, he along with 
other relatives went to the GGSMC Hospital where his sister, Smt. 
Kuldeep Kaur was lying on the bed in a burnt condition.  This 

27 
 
version of Thana Singh is in total contrast to the evidence of 
Guddi(PW-4). PW-5 also stated that Smt. Kuldeep Kaur(deceased) 
made an oral dying declaration in presence of all the relatives. PW-
5 also made an amelioration that his sister(deceased) also told him 
that Babu Singh(A5) was standing nearby her with dang in his 
hand during the alleged incident of crime. 
32. In cross-examination, PW-5 admitted that Baldev Singh(A2) 
had been residing separately from his father and brother for the 
last 6 to 7 years and was having separate residence and kitchen.  
Karamjit Kaur(A4), wife of accused Baldev Singh(A2) is resident of 
village Kaleke.  He, however, denied the suggestion that Baldev 
Singh(A2) and Karamjit Kaur(A4) were residing at village Kaleke 
with Balwinder Kaur(mother of Karamjit Kaur).  PW-5 feigned 
ignorance to the question as to whether his sister was got admitted 
in the GGSMC Hospital for treatment by her husband Randhir 
Singh(A1). 
33. Mohinder Singh(PW-6), resident of Village, Ajit Gill stated 
that a panchayat was convened in connection with the 
maltreatment meted out to Smt. Kuldeep Kaur(victim) by her 
husband, Randhir Singh(A1), father-in-law, Babu Singh(A5) and 
mother-in-law, Surjit Singh @ Seeto(A3).  In the Panchayat, an 

28 
 
issue was raised about Smt. Kuldeep Kaur(victim) being denied 
permission to live in the matrimonial home by her in-laws.  The 
panchayat convinced Randhir Singh(A1), his father Babu 
Singh(A5) and mother Seeto(A3) to take back Smt. Kuldeep 
Kaur(victim) with them to the matrimonial home.  The witness(PW-
6) also claimed that he too went to the GGSMC Hospital, Faridkot 
where Smt. Kuldeep Kaur(victim) was admitted in a burnt 
condition.  He also deposed regarding the so-called oral dying 
declaration made by the victim.  He, however, denied that the 
police had recorded her statement.  
34. A very consequential fact can be culled out from the evidence 
of PW-4, PW-5 and PW-6 that none of them stated about any dying 
declaration of the deceased having been recorded by either Surjit 
Singh, ASI(PW-11) or Ramesh Kumar Jain, Naib Tehsildar(PW-7) 
acting as Executive Magistrate after taking the fitness certificate 
from the duty doctor. These grave contradictions, creates a doubt 
on the very presence of these witnesses at the GGSMC Hospital 
until the time, the two dying declarations were recorded. However, 
we shall delve into this aspect of the case in the later part of the 
discussion. 

29 
 
35. Ramesh Kumar Jain, Naib Tehsildar(PW-7) acting as 
Executive Magistrate recorded the statement(Exhibit-PJ) which 
has already been reproduced supra.                                                                        
36. 
Dr. Manjit Singh, SMO(PW-9) testified regarding the issuance 
of the fitness certificates verifying the condition of the victim to 
make a statement.  He also made an endorsement on the 
statement(Exhibit-PJ) recorded by Ramesh Kumar Jain, Naib 
Tehsildar(PW-7). However, no such endorsement was made on the 
dying declaration(Exhibit-PM) recorded by Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-
11). 
37. Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-11) claimed to have recorded the dying 
declaration of the victim(Exhibit-PM) after taking a fitness 
certificate from the duty doctor.  However, this dying declaration 
does not bear any certification/endorsement of the doctor.  PW-11 
stated in his cross-examination that the certificate of fitness was 
issued by the doctor at 12:50 pm.  Thereafter, he proceeded to the 
office of SDM, Faridkot at 1:35 pm. However, he did not tell 
Ramesh Kumar Jain, Naib Tehsildar(PW-7) that he had already 
recorded the statement of the victim.  PW-11 stated that he came 
back to the hospital with Ramesh Kumar Jain, Naib Tehsildar(PW-
7) at 1:55 pm whereafter Naib Tehsildar recorded the statement of 

30 
 
the victim.  A pertinent suggestion was given to the witness(PW-
11) by the defence that there were certain infirmities in the 
statement(Exhibit-PJ) recorded by Ramesh Kumar Jain, Naib 
Tehsildar(PW-7) acting as Executive Magistrate and that is why, he 
later concocted and fabricated the dying declaration(Exhibit-PM) 
of the victim and antetimed the same.   
38. Ran Singh(DW-1) stated that Navjot Kaur, daughter of 
accused Baldev Singh(A2) was a student of Government Primary 
School, Kaleke, District Moga from 1st to 4th standard and she 
continued to study there.  Similar statements were given by 
Manminder Kaur(DW-2) and Balwinder Singh(DW-3) about the 
daughters(Navjot Kaur and Prabhjot Kaur) of Baldev Singh(A2).  All 
these witnesses proved factum of education of the daughters of 
Baldev Singh(A2) at the Government Primary School, Kaleke based 
on the Government record. 
39. From an overall appreciation of the evidence available on 
record, the following indisputable conclusions can be culled out: - 
(i) 
That there is no allegation whatsoever of the prosecution 
witnesses that the deceased was harassed or humiliated in 
the matrimonial home on account of any demand of dowry, 
etc. 

31 
 
(ii) 
The 
prosecution 
witnesses 
have 
given 
divergent 
statements regarding the cause of harassment meted out 
to the deceased.  Guddi(PW-4) and Thana Singh(PW-5) 
alleged that the deceased was being harassed because 
Randhir Singh(A1) was carrying an illicit affair with his 
sister-in-law Karamjit Kaur(A4). To the contrary, Mohinder 
Singh(PW-6) stated that a panchayat was convened for the 
reason that the deceased was being denied entry into her 
matrimonial home by the in-laws.  Thus, clearly before the 
panchayat, no such grievance was raised that the 
harassment of the deceased was on the account of the 
illicit affair of her husband(A1) and sister-in-law(A4). If at 
all, the cause of this strife was the so-called illicit relation 
between the accused Randhir Singh(A1) and Smt. Karamjit 
Kaur(A4), there could not have been any possibility that 
the accused Baldev Singh(A2) would have supported 
Randhir 
Singh(A1) 
because 
that 
would 
directly 
tantamount to his approving illicit relations between his 
wife and his brother.  Thus, the prosecution story is totally 
unnatural and unbelievable. 

32 
 
(iii) Guddi(PW-4), 
Thana 
Singh(PW-5) 
and 
Mohinder 
Singh(PW-6) claimed to be present besides the victim from 
about 11:00 am till the time of her death which occurred 
on 27th August, 1998.  However, they did not utter a word 
that any dying declaration of the victim was recorded 
either by Surjit Singh, ASI(PW-11) or by Ramesh Kumar 
Jain, Naib Tehsildar(PW-7). They also intentionally 
concealed the fact that the victim was brought to the 
hospital by Randhir Singh(A1) and Baldev Singh(A2). All 
these witnesses are close family members of the deceased 
and thus, their evidence must be viewed with a greater 
degree of circumspection. They apparently gave a false 
narrative on material aspects of the case. Their evidence is 
definitely of dubitable character apart from being partisan 
in nature. 
(iv) 
That none of the doctors examined by the prosecution 
stated that they sensed the smell of kerosene from the 
body of the victim after she had been admitted in the 
hospital.  This fact assumes significance when we consider 
the admission as appearing in the evidence of Dr. Sarabjit 
Singh Sandhu(PW-3) who stated that no burn injuries 

33 
 
were noticed on the head and shoulders of the deceased. 
Thus, there are well-founded reasons for this Court to hold 
that the allegation of the prosecution that kerosene oil was 
poured on the body of the victim and then she was set on 
fire is neither established nor corroborated by any 
independent or reliable piece of evidence. 
40. In view of the admission as appearing in the evidence of 
Thana Singh(PW-5) read with the evidence of Ran Singh(DW-1), 
Manminder Kaur(DW-2) and Balwinder Singh(DW-3), it is clear 
that Baldev Singh(A2) and Karamjit Kaur(A4) were residing at the 
village Kaleke where their daughters were also studying.  
Therefore, the presence of Baldev Singh(A2) and Karamjit Kaur(A4) 
in the house at the village Panj Grain Kalan where the incident 
took place is absolutely unbelievable, more so when the incident 
took place at around 4:00 to 5:00 am.  The prosecution has not 
come out with any concrete motive which could have incited the 
accused to put the victim on fire. 
41. The deceased while making the statement(Exhibit-PJ) stated 
that she was trying to prepare tea when people of her house set 
her on fire.  She also stated that after she had caught fire, she 
raised an alarm whereafter people of her house and neighbours 

34 
 
extinguished the fire. Her husband brought her to the hospital and 
got her admitted.   
42. The above dying declaration is also corroborated on some 
aspects by the statement of Kewal Singh(DW-5) who deposed on 
oath that he heard the cries coming from the house of the deceased 
and upon reaching there, he saw Randhir Singh(A1) extinguishing 
the fire of his wife.  The witness(DW-5) also mentioned that the 
victim spoke out that she had caught fire suddenly and nobody 
had set her ablaze.  Thus, the probability of the victim having 
caught accidental fire while preparing tea is higher rather than the 
theory set up by prosecution witnesses that it is a case of 
intentional immolation. 
43. The dying declaration(Exhibit-PM) recorded by Surjit Singh, 
ASI(PW-11) is apparently a post-investigation document and 
seems to have been prepared under the influence of Thana 
Singh(PW-5), brother of the deceased who was also employed in 
the police department. 
44. There is no corroborative evidence to persuade the Court to 
hold that any such dying declaration was actually recorded.  As 
per the dying declaration(Exhibit-PJ) recorded by the Ramesh 
Kumar Jain, Naib Tehsildar(PW-7) apparently the victim did not 

35 
 
take the name of any particular accused holding him/her 
responsible for the incident. 
45. In this background, the conviction of the accused was rightly 
interfered by the High Court while accepting the appeals against 
conviction.  The impugned order dated 17th July, 2014 rendered 
by the Division Bench of the High Court is based on an apropos 
appreciation of evidence available on record and hence, does not 
warrant any interference in these appeals against acquittal 
preferred by the State of Punjab. 
46. Consequently, the appeals fail and are dismissed. 
47. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ARAVIND KUMAR) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
July 09, 2024