2024 INSC 44
 Reportable
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1933 OF 2023
The State of Assam and others
 
 
…  Appellants
Versus
Binod Kumar and others
 
… Respondents
J U D G M E N T
SANJAY KUMAR, J
1.
By judgment dated 05.12.2017, the Gauhati High Court allowed
W.P(C). No.4752 of 2015 and held Rule 63(iii) of the Assam Police Manual
invalid on the ground that it is in direct conflict with Section 14(2) of the
Assam Police Act, 2007. This judgment is called in question by the State of
Assam and its officials in the Home Department.
2.
While ordering notice on 07.01.2019, this Court directed that no
coercive steps should be taken against the appellants on the basis of the
impugned judgment. On 21.03.2023, this Court issued notice to the learned
Attorney General for India, being of the opinion that his presence was
necessary for effective adjudication of this appeal. 
1
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2024.01.18
16:54:24 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

3.
The core controversy in this case is as to who should be the
‘Reporting Authority’ to initiate Annual Confidential Reports (ACRs)/Annual
Performance Appraisal Reports (APARs) of Indian Police Service (IPS)
Officers working as District Superintendents of Police (SPs) in the State of
Assam. More particularly, the issue is whether Rule 63(iii) of the Assam
Police  Manual  (for  brevity,  ‘the  Manual’),  which  prescribes  that  such
assessment should be initiated by the Deputy Commissioner concerned, as
the ‘Reporting Authority’, is lawful. The specific ground successfully urged
before the High Court by the respondents herein, viz., IPS Officers working
as SPs in the State of Assam, is that this Rule is violative of Section 14(2)
of the Assam Police Act, 2007, (for brevity, ‘the Act of 2007’). 
4.
It would be apposite at this stage to note the tone and tenor of the
relevant statutory provisions. Rule 63(iii) of the Manual, in the context of
initiation of the ACR/APAR of a SP of a district, reads as follows:
‘(iii)
Superintendent of Police - the report should be initiated by
Deputy Commissioner, reviewed by the Deputy Inspector General
of Police i/c Range and sent to the Commissioner of Division. The
Commissioner of Division will send the same with his opinion to
the Inspector General of Police for acceptance.
           The Inspector General of Police shall refer the report to the
Deputy  Inspector  General  of  Police,  S.B.,  for  recording  his
remarks regarding performance of the Superintendent of Police of
the District in subjects pertaining to the S.B.’
2

     Section 14 of the Act of 2007 reads thus:
‘14.
Relationship  of  Superintendent  of  Police  with  District
Magistrates -
 (1) The  administration  of  the  Police  throughout  the  local
jurisdiction of the Magistrate is vested in the Superintendent of
Police under the general control and direction of the Deputy
Commissioner as District Magistrate. The latter is responsible
for keeping  peace  and  maintenance  of  law  and  order  in  a
district and may employ the police as he thinks best for the
purpose.
(2) The Deputy Commissioner as District (sic.) Magistrate has
however, no authority to interfere in the internal organization
and discipline of the Police force, but it is his duty to bring to the
notice of the Superintendent of Police, all cases in which the
conduct of and qualification of Police Officer affect the general
administration of a district.’
5.
As  IPS  Officers  belong  to  an  ‘All  India  Service’,  it  would  be
pertinent to note the provisions of the All India Services (Confidential Rolls)
Rules, 1970 (for brevity, ‘the 1970 Rules’), which were thereafter replaced
by the All India Services (Performance Appraisal Report) Rules, 2007 (for
brevity,  ‘the  2007  Rules’),  in  the  context  of  the  mode  and  method  of
preparation of ACRs/APARs of IPS Officers in the rank of SPs. Rules 2(e),
2(f) and 2(a) of the 1970 Rules defined ‘Reporting Authority’, ‘Reviewing
Authority’ and ‘Accepting Authority’ respectively, apropos preparation of
ACRs/APARs. These Rules read as under: -
3

‘2(e) ‘reporting authority’ means the authority who was, during
the period for which the confidential report is written, immediately
superior to the member of the service and such other authority as
may be specifically empowered in this behalf by the Government;
2(f) 
‘reviewing  authority’  means  authority  or  authorities
supervising the performance of the reporting authority as may be
specifically empowered in this behalf by the Government;
2(a)
‘accepting  authority’ means  such  authority  or  authorities
supervising the performance of the reviewing authority as may be
specifically empowered in this behalf by the Government.’
 Rule  2(e)  above  was  thereafter  amended,  vide  Notification  No.
22012/4/87-AIS-III dated 08.12.1987, and from that date it read thus: -
‘2(e)
‘reporting  authority’  means  such  authority  or  authorities
supervising  the  performance  of  the  member  of  the  Service
reported upon as may be specifically empowered in this behalf by
the Government.’
6.
The 1970 Rules continued to govern the field till the advent of the
2007 Rules. Rules 2(j), 2(k) and 2(a) of the 2007 Rules define ‘Reporting
Authority’,  ‘Reviewing  Authority’  and  ‘Accepting  Authority’  respectively.
These Rules read as under: -
‘2(j)
‘reporting  authority’  means  such  authority  or  authorities
supervising  the  performance  of  the  member  of  the  Service
reported upon as may be specifically empowered in this behalf by
the Government.
 2(k)
‘reviewing  authority’ means  such  authority  or  authorities
supervising the performance of the reporting authority as may be
specifically empowered in this behalf by the Government.
4

 2(a)
‘accepting authority’ means the authority which supervises
the performance of the reviewing authority as may be specifically
empowered in this behalf by the Government.’
7.
Hitherto,  the  Police  Act,  1861,  was applicable  in  the  State  of
Assam and the Assam Police Manual originated from it. However, upon the
Act of 2007 being brought into force, the Police Act, 1861, was repealed in
so far as its application to the State of Assam was concerned. The question
presently is whether Rule 63(iii) of the Manual, which dates back to a point
of time when the Police Act, 1861, was in force, can be said to be still valid
and lawful in the framework of the Act of 2007 and the 2007 Rules relating
to preparation of ACRs/APARs of IPS Officers in the rank of SPs.
8.
As per Rule 63(iii) of the Manual, the ACR/APAR of a SP should
be initiated by the Deputy Commissioner concerned and the same would
be reviewed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police in charge of the
Range  and  then  sent  to  the  Commissioner  of  the  Division.  The
Commissioner would then send the same with his opinion to the Inspector
General of Police for acceptance who, in turn, would refer the report to the
Deputy Inspector General of Police (Special Branch) for his remarks on the
SP’s performance in subjects pertaining to that Branch.
9.
It is the contention of the appellants that a government servant has
no right, much less a legal right, to insist that his/her ACR/APAR ought to
5

be initiated by a particular ‘Reporting Authority’. It is argued that there is no
inconsistency in Rule 63(iii) when compared with the scheme of the Act of
2007 and the 1970 Rules/2007 Rules. Reliance is placed upon the 2007
Rules and the 1987 amendment of Rule 2(e) of the 1970 Rules, to contend
that it is not necessary that a ‘Reporting Authority’ should be the immediate
superior of the member of the service whose ACR/APAR is being prepared
and it is sufficient if the authority supervises his/her performance. It is
contended that, as Section 14(1) of the Act of 2007 vests the Deputy
Commissioner/District Magistrate (hereinafter referred to as, ‘the Deputy
Commissioner) with control over the functioning of the SP of that district,
the Deputy Commissioner would be the most suitable person to report
upon the performance of that SP. The appellants would point out that the
SP works under the control and direction of the Deputy Commissioner, who
has the overall responsibility of keeping peace and maintaining law and
order in the district and who is empowered to employ the police force within
the district as he/she thinks best for that purpose. 
10.
On the other hand, the respondents would point out that Section
14(2) of the Act of 2007 makes it clear that the Deputy Commissioner
cannot interfere with the internal organization or discipline within the police
force in the district and can only inform the SP if the conduct and/or
6

qualification of a police officer affects the general administration of the
district. They contend that the archaic Rule 63(iii) of the Manual is not
compatible with the scheme obtaining under the Act of 2007 and the 2007
Rules and that the Gauhati High Court was well justified in holding to that
effect and invalidating it.
11.
At  the  outset,  we  may  note  that  the  system  of  governance
obtaining under the Police Act, 1861, was altogether different from what it is
now. At that time, the Deputy Commissioner exercised far wider powers,
being the head of the criminal and police administration in the district. In
such circumstances, it was proper that he/she should be vested with the
power of assessing the performance of the SP of that district. Rule 63 of
the Manual also makes this clear as it speaks of the recording officers
being fully conversant with the quality of the work of the ‘officers working
under them’ and goes on to say that the intention is that the work of an
officer should be known to all his ‘superiors’ along the line. The hierarchical
superiority of  the  Deputy Commissioner  over  the  SP in  that  setup  is,
therefore, clear. 
12.
However, after the separation of powers in terms of the regime
now prevailing, the Deputy Commissioner is no longer the head of criminal
and police administration in the district. Presently, Section 14(1) of the Act
7

of 2007 provides that the administration of the police within the district
vests in the SP of that district and Section 14(2) of the Act of 2007 makes it
clear that the Deputy Commissioner would not have the power to interfere
with the internal organization of the police in the district or with discipline
within the police force. Notably, Rule 25(c) of the Manual empowered the
Deputy Commissioner to order an enquiry in case of misconduct by a
police officer, in direct variance with Section 14(2) of the Act of 2007 which
unequivocally divests the Deputy Commissioner of such disciplinary power.
This distinction, which was brought about in the administration of the police,
must necessarily be kept in mind while considering the validity of the
procedure prescribed under Rule 63(iii) of the Manual. As pointed out by
Sir Rupert Cross  in his ‘Statutory Interpretation (3rd Edition, 1995), a
statutory provision has to be considered first and foremost as a norm of the
current legal system whence it takes force, as it has a legal existence
independent of the historical contingencies of its promulgation and should
be interpreted in the light of its place within the system of legal norms
currently in force. These observations were quoted with approval by this
Court in Dharani Sugars and Chemicals Limited vs. Union of India and
others1.
1
 
(2019) 5 SCC 480
8

13.
That apart, one must also keep in mind that IPS Officers, being
members of an All India Service, would be amenable to the 2007 Rules.
Section 65 of the Act of 2007 makes it clear that police personnel in the
State of Assam shall be governed by the existing Discipline and Appeal
Rules and other Service Conduct Rules in force, as applicable to the Indian
Police Service, State Police Service and others serving in the State Police
Establishment. Therefore, merely because they are deployed/deputed to
work in the State of Assam, IPS Officers cannot be denied the benefit of the
2007 Rules which would be applicable across the board to their ilk serving
all over the country. It would, therefore, be incorrect to castigate such IPS
Officers as insisting upon a ‘Reporting Authority’ of their choice. They are
merely seeking parity with their kind working in other parts of the country. It
is in this context that the extant 2007 Rules would have a direct impact on
the issue under consideration. 
14.
The sheet anchor of the appellants’ case is the that the definition
of “Reporting Authority’ in the 1970 Rules, post the 1987 amendment, and
in the 2007  Rules does not  require  such  authority to  be  ‘immediately
superior’ to the officer being reported upon. Further, it is argued that,
thereunder,  the  Government  has  been  vested  with  the  discretion  of
empowering any of the supervising authorities as the ‘Reporting Authority’
9

and the same would fall in the realm of policy-making. Trite to state, such
discretion  must  be  exercised  judiciously  and  the  resultant  policy  must
necessarily fall within the four corners of the statutory scheme. The further
argument that, as the designated reviewing and accepting authorities are
senior officers in the police hierarchy, it would not make a difference if the
‘Reporting Authority’ is not from that department, needs mention only to be
rejected. Each cog in the assessment process has its own role to play and
this is clearly spelt out by Rule 63 of the Manual itself, which stipulates that
inability or failure to report properly and objectively would be construed as a
failure of the recording/reviewing officer and commented upon as such by
the next level. On the same lines, Instruction 5 of the Instructions appended
to Form I in the 1970 Rules, titled ‘Confidential Report for Indian Police
Service Officers’, stipulates that if the ‘Reviewing Authority’ finds that the
‘Reporting Authority’ made the report without due care and attention, he
shall record a remark to that effect and the same shall be entered in his
Confidential Roll.
15.
Significantly, though a ‘Reporting Authority’, as defined, is required
to be someone who supervises the performance of the officer reported
upon and not necessarily his/her immediate superior, there was no change
in the definition of ‘Reviewing Authority’. Be it noted that the 1970 Rules
10

and the 2007 Rules both define ‘Reviewing Authority’ to mean the authority
or authorities supervising the performance of the ‘Reporting Authority’, as
may be specifically empowered in this behalf by the Government. It is in the
backdrop of this definition of ‘Reviewing Authority’, that Rule 63(iii) of the
Manual needs to be examined. Notably, a Deputy Commissioner, being the
‘Reporting Authority’ thereunder, would be altogether independent of the
police department, being either an IAS Officer or a State Civil Service
Officer. Needles to state, performance of a Deputy Commissioner would
not be assessed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, the designated
‘Reviewing Authority’ under Rule 63(iii), but by his/her own superior in the
Administrative Service. There is, thus, a clear departure from the 1970
Rules/2007 Rules. 
16.
The  definition  of  ‘Reporting  Authority’ in  the  1970  Rules,  post
1987, and in the 2007 Rules, did away with the mandate of having the
‘immediate superior’ of the officer reported upon undertaking that exercise
but it still requires the ‘Reporting Authority’ to be someone who supervises
the performance of the said officer. Ordinarily, such supervision would be
by an officer from within the same department, who is higher in rank than
the officer reported upon. The Government was, no doubt, given discretion
to empower any of the authorities who supervise the performance of the
11

officer reported upon to assume such role. This discretion, however, cannot
be construed to mean that someone from outside the department can be
given such power, in the light of the ‘Reviewing Authority’ being defined as
someone who supervises the performance of such ‘Reporting Authority’.
This clearly implies that both authorities must belong to the same service or
department. In effect, Rule 63(iii) of the Manual does not fit in with the
scheme obtaining under the 1970 Rules and the 2007 Rules. 
17.
The learned Attorney General would suggest that this definition be
given a restricted meaning to the effect that the ‘Reviewing Authority’, i.e.,
the Deputy Inspector General of Police, would supervise the performance
of the ‘Reporting Authority’, viz., the Deputy Commissioner, only to the
extent of how he/she assessed the performance of the SP and no more.
However, we are of the opinion that such a construction does not flow from
the plain language of the definition and would require something more to be
read into it than was intended. Reference may be made to Kanai Lal Sur
vs. Paramnidhi Sadhukhan2, wherein this Court observed that the words
used in a statute must be interpreted in their plain grammatical meaning
and it is only when they are capable of two constructions that the question
of giving effect to the policy or object of the legislation can legitimately
arise. 
2 
AIR 1957 SC 907
12

18.
Further, reading down the meaning of the definition would have
unintended  consequences,  fully  divorced  from  the  unambiguous words
used therein, whereby ‘Reviewing Authority’ is defined to mean that such
an authority must be one who supervises the performance of the ‘Reporting
Authority’ in all respects and not in relation to one function alone. 
19.
Pertinently, there is no discernible conflict or contradiction between
the definitions of ‘Reporting Authority’ and ‘Reviewing Authority’ in the 1970
Rules,  post  1987,  and  in  the  2007  Rules.  The  clear  import  of  these
definitions is that such authorities must be from within the same service or
department. Invocation of the doctrine of harmonious construction vis-à-vis
these definitions, therefore, does not arise. Given the clear intent of the
1970  Rules/2007  Rules  that  the  reporting,  reviewing  and  accepting
authorities should be from within the same service or department, the
question is whether breach of such requirement can be permitted in the
State of Assam under Rule 63(iii) of the Manual. 
20.
In this milieu, Section 14(2) of the Act of 2007 assumes relevance.
Section 14(1) of the Act of 2007 states that administration of the police
within the local jurisdiction of the Deputy Commissioner is vested in the SP,
under the general control and direction of such Deputy Commissioner, but
Section  14(2)  makes  it  clear  that  the  Deputy  Commissioner  has  no
13

authority to interfere with the internal organization and discipline of the
police force. This sub-section further states that it would be within the
power and duty of the Deputy Commissioner to bring to the notice of the
SP all such cases in which the conduct of and/or qualification of a police
officer affects the general administration within the district and no more. On
a plain reading, Section 14(1) and Section 14(2) of the Act of 2007 appear
to be in derogation of each other, inasmuch as Section 14(1) vests the
Deputy Commissioner with control over the SP but Section 14(2) makes it
clear that such control would not extend to the Deputy Commissioner
interfering with the internal organization or discipline within the police force
in  the  district.  These  provisions  must  be  harmoniously  construed  by
restricting the power vesting in the Deputy Commissioner under Section
14(1), by duly carving out what has been excepted under Section 14(2).
Such harmonious construction would be necessary to give effect to both
provisions, so that they operate without conflict and a head-on collision
(See S. Gopal Reddy vs. State of A.P.3 and Sultana Begum vs. Prem
Chand Jain4).
21.
We may note that even as per the Manual, a SP is not made
subservient  to  a  Deputy  Commissioner.  Rule  25  of  the  Manual
3
(1996) 4 SCC 596
4
(1997) 1 SCC 373
14

demonstrates this. It provides that though the SP is required to obey the
instructions of the Deputy Commissioner in the first instance, the SP can
thereafter  request  the Deputy Commissioner  to refer any difference of
opinion between them on any question relating to police administration to
the Commissioner, who would decide such reference. Moreover, the SP is
at liberty to submit his case to the Inspector General of Police if he is
dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner. It is, thus, clear that a
SP is required to work under the ‘general control and direction’ of a Deputy
Commissioner and obey his/her instructions but that does not place the SP
under the hierarchical supremacy of that Deputy Commissioner. 
22.
Further, when liberty has been given to the SP to disagree with the
Deputy Commissioner on any point relating to police administration and
seek resolution of such difference of opinion through the Commissioner
and, thereafter, the Inspector General of Police, it would be a parody to
subject the performance assessment of such a SP to the same Deputy
Commissioner  with  whom  he/she  had  disagreed.  Such  an  ACR/APAR
cannot be taken to be impartial and objective, once it is preceded by a
difference  of  opinion  between  the  SP  and  the  Deputy  Commissioner,
leading to a reference being made to higher authorities. Such a situation
must necessarily be avoided to maintain the sanctity of the assessment
15

process. This constitutes one more reason why the Deputy Commissioner
should not be the ‘Reporting Authority’ of the SP of that district. 
23.
Significantly,  Circular  No.  11059/4/89-AIS.III,  dated  28.12.1990,
issued by the Government of India in exercise of power under Rules 3 and
10A of the 1970 Rules, stipulated that the ‘Reporting Authority’ should be in
a higher grade of pay than the officer reported upon. The Government
noted that there were instances where the ACRs of the members of All
India Services were initiated by officers belonging to the same batch or
drawing the same pay scale as the officer reported upon and instructed that
the State Governments must ensure that a member of the service does not
initiate the Confidential Report of another member of the service in the
same grade of pay. It is, therefore, clear that the ‘Reporting Authority’ must
necessarily be in a higher grade of pay than the officer who is being
reported upon. It may be noticed that Rule 11 of the 2007 Rules empowers
the Central Government to issue instructions with regard to the writing of
the Performance Appraisal Report. However, no new instruction or circular
has been issued in exercise of power thereunder, contrary to the earlier
Circular dated 28.12.1990.  However, instances have been cited by the
respondents where ACRs/APARs of the SPs in the State of Assam were
initiated by Deputy Commissioners who were not in a higher grade of pay. 
16

24.
In this regard, we may also note that, in State Bank of India and
others vs. Kashinath Kher and others5, this Court held that officers
reporting upon  performance  must  show  objectivity,  impartiality  and  fair
assessment, without any prejudices whatsoever, and the highest sense of
responsibility so as to inculcate devotion to duty, honesty and integrity. It
was further observed that as officers may get demoralized by negative
ACRs, which would be deleterious to the efficacy and efficiency of public
service, such ACRs should be written by a superior officer of high rank.
Earlier, in State of Haryana vs. P.C.Wadhwa, IPS, Inspector General of
Police and another6, this Court considered whether the State Government
could empower any authority to be the ‘Reporting Authority’ of the Inspector
General of Police under Rule 2(e) of the 1970 Rules. It was observed that,
from the point of view of propriety and reasonableness and having regard
to the intention behind the Rule, which is manifest, such an authority must
be one superior in rank to the member of the service concerned. No doubt,
these observations were made in the context of the unamended Rule 2(e)
of the 1970 Rules, but the principle culled out is sound and still holds good. 
25.
The appellants would argue that the Deputy Commissioner is the
most suitable person to assess the performance of the SP, as he works
5
(1996) 8 SCC 762
6
 
(1987) 2 SCC 602
17

under  his control  and  direction,  but  we  are  not  impressed.  Form  I  in
Appendix II to the 2007 Rules pertains to performance appraisal of all IPS
Officers upto the level of Inspector General of Police, which would include
SPs. Clause 6 in Rule 3 thereof, relating to appraisal by the ‘Reporting
Authority’, provides various domain assignments wherefrom the ‘Reporting
Authority’ is required to select any four. ‘Law and Order’ is only one of the
twenty  named  domains,  which  would  come  within  the  purview  of  the
Deputy Commissioner and the remaining nineteen would not be within
his/her purview and supervision. Seized of only one of the twenty domains,
the Deputy Commissioner would not even be competent to assess the
overall performance of the SP. 
26.
On the above analysis and given the fact that the 1970 Rules/2007
Rules define reporting, reviewing and accepting authorities to mean that
they must all be from the same service or department, intervention by the
Deputy Commissioner during the exercise of performance assessment of
SPs of the districts in the State of Assam, by virtue of Rule 63(iii) of the
Manual, cannot be countenanced, being in direct conflict therewith, and
would tantamount to permitting the Deputy Commissioner to interfere with
the internal organization of the police force, which would be contrary to the
mandate of Section 14(2) of the Act of 2007.  
18

27.
 
We, therefore, find no grounds to disagree with the conclusion
arrived at by the Gauhati High Court, holding to that effect. 
   
The appeal is, therefore, devoid of merit and is accordingly
dismissed. 
Applications  for  permission  to  file  additional  documents  are
allowed. Other pending applications, if any, shall stand closed.
Before  parting  with  the  case,  we  place  on  record  our
appreciation  and  gratitude  to  Mr.  R.  Venkataramani,  learned  Attorney
General, for his erudite and able assistance.     
Parties shall bear their own costs.
                                                    
………………………..,J
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE)
………………………..,J
(SANJAY KUMAR)
January 18, 2024.
New Delhi.
19