2024 INSC 490
1 
 
                                                                         REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 2038 OF 2017 
 
VINOD JASWANTRAY VYAS(DEAD)            
 
       
THROUGH LRs 
 
 
 
 
     ..…APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
THE STATE OF GUJARAT 
 
             ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
 
1. 
The instant appeal is directed against the judgment dated 
13th February, 2017 passed by the Division Bench of the High 
Court of Gujarat in Criminal Appeal No. 210 of 1997, whereby, the 
Division Bench partly accepted the appeal preferred by the 
accused appellant Vinod Jaswantray Vyas and altered his 
conviction as recorded by the trial Court for the offence punishable 
under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860(hereinafter 
being referred to as ‘IPC’) to one under Section 304 Part I IPC and 
sentenced him to undergo eight years rigorous imprisonment and 
Digitally signed by
geeta ahuja
Date: 2024.07.09
16:18:09 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
further directed that he shall pay a compensation of Rs. 50,000/- 
to the heirs of the deceased.  
2. 
Learned 
Additional 
City 
Sessions 
Judge, 
Ahmedabad(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘trial Court’) tried 
the accused appellant Vinod Jaswantray Vyas(Original accused 
No.1)(hereinafter being referred to as ‘A1’) and his co-accused 
Chinubhai Govindbhai Patel(Original accused No.2)(hereinafter 
being referred to as ‘A2’) for the offences punishable under Section 
302 read with Section 114 IPC and vide judgment dated 4th March, 
1997, the learned trial Court proceeded to convict both the 
accused for the above offences and sentenced them to 
imprisonment for life and fine of Rs. 25,000/- each, in default, to 
undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of two years. 
3. 
A1 and A2 preferred separate appeals before the Gujarat High 
Court being Criminal Appeal Nos. 210 of 1997 and 226 of 1997 
respectively, to challenge the judgment dated 4th March, 1997 
passed by the learned trial Court. A2 expired during the pendency 
of the appeal before the High Court. However, being a Government 
servant, the question of his conviction had a direct bearing on his 
death-cum-retiral benefits and thus, his legal heirs applied for and 
were granted permission to prosecute the appeal further. Both 

3 
 
appeals were decided by a learned Division Bench of the Gujarat 
High Court vide common judgment dated 13th February, 2017 and 
the learned Division Bench proceeded to affirm the findings of the 
learned trial Court holding that A1 and A2 had subjected 
Jeeva(deceased) to physical violence in police custody and thereby, 
the findings of guilt were affirmed. However, the offence was toned 
down from Section 302 IPC to offence under Section 304 Part I IPC 
and the sentence was modified as above.   
4. 
Only A1 approached this Court to challenge the impugned 
judgments whereas, the legal heirs of the co-accused, A2 have not 
challenged his conviction. Leave was granted by this Court on 27th 
November, 2017.  
5. 
During the pendency of the appeal, the sentence awarded to 
the accused appellant(A1) was suspended vide order dated 6th 
June, 2017 and he was directed to be released on bail. However, 
A1 also passed away during pendency of the instant appeal and 
accordingly, by an order dated 12th August, 2022 his legal heirs 
were taken on record and were allowed to continue the appeal by 
virtue of provisions contained in Section 394 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being referred to as ‘CrPC’), 
so as to seek service benefits of the original appellant Vinod 

4 
 
Jaswantray Vyas(since deceased) in the event of the acceptance of 
the appeal. 
Brief facts: - 
6. 
The accused appellant(A1) was posted as a Police Inspector 
at Amraiwadi Police Station, Ahmedabad. One Jeeva had appeared 
and surrendered at the said police station in the late hours of the 
night on 10th June, 1992 as he had been arraigned as an accused 
in C.R. No. 555 of 1992 registered at the said police station for the 
offences punishable under Sections 143, 147, 148, 149, 307, 323, 
324 and 427 IPC. He was also accompanied by the co-accused 
Anna Dorai.  
7. 
Jeeva had come to surrender at the police station along with 
his advocate Shri Patanwadia and his two sisters namely, Selvin 
Prabhakar(PW-1) 
and 
Dhanlakshmi 
Vaiyapuri(PW-2). 
The 
advocate Shri Patanwadia left after production of Jeeva at the 
police station, however, the two sisters remained behind.  
8. 
The original accused No.2(A2) was the Superintendent of 
Police at the relevant point of time who came to the police station 
sometime later. It is the case of prosecution that the two police 
officers i.e. A1 and A2, assaulted Jeeva with fists and sticks in the 

5 
 
confines of the police station at separate intervals causing multiple 
injuries all over his body due to which he became unconscious. He 
was then dragged and placed in the lockup room of the police 
station. Next evening i.e. on 11th June, 1992, Jeeva was produced 
before the jurisdictional Magistrate, who remanded him to judicial 
custody whereafter, he was taken to and lodged at the Sabarmati 
Central jail. Jeeva’s condition deteriorated in the prison and thus, 
he was rushed to the civil hospital in the early hours of 12th June, 
1992, where the doctors declared him dead.  
9. 
Selvin Prabhakar(PW-1), the sister of Jeeva(deceased), 
forwarded a telegram(Exhibit-14) to the DGP office, Ahmedabad 
regarding the custodial torture leading to her brother Jeeva’s 
death. However, no action was forthcoming upon this telegraphic 
complaint, whereupon she lodged a complaint(Exhibit-13) in the 
Court of the Magistrate concerned on 1st July, 1992. In the 
interregnum, a magisterial enquiry(inquest) had been undertaken. 
The dead body of Jeeva(deceased) was subjected to postmortem at 
the BJ Medical College, Ahmedabad by Dr. Nayan Kumar-Medical 
Jurist(PW-9). As per the postmortem report(Exhibit-50), following 
external injuries were observed on the body of Jeeva: - 

6 
 
“1) Abrasion on the doraam of right hand 1 x 1 cm in size which 
was red in colour.  
2) Abrasion on the posterior aspect of middle one-third of the 
right arm 1 x 1 cm in size red in colour. 
3) Two abrasions on the right shoulder each admeasuring 17 x 
1 cm in size and red in colour. 
4) Two bruises on the right scapular region each 6 x 4 cm in 
size on the back. 
5) Seven bruises on the back each varying in size but about 2 x 
4 cms to 4 x 1 cm. 
6) Abrasion on the left wrist 1 x 1 cm. 
7) Abrasion on the middle third of left forearm posterior aspect 
about 2 x 1 cm. 
8) Abrasion on the left shoulder 1 x 1 cm. 
9) Abrasion on the left side of ligome 1 x 1 cm. 
10) Bruise on the left lateral aspect of abdomen on mid-axillary 
line at 10th rib 6 x 4 cm in size. 
11) Bruise on the front of chest midline and 3rd rib 6 x 4 cm in 
size. 
12) Bruise on the left anterior axillary line 4 x 5 cms in size at 
nipple level. 
13) Bruise on the left side of knee 2 x 5 cm. 
14) Bruise on the left third 4 x 4 cm in size on thigh on front 
middle. 
Corresponding to such external injuries, following internal 
injuries were observed:- 
There was fracture of sternum under external wound No.11 
which was transverse in direction. There was fracture of 4th, 5th 
and 6th ribs under external injury No.12. Pleura on left side was 
cut. Left lung was ruptured under external injury No.12. There 
was about 600ml fluid and clotted blood in thorasic cavity. 
Paretareal cavity contained 1600 ml of clotted blood and fluid 
blood. Rupture of liver on the interior aspect of right lobe 3 x 4 
cm in size. There as rupture of spleen under external injury 
No.10. Rupture of 4 x 6 in size at diaphragmatic surface.” 
 
10. The 
complaint(Exhibit-13) 
submitted 
by 
Selvin 
Prabhakar(PW-1) was initially registered as Inquiry Case No. 84 of 

7 
 
1992. The learned Magistrate directed an inquiry under Sections 
200 and 202 CrPC. Cognizance was taken for the offence 
punishable under Section 302 IPC and the complaint came to be 
registered as Criminal Case No. 1920 of 1993.  Since the offence 
alleged was exclusively sessions triable, the case was committed to 
the Court of Additional City Sessions Judge, Ahmedabad, where 
the same was registered as Sessions Case No. 378 of 1993. 
Charges were framed by the trial Court against both the accused 
for the offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 
114 IPC. The accused abjured their guilt and claimed trial. The 
prosecution examined a total of 10 witnesses and exhibited 62 
documents in order to prove its case. In their statements under 
Section 313 CrPC, the accused denied the allegations appearing 
against them in the prosecution case and claimed to have been 
falsely implicated. 
11. The learned trial Court, after hearing the arguments 
advanced by the learned Additional Public Prosecutor and the 
learned defence counsel and upon appreciating the evidence 
available on record proceeded to convict A1 and A2 and sentenced 
them both as above vide judgment dated 4th March, 1997. The 
Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court in appeal, while affirming 

8 
 
the guilt of both the accused, toned down the offence from Section 
302 IPC to offence under Section 304 Part I IPC vide judgment 
dated 13th February, 2017 which is assailed in the present appeal 
by special leave. 
Submissions on behalf of the appellant: - 
12. Shri Harin P. Raval, learned senior counsel representing the 
accused appellant(A1), put forth the following submissions in 
order to assail the impugned judgments seeking acquittal for the 
accused appellant-Vinod Jaswantray Vyas(since deceased):- 
(i) 
That there is a delay of around 20 days in filing the 
formal complaint before the concerned Court of the 
Magistrate, since the alleged incident took place on 10th 
June, 1992 and the complaint came to be filed on 1st July, 
1992. 
(ii) That the accused appellant had neither any motive nor 
any reason to assault Jeeva(deceased). 
(iii) That Jeeva(deceased) and Anna Dorai(both accused in 
C.R. No. 555/92) had voluntarily surrendered at the 
Amraiwadi Police Station. However, the injuries were 
suffered only by Jeeva(deceased) which creates a doubt 
about the prosecution story, inasmuch as, it cannot be 

9 
 
believed that the police officers who were presumably 
intending to extract confessions from the accused would 
focus their attention only on one accused while totally 
sparing the other who was also arraigned in the same case. 
(iv)  That Jeeva(deceased) was presented in the concerned 
Court on 11th June, 1992, but he made no complaint 
whatsoever to the Magistrate that he had been maltreated or 
assaulted by the police officials at the police station. 
Jeeva(deceased) was having significant criminal antecedents 
and had been arraigned as an accused in multiple cases and 
had also been placed under preventive detention.  Therefore, 
he was fully aware about the nitty gritties of the legal system. 
Thus, the rank silence on part of the victim and his failure 
in raising a grievance before the remand Magistrate that he 
had been subjected to custodial torture at the police station 
despite having ample opportunity, creates a grave doubt on 
the truthfulness of the entire prosecution case. 
(v)  That Jeeva(deceased) had been taken and presented 
before the DCP Shri Surelia at the Karanj Bhavan, 
Ahmedabad and only thereafter, he was produced in the 
concerned Court of the Magistrate. Shri Raval referred to the 

10 
 
testimony of Pratapbhai Jagannath(PW-6) to contend that 
the office of DCP Shri Surelia was located on the fifth floor 
and Jeeva(deceased) climbed the staircases without any 
support or displaying signs of discomfort or pain. He 
fervently contended that it is impossible to believe that after 
having received such grave debilitating injuries as described 
in the postmortem report, Jeeva(deceased) would have been 
in a physical or mental condition to ascend and descend five 
flights of stairs and that too without exhibiting any sign of 
discomfort.  
(vi)  Shri Raval urged that Jeeva(deceased) had been sent to 
the Sabarmati Central jail on 11th June, 1992 at around 
6:30 pm after being remanded to judicial custody. As per 
Shri Raval, the probability of Jeeva(deceased) having been 
assaulted by co-prisoners in the prison cannot be ruled out 
and is rather more probabilized considering the fact that the 
injuries noticed on the body of the victim were fresh in 
nature as per Dr. Nayan Kumar-Medical Jurist(PW-9). To 
emphasize the above contention, Shri Raval referred to the 
testimony(Exhibit-49) of the Medical Jurist(PW-9) who 
categorically 
stated 
that 
the 
injuries 
caused 
to 

11 
 
Jeeva(deceased) were fresh and would have been suffered 
within six hours of the death.  
(vii)  Shri Raval referred to the testimony of Udesingh 
Himmatsingh Chauhan(PW-8) who stated that he had seen 
the red dust over the clothes of dead body. He also claimed 
to have seen Sabarmati Central jail from inside and stated 
that the soil of the jail was red in colour.  Based on the 
deposition of PW-8, Shri Raval contended that when the 
inquest(Exhibit-45) was carried out, the dead body of Jeeva 
was found smeared with red soil which is typical to the 
Sabarmati Central jail.  He thus urged that there is 
imminent probability that Jeeva(deceased) must have 
suffered the fatal injuries while being confined at the 
Sabarmati Central jail.  
(viii)  That the so-called eyewitnesses(Selvin Prabhakar(PW-
1), Dhanlakshmi Vaiyapuri(PW-2) and Nyakar Vasudev(PW-
3)) emphatically stated that Jeeva(deceased) was beaten on 
same parts of the body both by the accused appellant(A1) 
and co-accused(A2). Shri Raval urged that it is impossible to 
believe that two accused who assaulted the deceased at 

12 
 
different intervals would selectively target the same parts of 
the body to land the blows.  
 
(ix)  That the accused appellant(A1) was a seasoned police 
officer and hence, it does not stand to reason that he would 
use sticks to assault the victim so as to leave behind visible 
marks and risk the chance of the injuries being detected.  He 
submitted that clearly Jeeva(deceased) had been assaulted 
at the Sabarmati Central jail and a totally false case has 
been foisted by the family members of Jeeva(deceased) to 
wreak vengeance against the accused persons on account of 
the fact that Jeeva(deceased) was a known bootlegger and 
had been arraigned in number of criminal cases by the 
police officials.  
On these counts, learned senior counsel implored the Court to 
accept the appeal, set aside the impugned judgment and acquit 
the accused appellant of the charges. 
Submissions on behalf of the respondent-State: - 
13. Per contra, Ms. Deepanwita Priyanka, learned Standing 
Counsel for the State of Gujarat, vehemently and fervently opposed 
the submissions advanced by the learned senior counsel for the 
appellant. She contended that the trial Court and the High Court, 

13 
 
after thorough appreciation of evidence have recorded concurrent 
findings of facts holding the accused appellant(A1) and the co-
accused(A2) responsible for indulging in custodial violence thereby 
causing death of Jeeva.  
14. She contended that the witnesses, Selvin Prabhakar(PW-1), 
Dhanlakshmi Vaiyapuri(PW-2) had no reason so as to falsely 
implicate the accused appellant(A1) for the murder of their brother 
Jeeva(deceased). Presence of these witnesses at the Amraiwadi 
Police Station was not disputed by the accused persons.  The 
evidence of these witnesses is reliable and trustworthy. The 
witness Nyakar Vasudev(PW-3) was admittedly detained in the 
lockup of the police station with Jeeva(deceased) and he too has 
given clinching evidence supporting the case of prosecution and 
hence, this Court should not feel persuaded to interfere with the 
concurrent finding of facts recorded in the impugned judgments. 
15. She further urged that Jeeva(deceased) was apprehensive 
that he may be subjected to further cruelty at the hands of the 
police officials if he made a complaint about the violence meted out 
to him in police custody. Thus, rather than speaking out before the 
learned Magistrate, he confided about the violence to his sister, 
Selvin Prabhakar(PW-1), who sent a prompt telegram(Exhibit-14) 

14 
 
setting out the details of the incident to the DGP office, Ahmedabad 
promptly after the news of death of her brother Jeeva was conveyed 
to her and thus, there is no delay in lodging of the complaint.  
16. She further contended that the influence of the accused 
persons upon the investigation agency is clearly visible inasmuch 
as no action was taken on the telegram(Exhibit-14) promptly sent 
by Selvin Prabhakar(PW-1) who was later compelled to lodge a 
complaint before the concerned Magistrate, only whereafter, the 
criminal case could be registered against the accused.   
17. She thus urged that the testimony of the witnesses examined 
by the prosecution was rightly relied upon by the trial Court and 
the High Court and that the impugned judgments do not warrant 
any interference by this Court. 
18. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have minutely reappreciated the 
evidence available on record. We have also perused the judgments 
rendered by the High Court as well as the trial Court. 
Discussion of material/evidence available on record: -  
19. The following facts are undisputed as per the record: - 

15 
 
(i) 
That A1 was posted as Police Inspector, Amraiwadi Police 
Station and A2 was posted as Superintendent of Police on 
the date of the incident.  
(ii) 
That Jeeva(deceased) and Anna Dorai were arraigned as 
accused in C.R. No. 555 of 1992, registered at the Amraiwadi 
Police Station for the offences punishable under Sections 
143, 147, 148, 149, 307, 323, 324 and 427 IPC.  
(iii) That on 10th June, 1992 at 10:45 pm, Jeeva(deceased) 
accompanied by his two sisters, Selvin Prabhakar(PW-1) and 
Dhanlakshmi 
Vaiyapuri(PW-2) 
and 
advocate 
Shri 
Patanwadia had gone to the Amraiwadi Police Station for 
surrendering in connection with the above case. Anna Dorai 
also surrendered along with Jeeva as he too was arraigned 
as an accused in the same case. 
(iv) 
That advocate Shri Patanwadia was not examined in 
evidence in support of the prosecution case. 
(v) 
That Anna Dorai who surrendered at the police station along 
with Jeeva(deceased) in the same case, did not suffer any 
injuries during the period of detention at the police station. 
Anna Dorai was surprisingly not examined as a witness by 
the prosecution. 

16 
 
(vi) 
That Meena, wife of Jeeva(deceased), who went to meet him 
in the morning of 11th June, 1992 was not examined in 
evidence. 
(vii) Jeeva(deceased) had sufficient exposure to the legal system 
and procedure as he had previously also been arraigned in 
numerous criminal cases. Association of advocate Shri 
Patanwadia in the process of Jeeva’s surrender is ample 
proof of this fact. 
(viii) Before being presented in the Court of the Magistrate, Jeeva 
(deceased) was taken to the Karanj Bhavan and was 
presented before DCP Shri Surelia whose office was located 
at the fifth floor of the building and that Jeeva(deceased) 
ascended and descended the multiple flight of stairs without 
exhibiting any discomfort or signs of pain whatsoever. 
(ix) 
Jeeva(deceased) was produced in the Court of Magistrate in 
evening of 11th June, 1992 but he did not make any kind of 
complaint whatsoever to the Magistrate that he had been 
beaten by the accused at the police station. 
(x) 
That as per Jeeva’s sister, Selvin Prabhakar(PW-1), 
Jeeva(deceased) had complained after coming out of the 
Magistrate’s Court that he had been beaten/tortured at the 

17 
 
police station but he could not make any complaint to the 
Magistrate owing to the threat of retribution at the hands of 
the police officials. However, the fact remains that Jeeva’s 
sisters(PW-1 and PW-2) were free birds and nothing 
prevented them from lodging a prompt complaint regarding 
the custodial torture allegedly meted out to Jeeva(deceased) 
while he was in police custody. 
(xi) 
That the first complaint of the custodial torture meted out 
to Jeeva(deceased) in form of the telegram(Exhibit-14) came 
to be forwarded by Selvin Prabhakar(PW-1) to the DGP office, 
Ahmedabad on 13th June, 1992. When no action was 
forthcoming 
on 
this 
telegram(Exhibit-14), 
a 
formal 
complaint came to be filed in the Court of the Magistrate 
concerned on 1st July, 1992. 
(xii) That as per the evidence of Medical Jurist(PW-9), the injuries 
noticed on the body of the deceased at the time of the 
postmortem examination which was conducted on 12th 
June, 1992(between 4:15 pm to 5:30 pm) were fresh and 
were caused within six to eight hours of the death. The 
Medical 
Jurist(PW-9) 
observed 
in 
the 
postmortem 
report(Exhibit-50) that he noticed 600 ml fluid blood and 

18 
 
clotted blood in the thoracic cavity and 1600 ml of fluid 
blood and clotted blood in peritoneal cavity.  He also gave a 
pertinent reply to a question put in cross-examination that 
looking to the number of injuries including the fractures and 
having rupture of liver and lung, a person could not climb a 
staircase without support; he would be depressed and his 
expression and movements would be painful. The fracture of 
sternum and ribs would cause severe pain and would also 
affect the respiratory system. Due to the bruises and the 
fractures, the loss of blood would be about 30-35% of the 
total volume of blood in the body which would cause drop in 
the blood pressure.  
(xiii) The prosecution tried to overcome this pertinent opinion of 
the Medical Jurist(PW-9) regarding the time of injuries by 
examining the expert witness-Dr. Ravindra(PW-10) who gave 
his opinion(Exhibit-53) on queries being raised by the 
Investigating Officer which were based on the findings in 
postmortem report(Exhibit-50). Nevertheless, the expert 
witness(PW-10) while deposing, did not elaborate about the 
opinion which he had expressed in answer to the queries 
raised by the Investigating Officer. He only formally proved 

19 
 
the letter(Exhibit-53) without elaborating upon its contents. 
In the cross-examination, the expert witness(PW-10) 
admitted that the doctor who had performed the postmortem 
examination would be in a better position to give opinion 
about the age of injuries. 
20. Having set out the admitted facts, we shall now proceed to 
discuss the evidence of the prosecution witnesses. For the sake of 
convenience, the details of the prosecution witnesses are 
reproduced hereinbelow in a tabular form: - 
PW-1 
Selvin Prabhakar(Eyewitness) 
PW-2 
Dhanlakshmi Vaiyapuri(Eyewitness) 
PW-3 
Naykar Vasudev(Eyewitness) 
PW-4 
Harishkumar Fakirswamy 
PW-5 
Dr. 
Digant 
Kalidas 
Dixit(Medical 
Officer) 
PW-6 
Pratapbhai Jagannath 
PW-7 
Ranjitsing Tensing 
PW-8 
Udesinh Himmatsinh Chauhan 
PW-9 
Dr. 
Nayankumar 
Natvarlal 
Parikh(Medical Jurist) 
PW-10 
Dr. 
Ravindra 
Shrikrishna 
Bhise(Expert witness) 
 
21. First, we shall discuss the evidence of the star prosecution 
witnesses namely, Selvin Prabhakar(PW-1) and Dhanlakshmi 
Vaiyapuri(PW-2). Some relevant excerpts from the deposition of 
Selvin Prabhakar(PW-1) and Dhanlakshmi Vaiyapuri(PW-2) are 
reproduced hereinbelow for the sake of ready reference: - 

20 
 
Examination-in-Chief of Selvin Prabhakar(PW-1) 
“1.….Thereafter in the night at quarter to eleven hours PSI Shri 
Vyas in the same room only nearby to the table of the PSO making 
my brother to stand up facing the wall and keeping both hands 
up and thereafter Shri Vyas delivered blows with stick on the 
claws of the hands of my brother, on the back, on the buttock, on 
the ankle and on the thigh as also on the leg. Vyas Sir also pushed 
with stick on the chest of my brother. For half an hour, as on 
getting beaten up in this manner, my brother had fainted and had 
fallen down. Thereafter two police persons lifted and threw away 
my brother nearby to the table. At two hours in the night, SP Shri 
C.G. Patel had come. I know that C.G. Patel and at present he is 
present in the court as an accused person. 
2. Shri C.G. Patel coming there made my brother to stand up in 
such manner that his face was towards the wall and he delivered 
stick blows on the hand, on the back, on the side and also pushed 
with stick in the chest. Thereafter two police persons had put my 
brother in the lock up. When this happened at that time I and my 
sister Dhanlaxmi both were present at the Amraivadi Police 
Station. We were present in front of the lock up…. 
3……At quarter to six hours in the evening police persons brought 
down stairs my brother and Anna. Thereafter, policemen took 
both these persons at Court No. 7 and I and my sister Dhanlaxmi 
had gone to the Court No.7. In Court No. 7 these policemen were 
waiting for Shri Vyas Sir with my brother and Anna as they were 
not having sufficient papers. At that time my brother talked with 
me in Madrasi means in Tamil language. At that time my brother 
was weeping. When I asked him the reason for weeping he told to 
me that- he is having severe pain in the chest and stomach and 
therefore he is unable to stand up. When asked why, then he told 
to me that- both those persons had beaten me up and therefore I 
am feeling the pain. I asked my brother that as he has been beaten 
up, do you want to file complaint before the Magistrate sir. Then 
refused for the same. When I asked why, then he told to me that- 
PI Shri Vyas and C.G. Patel have given me the threat that if you 
will file complaint against us then, after getting released from the 
jail, by planning police encounter, and making you to run, bullet 
will be fired at you. Again he stated to say that still he feels 
fearful…. 
4. On 12/6/92, at half past eleven hour in the morning two police 
persons from jail had come there in civil dress and told to us that-
my brother Jeeva has died and his dead body is kept in the PM 
Room of Civil Hospital and saying this they had gone away……  

21 
 
….Thereafter at seven hours in the evening after conducting the 
post mortem, we were handed over the dead body. We had brought 
the dead body to our home. During the night the dead body was 
kept at the home and on the next day morning means on 13/6/92 
the last ritual rites were performed. During this night I had sent 
a telegram from Lal Darwaja telegram office to Meghaninagar DGP 
Office. The telegram stating about death of my brother in this 
manner was sent….. 
Thereafter, regarding this incident I had filed complaint in the 
Metropolitan Court. 
5…..In the year 1990, my brother Jeeva was arrested and was 
sent up outside Ahmedabad in the jail. Jeeva was kept in this 
manner for four months and after around four months he was 
released….. 
6.….During last year two cases of prohibition were filed against 
me. The cases that were filed against me were pertaining to 
Amraivadi Police Station. When Vyas Sir was in charge of the 
Amraivadi Police Station, at that time prohibition case was filed 
against me….. 
….I have filed the complaint. In this complaint as witness No.3 
name of Vasu Parthasarthi is in Ex-12 complaint who is not 
known to me…..  
….In this complaint I did not give the name of Anna as the 
witness.  On 1/7/92, complaint was filed. During the period when 
I had sent to telegram and filed the present complaint, Vasu, Ravi, 
Hari and Anna none of these persons had met me and I have not 
met them…. 
….It is not true that I, Jaykant and my sister and my deceased 
brother Jeeva were jointly working as botleggers. It is not true 
that, due to Vyas Sir joining the duty, as this business has been 
closed, we have animosity towards Vyas Sir….” 
Cross-examination of Selvin Prabhakar(PW-1) 
“8…..Thereafter on the next day, at 5.45 hours in the evening 
when my brother was brought in the Court at that time Advocate 
Shri Patanwadia met us. Prior to that we did not inform to our 
advocate that as my brother is to be produced, he should make 
the preparation for getting him released on bail…. 

22 
 
….During the period from 5.45 to 6.45 hours means for around 
one hour my brother was made to sit in the Court. During this 
period in the Court room many persons were moving….. 
….After my brother was brought in the Court, Patanwadia Sir had 
gone out of the court compound. We had sent the message to 
Patanwadia Sir and he came there and after meeting he had gone. 
Our advocate stayed with us for five-ten minutes…. 
….After my brother was beaten up, we met Patanwadia Sir in the 
Court and during the intervening period, we did not meet him. In 
the Court when Patanwadia Sir met us for five-ten minutes, at 
that time he was informed that my brother Jeeva has been beaten 
up in this manner and we had shown the marks of my brother 
Jeeva getting beaten up. These marks were not shown to 
Patanwadia Sir so that he can take appropriate actions…. 
9.  When Jeeva is produced before the Magistrate and if Jeevo 
makes a complaint before the Magistrate about his getting beaten 
up, then threat was given to him for killing him. We had informed 
about this to our advocate Patanwadia Sir. At the time when Jeeva 
was produced before the Magistrate at that time Patanwadia Sir 
should remain present before the Magistrate, about which we had 
not given intimation to Patanwadia Sir. However he told to us that 
at the time when Jeeva will be produced before the Hon'ble 
Magistrate, at that time we should inform him. When Patanwadia 
Sir left the court compound means at the second time he did not 
meet us….. 
10…..We do not have any relationship with accused person Mr. 
Vyas and we also do not have relationship with Patel Sir.  Prior to 
the incident I had never met any of the accused persons….. 
11.….The facts as to how he was beaten up and who had beaten 
up where, have not been stated in the telegram…..  
12.….My brother was kept at the Karanj Bhavan for two and half 
hour. During this two and half hours, when was my brother kept 
in the Karanj Bhavan I could not know about the same. However 
he was taken upstairs and was made to climb the steps about 
which fact I am aware. I am not aware as to which floor he was 
taken. The police persons who had brought my brother 
downstairs, had told that Jeeva was taken before Sureliya Sir….. 
14….Ex-14 is the copy of the telegram wherein it has been stated 
that, “when my brother was produced PI Shri Vyas Saheb had 
beaten up him severely with stick.”….. 

23 
 
19.  …..It is true that I have not seen if my brother had been 
beaten up by Sureliya Sir. In the Karanj Bhavan, Sureliya Sir had 
beaten up my brother, if such fact has been stated in the telegram 
then the same is false. It is true that I have not seen taking my 
brother to Stadium.  It is true that I had filed complaint against 
the present two accused persons and Sureliya Sir. 
20…..It is true that prohibition cases have been filed against my 
mother, myself and Pappu…..” 
Examination-in-Chief of Dhanlakshmi Vaiyapuri(PW-2) 
“2. Thereafter in the night at eleven or quarter to eleven hours PI 
Shri Vyas making my brother Jeeva to stand facing the wall and 
keeping hands up as support, PI Shri Vyas had beaten up my 
brother. He delivered blows with stick on the palm of his hand, on 
the back on the waist, on the thigh, on the ankle and pushed with 
stick in the chest. He continued to beat up my brother in this 
manner for around half an hour. Thereafter my brother fainted 
and had fallen down and thereafter two police persons had come 
and lifting my brother they had thrown him on the wooden bench. 
Thereafter at night at quarter to two or two hours, SP Shri Patel 
had come there. He had come down from the second floor. 
Thereafter he made my brother to stand up facing the wall with 
hands up and Shri C.G. Patel had beaten up Jeeva on the palm of 
his hand, on the back, on the side, on the buttock, on the thigh 
and on the ankle with stick and pushed with stick in the chest. 
The C.G. Patel was the SP……. 
3……Thereafter on that day at two hours in the noon PSI Shri 
Rana along with one police persons taking out from the police 
station my brother and Anna, they were sitting in the auto 
rickshaw and they had come in the office of DCP Shri Sureliya Sir. 
His office is at Lal Darwaja. After this rickshaw, in another auto 
rickshaw we had gone after Shri Rana Saheb. Thereafter, Rana 
Sir had taken my brother and Anna in the Office of DCP Shri 
Sureliya Sir. At 5.45 hours in the evening he was brought 
downstairs……. 
3.…..Thereafter my brother Jeevo was talking in Tamil language 
told to my sister crying. He said that- SP and PI had beaten up 
very severely. In the hand and leg, marks of stick could be seen. 
When my sister touched the body of my brother, at that time there 
was swallowing……. 
5……Thereafter on 12/2/92, at eleven or quarter to eleven hours 
in the morning, two police persons came to our' home. They said 
that Jeeva has died.” 

24 
 
Cross-Examination of Dhanlakshmi Vaiyapuri(PW-2) 
“6…..It is true that, arresting my brother under PASA , he was set 
up in the jail outside Ahmedabad…… 
8……It is true that in the portion inside the police station, Jeeva 
and Anna were taken and our advocate was with them and at that 
time the inside portion could not seen….. 
12….It is not true that in my statement dated 13/6/92 I have 
stated that, " on the next day on 11/6/92, at nine hours in the 
morning I and my sister Selvin and my sister in law all the three 
of us had gone to the Amraivadi Police Station for giving snack to 
my brother but my brother did not eat the snack. My sister stayed 
back to have talk with my brother. I and my sister in law 
Meenaben were sitting outside the police station"…. 
12…For an hour Jeevo was in the Court of the Metropolitan 
Magistrate. I had seen Jeeva in Court No. 7. I am not aware as to 
whether on that day whether the Magistrate of Court No. 7 was 
on leave or not?.... 
12.…..My brother Jeeva was taken at Karanj Bhavan on the upper 
floor where there is staircase and from the staircase, one can go 
upstairs about which I am not aware….” 
 
22. From the testimony of Selvin Prabhakar(PW-1) and 
Dhanlakshmi Vaiyapuri(PW-2), it is evident that Jeeva(deceased) 
was having long standing criminal antecedents and there were 
allegations of bootlegging against him.  He had also been detained 
under the Gujarat Prevention of Anti-Social Activities Act, 1985.  
Likewise, the evidence of the prosecution witnesses(PW-1 and PW-
2) also reveals that Anna Dorai who too was arraigned as accused 
with Jeeva(deceased) in C.R. No. 555 of 1992 also had similar 
criminal antecedents. However, as per these prosecution 
witnesses, Jeeva(deceased) was singled out for the custodial 

25 
 
torture whereas even a finger was not laid on Anna Dorai by A1 
and A2.  This creates a doubt in the mind of the Court on the 
truthfulness of the allegations set out in the evidence of the two 
sisters of Jeeva, i.e., PW-1 and PW-2.  
23. PW-1 and PW-2 claim to have personally witnessed the 
assault being made on Jeeva. In this background, there is a 
serious question mark on the claim of PW-1 that after being 
produced in the Court, Jeeva talked to her in Tamil language and 
that he was weeping and when the witness asked Jeeva for the 
reason of his grief, he told her that the police personnel had beaten 
him up and he was under severe pain and was unable to standup. 
If at all PW-1 and PW-2 had themselves seen the victim being 
beaten up, there was no occasion for PW-1 to put a question to 
Jeeva as to why he was weeping or as to the manner in which he 
had been beaten up. 
24. This Court has considered the effect of unnatural conduct on 
the credibility and evidentiary value of testimony of a witness 
through a series of judicial pronouncements over time. In the case 

26 
 
of Lahu Kamlakar Patil and Anr. v. State of Maharashtra1, 
this Court held as follows: - 
“26. From the aforesaid pronouncements, it is vivid that 
witnesses to certain crimes may run away from the scene and 
may also leave the place due to fear and if there is any delay in 
their examination, the testimony should not be discarded. That 
apart, a court has to keep in mind that different witnesses 
react differently under different situations. Some witnesses 
get a shock, some become perplexed, some start wailing 
and some run away from the scene and yet some who have 
the courage and conviction come forward either to lodge an 
FIR or get themselves examined immediately. Thus, it 
differs from individuals to individuals. There cannot be 
uniformity in human reaction. While the said principle has 
to be kept in mind, it is also to be borne in mind that if the 
conduct of the witness is so unnatural and is not in accord 
with acceptable human behaviour allowing variations, then 
his testimony becomes questionable and is likely to be 
discarded.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (emphasis supplied) 
 
25. In the case of Shivasharanappa and Others v. State of 
Karnataka2, it was held as follows: - 
“22. Thus, the behaviour of the witnesses or their reactions would 
differ from situation to situation and individual to individual. 
Expectation of uniformity in the reaction of witnesses would be 
unrealistic but the court cannot be oblivious of the fact that even 
taking into account the unpredictability of human conduct and 
lack of uniformity in human reaction, whether in the 
circumstances of the case, the behaviour is acceptably natural 
allowing the variations. If the behaviour is absolutely 
unnatural, the testimony of the witness may not deserve 
credence and acceptance.” 
 
 
 
 
 
                 (emphasis supplied) 
 
 
1 (2013) 6 SCC 417 
2 (2013) 5 SCC 705 

27 
 
26. In Narendrasinh Keshubhai Zala v. State of Gujarat3, it 
was held as follows: - 
“8. It is a settled principle of law that doubt cannot replace 
proof. Suspicion, howsoever great it may be, is no substitute of 
proof in criminal jurisprudence [Jagga Singh v. State of Punjab, 
1994 Supp (3) SCC 463]. Only such evidence is admissible and 
acceptable as is permissible in accordance with law. In the case 
of a sole eye witness, the witness has to be reliable, trustworthy, 
his testimony worthy of credence and the case proven beyond 
reasonable doubt. Unnatural conduct and unexplained 
circumstances can be a ground for disbelieving the 
witness.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (emphasis supplied) 
 
27. In the case of Harvinder Singh alias Bachhu v. State of 
Himachal Pradesh4, this Court held as below: - 
“18. Character and reputation do have an element of 
interconnectivity. Reputation is predicated on the general 
traits of character. In other words, character may be 
subsumed into reputation. Courts are not expected to get 
carried away by the mere background of a person especially 
while acting as an appellate forum, when his conduct, being 
a relevant fact, creates serious doubt. In other words, the 
conduct of a witness under Section 8 of the Evidence Act, 
is a relevant fact to decide, determine and prove the 
reputation of a witness. When the conduct indicates that it 
is unnatural from the perspective of normal human 
behaviour, the so-called reputation takes a back seat.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (emphasis supplied) 
 
28. In the case of Chunthuram v. State of Chhattisgarh5, a 
three judge Bench of this Court discarded the testimony of a 
 
3 2023(4) SCALE 478 
4 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1347 
5 (2020) 10 SCC 733 
 
 

28 
 
eyewitness on the ground that the deceased was known to the 
witness and claimed to have seen the assault on the deceased, but 
curiously, he did not take any proactive steps in the matter to 
either report to the police or inform any of the family members. The 
Court held that such conduct of the eyewitness is contrary to 
human nature. The relevant extracts from the judgment are as 
follows: - 
“15. Next the unnatural conduct of PW 4 will require some 
scrutiny. The witness Bhagat Ram was known to the deceased 
and claimed to have seen the assault on Laxman by 
Chunthuram and another person. But curiously, he did not 
take any proactive steps in the matter to either report to the 
police or inform any of the family members. Such conduct of 
the eyewitness is contrary to human nature. In Amar 
Singh v. State (NCT of Delhi)[2020 SCC OnLine SC 826], one 
of us, Krishna Murari, J. made the following pertinent 
comments on the unreliability of such eye witness : (SCC para 
32) 
 
“32. The conviction of the appellants rests on the oral 
testimony of PW 1 who was produced as eyewitness of 
the murder of the deceased. Both the learned Sessions 
Judge, as well as High Court have placed reliance on the 
evidence of PW 1 and ordinarily this Court could be 
reluctant to disturb the concurrent view but since there 
are inherent improbabilities in the prosecution story 
and the conduct of eyewitness is inconsistent with 
ordinary course of human nature we do not think it 
would be safe to convict the appellants upon the 
uncorroborated testimony of the sole eyewitness. 
Similar view has been taken by a three-Judge Bench of 
this Court in Selveraj v. State of T.N. [(1976) 4 SCC 
343] wherein on an appreciation of evidence the 
prosecution story was found highly improbable and 
inconsistent of ordinary course of human nature 
concurrent findings of guilt recorded by the two courts 
below were set aside.” 
 

29 
 
16. The witness here knew the victim, allegedly saw the fatal 
assault on the victim and yet kept quiet about the incident. If 
PW 4 had the occasion to actually witness the assault, his 
reaction and conduct does not match up to ordinary reaction of 
a person who knew the deceased and his family. His testimony 
therefore deserves to be discarded.” 
 
29. The two sisters(PW-1 and PW-2) were not under any restraint 
after witnessing the custodial assault allegedly made on Jeeva. 
They admitted in their cross-examination that they had been 
arraigned as accused in a couple of prohibition cases.  Thus, it can 
safely be inferred that these two so-called eyewitnesses were 
having sufficient contact with the legal system and were well aware 
of the legal machinery and would be knowing the importance of 
filing a complaint promptly. Nothing prevented these ladies from 
immediately approaching the higher officials or the concerned 
Court to make a complaint of the alleged assault made on their 
victim brother in the Amraiwadi Police Station by the police 
officials.   
30. Admittedly, an advocate named Shri Patanwadia was taken 
to the Amraiwadi Police Station for facilitating Jeeva’s surrender 
and he was also present when Jeeva(deceased) was presented in 
the Court on 11th June, 1992 by the Investigating Officer. Thus, 
the advocate was a vital witness to unfold the truth of the case.  
However, he was not examined in evidence for reasons best known 

30 
 
to the prosecution. Even if we assume that the advocate may have 
been hesitant to become a witness in a case involving his client, 
the fact remains that PW-1 and PW-2 had engaged Shri 
Patanwadia to represent Jeeva(deceased) in the criminal case 
wherein he was arraigned as an accused and he was taken along 
for effecting the surrender of Jeeva at the police station. Thus, it 
was logically expected from PW-1 and PW-2, that after having seen 
their brother Jeeva being assaulted by the police officer, they 
would have immediately thought of approaching the advocate 
engaged by them and tell him about the custodial torture.  
However, no such step was taken by the sisters(PW-1 and PW-2) 
of the deceased and this pertinent omission in failing to inform 
their advocate about the custodial torture allegedly meted out to 
Jeeva gives rise to a strong assumption about the unnatural 
conduct of these eyewitnesses, casting a doubt on the truthfulness 
of their version and discredits their testimony. 
 
31. Keeping in view the above referred judgments and the 
infirmities noticeable in the evidence of Selvin Prabhakar(PW-1) 
and Dhanlakshmi Vaiyapuri(PW-2), we are convinced that they are 
not witnesses of sterling worth and their evidence is not fit to be 
relied upon. 

31 
 
32. The prosecution claims that Naykar Vasudev(PW-3) was 
purportedly arraigned as an accused on a complaint lodged by one 
Babu Raja Ram and was also lodged at the Amraiwadi Police 
Station, at the same time, when Jeeva was allegedly subjected to 
custodial violence. He was examined as PW-3 and deposed that he 
saw the Police Inspector Vyas(appellant herein)(A1) and Mr. 
Patel(co-accused)(A2) beating Jeeva with sticks, etc. However, in 
cross-examination, the witness admitted that he had not stated 
the aforesaid details to the Sabarmati police which were being 
asked from him in the Court.  He also feigned ignorance as to the 
nature of case filed against him by Babu Raja Ram. He also stated 
that he had not tried to move Jeeva or talk to him when they were 
taken out of their lockup. Selvin(PW-1) and Dhanlakshmi(PW-2) 
had come to the police station with breakfast on the next morning. 
He did not see Jeeva in a conscious state till he woke up in the 
next morning. He was released on bail at half past 3’o clock in the 
afternoon. He did not tell his advocate Mr. Pathan about the 
incident with Jeeva. He also admitted that he had not given the 
name of Mr. Patel in the statement recorded by the Sabarmati 
police. He explained that Sabarmati police had not recorded his 
statement willingly. He also admitted that he did not state at the 

32 
 
police station that he was knowing Mr. Vyas and Mr. Patel 
previously. He tried to explain that he had not divulged at the 
Sabarmati Police Station that Mr. Patel had inflicted blow of stick 
on the chest of Jeeva as he was not asked about the same. 
33. Considering the tenor of evidence of PW-3, it is evident that his 
version also suffers from grave infirmities, contradictions and 
omissions and thus, implicit reliance cannot be placed on his 
testimony.  
34. Jeeva(deceased) expired around 36 hours after his surrender 
before the officials of the Amraiwadi Police Station and thus, the 
medical evidence assumes great significance in the case. Dr. 
Digant Kalidas Dixit(PW-5) who was working as a Medical Officer 
at the Civil Hospital, Ahmedabad deposed as below: - 
“On 12th June 1992 at 8/00AM to 2/00 PM I was on duty as 
Casualty Medical Officer at Civil Hospital, Ahmedabad. At 
about 8/30AM on that day Shri R.K. Thakur, Jailor of 
Sabarmati Central Prison, Head Constable Udaysinghbhai and 
police constable Maheshbhai of Central Prison, Ahmedabad 
had brought one Jeevabhai Vaiyapuri from Sabarmati Central 
Prison. I had examined him and I found that the patient was 
unconscious. His body was cold and calm. Pulse was not 
palpable and it was not possible to record Blood Pressure: 
respiration was absent; heart sounds were not heard by 
stethoscope; pupils were dilated, fixed and not reactive to light. 
All functions were suggestive that the patient is dead. As such 
I had made a note in the Register that the person is dead.” 
 

33 
 
35. Dr. 
Nayan 
Kumar-Medical 
Jurist(PW-9) 
conducted 
postmortem upon the dead body of Jeeva. The relevant excerpts 
from the evidence of the Medical Jurist(PW-9) are reproduced 
below: - 
“The injuries found by me externally were fresh in nature. The 
injuries were fresh and must have occurred within six to eight 
hours of the death. I have brought the case papers. A query was 
raised by the Police Inspector of Sabarmati Police Station and 
it was replied by my brother doctor Dr. Desai. In reply to the 
query, it was stated by Dr. Desai that the injuries were fresh 
and he had opined in the said letter that the injuries were 
within few hours before the death. Again there was query from 
the Crime Branch and they had made a query to the tune as to 
what was the meaning of "few hours" and he had given time 
that it may have occurred within four to five hours prior to the 
post-mortem. 
 
It is true that if lathi blow is given on the back side of a person, 
then it will cause wheel marks. 
 
All the bruises were red in colour. From the colour of bruises 
time can be ascertained by the medical man who has seen the 
injuries. 
 
Taking into consideration the bruises and the fracture there will 
be loss of blood of about 30 to 35 per cent of the total blood. 
With this loss of blood gradually blood pressure will come down. 
It is true that fracture of sternum and three ribs would cause 
severe pain and would also affect the respiratory system as well. 
In the present case there was fracture of lung also. I am of the 
view that having four fractures as in this particular case and 
after having rupture of liver and lung, a person cannot climb 
stair-case without support. A man would be depressed and his 
expression and movements will be painful.” 
 
 
36. Dr. Ravindra(PW-10) was examined by the prosecution as an 
expert witness to give opinion on certain queries raised by the 
Investigating Officer. Dr. Ravindra(PW-10) responded to these 
queries vide a letter which was marked as Exhibit-53 during his 

34 
 
sworn testimony.  However, what precisely were the contents of the 
letter were not deposed by the expert in his evidence. Thus, mere 
marking of exhibit upon the letter without the expert deposing 
about the opinion given therein would not dispense with the  proof 
of contents of the document as per the mandate of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872.   
37. This Court in the case of Sait Tarajee Khimchand and 
Others v. Yelamarti Satyam alias Satteyya and Others6 held 
as follows: - 
“15. The plaintiffs wanted to rely on Exs. A-12 and A-13, the 
day book and the ledger respectively. The plaintiffs did not 
prove these books. There is no reference to these books in the 
judgments. The mere marking of an exhibit does not 
dispense with the proof of documents. It is common place to 
say that the negative cannot be proved. The proof of the 
plaintiffs' books of account became important because the 
plaintiffs' accounts were impeached and falsified by the 
defendants' case of larger payments than those admitted by the 
plaintiffs. The irresistible inference arises that the plaintiffs' 
books would not have supported the plaintiffs.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
38. In the case of Narbada Devi Gupta v. Birendra Kumar 
Jaiswal and Another7, it was held as follows:  
“16. ….The legal position is not in dispute that mere production 
and marking of a document as exhibit by the court cannot be 
held to be a due proof of its contents. Its execution has to be 
proved by admissible evidence, that is, by the “evidence of those 
persons who can vouchsafe for the truth of the facts in 
issue”……” 
 
 
6 (1972) 4 SCC 562 
7 (2003) 8 SCC 745 

35 
 
39. Furthermore, the expert witness(PW-10) admitted in his 
cross-examination that the doctor who had performed the 
postmortem examination physically can give better opinion about 
the age of the injuries. Thus, there is no doubt in the mind of the 
Court that the evidence of the expert witness(PW-10) does not lend 
any support to the case of prosecution. 
40. From the evidence of the so called eyewitnesses Selvin 
Prabhakar(PW-1) 
and Dhanlakshmi 
Vaiyapuri(PW-2), 
it 
is 
apparent that the victim was made to climb the five flights of stairs 
for being presented before DCP Shri Surelia at the Karanj Bhavan, 
Ahmedabad. 
41. Looking to the nature of injuries noted by the Medical 
Jurist(PW-9) in the postmortem report(Exhibit-50), it is impossible 
to believe that the victim, having received the multiple injuries, 
which included rupture of spleen, rupture of liver, fracture of ribs, 
would have been in a position to walk what to say of climb five 
flight of stairs.  The Medical Jurist(PW-9) stated that the person 
having 
received 
the 
injuries 
noted 
in 
the 
postmortem 
report(Exhibit-50) would not be able to climb a stair case without 
support and that the expression of the person and his movement 
would be painful.  Thus, there was hardly any possibility that after 

36 
 
having received the injuries mentioned in the postmortem 
report(Exhibit-50), Jeeva(deceased) could have climbed up the 
stairs of Karanj Bhavan, Ahmedabad for being presented before 
DCP Shri Surelia. 
42. Viewed in light of the evidence of the Medical Jurist(PW-9) 
who conducted the autopsy upon Jeeva’s dead body, we are of the 
opinion that, if at all, the victim had already been subjected to the 
injuries noted in the postmortem report(Exhibit-50), he would be 
having a severe expression of pain and it would have been 
impossible for him to climb up the flights of stairs.  Furthermore, 
on being presented before the learned Magistrate, the expression 
of pain on the face of the victim, would be prominently visible and 
could not have escaped being noticed by the learned Magistrate.   
43. The opinion of the Medical Jurist(PW-9) regarding the age of 
injuries has not been controverted by the prosecution.  The said 
witness was examined by the prosecution and he has categorically 
opined in his examination in chief that the injuries caused to the 
deceased were fresh and must have occurred within six to eight 
hours of the death. The expert witness(PW-10) also admitted that 
the doctor who had performed the postmortem examination would 
be in a better position to give opinion about the age of injuries.   

37 
 
Thus, there is formidable evidence of the Medical Jurist(PW-9) 
which 
totally 
discredits 
the 
version 
of 
the 
so 
called 
eyewitnesses(PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3) that Jeeva(deceased) was 
inflicted the injuries leading to his death while being in police 
custody at the Amraiwadi Police Station. Their evidence is 
contradicted in material particulars by the medical evidence and 
other attending circumstances. 
44. We are conscious of the proposition that where there are 
contradictions inter se between the opinion of the Medical Jurist 
and the ocular testimony, generally, the evidence of the 
eyewitnesses should be given precedence. However, where the 
contradiction is so prominent that it completely demolishes the 
version of the eyewitnesses who are interested and partisan, in 
such cases, the Court should be circumspect in admitting the 
evidence of the eyewitness while ignoring the convincing opinion of 
the Medical Expert. 
45. Our view is fortified by the judgment of this Court in the case 
of Bhajan Singh alias Harbhajan Singh and Others. v. State 
of Haryana8 wherein, it was held as below: - 
“38. Thus, the position of law in such a case of contradiction 
between medical and ocular evidence can be crystallised to the 
 
8 (2011) 7 SCC 421 

38 
 
effect that though the ocular testimony of a witness has greater 
evidentiary value vis-à-vis medical evidence, when medical 
evidence makes the ocular testimony improbable, that becomes 
a relevant factor in the process of the evaluation of evidence. 
However, where the medical evidence goes so far that it 
completely rules out all possibility of the ocular evidence 
being true, the ocular evidence may be disbelieved.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
46. Considering the unimpeachable and strong opinion of the 
Medical Jurist(PW-9), the probability of the victim having been 
assaulted in Sabarmati Central jail leading to the fatal injuries 
noted in the postmortem report(Exhibit-50) is much higher as 
compared to the theory set up in the complaint and the evidence 
of the star prosecution witness that Jeeva(deceased) was fatally 
assaulted by A1 and A2 while he was detained at the Amraiwadi 
Police Station. 
47. The 
witness 
Udesingh 
Himmatsinh 
Chauhan(PW-8) 
categorically stated in his evidence that at the time of inquest, he 
had seen the victim’s clothes thoroughly and there was red dust 
over the said clothes.  He also stated to have seen Sabarmati 
Central jail from inside and deposed that soil of the jail is red. 
48. We feel that since the victim was brought dead from the 
Sabarmati Central jail, it was imperative upon the Investigating 
Agency to have made extensive investigation from the prison 
authorities so as to rule out the possibility of injuries having been 

39 
 
caused, while the victim was lodged in the prison. We are also of 
the view that if at all, Jeeva(deceased) was having the large number 
of injuries as noted in the postmortem report(Exhibit-50), the 
prison authorities would definitely have made a note thereof in the 
jail records at the time of his admission in the jail premises and 
the observations made at that time would be crucial for arriving at 
the truth of the matter. 
49. The theory of motive attributed by the prosecution witnesses 
(PW-1 and PW-2) to the accused A1 and A2 is also not palpable.  It 
may be noted that the accused appellant(A1) had been posted as 
Police Inspector at the Amraiwadi Police Station just a few months 
before the incident. Merely because Jeeva(deceased) was having 
prior criminal antecedents, that by itself, could not have provided 
motive to the accused police officials to have singled him out for 
custodial torture while totally sparing the co-accused Anna Dorai.   
50. As an upshot of the above discussion, we are of the view that 
the prosecution has failed to bring home the guilt of both the 
accused persons i.e. Vinod Jaswantray Vyas(A1)(since deceased)  
and Chinubhai Govindbhai Patel(A2)(since deceased) by leading 
cogent, convincing and reliable evidence and their conviction as 

40 
 
recorded by the trial Court and affirmed by the High Court is not 
sustainable in the eyes of law. 
51. Resultantly, the accused appellant Vinod Jaswantray 
Vyas(A1)(since deceased) deserves to be acquitted of the charges. 
The co-accused Chinubhai Govindbhai Patel(A2)(since deceased) 
who too was convicted by the trial Court and his appeal was also 
dismissed by the High Court, also deserves to be given the benefit 
of the conclusions drawn by us in this appeal even though no 
appeal has been preferred on his behalf. 
52. As a consequence, the judgment dated 4th March, 1997 
passed by the trial Court and judgment dated 13th February, 2017 
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court are quashed and 
set aside. Both the accused i.e. Vinod Jaswantray Vyas(A1)(since 
deceased) and Chinubhai Govindbhai Patel(A2)(since deceased) are 
acquitted of the charges. 
53. The appeal is allowed in these terms. 
54. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
July 09, 2024