2024 INSC 507
1 
 
Non-reportable 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.434 OF 2013 
 
PYDI RAMANA @ RAMULU  
 
 
…APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
DAVARASETY MANMADHA RAO  
 
…RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 J U D G E M E N T 
 
 
Aravind Kumar, J.  
1. 
The appellant who is the original defendant before the trial Court 
has preferred this appeal questioning the correctness and legality of the 
judgment dated 07.06.2011 whereunder the second appeal filed by him in 
S.A No.1282 of 2008 came to be partly allowed, confirming the order of 
the appellate court passed in A.S. No.39 of 2004 which granted the relief 
of specific performance in favour of the plaintiff and directed the 
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2024.07.10
16:40:47 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
respondent-plaintiff to pay additional sale consideration namely twice the 
sale consideration. 
2. 
We have heard the arguments of Shri B. Adinarayana Rao, learned 
Senior Counsel appearing for appellant and Shri D. Bharat Kumar, learned 
Counsel appearing for the respondent perused the records. 
 
Brief Background 
3. 
The respondent herein who was the plaintiff filed a suit for specific 
performance of the agreement dated 07.06.1993 by contending inter alia 
that appellant-defendant had agreed to sell the property measuring Ac.1.38 
cents for a total consideration of Rs.705/- per cent as per the terms reduced 
by way of an agreement executed on the same day whereunder plaintiff 
claimed to have paid an advance amount of Rs.2,005/- and defendant 
agreed to execute sale deed in favour of the plaintiff  within one  year after 
getting the suit property surveyed. Further sum of Rs.17,000/- was paid by 
the plaintiff to the defendant on 23.06.1993. It is the case of the plaintiff 
that despite demand, the defendant postponed the execution of the sale 
deed and as such plaintiff got issued a legal notice on 30.05.1996 to the 
defendant for which no reply was received and as such suit for specific 
performance of the agreement of sale dated 07.06.1993 or in the alternate 
for the refund of the advance money paid with interest came to be filed. 

3 
 
 
4. 
Upon service of suit summons defendant appeared and filed his 
written statement and denied the averments made in the plaint in toto and 
further contended that the legal notice was duly replied. There was a total 
denial of sale transaction and it was also contended that one 
Varahanarsimhan @ Varam had taken signature of the defendants on blank 
stamp papers and plaintiff being closely related to the said person, had 
created an agreement of sale of suit schedule property in order to get illegal 
benefits. Hence, he prayed for dismissal of the suit.  
 
5. 
The trial court on the basis of the pleadings of the parties framed 
four issues and after examining the pleadings and evaluating the oral and 
documentary evidence tendered by the parties, rejected the claim for 
specific performance and granted the alternate relief namely ordered for 
refund of the amount of Rs.37,436.80 with 24% interest per annum on the 
said amount from the date of suit filed to till date of realisation. Being 
aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial court namely refusal to 
decree for specific performance, the unsuccessful plaintiff filed an appeal 
against A.S. No.39 of 2004. The appellate court on reappreciation of 
pleadings and evidence reversed the findings of the trial court and decreed 
the suit in toto namely the relief of specific performance was granted in 
favour of plaintiff. 

4 
 
 
6. 
The defendant being aggrieved by the same filed second appeal 
S.A No.1282 of 2008 which came to be allowed by judgment dated 
07.06.20211 in part namely the plaintiff was directed to pay additional sale 
consideration namely twice the sale consideration stipulated under the 
agreement of sale. 
 
7. 
It is the contention of the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 
appellant that trial court had rightly rejected the prayer for specific 
performance on appreciation of evidence which finding did not suffer from 
any infirmity whatsoever and as such the appellate court ought not to have 
interfered with the findings of the trial court. It is further contended that 
plaintiff had failed to lead any evidence or produce or tender proof that he 
was ready and willing to perform his part of the contract continuously. 
 
7.1 
It is also submitted that the plaintiff having kept quiet for a period 
of 2 years had got issued notice on 30.05.1996 i.e. after a period of 2 years 
from the date of expiry period i.e. 06.06.1994 and no explanation has been 
offered by the plaintiff. 
 
7.2 
It is the further submission of the learned Senior Counsel for the 
appellant that plaintiff had not called upon the defendant to conduct survey 

5 
 
or measurement of the land and no fault could have been laid at the doors 
of the defendant for not conducting survey of the suit land. It is further 
submitted that agreement had stood cancelled for non-payment of balance 
sale consideration within the stipulated time specified in the agreement and 
time was the essence of the contract as could be clearly inferred from the 
terms of the agreement dated 07.06.1993. Hence, the learned Senior 
Counsel for the appellant sought for appeal being allowed and suit being 
dismissed. 
 
8. 
Per contra, learned Counsel appearing for the respondent would 
support the impugned judgment by contending that time was not the 
essence of the contract in the instant case and the very fact that the 
defendant had received further advance amount on 23.06.1993 would belie 
the claim of the defendant in this regard. He further contends that 
defendant was under obligation to get the suit land surveyed and measured 
which was never done and as such the obligation of the plaintiff to pay 
balance sale consideration to the defendant did not arise till such survey 
was conducted by the defendant. He would further submit that defendant 
had never raised a plea with regard to the financial capacity of the plaintiff 
and the denial of execution of the agreement has not been accepted by the 
courts below and it is for this precise reason the rejection of the prayer for 
specific performance by the trial court came to be reversed by the first 

6 
 
appellate court as the trial court having held that defendant had executed 
the agreement in favour of the plaintiff it ought to have decreed the suit. 
He would also submit that plaintiff has sufficiently proved his readiness 
and willingness and at no point of time this was questioned by the 
defendant. It is further submitted that reply to the legal notice was 
furnished after 5 months after issuing of the legal notice by the plaintiff 
and defendant had never cancelled the agreement and as such counsel for 
the respondent-plaintiff sought for dismissal of this appeal. 
 
POINTS FOR CONSIDERATION  
9. 
 Having heard the learned advocates appearing for the parties, we 
are of the considered view that the following points would arise for our 
consideration:  
1. Whether the impugned order of the High Court 
requires to be affirmed or reversed? 
 
2. What order? 
 
 
RE: POINT NO.1 
10. 
In order to answer the point No.1 formulated herein above, it 
would be apt and appropriate to tabulate the list of dates and events which 
are not in dispute and they are tabulated herein below: 

7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. 
At the outset, it requires to be clarified and made clear that in 
the instant case the amendment brought to the Specific Relief Act by 
Act 18 of 2018 would be inapplicable. The amendment is prospective 
in nature and cannot be applied to those transactions which took place 
prior to amendment.1 In order to prove2 that the plaintiff is entitled to 
the specific performance as per the law existing prior to amendment, 
the plaintiff has to establish: 
 
1 Katta Sujatha Reddy v. Siddamsetty Infra Projects (P) Ltd & Ors (2023) 1 SCC 355]  
2 Man Kaur v. Hartar Singh Sangha (2010) 10 SCC 512 
S. NO. 
EVENT 
DATE 
1 
Execution of Agreement to Sell  
07/06/1993 
2 
Additional 
Rs. 
17,000/- 
consideration was paid  
23/06/1993 
3 
Last date to get the sale deed 
registered 
according 
to 
Agreement to Sell  
06/06/1994  
4 
Issuance of Legal Notice  
30/05/1996 
5 
Filing of Suit  
09/06/1997 

8 
 
a. that a valid agreement of sale was entered into by the 
Defendant in his favour; 
 
b. that the defendant committed breach of the agreement; 
and  
 
c. that he was always ready and willing to perform his 
part of the obligations in terms of the agreement. 
  
12. 
Section 16 of the Specific Relief Act provides certain bars to the 
relief of specific performance.  
“16. Personal bars to relief.- Specific performance of a 
contract cannot be enforced in favour of a person- 
(a) who would not be entitled to recover compensation for 
its breach; or 
 
(b) who has become incapable of performing, or violates 
any essential term of, the contract that on his part remains 
to be performed, or acts in fraud of the contract, or wilfully 
acts at variance with, or in subversion of, the relation 
intended to be established by the contract; or  
 
(c) who fails to aver and prove that he has performed or 
has always been ready and willing to perform the essential 
terms of the contract which are to be performed by him, 
other than terms of the performance of which has been 
prevented or waived by the defendant. 
 
Explanation- For the purpose of clause (c),- 
(i)  where a contract involves the payment of money, it is 
not essential for the plaintiff to actually tender to the 
defendant or to deposit in court any money except when so 
directed by the court; 
 
(ii)  the plaintiff must aver performance of, or readiness 
and willingness to perform, the contract according to its 
true construction.” 
 
 

9 
 
READINESS AND WILLINGNESS NOT PROVED  
13. 
 In order to obtain a decree for specific performance, the plaintiff 
must aver and prove that he has performed his part of the contract and has 
always been ready and willing to perform the terms of the contract which 
are to be performed by him. Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act 
mandates ‘readiness and willingness’ of the plaintiff to be averred and 
proved and it is a condition precedent to obtain the relief of specific 
performance.  
 
14. 
There is a distinction between the terms ‘readiness’ and 
‘willingness’.3 ‘Readiness’ is the capacity of the plaintiff to perform the 
contract which includes his financial position to pay the sale consideration. 
‘Willingness’ is the conduct of the party. In the instant case, even 
according to the concurrent findings recorded by the courts below, it would 
emerge that the plaintiff had been able to successfully prove the sale 
agreement dated 07.06.1993 Ex.A1 on which date Rs.2,005/- was paid by 
the plaintiff to the defendant. The evidence on record tendered by plaintiff 
came to be accepted by all the courts and judgments of courts below would 
also indicate that further amount towards sales consideration in a sum of 
Rs.17,000/- was paid by plaintiff to defendant on 23.06.1993 and same was 
endorsed by him. As per the recital in the agreements, the defendant was 
 
3 His Holiness Acharya Swami Ganesh Dassji v Sit ram Thapar (1996) 4 SCC 526  

10 
 
required to get the suit land surveyed and as such the total consideration 
was agreed to be settled after such survey. On the one hand, the plaintiff 
contends that defendant never got surveyed the suit land. On the other hand 
pleadings and evidence of plaintiff is silent on steps taken by the plaintiff 
as expected of a reasonable person which has not been  taken in the instant 
case namely the plaintiff has not produced any evidence either oral or 
documentary to establish that there was any demand made by him for the 
land being surveyed by defendant. No witnesses have been examined on 
behalf of the plaintiff to establish that at any point of time there has been 
demand made by the plaintiff with the defendant by calling upon him to 
get the suit land surveyed as agreed under the agreement of sale Ex.A1. It 
is for the first time after a period of 3 years from the date of agreement 
Ex.A.1 namely on 30.05.1996 legal notice (Ex.A3) was got issued or in 
other words plaintiff was silent for  a period of 3 years in enforcing of the 
agreement of sale. It is for this specific reason the trial court while 
rejecting the prayer for decree of specific performance has recorded a 
categorical finding to the following effect: 
21. The terms of the agreement  xxx  the period of one year. 
The plaintiff got issued a legal notice on 30.05.1996 Ex.A.3 
expressing his readiness to go ahead with the transaction 
and calling upon the vendors to execute the sale deed. That 
means nearly for two years after the expiry of one year 
period. The plaintiff vendee did nothing to act in 
furtherance of the agreement. Excepting a bald and vague 
assertion that he was contacting the vendors but they were 
dodging nothing more is brought on record to satisfy the 
court that the plaintiff was at all material times interested 

11 
 
in finalizing the deal and showing his readiness and 
willingness to perform the essential terms of the agreement. 
Though the suit was filed within the period of limitation, it 
is not sufficient. In assessing the question of readiness and 
willingness of the party to perform his part of the contract. 
It is highly essential to take into account the long 
unexplained silence and inaction on the part of the 
plaintiff. 
 
22. Plaintiff must perform his part of the contract within 
reasonable time. There was total inaction on the part of the 
plaintiff for 2 ½ years which was not consistent with the 
terms of agreement. From 6.6.94 to 30.5.96 i.e., for a 
period of 23 months, plaintiff sat quiet without taking any 
steps to perform his part of the contract under the 
agreement though the agreement specified a period of one 
year, within which he was expected to urge the defendant-
vendor to get measurements of land and fix the sale price 
and to tender the balance amount and call upon the 
defendants to execute sale deed and deliver possession of 
the property.  
 
As rightly pointed out by the trial court, the respondent-plaintiff has not 
produced any satisfactory evidence to prove his readiness and willingness.  
As regards ‘willingness’ of the plaintiff to perform his part of the contract, 
the conduct of the plaintiff warranting the performance has to be looked 
into. The following conduct of the plaintiff warrants consideration:  
a. Plaintiff got issued legal notice nearly after two years 
after the expiry of one year period as prescribed in the 
agreement.  
 
b. Plaintiff has not brought anything on record to prove 
that he contacted the Defendant after the expiry of one year 
period and was interested in finalising the deed. 
  
c. There was total inaction of the Plaintiff from 
06/06/1994 (expiry of one year period) to 30/05/1996 (Date 
of issuance of legal notice) 
 

12 
 
d. Suit was filed on 09/06/1997 i.e. after a period of more 
than one year from the date of issuing of legal notice. Said 
delay has not been sufficiently explained by the Plaintiff.  
 
The continuous readiness and willingness is a condition precedent to 
grant the relief of specific performance.4 The trial Court has rightly held 
that plaintiff has not sufficiently explained and proved that he was always 
ready and willing to perform his part of the contract. As such the High 
Court and the First Appellate Court had erred in holding that plaintiff had 
proved his readiness and willingness.  
 
15. 
The ratio of the above judgment in all force would be applicable to 
the facts on hand in the instant case. The agreement of sale (Ex.A1) was 
executed  on 07.06.1993 and the date fixed for execution of the sale deed 
was one year from the date of measurement of the suit schedule property. 
Undisputedly no such measurement was carried out and plaintiff has not 
raised his little finger in this regard from the date of execution of 
agreement till he got issued legal notice dated 30.05.1996 that is almost for 
a period of 3 years and suit came to be filed only on 09.06.1997 at the fag 
end of the expiration of the limitation. The long unexplained delay in not 
taking any reasonable steps as is expected from a reasonable person is 
 
4 Vijay Kumar and Ors V. Om Parkash-Supreme Court Judgment (Civil Appeal 
No.10191 of 2018) 

13 
 
itself sufficient to disentitle the plaintiff to an equitable relief.5 It is no 
doubt true that suit for specific performance can be filed even on the last 
date of the limitation as prescribed under Article 54 of the Limitation Act. 
However, the steps taken by the plaintiff during this period namely from 
the date of agreement till date of filing of suit will have to be explained in 
the plaint and proved in the evidence which is lacking in the instant case. 
The long unexplained delay and silence on the part of the plaintiff in this 
regard while in the witness box would not entitle the plaintiff to a decree of 
specific performance and it is for this precise reason, the trial court as 
noticed supra has refused to grant the equitable relief which has been 
reversed by the appellate court without assigning proper and cogent reason 
and the one assigned are at tangent or in other words contrary to the facts. 
The resultant effect of filing the suit for specific performance on the verge 
of limitation coming to an end came to be examined by this Court in the 
matter of Rajesh Kumar Vs. Anand Kumar and Ors6 and held that plaintiff 
would not be entitled to the equitable relief (vide paragraph Nos.14, 15, 16, 
17 and 18). Hence, the appellant would succeed in this appeal. Point No.1 
is answered in favoured of appellant-defendant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 U.N. KRISHNAMURTHY (SINCE DECEASED) THR. LRS. versus A.M. KRISHNAMURTHY  
6 2024 SCC Online SC 981 

14 
 
RE: Point No.2 
 
 
 
 
16. 
For the reasons afore-stated, we are of the considered view that the 
impugned judgment of the High Court and the First Appellate Court is 
liable to be set aside and accordingly, it is set aside. Consequently, the 
judgment of the trial Court dated 19.01.2002 passed in O.S. No.226 of 
1998 is restored.   The appeal stands allowed with no order as to costs.     
 
  
……............………………….J. 
 (Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha) 
 
 
……............………………….J. 
 (Aravind Kumar) 
New Delhi, 
July 10, 2024