2024 INSC 502
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION  
 
ORIGINAL SUIT NO. 4 OF 2021 
 
 
THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL       
      ...PLAINTIFF(S) 
VERSUS 
UNION OF INDIA 
         
 
 
   ...DEFENDANT(S) 
 
INDEX 
Sl. No. 
Particulars 
 
Para Nos. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1-3 
II. 
SUBMISSIONS OF DEFENDANT 
 
4-14 
III. 
SUBMISSIONS OF PLAINTIFF 
 
15-21 
IV. 
LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
 
a. Supreme Court Rules, 2013 
b. Article 131 of the Constitution 
 
22-31 
 
22-29 
 
30-31 
V. 
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 
 
a. State of Bihar v. Union of India 
b. State of Rajasthan v. Union of 
India 
 
32-43 
 
32-33 
 
34-43 
VI. 
CONSIDERATION 
a. Reading of the Plaint 
b. Scheme of the DSPE Act 
c. Power of superintendence of the 
Central Government 
d. Interpretation 
of 
the 
term 
“subject to the provisions of this 
Constitution” 
e. Suppression of material fact 
f. Cause of action of the suit  
 
 
44-83 
 
44-51 
 
52-66 
 
67 
 
68-77 
 
78-79 
80-83 
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
 
84 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2024.07.10
12:06:08 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION: 
1. 
The present suit has been filed by the State of West 
Bengal against Union of India seeking the following reliefs: 
i. 
“Pass a Judgment and Decree declaring that 
registration of cases by the Defendant after 
withdrawal of Notification under Section 6 of 
the 
DSPE 
Act 
by 
the 
Plaintiff 
is 
unconstitutional and non-est;  
ii. 
Pass Judgment and Decree thereby restraining 
and forbearing the Defendant from registering 
any case and/or investigating a case in 
connection with offences committed within the 
territory 
of 
State 
of 
West 
Bengal 
after 
withdrawal of the consent under Section 6 of 
the DSPE Act by the State;  
iii. 
Pass a Judgment and Decree declaring that 
the action of the Defendant in registering cases 
by 
the 
Defendant 
after 
withdrawal 
of 
Notification under Section 6 of the DSPE Act 
by the Plaintiff is violative of Constitution of 
India as well as violative of the basic structure 
of the Constitution and the principle of 
federalism;  
iv. 
Pass a Judgment and Decree thereby quashing 
all cases registered by the Defendant after 
withdrawal of Notification under Section 6 of 
the DSPE Act by the Plaintiff and transmit 
those records to the Plaintiff for registration of 
regular cases by the police force of the 
Plaintiff;  
v. 
Ad-interim order restraining the Defendant 
from proceeding with any investigation on an 

3 
 
FIR and any proceeding arising therefrom, 
registered after November 16, 2018 when the 
consent under Section 6 of the DSPE Act was 
withdrawn 
by 
the 
Plaintiff, 
other 
than 
investigation 
with 
respect 
to 
an 
FIR 
filed/registered on an order of a competent 
court of law;  
vi. 
Pass a Judgment and Decree granting such 
other and further reliefs that are deemed fit in 
the facts and circumstances of the case.” 
 
2. 
On filing of the suit, preliminary objections have been 
raised by the defendant – Union of India with regard to the 
maintainability of the present suit.  Through this judgment, 
we have dealt with the contentions of the parties on the 
aspect of maintainability. 
3. 
For 
the 
consideration 
of 
the 
present 
issue 
of 
maintainability, we have heard Shri Tushar Mehta, learned 
Solicitor General of India appearing on behalf of the 
defendant-Union of India and Shri Kapil Sibal, Shri Abhishek 
Manu Singhvi and Shri Bishwajit Bhattacharya, learned 
Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the plaintiff-State of 
West Bengal. 
II. 
SUBMISSIONS OF DEFENDANT: 
4. 
The basic objection with regard to tenability of the suit 
is based on Article 131 of the Constitution of India (for short, 

4 
 
“the Constitution”).  The learned Solicitor General submitted 
that, upon interpretation of Article 131 of the Constitution, it 
is clear that the provisions of Article 131 of the Constitution 
are subject to the other provisions of the Constitution. He 
therefore submitted that, since the issue involved in the 
present lis is also an issue arising in certain appeals pending 
before this Court, under Article 136 of the Constitution, a 
fresh suit under Article 131 of the Constitution would not be 
tenable.  It is submitted that the term “subject to the 
provisions of this Constitution” has to be interpreted as 
“subject to the other provisions of the Constitution including 
Article 136”.  It is therefore submitted that, since the issue 
with regards to the same subject matter is pending before 
this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution, a suit for 
the same purpose under Article 131 of the Constitution is 
barred. 
5. 
The learned Solicitor General further submitted that, in 
various proceedings filed either under Article 226 before the 
High Court or under Article 136 of the Constitution wherein 
the State of West Bengal is a party, the question with regards 
to the jurisdiction of the Central Bureau of Investigation (for 

5 
 
short “CBI”) to investigate cases within the State of West 
Bengal after 16th November 2018, i.e., the date on which the 
consent under Section 6 of the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment Act, 1946 (hereinafter referred to as “DSPE 
Act”) was withdrawn arises for consideration.  
6. 
While making a reference to the term “subject to the 
provisions of this Constitution” in Article 131 of the 
Constitution, the learned Solicitor General submitted that, 
since the subject matter of the present suit is also pending 
before this Court or the High Courts under Article 136 or 226 
of the Constitution respectively, the present suit would not 
be tenable. 
7. 
The learned Solicitor General further submitted that, 
perusal of the entire matter would reveal that, taking the 
averments in the plaint at its face value, it can be seen that 
no cause of action has been made out against the defendant 
to the suit i.e. the Union of India.  Shri Mehta submitted that 
all the reliefs including declaration of the registration of cases 
being unconstitutional, restraining and forbearing the 
defendant from registering any case etc., are all related to the 
CBI.  It is submitted that the cases referred to in the plaint 

6 
 
are registered at the instance of the CBI and the Union of 
India has no role to play.  It is submitted that, though the 
reliefs are claimed against the CBI, it has not been made a 
party to the suit and that this has been rightly done 
inasmuch as if the CBI was made a party, the suit would not 
have 
been 
maintainable 
under 
Article 
131 
of 
the 
Constitution.  It is submitted that, since the defendant has 
no role to play in the registration of cases; even if the suit is 
decreed, the said decree would remain unenforceable against 
the present defendant.  Reliance in this respect is placed on 
the judgments of this Court in the cases of Mumbai 
International 
Airport 
Private 
Limited 
v. 
Regency 
Convention Centre and Hotels Private Limited and 
Others1 and Ram Kumar v. State of Uttar Pradesh and 
Others2.  It is therefore submitted that the present suit is 
liable to be dismissed on the ground of misjoinder or non-
joinder of parties. 
8. 
The learned Solicitor General further submitted that the 
present suit is also liable to be dismissed on the ground of 
non-laying down of the factual foundation in the suit.  It is 
 
1 (2010) 7 SCC 417 : 2010 INSC 362 
2 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1312 : 2022 INSC 1032 

7 
 
submitted that, unless there is a factual basis in the suit 
itself, no legal arguments 
arising therefrom can be 
entertained.  Reliance in this respect is placed on the 
judgment of this Court in the case of D.M. Deshpande and 
Others v. Janardhan Kashinath Kadam (Dead) By LRs 
and Others3 and the judgment of the Privy Council in the 
case of Attorney-General of the Colony of Fiji v. J.P. Bayly 
Limited4. 
9. 
Shri Mehta further submitted that, Article 131 of the 
Constitution clearly provides as to who can be parties to the 
suit under Article 131 of the Constitution.  He submitted 
that, even for a moment, if it is assumed that CBI is an 
instrumentality of the State under Article 12 of the 
Constitution, still the suit would not be maintainable.  It is 
submitted that the expanded meaning given to the term 
‘State’ under Article 12 of the Constitution cannot be made 
applicable to the term ‘Union’ or ‘State’ mentioned under 
Article 131 of the Constitution.  Reliance in this respect is 
placed on the Constitution Bench judgments of this Court in 
the cases of State of Bihar v. Union of India and 
 
3 (1998) 8 SCC 315 : 1998 INSC 425 
4 1949 SCC OnLine PC 76 

8 
 
Another5, State of Rajasthan and Others v. Union of 
India and Others6 and Tashi Delek Gaming Solutions 
Limited and Another v. State of Karnataka and Others7. 
10. The learned Solicitor General further submitted that the 
dispute, at the most, is between the State of West Bengal and 
the CBI. Reliance in this respect is placed on the judgment of 
this Court in the case of National Textile Corporation 
Limited 
v. 
Nareshkumar 
Badrikumar 
Jagad 
and 
Others8. 
11. Relying on the judgment of this Court in the case of 
Vineet Narain and Others v. Union of India and 
Another9, the learned Solicitor General further submitted 
that the responsibility of superintendence over the CBI’s 
functioning has been entrusted with the Central Vigilance 
Commission (for short “CVC”).  It is submitted that CVC is an 
independent body appointed by an independent collegium.  It 
is submitted that this Court has clearly emphasized that the 
CBI has to be viewed as a non-partisan agency.  It is 
submitted that no control is vested with the Central 
 
5 (1970) 1 SCC 67 : 1969 INSC 253 
6 (1977) 3 SCC 592 : 1977 INSC 143 
7 (2006) 1 SCC 442 : 2005 INSC 607 
8 (2011) 12 SCC 695 : 2011 INSC 651 
9 (1998) 1 SCC 226 : 1997 INSC 826 

9 
 
Government insofar as CBI is concerned.  The learned 
Solicitor General submitted that Section 8 of the Central 
Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as 
“CVC Act”) would make it clear that the CBI is under 
superintendence of the CVC and not the Union of India.  He 
submitted that the proviso to Section 8(1)(b) of the CVC Act 
makes it clear that even the CVC is not empowered to 
exercise powers in such a manner so as to require the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment (for short, “DSPE”) to investigate 
or dispose of any case in a particular manner.  It is 
submitted that this Court, in the case of Centre for Public 
Interest Litigation and Others v. Union of India and 
Others10 held that the power of superintendence can neither 
be used by the CVC for interfering with the manner and 
method of investigation by the CBI nor can the CBI be 
directed to exercise its powers in a particular manner. 
12. The learned Solicitor General further submitted that 
Section 4 of the DSPE Act would also clearly reveal that the 
administration of the CBI is with the CVC and not the Union 
of India.   
 
10 (2012) 3 SCC 104 : 2012 INSC 68 

10 
 
13. Shri Mehta further submitted that the plaintiff has 
suppressed the material fact that most of the cases stated in 
the plaint have been registered on the directions of the High 
Court issued under Article 226 of the Constitution. He 
submitted that, under Order XXVI Rule 9 of the Supreme 
Court Rules, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as “SC Rules”), the 
plaintiff, when he sues upon a document in his possession, is 
required to deliver such document or a copy thereof with the 
plaint and under Order XXVI Rule 10 of the SC Rules, the 
plaintiff, when he relies on any other documents (whether in 
his possession or power or not) as evidence in support of his 
claim, is required to enter such documents in a list to be 
added or annexed to the plaint. It is submitted that, 
admittedly, the requirements under Order XXVI Rules 9 and 
10 of SC Rules have not been fulfilled in the present plaint.  
Relying on the judgment of this Court in the case of S.P. 
Chengalvaraya Naidu (Dead) by LRs. v. Jagannath (Dead) 
by LRs. and Others11, it is submitted that when a party 
withholds a vital document in order to gain advantage on the 
other side, then such a party would be guilty of playing fraud 
 
11 (1994) 1 SCC 1 : 1993 INSC 344 

11 
 
on the court as well as on the opposite party. He therefore 
submitted that, on this short ground alone, the suit is liable 
to be dismissed.  In addition to S.P. Chengalvaraya Naidu 
(Dead) by LRs. (supra), reliance is placed on the judgments 
of this Court in the cases of Atma Linga Reddy and Others 
v. Union of India and Others12 and Kazi Lhendup Dorji v. 
Central Bureau of Investigation and Others13. It is 
therefore submitted that, in view of Order XXVI Rule 6 of the 
SC Rules, the plaint is liable to be rejected. 
14. In response to the contention of the plaintiff regarding 
the defendant not filing an application under Order VII Rule 
11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred 
to as “CPC”) is concerned, it is submitted that the defendant 
has taken preliminary objections with regard to the 
maintainability of the suit itself and therefore there is no 
substance with regard to the said submission of the plaintiff. 
III. SUBMISSIONS OF PLAINTIFF: 
15. Shri Sibal, on the contrary submitted that, for 
considering the question as to whether the suit is 
maintainable or not, only the averments made in the plaint 
 
12 (2008) 7 SCC 788 : 2008 INSC 805 
13 1994 Supp (2) SCC 116 : 1994 INSC 129 

12 
 
will have to be taken into consideration.  It is submitted that, 
only the averments made in the plaint can be considered to 
decide as to whether the plaint discloses any cause of action 
or not.  It is submitted that, perusal of the averments made 
in the plaint would clearly reveal that a cause of action has 
been made out against the defendant – Union of India.  It is 
submitted that, perusal of Section 2 of the DSPE Act would 
reveal that it is the Central Government that is empowered to 
constitute a special police force to be called the DSPE for the 
investigation of offences notified under Section 3 of the DSPE 
Act. It is submitted that, perusal of Section 3 of the DSPE Act 
would also reveal that it is the Central Government that is 
empowered to specify the offences or classes of offences 
which are to be investigated by the DSPE.  He submitted 
that, perusal of sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the DSPE Act 
would reveal that the superintendence of the DSPE vests with 
the CVC only for the investigation of offences committed 
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter 
referred to as “PC Act”).  He submitted that sub-section (2) of 
Section 4 clearly reveals that, except what has been provided 
in sub-section (1) thereof, the superintendence of DSPE in all 

13 
 
other matters shall vest with the Central Government.  He 
submitted that sub-section (3) of Section 4 would reveal that 
the administration of the said police establishment shall vest 
in an officer appointed in this behalf by the Central 
Government and that such an officer, in respect of the CBI, is 
entitled to exercise powers exercisable by an Inspector-
General of Police in respect of the police force in a State. 
16. Shri Sibal further submitted that sub-section (1) of 
Section 5 of the DSPE Act would reveal that it is only the 
Central Government that is empowered to extend to any area 
(including Railway areas) in a State, the powers and 
jurisdiction of members of the CBI for the investigation of any 
offences or classes of offences specified in a notification 
under Section 3 of the DSPE Act. He submitted that under 
sub-section (2) of Section 5, a member of the CBI may, when 
by an order under sub-section (1) thereof, the powers and 
jurisdiction of the CBI are extended to any such area, 
discharge the functions of a police officer in that area.  
However, this is again subject to any orders which the 
Central Government may make in this behalf.  It is submitted 
that, perusal of sub-section (3) thereof would reveal that any 

14 
 
member of CBI of or above the rank of Sub-Inspector is 
entitled to exercise the powers of the officer in charge of a 
police station in that area and when so exercising such 
powers, shall be deemed to be an officer in charge of a police 
station discharging the functions of such an officer within the 
limits of his station.  This is again subject to the orders 
which the Central Government may make in that behalf.  It is 
therefore submitted that the provisions of the DSPE Act 
would 
reveal 
that 
CBI 
cannot 
be 
said 
to 
be 
an 
instrumentality of a State by giving an expanded meaning to 
the term ‘State’ in Article 12 of the Constitution but is one of 
the organs of the Union of India through which it derives 
powers to investigate offences. 
17. It is further submitted that the power available with the 
Central Government for extension of the jurisdiction of CBI to 
other areas is subject to the consent of such State 
Government under Section 6 of the DSPE Act. It is therefore 
submitted that if consent is given by a State and 
subsequently withdrawn, then the CBI will not have 
jurisdiction to exercise the powers in that State.  
  

15 
 
18. Shri Sibal submitted that grant of consent under 
Section 6 of the DSPE Act is a privilege.  It is the discretion of 
the State as to whether such a privilege is to be granted or 
not.  He submitted that the cause of action in the present 
suit is that, after withdrawal of the consent which was 
granted under Section 6 of the DSPE Act by the plaintiff, the 
Central Government has no jurisdiction to authorize 
investigating agency (CBI) to register cases in the State of 
West Bengal. 
19. Shri Sibal further submitted that the interpretation 
sought to be given by the defendant to the words “subject to 
the provisions of this Constitution” as appearing in Article 
131 of the Constitution is incorrect.  It is submitted that the 
correct interpretation would be that when there is some other 
provision in the Constitution prohibiting this Court from 
exercising its jurisdiction, then a suit under Article 131 of the 
Constitution would not be tenable.  He refers to Articles 262 
and 279A(11) of the Constitution in this regard. He submits 
that the words “subject to the provisions of this Constitution” 
would not make the present suit non-maintainable. 
 

16 
 
20. Dealing with the arguments of the learned Solicitor 
General on Order XXVI Rule 6 of the SC Rules, Shri Sibal 
submitted that the plaint can be rejected only when it either 
does not disclose a cause of action or where the suit appears 
from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law.  It 
is submitted that neither of the grounds is available in the 
present case.  Insofar as the argument with regard to Order 
XXVI Rules 9 and 10 of the SC Rules are concerned, Shri 
Sibal submitted that there is sufficient compliance with 
regard to the said provisions.  
21. With regard to the allegations regarding suppression, 
Shri Sibal submitted that, out of so many instances listed in 
the plaint, only one or two cases are registered under the 
directions of the High Court.  It is therefore submitted that 
there is no material suppression as alleged.  Shri Sibal 
therefore pressed for rejection of the preliminary objections 
raised by the learned Solicitor General. 
IV. 
LEGAL FRAMEWORK: 
a. Supreme Court Rules, 2013 
22. For appreciating the rival submissions, it will be 
relevant to refer to Order XXVI Rule 6 of the SC Rules, which 

17 
 
reads thus: 
“Order XXVI 
Plaints 
………… 
6. The plaint shall be rejected:- 
(a) where it does not disclose a cause of action; 
(b) where the suit appears from the statement in the 
plaint to be barred by any law.” 
 
23. It can thus be seen that a plaint is liable to be rejected 
where it does not disclose a cause of action or where the suit 
appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any 
law.   
24. As such, it could be seen that the provisions in Order 
XXVI Rule 6 (a) and (b) are analogous to the provisions in 
clauses (a) and (d) of Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC.   
25. It is a settled position of law that, for considering 
objections under Order VII Rule 11 (a) and (d) of the CPC, 
what needs to be looked into is only the averments made in 
the plaint.  It is well settled that if the averments made in the 
plaint are germane then the pleas taken by the defendant in 
the written statement would be wholly irrelevant at this 
stage.  Reference in this respect could be made to the 

18 
 
judgments of this Court in the cases of Saleem Bhai and 
Others v. State of Maharashtra and Others14, Sopan 
Sukhdeo 
Sable 
and 
Others 
v. 
Assistant 
Charity 
Commissioner and Others15, Bhau Ram v. Janak Singh 
and Others16 and Chhotanben and Another v. Kirtibhai 
Jalkrushnabhai Thakkar and Others17. 
26. In view of the word ‘shall’ used in the provisions, a duty 
is cast on the court to examine as to whether the plaint is hit 
by any of the infirmities provided in the six clauses of Order 
VII Rule 11 of the CPC.  A duty is cast on the court to reject 
the plaint even without the intervention of the defendant.  
Reference in this respect could be made to the judgment of 
this Court in the case of Sopan Sukhdeo Sable (supra).   
27. It is further settled that the averments made in the 
plaint have to be read as a whole and not in isolation.  
Reference in this respect could be made to the judgment of 
this Court in the case of Kirtibhai Jalkrushnabhai 
Thakkar (supra). 
 
 
14 (2003) 1 SCC 557 : 2002 INSC 554 
15 (2004) 3 SCC 137 : 2004 INSC 56 
16 (2012) 8 SCC 701 : 2012 INSC 293 
17 (2018) 6 SCC 422 : 2018 INSC 319 

19 
 
28. As already discussed hereinabove, the provisions under 
Order XXVI Rule 6 of the SC Rules are analogous to Order VII 
Rule 11 (a) and (d) of the CPC.  We will have to therefore 
consider the preliminary objections as raised by the 
defendant in the light of the aforesaid legal provisions. 
29. As already observed hereinabove, the word ‘shall’ casts 
a duty upon the court to consider as to whether the plaint is 
hit by any of the infirmities mentioned in the provision even 
without the intervention of the defendant.  As such, we do 
not find any force in the submission of the plaintiff that the 
objections could not be considered in the absence of an 
application for the rejection of plaint filed by the defendant 
under Order XXVI Rule 6 of the SC Rules.   
b. Article 131 of the Constitution: 
30. It will be apposite to refer to Article 131 of the 
Constitution, which reads thus: 
“131. Original jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court.- 
Subject 
to 
the 
provisions 
of 
this 
Constitution, the Supreme Court shall, to the 
exclusion 
of 
any 
other 
court, 
have 
original 
jurisdiction in any dispute- 
(a) between the Government of India and 
one or more States; or 

20 
 
(b) between the Government of India and 
any State or States on one side and one 
or more other States on the other; or 
(c) between two or more States,  
if and in so far as the dispute involves any question 
(whether of law or fact) on which the existence or 
extent of a legal right depends: 
Provided that the said jurisdiction shall not extend 
to a dispute arising out of any treaty, agreement, 
covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar 
instrument which, having been entered into or 
executed 
before 
the 
commencement 
of 
this 
Constitution, continues in operation after such 
commencement, or which provides that the said 
jurisdiction shall not extend to such a dispute.” 
 
31. It is thus clear that the jurisdiction of this Court, 
subject to the provisions of the Constitution, is to the 
exclusion of any other court. The jurisdiction has to be 
exercised for any dispute either between the Government of 
India and one or more States; or between the Government of 
India and any State or States on one side and one or more 
other States on the other; or between two or more States. The 
jurisdiction is also limited insofar as the dispute involves any 
question (whether of law or fact) on which the existence or 
extent of legal right depends. 
 
 

21 
 
V. 
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS: 
a. State of Bihar v. Union of India: 
32. The learned Solicitor General relied on the Constitution 
Bench judgment of this Court in the case of State of Bihar 
v. Union of India and Another (supra).  In the said case, 
the State of Bihar had filed 9 suits against the Union of India 
who was the first defendant in all of the said suits.  Whereas 
in 6 suits, the second defendant was Hindustan Steel Limited 
and in 3 others, the second defendant was Indian Iron and 
Steel Company Limited.  The cause of action in all the said 
suits was that “due to the negligence or deliberate action of 
the servants of both defendants, there was a shortage in the 
delivery of iron and steel material ordered by the plaintiff to 
various sites in the State of Bihar in connection with the 
construction work of the Gandak Project”.  It will be relevant 
to refer to the following observations made in the said 
judgment: 
“3. Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of the article specify the 
parties who can appear as disputants before this 
Court. Under clause (a) it is the Government of 
India and one or more States; under clause (b) it is 
the Government of India and one or more States on 
one side and one or more other States on the other, 
while under clause (c) the parties can be two or 

22 
 
more States without the Government of India being 
involved in the dispute. The specification of the 
parties is not of an inclusive kind. The express 
words of clauses (a), (b) and (c) exclude the idea 
of a private citizen, a firm or a corporation 
figuring as disputant either alone or even along 
with a State or with the Government of India in 
the category of a party to the dispute. There is no 
scope for suggesting that a private citizen, a firm or 
a corporation can be arrayed as a party by itself on 
one side and one or more States including the 
Government of India on the other. Nor is there 
anything in the article which suggests a claim being 
made by or preferred against a private party jointly 
or in the alternative with a State or the Government 
of India. The framers of the Constitution appear 
not to have contemplated the case of a dispute 
in which a private citizen, a firm or a 
corporation is in any way involved as a fit 
subject for adjudication by this Court under its 
exclusive 
original 
jurisdiction 
conferred 
by 
Article 131. 
………….. 
9. So far as the proceedings of the Joint Committee 
on Indian Constitutional Reform and the report of 
the Committee on the same are concerned, they 
make it clear that the object of conferring 
exclusive original jurisdiction on the Federal 
Court was that the disputes of the kinds 
specified 
between 
the 
Federation 
and 
the 
Provinces as the constituent units of the 
Federation, should not be left to be decided by 
courts of law of a particular unit but be 
adjudicated upon only by the highest tribunal in 
the land which would be beyond the influence of 
any one constituent unit. 
10. Although Article 131 does not defines the scope 
of the disputes which this Court may be called upon 
to determine in the same way as Section 204 of the 
Government of India Act, and we do not find it 
necessary to do so this much is certain that the 

23 
 
legal right which is the subject of dispute must 
arise in the context of the constitution and the 
Federalism it sets up. However, there can be no 
doubt that so far as the parties to the dispute 
are concerned, the framers of the Constitution 
did 
intend 
that 
they 
could 
only 
be 
the 
constituent units of the Union of India and the 
Government of India itself arrayed on one side 
or the other either singly or jointly with another 
unit or the Government of India. 
……………… 
18. It was argued by counsel on behalf of the State 
of Bihar that so far as the Hindustan Steel Limited, 
is concerned it is “State” and the suits in which the 
Government of India along with Hindustan Steel 
Limited, have been impleaded are properly filed 
within Article 131 of the Constitution triable by this 
Court in its original jurisdiction. Reference was 
made to the case of Rajasthan State Electricity 
Board v. Mohan Lal [1967 3 SCR 377] . There the 
question arose between certain persons who were 
permanent employees of the Government of the 
State of Rajasthan and later placed at the disposal 
of the State Electricity Board and one of the 
questions was whether the appellant Board could be 
held to be “State” as defined in Article 12. This 
Court by a majority held that the Board was “other 
authority” within the meaning of Article 12 and 
therefore was a “state” to which appropriate 
directions could be given under Articles 226 and 
227 of the Constitution. It will be noted that 
under Article 12 all local or other authorities 
within the territory of India or under the control 
of the Government of India are “States” for 
purposes of Part III which defines and deals with 
the 
Fundamental 
Rights 
enshrined 
in 
the 
Constitution. The expression “the State” has the 
same meaning in Part IV of the Constitution 
under Article 36. No reason was shown as to why 
the enlarged definition of “State” given in Parts III 
and IV of the Constitution would be attracted to 

24 
 
Article 131 of the Constitution and in our opinion 
a body like the Hindustan Steel Limited cannot 
be considered to be “a State” for the purpose of 
Article 131 of the Constitution.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
33. It could be seen that this Court held that the express 
words of clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Article 131 of the 
Constitution exclude the idea of a private citizen, a firm or a 
corporation figuring as a disputant either alone or even along 
with a State or with the Government of India in the category 
of a party to the dispute. It has been held that the framers of 
the Constitution did not contemplate a dispute in which a 
private citizen, a firm or a corporation is in any way involved 
as a fit subject for adjudication by this Court under its 
exclusive original jurisdiction conferred by Article 131 of the 
Constitution.  It further observed that the legal right which is 
the subject of dispute must arise in the context of the 
Constitution and the Federalism it sets up. It has been 
unequivocally held that there can be no doubt that so far as 
the parties to the dispute are concerned, the framers of the 
Constitution did intend that they could only be the 
constituent units of the Union of India and the Government 
of India itself arrayed on one side or the other, either singly 

25 
 
or jointly with another unit or the Government of India.  The 
Court then observed that, under Article 12 of the 
Constitution, all local or other authorities within the territory 
of India or under the control of the Government of India are 
“States” for purposes of Part III of the Constitution which 
defines and deals with the Fundamental Rights enshrined in 
the Constitution.  It further observed that the expression “the 
State” has the same meaning as in Part IV of the Constitution 
under Article 36.  It therefore observed that a body like the 
Hindustan Steel Limited cannot be considered to be “a State” 
for the purpose of Article 131 of the Constitution.  A strong 
reliance has been placed on these observations by the 
learned Solicitor General. 
b. State of Rajasthan v. Union of India: 
34. The learned Solicitor General strongly relies on the 
judgment of this Court in the case of State of Rajasthan 
and Others v. Union of India and Others (supra).  The 
brief facts of the said case are as under: 
“In the elections held in March, 1977, the Janata 
party had secured overwhelming majority in the Lok 
Sabha.  In some of the States, the Congress was 
continuing in power.  In view of the complete and 
unequivocal rejection of the Congress Party, the 

26 
 
Union Home Minister addressed a communication 
on 18th April 1977 to nine States asking them to 
advise their respective Governors to dissolve the 
Assemblies and seek a fresh mandate from the 
people.  Some of the States had filed suits before the 
Supreme Court praying for a declaration that the 
letter of the Union Home Minister was illegal and 
ultra vires of the Constitution of India and not 
binding on the plaintiffs and prayed for an interim 
injunction restraining the Central Government from 
restoring to Article 356 of the Constitution.  
Preliminary objections were raised on behalf of the 
defendant 
– 
Union 
of 
India 
against 
the 
maintainability of the suits under Article 131 of the 
Constitution of India.  The preliminary objections 
were raised on two grounds.  The first was that 
under Article 131 of the Constitution of India, the 
‘State’ and not the ‘State Government’ should be a 
party.  The second was that the present matter did 
not involve a legal dispute.”  
 
35. It will be apposite to refer to the following paragraphs of 
the said judgment of Y.V. Chandrachud, J. (as His Lordship 
then was): 
“108. The absence of the expression “State 
Government” and the use in its place of the 
expression “State” in Article 131, is said to 
furnish intrinsic evidence that for a suit to fall 
under that article, the dispute must arise 
between the Government of India and a State, 
not between the Government of India and the 
Government of a State. The intrinsic evidence, it is 
argued, assumes greater credibility in the context 
that the article does employ the expression 
“Government of India” when what was meant was 
the government, as contra distinguished from the 
State. The presence of the particular expressions in 
Article 131 does not, in my opinion, support the 

27 
 
inference suggested on behalf of the Union of India. 
The use of the phrase “Government of India” in 
Article 131(a) and (b) does not mean that one party 
to the dispute has to be the Government of the day 
at the Centre. “Government of India” means “Union 
of India” because if there be merit in the logic that 
Article 131 does not comprehend disputes in which 
the Government of a State as contrasted with the 
State itself is interested, it must follow that 
correspondingly, the “Government of India” too 
cannot mean the Government for the time being in 
power at the Centre. The true construction of Article 
131(a), true in substance and true pragmatically, is 
that a dispute must arise between the Union of 
India and a State. 
109. This may sound paradoxical because if the 
preliminary objection is unsustainable, it would be 
easier to say that the expression “Government of 
India” means “Government in office” and the 
expression “State” means the State as a polity and 
not “the Government in Office”. But convenient 
interpretations are apt to blur the significance of 
issues involved for interpretations. Therefore, the 
effort has to be to accept what the words truly mean 
and to work out the constitutional scheme as it may 
reasonably be assumed to have been conceived. 
110. The dispute between the Union of India and 
a State cannot but be a dispute which arises out 
of the differences between the Government in 
office at the Centre and the Government in 
office in the State. “In office” means “in power” but 
the use of the latter expression may prudently be 
avoided with the realisation of what goes with 
power. But there is a further prerequisite which 
narrows down the ambit of the class of disputes 
which fall within Article 131. That requirement is 
that the dispute must involve a question, whether of 
law or fact, on which the existence or extent of a 
legal right depends. It is this qualification which 
affords the true guide for determining whether a 
particular dispute is comprehended within Article 

28 
 
131. Mere wrangles between governments have 
no place in the scheme of that article. They have 
to be resolved elsewhere and by means less solemn 
and sacrosanct than a court proceeding. The 
purpose of Article 131 is to afford a forum for 
the resolution of disputes which depend for their 
decision on the existence or extent of a legal 
right. It is only when a legal, not a mere 
political, 
issue 
arises 
touching 
upon 
the 
existence or extent of a legal right that Article 
131 is attracted. 
………….. 
113. I find it difficult to accept that the State as 
a polity is not entitled to raise a dispute of this 
nature. In a federation, whether classical or 
quasi-classical, the States are vitally interested 
in the definition of the powers of the Federal 
Government on one hand and their own on the 
other. A dispute bearing upon the delineation of 
those powers is precisely the one in which the 
federating States, no less than the Federal 
Government itself, are interested. The States, 
therefore, have the locus and the interest to 
contest and seek an adjudication of the claim 
set up by the Union Government. The bond of 
constitutional 
obligation 
between 
the 
Government of India and the States sustains 
that locus. 
114. The expression “legal right” which occurs in 
Article 131 has to be understood in its proper 
perspective. In a strict sense, legal rights are 
correlative of legal duties and are defined as 
interests which the law protects by imposing 
corresponding duties on others. But in a generic 
sense, the word “right” is used to mean an 
immunity from the legal power of another: immunity 
is exemption from the power of another in the same 
way as liberty is exemption from the right of 
another. Immunity, in short, is “no-subjection”. [ 
Salmond's Jurisprudence 11th Edn. pp. 276-7] 
R.W.M. Dias says in his “Jurisprudence” (1976 Edn., 

29 
 
pp. 33-4) that the word “right” has undergone 
successive shifts in meaning and connotes four 
different ideas concerning the activity, or potential 
activity, of one person with reference to another. 
One of these four jural relationships, according to 
the learned Author, is the “you cannot” relationship, 
which is the same thing as the right of immunity 
which “denotes freedom from the power of another” 
(p. 58). Paton's book on Jurisprudence (3rd Edn. p. 
256) contains a similar exposition of legal rights. 
The legal right of the States consists in their 
immunity, in the sense of freedom from the 
power of the Union Government. They are 
entitled, under Article 131, to assert that right 
either by contending in the absolute that the 
Centre has no power to dissolve the Legislative 
Assemblies or with the qualification that such a 
power cannot be exercised on the ground stated. 
115. It is true that the State, like the British 
Monarch, never dies. A Legislative Assembly may be 
dissolved, a Council of Ministers may go out of 
power, the President's rule may be introduced or 
imposed, or an emergency may be declared which 
can conceivably affect the States' powers in matters 
legislative and executive. The State survives these 
upheavals. But it is constitutionally unsound to 
say that the State, as a political entity, has no 
legal interest in such cataclysmic events and no 
legal rights to assert in relation thereto. Were it 
so, which then are the legal rights which the 
State, as distinguished from its Government, can 
agitate under Article 131? Whatever be the 
nature of the claim, the argument can always be 
put forward that the Government, not the State, 
is interested in making that claim. Such a rigid 
interpretation of the scope of Article 131 will 
virtually reduce it to a dead-letter and destroy a 
precious safeguard against the use of arbitrary 
power. The interpretation canvassed by the learned 
Additional Solicitor General must, therefore, be 
avoided, Insofar as the language of the article 
permits it which in my opinion it does. 

30 
 
………. 
117. The judgment of this Court in State of 
Bihar v. Union of India [(1970) 1 SCC 67 : (1970) 2 
SCR 522] affords no real assistance on the question 
arising before us. In that case, the Court raised 
three issues in the suits filed under Article 131. The 
first issue which related to the question whether the 
suits were within the scope of Article 131 was not 
answered by the Court because it held on the 
second issue that the suits were not maintainable, 
since a private party was impleaded thereto. The 
only assistance which may be derived from the 
judgment in that case is that it said that the 
disputes under Article 131 should be “in respect of 
legal rights and not disputes of a political character” 
and that though it was unnecessary to define the 
scope of Article 131, “this much is certain that 
the legal right which is the subject of dispute 
must arise in the context of the Constitution 
and the Federalism it sets up” (p. 529). These 
observations do not affect the construction which I 
have placed on Article 131. I have endeavoured to 
show 
that 
it 
is 
competent 
to 
the 
State 
Governments to bring suits of the present nature 
under that article and that by these suits, the 
State Governments are raising a legal, not a 
political, issue. Their assertion is that the 
Government of India does not possess the 
constitutional power claimed by it and therefore, 
this Court should declare that they are immune 
from the exercise of that power. The States 
assert their legal right of immunity which, as 
explained above, denotes freedom from the 
power of another.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
36. It could thus be seen that Justice Chandrachud 
observed that the true construction of Article 131(a), true in 

31 
 
substance and true pragmatically, is that a dispute must 
arise between the Union of India and a State.  His Lordship 
further observed that the dispute between the Union of India 
and a State cannot but be a dispute which arises out of the 
differences between the Government in office at the Centre 
and the Government in office in the State.  It was further 
held that the further requirement for a dispute to fall within 
the ambit of the classes of disputes under Article 131 of the 
Constitution is that the dispute must involve a question, 
whether of law or fact, on which the existence or extent of a 
legal right depends.  It was further observed that mere 
wrangles between governments have no place in the scheme 
of that article.  His Lordship further held that the purpose of 
Article 131 is to afford a forum for the resolution of disputes 
which depend for their decision on the existence or extent of 
a legal right. It has been held that it is only when a legal, not 
a mere political issue arises touching upon the existence or 
extent of a legal right that Article 131 of the Constitution is 
attracted. 
37. Justice 
Chandrachud 
specifically 
rejected 
the 
contention that the State as a polity was not entitled to raise 

32 
 
a dispute of the nature raised herein. His Lordship observed 
that in a federation, whether classical or quasi-classical, the 
States are vitally interested in the definition of the powers of 
the Federal Government on one hand and their own on the 
other. A dispute bearing upon the delineation of those powers 
is precisely the one in which the federating States, no less 
than the Federal Government itself, are interested. It was 
also observed that the States therefore have the locus and 
the interest to contest and seek an adjudication of the claim 
set up by the Union Government. The bond of constitutional 
obligation between the Government of India and the States 
sustains that locus.  His Lordship further observed that the 
legal right of the States consists in their immunity, in the 
sense of freedom from the power of the Union Government. It 
has been held that the States are entitled, under Article 131, 
to assert that right either by contending in the absolute that 
the Centre has no power to dissolve the Legislative 
Assemblies or with the qualification that such a power 
cannot be exercised on the ground stated.  It has been held 
that it is constitutionally unsound to say that the State, as a 
political entity, has no legal interest in such cataclysmic 

33 
 
events and no legal rights to assert in relation thereto.  The 
Court specifically rejected the argument on the rigid 
interpretation of the scope of Article 131 and observed that if 
such an interpretation was to be accepted, it would virtually 
reduce it to a dead-letter and destroy a precious safeguard 
against the use of arbitrary power.   
38. After referring to the judgment in the case of State of 
Bihar v. Union of India and Another (supra), His Lordship 
observed that, in the said case, the Court held that on the 
second issue, the suits were not maintainable since a private 
party was impleaded thereto.  His Lordship further observed 
that the only assistance that could be derived from the said 
judgment was that the disputes under Article 131 should be 
“in respect of legal rights and not disputes of a political 
character”.  His Lordship further observed that the assertion 
of the States was that the Government of India did not 
possess the constitutional power claimed by it and therefore, 
this Court should declare that they are immune from such 
exercise of that power.  
39. With the aforesaid observations, the Court rejected the 
preliminary objections with regard to maintainability of the 

34 
 
suits therein.  Justice Chandrachud, further observed thus: 
“138. That 
takes 
us 
to 
the 
question 
of 
maintainability of the suits. There are six suits 
before us filed by the States of Rajasthan, Madhya 
Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh and 
Orissa. Each of these suits has been filed under 
Article 131 of the Constitution. This Article confers 
original jurisdiction on the Supreme Court, to the 
exclusion of all other courts, in respect of certain 
categories of suits and is in the following terms: 
“131. Subject to the provisions of this 
Constitution, the Supreme Court shall, to 
the exclusion of any other court, have 
original jurisdiction in any dispute— 
(a) between the Government of India 
and or more States; or 
(b) between the Government of India 
and any State or States on one side 
and one or more other States on the 
other; or 
(c) between two or more States, 
if and insofar as the dispute involves any 
question (whether of law or fact) on which 
the existence or extent of a legal right 
depends: 
Provided that the said jurisdiction shall 
not extend to a dispute arising out of any 
treaty, 
agreement, 
covenant, 
engagement, sanad or 
other 
similar 
instrument which having been entered 
into 
or 
executed 
before 
the 
commencement 
of 
the 
Constitution, 
continues 
in 
operation 
after 
such 
commencement, or which provides that 
the said jurisdiction shall not extend to 
such a dispute.” 
There are two limitations in regard to the nature of 
the suit which can be entertained by the Supreme 

35 
 
Court under this Article. One is in regard to parties 
and the other is in regard to the subject-matter. The 
Article provides in so many terms in clauses (a), (b) 
and (c) that the dispute must be between the 
Government of India and one or more States, or 
between the Government of India and any other 
State or States on one side and one or more other 
States on the other, or between two or more States. 
It does not contemplate any private party being 
arrayed as a disputant on one side or the other. 
The parties to the dispute must fall within one 
or the other category specified in clauses (a), (b) 
and (c). That was established by a decision of 
this 
Court 
in State 
of 
Bihar v. Union 
of 
India [(1970) 1 SCC 67 : (1970) 2 SCR 522] where 
this Court pointed out: 
“a dispute which falls within the ambit of 
Article 131 can only be determined in the 
forum mentioned therein, namely, the 
Supreme Court of India, provided there 
has not been impleaded in any said 
dispute any private party, be it a citizen 
or a firm or a corporation along with a 
State either jointly or in the alternative. A 
dispute in which such a private party is 
involved must be brought before a court, 
other than this court, having jurisdiction 
over the matter.” 
This is the limitation as to parties. The other 
limitation as to subject-matter flows from the words 
“if and insofar as the dispute involves any question 
(whether of law or fact) on which the existence or 
extent of a legal right depends”. These words clearly 
indicate that the dispute must be one relating to a 
legal right and not a dispute on the political plans 
not based on a legal right, for instance, to take an 
example given by Mr Seervai in his well known work 
on “Constitutional Law of India” at p. 1385: “a claim 
that a State project should be included in the Five-
Year Plan.” The dispute must, therefore, involve 
assertion or vindication of a legal right of the 

36 
 
Government of India or a State. It is not necessary 
that the right must be a constitutional right. All that 
is necessary is that it must be a legal right. It is 
true that in the State of Bihar v. Union of 
India this Court, while discussing the scope of 
the dispute which may be determined by the 
Supreme Court under Article 131, happened to 
make an observation that “this much is certain 
that the legal right which is the subject of 
dispute must arise in the context of the 
Constitution and the federalism it sets up”. But 
this observation, Insofar as it suggests that the 
“legal right” must be one which arises under the 
Constitution, goes much further than what the 
language of Article 131 warrants. The Article speaks 
only of “legal right” and does not qualify it by any 
other words. It may be noted that the provision in 
the corresponding Section 204 of the Government of 
India Act, 1935 was significantly different. It 
contained a proviso that the dispute must inter alia 
concern the interpretation of the Government of 
India Act, 1935 “or of an Order in Council made 
thereunder or the extent of the legislative or 
executive authority vested in the Federation by 
virtue of the Instrument of Accession of that State”. 
This 
provision 
has 
been 
deliberately 
and 
designedly 
omitted 
in 
Article 
131 
and 
now any legal right can be enforced by a suit in 
the Supreme Court provided the parties fill the 
character specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c). The 
question 
which 
therefore 
requires 
to 
be 
considered in determining the maintainability of 
the suits is whether any legal right of the 
States is sought to be vindicated in the suits. We 
shall presently consider this question, but before 
we do so, we must point out one other error in 
which, with the greatest respect, the learned 
Judges who decided the case of State of 
Bihar v. Union of India seem to have fallen. They 
held that in a suit under Article 131 the only order 
which the Supreme Court could make was a 
declaration adjudicating on the legal right claimed 

37 
 
in the suit and once such a declaration was given, 
the function of the Supreme Court under Article 
131 was at an end. If this conclusion were correct, 
then obviously the present suits seeking permanent 
injunction restraining the Government of India from 
issuing a proclamation under Article 356 clause (1) 
could not lie and equally no interim injunction 
could be granted by this Court, but the learned 
Additional Solicitor General, with his usual candour 
and fairness, conceded that he was not in a position 
to support this view. This view seems to be 
erroneous and for two very good reasons. In the first 
place, it overlooks the fact that whereas sub-section 
(2) of Section 204 of the Government of India Act, 
1935 provided that the Federal Court, in exercise of 
its original jurisdiction, shall not pronounce any 
judgment, other than a declaratory judgment, no 
such provision limiting the power of the Supreme 
Court in regard to the relief to be granted is to be 
found in Article 131. The power of the Supreme 
Court to grant relief in a suit under Article 131 is 
not restricted only to “declaratory judgment”. 
Secondly, as pointed out by Mr Seervai in his book 
at p. 1385, “when a court is given exclusive 
jurisdiction in respect of a dispute between the 
parties, it is reasonable to hold that the Court has 
power to resolve the whole dispute”, unless its 
power is limited by express words or by necessary 
implication. There is no such limitation in Article 
131 and hence it is not correct to say that the 
Supreme Court can only give a declaratory 
judgment in a suit under Article 131. The Supreme 
Court would have power to give whatever reliefs are 
necessary for enforcement of the legal right claimed 
in the suit if such legal right is established.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
40. It could thus be seen that His Lordship approved the 
ratio in State of Bihar v. Union of India and Another 

38 
 
(supra) to the effect that the suit under Article 131 of the 
Constitution does not contemplate any private party being 
arrayed as a disputant on one side or the other. It held that 
the parties to the dispute must fall within one or the other 
category specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Article 131 of 
the Constitution.   
41. His Lordship disapproved the observations made in the 
case of State of Bihar v. Union of India and Another 
(supra) to the effect that “this much is certain that the legal 
right which is the subject of dispute must arise in the context 
of the Constitution and the federalism it sets up”.  His 
Lordship held that the suggestion that the legal right must be 
one which arises under the Constitution, goes much further 
than what the language of Article 131 of the Constitution 
warrants. 
42. Justice Chandrachud further pointed out that, under 
the Government of India Act, 1935, Section 204 provided that 
the dispute must inter alia concern the interpretation of the 
Government of India Act, 1935 or of an Order in Council 
made thereunder or the extent of the legislative or executive 
authority vested in the Federation by virtue of the Instrument 

39 
 
of Accession of that State.  It has been observed that the said 
provisions have been deliberately and designedly omitted in 
Article 131 of the Constitution and now any legal right can be 
enforced by a suit in this Court provided the parties fill the 
character specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Article 131 of 
the Constitution. What is required to be considered is that in 
determining the maintainability of the suits, whether any 
legal right of the States is sought to be vindicated or not. His 
Lordship, in paragraph 142, specifically observed that the 
suits for consideration before it sought to enforce a legal right 
of the States arising under the Constitution and the suits 
could not be thrown out in limine as being outside the scope 
and ambit of Article 131 of the Constitution.  The same view 
has been taken by Justice P.K. Goswami in paragraph 159 
with regard to parties that may be impleaded in a suit under 
Article 131 of the Constitution as well as with regard to the 
subject matter of the litigation. 
43. In the light of the law laid down in the case of State of 
Rajasthan and Others v. Union of India and Others 
(supra), which is a judgment of seven Judges of this Court, 
we will have to examine the rival submissions. 

40 
 
VI. 
CONSIDERATION: 
a. Reading of the Plaint: 
44. As observed hereinabove, in a catena of judgments, it 
has been held that for considering the preliminary objections, 
only the averments made in the plaint are to be looked into to 
determine as to whether a cause of action has been made out 
or not. In that regard, it will be relevant to refer to some of 
the paragraphs in the plaint, which read thus: 
“3.  Article 246(1) empowers the Parliament with 
exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of 
the matters enumerated in List I, Seventh Schedule 
(known as the Union List). Entry 80, List I is 
relevant in this regard: 
“80. 
Extension 
of 
the 
powers 
and 
jurisdiction of members of a police force 
belonging to any State to any area outside 
that State, but not so as to enable the 
police of one State to exercise powers and 
jurisdiction in any area outside that State 
without the consent of the Government of 
the State in which such area is situated; 
extension of the powers and jurisdiction of 
members of a police force belonging to any 
State to railway areas outside that State.” 
4.    That the police powers come within the State’s 
exclusive jurisdiction is also recognized in Article 
246(3) of the Constitution, which provides that the 
State has exclusive power to make laws for such 
state for any of the matters enumerated in List II. 
Specifically, of such matters, Entry 1 and Entry 2 
are relevant which are:  
“1. Public order (but not including the use 

41 
 
of any naval, military or air force or any 
other armed force of the Union or of any 
other force subject to the control of the 
Union or of any contingent or unit thereof 
in aid of the civil power). 
2. Police (including railway and village 
police) subject to the provisions of entry 2A 
of List I.”  
5.   Entries 1 and 2 of List II, the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution of India thus prescribe that 
public order and the police are exclusive subject 
matters of the concerned State. Further Entry 80, 
List I, ensures that the Union/Center does not 
transgress into the jurisdiction of the State without 
permission of the concerned State.  
6.   The CBI which draws its powers under the 
DSPE 
Act 
has 
acted 
in 
violation 
of 
the 
aforementioned Constitutional provisions and the 
DSPE Act. The DSPE Act, as its preamble provides, 
was enacted to make provisions for the constitution 
of a Special ‘Police Force’ in Delhi for the 
investigation of certain offences in the Union 
Territory, 
for 
the 
superintendence 
and 
administration of the said Force and for the 
extension of its powers and jurisdiction in regard to 
the investigation of the said offences. Section 2 of 
the DSPE Act provides for constitution of the force, 
Section 3 thereof prescribes the offence which are to 
be investigated by CBI; Section 5 of DSPE Act 
provides extension of power and jurisdiction of CBI 
into any area (including a railway area) in a State; 
Section 6 thereof expressly provides that the 
force/CBI is required to obtain the consent of the 
concerned State in case of exercise of such power in 
terms of Section 5 of the DSPE Act. 
7.  
Section 6 of the DSPE Act is the statutory 
recognition of the principle of federalism which 
forms a part of the basic structure of the 
Constitution of India, as also protected under Entry 
80, List I and Entries 1 and 2, List II, Constitution 
of India. In absence of Section 6 in the statute book, 

42 
 
the piece of legislation would have attracted the vice 
of unconstitutionality. 
8.  
Any act of the CBI in violation of Section 6, 
DSPE Act, strikes at the roots of federalism, which 
this Hon’ble Court in S.R. Bommai v. Union of India, 
1994 SCC (3) 1, has held to be a part of the 
Constitution’s basic structure. Therefore, the CBI’s 
exercise of powers by violating Section 6, DSPE Act, 
subverts the basic structure of the Constitution. 
9.  
Under 
the 
Constitution, 
a 
threefold 
distribution of legislative power by the three 
Legislative Lists in the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution of India has been conceptualized (vide 
Article 246). List II of the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution of India is the part and parcel of a 
single 
constitutional 
instrument 
envisaging 
a 
federal scheme. It thus confers plenary power on 
the State to legislate on certain exclusive subject 
matters which includes “public order” and “police” 
in a State. 
10. Section 6 of the DSPE Act is a component of 
such federalism that provides for a prior approval of 
the State in case Centre wishes to transgress in the 
territory of the State and usurping the powers of the 
police force of the State. 
11. The provision of Section 6 therefore, assumes 
immense significance and therefore, cannot be 
ignored and violated by the Defendant. Any such 
attempt on the part of the Defendant would cause 
an inroad to the constitutionalism and therefore, 
this Hon’ble Court being the conscience keeper of 
the Constitution ought not to permit the Defendant 
to do so. 
12. In State of West Bengal and others v. 
Committee for Protection of Democratic Right, West 
Bengal and others reported in (2010) 3 SCC 571, 
this Hon’ble Court held that although Section 5(1), 
DSPE Act empowers the Central Government to 
extend power and jurisdiction of members of the 
DSPE force to any area in a State, Section 6 

43 
 
imposes a restriction on such power of the Central 
Government requiring it to obtain the consent of the 
concerned State Government. This Hon’ble Court 
further held that the only exception is when either 
the Hon’ble High Courts or this Hon’ble Court, in 
exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 or 32 of 
the Constitution, respectively, directs the CBI to 
investigate a cognizable offence allegedly to have 
been committed within the territory of a state 
without the consent of that particular state; such 
direction 
under 
Articles 
226 
or 
32 
of 
the 
Constitution will neither impinge upon the federal 
structure of the Constitution nor violate the 
doctrine of separation of power, and shall be valid in 
law. 
13.  In the instant proceeding, the Plaintiff is 
challenging the act of the defendant in registering 
suo moto cases for offences that have occurred 
within the territory of the plaintiff dehors any 
direction from any competent court or prior consent 
granted by the Plaintiff.  
14. In this regard, Section 6 of the DSPE Act is 
crucial since it requires prior consent of the State 
Government for exercising power and jurisdiction 
under the DSPE Act by CBI to any area in a State 
not having Union Territory or Railways. Before the 
provision of DSPE Act are invoked to authorize the 
CBI to exercise its power and jurisdiction within any 
State, the following conditions are to be specified 
compulsorily. 
i)  A notification must be issued by the 
Central 
Government 
specifying 
the 
offences 
to 
be 
investigated 
by 
CBI 
(Section 3); 
ii) An order must be passed by the 
Central Government extending power and 
jurisdiction of CBI to any area (including 
railway area) in a State not being an 
Union Territory in respect of offences 
specified under Section 3 (Section 5); and 

44 
 
iii) Consent of the State Government 
must be obtained for the exercise of 
power by CBI in the concerned State 
(Section 6). 
15. Thus, from a plain reading of the law, it is 
evident that the CBI does not have any inherent 
jurisdiction in any area in a State including a 
railway area. The DSPE has to mandatorily meet the 
requirements of Section 3 and Section 5, DSPE Act, 
and thereafter its powers become subject to the 
consent of the State under Section 6, DSPE Act.  
16. This Hon’ble Court has held that fulfillment of 
all three conditions under Sections 3,5, and 6 are 
required prior to the CBI exercising its powers in 
any State (M. Balakrishna Reddy v. CBI, (2008) 4 
SCC 409). 
17. On February 18, 1963, the Defendant under 
Section 3 (1) of the DSPE Act notified a class of 
offences, wherein, the power to investigate given to 
be vested with CBI. On February 18, 1963, by order 
No. 25/12/6-AVD-II, issued by Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Government of India Act, under Section 5, 
DSPE Act extended jurisdiction of members of the 
Delhi Special Police Establishment to various states, 
including the State of West Bengal.  
18. On August 2, 1989, in exercise of its powers 
under Section 6, DSPE Act, the Plaintiff vide 
Notification being G.O. No. 6845-PL/PE/2A- 10/88, 
accorded its consent to CBI to exercise the power 
and jurisdiction within the territory of the State of 
West Bengal for certain offences, except for public 
servants employed in connection with the affairs of 
the State or any Authority controlled or aided wholly 
or partly by the State Government for which the 
specific request and with the prior concurrence of 
the State Government was required. 
19. On November 16, 2018, the Plaintiff, in 
exercise of its powers under Section 6, DSPE Act, 
withdrew the aforesaid consent accorded vide G.O. 
No. 6845-PL/PE/2A-10/88 dated August 2, 1989. 

45 
 
Thus, the Plaintiff, during the period August 2, 
1989 to November 16, 2018, had given a limited 
consent to the CBI to investigate certain offences 
pertaining to persons who were not employed in 
connection 
with 
the 
affairs 
of 
the 
State 
Government/authority controlled or aided by the 
State Government. However, after November 16, 
2018, the CBI would have been required to obtain 
the prior and specific consent of the Plaintiff for 
exercise of any power under the DSPE Act in the 
State of West Bengal. 
………… 
21. The cause of action for filing this suit thus does 
not arise from any one particular event or case but 
arises due to the fact that the CBI, despite the 
withdrawal of consent by the State under Section 6, 
DSPE Act, has registered cases and has been 
exercising its powers under the DSPE Act in an 
unconstitutional manner. This impacts many cases 
and investigation of offences that ought to be done 
by the State Police. The details of some of the cases 
registered by the CBI without obtaining consent of 
the Plaintiff, which gives rise to a continuing cause 
of action, are as follows: 
 
Sl. No. 
 
Date of Registration Regular Case No. 
 
1.  
17/11/2018 
RC0102018A0011 
2.  
19/11/2018 
RC0102018A0012 
3.  
23/08/2019 
RC0562019S0004 
4.  
30/09/2019 
RC0562019S0005 
5.  
21/09/2020 
RC0102020A0018 
6.  
21/09/2020 
RC0102020A0019 
7.  
22/09/2020 
RC0102020A0020 
8.  
19/10/2020 
RC0102020A0021 
9.  
27/11/2020 
RC0102020A0022 
10. 
07/12/2020 
RC0102020A0023 
11. 
29/01/2021 
RC0732021E0001 
12. 
15/06/2021 
RC0102021A0003 
 
22. All of the abovementioned FIRs concern 

46 
 
offences under laws such as the Indian Penal Code 
1860 and/or Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, all 
of which the State/Kolkata Police is empowered to 
investigate by statute. Therefore, the CBI in 
exercising its powers under the DSPE Act, without 
the requisite State consent is not only violating 
Section 6, DSPE Act, but also usurping and ousting 
State/Kolkata Police’s statutory jurisdiction over 
such offences.  
23. Such action of the Defendant violates the 
Constitutional provisions, the DSPE Act, and 
derogates from the doctrine of federalism. By 
registration of these cases, the Defendant herein 
has rendered the provisions under Section 6 of the 
DSPE Act nugatory.  
24. The requirement of obtaining consent of the 
concerned state to enable CBI to investigate in the 
said state under section 6 of the DSPE Act aligns 
with the principles of federalism as envisaged in the 
constitution which has vested the state with the 
power to exercise exclusive jurisdiction by making 
laws with respect to police under Entry 2 of the 
State List of the Seventh Schedule read with Article 
246(3) of the Constitution of India. 
…………. 
29. 
 
In 
accordance 
with 
the 
provisions 
of 
Constitution and the law interpreted by this Hon’ble 
Court, 
the 
Plaintiff 
State 
will 
suffer 
grave 
constitutional prejudice in case the Defendant is 
allowed to operate its own police force within the 
State of West Bengal in absence of previous 
approval of the Plaintiff State. Thus, there exists a 
dispute, involving of question of law and fact, 
between the Plaintiff State of West Bengal and the 
Defendant 
Union 
of 
India, 
regarding 
the 
encroachment of jurisdiction and encroachment of 
legal rights as a State and as well as for the 
enforcement 
of 
the 
fundamental, 
statutory 
constitutional and other legal rights of the State of 
West Bengal. Hence, this Original Suit under Article 
131 of the Constitution of India is being preferred. 

47 
 
30.    The action of the Defendant is an act of 
constitutional overreach inasmuch as by registering 
cases within the State of West Bengal in absence of 
the consent of the Plaintiff, the Defendant has 
exceeded its jurisdiction and has acted contrary to 
the scheme of Constitution and DSPE statute.  
31.  Such action of the Defendant also violates the 
law laid down by this Hon’ble Court that no 
investigation can be conducted within the territory 
of a State in absence of consent under Section 6 of 
the DSPE Act (see Kazi Lehendup Dorji v. CBI, & Ors 
1994 Supp (2) SCC 116 (para 4,9,17); Subramanian 
Swami v. CBI 2014 (8) SCC 682 (Para 67,68); State 
of West Bengal v. Committee for Protection of 
Democratic Right, West Bengal & Ors. 2013(3) SCC 
571 (Para 35,37); Mayawati v. Union of India (2012) 
8 SCC106 (Para 9, 30, 41, 44); A.C Sharma v. Delhi 
Administration, 1973 (1) SCC 726 (Para 13); M 
Balakrishnan v. Director, CBI Delhi 2008 (4) SCC 
409 (Para 18, 19)). 
32.  It is well settled that when differences arise 
between the representative of the State and that of 
the Union on questions of interpretation of the 
Constitution and law which may affect the welfare 
of the whole people and particularly that of the 
people of the State concerned, a suit under Article 
131 of the Constitution lies. Given the aforesaid 
statutory obligation of the Defendant, the Plaintiff 
being the repository of people on the subject of law 
and order in State, the Defendant cannot cause 
investigation into the offences in the State. Since 
there cannot be two parallel investigations in 
respect of the same offence, the registration of FIRs 
by the Defendant precludes the State from initiating 
appropriate action on the allegations of this subject. 
As a consequence thereof, the Plaintiff fails to 
adhere to the constitutional obligation. 
33.  Article 131 of the Constitution provides for 
independent adjudication in case of federal disputes 
and should be widely and generously interpreted to 
advance the intended remedy. It can be invoked 

48 
 
whenever a State and other States or Union differ 
on a question of interpretation of constitution or law 
so that a decision of it will affect the scope and 
exercise of the governmental powers which are 
attributes of a State. The jurisdiction conferred on 
this Hon’ble Court under Article 131 of the 
Constitution should not be tested on the anvil of 
banal rules which are applied under the provisions 
of Code of Civil Procedure for determining whether a 
suit is maintainable. 
34.  The Constitution aims at maintaining a fine 
balance not only between the legislature, the 
executive and the judiciary, but also between the 
powers of the Union and State, as demonstrated by 
the Legislative Lists and the executive power of the 
Central Government and the State Governments in 
part XI of the Constitution. This is a delicate 
relationship particularly if different political parties 
are in power in the Centre and in the States. The 
object of the Articles 245-246 is to ensure that the 
Central Government and State Governments act 
within the respective spheres of their authority and 
do not transgress upon each other’s constitutional 
functions or powers. 
………… 
36.  This present suit is being filed to challenge the 
constitutionality of the actions of the defendant. 
Thus, a suit under Article 131 of the Constitution of 
India challenging the constitutionality of the 
impugning the action of the Defendant at the 
instance of a constituent State of the Union is 
maintainable.  
37.  A 
proceeding 
under 
Article 
131 
of 
the 
Constitution stands in sharp contrast with an 
ordinary suit. The proceedings are adjudicatory of 
the limits of the constitutional power vested in the 
Central 
and 
the 
State 
Governments. 
The 
competition in such a proceeding is between two or 
more Governments either the one or the other of 
which possesses the constitutional power to act. 

49 
 
38.  While mere wrangles between the Governments 
have no place under the scheme, when legal as 
distinct from a mere political issue arises touching 
upon the existence or extent of the legal right the 
article is attracted. There is a distinction between 
“State” and “State Government”. When a right or 
capacity or lack of it attributed to any institution of 
person acting on behalf of the State, it raises a 
matter in which the State is involved or concerned. 
The State would therefore be affected by any 
unconstitutional exercise of power by the Central 
Government. The word “right” in Article 131 of the 
Constitution is used in a generic sense. If the State 
claims to be entitled to legislative exclusivity on a 
particular matter on the ground that it falls within 
List II of Seventh Schedule and the Union of India 
questions this right, despite the constitutional 
restriction under Entry 80, List I, the dispute is one 
relating not to not only the right of the State in the 
strict sense of the term but also of the liberty of the 
State, and the same would directly come within the 
scope of Article 131 of the Constitution. It is 
therefore, 
evident 
that 
the 
present 
suit 
is 
maintainable by the Plaintiff against the Defendant 
before this Hon’ble Court under Article 131 of the 
Constitution. The plaintiff has not filed any other 
similar suit claiming the same reliefs before this 
Hon’ble Court or any other Court. The Suit is not 
barred by limitation as on the date of filing of the 
present Suit.” 
 
45. A perusal of the plaint would reveal that it refers to 
Article 246(1) of the Constitution which empowers the 
Parliament with exclusive power to make laws with respect to 
any of the matters enumerated in List I.  It refers to Entry 80 
of List I which enables the Parliament to make laws with 
regard to extension of the powers and jurisdiction of 

50 
 
members of a police force belonging to any State to any area 
outside that State.  However, the same cannot be done 
without the consent of the Government of the State in which 
such area is situated.  Then, it refers to the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the State Legislature as recognized in Article 
246(3) of the Constitution to make laws with regard to any of 
the matters enumerated in List II.  It refers to Entries 1 and 2 
which relate to public order and police.  Then, the plaint 
avers that the public order and police are exclusive subject 
matters of the concerned State.  It avers that Entry 80, List I, 
ensures that the Union/Centre does not transgress into the 
jurisdiction of the State without permission of the concerned 
State.  It therefore avers that the CBI which draws its powers 
from the DSPE Act has acted in violation of the 
aforementioned Constitutional provisions as also the DSPE 
Act and then it refers to various provisions of the DSPE Act 
including Section 6 thereof which requires the consent of the 
Government of the concerned State in whose areas the 
jurisdiction of  the CBI is being extended.  Thereafter, it refers 
to Section 6 of the DSPE Act as a component of the concept 
of federalism.  It avers that the provisions of Section 6 of the 

51 
 
DSPE Act cannot be ignored or violated by the defendant. 
46. In paragraph 12 of the plaint, the plaint refers to 
various judgments of this Court interpreting Sections 5(1) 
and 6 of the DSPE Act.  In paragraph 13, the plaint avers 
that the plaintiff is challenging the act of the defendant in 
registering suo moto cases for offences that have occurred 
within the territory of the plaintiff without any direction from 
the competent court or prior consent granted by the plaintiff. 
Then, in paragraph 14, averments are made with regard to 
the approval to be made by the Central Government, a rule 
which is required to be followed by the Central Government 
in extending powers and jurisdiction of the CBI.  Thereafter, 
it refers to the judgment of this Court which requires the 
fulfillment of the three conditions under Sections 3, 5 and 6 
of the DSPE Act prior to the CBI exercises powers in any 
State, which read thus: 
i) 
A notification must be issued by the 
Central 
Government 
specifying 
the 
offences to be investigated by CBI 
(Section 3); 
ii) 
An order must be passed by the Central 
Government 
extending 
power 
and 
jurisdiction 
of 
CBI 
to 
any 
area 
(including railway area) in a State not 
being an Union Territory in respect of 

52 
 
offences specified under Section 3 
(Section 5); and 
iii) 
Consent of the State Government must 
be obtained for the exercise of power by 
CBI in the concerned State (Section 6). 
 
47. Thereafter, the plaint refers to the consent granted by 
the plaintiff under Section 6 of the DSPE Act on 2nd August 
1989 vide notification issued by it. Then, it refers to the 
withdrawal of the said consent on 16th November 2018.  
48. Paragraph 21 of the plaint avers regarding the powers of 
the CBI.  It avers that despite withdrawal of the consent given 
by the plaintiff under Section 6 of the DSPE Act, the CBI has 
registered cases and has been exercising its powers under 
the DSPE Act in an unconstitutional manner.  The plaint 
thereafter gives a list of the cases and states that the CBI 
exercised its powers under the DSPE Act without the 
requisite consent of the State and as such, not only violated 
Section 6 of the DSPE Act but also usurped and ousted the 
State police’s statutory jurisdiction. 
49. In paragraph 24 of the plaint, the averments with regard 
to principles of federalism are reiterated. 
  

53 
 
50. Paragraph 27 of the plaint states that the present lis 
involves substantial question of law as to the interpretation 
of Articles 245 and 246 of the Constitution and various 
Entries in the Seventh Schedule as well as corresponding 
provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the 
DSPE Act. 
51. In paragraph 29 of the plaint, it is averred that, in case 
the defendant is allowed to operate its own police force within 
the State of West Bengal in the absence of previous approval 
of the plaintiff State, the plaintiff will suffer grave 
constitutional prejudice.  It is therefore averred that there 
exists a dispute involving question of law and fact between 
the plaintiff and the defendant – Union of India regarding the 
encroachment of jurisdiction and legal rights.  In paragraph 
30 of the plaint, it is averred that the action of the defendant 
is an act of constitutional overreach.  In paragraph 32 and 
subsequent paragraphs of the plaint, it delineates the scope 
of Article 131 of the Constitution. 
b. Scheme of the DSPE Act: 
52. After considering the averments in the plaint, we now 
propose to consider the contention of the learned Solicitor 

54 
 
General 
with 
regard 
to 
Union 
of 
India 
having 
no 
superintendence or control over the CBI. For considering the 
same, it will be necessary to refer to certain provisions of the 
DSPE Act.   
53. Section 2 of the DSPE Act reads thus: 
“2. Constitution and powers of special police 
establishment.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in 
the Police Act, 1861 (5 of 1861), the Central 
Government may constitute a special police force to 
be called the Delhi Special Police Establishment for 
the investigation in any Union Territory, of offences 
notified under Section 3. 
(2) Subject to any orders which the Central 
Government may make in this behalf, members of 
the 
said 
police 
establishment 
shall 
have 
throughout any Union Territory, in relation to the 
investigation of such offences and arrest of persons 
concerned in such offences, all the powers, duties, 
privileges and liabilities which police officers of that 
Union Territory have in connection with the 
investigation of offences committed therein. 
(3) Any member of the said police establishment of 
or above the rank of Sub-Inspector may, subject to 
any orders which the Central Government may 
make in this behalf, exercise in any Union Territory 
any of the powers of the officer in charge of a police 
station in the area in which he is for the time being 
and when so exercising such powers shall, subject 
to any such orders as aforesaid, be deemed to be an 
officer in charge of a police station discharging the 
functions of such an officer within the limits of his 
station.” 
 

55 
 
54. A perusal of sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the DSPE Act 
clearly shows that it is the Central Government that is 
entitled to constitute a special police force to be called the 
DSPE for investigation of cases in any Union Territory of 
offences notified under Section 3 of the DSPE Act.  Sub-
section (2) thereof would show that, subject to any orders 
which the Central Government may make in this behalf, 
members of the DSPE shall have, throughout any Union 
Territory, in relation to the investigation of such offences and 
arrest of persons concerned in such offences, all the powers, 
duties, privileges and liabilities which police officers of that 
Union Territory have in connection with the investigation of 
offences committed therein.  Again, under sub-section (3) 
thereof, any member of the DSPE of or above the rank of 
Sub-Inspector may, subject to any orders which the Central 
Government may make in this behalf, exercise, in any Union 
Territory, any of the powers of the officer in charge of a police 
station in the area in which he is for the time being and when 
so exercising such powers, he shall, subject to any such 
orders as aforesaid, be deemed to be an officer in charge of a 
police station discharging the functions of such an officer 

56 
 
within the limits of his station.  
55. Section 3 of the DSPE Act reads thus: 
“3. Offences to be investigated by special police 
establishment.—The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify the 
offences or classes of offences which are to be 
investigated 
by 
the 
Delhi 
Special 
Police 
Establishment.” 
 
56. It is thus clear that the DSPE is entitled to investigate 
only such offences or classes of offences which are specified 
by the Central Government by issuing a notification in the 
official gazette.   
57. Section 4 of the DSPE Act reads thus: 
“4. 
Superintendence 
and 
administration 
of 
Special 
Police 
Establishment.—(1) 
The 
superintendence 
of 
the 
Delhi 
Special 
Police 
Establishment insofar as it relates to investigation 
of offences alleged to have been committed under 
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988), 
shall vest in the Commission. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), 
the 
superintendence 
of 
the 
said 
police 
establishment in all other matters shall vest in the 
Central Government. 
(3) 
The 
administration 
of 
the 
said 
police 
establishment shall vest in an officer appointed in 
this behalf by the Central Government (hereinafter 
referred to as the Director) who shall exercise in 
respect of that police establishment such of the 
powers exercisable by an Inspector-General of Police 

57 
 
in respect of the police force in a State as the 
Central Government may specify in this behalf.” 
 
58. A perusal of sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the DSPE Act 
would reveal that the superintendence of the DSPE insofar as 
it relates to investigation of offences alleged to have been 
committed under the PC Act is concerned, shall vest with the 
CVC.  However, sub-section (2) thereof provides that except 
for what has been provided in sub-section (1) thereof, the 
superintendence of the said police establishment in all other 
matters shall vest with the Central Government.  Sub-section 
(3) thereof provides that the administration of the DSPE shall 
vest in an officer appointed in this behalf by the Central 
Government who shall exercise, in respect of that police 
establishment, such of the powers exercisable by an 
Inspector-General of Police in respect of the police force in a 
State as the Central Government may specify in this behalf. 
59. Section 5 of the DSPE Act reads thus: 
“5. Extension of powers and jurisdiction of special 
police establishment to other areas.—(1) The Central 
Government may by order extend to any area (including 
Railway areas) in a State, not being a Union Territory 
the powers and jurisdiction of members of the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment for the investigation of any 

58 
 
offences or classes of offences specified in a notification 
under Section 3. 
(2) When by an order under sub-section (1) the powers 
and jurisdiction of members of the said police 
establishment are extended to any such area, a member 
thereof may, subject to any orders which the Central 
Government may make in this behalf, discharge the 
functions of a police officer in that area and shall, while 
so discharging such functions, be deemed to be a 
member of a police force of that area and be vested with 
the powers, functions and privileges and be subject to 
the liabilities of a police officer belonging to that police 
force. 
(3) where any such order under sub-section (1) is made 
in relation to any area, then, without prejudice to the 
provisions of sub-section (2) any member of the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment of or above the rank of 
Sub-Inspector may subject to any orders which the 
Central Government may make in this behalf, exercise 
the powers of the officer in charge of a police station in 
that area and when so exercising such powers, shall be 
deemed to be an officer in charge of a police station 
discharging the functions of such an officer within the 
limits of his station.” 
 
60. A perusal of sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the DSPE Act 
would reveal that the Central Government, by an order, is 
entitled to extend to any area including Railway areas in a 
State, not being a Union Territory, the powers and 
jurisdiction of members of the DSPE for the investigation of 
any offences or classes of offences specified in a notification 
under Section 3 of the DSPE Act.  Sub-section (2) thereof 
provides that when by an order under sub-section (1), the 

59 
 
powers and jurisdiction of members of the DSPE are 
extended to any such area, a member thereof may, subject to 
any orders which the Central Government may make in this 
behalf, discharge the functions of a police officer in that area 
and shall, while so discharging such functions, be deemed to 
be a member of the police force of that area and be vested 
with the powers, functions and privileges and be subject to 
the liabilities of a police officer belonging to that police force.  
Again, under sub-section (3) thereof, where any such order 
under sub-section (1) is made in relation to any area, then, 
without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), any 
member of the DSPE of or above the rank of Sub-Inspector 
may, subject to any orders which the Central Government 
may make in this behalf, exercise the powers of the officer in 
charge of a police station in that area and when so exercising 
such powers, shall be deemed to be an officer in charge of a 
police station discharging the functions of such an officer 
within the limits of his station.   
61. Section 6 of the DSPE Act reads thus: 
“6. Consent of State Government to exercise of 
powers and jurisdiction.—Nothing contained in 
section 5 shall be deemed to enable any member of 

60 
 
the Delhi Special Police Establishment to exercise 
powers and jurisdiction in any area in a State, not 
being a Union Territory or railway area, without the 
consent of the Government of that State.” 
 
62. A perusal of Section 6 of the DSPE Act would reveal that 
nothing contained in Section 5 shall be deemed to enable any 
member of the DSPE to exercise powers and jurisdiction in 
any area in a State, not being a Union Territory or railway 
area, without the consent of the Government of that State. 
63. A perusal of the entire scheme would therefore reveal 
that right from the constitution of the special police force 
which is called DSPE, issuance of notifications specifying the 
offences or classes of offences which are to be investigated by 
the DSPE, superintendence and administration of DSPE and 
the extension of powers and jurisdiction of DSPE to the areas 
beyond the Union Territories, it is the Central Government 
which is vitally concerned with.  Not only that, only such 
offences which the Central Government notifies in the official 
gazette, can be investigated by the DSPE. Under Section 4 of 
the DSPE Act, except the offences under the PC Act in which 
the 
superintendence 
will 
be 
with 
the 
CVC, 
the 
superintendence of the DSPE in all other matters would vest 

61 
 
with the Central Government. 
64.  If the powers and jurisdiction of the members of the 
DSPE are to be extended to any area including railway areas, 
in a State not being a Union Territory, the same cannot be 
done unless the Central Government passes an order in that 
regard.  The statutory scheme makes it clear that, for 
extending such powers under Section 5 of the DSPE Act, it 
cannot be done without the consent of the Government of 
that State under Section 6 of the DSPE Act. 
65. In that view of the matter, we find that the contention of 
the learned Solicitor General that even if the CBI, being an 
independent agency, is considered to be an instrumentality of 
the State under Article 12 of the Constitution, it cannot be 
equated to the term Government of India as contemplated 
under Article 131 of the Constitution, in our view, holds no 
water. 
66. We further find that the very establishment, exercise of 
powers, extension of jurisdiction, the superintendence of the 
DSPE, all vest with the Government of India.  In that view of 
the matter, in our opinion, the reliance placed by the learned 
Solicitor General on the judgment of this Court in the case of 

62 
 
State of Bihar v. Union of India and Another (supra), is 
not well placed. In our view, the CBI is an organ or a body 
which 
is 
established 
by 
and 
which 
is 
under 
the 
superintendence of the Government of India in view of the 
statutory scheme as enacted by the DSPE Act. 
c. Power of superintendence of the Central Government: 
67. Insofar as reliance placed by the learned Solicitor 
General on the judgments of this Court in the cases of Vineet 
Narain (supra) and State of West Bengal and Others v. 
Committee for Protection of Democratic Rights, West 
Bengal and Others18 is concerned, no doubt that the 
powers of superintendence of the Central Government would 
not relate to the superintendence of investigation of a 
particular case and the investigating agency (CBI) would 
always be entitled to investigate the offences independently.  
However, that would not water down the administrative 
control and superintendence of the DSPE that vests with the 
Central Government. In that view of the matter, we find that 
the contention in that regard needs to be rejected. 
 
 
18 (2010) 3 SCC 571 : 2010 INSC 104 

63 
 
d. Interpretation of the term “subject to the provisions of 
this Constitution”: 
 
68. The learned Solicitor General has vehemently argued 
that, in view of the term “subject to the provisions of this 
Constitution” used in Article 131 of the Constitution, since 
various matters are already pending with regard to the 
subject matter of the present suit, be it the proceedings 
either under Article 136, Article 32 or Article 226 of the 
Constitution, the present suit would not be maintainable. 
69. No doubt that Article 131 of the Constitution begins 
with the term “subject to the provisions of this Constitution”.  
To understand the said term, we can gainfully refer to a few 
authorities.  
70. In Black’s Law Dictionary, 5th Edition at Page 1278, the 
expression “subject to” has been defined as under: 
“Liable, subordinate, subservient, inferior, obedient 
to; governed or affected by; provided that; provided; 
answerable for.” 
 
71. A Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of The 
South India Corporation (P) Limited v. The Secretary, 
Board of Revenue, Trivandrum and Another19 also had an 
 
19 [1964] 4 SCR 280 : 1963 INSC 163 

64 
 
occasion to consider the said term, though it was in a case 
concerning Article 372 of the Constitution.  It will be apposite 
to refer to the following part of the said judgment of the 
Constitution Bench: 
“13. ……..Article 372 reads: 
“(i) Notwithstanding the repeal by this 
Constitution of the enactments referred 
to in Article 395 but subject to the other 
provisions of this Constitution, all the law 
in 
force 
in 
the 
territory 
of 
India 
immediately before the commencement of 
this Constitution shall continue in force 
therein until altered or repealed or 
amended by a competent legislature or 
other competent authority. 
*** 
Explanation I.—The expression “law in 
force” in this article shall include a law 
passed or made by a legislature or other 
competent authority in the territory of 
India before the commencement of this 
Constitution and not previously repealed, 
notwithstanding that it or parts of it may 
not be then in operation either at all or in 
particular areas.” 
The object of this article is to maintain the 
continuity of the pre-existing laws after the 
Constitution came into force till they were repealed, 
altered or amended by a competent authority. 
Without the aid of such an article there would be 
utter confusion in the field of law. The assumption 
underlying the article is that the State laws may or 
may not be within the legislative competence of the 
appropriate authority under the Constitution. The 
article would become ineffective and purposeless if 
it was held that pre-Constitution laws should be 

65 
 
such as could be made by the appropriate authority 
under the Constitution. The words “subject to the 
other provisions of the Constitution” should, 
therefore, be given a reasonable interpretation, an 
interpretation which would carry out the intention 
of the makers of the Constitution and also which is 
in accord with the constitutional practice in such 
matters. The article posits the continuation of the 
pre-existing laws made by a competent authority 
notwithstanding the repeal of Article 395; and the 
expression “other” in the article can only apply to 
provisions other than those dealing with legislative 
competence. 
14. The learned Advocate-General relied upon the 
following decisions for the said legal position 
: Gannon Dankerly and Co. v. Sales Tax Officer, 
Maatancherry [ILR 
(1957) 
Kerala 
462] 
; Sagar 
Mall v. State [ILR (1952) 1 All 862] ; Kanpur Oil 
Mills v. Judge (Appeals) Sales Tax, Kanpur [AIR 1955 
All 99] ; Amalgamated Coalfields Ltd. v. Janapada 
Sabha, Chhindwara [(1962) 1 SCR 1] ; Jagdish 
Prasad v. Saharanpur Municipality [AIR 1961 All 
583] ; Saeoshankar v. M.P. State [AIR 1951 Nag 58] 
; State v. Yash Pal [AIR 1957 P&H 91] ; and Binoy 
Bhusan v. States of Bihar [AIR 1954 Pat 346] . It is 
not necessary to consider in detail the said 
decisions, as they either resume the said legal 
position or sustain it, but do not go further. They 
held that a law made by a competent authority 
before the Constitution continues to be in force after 
the Constitution till it is altered or modified or 
repealed by the appropriate authority, even though 
it is beyond the legislative competence of the said 
authority under the Constitution. We give our full 
assent to the view and hold that a pre-Constitution 
law made by a competent authority, though it has 
lost 
its 
legislative 
competency 
under 
the 
Constitution, shall continue in force, provided the 
law does not contravene the “other provisions” of 
the Constitution.” 
 

66 
 
72. The Constitution Bench has held that the words 
“subject to the other provisions of the Constitution” should 
be given a reasonable interpretation.  It has been held that 
the interpretation which would carry out the intention of the 
makers of the Constitution and also which is in accord with 
the constitutional practice in such matters, should be 
adopted. The Court held that Article 372 of the Constitution 
posits the continuation of the pre-existing laws made by a 
competent authority notwithstanding the repeal of Article 
395 of the Constitution.  It has been held that the expression 
“other” under Article 372 of the Constitution can only apply 
to the provisions other than those dealing with legislative 
competence. The Court therefore held that a pre-Constitution 
law made by a competent authority, though it has lost its 
legislative competency under the Constitution, shall continue 
in force, provided the law does not contravene the “other 
provisions” of the Constitution. 
73. Another Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of 
Union of India and Another v. Tulsiram Patel20 also had 
an occasion to consider the said term which is also recorded 
 
20 (1985) 3 SCC 398 : 1985 INSC 155 

67 
 
in Article 309 of the Constitution.  The Court held thus: 
“106. It is not possible to accept this submission. 
The opening words of Article 309 make that article 
expressly 
“Subject 
to 
the 
provisions 
of 
this 
Constitution”. Rules made under the proviso to 
Article 309 or under Acts referable to that article 
must, therefore, be made subject to the provisions 
of the Constitution if they are to be valid. Article 
310(1) which embodies the pleasure doctrine is a 
provision contained in the Constitution. Therefore, 
rules made under the proviso to Article 309 or 
under Acts referable to that article are subject to 
Article 310(1). By the opening words of Article 
310(1) the pleasure doctrine contained therein 
operates “Except as expressly provided by this 
Constitution”. Article 311 is an express provision of 
the Constitution. Therefore, rules made under the 
proviso to Article 309 or under Acts referable to 
Article 309 would be subject both to Article 310(1) & 
Article 311……….” 
 
74. This Court held that, in view of the said term “subject to 
the provisions of this Constitution”, rules made under the 
proviso to Article 309 must be made subject to the provisions 
of this Constitution if they are to be valid.  The Constitution 
Bench held that the rules made under the proviso to Article 
309 or under Acts referable to that article are subject to 
Articles 310(1) and 311 of the Constitution. 
75. In our opinion, Article 131 of the Constitution is a 
special provision which deals with the original jurisdiction of 
this Court in case of a dispute between the Federal 

68 
 
Government and the State Governments.  It provides for a 
special jurisdiction to this Court to decide any question on 
which the existence or extent of a legal right depends.  Any 
dispute either between the Government of India and one or 
more States; or between the Government of India and any 
State or States on one side and one or more other States on 
the other; or between two or more States which involve a 
question on which the existence or extent of a legal right 
depends are covered by this provision.  A special provision 
has been made for deciding the question on which the 
existence or extent of a legal right between the special parties 
mentioned therein has been provided.  Therefore, the words 
“subject to the provisions of this Constitution” will have to be 
considered in that context.  The jurisdiction under Article 
131 of the Constitution would only be subject to any other 
provision in the Constitution which provides for entertaining 
a dispute between the parties mentioned therein.  We could 
notice only one such other provision in the Constitution, 
which is Article 262, which reads thus: 
“262. Adjudication of disputes relating to waters 
of 
inter-State 
rivers 
or 
river 
valleys.—(1) 
Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication 
of any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, 

69 
 
distribution or control of the waters of, or in, any 
inter-State river or river valley. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, 
Parliament may by law provide that neither the 
Supreme Court nor any other court shall exercise 
jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or 
complaint as is referred to in clause (1).” 
 
76. Article 262 of the Constitution deals with adjudication 
of disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers or river 
valleys.  It provides that the Parliament may by law provide 
for the adjudication of such disputes or complaints excluding 
the jurisdiction of all courts including this Court.  As such, 
ordinarily a dispute with respect to the use, distribution or 
control of the waters of, or in, any inter-State river or river 
valley between two States could have fallen under Article 131 
of the Constitution but because of the words “subject to the 
provisions of this Constitution” used therein and in view of 
Article 262, such a dispute would not be entertainable under 
Article 131 of the Constitution. 
77. Article 32 of the Constitution provides for remedy for 
enforcement of rights conferred by Part-III of the Constitution 
whereas Article 136 provides for remedy by way of special 
leave to appeal before this Court.  These are the general 

70 
 
remedies available to “any party”.  Merely because, in any of 
the proceedings initiated under Article 32 or Article 136 or 
even Article 226 of the Constitution, one of the parties is 
common, in our view, the pendency of such proceedings 
would not come in the way of a specific party mentioned in 
Article 131 of the Constitution to take recourse to the remedy 
available therein. As already discussed hereinabove, a 
remedy under Article 131 of the Constitution is a special 
remedy available only to the parties mentioned therein and 
for the purposes mentioned therein. In our view, therefore, 
the interpretation as placed by the defendant - Union of India 
would not be in consonance with the constitutional scheme 
and as such, is liable to be rejected. 
e. Suppression of material fact: 
78. The Union of India has also pressed that the present 
suit is liable to be dismissed on the ground of suppression of 
material facts.  It is argued that many of the FIRs mentioned 
in the plaint are registered under the directions of the High 
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.  It is submitted 
that this fact is suppressed by the plaintiff and as such, the 
plaint is liable to be rejected on this ground.   

71 
 
79. No doubt that material suppression of fact would entail 
a plaint to be rejected.  However, a very reading of the plaint 
including the prayer clause and specifically paragraph 13 of 
the plaint would reveal that the claim of the petitioner is with 
regard to the investigations except with respect to the FIRs 
registered under the order of competent court of law.  In that 
view of the matter, we find that the contention in that respect 
is also liable to be rejected. 
f. Cause of action of the suit:  
80. The next contention is with regard to non-disclosure of 
cause of action against the defendant.  We have hereinabove 
extensively reproduced the averments made in the plaint. At 
the cost of repetition, it is only the averments in the plaint 
which can be gone into for considering as to whether the 
cause of action against the defendant arises or not.  
81. The main case of the plaintiff as could be gathered from 
the averments in the plaint is that, before the provisions of 
DSPE Act can be invoked to authorize the CBI to exercise its 
powers and jurisdiction within any State, the following 
conditions are necessary: 

72 
 
i) 
“A notification must be issued by the 
Central 
Government 
specifying 
the 
offences to be investigated by CBI (Section 
3); 
ii) 
An order must be passed by the Central 
Government 
extending 
power 
and 
jurisdiction of CBI to any area (including 
railway area) in a State not being an Union 
Territory in respect of offences specified 
under Section 3 (Section 5); and 
iii) 
Consent of the State Government must be 
obtained for the exercise of power by CBI 
in the concerned State (Section 6).” 
 
82. It is the case of the plaintiff that unless the three 
conditions under Sections 3, 5 and 6 of the DSPE Act are 
fulfilled, the CBI cannot exercise its powers in any State.  It is 
the case of the plaintiff that after withdrawal of the consent 
by the plaintiff on 16th November 2018, the CBI could not 
have continued to register cases and exercise its powers 
under the DSPE Act.  It is the plaintiff’s case that 
continuation of the registration of cases and exercise of 
powers after withdrawal of the consent is an act of 
constitutional overreach. 
83. As already discussed hereinabove, the averments in the 
plaint cannot be read in isolation but are to be read in 
entirety. It is the case of the plaintiff that the CBI is 

73 
 
established by the defendant, its exercise of powers is 
controlled by the defendant and its functioning is also under 
the superintendence of the defendant. Therefore, it cannot be 
said that the plaintiff has not made out any cause of action 
against the defendant.  As has been held by Their Lordships 
Justice Chandrachud and Justice Bhagwati in the case of 
State of Rajasthan and Others v. Union of India and 
Others (supra), the legal right of the States could be sought 
to be indicated in the suits.  In the said case, the Court has 
disapproved the observations made by five-Judges Bench in 
the case of State of Bihar v. Union of India and Another 
(supra) that the legal right which is the subject of dispute 
must arise in the context of the Constitution and federalism 
itself.  As has been held by this Court in the case of State of 
Rajasthan and Others v. Union of India and Others 
(supra), the legal right of the States consists in their 
immunity, in the sense of freedom from the power of the 
Union Government.  Therefore, in light of DSPE Act and the 
judgments of this Court, even this contention is liable to be 
rejected. 
 

74 
 
VII. CONCLUSION: 
84. We find that, in the present suit, the plaintiff is raising 
the legal issue as to whether after withdrawal of the consent 
under Section 6 of the DSPE Act, the CBI via the defendant – 
Union of India can continue to register and investigate cases 
in its area in violation of the provisions of Section 6 of the 
DSPE Act.  The same has been sought to be attacked by the 
defendant – Union of India by raising various contentions 
challenging the maintainability of the suit.  In our considered 
opinion, the contentions raised by the defendant, do not 
merit acceptance and for the reasons given hereinbefore, are 
rejected.  The preliminary objection is, therefore, rejected. 
However, we clarify that the aforesaid findings are for the 
purposes of deciding preliminary objection and will have no 
bearing on merits of the suit. The suit shall proceed in 
accordance with law on its own merits. 
85. List the suit on 13th August, 2024 for framing of issues.  
 
 
…….........................J.        
[B.R. GAVAI] 
 
 
 
   …….........................J.        
                                                    [SANDEEP MEHTA] 
NEW DELHI; 
JULY 10, 2024.