2024 INSC 511
1
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL 
 
 APPEAL NO.        
 
 OF 2024
 
 
[@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.    
 
 OF
   2024]
 
 
    [@ DIARY NO.20674 OF 2017]
   MD. RAHIM ALI @ ABDUR RAHIM
      … APPELLANT
VERSUS
   THE STATE OF ASSAM & ORS.              … RESPONDENTS
RESPONDENT NO.
PARTICULARS
1
The State of Assam
2
Union of India represented
by Secretary, Home Affairs
3
Superintendent  of  Police,
Nalbari
Digitally signed by
Nirmala Negi
Date: 2024.07.11
15:09:35 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
J U D G M E N T
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
   I.A. No.58315 of 2017 [Condonation of Delay] is
allowed,  keeping  in  mind  the  peculiar  facts  and
circumstances  herein.  I.A.  No.58325  of  2017
[Exemption  from  filing  Certified  Copy  of  the
Impugned Judgment], being formal in nature, is also
allowed.   
2.
Leave granted.
3.
The  present  appeal  arises  out  of  the  Final
Judgment and Order passed by a Division Bench of the
Gauhati High Court at Guwahati (hereinafter referred
to  as  the  “High  Court”)  in  Writ  Petition  (Civil)
No.2668  of  2012  dated  23.11.2015  (hereinafter
referred to as the “Impugned Judgment”) by which the
Writ Petition filed by the appellant was dismissed
and  the  order  passed  by  the  Foreigners  Tribunal,
Nalbari (hereinafter referred to as the “Tribunal”)

3
dated  19.03.2012  passed  in  F.T.  (Nal)  Case
No.(N)/1096/06  declaring  the  appellant  to  be  a
foreigner on the grounds that he failed to discharge
his burden under Section 9 of the Foreigners Act,
1946  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “Act”)  and
failed  to  prove  that  he  is  not  a  foreigner,  was
affirmed.
THE FACTUAL PRISM:
4.
The  appellant  claims  that  his  parents’  names
appeared in the Voter List of the year 1965 at Sl.
Nos.71 & 72 showing the address as House No.17 in
Village Dolur Pather, P.S. - Patacharkuchi, in the
then  district  of  Kamrup  under  48  Bhabanipur
Legislative  Assembly  Constituency  in  the  State  of
Assam.  It  is  further  his  claim  that  his  parents’
names also appeared in the Voter List of the year
1970 at Sl. Nos.79 & 80 showing the same address.
The appellant was born in the Village Dolur under
Patacharkuchi  Police  Station  in  the  District  of

4
Barpeta  and  his  name  was  enrolled  alongwith  his
family  members  in  the  voter  list  of  1985  which
appeared  in  the  additional  amended  voter  list  of
1985  at  Sl.  No.552  showing  the  same  address.
However, upon getting married in the year 1997, he
left  the  joint  family  and  shifted  to  his  present
place  of  residence  i.e.,  village  Kashimpur,  P.O.-
Kendu  Kuchi,  P.S.  -  Nalbari,  in  the  district  of
Nalbari in the State of Assam. As a result of this,
the appellant’s name was in the Voter List of the
year 1997 at Sl. No.105 showing the address as House
No.38 in Village Kashimpur, P.S. - Nalbari in the
district of Nalbari under 61 No. Dharmapur LAC. In
the year 2006, doubting his nationality, a case was
registered  in  the  Tribunal,  Nalbari,  being  F.T.
(Nal)  Case  No.(N)/1096/06,  Police  Reference
No.948/04 and notice was served upon him.
5.
The  appellant’s  daughter  was  issued  a
certificate  by  the  Gaonbura  of  Kashimpur  Village

5
stating the residential status of the appellant/his
daughter on 07.09.2010.
6.
The appellant, on receipt of notice from the
Tribunal, appeared on 18.07.2011, praying for time
to file Written Statement but the same could not be
done as the appellant claimed to be suffering from
serious health issues.
7.
On  12.09.2011,  the  Gaonbura  of  Village  Dolur
Pathar issued certificate to the appellant regarding
his  residential  status.  By  ex-parte order  dated
19.03.2012, the Tribunal held that the appellant had
failed to discharge his burden under Section 9 of
the  Act  and  failed  to  prove  that  he  is  not  a
foreigner.  The  appellant  also  obtained  a  medical
certificate issued by the consultant doctor of Civil
Hospital, Nalbari dated 24.04.2012 stating that he
was  suffering  from  Chronic  Bronchitis  Respiration
disturbance  from  25.11.2011  to  24.04.2012.  Upon
becoming aware of the order dated 19.03.2012 of the
Tribunal from his counsel, the appellant filed Writ

6
Petition  (Civil)  No.2668  of  2012  on  30.05.2012
before the High Court.
8.
In the said writ petition, the High Court by
its  interim  order  dated  06.06.2012  stayed  the
operation of the Tribunal’s order dated 19.03.2012
directing the authority not to deport the appellant
during  the  pendency  of  the  proceedings  before
itself.  However,  ultimately  vide the  order  dated
23.11.2015,  the  High  Court  dismissed  the  Writ
Petition, which is assailed herein.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPELLANT:
9.
Learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  submitted
that he has been subjected to unfair treatment by
the  Tribunal  as  though  he  had  entered  appearance
upon  notice,  one  opportunity  was  required  to  be
given to him since he was faced with serious penal
consequences like detention and/or deportation from
the  country,  which  was  not  done.  Further,  it  was
submitted that even the High Court in the Impugned

7
Judgment  has  gone  on  technicalities  by  accepting
minor discrepancies in the documents which were not
of the nature to lead to a presumption in law that
the  same  were  not  correct  and  were  merely
differences in the spellings and date of birth. Even
the medical certificate, which is disputed, has been
issued by the consultant of the hospital, who was
never examined. It was urged that as is known to
everybody, on the prescription given to a patient, a
doctor writes his opinion, record of which may not
be  maintained  meticulously  or  even  casually  in  a
hospital which is at the level of the District, as
may be done in big hospitals in cities.
10.
It  was  submitted  that  the  High  Court  has
erroneously  presumed  that  the  ground  for  not
appearing  before  the  Tribunal  was  not  genuine.
Learned counsel contended that even if for the sake
of argument it is presumed that the reason for his
absence  was  not  genuine,  it  cannot  take  away  the
basic  fundamental  right  of  the  appellant  to  be

8
heard, that too in such an important case, where the
appellant stood not only to lose his nationality but
also  separation  from  his  family  and  possible
deportation to a foreign State which would obviously
not  accept  him  because  he  was  born  in  India  and
thus, there was no occasion for any foreign country
to accept him as its citizen.
11.
It was submitted that earlier also, this Court
in the present proceedings by order dated 28.07.2017
had directed the Tribunal to decide the nationality
of the appellant on merit by holding an enquiry and
submit a report after hearing the appellant and the
same has been done resulting in the Tribunal passing
an opinion and order on 16.11.2017 which has again
declared the appellant to be a foreigner.
12.
It  was  submitted  that  such  declaration  is
totally  perverse  in  the  face  of  overwhelming
evidence to show that the appellant besides being
born in India and being a resident in India for his
entire life and his blood relatives i.e., siblings

9
and parents having been Indian citizens much prior
to the cut-off date, the appellant has still been
singled out to be declared a foreigner which does
not  stand  to  reason.  Another  point  which  learned
counsel canvassed was that there was no occasion for
the  appellant’s  name  to  figure  in  the  National
Register of Citizens (hereinafter referred to as the
“NRC”) as he was declared a foreigner way back in
the year 2012 and as per the judgment of this Court
in Abdul Kuddus v Union of India, (2019) 6 SCC 604,
a person whose name is not included in the NRC and
is  declared  a  foreigner  by  the  Tribunal  can  only
move before the High Court in writ proceedings, the
relevant being Paragraph 271.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE STATE [RESPONDENTS NO.1 AND 3]:
13.
Per contra, learned counsel for the State of
Assam submitted that because of the grave threat to
the economy, demography and culture on account of
1‘27. As stated above, a person aggrieved by the opinion/order of the Tribunal can challenge the findings/opinion
expressed by way of a writ petition wherein the High Court would be entitled to examine the issue with reference to
the evidence and material in the exercise of its power of judicial review premised on the principle of “error in the
decision-making process”, etc. This serves as a necessary check to correct and rectify an “error” in the orders
passed by the Tribunal.’

10
unabated  and  large-scale  illegal  migration  from
Bangladesh, this Court in Sarbananda Sonowal v Union
of India, (2005) 5 SCC 665 [hereinafter referred to
as  Sarbananda Sonowal I] had held that ‘…there can
be no manner of doubt that the State of Assam is
facing
 
“external
 
aggression
 
and
 
internal
disturbance”  on  account  of  large-scale  illegal
migration of Bangladeshi nationals. It, therefore,
becomes the duty of India to take all measures for
protection of the State of Assam from such external
aggression  and  internal  disturbance  as  in  Article
355 of the Constitution…’.
14.
It was submitted that the present was a case of
illegal migration of a Bangladeshi national to India
(Assam) after the cut-off date of 25.03.1971 and has
to  be  dealt  with  utmost  caution,  considering  the
adverse  consequence  of  illegal  migration  on  the
whole country in general and the respondent-State in
particular.  It  was  further  submitted  that  the
present proceedings against the appellant have been

11
initiated  under  the  Act,  which  under  Section  9
provides that the onus is on the person proceeded
against/alleged foreigner to prove that he is not a
foreigner.
15.
Learned
 
counsel
 
contended
 
that
 
the
justification  for  placing  the  burden  upon  the
alleged foreigner has been dealt with by this Court
in Sarbananda Sonowal I (supra) at Paragraph 262.
16.
Learned counsel submitted that the proceeding
against the appellant was initiated on the basis of
inquiry conducted in the year 2004 and due to the
appellant failing to produce any document before the
Inquiry  Officer,  the  case  was  referred  to  the
Tribunal and after service of notice, the appellant
had appeared on 18.07.2011 and prayed for time to
file  written  statement  which  was  allowed  and  the
2 ‘26. There is good and sound reason for placing the burden of proof upon the person concerned who asserts to be
a citizen of a particular country. In order to establish one's citizenship, normally he may be required to give
evidence of (i) his date of birth (ii) place of birth (iii) name of his parents (iv) their place of birth and citizenship.
Sometimes the place of birth of his grandparents may also be relevant like under Section 6-A(1)(d) of the Citizenship
Act. All these facts would necessarily be within the personal knowledge of the person concerned and not of the
authorities of the State. After he has given evidence on these points, the State authorities can verify the facts and can
then lead evidence in rebuttal, if necessary. If the State authorities dispute the claim of citizenship by a person and
assert that he is a foreigner, it will not only be difficult but almost impossible for them to first lead evidence on the
aforesaid points. This is in accordance with the underlying policy of Section 106 of the Evidence Act which says that
when any fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him.’

12
matter was fixed for 11.08.2011, on which date his
counsel filed a petition for further time and the
matter was fixed for 09.09.2011, but thereafter the
appellant remained absent on all subsequent dates.
Thus,  learned counsel  contended that the appellant
failed to discharge the burden cast upon him under
Section 9 of the Act and the Tribunal had no option
but to proceed and pass an ex-parte order/opinion on
19.03.2012 holding him to be a foreigner.
17.
Learned  counsel  submitted  that  in  the  Writ
Petition before the High Court, the appellant placed
reliance  on  the  medical  certificate  of  Swahid
Mukunda  Kakati  Civil  Hospital,  Nalbari  dated
24.04.2012 to the effect that he was under treatment
from ‘25.11.2011 till now’. The High Court, after
verification,  found  the  authenticity  of  the  said
certificate to be fake and held that the appellant
had taken recourse to falsehood with production of
fake medical certificate and on that count alone,
the writ petition was dismissed which cannot be said

13
to be unreasonable warranting interference. It was
submitted that in compliance of the order of this
Court in the present matter on 28.07.2017 directing
the Tribunal to examine the documents filed by the
appellant  and  to  undertake  an  inquiry  and  submit
report,  the  Tribunal  undertook  such  exercise  and
submitted  its  opinion  finally  holding  that  the
appellant had entered India illegally on or after
25.03.1971 i.e., the cut-off date and thus, was an
illegal migrant post the cut-off date.
18.
It  was  submitted  that  this  Court  may  also
consider the fact that the proceedings against the
appellant  had  already  taken  two  decades  to  reach
this stage and any further delay would defeat the
very object and purpose of the Act which is speedy
detection
 
and
 
deportation
 
of
 
illegal
migrants/foreigners  staying  in  India.  He  also
reiterated the fact that because the appellant was
declared to be a foreigner prior to the preparation
of the Draft and Supplementary NRC List, his name

14
was  not  included  in  the  same.  Learned  counsel
submitted that this Court in  Abdul Kuddus (supra)
had settled the position that the proceedings before
the  Tribunal  being  quasi-judicial  in  nature,  the
findings thereof would operate as res judicata over
the administrative process of inclusion in NRC List
and any person aggrieved by the findings/opinion of
the  Tribunal  would  have  to  invoke  the  power  of
judicial  review  under  writ  jurisdiction.  Thus,  he
contended that if any further liberty is given to
the appellant to again challenge the fresh report
dated  16.11.2017  of  the  Tribunal  in  writ
proceedings, a time-limit be fixed so that closure
could be given to the proceedings.
   ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
19.
Having considered the matter, the Court finds
that grave miscarriage of justice has occasioned in
the instant case. We may note that Section 8 of the
Act reads as follows:

15
“8. Determination of nationality.—(1) When
a foreigner is recognised as a national by
the law of more than one foreign country or
where for any reason it is uncertain what
nationality if any is to be ascribed to a
foreigner, that foreigner may be treated as
the national of the country with which he
appears to the prescribed authority to be
most closely connected for the time being
in  interest  or  sympathy  or  if  he  is  of
uncertain nationality, of the country with
which he was last so connected:
Provided that where a foreigner acquired a
nationality  by  birth,  he  shall,  except
where  the  Central  Government  so  directs
either generally or in a particular case,
be deemed to retain that nationality unless
he proves to the satisfaction of the said
authority that he has subsequently acquired
by  naturalization  or  otherwise  some  other
nationality  and  still  recognized  as
entitled to protection by the Government of
the  country  whose  nationality  he  has  so
acquired.
(2)  A  decision  as  to  nationality  given
under  sub-section  (1)  shall  be  final  and
shall  not  be  called  in  question  in  any
Court:
Provided  that  the  Central  Government,
either  of  its  own  motion  or  on  an
application by the foreigner concerned, may
revise any such decision.”
20.
Undisputedly, the appellant is not a foreigner3
recognised as a national by the law of more than one
foreign  country.  Thus,  the  appellant’s  case  would
3 A ‘foreigner’ under Section 2(a) of the Act means “a person who is not a citizen of India”.

16
not fall under Section 8 of the Act. That being the
position as regards Section 8 of the Act, we venture
forward.
21.  There is judicial clarity as regards the scope
and nature of proceedings before the Tribunal under
the  Act,  as  delineated  by  the  judgments  in  Abdul
Kuddus (supra) and Sarbananda Sonowal I (supra). For
the  purposes  of  proper  appreciation,  it  is
worthwhile to reproduce Section 9 of the Act which
reads as under:
“9. Burden of proof – If in any case not
falling under section 8 any question arises
with  reference  to  this  Act  or  any  order
made or direction given thereunder, whether
any person is or is not a foreigner of a
particular class or description the onus of
proving that such person is not a foreigner
or  is  not  a  foreigner  of  such  particular
class or description, as the case may be,
shall,  notwithstanding  anything  contained
in  the  Indian  Evidence  Act,  1872  (1  of
1872), lie upon such person.”  
22.
In Abdul Kuddus (supra), it has been explained
that  after the  preparation and  publication of  NRC
for the State of Assam, as set out in Paragraphs 2

17
to  8  of  the  Schedule  to  the  Citizenship
(Registration  of  Citizens  and  Issue  of  National
Identity Cards) Rules, 2003 made under Section 18 of
the Citizenship Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to
as  the  “Citizenship  Act”),  the  right  to  appeal
before the Tribunal under Paragraph 8 would not be
available  to  persons  whose  nationality  and
citizenship  status,  either  as  an  Indian  or  as  a
foreign national, has already been adjudicated and
declared under the Foreigners (Tribunal) Order, 1964
(hereinafter referred to as the “1964 Order”) issued
under Section 3 of the Act. In the present case, it
is not in dispute that the matter was decided by the
Tribunal  and  at  the  first  round,  the  verdict  was
against  the  appellant  based  on  an
 ex-parte
proceeding. Later, in view of the interim order of
this  Court,  after  giving  an  opportunity  to  the
appellant,  the  matter  was  again  gone  into  by  the
Tribunal and a report submitted to this Court which
reiterated its earlier decision that the appellant
is a foreigner.

18
23.
Thus,  the  Court,  for  completeness  of
adjudication,  has  to  trace  its  steps  back  to  the
proceeding right to the stage of inception i.e., the
very initiation of proceedings before the Tribunal
under the Act.
24.
A reference to Section 6A of the Citizenship
Act is warranted:
“6A. Special provisions as to citizenship
of  persons  covered  by  the  Assam
Accord.―(1)  For  the  purposes  of  this
section
(a)  "Assam"  means  the  territories
included  in  the  State  of  Assam
immediately  before  the  commencement  of
the  Citizenship  (Amendment)  Act,  1985
(65 of 1985);
b)  "detected  to  be  a  foreigner"  means
detected to be a foreigner in accordance
with  the  provisions  of  the  Foreigners
Act,  1946  (31  of  1946)  and  the
Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 by a
Tribunal  constituted  under  the  said
Order;
c)  "specified  territory"  means  the
territories  included  in  Bangladesh
immediately  before  the  commencement  of

19
the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 (65
of 1985);
(d) a person shall be deemed to be Indian
origin, if he, or either of his parents
or any of his grandparents was born in
undivided India;
(e) a person shall be deemed to have been
detected to be a foreigner on the date on
which  a  Tribunal  constituted  under  the
Foreigners  (Tribunals)  Order,  1964
submits its opinion to the effect that he
is  a  foreigner  to  the  officer  or
authority concerned.
(2)  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  sub-
sections  (6)  and  (7),  all  persons  of
Indian origin who came before the lst day
of  January,  1966  to  Assam  from  the
specified  territory  (including  such  of
those  whose  names  were  included  in  the
electoral rolls used for the purposes of
the General Election to the House of the
People held in 1967) and who have been
ordinarily  resident  in  Assam  since  the
dates of their entry into Assam shall be
deemed to be citizens of India as from
the lst day of January, 1966.
(3)  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  sub-
sections  (6)  and  (7),  every  person  of
Indian origin who―

20
(a) came to Assam on or after the lst day
of January, 1966 but before the 25th day
of  March,  1971  from  the  specified
territory; and
(b) has, since the date of his entry into
Assam, been ordinarily resident in Assam;
and
 
(c) has been detected to be a foreigner;
shall register himself in accordance with
the rules made by the Central Government
in this behalf under section 18 with such
authority (hereafter in this sub-section
referred to as the registering authority)
as may be specified in such rules and if
his  name  is  included  in  any  electoral
roll  for  any  Assembly  or  Parliamentary
constituency in force on the date of such
detection,  his  name  shall  be  deleted
therefrom.
Explanation.―In the case of every person
seeking  registration  under  this  sub-
section,  the  opinion  of  the  Tribunal
constituted
 
under
 
the
 
Foreigners
(Tribunals)  Order,  1964  holding  such
person to be a foreigner, shall be deemed
to be sufficient proof of the requirement
under clause (c) of this subsection and
if any question arises as to whether such
person
 
complies
 
with
 
any
 
other
requirement  under  this  sub-section,  the
registering authority shall,―

21
(i)  if  such  opinion  contains  a  finding
with respect to such other requirement,
decide  the  question  in  conformity  with
such finding;
(ii) if such opinion does not contain a
finding  with  respect  to  such  other
requirement,  refer  the  question  to  a
Tribunal constituted under the said Order
having  jurisdiction  in  accordance  with
such rules as the Central Government may
make in this behalf under section 18 and
decide  the  question  in  conformity  with
the opinion received on such reference.
(4)  A  person  registered  under  sub-
section (3) shall have, as from the date
on which he has been detected to be a
foreigner  and  till  the  expiry  of  a
period of ten years from that date, the
same rights and obligations as a citizen
of India (including the right to obtain
a passport under the Passports Act, 1967
(15  of  1967)  and  the  obligations
connected  therewith),  but  shall  not
entitled  to  have  his  name  included  in
any electoral roll for any Assembly or
Parliamentary  constituency  at  any  time
before the expiry of the said period of
ten years.
(5) A person registered under sub-section
(3) shall be deemed to be a citizen of
India for all purposes as from the date

22
of expiry of a period of ten years from
the date on which he has been detected to
be a foreigner.
(6) Without prejudice to the provisions
of section 8―
(a)  if  any  person  referred  to  in  sub-
section  (2)  submits  in  the  prescribed
manner  and  form  and  to  the  prescribed
authority within sixty days from the date
of  commencement  of  the  Citizenship
(Amendment)  Act,  1985  (65  of  1985),  a
declaration that he does not wish to be a
citizen of India, such person shall not
be  deemed  to  have  become  a  citizen  of
India under that sub-section;
(b)  if  any  person  referred  to  in  sub-
section  (3)  submits  in  the  prescribed
manner  and  form  and  to  the  prescribed
authority within sixty days from the date
of  commencement  of  the  Citizenship
(Amendment)  Act,  1985(65  of  1985),  or
from  the  date  on  which  he  has  been
detected to be a foreigner, whichever is
later,  a  declaration  that  he  does  not
wish to be governed by the provisions of
that sub-section and sub-sections (4) and
(5), it shall not be necessary for such
person  to  register  himself  under  sub-
section (3).
Explanation.― Where a person required to
file a declaration under this sub-section

23
does not have the capacity to enter into
a contract, such declaration may be filed
on  his  behalf  by  any  person  competent
under the law for the time being in force
to act on his behalf.
(7)  Nothing  in  sub-sections  (2)  to  (6)
shall apply in relation to any person―
(a)  who,  immediately  before  the
commencement
 
of
 
the
 
Citizenship
(Amendment) Act, 1985 (65 of 1985), is a
citizen of India;
(b)  who  was  expelled  from  India  before
the  commencement  of  the  Citizenship
(Amendment)  Act,  1985,  under  the
Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946).
(8) Save as otherwise expressly provided
in this section, the provisions of this
section shall have effect notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force.”
25.
From the aforesaid, it is clear that a cut-off
date of 25.03.1971 was fixed with regard to deciding
the status of persons who had come to Assam on or
after  01.01.1966  but  before  25.03.1971  from  the

24
“specified  territory”4 and  from  the  date  of  entry
have  been  ordinarily  resident  in  Assam  and  been
detected  to  be  foreigners.  Such  persons  were
required to register themselves with the Registering
Authority  in  accordance  with  rules  made  by  the
Central  Government  under  Section  18  of  the
Citizenship Act.
26.
In  the  Explanation  to  Sub-section  (3)  of
Section  6A  of  the  Citizenship  Act,  it  has  been
provided  that  the  opinion  of  the  Tribunal
constituted under the 1964 Order holding the person
to be a foreigner shall be deemed sufficient proof
of  the  requirement  under  clause  (c)  of  the  sub-
section
 
aforesaid
 
[viz.
 
Section
 
6A(3)(c),
Citizenship Act] and the same would also suffice for
any  other  requirement  of  the  Sub-section.  If  a
question arises as to whether the person complies
with any other requirement under this Sub-section,
and the opinion of the Tribunal contains a finding
4 Section 6A(1)(c) of the Citizenship Act states: ‘“specified territory” means the territories included in Bangladesh
immediately before the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 (65 of 1985)’

25
qua 
such  other  requirement,  the  Registering
Authority  will  decide  the  question  in  accordance
with  the  opinion  of  the  Tribunal.  However,  the
Registering  Authority  is  required  to  refer  the
matter  to  the  Tribunal,  if  the  opinion  of  the
Tribunal is silent as to the other requirements, and
thereupon  the  question  is  to  be  decided  by  the
Registering Authority in conformity with the opinion
received from the Tribunal.
27.
The very initiation of the proceeding was under
the 1964 Order. It is worthwhile to point out that
the  1964  Order  has  been  subjected  to  multiple
amendments.  Para  3  of  the  1964  Order  has  also
undergone  variation  –  a  different  version  was  in
existence  when  the  Tribunal  examined  the  matter.
However, as we are expounding the law, it is deemed
appropriate to refer to the position as it prevails
on date. Para 3 of the 1964 Order, last amended by
GSR dated 30.08.2019, reads as under:
“3. Procedure for disposal of questions.—
(1) The Tribunal shall serve on the person

26
to whom the question relates,  a copy of
the main grounds
 
 5  on which he is alleged
 
 
to  be  a  foreigner 
and  give  him  a
reasonable  opportunity  of  making  a
representation  and  producing  evidence  in
support of his case and after considering
such evidence as may be produced and after
hearing such persons as may desire to be
heard,  the  Tribunal  shall  submit  its
opinion  to  the  officer  or  authority
specified in this behalf in the order of
reference.
(2) The Foreigners Tribunal shall serve
a show-cause notice on the person to whom
the  question  relates,  that  is,  the
proceedee.
(3) The notice referred to in sub-para
(2) shall be served within ten days of the
receipt of the reference of such question
by the Central Government or any competent
authority.
(4)  The  notice  shall  be  served  in
English and also in the official language
of the State indicating that the burden is
on the proceedee to prove that he or she
is not a foreigner.
(5)(a) The notice shall be served at the
address where the proceedee last resided
or reportedly resides or works for gain,
and  in  case  of  change  of  place  of
residence, which has been duly intimated
in writing to the investigating agency by
the alleged person, it shall be served at
5 This was brought in by GSR dated 30.09.1965 and has remained since then. In other words, when notice was
served on the appellant, this portion of the 1964 Order was in existence.

27
such  changed  address  by  the  Foreigners
Tribunal.
(b) if the proceedee is not found at
the  address  at  the  time  of  service  of
notice, the notice may be served on any
adult  member  of  the  family  of  the
proceedee and it shall be deemed to be
served on the proceedee;
(c) where the notice is served on the
adult  member  of  the  family  of  the
proceedee,  the  process  server  shall
obtain the signature or thumb impression
of the adult member on the duplicate of
the  notice  as  a  token  of  proof  of  the
service;
(d) if the adult member of the family of
the proceedee refuses to put a signature
or the thumb impression, as the case may
be,  the  process  server  shall  report  the
same to the Foreigners Tribunals;
(e)  if  the  proceedee  or  an  available
adult member of his or her family refuses
to accept the notice, the process server
shall  give  a  report  to  the  Foreigners
Tribunal  in  that  regard  along  with  the
name  and  address  of  a  person  of  the
locality, who was present at the time of
making such an effort to get the notices
served, provided such person is available
and  willing  to  be  a  witness  to  such
service  and  the  process  server  shall
obtain the signature or thumb impression

28
of such witness, if he or she is present
and  willing  to  sign  or  put  his  or  her
thumb impression, as the case may be;
(f)  if  the  proceedee  has  changed  the
place  of  residence  or  place  of  work,
without  intimation  to  the  investigating
agency, the process server shall affix a
copy of the notice on the outer door or
some other conspicuous part of the house
in which the proceedee ordinarily resides
or last resided or reportedly resided or
personally worked for gain or carries on
business, and shall return the original to
the Foreigners Tribunal from which it was
issued with a report endorsed thereon or
annexed  thereto  stating  that  he  has  so
affixed the copy, the circumstances under
which he did do, and the name and address
of the person (if any) by whom the house
was identified and in whose presence the
copy was affixed;
(g)  where  the  proceedee  or  any  adult
member of his or her family or her is not
found  at  the  residence,  a  copy  of  the
notice  shall  be  pasted  in  a  conspicuous
place of his or her residence, witnessed
by one respectable person of the locality,
subject  to  his  or  her  availability  and
willingness to be a witness in that regard
and  the  process  server  shall  obtain  the
signature or the thumb impression of that
person in the manner in which such service
is affected;

29
(h) where the proceedee resides outside
the  jurisdiction  of  the  Foreigners
Tribunal,  the  notice  shall  be  sent  for
service  to  the  officer  incharge  of  the
police  station  within  whose  jurisdiction
the proceedee resides or last resided or
is last known to have resided or worked
for gain and the process server shall then
cause the service of notice in the manner
as provided hereinabove;
(i) if no person is available or willing
to be the witness of service of notice or
refuses  to  put  his  or  her  signature  or
thumb impression the process server shall
file a signed certificate or verification
to that effect, which shall be sufficient
proof
 
of
 
such
 
non-availability,
unwillingness and refusal;
(j) on receipt of the signed certificate
or verification referred to in clause (i)
the Foreigners Tribunals shall return such
references  with  such  directions  as  it
thinks fit to the competent authority for
tracing  out  the  proceedee  and  produce
before the said Tribunal.
(6)  Where  the  proceedee  appears  or  is
brought before the Foreigners Tribunal and
he  produces  the  documents  in  support  of
his  claim,  the  Foreigners  Tribunal  may
release such person on bail and decide the
matter accordingly.

30
(7) In case where notice is duly served,
the  proceedee  shall  appear  before  the
Foreigners  Tribunal  in  person  or  by  a
counsel engaged by him or her, as the case
may  be,  on  every  hearing  before  the
Foreigners Tribunal.
(8) The Foreigners Tribunal shall give
the proceedee ten days time to give reply
to the show-cause notice and further ten
days time to produce evidence in support
of his or her case.
(9) The Foreigners Tribunal may refuse a
prayer  for  examination  of  witnesses  on
Commission for production of documents if,
in the opinion of the Foreigners Tribunal,
such  prayer  is  made  to  delay  the
proceedings.
(10) The Foreigners Tribunal shall take
such evidence as may be produced by the
concerned Superintendent of Police.
(11) The Foreigners Tribunal shall hear
such  persons  as,  in  its  opinion,  are
required to be heard.
(12) The Foreigners Tribunal may grant
adjournment  of  the  case  on  any  plea
sparingly and for reasons to be recorded
in writing.
(13)  Where  the  proceedee  fails  to
produce any proof in support of his or her
claim that he or she is not a foreigner
and also not able to arrange for bail in
respect of his or her claim, the proceedee

31
shall be detained and kept in internment
or detention centre;
(14)  The  Foreigners  Tribunal  shall
dispose  of  the  case  within  a  period  of
sixty days of the receipt of the reference
from the competent authority.
(15) After the case has been heard, the
Foreigners  Tribunal  shall  submit  its
opinion  as  soon  thereafter  as  may  be
practicable,  to  the  officer  or  the
authority specified in this behalf in the
order of reference.
(16) The final order of the Foreigners
Tribunal shall contain its opinion on the
question  referred  to  which  shall  be  a
concise  statement  of  facts  and  the
conclusion.”
                     (emphasis supplied)
28.
The case against the appellant was initiated in
the year 2004 alleging that the appellant illegally
migrated  to  India  after  25.03.1971  from  Village-
Dorijahangirpur, Police Station - Torail, District-
Mymansingh,  Bangladesh  and  was  living  in  Village
Kasimpur, Police Station, District - Nalbari in the
State  of  Assam  in  S.P.  Reference  No.948/2004.  It
appears that the State examined a Sub-Inspector of

32
Police Sh.  Bipin Dutta,  who was  the Investigating
Officer in the case and in his evidence, has stated
that on 12.05.2004, he was posted at Nalbari Police
Station when the S.P. (B) Nalbari, directed him to
enquire  into  the  nationality  of  the  appellant
pursuant to which on 17.05.2004, he opened a Case
Diary  and  went  to  the  house  of  the  appellant,
informed him about the enquiry and filled up Form
No.I. This reference was made by the Superintendent
of Police under Section 8(1) of the Illegal Migrants
(Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1982 (hereinafter
referred  to  as  the  “IMDT  Act”),  suspecting  the
appellant  to  be  an  illegal  migrant  on  the  ground
that  on  being  asked,  he  could  not  produce  any
documentary  evidence  in  support  of  his/her  entry
into India, prior to 01.01.1966.
29.
Thus, IMDT Case No.692/05 was registered before
the then IMD Tribunal, Nalbari. The same case was
re-registered under the 1964 Order as F.T.(Nal) Case
No.(N)1096/06  upon  the  IMDT  Act  being  declared

33
unconstitutional by this Court in Sarbananda Sonowal
I (supra) on 12.07.2005.
30.
Consequently, the notice issued under Section
8(1), IMDT Act became a nullity and therefore F.T.
(Nal)  Case  No.(N)  1096/06  was  started  and  a
reference  was  made  to  the  Tribunal.  The  Tribunal
answered the reference by order dated 19.03.2012 as
under:
“This is a reference u/s 2(1) of the
Foreigner's  Tribunal  (Order)  1964  for
opinion whether O.P.  Md. Rahim Ali son of
Late  Solimuddin  Ali  of  Village  Kasimpur
Police Statin and District nalbari, Assam
is a foreigner or not. The reference is
that O.P. Ms. Rahim Ali illegally migrated
to  India  after  25th  March,  1971  from
village  Darijahangirpur  Police  Station
Tarail District Mymansingh Bangladesh and
is  living  in  village  Kasimpur  Police
Station and District nalbari, Assam.
Notice  was  serve  upon  the  O.P.  and
the O.P. appeared in the case and prayed
time  for  filing  written  statement  by
submitting  petition.  Thereafter  0.P.
became absent without step for which the
case preceded ex-parte.
State  examined  S.I.  of  police  Sri
Bipin Dutta who is I/O of this case and he
deposed in his evidence that on 12.5.04 he
was at Nabari Police Station and on that

34
day,  S.P.  (B)  Nalbari,  directed  him  to
enquire  the  nationality  of  suspect  Ms.
Rahim  Ali  of  village  Kasimpur  Police
Station Nalbari. On 17.5.04 he opened the
Case  Diary  and  went  to  the  house  of
suspect Rahim Ali with staff. He met the
suspect  in  his  house  and  informed,  him
about the enquiry and filled up Folm No.I
as per version of suspect. Then we asked
the  suspect  to  show  the  documents
regarding  his  India  nationality.  Then
suspect told him that he has no documents
in his hand and he can show the documents
if  time  allowed.  Then  he  recorded  the
statement of suspect Rahim Ali and witness
Samin Bore and kept in the Case Diary. He
gave 7 days time to the suspect to show
the documents but, the suspect failed to
do so. Then he filled up Form No.II and
submitted his report to the authority with
the  case  diary.  Form  enquiry  it  reveals
that suspect. Rahim Ali illegally migrated
to Assam from Bangladesh after 25th march,
1971.
O.P.  has  failed  to  discharges  his
burden U/s 9 of the Foreigner's Act and
failed  to  prove  that  he  is  not  a
foreigner.
Considering  the  above,  I  am  of  the
opinion  that  O.P.  Md.  Rahim  Ali  is  a
foreigner.
Sd/- B.K. Sarma
Member, F.T. Balbari”
(sic)

35
31.
Some repetition in narration is inescapable. As
obvious from the above, the initiation of the case
against  the  appellant  was  based  on  the  report
submitted by the Sub-Inspector Sh. Bipin Dutta which
in turn was based on the fact that in his deposition
he had stated that upon being directed by the S.P.
(B), Nalbari, he had undertaken an inquiry against
the appellant and asked him to show the documents
regarding  his  Indian  nationality,  whereupon  the
appellant had asked for time and was given 7 days’
time, but did not show any document(s) and thus, Sh.
Bipin Dutta filled up Form No.II and submitted his
report  along  with  the  case  diary  before  the
authority.
32.
It is further stated that from such inquiry it
is  revealed  that  the  appellant  had  illegally
migrated to Assam from Bangladesh after 25.03.1971
and based on the same, the opinion given was that
the appellant was a foreigner.

36
33.
Section 9 of the Act stipulates if in a case
not falling under Section 8 of the Act, any question
arises  as  to  whether  a  person  is  or  is  not  a
foreigner  or  is  or  is  not  a  foreigner  of  a
particular  class,  the  person  concerned  must  prove
that he/she is not a foreigner or not a foreigner of
that  particular  class.  This  provision  prevails
notwithstanding anything in the Indian Evidence Act,
1872.
34.  However, the question is that does Section 9 of
the Act empower the Executive to pick a person at
random,  knock  at  his/her/their  door,  tell
him/her/they/them  ‘We  suspect  you  of  being  a
foreigner.’, and then rest easy basis Section 9? Let
us  contextualise  this  to  the  facts  at  hand.  The
originating  point  of  inquiry  is  the  S.P.  (B)
Nalbari’s  direction  to  Sub-Inspector  Dutta  on
12.05.2004. The pleadings and the record are silent
as to what was the basis of the S.P. (B) Nalbari’s
direction? What materials or information had come to

37
his  knowledge  or  possession  that  warranted  his
direction?  Obviously,  the  State  cannot  proceed  in
such manner. Neither can we as a Court countenance
such approach.
35. First, it is for the authorities concerned to
have in their knowledge or possession, some material
basis or information to suspect that a person is a
foreigner and not an Indian. In the present case,
though  it  is  mentioned  that  from  inquiry  it  was
revealed that the appellant had migrated illegally
to  the  State  of  Assam  from  Bangladesh  after
25.03.1971  but  nothing  has  come  on  record  to
indicate  even  an  iota of  evidence  against  him,
except for the bald allegation that he had illegally
migrated to India post 25.03.1971. It is also not
known as to who, if any person, had alleged that the
appellant  had  migrated  to  India  after  25.03.1971
from  Village  -  Dorijahangirpur,  Police  Station  -
Torail,  District  -  Mymansingh  in  Bangladesh.  It
needs  no  reiteration  that  a  person  charged  or

38
accused would generally not be able to prove to the
negative,  if  he/she  is  not  aware  of  the
evidence/material against him/her which leads to the
person being labelled suspect.  Ipso facto just an
allegation/accusation cannot lead to shifting of the
burden to the accused, unless he/she is confronted
with  the  allegation  as  also  the  material  backing
such  allegation.  Of  course,  at  such  stage,  the
evidentiary  value  of  the  material  would  not  be
required to be gone into, as the same would be done
by  the  Tribunal  in  the  reference.  However,  mere
allegation,  that  too,  being  as  vague  as  to
mechanically reproduce simply the words which mirror
the  text  of  provisions  in  the  Act  cannot  be
permitted  under  law.  Even  for  the  person  to
discharge the burden statutorily imposed on him by
virtue of Section 9 of the Act, the person has to be
intimated of the information and material available
against him, such that he/she can contest and defend
the proceedings against him.

39
36.
In  the  present  case,  it  was  specifically
alleged that the appellant had come to Assam from
Village - Dorijahangirpur, Police Station - Torail,
District - Mymansingh in Bangladesh while making a
reference to the Tribunal. Hence, it was incumbent
on  the  authority  making  the  reference  to  provide
details as to how it had received such information
as also its  bona fide  belief of such factum being
true.  In  other  words,  the  authority  had  been,  as
claimed,  able  to  trace  the  appellant’s  place  of
origin. Surely then, the authority had some material
to back its assertion. The record does not show such
material was given either to the appellant or the
Tribunal by the authority.
37.  In the absence of the basic/primary material,
it cannot be left to the untrammelled or arbitrary
discretion  of  the  authorities  to  initiate
proceedings,  which  have  life-altering  and  very
serious consequences for the person, basis hearsay
or bald and vague allegation(s). In neither round of

40
the proceedings before the Tribunal, whether it be
the initial  ex-parte  one, or even after the matter
was referred by this Court to the Tribunal to hear
the  appellant  and  pass  an  order,  has  it  been
revealed  as  to  how  and  from  where  such  specific
allegation, down to the alleged village of origin of
the appellant in Bangladesh was brought to or came
to  the  knowledge  of  the  authorities.  Nor  do  we
locate any supporting material.
38.
In  the  present  case,  clearly  the  authorities
concerned  have  gravely  faulted  by  construing  the
words ‘a copy of the main grounds on which he is
alleged to be a foreigner’ in Para 3(1) of the 1964
Order to mean the allegations levelled against the
person. This error at the very inception stage is
enough to render a fatal blow to the entire exercise
undertaken.  The  term  ‘main  grounds’  is  not
synonymous  or  interchangeable  with  the  term
‘allegation(s)’. There is no, and there cannot be
any,  ambiguity  that  ‘main  grounds’  is  totally

41
distinct  and  different  from  the  ‘allegation’  of
being ‘a foreigner’.
39.
For  avoidance  of  doubt,  we  may  restate  that
this  does  not  imply  that  strict  proof  of  such
allegation has to be given to the accused person but
the material on which such allegation is founded has
to be shared with the person. For obvious reasons
and as pointed out hereinbefore, at this stage, the
question of the evidentiary nature of the material
and/or  its  authenticity  is  not  required.  However,
under the garb of and by taking recourse to Section
9 of the Act, the authority, or for that matter, the
Tribunal,  cannot  give  a  go-by  to  the  settled
principles of natural justice.  Audi alteram partem
does  not  merely  envisage  a  fair  and  reasonable
opportunity of being heard. In our opinion, it would
encompass  within  itself  the  obligation  to  share
material  collected  with  the  person/accused
concerned.  It  is  no  longer  res  integra that
principles of natural justice need to be observed

42
even if the statute is silent on that aspect, as
laid  down  in  Mangilal  v  State  of  Madhya  Pradesh,
(2004) 2 SCC 447:
‘10. Even if a statute is silent and there
are no positive words in the Act or the
Rules  made  thereunder,  there  could  be
nothing wrong in spelling out the need to
hear the parties whose rights and interest
are likely to be affected by the orders
that  may  be  passed,  and  making  it  a
requirement  to  follow  a  fair  procedure
before  taking  a  decision,  unless  the
statute provides otherwise. The principles
of  natural  justice  must  be  read  into
unoccupied  interstices  of  the  statute,
unless  there  is  a  clear  mandate  to  the
contrary. No form or procedure should ever
be permitted to exclude the presentation
of a litigant's defence or stand. Even in
the absence of a provision in procedural
laws,
 
power
 
inheres
 
in
 
every
tribunal/court  of  a  judicial  or  quasi-
judicial  character,  to  adopt  modalities
necessary  to  achieve  requirements  of
natural  justice  and  fair  play  to  ensure
better  and  proper  discharge  of  their
duties.  Procedure  is  mainly  grounded  on
the  principles  of  natural  justice
irrespective  of  the  extent  of  its
application by express provision in that
regard in a given situation. It has always
been  a  cherished  principle.  Where  the
statute is silent about the observance of
the  principles  of  natural  justice,  such
statutory  silence  is  taken  to  imply
compliance with the principles of natural
justice  where  substantial  rights  of
parties  are  considerably  affected.  The

43
application  of  natural  justice  becomes
presumptive,  unless  found  excluded  by
express  words  of  statute  or  necessary
intendment. Its aim is to secure justice
or  to  prevent  miscarriage  of  justice.
Principles  of  natural  justice  do  not
supplant the law, but supplement it. These
rules operate only in areas not covered by
any law validly made. They are a means to
an end and not an end in themselves. …’ 
(emphasis supplied) 
40.
The initial infirmity of there being nothing on
record  as  regards  what  grounds  or  material  were
actually available with the authorities to question
the  appellant’s  status  as  to  his  nationality,  is
fatal  to  the  projected  case.  The  appellant  had
obtained
 
documents/certificates
 
from
 
various
officers with regard to his/his parents’ continuous
presence in India much prior to the date 25.03.1971,
which  were  produced  before  the  Tribunal  and  have
been  noted  by  the  Tribunal  in  its  report  dated
16.11.2017. Another relevant aspect is the prevalent
situation on the ground where uninformed/illiterate
persons or persons not being well-informed, in the
absence  of  any  requirement  to  obtain  and  hold  an

44
official document and without possessing property in
their  own  names,  would  not  have  any  official
document issued by the government, State or Central.
It is neither difficult nor inconceivable to fathom
such scenario amongst the rural populace, including
within Assam.
41.  The evidence produced before the Tribunal by
the appellant to indicate that his parents had been
resident in India much prior to 01.01.1966 whereas
his  siblings  and  he  himself  much  prior  to
25.03.1971, has been disbelieved only on the ground
of mismatch of actual English spelling of the names
and  discrepancy  in  dates.  As  far  as  the
discrepancy(ies)  in  dates  and  spellings  are
concerned,  we  are  of  the  view  that  the  same  are
minor in nature. Variation in name spelling is not a
foreign phenomenon in preparation of the Electoral
Roll. Further, the Electoral Roll has no acceptance
in the eyes of law insofar as proof of date of birth
is concerned. A casual entry by the enumerators when

45
noting  and  entering  the  name(s)  and  dates  of
birth(s) as also the address(es) of the person(s)
while making preparatory surveys for the purposes of
preparing  the  Electoral  Rolls  cannot  visit  the
appellant with dire consequences. Moreover, in our
country, sometimes a title is prefixed or suffixed
to a name such that the same person may be known
also by one or two aliases. The Tribunal seems to
have been totally oblivious to all this.
42.
The  State  of  Assam,  as  per  the  Census  2011,
boasts  of  72.19%  literacy  rate,  with  females  at
66.27% and males at 77.85%. However, this was not
the case during the 1960s or even 1970s. Not just in
Assam but in many States, it is seen that names of
people, even on important government documents can
have and do have varied spellings depending on them
being in English or Hindi or Bangla or Assamese or
any other language, for that matter. Moreover, names
of persons which are written either by the persons
preparing the Voters List or by the personnel making

46
entries  into  different  Government  records,  the
spelling of the name, based upon its pronunciation,
may take on slight variations. It is not uncommon
throughout  India  that  different  spellings  may  be
written in the regional/vernacular language and in
English.  Such/same  person  will  have  a  differently
spelt name in English and the local language. This
is  more  pronounced  where  due  to  specific
pronunciation  habits  or  styles  there  can  be
different spellings for the same name in different
languages
 viz.  English/Hindi/Urdu/Assamese/Bangla
etc.
43.
The appellant had produced a document showing
that  his  father  and  mother  had  been  resident  of
Village Dolur Pather since 1965; that his sibling
had also been declared not to be a foreigner by the
Tribunal, and; his elder brother and he were both
voters as per the 1985 Electoral Roll relating to 41
Bhabanipur  Legislative  Assembly  Constituency.
Further, upon his marriage, the appellant came to

47
Village Kasimpur in District - Nalbari, Assam where
his name appeared in the Electoral Roll of 1997 for
61 Dharmapur Legislative Assembly Constituency.
44.
From
 
an
 
overall
 
discussion
 
on
 
the
Report/opinion of the Tribunal dated 16.11.2017, it
is clear that there are minor discrepancy(ies) in
the
 
appellant’s
 
documents,
 
however
 
their
authenticity  is  not  in  doubt.  In  the  considered
opinion  of  this  Court,  the  same  would  further
buttress the appellant’s claim, that not being in
the  wrong,  and  being  an  ignorant  person,  he,
truthfully  and  faithfully  produced  the  official
records as they were in his possession. We do not
see any attempt by the appellant to get his official
records
 
prepared
 
meticulously
 
without
 
any
discrepancy. The conduct of an illegal migrant would
not be so casual.
45.
The  debate  has  long  been  settled  that  penal
statutes must be construed strictly [Tolaram Relumal

48
v  State  of  Bombay,  (1955)  1  SCR  158 at  Para  86;
Krishi  Utpadan  Mandi  Samiti  v  Pilibhit  Pantnagar
Beej Ltd., (2004) 1 SCC 391 at Paras 57-587; Govind
Impex Pvt. Ltd. v Appropriate Authority, Income Tax
Dept.,  (2011)  1  SCC  529
 at  Para  118,  and;
Commissioner  of  Customs  (Import),  Mumbai  v  Dilip
6 ‘8. The question that needs our determination in such a situation is whether Section 18(1) makes punishable
receipt of money at a moment of time when the lease had not come into existence, and when there was a possibility
that the contemplated lease might never come into existence. It may be here observed that the provisions of Section
18(1) are penal in nature and it is a well-settled rule of construction of penal statutes that if two possible and
reasonable constructions can be put upon a penal provision, the court must lean towards that construction which
exempts the subject from penalty rather than the one which imposes penalty. It is not competent to the court to
stretch the meaning of an expression used by the legislature in order to carry out the intention of the legislature. As
pointed out by Lord Macmillan in London and North Eastern Railway Co. v. Berriman [1946 AC 278, 295] “where
penalties for infringement are imposed it is not legitimate to stretch the language of a rule, however, beneficient its
intention, beyond the fair and ordinary meaning of its language”.’
7 ‘57. Although the dictionary meaning of business may be wide, in our opinion, for the purpose of considering the
same in the context of regulatory and penal statute like the Act, the same must be read as carrying on a commercial
venture in agricultural produce. The rule of strict construction should be applied in the instant case. The intention of
the legislature in directing the trader to obtain licence is absolutely clear and unambiguous insofar as it seeks to
regulate the trade for purchase and sale. Thus a person who is not buying an agricultural produce for the purpose
of selling it whether in the same form or in the transformed form may not be a trader. Furthermore, it is well known
that construction of a statute will depend upon the purport and object of the Act, as has been held in Sri Krishna
Coconut case [AIR 1967 SC 973] itself. Therefore, different provisions of the statute which have the object of
enforcing the provisions thereof, namely, levy of market fee, which was to be collected for the benefit of the
producers, in our opinion, is to be interpreted differently from a provision where it requires a person to obtain a
licence so as to regulate a trade. It is now well known that in case of doubt in construction of a penal statute, the
same should be construed in favour of the subject and against the State.
58. In the case of London and North Eastern Rly. Co. v. Berriman [1946 AC 278 : (1946) 1 All ER 255 (HL)] , Lord
Simonds quoted with approval (at All ER p. 270 C-D) the following observations of Lord Esher, M.R. in the case of
Tuck & Sons v. Priester [(1887) 19 QBD 629 : 56 LJ QB 553 (CA)] , QBD at p. 638:
“We must be very careful in construing that section, because it imposes a penalty. If there is a reasonable
interpretation which will avoid the penalty in any particular case we must adopt that construction. If there are
two reasonable constructions we must give the more lenient one. That is the settled rule for the construction of
penal sections.”
It is trite that fiscal statute must not only be construed literally, but also strictly. It is further well known that if in
terms of the provisions of a penal statute a person becomes liable to follow the provisions thereof it should be clear
and unambiguous so as to let him know his legal obligations and liabilities thereunder.’
8 ‘11. Mr Salve  submits that a statute providing for penal prosecution has to be construed strictly. He refers to
Clause 12 aforesaid and contends that it shall govern the field. Mr Bhatt submits that it is Clause 1 of the lease deed
which shall govern the issue. We do not have the slightest hesitation in accepting the broad submission of Mr Salve
that a penal statute which makes an act a penal offence or imposes penalty is to be strictly construed and if two
views are possible, one favourable to the citizen is to be ordinarily preferred but this principle has no application in
the facts of the present case. There is no serious dispute in regard to the interpretation of Explanation to Section
269-UA(f) of the Act and in fact, we are proceeding on an assumption that it will cover only such cases where exists
provision for extension in lease deed.’

49
Kumar  &  Company,  (2018)  9  SCC  1  at  Para  249].
Equally,  ‘If  special  provisions  are  made  in
derogation to the general right of a citizen, the
statute,  in  our  opinion,  should  receive  strict
construction.  …’10 The  consequences  which  would
befall  the  person  declared  as  a  foreigner  are  no
doubt  penal  and  severe.  The  moment  a  person  is
declared to be a foreigner, he/she is liable to be
detained  and  deported  to  the  country  of  his/her
origin. Thus, the same would necessarily pre-suppose
existence of material to (a) prove the person is not
an Indian national, and (b) establish or identify
his/her country of origin. Herein, on the facts, the
authorities have not been able to succeed either on
(a) or on (b). Another possibility is that if the
foreign country refuses to accept the foreigner, he
9 ‘24. In construing penal statutes and taxation statutes, the Court has to apply strict rule of interpretation. The
penal statute which tends to deprive a person of right to life and liberty has to be given strict interpretation or else
many innocents might become victims of discretionary decision-making. Insofar as taxation statutes are concerned,
Article 265 of the Constitution [“265. Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law.— No tax shall be levied or
collected except by authority of law.”] prohibits the State from extracting tax from the citizens without authority of
law. It is axiomatic that taxation statute has to be interpreted strictly because the State cannot at their whims and
fancies burden the citizens without authority of law. In other words, when the competent Legislature mandates
taxing certain persons/certain objects in certain circumstances, it cannot be expanded/interpreted to include those,
which were not intended by the legislature.’
10 Karnataka State Financial Corporation v N Narasimhaiah, (2008) 5 SCC 176 at Para 18.

50
would be rendered stateless, and languish for the
remainder of his life in confinement.
46.
Notably, under the Constitution of India, Part
III  [Fundamental  Rights]  distinguishes  between
citizens and non-citizens. Articles 14, 20, 21, 22,
25 and 27 are available to all persons. We have kept
in mind Articles 1411 and 2112 of the Constitution
while penning down this judgment.
47.
In  Mukesh  Singh  v  State  (Narcotic  Branch  of
Delhi),  (2020)  10  SCC  120,  a  Bench  of  5  learned
Judges held:
‘11.3. Now so far as the observations made
by  this  Court  in  para  13  in Mohan
Lal [Mohan Lal v. State of Punjab, (2018)
17 SCC 627 : (2019) 4 SCC (Cri) 215] that
in the nature of reverse burden of proof,
the onus will lie on the prosecution to
demonstrate  on  the  face  of  it  that  the
investigation was fair, judicious with no
circumstance  that  may  raise  doubt  about
its veracity, it is to be noted that the
presumption under the Act is against the
accused as per Sections 35 and 54 of the
NDPS Act.  Thus, in the cases of reverse
11 ‘14. Equality before law.— The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection
of the laws within the territory of India.’
12 ‘21. Protection of life and personal liberty.— No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except
according to procedure established by law.’

51
burden  of  proof,  the  presumption  can
operate  only  after  the  initial  burden
which  exists  on  the  prosecution  is
satisfied. At this stage, it is required
to be noted that the reverse burden does
not  merely  exist  in  special  enactments
like the NDPS Act and the Prevention of
Corruption Act, but is also a part of the
IPC — Section 304-B and all such offences
under  the  Penal  Code  are  to  be
investigated  in  accordance  with  the
provisions  of  CrPC  and  consequently  the
informant can himself investigate the said
offences under Section 157 CrPC.’
(emphasis supplied) 
48.  Before  Mukesh Singh (supra), 2 learned Judges
of this Court, in Noor Aga v State of Punjab, (2008)
16 SCC 417, had examined the imposition of a reverse
burden, on an accused, under the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985. While holding the
provisions concerned imposing reverse burden as not
ultra vires the Constitution, it was held:
’54.  Provisions  imposing  reverse  burden,
however, must not only be required to be
strictly  complied  with  but  also  may  be
subject to proof of some basic facts as
envisaged under the statute in question.
xxx
56. The  provisions  of  the  Act  and  the
punishment  prescribed  therein  being

52
indisputably  stringent 
flowing  from
elements such as a heightened standard for
bail,  absence  of  any  provision  for
remissions, specific provisions for grant
of  minimum  sentence,  enabling  provisions
granting power to the court to impose fine
of  more  than  maximum  punishment  of  Rs
2,00,000 as also the presumption of guilt
emerging from possession of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances, the extent of
burden to prove the foundational facts on
the  prosecution i.e.  “proof  beyond  all
reasonable doubt” would be more onerous. A
heightened  scrutiny  test  would  be
necessary to be invoked. It is so because
whereas, on the one hand, the court must
strive  towards  giving  effect  to  the
parliamentary  object  and  intent in  the
light  of  the  international  conventions,
but, on the other, it is also necessary to
uphold  the  individual  human  rights  and
dignity as  provided  for  under  the  UN
Declaration of Human Rights by  insisting
upon  scrupulous  compliance  with  the
provisions of the Act for the purpose of
upholding  the  democratic  values. It  is
necessary for giving effect to the concept
of  “wider  civilisation”.  The  court  must
always remind itself that it is a well-
settled
 
principle
 
of
 
criminal
jurisprudence  that  more  serious  the
offence,  the  stricter  is  the  degree  of
proof. A higher degree of assurance, thus,
would be necessary to convict an accused.
In State of Punjab v. Baldev Singh [(1999)
6  SCC  172:  1999  SCC  (Cri)  1080]  it  was
stated: (SCC p. 199, para 28)
“28.  …  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that
severer the punishment, greater has to be
the  care  taken to  see  that  all  the

53
safeguards  provided  in  a  statute  are
scrupulously followed.”
(See also Ritesh Chakarvarti v. State of
M.P. [(2006)  12  SCC  321:  (2007)  1  SCC
(Cri) 744])
57. It is also necessary to bear in mind
that superficially a case may have an ugly
look and thereby, prima facie, shaking the
conscience  of  any  court  but  it  is  well
settled  that  suspicion,  however  high  it
may  be,  can  under  no  circumstances,  be
held  to  be  a  substitute  for  legal
evidence.
58. Sections  35  and  54  of  the  Act,  no
doubt, raise presumptions with regard to
the culpable mental state on the part of
the accused as also  place the burden of
proof in this behalf on the accused; but a
bare perusal of the said provision would
clearly  show  that  presumption  would
operate in the trial of the accused only
in the event the circumstances contained
therein  are  fully  satisfied.  An  initial
burden  exists  upon  the  prosecution  and
only when it stands satisfied, would the
legal  burden  shift.  Even  then,  the
standard of proof required for the accused
to prove his innocence is not as high as
that  of  the  prosecution.  Whereas  the
standard  of  proof  required  to  prove  the
guilt of the accused on the prosecution is
“beyond  all  reasonable  doubt”  but  it  is
“preponderance  of  probability”  on  the
accused. If the prosecution fails to prove
the  foundational  facts  so  as  to  attract
the rigours of Section 35 of the Act, the
actus  reus 
which  is  possession  of
contraband  by the accused cannot be said
to have been established.

54
xxx
63. Placing  persuasive  burden  on  the
accused persons must justify the loss of
protection which will be suffered by the
accused.  Fairness  and  reasonableness  of
trial  as  also  maintenance  of  the
individual dignity of the accused must be
uppermost in the court's mind.’
(emphasis supplied)
49.  In Sarbananda Sonowal v Union of India, (2007)
1  SCC  174  [hereinafter  referred  to  as  Sarbananda
Sonowal II], it was held:
‘55.  There cannot, however, be any doubt
whatsoever  that  adequate  care  should  be
taken to see that no genuine citizen of
India  is  thrown  out  of  the  country.  A
person who claims himself to be a citizen
of India in terms of the Constitution of
India or the Citizenship Act is entitled
to  all  safeguards  both  substantive  and
procedural  provided  for  therein  to  show
that he is a citizen.
56.  Status  of  a  person,  however,  is
determined  according  to  statute.  The
Evidence  Act  of  our  country  has  made
provisions as regards “burden of proof”.
Different statutes also lay down as to how
and  in  what  manner  burden  is  to  be
discharged.  Even  some  penal  statutes
contain  provisions  that  burden  of  proof
shall  be  on  the  accused.  Only  because
burden of proof under certain situations
is placed on the accused, the same would

55
not  mean  that  he  is  deprived  of  the
procedural safeguard.
57.  In  Hiten  P.  Dalal  v.  Bratindranath
Banerjee [(2001) 6 SCC 16: 2001 SCC (Cri)
960] this Court categorically opined: (SCC
pp. 24-25, paras 22-23)
“22. … Presumptions are rules of evidence
and do not conflict with the presumption
of innocence, because by the latter, all
that is meant is that the prosecution is
obliged  to  prove  the  case  against  the
accused  beyond  reasonable  doubt.  The
obligation  on  the  prosecution  may  be
discharged with the help of presumptions
of law or fact unless the accused adduces
evidence
 
showing
 
the
 
reasonable
possibility  of  the  non-existence  of  the
presumed fact.
23.  In  other  words,  provided  the  facts
required  to  form  the  basis  of  a
presumption of law exist, no discretion is
left  with  the  court  but  to  draw  the
statutory  conclusion,  but  this  does  not
preclude  the  person  against  whom  the
presumption is drawn from rebutting it and
proving the contrary. A fact is said to be
proved when,
‘after considering the matters before it,
the court either believes it to exist, or
considers its existence so probable that a
prudent man ought, under the circumstances
of the particular case, to act upon the
supposition that it exists’.
Therefore, the rebuttal does not have to
be  conclusively  established  but  such
evidence must be adduced before the court
in support of the defence that the court
must either believe the defence to exist
or consider its existence to be reasonably

56
probable,  the  standard  of  reasonability
being that of the ‘prudent man’.”
xxx
60.  Having  regard  to  the  fact  that  the
Tribunal in the notice to be sent to the
proceedee is required to set out the main
grounds;  evidently  the  primary  onus  in
relation  thereto  would  be  on  the  State.
However,  once  the  Tribunal  satisfied
itself about the existence of grounds, the
burden  of  proof  would  be  upon  the
proceedee.
61.  In Sonowal I [(2005) 5 SCC 665] this
Court  clearly  held  that  the  burden  of
proof would be upon the proceedee as he
would  be  possessing  the  necessary
documents to show that he is a citizen not
only within the meaning of the provisions
of  the  Constitution  of  India  but  also
within the provisions of the Citizenship
Act.’
(emphasis supplied) 
50.  Evidently, our understanding and exposition of
the law in the preceding paragraphs can be read with
Sarbananda Sonowal I (supra) and Sarbananda Sonowal
II  (supra).  It  embodies  meaning  as  to  what  is
expected  of  the  authorities  till  the  stage  of
Section 9 of the Act arrives. The statutory burden
would kick in thereafter.

57
51.   5  learned  Judges  of  this  Court  in  Union  of
India v Ghaus Mohammad, 1961 SCC OnLine SC 2 held:
‘6. Section 9 of this Act is the one that
is  relevant.  That  section  so  far  as  is
material is in these terms:
“xxx”
It  is  quite  clear  that  this  section
applies to the present case and the onus
of showing that he is not a foreigner was
upon  the  respondent.  The  High  Court
entirely overlooked the provisions of this
section and misdirected itself as to the
question that arose for decision. It does
not seem to have realised that the burden
of proving that he was not a foreigner,
was on the respondent and appears to have
placed that burden on the Union. This was
a wholly wrong approach to the question.’
52.  However, the above conclusion was premised on
what the Court noted in the preceding paragraph in
Ghaus Mohammad (supra):
‘2. The High Court observed that: “There
must be prima facie material on the basis
of which the authority can proceed to pass
an  order  under  Section  3(2)(c)  of  the
Foreigners  Act,  1946.  No  doubt  if  there
exists such a material and then the order
is made which is on the face of it a valid
order, then this Court cannot go into the
question  whether  or  not  a  particular
person is a foreigner or, in other words,
not  a  citizen  of  this  country  because
according to Section 9 of the Citizenship

58
Act, 1955, this question is to be decided
by  a  prescribed  authority  and  under  the
Citizenship Rules, 1956, that authority is
the  Central  Government”.  The  High  Court
then examined the materials before it and
held, “in the present case there was no
material at all on the basis of which the
proper authority could proceed to issue an
order  under  Section  3(2)(c)  of  the
Foreigners Act, 1946”. In this view of the
matter the High Court quashed the order.’
53.   We  need  not  be  detained  on  Ghaus  Mohammad
(supra) as it is clear that therein, the Punjab High
Court (Circuit Bench) at Delhi had conflated the Act
with  the  Citizenship  Act.  Fateh  Mohd.  v  Delhi
Administration, 1963 Supp (2) SCR 560 by a 4-Judge
Bench  and  Masud  Khan  v  State  of  Uttar  Pradesh,
(1974)  3  SCC  469  [3-Judge  Bench] followed  Ghaus
Mohammad (supra).  We  are  of  the  opinion  that  the
facts therein were also different than what stares
us in the case at hand. No doubt the principles of
law  stand,  yet  we  see  no  real  difficulty  in  our
formulations hereinabove harmonising with what has
been held in the gamut of case-law. As such, the
burden under Section 9 of the Act would operate in

59
the  manner  delineated  by  us,  factoring  in  the
imperative  to  maintain  consistency  amongst  Ghaus
Mohammad (supra),  Sarbananda  Sonowal  I (supra),
Sarbananda Sonowal II (supra), Mukesh Singh (supra)
and this judgment.
54.   For  and  on  the  strength  of  the  totality  of
reasons afore-indicated, this Court finds that the
report/opinion of the Tribunal dated 16.11.2017, as
sought  by  this  Court  through  order  dated
28.07.201713,  is  wholly  unsustainable.  Accordingly,
the report/opinion dated 16.11.2017 is quashed. As
the  report/opinion  dated  16.11.2017  has  been
examined threadbare by us, we have no hesitation in
setting aside the Tribunal’s order dated 19.03.2012
as  also  the  Impugned  Judgment  dated  23.11.2015
passed by the High Court. In any event, once this
Court had passed the order dated 28.07.2017 (supra)
13 ‘In the peculiar facts of the case, we would request the Foreign Tribunal, Nalbari, to examine the documents filed
by the petitioner on the basis of which the petitioner is claiming that he is not a foreigner but a national of this
country. The petitioner shall appear before the Tribunal on 21.08.2017 and give the copies of the documents which
are filed along with this petition. The Tribunal shall thereafter undertake an inquiry into those documents and
submit its report. 
List the matter after four months.
In the meantime, the petitioner shall not be deported.’

60
calling  for  a  fresh  report/opinion,  the  sequitur
logically would translate into the Tribunal’s order
dated 19.03.2012 and the Impugned Judgment becoming
susceptible to being quashed. It is so ordered.
55.  This Court has found that the inferences drawn
by  the  Tribunal  do  not  falsify  the  appellant’s
claim.  In  view  of  detailed  analysis,  the
discrepancy(ies)  in  the  material  produced  by  the
appellant  can  be  termed  minor.  The  same  were  not
sufficient  to  lead  the  Tribunal  to  doubt  and
disbelieve the appellant and the version put forth
by  him.  Thus,  we  are  not  inclined  to  remand  the
matter  to  the  Tribunal  for  another  round  of
consideration. Putting an authoritative  quietus to
the  issue,  the  appellant  is  declared  an  Indian
citizen and not a foreigner.
56.
Necessary consequences in law shall follow.

61
57.
The appeal would, accordingly, stand allowed on
the aforementioned terms, without any order as to
costs.
58. Let a copy of the judgment be circulated to the
Tribunals constituted under the 1964 Order by the
Registrar General of the High Court.
 
                 ........................J.
             [VIKRAM NATH]
 
                 ........................J.
    [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI
JULY 11, 2024