2024 INSC 525
Page 1 of 21 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION  
 
 
WRIT PETITION (CRL.) NO. 546 OF 2023 
 
 
Balasaheb Keshawrao Bhapkar & Ors.  
 
   ….Petitioner(s) 
 
Versus 
 
Securities and Exchange Board of India & Ors. 
….Respondent(s) 
 
O R D E R 
 
SURYA KANT, J. 
 
1. 
Petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 are husband and wife, whereas Petitioner 
No. 3 is their son.  They have invoked the jurisdiction of this Court 
under Article 32 of the Constitution, seeking the following directions: - 
“(a) 
To issue appropriate writ in the nature of mandamus or 
any direction or order directing the Respondent No. 1 to 
liquidate the attached assets within a period of 6 
months and/or, in the alternative, allow the Petitioners 
to assist Respondent No. 1 in liquidating the attached 
assets; 
(b) 
Direct Respondent No.1 to distribute the amount lying 
within it to genuine investors as early as possible; 
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2024.07.16
15:46:35 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 21 
 
(c) 
Direct Respondent No. 1 to allow the Petitioners to assist 
them in identifying genuine investors and also the 
amount deposited by them; and 
(d)  
Pass other and further order(s) as this Hon’ble Court 
may deem fit in the facts and circumstances of the case.” 
2. 
The above-stated reliefs have been sought in light of the following 
set of events predicated in this factual background: - 
(a) Petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 are the founder-Directors of one Sai Prasad 
Properties Ltd, incorporated under the provisions of the Companies 
Act, 1956.  Petitioner No. 3 also joined the aforesaid company as a 
Director in 2008, allegedly when he was still studying in college, 
and is claimed to have thereafter resigned in the year 2014.  The 
Petitioners also floated various other companies, known as the Sai 
Group of Companies, consisting of: 
(i) 
M/s Sai Prasad Properties Ltd. (hereinafter, “SPPL”); 
(ii) M/s Sai Prasad Foods Ltd. (hereinafter, “SPFL”); 
(iii) M/s Sai Prasad Corporation Ltd. (hereinafter, “SPCL”); and 
(iv) M/s Shree Sai Space Creations Ltd. (hereinafter, “SSSCL”). 
 
(b) The Security and Exchange Board of India (hereinafter, “SEBI”) 
received a complaint dated 02.06.2010 alleging illegal mobilisation 
of funds by SPFL. After processing the said complaint and in 

Page 3 of 21 
 
furtherance of the orders passed by the High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh and the Department of Financial Services, Ministry of 
Finance, the Whole Time Member of SEBI (hereinafter, “WTM”) 
issued an interim order-cum-show cause notice dated 17.07.2013, 
inter alia, directing SPFL and its Directors to refrain from collecting 
any more money from investors, under the existing schemes or any 
new schemes. SEBI, once again passed an order dated 14.01.2015 
against SPFL and its Promotors/Directors, restraining them from 
collecting any money from the investors, launching or carrying out 
any 
Collective 
Investment 
Schemes, 
and 
from 
alienating/disposing/selling any of the assets of the Company, 
except for the purpose of refund to its investors. 
(c) SEBI received a letter dated 17.08.2012 from the Registrar of 
Companies, Goa, Daman & Diu informing that upon inspection 
conducted under Section 209A of the Companies Act, 1956, it was 
found that SPPL had been accepting investments from their 
associates for a period of 4 to 9 years and had also been executing 
joint venture agreements. SEBI was then requested to take 
appropriate action against SPPL for violating Section 11AA of the 
SEBI Act, 1992.   
(d) A preliminary enquiry was conducted, and after issuing an interim 
order-cum-show cause notice dated 17.07.2013, the WTM vide the 

Page 4 of 21 
 
final order dated 14.01.2015 issued directions against SPPL and its 
Promotors/Directors, identical to those passed against SPFL 
(mentioned in paragraph 2(b) above). 
(e) In addition, SEBI received complaints on 23.09.2013 against SPCL 
and its sister concerns, alleging collection of money from the public, 
through 
the 
Collective 
Investment 
Schemes. 
While 
these 
complaints were under investigation, SEBI also received a reference 
from the Income Tax Department dated 03.03.2014 alleging the 
collection of money from the public by M/s Sai Prasad Group, to 
the tune of Rs. 290 crores.  WTM once again issued an interim order 
on 22.07.2014, followed by a final order dated 01.02.2016, 
directing SPCL and its Directors not to collect any money from the 
investors or launch or carry out any Collective Investment 
Schemes.  SPCL and its Directors were further restrained from 
accessing the securities market and were prohibited from buying, 
selling, or otherwise dealing in the securities market for a period of 
four years. 
(f) 
A somewhat similar complaint dated 06.10.2013 was received by 
SEBI against SSSCL, alleging the illegal mobilisation of funds 
through a joint venture participation project, which was in the 
nature of Collective Investment Schemes. Upon investigation, SEBI 
found a prima facie violation of Section 11AA (2) of the SEBI Act. 

Page 5 of 21 
 
Consequently, an interim order-cum-show cause notice was issued 
on 23.01.2014, directing SSSCL and its Directors to abstain from 
collecting any money from the investors and from launching or 
carrying out any Collective Investment Schemes. WTM further 
directed SSSCL to wind up the existing Collective Investment 
Schemes, refund the monies collected by it under such schemes 
and submit a compliance report including the trail of funds claimed 
to be refunded, bank account statements indicating the refunds to 
investors, and replies from the investors acknowledging such 
refunds. In addition, proceedings under Chapter VI-A of the SEBI 
Act, 1992 were also initiated, and an Adjudicating Officer was 
appointed to inquire into the violations. 
(g) It may not be necessary to refer to the subsequent events in relation 
to the four companies referred to above, except to say that: 
(i) 
Penalties were imposed; 
(ii) Recovery proceedings for a sum of Rs. 30,561,041,451.69 
(Three Thousand and Fifty-Six Crores approximately) were 
initiated; and 
(iii) All the immovable properties and jewelleries owned by the 
aforesaid companies were attached, including those permitted 
to be auctioned by the MPID Court in Mumbai in Case No. 
7/2016. 

Page 6 of 21 
 
(iv) The MPID Court and the SEBI, vide orders dated 30.01.2017 
and 10.03.2017 respectively, attached various properties of 
the companies and jewellery items. Subsequently, through 
various orders passed from time to time, including the one 
dated 12.02.2020, SEBI attached additional properties in the 
State of Maharashtra and prevented the creation of any further 
encumbrances in all the immoveable properties held by the 
Petitioners. In furtherance, SEBI sold 100 properties in 7 
public auctions to liquidate the movable or immovable assets.   
(h) Meanwhile, FIR No. 78/2015 was registered on 16.03.2015 at 
Police Sation Rajhara, District Balod, State of Chhattisgarh, 
against the Petitioners under Sections 3, 4, and 5 of the Prize Chits 
and Money Circulation Scheme (Banning) Act, 1978 (hereinafter, 
“Prize Chits Act”).  It appears that the Petitioners were arrested in 
that case on 27.01.2016. 
(i) 
Thereafter, a series of FIRs were registered in the States of 
Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar 
Pradesh and Haryana.  Most of these FIRs have been registered 
under Sections 406, 420 and 34 of IPC read with Sections 3, 4, 5, 
6 and 10 of the Prize Chits Act and Section 3 of the Maharashtra 
Protection of Interest of Depositors (in Financial Establishment) 
Act, 1999 (hereinafter, “MPID Act”).  It appears that while 28 FIRs 
have been registered in the State of Chhattisgarh, 16 FIRs are 

Page 7 of 21 
 
registered in the State of Madhya Pradesh, 11 FIRs in the State of 
Rajasthan, 2 FIRs in the State of Uttar Pradesh, and 1 FIR in the 
State of Maharashtra and the State of Haryana each.    
(j) 
It further appears that after the Petitioners were arrested on 
27.01.2016 in the first case registered in the State of Chhattisgarh, 
the Petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 still continue to be in custody of various 
courts, as a result of multiple FIRs registered across the country.  
Petitioner No. 3, however, was first released on bail by this Court 
vide order dated 15.03.2021, but was again arrested on 26.12.2022 
by the Chhattisgarh Police in similar cases registered in 2016 and 
2019.  It appears that he was, however, released on bail by the 
Chhattisgarh High Court on 10.04.2023 in MCRC No. 724 / 2023.  
Thereafter, vide the order dated 15.04.2024 passed in SLP (Crl.) D. 
No. 43363/2023, it has been directed that Petitioner No. 3 shall not 
be arrested in any fresh case registered against the Petitioners on 
the same or related issues. On 29.04.2024, it was further directed 
that Petitioner No.3 shall not be arrested in any of the cases 
registered against him until further orders. 
3. 
Having understood the facts, we shall now advert to the 
Petitioners’ prayer seeking a direction to SEBI to liquidate the attached 
assets in a time-bound manner and disburse the sale proceeds to 
genuine investors as early as possible. In this regard, SEBI noted that 

Page 8 of 21 
 
the Forensic Audit conducted by the Economic Offence Wing 
(hereinafter, “EOW”) revealed that the Companies floated by the 
Petitioners were liable to refund Rs. 4700 crores, though as per the 
order passed by the WTM the refund amount was initially Rs. 3049 
crores only.  It is also not in dispute that there are 498+13 immovable 
properties owned by the companies; the details whereof have been 
furnished before the MPID Court, Mumbai.  The parties are broadly ad 
idem that the entire liability of each Company regarding refund of the 
due amount to all the investors as well as various statutory, foreseen or 
unforeseen liabilities, can be extinguished from the sale proceeds of 
some of the immovable properties, if not all of them. 
4. 
Since the immovable properties owned by the companies are 
spread over different parts of the country, it was sensed unachievable 
for either the SEBI or the MPID Court at Mumbai, to liquidate all these 
assets through time-bound public auctions, for the reason that the 
process postulates various complex questions such as: 
(i) 
What is the exact location of the immovable property in metes and 
bounds?; 
(ii) Whether or not such property is free from encumbrances?; 
(iii) Whether the physical possession of the subject-property is with one 
of the companies or not; 

Page 9 of 21 
 
(iv) Whether any civil dispute regarding the title/ownership of such 
property is pending before a competent forum?; 
(v) What is the market value of the property in the event of its sale in 
a transparent manner?; 
(vi) Is there any lien of statutory tax, levy, duty, or any other charge 
attached to such property?; 
(vii) What mechanism shall be evolved for the sale of each property, so 
as to fetch the best price?; and 
(viii) What is the mandatory procedure to be followed in terms of local 
laws for the purpose of registration of the auctioned property and 
its mutation in favour of the auction purchaser, etc. 
5. 
Since SEBI with its bona fide pursuits to liquidate the assets and 
generate funds to satisfy the claims of investors, has already auctioned 
some of the assets, it has taken a very fair stand through its learned 
Senior Counsel, agreeing to the constitution of a High-Powered Sale 
Committee (hereinafter, “HPSC”) to auction the immovable assets of the 
companies, to the extent they are required to satisfy the investors’ 
claims and liquidate all other statutory liabilities of the Companies.  In 
this regard, the Petitioners, as well as SEBI, have submitted their 
comprehensive notes of suggestions to work out the modalities.   

Page 10 of 21 
 
6. 
We have minutely considered the valuable suggestions given by 
learned Senior Counsel/Counsel for the parties for the constitution of 
HPSC and have also kept in view exigencies such as that: 
(a) Petitioner Nos.1 and 2 are languishing in jail as undertrials for over 
8 years; 
(b) Innocent investors have been eagerly awaiting the refund of their 
hard-earned money for more than a decade; 
(c) Despite its best intentions and commitment, SEBI is facing an 
uphill task in conducting public auctions in a timebound manner; 
(d) SEBI or MPID Court, Mumbai do not have the readily available 
infrastructural and strategical facilities to identify each property, to 
have fair assessment of their market value, and then to auction 
them to fetch the true market value; 
(e) The conclusion of trials in the pending criminal cases is marred by 
uncertainty; and 
(f) 
The Petitioners have shown their bona fide towards refunding the 
investors' amounts, and any further delay in this regard, will be 
prejudicial to one and all.  
7. 
Keeping these exceptional and peculiar circumstances in view, we 
deem it fit to invoke our powers under Article 142 of the Constitution of 

Page 11 of 21 
 
India, so as to do complete justice between the parties and hence, 
constitute the HPSC comprising of the following: 
(a) Hon’ble Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhatt, Former Judge, Supreme 
Court of India – Chairperson; 
(b) Dr. Justice Satish Chandra, Former Judge, High Court of 
Allahabad – Member; 
(c) A nominee of SEBI who shall be an officer preferably in the rank of 
its Director – Member; 
(d) States of Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Uttar Pradesh and Haryana are hereby directed to appoint one of 
their officers of the Revenue Department, not below the rank of 
Collector, to assist the HPSC in relation to the properties situated 
within that State. The Collector shall be obligated to provide the 
requisite information, in writing, and shall sign the proceedings as 
State Representative; 
(e) Mr. Pardeep Kumar Sharma, Registrar (Retd.), Supreme Court of 
India is hereby appointed as the Member Secretary-cum-Nodal 
officer of the HPSC. He shall be the Principal Custodian of all 
records and shall coordinate between the Chairperson and 
Members of the Committee as well as the State Authorities to give 
effect to the task assigned to the HPSC; 
(f) 
The Deputy Secretary, Department of Home, Government of 
Maharashtra, who is the Officer in charge of the EOW, shall act as 

Page 12 of 21 
 
Secretary to the HPSC for the purpose of securing title/ownership 
records or other relevant documents from different States and shall 
be 
jointly 
responsible 
along 
with 
Member-Secretary 
for 
maintenance and custody of record; 
(g) The HPSC may, at its discretion, associate: 
(i) 
A Chartered Accountant; or 
(ii) A Civil Engineer; or 
(iii) An Architect; or 
(iv) Any other expert, from time to time as and when required; 
(h) The HPSC shall: 
(i) 
Firstly, obtain all property documents/original title deeds and 
other relevant records from the SEBI/EOW/MPID Court, 
Mumbai and Sub-Registrars of different States, where the 
properties of M/s Sai Prasad Group of Companies are located; 
(ii) A database of the property documents, along with material 
details, shall be created; 
(iii) Arrangements shall be made for safe storage, digitalisation, 
and 
unique 
number 
marking 
of 
the 
property 
documents/original title deeds and other jewellery items; 
(iv) In this regard, SEBI with the help of Stock Holding Document 
Management Services Ltd., will provide the necessary facilities; 

Page 13 of 21 
 
(i) 
The HPSC shall take necessary steps to ensure that all the 
properties are shown to be entrusted/encumbered in its favour in 
the State Government land records; 
(j) 
The HPSC shall appoint a pool of Certified Valuers to evaluate the 
Company's assets in each State; 
(k) We hereby confer and vest all the powers of a Civil Court in the 
HPSC for taking necessary actions to speed up the liquidation of 
the Companies' properties; 
(l) 
The HPSC, with the help of experts, will prepare a list of properties 
already sold under the supervision of the MPID Court, Mumbai, as 
well as a separate list of the properties that are yet to be sold; 
(m) The HPSC will engage/appoint e-auction service providers for 
auctioning of the assets; 
(n) Similarly, expert agencies may be empanelled for the valuation of 
the assets for initiating the public auction process and its 
advertisement; 
(o) The final decision regarding the disposal of the assets shall be at 
the complete discretion of the HPSC and once the sale is made the 
property shall vest in the buyer, free from all encumbrances.  
(p) The Petitioners or their nominees will be at liberty to join the 
auction proceedings and bring prospective buyers. They may 
submit their suggestions to the HPSC, if any. However, the HPSC 
will have full discretion to decide on those suggestions, and the 

Page 14 of 21 
 
Petitioners shall not be entitled to agitate on such issues before this 
Court or any other forum; 
(q) The objections, if any, submitted by the Companies against the 
Forensic Audit Report and which are stated to be pending before 
the MPID Court, Mumbai, are directed to be decided within two 
months. A copy of the order shall be forwarded by the MPID Court 
to the HPSC for its information and record; and 
(r) 
SEBI is directed to provide a separate account where the sale 
proceeds shall be deposited.  Such account shall be jointly operated 
by the Chairperson or his nominee Member along with the Member, 
nominated by SEBI. 
Refund Process 
8. 
Having delineated the manner in which the HSPC will auction the 
assets and accommodate the sale proceeds in a dedicated account, the 
following process may be undertaken for the refund to investors: 
(i) 
The HPSC shall identify the number of investors and database of 
such investors, in consultation with all the concerned agencies / 
State Representatives and, if so required, the Representatives of the 
Companies; 
 

Page 15 of 21 
 
(ii) The HPSC shall thereafter determine the amount to be refunded to 
each investor; 
(iii) The HPSC shall determine a threshold recovery limit beyond which 
the refund process can be started; 
(iv) The HPSC shall also decide upon a category of investors based on 
their investment amount so that the refund can be done in a 
segregated and simultaneous manner; 
(v) As already stated, the HPSC shall open an Escrow Account with a 
bank designated by SEBI, transfer all amounts from the account 
monitored presently by the MPID Court, Mumbai, and deposit all 
sale proceeds in that interest-bearing account; 
(vi) The HPSC shall decide the nature of documents to be sought from 
the investors to determine their claims and the mode of application 
by the investors (online/physical) to determine their eligibility for 
refund, as well as the mode of refund (online/draft/both); and 
(vii) Investor’s claims shall be invited through a public notice that shall 
be widely publicized in one English newspaper and in one 
vernacular newspaper, popular in the State. 
Obligation of the Petitioners and their Companies 
9. 
Having regard to the duties and obligations to be carried out by 
the Petitioners and their companies, the following may be done: 

Page 16 of 21 
 
(i) 
The Petitioners and their Companies shall forthwith submit details 
of all the immovable assets/jewellery items to the HPSC and shall 
also handover original title deeds or other relevant documents as 
may be in their possession; 
(ii) The Petitioners and their Companies shall execute the necessary 
sale deeds within the time frame and as per the instructions of the 
HPSC after the sale is confirmed and the full consideration is 
received in the bank account to be operated by HPSC; and 
(iii) In the event of any pending title dispute, the HPSC shall determine 
the rights of the Sai Prasad Group of Companies in such properties 
for the limited purpose of auctioning them. Except for when there 
are legal impediments, such property shall be auctioned without 
any delay, and the Petitioners or the authorised representatives of 
their Companies will execute the necessary documents, including 
sale deeds, in such cases also. 
Secretarial cum Administrative requirements 
10. 
With respect to the administrative or secretarial assistance that is 
necessitated in the course of dealing with these directions, the following 
may be adhered to: 
(i) 
SEBI will assist HPSC in the opening of its office, for the purpose 
of overall coordination and receiving correspondence from the 
stakeholders. HPSC will also arrange other infrastructure and may 

Page 17 of 21 
 
engage secretarial assistance as may be necessary for its smooth 
functioning. If the SEBI has any adequate office space and 
infrastructure at a place where the HPSC decides to set up its 
Principal Office, SEBI may provide the same without prejudice to 
its right to recover user charges, which will be determined by the 
HPSC; 
(ii) Needless to say, the office space shall be sufficient for carrying out 
meetings, sitting of secretarial services, maintenance of records, 
etc.; 
(iii) The HPSC shall open a dedicated website for the auction / e-
auction/advertisement / refund process etc.; 
(iv) The claims / objections / representations etc., as may be received 
by HPSC shall also be disposed of at its end; 
(v) The HPSC shall fix a time line for every action and endeavour to 
conclude the sale process as early as possible and within the time 
frame so determined; and  
(vi) We will at this stage request the HPSC to make an endeavour to 
conclude the entire process within one year. 
Remuneration  
11. 
Finally, keeping in mind the distinct responsibilities and 
obligations to be shouldered by the HPSC, it is imperative to also 
address the remuneration of the learned Chairperson along with all the 

Page 18 of 21 
 
members. In this regard, learned Senior counsel for the parties have 
referred to two orders passed by this Court as `guidelines’.  
The first order is dated 4th May, 2022 passed in Writ Petition (C) 
No.995 of 2019 (National Spot Exchange Ltd. v. Union of India & Ors.) 
wherein, a `Supreme Court Committee’ headed by a former Chief 
Justice of the High Court was constituted for the purpose of sale of the 
attached properties and disbursement of sale proceeds amongst the 
investors. This Court, instead of fixing the honorarium, observed that 
“the learned Judge will fix his own fee”. The second order dated 29th 
March, 2023 was passed in I.A. No.56308 of 2023 in Writ Petition (C) 
No.191 of 2022 (Pinak Pani Mohanty v. Union of India & Ors.) wherein 
also a High-Powered Committee headed by a former Judge of this Court 
was constituted to supervise and monitor the disbursement of an 
amount of Rs. 5000 crores to the depositors of the Sahara Group of Co-
operative Societies. In that case, an honorarium of Rs. 15 lakhs per 
month was ordered to be paid to the learned former Judge of this Court, 
besides Rs. 5 lakhs per month to the learned amicus curiae. 
12. 
Having bestowed our thoughtful consideration on these two orders 
and after taking note of the fact that the entire process in the case in 
hand might take more than a year, it seems to us that fixation of 
monthly honorarium may not be desirable. Similarly, we do not want to 
leave it for the learned Chairperson or members of the HPSC to fix their 

Page 19 of 21 
 
own honorarium as it is likely to cause embarrassment to them. 
Considering all these aspects in view, we issue the following directions:- 
(i) 
The Chairperson of the HPSC shall be entitled to an honorarium of 
Rs. 2 lakhs per sitting day, when effective proceedings are held. 
This will be in addition to travelling, boarding and other 
miscellaneous expenses as may be incurred in discharging the 
assigned responsibilities; 
(ii) The learned Member, who is a former Judge of the High Court shall 
be entitled to an honorarium of Rs. 1.50 lakhs per sitting day, when 
effective proceedings are held. This will be in addition to travelling, 
boarding and other miscellaneous expenses as may be incurred in 
discharging the assigned responsibilities; 
(iii) The Member nominated by SEBI shall not be entitled to any 
remuneration—since he is a full-time officer of SEBI. However, he 
shall be entitled to travelling, boarding, and other miscellaneous 
expenses as may be incurred in discharging the assigned 
responsibilities; 
(iv) The Member Secretary cum Nodal Officer of the Committee shall be 
entitled to an honorarium of Rs. 75 thousand per sitting day, when 
effective proceedings are held. This will be in addition to travelling, 
boarding and other miscellaneous expenses as may be incurred in 
discharging the assigned responsibilities;  

Page 20 of 21 
 
(v) Remuneration of experts like Chartered Accountant, Civil Engineer, 
Architect, Certified Valuer etc. shall be determined by the HPSC; 
and 
(vi) The expenditure towards honorarium, hiring of office, secretarial 
assistance, as well as for following the prescribed procedure of 
auction, etc., shall be reimbursed from the sale proceeds. The 
initial expenditure shall be reimbursed from the sale proceeds of 
the properties which have already been sold, namely, the amount 
which the SEBI will transfer to the Escrow Account. 
 
13. The States of Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana are hereby directed through 
their Chief Secretaries and Financial Commissioners (Revenue), to 
extend full cooperation and provide complete assistance as may be 
required by the HPSC for the purpose of execution and fulfilment of the 
assigned task. There must not be any delay on their part to comply with 
the instructions as may be received from the Chairperson of the HPSC. 
14. Similarly, the Directors General of Police of the above-mentioned 
States are directed to provide assistance, if so required for the purpose 
of securing and protecting possession of the properties of the 
Companies. 
15. In addition, the HPSC, if so required, may deploy private guards 
for the protection of the properties of the Companies. 

Page 21 of 21 
 
16. SEBI and the Petitioners are also directed to extend full 
cooperation to the HPSC. 
17. To facilitate the sale and disbursement process and keeping in 
mind the period of incarceration already undergone, Petitioner Nos. 1 
and 2 are directed to be enlarged on interim bail to the satisfaction of 
the MPID Court, Mumbai in Case No. 7 / 2016. This will be treated as 
interim bail in all of the FIRs. We order this on the basis of the special 
facts of the case, in exercise of our power under Article 142 of the 
Constitution of India. 
18. The HPSC shall be at liberty to seek further guidelines or 
clarifications as may be required, for which its Member Secretary cum 
Nodal Officer shall be at liberty to move an appropriate application 
before this Court. 
 
………………………………J. 
(SURYA KANT) 
 
 
………………………………J. 
(K.V. VISWANATHAN) 
NEW DELHI 
DATED: 15.07.2024