2024 INSC 534
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  2790  OF 2024 
 
 
SHEIKH JAVED IQBAL  
@ ASHFAQ ANSARI @ JAVED ANSARI 
 
  APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH              
RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
UJJAL BHUYAN, J. 
 
 
Leave granted. 
2. 
 
Heard learned counsel for the parties.  
3. 
 
This appeal is directed against the order dated 
03.04.2023 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, 
Lucknow Bench in Criminal Miscellaneous Bail Application No. 
2282 of 2021 (Sheikh Javed Iqbal @ Ashfaq Ansari @ Javed Ansari 
Vs. State of U.P.). 
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2024.07.18
16:28:15 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
3.1.  
By the aforesaid order, the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad, Lucknow Bench (‘High Court’ hereinafter) has rejected 
the bail application of the petitioner filed under Section 439 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.P.C.) in Crime No. 01 of 2015 
registered under Sections 489B and 489C of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (‘IPC’ for short) and under Section 16 of the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (‘UAP Act’ for short) before Police 
Station ATS, Uttar Pradesh, District Lucknow. 
4. 
 
This Court by order dated 10.04.2024 condoned the 
delay in filing the related Special Leave Petition (Criminal) Diary 
No. 11387 of 2024 and issued notice. On delay being condoned, 
the case came to be registered as Special Leave Petition (Criminal) 
No. 5260 of 2024. The matter was heard by the Vacation Bench on 
03.07.2024. 
5. 
 
First Information Report (FIR) was lodged against the 
appellant by the informant Inspector Tej Bahadur Singh under 
Sections 121A, 489B and 489C of IPC. It came to be registered as 
Crime No. 01 of 2015. Informant stated that fake Indian currency 
notes of the denomination of Rs. 1,000 and Rs. 500, totalling a 
sum of Rs. 26,03,500.00, were recovered from the possession of 
the appellant on 22.02.2015 at about 09:10 PM from the Indo-

3 
 
Nepal border. He was apprehended by a constable of the ATS team 
and brought to the ATS Headquarter. In the course of 
investigation, the appellant disclosed his name as Sheikh Javed 
Iqbal @ Ashfaq Ansari @ Javed Ansari, resident of Narayani Parsa, 
Belwa, Nepal. In addition to the fake Indian currency notes, one 
Nepalese driving licence of the appellant and one Nepalese 
citizenship certificate also of the appellant were recovered besides 
two mobile phones. According to the police, appellant had 
confessed that he was engaged in the illegal trade of supplying 
counterfeit Indian currency notes in Nepal. The appellant was 
arrested on 23.02.2015. 
6. 
 
Appellant had moved a bail application before the 
Additional Sessions Judge, Special Judge, Lucknow (‘trial court’ 
hereinafter) but the same was rejected on 24.08.2016. It was 
thereafter that the related bail application was filed by the 
appellant before the High Court which came to be dismissed by the 
impugned order.  
7. 
 
At this stage, it may be stated that chargesheet against 
the appellant under Section 489B and 489C IPC was filed by the 
prosecution on 19.08.2015. Supplementary chargesheet under 
Section 16 of the UAP Act was filed on 26.08.2015. It was 

4 
 
mentioned therein that the Hon’ble Governor had granted sanction 
on 25.08.2015 to prosecute the appellant under Sections 489B 
and 489C IPC read with Section 16 of the UAP Act, as amended. 
Before the trial court, the case came to be registered as Case No. 
940 of 2015. 
8. 
 
The trial court considered the chargesheet as well as the 
discharge application filed by the appellant and by the common 
order dated 27.05.2016, the discharge application was dismissed, 
while directing that charges be framed against the appellant under 
aforesaid provisions of law. 
9. 
 
By order dated 16.07.2016, the trial court framed the 
charge against the appellant under the aforesaid provisions who 
pleaded not guilty. Thereafter, the trial court issued summons to 
the prosecution witnesses.  
10.  
It may also be mentioned that the Home Department, 
Government of U.P. passed an order on 13.01.2017, stating that 
the earlier sanction granted by the Hon’ble Governor on 
25.08.2015 was modified whereafter the Hon’ble Governor granted 
full sanction for prosecution of the appellant in the aforesaid case 
for commission of the offence under Section 16 of the UAP Act 
which is punishable under Section 45(2) of the aforesaid Act. 

5 
 
11.  
Appellant filed an application before the High Court 
under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. for quashing of the order dated 
27.05.2016 passed by the trial court whereby the application for 
discharge moved by the appellant was rejected. He also sought for 
quashing of the order dated 16.07.2016 passed by the trial court 
framing charge against the appellant.  
11.1.  
The High Court by the order dated 08.10.2021 took the 
view that no cognizance could have been taken by the trial court 
against the appellant in the absence of any valid sanction of 
prosecution for the offence under Section 16 of the UAP Act. The 
High Court held that although sanction for prosecution had been 
obtained, yet the same was not based upon recommendation after 
an independent review of the evidence collected during the course 
of investigation by the appropriate authority as required under 
Section 45(2) of the UAP Act. According to the High Court, it was a 
clear case of non-application of mind as the State failed to comply 
with the mandatory statutory provision under Section 45 of the 
UAP Act. Thus, the sanction orders dated 25.08.2015 and 
13.01.2017 were held to be invalid. Therefore, the trial court was 
barred from taking cognizance under Section 16 of the UAP Act. 
Consequently, the order of cognizance dated 27.05.2016 passed by 

6 
 
the trial court in Case No. 940 of 2015 in so far the offence under 
Section 16 of the UAP Act was concerned as well as the charge to 
the extent of Section 16 of the UAP Act were quashed. The trial 
court was directed to proceed with the trial only with respect to the 
rest of the offences under Sections 489B and 489C IPC against the 
appellant. 
12.  
State of U.P. assailed the order of the High Court dated 
08.10.2021 before this Court by filing Special Leave to Appeal 
(Criminal) No. 861 of 2022. This Court by order dated 11.02.2022 
issued notice and in the meanwhile directed stay of the order of 
the High Court dated 08.10.2021. 
13.  
On 20.02.2024, this Court on perusal of the materials 
placed before the Court, noted that subsequent development had 
taken place whereby sanction was granted vide order dated 
15.12.2021 after the order of the High Court. In view of the 
subsequent development, this Court declined to examine the issue 
on merit leaving it open to the State Government to apply before 
the High Court seeking permission to proceed in the matter for the 
offence under the UAP Act on the basis of the subsequent 
development. It was clarified that on filing of such proceedings, the 
High Court would be at liberty to consider the issue and decide the 

7 
 
same affording due opportunity to all concerned without being 
influenced by the observations made in the order of the High Court 
dated 08.10.2021. Consequently, the Special Leave to Appeal 
(Criminal) No. 861 of 2022 was disposed of. 
14.  
In the meanwhile, appellant moved the High Court for 
regular bail under Section 439 Cr.P.C. which came to be registered 
as Criminal Miscellaneous Bail Application No. 2282 of 2021. By 
the impugned order dated 03.04.2023, the High Court observed 
that the charges levelled against the appellant are grave. Though 
the appellant is in jail since the last eight years and evidence of 
only two witnesses had been recorded, appellant could not be 
released on bail since he belongs to Nepal and that there is a strong 
probability of the appellant evading trial by absconding. 
Accordingly, the bail application has been rejected. 
15.  
Mr. M.S. Khan, learned counsel for the appellant 
submits that appellant is in custody for more than nine years now. 
There is no possibility of the criminal trial being concluded in the 
near future. Therefore, the appellant should be enlarged on bail. 
16.  
On the other hand, Ms. Garima Prasad, learned 
Additional Advocate General for the State of U.P. submits that the 
charges against the appellant are very serious in nature. Besides, 

8 
 
he being a foreign national, there is an attendant flight risk. 
Therefore, appellant may not be released on bail; instead the trial 
court may be directed to expedite the trial. Referring to the counter 
affidavit filed on behalf of the State of U.P., she submits that 
appellant is an accused under the UAP Act and is, therefore, not 
entitled to bail. In this connection, she has referred to a recent 
decision of this Court in Gurwinder Singh Vs. State of Punjab1. 
17.  
Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties 
have been duly considered. 
18.  
We have already noticed that the appellant is in jail 
since 23.02.2015. Now we are in July 2024. Nine years have gone 
by in the meanwhile. As per the impugned order, evidence of only 
two witnesses have been recorded. In the course of hearing, the 
Bench had queried learned counsel for the parties as to the stage 
of the trial; how many witnesses the prosecution seeks to examine 
and evidence of the number of witnesses recorded so far. 
Unfortunately, counsel for either side could not apprise the Court 
about the aforesaid. On the contrary, learned state counsel sought 
for time to obtain instructions. Having regard to the fact that 
 
1 (2024) SCC Online SC 109 
 

9 
 
appellant is in custody for more than nine years now, we declined 
the prayer of the learned state counsel seeking further time. 
Learned counsel for the parties were also unable to tell us as to 
whether the State has moved the High Court after the order of this 
Court dated 20.02.2024 and whether any order has been passed 
by the High Court on the same. 
19.  
As already noted above, appellant is in custody for more 
than nine years now. The impugned order says that evidence of 
only two witnesses have been recorded. In such circumstances, a 
reasonable view can be taken that the trial is likely to take 
considerable time. 
20.  
Before proceeding further, let us briefly look at the 
sections invoked against the appellant. Section 489B IPC deals 
with the offence of using forged or counterfeit currency notes or 
bank notes as genuine despite knowing the same to be forged or 
counterfeit. Conviction for such an offence would result in 
punishment of imprisonment for life or with punishment of either 
description for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also 
be liable to fine. Offence under Section 489C IPC is committed 
when one is found in possession of any forged or counterfeit 
currency notes or bank notes despite knowing the same to be 

10 
 
forged or counterfeit and intending to use the same as genuine. 
Punishment for such an offence is imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years or with fine 
or with both. 
20.1.  
Section 16 of the UAP Act provides for punishment for 
committing a ‘terrorist act’. ‘Terrorist act’ is defined in Section 15. 
For the present case, the definition which would be relevant is that 
a person commits a ‘terrorist act’ if he does any act with the 
intention to threaten or likely to threaten the economic security of 
India i.e. damage to the monetary stability of India by way of 
production or smuggling or circulation of ‘high quality counterfeit 
Indian paper currency’, coin or of any other material. Explanation 
(b) explains ‘high quality counterfeit Indian currency’. In such a 
case, the punishment under Section 16 would be imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may 
extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine. 
20.2.  
Section 43D of the UAP Act says that there shall be 
modified application of certain provisions of the Cr.P.C. As per sub-
Section (5) of Section 43D, which starts with a non-obstante clause, 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Cr.P.C, no person 
accused of an offence punishable under Chapters IV (which 

11 
 
includes Section 16) and VI of the UAP Act shall, if in custody, be 
released on bail or on his own bond unless the public prosecutor 
has been given an opportunity of being heard on the bail 
application. The proviso says that such accused person shall not 
be released on bail or on his own bond if the court on a perusal of 
the case diary or the report made under Section 173 Cr.P.C. is of 
the opinion that there are reasonable grounds for believing that 
the accusation against such person is prima-facie true. Sub-
Section (6) clarifies that the restrictions on granting of bail 
specified in sub-Section (5) would be in addition to the restrictions 
under the Cr.P.C. or any other law for the time being in force on 
granting of bail. 
21.  
It is true that the appellant is facing charges under 
Section 489B IPC and under Section 16 of the UAP Act which 
carries a maximum sentence of life imprisonment, if convicted. On 
the other hand, the maximum sentence under Section 489C IPC is 
7 years. But as noticed above, the trial is proceeding at a snail’s 
pace. As per the impugned order, only two witnesses have been 
examined. Thus, it is evident that the trial would not be concluded 
in the near future. 

12 
 
22.  
It is trite law that an accused is entitled to a speedy trial. 
This Court in a catena of judgments has held that an accused or 
an undertrial has a fundamental right to speedy trial which is 
traceable to Article 21 of the Constitution of India. If the alleged 
offence is a serious one, it is all the more necessary for the 
prosecution to ensure that the trial is concluded expeditiously. 
When a trial gets prolonged, it is not open to the prosecution to 
oppose bail of the accused-undertrial on the ground that the 
charges are very serious. Bail cannot be denied only on the ground 
that the charges are very serious though there is no end in sight 
for the trial to conclude.  
23.  
This Bench in a recent decision dated 03.07.2024 in 
Javed Gulam Nabi Shaikh Vs. State of Maharashtra, Criminal 
Appeal No. 2787 of 2024, has held that howsoever serious a crime 
may be, an accused has the right to speedy trial under the 
Constitution of India. That was also a case where fake counterfeit 
Indian currency notes were seized from the accused-appellant. He 
was investigated by the National Investigating Agency (NIA) under 
the National Investigating Agency Act, 2008 and was charged 
under the UAP Act alongwith Sections 489B and 489C IPC. He was 
in custody as an undertrial prisoner for more than four years. The 

13 
 
trial court had not even framed the charges. It was in that context, 
this Court observed as under: 
9. Over a period of time, the trial courts and 
the High Courts have forgotten a very well 
settled principle of law that bail is not to be 
withheld as a punishment. 
23.1.  
After referring to various other decisions, this Court 
further observed as follows: 
19. If the State or any prosecuting agency 
including the court concerned has no 
wherewithal to provide or protect the 
fundamental right of an accused to have a 
speedy trial as enshrined under Article 21 of 
the Constitution then the State or any other 
prosecuting agency should not oppose the 
plea for bail on the ground that the crime 
committed is serious. Article 21 of the 
Constitution applies irrespective of the 
nature of the crime.  
20.  We may hasten to add that the petitioner 
is still an accused; not a convict. The over-
arching postulate of criminal jurisprudence 
that an accused is presumed to be innocent 
until proven guilty cannot be brushed aside 
lightly, howsoever stringent the penal law 
may be.  

14 
 
21.  We are convinced that the manner in 
which the prosecuting agency as well as the 
Court have proceeded, the right of the 
accused to have a speedy trial could be said 
to have been infringed thereby violating 
Article 21 of the Constitution. 
24.  
Earlier, in Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee 
(Representing Undertrial Prisoners) Vs. Union of India2, this Court  
had issued a slue of directions relating to undertrials in jail facing 
charges under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances 
Act, 1985 (briefly, the ‘NDPS Act’ hereinafter) for a period 
exceeding two years on account of the delay in disposal of the 
cases lodged against them. In respect of undertrials who were 
foreigners, this Court directed that the Special Judge should 
impound their passports besides insisting on a certificate of 
assurance from the concerned Embassy/High Commission of the 
country to which the foreigner accused belonged and that such 
accused should not leave the country and should appear before 
the Special Court as required. 
25.  
Similarly, in Shaheen Welfare Association Vs. Union of 
India3, this Court was considering a public interest litigation 
 
2 (1994) 6 SCC 731 
3 (1996) 2 SCC 616 

15 
 
wherein certain reliefs were sought for undertrial prisoners 
charged with offences under the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1987 (TADA Act) languishing in jail for 
considerable periods of time. This Court observed that while liberty 
of a citizen must be zealously safeguarded by the courts but, at the 
same time, in the context of stringent laws like the TADA Act, the 
interest of the victims and the collective interest of the community 
should also not be lost sight of. While balancing the competing 
interest, this Court observed that the ultimate justification for 
deprivation of liberty of an undertrial can only be on account of the 
accused-undertrial being found guilty of the offences for which he 
is charged and is being tried. If such a finding is not likely to be 
arrived at within a reasonable time, some relief(s) becomes 
necessary. Therefore, a pragmatic approach is required.  
26.  
Angela Harish Sontakke Vs. State of Maharashtra4 is a 
case where the accused-appellant was charged under various 
provisions of the UAP Act as well as under the IPC. He sought for 
bail. This Court observed that, undoubtedly, the charges are 
serious but the seriousness of the charges will have to be balanced 
with certain other facts like the period of custody suffered and the 
 
4 (2021) 3 SCC 723 

16 
 
likely period within which the trial can be expected to be completed. 
In that case, it was found that the appellant-accused was in 
custody since April, 2011 i.e. for over five years. The trial was yet 
to commence. A large number of witnesses were proposed to be 
examined. It was in that context that the appellant-accused was 
directed to be released on bail.  
27.  
More recently, a three Judge Bench of this Court in 
Union of India Vs. K.A. Najeeb5, considered an appeal filed by the 
Union of India through the National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
against an order passed by the High Court of Kerala granting bail 
to an accused-undertrial facing trial for allegedly committing 
offences, amongst others, under Sections 16, 18, 18B, 19 and 20 
of the UAP Act. 
27.1.  
This Court noted that the appellant in K.A. Najeeb 
(supra) was in jail for more than five years. Charges were framed 
only on 27.11.2020 and there were 276 witnesses still left to be 
examined. This Court emphasized that liberty granted by Part III 
of the Constitution would cover within its protective ambit not only 
due procedure and fairness but also access to justice and speedy 
trial. No undertrial can be detained indefinitely pending trial. Once 
 
5 (2021) SCC Online SC 50 

17 
 
it is obvious that a timely trial would not be possible and the 
accused has suffered incarceration for a significant period of time, 
the courts would ordinarily be obligated to enlarge them on bail. 
27.2.  
Referring to the decision of this Court in NIA Vs. Zahoor 
Ahmad Shah Watali6, this Court opined that the High Court in that 
case had virtually conducted a mini trial and determined 
admissibility of certain evidence which clearly exceeded the limited 
scope of a bail proceeding. Not only was it beyond the statutory 
mandate of prima-facie assessment under Section 43D(5) of the 
UAP Act, it was premature and possibly would have prejudiced the 
trial as well. It was in these circumstances that this Court in 
Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali (supra) had to intervene leading to 
cancellation of the bail granted. 
28.  
We are in respectful agreement with the reasoning given 
in K.A. Najeeb (supra) regarding the decision in Zahoor Ahmad 
Shah Watali (supra). This decision i.e. Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali  
(supra) has to be read and understood in the context in which it 
was rendered and not as a precedent to deny bail to an accused-
undertrial suffering long incarceration with no end in sight of the 
criminal trial.  
 
6 (2019) 5 SCC 1 

18 
 
29.  
Going back to K.A. Najeeb (supra), this Court thereafter 
proceeded to hold that Section 43D(5) of the UAP Act does not oust 
the ability of the constitutional courts to grant bail on grounds of 
violation of Part III of the Constitution. Long incarceration with the 
unlikelihood of the trial being completed in the near future is a 
good ground to grant bail. This Court also distinguished Section 
43D(5) of the UAP Act from Section 37 of the NDPS Act. It has been 
held as follows: 
17. It is thus clear to us that the presence of 
statutory restrictions like Section 43-D(5) of the 
UAPA per se does not oust the ability of the 
constitutional courts to grant bail on grounds of 
violation of Part III of the Constitution. Indeed, 
both the restrictions under a statute as well as 
the powers exercisable under constitutional 
jurisdiction can be well harmonised. Whereas at 
commencement of proceedings, the courts are 
expected to appreciate the legislative policy 
against grant of bail but the rigours of such 
provisions will melt down where there is no 
likelihood of trial being completed within a 
reasonable time and the period of incarceration 
already undergone has exceeded a substantial 
part of the prescribed sentence. Such an 
approach 
would 
safeguard 
against 
the 
possibility of provisions like Section 43-D(5) of 

19 
 
the UAPA being used as the sole metric for 
denial of bail or for wholesale breach of 
constitutional right to speedy trial. 
18. Adverting to the case at hand, we are 
conscious of the fact that the charges levelled 
against the respondent are grave and a serious 
threat to societal harmony. Had it been a case 
at the threshold, we would have outrightly 
turned down the respondent's prayer. However, 
keeping in mind the length of the period spent 
by him in custody and the unlikelihood of the 
trial being completed anytime soon, the High 
Court appears to have been left with no other 
option except to grant bail. An attempt has been 
made to strike a balance between the appellant's 
right to lead evidence of its choice and establish 
the 
charges 
beyond 
any 
doubt 
and 
simultaneously 
the 
respondent's 
rights 
guaranteed under Part III of our Constitution 
have been well protected. 
19. Yet another reason which persuades us to 
enlarge the respondent on bail is that Section 
43-D(5) of the UAPA is comparatively less 
stringent than Section 37 of the NDPS Act. 
Unlike the NDPS Act where the competent court 
needs to be satisfied that prima-facie the 
accused is not guilty and that he is unlikely to 
commit another offence while on bail; there is 
no such precondition under UAPA. Instead, 

20 
 
Section 43-D(5) of the UAPA merely provides 
another possible ground for the competent court 
to refuse bail, in addition to the well-settled 
considerations like gravity of the offence, 
possibility 
of 
tampering 
with 
evidence, 
influencing the witnesses or chance of the 
accused evading the trial by absconsion, etc. 
 
29.1.  
Declining to interfering with the order of the High Court, 
this Court in K.A. Najeeb (supra) dismissed the appeal of the Union 
of India. 
30.  
Recently, this Court dealt with a matter where the 
appellant, a foreign national, is being prosecuted for offences 
punishable under Sections 8, 22, 23 and 29 of the NDPS Act. The 
appellant was arrested on 21.05.2014. The High Court had 
granted bail to the appellant vide the order dated 31.05.2022 but 
had incorporated certain conditions in the bail order because of 
which the appellant remained in custody despite having a bail 
order in his favour. One of the conditions was that the appellant, 
a Nigerian national, should obtain a certificate of assurance from 
the High Commission of Nigeria to the effect that the appellant 
would not leave the country and would appear before the trial 
court on the dates fixed. Another condition imposed was that the 
accused should drop a pin on the google map to ensure that his 

21 
 
location is available to the investigation officer at all times. This 
Court as an interim measure had granted bail to the accused-
appellant and thereafter passed a detailed judgment in Frank Vitus 
Vs. Narcotics Control Bureau, Criminal Appeal No. 2814-15 of 
2024, decided on 08.07.2024. This Court after referring to earlier 
decisions of this Court held that conditions of bail cannot be 
arbitrary and fanciful. The expression ‘interest of justice’ finding 
place in Section 437(3) Cr.P.C. means only good administration of 
justice or advancing the trial process. It cannot be given any 
further broader meaning to curtail the liberty of an accused 
granted bail. Courts cannot impose freakish conditions while 
granting bail. Bail conditions must be consistent with the object of 
granting bail. While imposing bail conditions, the constitutional 
rights of an accused who is ordered to be released on bail can be 
curtailed only to the minimum extent required. Even when an 
accused is in jail, he cannot be deprived of his right to life which 
is a basic human right of every individual. This Court held that 
bail conditions cannot be so onerous so as to frustrate the order of 
bail itself.  
30.1.  
Thereafter, this Court held as follows: 
7.1.  We are dealing with a case of the accused 
whose guilt is yet to be established. So long as he 

22 
 
is not held guilty, the presumption of innocence 
is applicable. He cannot be deprived of all his 
rights guaranteed under Article 21. The Courts 
must 
show 
restraint 
while 
imposing 
bail 
conditions. Therefore, while granting bail, the 
Courts can curtail the freedom of the accused 
only to the extent required for imposing the bail 
conditions warranted by law. Bail conditions 
cannot be so onerous as to frustrate the order of 
bail itself. For example, the Court may impose a 
condition of    periodically reporting to the police 
station/Court or not travelling abroad without 
prior permission. Where circumstances require, 
the Court may impose a condition restraining an 
accused from entering a particular area to protect 
the prosecution witnesses or the victims. But the 
Court cannot impose a condition on the accused 
to keep the Police constantly informed about his 
movement from one place to another. The object 
of the bail condition cannot be to keep a constant 
vigil on the movements of the accused enlarged 
on bail. The investigating agency cannot be 
permitted to continuously peep into the private 
life of the accused enlarged on bail, by imposing 
arbitrary conditions since that will violate the 
right of privacy of the accused, as guaranteed by 
Article 21. If a constant vigil is kept on every 
movement of the accused released on bail by the 
use of technology or otherwise, it will infringe the 

23 
 
rights of the accused guaranteed under Article 
21, including the right to privacy. The reason is 
that the effect of keeping such constant vigil on 
the accused by imposing drastic bail conditions 
will amount to keeping the accused in some kind 
of confinement even after he is released on bail. 
Such a condition cannot be a condition of bail. 
*********** 
9. 
A condition cannot be imposed while 
granting bail which is impossible for the accused 
to comply with. If such a condition is imposed, it 
will deprive an accused of bail, though he is 
otherwise entitled to it. 
30.2.  
In so far the condition that the accused should drop a 
pin on the google map, this Court referred to the affidavit filed 
Google LLC wherein it was stated that the user has full control over 
sharing of pin with other users; pin location does not enable real 
time tracking of the user or a user’s device. Therefore, this Court 
found that such a condition was completely redundant. Thereafter, 
this Court held that imposing any bail condition which enables the 
police/investigating agency to track every movement of the 
accused released on bail by use of technology or otherwise would 
undoubtedly violate the right to privacy of the accused guaranteed 
under Article 21. 

24 
 
 
30.3.  
Distinguishing the decision of this Court in Supreme 
Court Legal Aid Committee (Representing Undertrial Prisoners) 
(supra), this Court observed that an accused-undertrial has no 
control over the Embassy or High Commission of his country. On 
failure of the Embassy or High Commission to issue a certificate 
that the accused-undertrial would not flee from the country and 
would attend the trial proceedings regularly, he cannot be 
continued to be kept in detention despite a bail order. Instead of 
the same, other practical and pragmatic conditions may be 
imposed. This Court clarified that it is not necessary that in every 
case where bail is granted to the accused in an NDPS case who is 
a foreign national, the condition of obtaining a certificate of 
assurance from the Embassy or the High Commission should be 
incorporated. Consequently, in Frank Vitus (supra), this Court 
while confirming the bail granted to the appellant, set aside the 
two impugned conditions. 
31.  
In Gurwinder Singh (supra) on which reliance has been 
placed by the respondent, a two Judge Bench of this Court 
distinguished K.A. Najeeb (supra) holding that the appellant in 
K.A. Najeeb (supra) was in custody for five years and that the trial 

25 
 
of the appellant in that case was severed from the other co-accused 
whose trial had concluded whereupon they were sentenced to 
imprisonment of eight years; but in Gurwinder Singh, the trial was 
already underway and that twenty two witnesses including the 
protected witnesses have been examined. It was in that context, 
the two Judge Bench of this Court in Gurwinder Singh observed 
that mere delay in trial pertaining to grave offences cannot be used 
as a ground to grant bail.  
32.  
This Court has, time and again, emphasized that right 
to life and personal liberty enshrined under Article 21 of the 
Constitution 
of 
India 
is 
overarching 
and 
sacrosanct. 
A 
constitutional court cannot be restrained from granting bail to an 
accused on account of restrictive statutory provisions in a penal 
statute if it finds that the right of the accused-undertrial under 
Article 21 of the Constitution of India has been infringed. In that 
event, such statutory restrictions would not come in the way. Even 
in the case of interpretation of a penal statute, howsoever stringent 
it may be, a constitutional court has to lean in favour of 
constitutionalism and the rule of law of which liberty is an intrinsic 
part. In the given facts of a particular case, a constitutional court 
may decline to grant bail. But it would be very wrong to say that 
under a particular statute, bail cannot be granted. It would run 

26 
 
counter to the very grain of our constitutional jurisprudence. In 
any view of the matter, K.A. Najeeb (supra) being rendered by a 
three Judge Bench is binding on a Bench of two Judges like us. 
33.  
Thus, having regard to the discussions made above, we 
are of the considered view that continued incarceration of the 
appellant cannot be justified. We are, therefore, inclined to grant 
bail to the appellant.  
34.  
Consequently, we pass the following order: - 
(i) 
The impugned order dated 03.04.2023 of the High 
Court is set aside and quashed;  
(ii) 
Appellant is directed to be released on bail subject 
to fulfilment of the following conditions: - 
(a) 
Trial court shall impound the passport 
and/or citizenship document(s) of the appellant. If 
those are in the custody of the prosecution, those 
shall be handed over to the trial court.  
(b) 
Appellant shall not leave the territorial 
jurisdiction of the trial court; he shall furnish his 
address to the trial court. 
(c) 
He shall appear before the trial court on each 
and every date of the trial. 

27 
 
(d) 
In addition to the above, the appellant shall 
mark his attendance before the police station 
which the trial court may indicate once in every 
fortnight till conclusion of the trial.  
(e) 
He shall not tamper with the evidence and 
shall not threaten the witnesses.  
(iii) 
 If there is any violation of the bail conditions as 
above, it would be open to the prosecution to move the 
trial court for cancellation of bail. 
35.  
The appeal is, accordingly, disposed of.  
 
.………………………………J 
   [J.B. PARDIWALA] 
 
 
 
…………………………………J 
   [UJJAL BHUYAN] 
 
NEW DELHI;  
JULY 18, 2024.