2024 INSC 539
1 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8985 OF 2013 
 
M/S REWA TOLLWAY P. LTD.            …APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
THE STATE OF MADHYA  
PRADESH & ORS.   
 
 
 …RESPONDENT(S) 
                                
 
WITH 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8989 OF 2013 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8986 OF 2013 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8990 OF 2013 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8988 OF 2013 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8987 OF 2013 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8991 OF 2013 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8992 OF 2013 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8993 OF 2013 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8995 OF 2013 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8996 OF 2013 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.8994 OF 2013 
 
 
 
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2024.07.19
17:53:27 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
J U D G M E N T 
 
VIKRAM NATH, J. 
 
1. 
By the impugned judgment and order dated 
11.02.2010, the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at 
Jabalpur decided a group of twelve petitions wherein the 
question involved was whether a transaction where the 
right to collect tolls is given in lieu of the amount spent 
by the Concessionaire in the construction of roads, 
bridges etc. under the Build, Operate & Transfer (BOT) 
Scheme amounts to a “lease” as contemplated under 
Section 105 of the Transfer of Property Act, 18821 and 
Section 2(16) of the Indian Stamp Act, 18992. Further 
challenge made in the said writ petitions was with regard 
to the validity of the amendment made in proviso (c) to 
Clause (C) of Article 33 of Schedule 1(A) as amended by 
the Indian Stamp (M.P.) Act, 2002, and a further prayer 
was made to declare Section 48 and 48(B) of IS Act, 1899, 
as amended by M.P. Act 24 of 1990 as ultra vires. 
2. 
The Division Bench of the High Court, after 
considering the submissions and the material on record 
came to the conclusion that the writ petitions were 
without any merit and accordingly dismissed the same. 
 
1 TP Act 
2 IS Act 

3 
Aggrieved by the same, these twelve appeals have been 
preferred. 
3. 
For the sake of convenience, we are referring to the 
facts of Civil Appeal No.8985 of 2013, which are briefly 
stated hereunder: 
(i) 
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Setu Nirman Nigam 
Ltd.3, (respondent no.3) is a Company incorporated 
and registered under the Companies Act, 1956. The 
State 
of 
Madhya 
Pradesh, 
vide 
order 
dated 
01.02.2001, authorized MPRSNN for reconstruction, 
strengthening, widening and rehabilitation of a 
section of road on Satna-Maihar-Parasimod-Umaria 
Road Project to be executed through Concession on 
Build, Operate and Transfer Scheme. 
(ii) 
MPRSNN, 
vide 
Advertisement 
dated 
22.04.2002, invited tenders against the aforesaid 
project pursuant to which the bid of the appellant was 
accepted. On 8th August, 2002, Letter of Acceptance 
was issued by the MPRSNN to the appellant for 
execution of the Concession Agreement within 30 
days. 
(iii) 
The IS Act was amended in the State of Madhya 
Pradesh vide Amendment Act No.12 of 2002 and 
proviso (c) to Clause(C) was inserted to Entry No.33 
 
3 MPRSNN 

4 
of Schedule-1(A), which provided that there shall be 
levy of stamp duty @ 2% on the amount likely to be 
spent on the project, on the agreement to lease and 
right to collect the toll is given. The State of Madhya 
Pradesh notified the said amendment on 12.08.2002. 
(iv) 
A Concession Agreement was signed on 
15.09.2002 on a stamp paper of Rs.100 between 
MPRSNN and the appellant. A show cause notice 
dated 26.03.2004 was issued to the appellant 
intimating that the matter between State of M.P. and 
the Rewa Tollway Private Ltd. would be listed for 
hearing on 29.03.2004 before the Collector of Stamps, 
Bhopal and the appellant was required to produce the 
original copy of the agreement dated 15.09.2002. The 
appellant filed a detailed reply dated 25.04.2004 
stating 
that 
the 
agreement 
executed 
was 
a 
Concession Agreement and, as such, it cannot be 
treated as a lease but as a license at best. The 
Collector 
(Stamps), 
Bhopal 
vide 
order 
dated 
30.04.2004 passed an order exercising power under 
Section 48-B of the IS Act directing recovery of deficit 
stamp duty amounting to Rs.1,08,00,000/-(Rupees 
one crore eight lakhs) said to be payable on the 
Concession Agreement dated 15.09.2002. Thereafter, 
a recovery notice was issued on 29.05.2004 by the 
Collector (Stamps), Bhopal to deposit the aforesaid 

5 
amount within seven days of the receipt of the said 
recovery notice. 
(v) 
On 6th June, 2004, the appellant challenged 
the order dated 30.04.2004 by way of a writ petition 
under Article 226 of the Constitution which was 
registered as Writ Petition No.2219 of 2004. The High 
Court vide order dated 03.08.2004 granted interim 
stay of recovery of any amount pursuant to the 
impugned order dated 30.04.2004. The High Court, 
vide 
judgment 
and 
order 
dated 
11.02.2010, 
dismissed the said writ petition along with eleven 
other matters and upheld the demand raised by the 
Collector of Stamps by the order dated 30.04.2004. 
(vi) 
Aggrieved by the impugned judgment of the 
High Court, the appellant preferred the instant 
appeal with connected matters before this Court on 
3rd May, 2010, in which notices were issued on 14th 
May, 2010 and, thereafter, interim order was passed 
on 7th January, 2011. Later on, vide order dated 
13.09.2013, this Court granted leave and further 
directed the interim stay granted earlier to continue. 
4. 
We have heard Shri Dushyant Dave, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing for the appellants in nine (9) appeals 
and other learned counsels appearing for the appellants 
in the other three (3) appeals and Shri Saurabh Mishra, 
learned Additional Advocate General for the State of 

6 
Madhya Pradesh on behalf of the respondents. 
5. 
Before we proceed further with the submissions, it 
would be relevant to refer to three other dates which have 
been referred to by Shri Dave in support of his 
submissions on legitimate expectation and promissory 
estoppel. According to Shri Dave, after the tender was 
invited vide Advertisement dated 22nd April, 2002, the 
Chief Secretary issued a Clarification dated 01.07.2002 
with respect to the agreements executed under BOT 
Scheme stating that stamp duty would not be payable on 
such agreements in the State of Madhya Pradesh also and 
further reiterating that in order to avoid any doubts to be 
raised in future, it is necessary to clarify that no stamp 
duty shall be payable on the agreements being executed 
under BOT Scheme. A further clarification was issued 
vide letter dated 21.07.2002 by the Chief Secretary of the 
State with respect to the Resolution dated 01.07.2002, 
that no stamp duty would be levied on BOT Projects in 
future and such agreements would be signed on stamp 
paper of Rs.100/-. Shri Dave further referred to the 
Notification of the State Government dated 10th March, 
2008 whereby the stamp duty on toll was reduced from 2% 
to Rs.100 i.e.    the position which existed prior to the 
Amendment of 2002 and as clarified in the notification 
and the letters of 1st July of 2002 and 21st July, 2002. It 
was, thus, submitted that the charge of 2% stamp duty 

7 
was only applicable in the State of Madhya Pradesh 
between August, 2002 till March, 2008 and, thereafter, 
again all such Concession Agreements under BOT 
Scheme are to be executed on stamp paper of Rs.100. It 
was throughout the intention of the State of Madhya 
Pradesh to not charge stamp duty @ 2% and treat the 
Concession Agreement under BOT Scheme to be a license 
but unfortunately for the period referred to above, it was 
treated as a lease and the appellants are the victims of 
this 
period, 
whereas 
all 
subsequent 
Concession 
Agreements under BOT Scheme executed after 10th March, 
2008 are exempt from such stamp duty. 
6. 
Further continuing his submissions Mr. Dave, 
learned Senior Counsel submitted that in view of the 
Clarification 
dated 
01.07.2002 
and 
subsequent 
circulation vide letter dated 21.07.2002 throughout the 
State, once it was clarified that the Concession 
Agreements under the BOT Projects would be executed on 
stamp paper of Rs.100/-, the appellants entered into the 
agreement with the same impression and having 
calculated their project cost and also their tenders 
without factoring in 2% stamp duty, had legitimate 
expectation that the agreement would not require stamp 
duty @ 2% of the value, but was to be executed only on 
stamp paper of Rs.100/-. The subsequent demand was 
contrary to the legitimate expectations of the appellants 

8 
and, therefore, liable to be set aside. 
7. 
It was next submitted that the Circular of the Chief 
Secretary dated 1st July, 2002 and its subsequent 
circulation vide letter dated 21st July, 2002, estopped the 
State Government from amending the IS Act and, further 
raising the demand @ 2% treating the Concession 
Agreement to be a lease, the same would be hit by 
principle of promissory estoppel. The State was estopped 
from demanding such stamp duty by treating the 
Concession Agreement to be a lease. 
8. 
In support of his submissions, Shri Dave has placed 
reliance upon the following judgments: 
(1) Navjyoti Co-op. Group Housing Society 
Vs. Union of India;4   
(2) 
Food 
Corporation 
of 
India 
Vs. 
Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries5;  
(3) The State of Jharkhand and Ors. Vs. 
Brahmputra Metallies Ltd. Ranchi and 
Anr6.;   
(4) State of Bihar and Ors. Vs. Shyama 
Nandan Mishra7;   
(5) M/S Hero Moto Corp Ltd. Vs. Union of 
 
4 (1992) Supp.1 SCR 709 
5 (1992) Supp.2 SCR 322 
6 (2020) 14 SCR 45 
7 (2022) 11 SCR 1136 

9 
India and Ors.8;   
9. 
Shri Dave, learned Senior Counsel next submitted 
that the insertion of proviso (c) to Clause(C) under Article 
33 of Schedule 1-A by the 2002 Amendment Act was ultra 
vires as it violates the mandate of Article 14 of the 
Constitution of India. It was submitted that the said 
amendment was illegal, arbitrary and bad in law as it 
nullified the promise made by the Chief Secretary, vide 
Circular dated 01.07.2002, and has taken away the 
vested right of the appellants of not factoring in 2% stamp 
duty and ultimately resulting into a demand of a huge 
amount of Rs.1,08,00,000/- (Rupees one crore eight 
lakhs) approximately. In support of his submission, he 
has relied upon the following two judgments: 
(1) State of Gujarat and another Vs. Raman 
Lal Keshav Lal Soni and Ors.9;  
(2) B.S. Yadav and Ors. etc. Vs. State of 
Haryana and Ors. Etc.10;   
10. The next point raised by Shri Dave is that the 
aforesaid amendment was ultra vires, inasmuch as, the 
State had no legislative competence to bring in this 
amendment. Further, it was submitted that it was a 
colourable and excessive legislation and was a fraud on 
 
8 (2022) 13 SCR 592 
9 (1983) 2 SCR 287 
10 (1981) 1 SCR 1024 

10 
the Constitution of India, inasmuch as, the State itself in 
2008 withdrew the Amendment of 2002. In support of his 
submission, he has relied upon the following judgment: 
(1) Kunnathat Thathunni Moopil Nair Vs. 
The State of Kerala and another11;   
11. The next submission of Shri Dave is that the 
Concession Agreement dated 15.09.2002 is not an 
instrument of lease and, as such, the demand of 2% 
stamp duty was totally uncalled for and illegal. According 
to him, the ownership of the project land has not been 
transferred by the State to the MPRSNN and, as such, 
MPRSNN could not transfer any ownership or interest to 
the appellants. The Concession Agreement was on the 
concept of public, profit, partnership (PPP mode). He has 
further elaborated his submissions by referring to Section 
105 of the TP Act. According to him, in a lease, the 
following three ingredients must pre-exist: 
(1) There is a transfer of a right to enjoy such property. 
(2) It is made for a fixed time, express or implied or in 
perpetuity. 
(3) There has to be consideration of a price paid or 
promised. 
12. According to Shri Dave, learned Senior Counsel for 
 
11 (1961) 3 SCR 77 

11 
the appellants, lease means transfer of interest in the 
property to enjoy the property whereas, license means 
transfer of property but no interest in the property. 
According to him, in the present case, there was no 
transfer of interest in the property, as such, it would not 
fall within the definition of lease. He has further referred 
to various clauses of the Concession Agreement in 
support of his submission. 
13. It was next submitted that MPRSNN is a 50% 
partner in the construction of the project which indicates 
that the Concession Agreement is a mutual contract and, 
as such, would not levy 2% stamp duty as imposed by the 
impugned orders. According to him, out of a total project 
cost, 50% was to be paid by the MPRSNN. According to 
him, respondent no.3, MPRSNN being a 50% partner in 
the entire road project meant that the appellant and 
respondent no.3 are equal stake holders and, as such, the 
unilateral imposition of 2% stamp duty of the entire 
project cost on the appellant was illegal and unwarranted. 
He has further criticised the judgment of the Collector 
(Stamps), Bhopal whereby he held that the total project 
cost was Rs.110 crores whereas actually it was 54 crores, 
out of which, MPRSNN (respondent no.3) had granted 
subsidy and invested Rs.29.10 crores and the remaining 
Rs.24.90 crores, was invested by the appellant. As such, 
even if he was liable to pay 2% stamp duty, the amount 

12 
would be much less, approximately Rs.48 lakhs and odd 
and not Rs.1.08 crores, which was 2% stamp duty on the 
entire project cost. 
14. The last argument raised is that once the IS Act had 
been re-amended on 10th March, 2008, the earlier 
Amendment of 2002 should be held to be illegal and 
arbitrary. On such submissions, Shri Dave, learned 
senior counsel urged the Court to allow the appeal and 
set aside the impugned orders imposing deficiency in 
stamp duty of Rs.1.08 crores. 
15. On the other hand, Shri Saurabh Mishra, learned 
Additional Advocate General for the State of Madhya 
Pradesh representing all the three respondents including 
'MPRSNN' submitted that the High Court had dealt with 
all the above arguments in great detail and had rejected 
them for good reasons based on statutory provisions as 
also the law on the point. It did not suffer from any 
infirmity, 
much 
less 
any 
perversity 
warranting 
interference by this Court. 
16. According to Shri Mishra, all the ingredients of a 
document constituting a lease as defined under the TP Act 
were existing in the Concession Agreements under the 
BOT Scheme. He has also referred to various clauses of 
the Concession Agreement to show that possession was 
actually transferred to the appellants in order to recover 
the toll, the period of such possession was defined to be 

13 
fifteen years. It was for a consideration which was also 
mentioned in the agreement. Therefore, all the three 
ingredients were fulfilled and, as such, the Collector 
(Stamps), Bhopal and the High Court rightly held the 
Concession Agreements to be a lease. He also referred to 
definition of ‘lease’ under the IS Act, as laid down in 
Section 2(16), which includes any instrument by which 
tolls of any description are let. He also referred to the 
definition of ‘immovable property’ as defined under 
Section 3(26) of the General Clauses Act, 1897, which 
would include land, benefits to arise out of land, and 
things attached to the earth, or permanently fastened to 
anything attached to the earth. He further referred to 
various findings recorded by the High Court. He further 
placed reliance upon three judgments of this Court:- 
(1) Associated Hotels of India Ltd. Vs. R.N. 
Kapoor12;   
(2) State of Uttarakhand and Ors. Vs. 
Harpal Singh Rawat13;   
(3) Nasiruddin and another Vs. State of 
Uttar Pradesh Thr. Secretary and Ors14.;   
17. Shri Mishra, further referred to the various 
provisions of the Indian Tolls (MP) Amendment Act, 1972. 
Insofar as to the challenge of the amendments as being 
 
12 AIR 1959 SC 1262 
13 (2011) 4 SCC 575 
14 (2018) 1 SCC 754 

14 
ultra vires is concerned, Shri Mishra submitted that the 
insertion of proviso (c) to Clause(C) to Entry-33, is only for 
determining the rate of charging stamp duty and, as such, 
the challenge was totally irrelevant. The Concession 
Agreement is a lease as defined under Section 105 of the 
TP Act as also under Section 2(16) of the IS Act and, 
therefore, would be chargeable to stamp duty, for which 
rate is provided under Schedule 1-A. It was further 
submitted that the submission relating to Promissory 
Estoppel and Legitimate Expectation are unwarranted 
and without any merit, inasmuch as, prior to the 
execution of the concession agreement, the amendment 
had been brought in. The communication by the Chief 
Secretary cannot have any overriding effect over the 
statutory amendments brought in by the State legislature. 
It is also submitted that there can be no Legitimate 
Expectation or application of Promissory Estoppel against 
statute. It is also submitted that the State was fully 
competent to carry out the amendments. It was next 
submitted that as the 2002 amendment had been 
reversed in 2008, cannot by itself draw any kind of 
presumption that 2002 amendment was illegal. It was 
submitted that the appeals lack merit and are liable to be 
dismissed. 
18. Having considered the submissions advanced and 
having perused the material on record, we have no 

15 
hesitation in holding that the judgment of the High Court 
impugned in these appeals does not require any 
interference. We do not find any infirmity, much less any 
perversity warranting any interference by this Court. The 
High Court has dealt with all aspects of the matter 
considering not only the stipulations in the Concession 
Agreement but has also dealt with in detail with the 
respective arguments advanced by the petitioners before 
the High Court (the appellants herein) at the same time 
referring to the statutory provisions, the constitutional 
provisions as also the case-laws relied upon by the 
counsel for the parties. However, there is one aspect of 
the matter which requires clarification which we shall 
deal with at the end of this judgment. 
19. The arguments made on behalf of the appellants 
relating to the vires of inserting the proviso (c) to Clause 
(C) to Entry 33 of Schedule 1-A of the IS Act, 1899 by the 
M.P. Amendment of 2002 have no merits as it neither 
defines the word 'lease' nor does it in any way interfere 
with the definition of 'lease' in any manner, either by 
expanding or restricting its interpretation. It is only a 
statutory provision as to what would be the rate of stamp 
duty payable on lease deeds of a particular type. But for 
the insertion of the proviso which is sought to be 
challenged, the stamp duty payable on the lease would be 
8% of the market value as provided to be charged on the 

16 
conveyance under Entry-22 of Schedule 1-A. By inserting 
the proviso, the stamp duty chargeable on a lease under 
BOT Project for tolls/bridges, construction of roads etc. 
would be 2% of the amount spent by the lessee. In fact, 
insertion of this proviso reduced the rate of stamp duty to 
be charged to 2% instead of 8% and that too on the 
amount to be spent by the lessee. 
20. The doctrine of legitimate expectation has been 
discussed and elucidated upon in several judgment by 
this Court. The doctrine provides a framework for judicial 
review of executive actions, policy changes, and legislative 
decisions. In Union of India & Ors. v. Hindustan 
Development Corporation & Ors.
15 , this Court 
emphasized that legitimate expectation primarily grants 
an applicant the right to a fair hearing before a decision 
that negates a promise or withdraws an undertaking from 
which an expectation of certain outcome or treatment 
arises. It does not, however, create an absolute right to 
the expected outcome. The protection of legitimate 
expectation is subject to overriding public interest, which 
means that even if an individual’s expectation is 
reasonable and based on a past practice or representation 
by the executive or legislature, it can be denied if justified 
by a significant public necessity. The Court also 
highlighted that in matters of policy change, the judiciary 
 
15   (1993) 3 SCC 499 

17 
typically refrains from interfering, unless the decision is 
arbitrary, unreasonable, or not in public interest. 
21. The judgment in Ram Pravesh Singh & Ors. v. 
State of Bihar & Ors16.  defines legitimate expectation as 
an expectation of a benefit, relief, or remedy that arises 
from 
a 
promise 
or 
established 
practice 
through 
administrative, executive or legislative action. This 
expectation must be reasonable, logical, and valid; but it 
in no way vests any enforceable legal right. The doctrine 
does not elevate legitimate expectation to the level of a 
right enforceable by law. Instead, it is a procedural 
concept that demands fairness in administrative action. 
When an expectation is deemed legitimate, it may entitle 
the individual to a chance to show cause before the 
expectation is denied or to receive an explanation for the 
denial. However, legitimate expectation does not always 
result in relief, particularly when public interest, policy 
changes, or other valid reasons justify the deviation from 
the expected course of action. 
22. The decision in P.T.R. Exports (Madras) Pvt. Ltd. 
v. Union of India & Ors .17 further clarifies the limited 
role of legitimate expectation in the context of policy 
changes and legislative actions. This Court observed that 
the government retains the authority to revise policies in 
 
16   (2006) 8 SCC 381 
17   (1996) 5 SCC 268 

18 
response to changing circumstances, such as potential 
foreign markets and the need to earn foreign exchange. 
Thus, the doctrine of legitimate expectation does not 
constrain the government from altering its policies, 
provided the changes are made in public interest and not 
through an abuse of power. The judiciary affords 
considerable leeway to the executive and legislature in 
matters of economic policy, recognizing their prerogative 
to prioritize different economic factors. Consequently, 
previous policies do not bind the government indefinitely; 
new policies can be adopted, if deemed necessary, for the 
public good. This underscores the principle that while 
legitimate expectation warrants fair treatment, it does not 
preclude the government’s flexibility in policy-making. 
23. Therefore, the doctrine of legitimate expectation 
serves only as a procedural safeguard ensuring fairness 
in administrative decisions and policy changes. It grants 
the expectant party the right to a fair hearing and an 
explanation but does not guarantee the realization of the 
expected benefit. The government’s authority to revise 
policies in public interest remains paramount, with the 
judiciary intervening only in cases of arbitrariness, 
unreasonableness, or lack of public interest. This 
balanced approach ensures that while individuals can 
expect consistent treatment based on past practices or 
promises, the government retains the flexibility to 

19 
respond to evolving needs and priorities. 
24. On the doctrine of promissory estoppel, since it is an 
equitable doctrine, it only comes into play when equity 
requires a party be estopped from withdrawing its 
promise. It has been well settled by this Court in several 
judgments that the principle of promissory estoppel 
cannot be invoked against the exercise of legislative power. 
In order to avoid burden on the present judgment, we are 
relying on the observations made by this Court in a recent 
judgment dealing with the doctrine of promissory estoppel. 
The Bench in Hero Motocorp Ltd vs Union of India,18 
while relying upon other judgments of this Court in this 
regard, observed thus (SCC pp. 414-415, para 68) 
“68. A common thread in all these judgments that 
could be noticed is that all these judgments 
consistently hold that there can be no estoppel against 
the legislature in the exercise of its legislative 
functions. The Constitution Bench in the case of M. 
Ramanatha Pillai (supra) has approved the view in 
American Jurisprudence that the doctrine of estoppel 
will not be applied against the State in its 
governmental, public or sovereign capacity. It further 
held that the only exception with regard to 
applicability of the doctrine of estoppel is where it is 
necessary to prevent fraud or manifest injustice. The 
analysis of all the judgments of this Court on the issue 
 
18 (2023) 1 SCC 386 

20 
would reveal that it is a consistent view of this Court, 
reiterated again in Godfrey Philips India Ltd. (supra), 
that there can be no promissory estoppel against the 
legislature in the exercise of its legislative functions.” 
 
25. In light of the observations made by this Court in the 
above cited judgments and several others, it is an evident 
position of law that a prior executive decision does not bar 
the State legislature from enacting a law or framing any 
policy contrary to or in conflict with the previous executive 
decision in furtherance of larger public interest. Nor can 
it be canvassed that the law laid down by the legislature 
would be hit by principle of promissory estoppel or 
legitimate expectation because earlier the executive had 
expressed its view differently.  
26. Promissory estoppel or legitimate expectation can be 
dealt with on the same status of the executive decision 
when the prior as well as the subsequent decisions are 
both taken by the same or similarly placed authorities. 
Where the executive takes a decision based upon which a 
party acts and, later on, the executive withdraws that 
decision to the detriment of the party acting upon the 
earlier decision, it can be said to be estopped from 
withdrawing its promise or depriving the party from its 
legitimate expectation of what had been promised.  
27. In situations, such as the one before us, if the 
previous executive decision is withdrawn, modified or 

21 
amended in any manner in exercise of legislative power in 
larger public interest, then the earlier promise upon 
which the party acts, cannot be enforced as a right and 
neither can the authorities be estopped from withdrawing 
its promise, as such an expectation does not give any 
enforceable right to the party. Applying the above 
discussion to the present facts, it is evident that the 
principles of legitimate expectation and promissory 
estoppel would not apply here, as the appellants cannot 
be said to have any enforceable legal right in light of the 
previous law or policy and executive action, which was 
subsequently changed by the state legislature in light of 
larger public interest. Thus, the submissions advanced on 
behalf of the appellants relating to the challenge to the 
M.P. Act No.12 of 2002 inserting the proviso (c) to 
Clause(C) to Entry 33 of Schedule 1-A of the IS Act has to 
be rejected. None of the case-laws relied upon on behalf 
of the appellants come to the rescue of the appellants and 
have no application in the facts and circumstances of the 
present case. 
28. Now coming to the next submission on behalf of the 
appellants with regard to the question as to whether the 
Concession Agreement is a lease or a bond or a license. 
The definition of lease as given under the IS Act clearly 
covers any instrument by which tolls of any description 
are let and also under Section 105 of the TP Act, all the 

22 
ingredients of a lease are fulfilled. In the present case, we 
need not reiterate and repeat the same reasoning and 
findings as given by the High Court in great detail after 
considering the various clauses of the Concession 
Agreement. We uphold the finding of the High Court to be 
clearly justified and based upon a clear understanding of 
the terms of the concession agreement. We do not find 
any perversity at all in the reasoning given by the High 
Court to uphold the Concession Agreement to be a lease. 
29. After the judgment of the High Court which is of the 
year 2010, two further judgments have been delivered by 
this Court regarding interpretation of a lease, which have 
been relied upon by Shri Mishra on behalf of the 
respondents. Out of the three judgments relied upon by 
Shri Mishra, the judgment in the case of Associated 
Hotels of India Ltd. (supra) has already been considered 
by the High Court. Further, the judgments in the case of 
State of Uttarakhand and others (supra) and in the case 
of Nasiruddin and another (supra) further reiterated the 
view taken by Associated Hotel of India Ltd. (supra). 
Paragraph 17 in the case of Nasiruddin and another 
(supra) is reproduced hereunder: 
“17. The expression “lease” under the Stamp Act 
has a wider meaning as compared to its original 
meaning contained in Section 105 of the Transfer of 
Property Act (for short “the TP Act”). If “lease” under 

23 
Section 2(16) of the Stamp Act includes therein four 
specified categories of documents set out in sub-
clauses (a) to (d), we do not find any such inclusion 
in Section 105 of the Transfer of Property Act. It is 
for this reason, we are of the view that the definition 
of “lease” for the purpose of the Stamp Act is 
extensive in nature. It is also clear from the use of 
the expression and includes also “in Section 2(16) of 
the Stamp Act. So by fiction, “any instrument by 
which tolls of any description are let “is considered 
as “lease” for the purpose of payment of stamp duty 
under the Stamp Act.” 
 
30. Thus, the view taken by the High Court further 
stands fortified by the above two judgments and the view 
that we are taking. 
31. The only issue which requires to be considered 
afresh is with respect to determination of the amount 
spent under the agreement by the lessee. For the said 
purpose, we reproduce proviso(c) to  Clause(C) of the 
proviso inserted in 2002: 
“(c) an agreement to lease where the right to 
collect tolls is given in lieu of the amount 
spent by the lessee in construction of roads, 
bridge etc. under the Build, Operate and 
Transfer (B.O.T.) scheme, shall be chargeable at 
the rate of two percent on the amount likely 

24 
to be spent under the agreement by the 
lessee.” 
32. From a clear reading of the above proviso (c) to 
Clause(C), the stamp duty would be chargeable @ 2% on 
the amount likely to be spent under the agreement by the 
lessee. Thus, the lessee has no liability to pay any stamp 
duty on the amount not spent by the lessee but by the 
lessor or any other stake-holder. The amount spent by the 
lessee as per the agreement generally was 50% of the total 
cost of the project. 
33. In the case of Rewa Tollway19 , the total cost of the 
project was Rs.54 crores, out of which, approximately 50 % 
would be that of the lessee and 50% to be funded by the 
lessor i.e. MPRSNN, respondent no.3. However, further 
reading of the Concession Agreement reflects that the 
amount to be spent by the lessee was not exactly 50% but 
is slightly different figure. At some places, it is mentioned 
as Rs.24.10 crores and in other places a different amount 
is mentioned. We are not entering into this issue of what 
is the amount spent but we require that this be 
determined by the Collector (Stamps) / Revenue Officer of 
the concerned district. 
34. Once, the stamp duty is payable on the amount 
spent by the lessee, the demand raised on the whole 
 
19 Civil Appeal No.8985 of 2013 

25 
amount would be unjustified, as such, to the above extent, 
the demand needs to be set aside with a further direction 
to the Revenue Officer/Collector (Stamps) of the district 
concerned to re-calculate the same as observed above and, 
accordingly, raise the demand. In case, the appellants 
have deposited the demand raised on the entire project 
cost then the amount lying in excess with the State would 
be refunded to them. However, in case of any deficit in 
stamp duty having not been deposited, the appellants 
would deposit the same within two months of the fresh 
demand being raised by the Revenue Officer/Collector 
(Stamps) of the district concerned. The Collector 
(Stamps)/Revenue Officer is further directed to calculate 
the said amount in each of the cases individually and 
communicate the same to the appellants within a period 
of two months from today and where the amount is lying 
in excess with the State, the same shall be refunded 
within a period of two months of such determination. 
35. The appeals stand partly allowed as above. No costs. 
 
……………………………………J. 
(VIKRAM NATH) 
 
 
……………………………………J.  
 (AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH) 
NEW DELHI 
JULY 19, 2024