2024 INSC 543
Page 1 of 9 
SLP (Crl.) No.14705 of 2023 
Reportable 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal No.  
of 2024 
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.14705 of 2023) 
 
 
Amit Rana @ Koka & Anr. 
 
 
 
 
 
…Appellant(s) 
Versus 
 
State of Haryana 
   
   
         …Respondent(s) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. 
 
Leave granted 
1. 
The captioned appeal is filed to challenge the 
concurrent conviction of the appellants under Section 
307 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 
(for short the ‘IPC’) and the consequently, imposed 
sentence on them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 
14 years each and to pay a fine of Rs.1,50,000/- (Rupees 
one lakh fifty thousand only) each and in default to 
undergo simple imprisonment for six months. 
Digitally signed by Dr.
Naveen Rawal
Date: 2024.07.22
11:31:35 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 9 
SLP (Crl.) No.14705 of 2023 
2. 
On 21.11.2023, after hearing the learned counsel 
for the appellants and looking into the overwhelming 
conclusive evidence supporting the conviction of the 
appellants under Section 307, IPC, with the aid of Section 
34, IPC, this Court declined to entertain the Special 
Leave Petition to the extent it seeks to challenge the 
conviction, and issued limited notice confining to the 
challenge against the award of 14 years of rigorous 
imprisonment for the conviction thereof.  The challenge 
is to the effect that in terms of the provisions under 
Section 307, IPC a term imprisonment beyond the period 
of ten years is impermissible though in case of hurt 
during attempt to murder would make the convict liable 
for imprisonment for life.  Hence, the scope of this appeal 
is confined only to the question on sentence. 
3. 
Heard learned counsel for the appellants and 
learned counsel appearing for the respondent-State.  
The rival contention raises a question of seminal 
importance as mentioned, viz., ‘whether a convict under 
Section 307, IPC, can be sentenced to undergo 
imprisonment, of either description, beyond the period 
of ten years.  It is worthwhile to extract Section 307, IPC 
for a proper consideration of the aforesaid question.  It 
reads thus:- 

Page 3 of 9 
SLP (Crl.) No.14705 of 2023 
“307. Attempt to murder.—Whoever does 
any act with such intention or knowledge, and 
under such circumstances that, if he by that act 
caused death, he would be guilty of murder, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if hurt 
is caused to any person by such act, the 
offender 
shall 
be 
liable 
either 
to 
[imprisonment for life], or to such punishment 
as is hereinbefore mentioned. 
Attempts by life-convicts.— [When any 
person offending under this section is under 
sentence of [imprisonment for life], he may, if 
hurt is caused, be punished with death.]” 
 
4. 
A perusal of Section 307, IPC, would make it clear 
that it really imbibes the true spirit of the maxim ‘culpae 
poena per esto’ – means ‘let the punishment be 
proportionate to the offence; let the punishment fit the 
crime.’  It itself prescribes three types of sentences 
imposable on a convict thereunder.  If it is an attempt to 
murder simpliciter, the offence is punishable maximum 
with by a term of imprisonment of either description upto 
ten years and fine.  The last part of Section 307 

Page 4 of 9 
SLP (Crl.) No.14705 of 2023 
prescribes death sentence as the only punishment when 
the offender during the commission of the crime is under 
the sentence of imprisonment for life and hurt is caused 
to the victim. 
5. 
We are concerned with the second part of Section 
307, where victim suffers hurt.  There can be no doubt 
with respect to the position that the convict under this 
part can be sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life.  
The parties are at issue only on the expression in the 
second part ‘or to such punishment as is hereinbefore 
mentioned’. The learned counsel for the appellants 
would contend that the said expression limits the 
maximum sentence imposable, when imprisonment for 
life is found not to be imposed, to what is mentioned in 
the first part viz., imprisonment of either description up 
to ten years and fine.  A feeble attempt was made by the 
learned counsel for the state to justify the imposition of 
sentence of imprisonment for 14 years contending that 
the nature of the bodily injury sustained by the victim 
and its aftermath were taken into consideration by the 
trial Court and the High Court found that imprisonment 
for life would be disproportionate and the proportionate 
punishment to the gravity of the offence invites 
imposition of imprisonment short of imprisonment for 

Page 5 of 9 
SLP (Crl.) No.14705 of 2023 
life.  It is further submitted that when imprisonment for 
life is imposable for attempt to murder where the victim 
suffered hurt imposition of sentence lesser than 
imprisonment for life cannot be said to be beyond the 
penal power of the Court. 
6. 
Section 307, IPC, makes it clear that to attract the 
said offence the victim need not suffer any kind of bodily 
injury.  The offence to commit murder punishable under 
Section 307, IPC is constituted by the concurrence of 
mens rea followed by actus reus, to commit an attempt to 
murder though its accomplishment or sufferance of any 
kind of bodily injury to the victim is not a ‘sine qua non’.  
In other words, if a man commits an act with such 
intention or knowledge and under such circumstances 
that if death had been caused, the offence would have 
amounted to murder or the act itself is of such a nature as 
would have caused death in the usual course of an event, 
but something beyond his control prevented that result, 
his act would constitute the offence punishable as an 
attempt to murder under Section 307, IPC. 
7. 
Now we will refer to the incident in question which 
led to the conviction of the appellants under Section 307, 
IPC.  In view of the fact that we are not considering the 
question of conviction, it is unnecessary to deal with the 

Page 6 of 9 
SLP (Crl.) No.14705 of 2023 
occurrence in detail.  PW-5 Dr. Sahil, the then medical 
officer attached to PGIMS, Rohtak, deposed that the 
complainant (victim) was admitted in the hospital from 
09.06.2016 to 02.07.2016 with history of gunshot injury.  
He would further depose that he along with Dr. Shubham 
removed the foreign body from the spine of the victim-
Mangtu Ram.  The indisputable fact is that the victim 
became paralysed due to the said spinal injury.  Thus, it 
can be seen that the attempt to murder the complainant 
caused the injury and resultantly he became paralysed.  
When that be the consequence of the attempt to murder, 
the case would definitely be fallen under the second part 
of Section 307, IPC.  On scanning the provisions under 
Section 307, IPC, we have already found that in case the 
victim suffered hurt in terms of the second part of Section 
307, IPC, the convict can be sentenced to undergo 
imprisonment for life.  In the event the court did not 
consider that imprisonment for life is not to be imposed 
the other option, going by the provision, is only to 
impose such punishment as is mentioned in the first part 
of Section 307, IPC.  The first part, as noticed 
hereinbefore, 
prescribes 
punishment 
with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to 10 years and also to pay fine.  A bare perusal 

Page 7 of 9 
SLP (Crl.) No.14705 of 2023 
of the second part of Section 307, IPC, would 
undoubtedly show that it did not prescribe for imposition 
of punishment more than what is prescribed under the 
first part thereof.  We have already noted that the 
maximum imprisonment permissible under the first part 
of Section 307, IPC, is “imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may not extent to 10 years and also fine”.  
When in unambiguous terms the legislature prescribed 
the maximum corporeal sentence imposable for the 
conviction under Section 307, IPC, under the first part 
and when the court concerned upon convicting the 
accused concerned thought it fit not to impose 
imprisonment for life, the punishment to be handed 
down to the convict concerned in any circumstance 
cannot exceed the punishment prescribed under the first 
part of Section 307, IPC.  When this be the mandate under 
Section 307, IPC, the trial Court in view of its decision not 
to award the punishment of imprisonment for life could 
not have granted punishment to a term exceeding 10 
years.  It is to be noted that the respondent-State has not 
filed any appeal contending that the punishment 
imposed on the appellants is liable to be enhanced to 
imprisonment for life thus, we do not deem it necessary 
to go into the question whether the punishment is to be 

Page 8 of 9 
SLP (Crl.) No.14705 of 2023 
enhanced.  Thus, the question is whether the sentence of 
rigorous imprisonment for 14 years is permissible in law 
and if not, what should be the comeuppance.  The 
discussion as above with reference to Section 307, IPC, 
would thus go to show that imposition of rigorous 
imprisonment for a term of 14 years for a conviction 
under Section 307, IPC, is impermissible in law and it is 
liable to be interfered with.  Since the High Court had not 
gone into the question as to how imprisonment for a term 
of 14 years or the conviction under Section 307, IPC 
would be maintained and in view of our conclusion as 
above, the judgment of the High Court confirming the 
judgment of the trial Court awarding 
rigorous 
imprisonment for 14 years calls for interference. 
8. 
Since the conviction of the appellants under 
Section 307, IPC, is declined to be interfered with by us, 
necessarily the punishment for the said offence taking 
note of the gravity of the crime has to be imposed.  Since 
we are not proposing to enhance the sentence to 
imprisonment for life and the only option is to bring 
down the term of imprisonment from 14 years, there is 
absolutely no reason to hear the appellants in-person.   
9. 
We have taken note of the fact that as a 
consequence of the attempt to do away with the life of the 

Page 9 of 9 
SLP (Crl.) No.14705 of 2023 
complainant, he had suffered spine injury and became 
paralysed in terms of the second part of the Section 307, 
IPC, the appellants are to be given the maximum 
corporeal sentence imposable under the first part of 
Section 307, IPC.  Accordingly, the imposition of rigorous 
imprisonment for 14 years each to the appellants is 
converted to rigorous imprisonment for a period of 10 
years.  The order of sentence with respect to fine is kept 
intact.  The appeal is thus allowed in part and the 
impugned judgment of the High Court and the judgment 
of the trial Court in S.T. No.281/2016 qua the appellants 
stands modified as above. 
10. 
Pending applications, if any, stands disposed of. 
 
 
 
……………………, J. 
                 (C.T. Ravikumar) 
 
 
……………………, J. 
                 (Rajesh Bindal) 
 
 
New Delhi; 
July 22, 2024.