2024 INSC 544
 
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. ___________ OF 2024 
[ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NOS. 19647-48 OF 2022] 
S. TIRUPATHI RAO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
… APPELLANT 
VERSUS 
M. LINGAMAIAH & ORS  
 
 
 
 
 
…RESPONDENTS 
WITH 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. ___________ OF 2024 
[ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NOS. 19748-19749 OF 2022] 
 
J U D G M E N T 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J. 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. ___________ OF 2024 
[ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NOS. 19647-48 OF 2022] 
Leave granted. 
2. 
These appeals assail the common judgment and order dated 27th April, 
20221 of the High Court for the State of Telangana at Hyderabad2 allowing 
 
1 impugned order, hereafter 
2 High Court, hereafter 
Digitally signed by
Jatinder Kaur
Date: 2024.07.22
16:56:43 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
2
Review I.A. No. 1/2020 in LPA 1/2018 and Review I.A. No. 3/2020 in CA 
33/20173 preferred by the first respondent. The impugned order of the High 
Court recalled the order under review and dismissed a contempt appeal as 
well as a letters patent appeal of the appellant.   
3. 
The present dispute emerges from a complex and interwoven set of legal 
proceedings, involving myriad parties and decisions rendered by both 
judicial and quasi-judicial authorities. The factual matrix, to the extent 
relevant for adjudication of these civil appeals, is noticed hereunder:  
I. 
Ms. Sultana Jahan Begum, daughter of Nawab Moin-ud-Dowla Bahadur, 
instituted Original Suit 130/19534 (since renumbered as Civil Suit 
07/1958 upon its transfer to the High Court) before the City Civil Court, 
Andhra Pradesh, seeking partition of her father’s properties known as 
‘Asman Jahi Paigah’.  
II. 
On 06th April, 1959, a preliminary decree was passed by the High Court 
on the basis of a compromise entered into by and between the parties 
to the civil suit. The schedule of properties included within it Raidurg 
village5.  
III. 
Notably, it is recorded therein that the plaintiff chose to withdraw her 
claim against, inter alia, the defendant no. 48 in the suit, i.e., the 
Secretary, Finance Department of the Government of Andhra Pradesh. 
Resultantly, the suit stood dismissed against the State unconditionally. 
 
3 review petitions, hereafter 
4 civil suit, hereafter 
5 subject land, hereafter 

 
3
IV. 
During the pendency of the civil suit, Nawab Zaheer Yar Jung, son of 
Nawab Moin-ud-Dowla Bahadur, filed a claim petition before the Nazim-
e-Atiyat, claiming the subject land as jagir land. This claim was 
negatived by the Nazim-e-Atiyat vide an order dated 28th October, 1968 
upon verification of sanad, which revealed that there did not exist any 
document granting paigah with respect to the subject land to the 
claimant’s father.  
V. 
The order passed by the Nazim-e-Atiyat, upon appeal, was confirmed by 
the Board of Revenue vide an order dated 29th December, 1976, which 
held that the subject land stood escheated to the Government. 
VI. 
Meanwhile, on 01st October, 2003, the decree holders in the civil suit 
executed a deed of assignment in favour of the first respondent herein 
in respect of land measuring more or less Ac 143.00 guntas forming part 
of certain survey numbers of the subject land.  
VII. 
On 26th December, 2003, the High Court passed the final decree and 
judgment in the civil suit in favour of the first respondent, with respect 
to land measuring more or less acres 84.30 guntas6 forming part of 
Survey No. 46 of the subject land.  
VIII. 
Pursuant thereto, the first respondent had approached the Tahsildar with 
a prayer for mutation of his name in respect of the decretal property in 
the revenue records which proved abortive. Consequently, the first 
respondent invoked the writ jurisdiction of the High Court by preferring 
 
6  decretal property 

 
4
Writ Petition 1729/20097, seeking direction for effecting mutation in 
terms of the final decree in the civil suit. The respondent’s writ petition 
was heard with a connected matter being Writ Petition 581/2009.  
IX. 
On 05th March, 2009, a Single Judge of the High Court vide a common 
order disposed of both the writ petitions at the admission stage itself, 
with the following order:  
“A partial final decree was passed by this Court on 26.12.2003 in 
Application No.1409 of 2003 in C.S. No. 7 of 1958, directing 
several steps. One of the steps is that the names of the decree 
holders be mutated in respect of the property mentioned in the 
decree. It appears that the persons, who have purchased part of 
the property from the parties to the decree, have also approached 
the respondents for mutation of their names. Having regard to the 
fact that there was a specific direction in the decree, Acviving (sic, 
requiring) authorities first to implement the decree by effecting 
mutation in the only (sic) after the initial step is complied with. 
Hence, the writ petitions are disposed of, directing that the Deputy 
Collector / Tahsildar, Serilingampally Mandal, Ranga Reddy 
District, shall effect necessary mutations in the revenue records 
strictly in accordance with the decree, dated 26.12.2003, in 
Application No.1409 of 2003 in C.S.No.7 of 1958 passed by this 
Court, after issuing notices to the affected parties. The subsequent 
purchasers, if any, shall be entitled to pursue their remedies after 
this step. There shall be no order as to costs.” 
X. 
Thereafter, one Syed Azizulla Husaini challenged only the decision in Writ 
Petition 581/2009. In exercise of appellate jurisdiction, a Division Bench 
of the High Court, vide order dated 18th August 2009, modified the 
order dated 05th March, 2009 as follows: 
“Heard the learned advocates. The learned advocates appearing 
for the respondents have no  objection if the objections which have 
been filed by the appellant before the Deputy Collector / Tahsildar, 
Srilingampally Mandal, Ranga Reddy District are also considered 
along with the other objections which have been filed by the 
affected parties.  
 
7 writ petition, hereafter 

 
5
In the circumstances, the order dated 05-03-2009 passed in Writ 
Petition No. 581 of 2009 is modified to the effect that while 
considering the objections of the affected parties, the Deputy 
Collector / Tahsildar, Srilingampally Mandal, Ranga Reddy District 
shall also consider the objections which have already been filed by 
the present appellant viz. Syed Azizullah Hussaini.” 
 
XI. 
However, the appellant (the Tahsildar) did not carry the order of disposal 
of the writ petition of the first respondent in appeal and, thus, between 
the appellant and the first respondent, the order dated 05th March, 2009 
became final and binding.  
XII. 
In view of the Tahsildar’s inaction in effecting mutation, as ordered, the 
first respondent instituted Contempt Case 217/20148 before the High 
Court on 10th February, 2014.  
XIII. 
The Single Judge, vide order dated 04th October, 2017, allowed the 
contempt petition. The State’s contention that the petition was barred 
by limitation was rejected on the ground that the Tahsildar’s failure to 
obey the order of the Court, till mutation was effected, would constitute 
a continuing wrong. Consequently, the Tahsildar was directed to mutate 
the name of the first respondent in terms of the final decree, and was 
also sentenced to simple imprisonment for a term of two months, 
together with a fine of Rs 1500/- (Rupees fifteen hundred only).  
XIV. 
This decision of the Single Judge was challenged by the appellant in two 
separate appeals – (i) Contempt Appeal 33/20179, presented against 
the punishment imposed on the appellant and (ii) Letters Patent Appeal 
 
8  contempt petition, hereafter 
9  contempt appeal, hereafter 

 
6
01/201810, presented against the direction for mutation of the name of 
the first respondent in the revenue records qua the decretal property.  
XV. 
A Division Bench of the High Court11, vide a detailed judgment and order 
dated 16th August, 2018, allowed both the appeals and set aside the 
order under challenge for two primary reasons – (i) the contempt 
petition was barred by limitation, the failure of the Tahsildar to effect 
the mutation constituting a single act and not a continuing wrong; and 
(ii) the preliminary decree recorded that the civil suit was withdrawn as 
against the State Government. Thus, there did not exist any decree 
which could have been executed against the Government by the civil 
court. Thus, as a legal and logical corollary, the State could not be bound 
to effect mutation in the revenue records in terms of a decree which was 
unenforceable against it. Consequently, the first respondent’s attempt 
to seek a direction of mutation against the State, on the strength of such 
a decree, was held to be fraudulent in nature.  
XVI. 
Challenge laid by the first respondent to the judgment and order dated 
16th August, 2018 by presenting special leave petitions12 before this 
Court was not entertained resulting in its dismissal vide order dated 29th 
October, 2018. A petition seeking review13 of such order of dismissal 
was also dismissed by this Court vide order dated 08th January, 2019.  
XVII. 
This Court having spurned his aforesaid challenges, the first respondent 
knocked the doors of the High Court once again by filing review petitions 
 
10 letters patent appeal, hereafter 
11 Division Bench (original), hereafter 
12 SLP (C) 24646-24647/2018 
13 R.P. (C) 3973/2018 

 
7
against the common judgment and order dated 16th August, 2018 
(allowing the letters patent appeal and the contempt appeal). 
XVIII. 
As noted at the beginning of this judgment, vide the impugned order, 
another Division Bench14 of the High Court allowed the review petitions. 
IMPUGNED ORDER  
4. 
The Division Bench (review) noted at the outset that the merits of the 
matter need not be looked into, and then went on to undertake an 
exhaustive examination of precisely the same.  
4.1 The High Court adversely observed that the State had not yet obtained any 
decree against the first respondent or his predecessors-in-interest to the 
effect that the subject land belonged to it. The State was noted to have filed 
OSA (Sr) No. 2116/2011, challenging the final decree proceedings dated 
26th December, 2003 but the same stood dismissed vide order dated 24th 
August, 2011, with an observation that the State ought to initiate separate 
proceedings in accordance with law. However, no such proceedings were 
thereafter initiated by the State. 
4.2 The High Court further observed that the State sought to set up title to the 
subject land based on the concept of escheat without invoking the 
provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Escheats and Bona Vacantia Act, 1974. 
This led to admonition of the State authorities for taking mutually 
inconsistent pleas of ‘absolute title’ and ‘right by escheat’. 
 
14 Division Bench (review), hereafter 

 
8
4.3 The State was further held to have suppressed material information and 
approached the Court with unclean hands inasmuch as the stand taken by 
them was not supported by any documentary evidence.  
4.4 The State, on its part, had argued that the contempt action was itself barred 
by limitation, as per section 20 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 197115 read 
with rule 21 of the Andhra Pradesh High Court Writ Proceedings Rules, 
197716. Such argument was rejected by the Division Bench (review) by 
relying on the decision in Pallav Seth v. Custodian17, wherein it was held 
that the period of limitation would only commence upon the date from the 
discovery of fraud played by the party on the Court/opposite party; the 
State having acted fraudulently by suppressing information, the contempt 
petition would not be barred by limitation. 
4.5 With respect to the contempt alleged, the Division Bench (review) examined 
the conduct of the State in remaining silent on the matter of mutation and 
held that such silence could not be interpreted to be a refusal on the part 
of the State to act upon the representations. In view thereof, coupled with 
the State’s periodic representations made before the Court that they would 
implement the direction for mutation, it was held that such acts constituted 
a continuing wrong so as to ensconce the contempt petition within the ambit 
of the period of limitation.   
4.6 In such review proceedings, the first respondent had brought on record 
additional documents in the nature of sale deeds, orders by revenue 
 
15 the Act, hereafter 
16 the Writ Rules, hereafter 
17 (2001) 7 SCC 549 

 
9
authorities and governmental memos, to which allegedly access was 
obtained only after the disposal of the contempt appeal, to argue that the 
subject land was the self-acquired private property of the first respondent’s 
predecessor-in-interest. The Division Bench (review) undertook a detailed 
examination of the same to definitively conclude, with the aid of section 79 
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, that the property belonged to the 
predecessor-in-interest of the first respondent. The State’s objection to 
such documents was overruled as the same were held to come within the 
purview of “new and important matter or evidence” as provided in Order 
XLVII Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure18.  
4.7 In summation, the Division Bench (review) reviewed and reversed the 
judgment and order dated 16th August, 2018 and confirmed the order dated 
04th October, 2017 of the Single Judge passed on the writ petition. The 
appellant’s sentence of imprisonment was modified to four months, and a 
direction was issued to implement the order passed in the writ petition 
within a period of four weeks.  
SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
Mr. C.S. Vaidyanathan, learned senior counsel for the appellant, while 
seeking our interference with the impugned order, submitted as under: 
a) The Division Bench (review) of the High Court erred in allowing the 
review petitions, without affording a hearing to the appellant on 
merits.  
 
18 CPC, hereafter 

 
10
b) The Division Bench (review) set aside the reasoned judgment of the 
Division Bench (original) in the contempt appeal and while 
substituting its own reasoning for that in the order under review, did 
not disclose the error that was apparent on the record; instead, it 
proceeded to decide the review as if it were sitting in appeal over 
the earlier decision.  
c) The Division Bench (review) placed undue reliance on the additional 
documents produced by the first respondent, which were accepted 
on face value, without giving an opportunity to the appellant to rebut 
the same.  
d) The Division Bench (review), in exercise of its review jurisdiction, 
went beyond the order of the Single Judge passed in the writ 
petition. It is settled law that a writ court cannot adjudicate on title, 
since the same falls within the exclusive jurisdiction of a civil court.  
e) The Division Bench (original) had rightly set aside the order of the 
Single Judge, as the order had been obtained by playing fraud on 
the Court and the proceedings in the suit were itself fraudulent in 
nature.  
f) The civil suit was dismissed as against the State Government and, 
thus, there could not have been an executable decree as against the 
State.  
g) The Division Bench (original) had rightly allowed the appellant’s 
appeal on the ground that the failure to mutate the names of the 

 
11
first respondent was not a continuing wrong and, therefore, the 
contempt petition was barred by limitation. 
6. 
Mr. C. A. Sundaram, learned senior counsel appearing for an intervenor, who 
disputed the title of the first respondent, adopted the submissions of Mr. 
C.S. Vaidyanathan. In addition, he contended that there cannot be a more 
egregious mistake as the one committed by the Division Bench (review) in 
exercise of its review jurisdiction. He invited our attention to the grounds of 
review forming part of the review petition and contended that none of the 
grounds can be said to be within the parameters of section 114 read with 
Order XLVII Rule 1 of the CPC; hence, the Division Bench (review) assumed 
a jurisdiction which it could not have more particularly after the 
unsuccessful misadventures of the first respondent before this Court. 
7. 
Mr. Ranjit Kumar, Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Mr. Vipin Sanghi and Mr. R. Anand 
Padmanabhan, 
learned 
senior 
counsel 
appearing 
for 
the 
various 
respondents, in support of upholding the impugned order, submitted as 
under: 
a) The appellant had not approached this Court with clean hands since 
the Government Pleader, during the pendency of the contempt 
proceedings, had avowed that the process of mutation had already 
commenced, while the counter affidavit filed in the same 
proceedings stated that the contempt petition itself was barred by 
limitation. 
b) The State had submitted in the contempt proceedings that there was 
serious dispute with respect to the question of title which could only 

 
12
be adjudicated in a civil suit; however, during the course of the 
review proceedings, the senior counsel appearing for the State 
categorically stated that no civil suit had been filed till date.  
c) During the period 1968 to 2022, the appellant had consistently taken 
the plea of absolute title having been escheated to the Government, 
but in course of consideration of the review petitions, undertook a 
mutually inconsistent plea of the subject land being Government 
land on the basis of revenue entries. 
d) The appellant did not raise objections with respect to fraud and 
fabrication when the additional documents were produced by the 
first respondent before the High Court; having acquiesced to the 
same, the appellant was now estopped from raising such pleas.  
e) The first respondent relied on a multitude of orders by both judicial 
and administrative authorities to prove that the subject land was 
privately purchased, and constituted self-acquired lands of the first 
respondent’s predecessor in interest.  
ANALYSIS 
8. 
The present lis confronts us primarily with two inter-related legal issues. 
The first one requires us to examine whether the parameters set out in 
Order XLVII Rule 1 of the CPC for exercising the power of review, as 
interpreted by this Court in its numerous judgments, were at all satisfied 
for the High Court to embark on an exercise of review. The second issue 
requiring our consideration is the terminus a quo for commencement of the 
point of limitation in matters of contempt, in the light of provisions of section 

 
13
20 of the Act read with Article 215 of the Constitution and rule 21 of the 
Writ Rules. This would, in turn, require us to examine whether the contempt 
petition could have been held to be maintainable by the High Court on the 
ground of the appellant having continued to observe the order (directing 
mutation to be effected) in the breach; in other words, whether there was 
a continuing wilful breach of the order of the Single Judge dated 5th March, 
2009, amounting to civil contempt. These being preliminary legal issues are 
proposed to be dealt with at the outset. Needless to observe, hardly any 
other issue would survive for decision should any of these issues be 
answered in favour of the appellant and against the first respondent. 
9. 
We are not too inclined to examine the contention raised on behalf of the 
appellant that he was not extended reasonable and adequate opportunity 
of hearing, once the Division Bench (review) allowed the review petitions 
and proceeded to reverse the decision of the Division Bench (original) on 
merits. There are other formidable grounds of challenge, which would 
necessarily fall for our examination and succeeding on one of such grounds 
would render the contention raised redundant.  
10. 
The Division Bench (review) extensively discussed the grounds which need 
to exist so as to validate the invocation and exercise of the Court’s power 
of review.  In the impugned order, it held that the State suppressed certain 
title documents, which were for the first time produced before the Court by 
the first respondent as additional documents. The additional documents 
constituted, inter alia, an order of the Board of Revenue, Andhra Pradesh 
dated 19th November, 1959, which confirmed that the subject land is private 
land and not inam or Government land. The first respondent justified the 

 
14
production of these documents on the ground that access to such 
documents was obtained only after the Division Bench (original) had 
rendered the judgment and order dated 16th August, 2018. It was argued 
that if the Division Bench (original) had the benefit of examination of such 
additional documents, it would not have set aside the order dated 04th 
October, 2017 passed on the contempt petition. The Division Bench (review) 
held that since the first respondent had discovered new evidence which was 
unavailable at the earlier stage of proceedings, the threshold for 
maintainability of a review petition was satisfied. 
11. 
While proceeding to determine the correctness of the impugned order vis-
à-vis the exercise of review jurisdiction, we ought to remind ourselves of 
certain cardinal principles. The exercise of review jurisdiction is not an 
inherent power given to the court; the power to review has to be specifically 
conferred by law. In civil proceedings, review jurisdiction is governed by 
section 114 read in conjunction with order XLVII of the CPC and the court 
has to be certain that the elements prescribed therein are satisfied before 
exercising such power. This Court in Kamlesh Verma v. Mayawati19 has 
succinctly observed that: 
“19. Review proceedings are not by way of an appeal and have to be 
strictly confined to the scope and ambit of Order 47 Rule 1 CPC.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          (emphasis ours) 
12. That the provisions contained in section 114 and Order XLVII of the CPC 
relating to review of an order or decree are mandatory in nature and any 
 
19 (2013) 8 SCC 320 

 
15
petition for review not satisfying the rigours therein cannot be entertained 
ex debito justitiae, by a court of law, is trite. 
13. There is a plethora of decisions analysing the statutory provisions governing 
the exercise of review jurisdiction; however, we would be referring to a few 
of them for the purpose of the present exercise. Suffice it to note that 
despite legal proceedings having commenced with institution of the civil suit 
as far back as in 1953, the present controversy has, as its source, a writ 
petition between the first respondent and the Tahsildar preferred in 2009. 
Although the explanation to section 141 of the CPC makes it clear that 
provisions of the CPC would not apply to proceedings under Article 226 of 
the Constitution, there is authority in abundance that the principles flowing 
from the CPC may safely be taken as a guide to decide writ proceedings but 
to the extent the same can be made applicable.  
14. To put it plainly, Order XLVII Rule 1 of the CPC provides three grounds for 
review: 
1) discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the 
exercise of due diligence was not within the applicant’s knowledge 
or could not be produced by the applicant at the time when the 
decree was passed, or order made; or  
2) mistake or error apparent on the face of the record; or  
3) for any other sufficient reason, which must be analogous to either of 
the aforesaid grounds. 

 
16
15. In Moran Mar Basselios Catholicos and another v. Most Rev. Mar 
Paulose Athanasius20,  this Court approved the view that the third ground 
– “any other sufficient cause” must mean a reason sufficient on grounds, at 
least analogous to the first two grounds. The same view has been reiterated 
in a recent decision of this Court in State (NCT of Delhi) v. K.L. Rathi 
Steels Ltd.21. This Court affirmed that the scope of the third ground had to 
be narrowly construed so as to not traverse beyond the orbit of the first two 
grounds.   
16. Since the Division Bench (review) invoked the first clause, we hasten to 
emphasize that an applicant seeking review on the basis of discovery of new 
evidence has to demonstrate: first, that there has been discovery of new 
evidence, of which he had no prior knowledge or that it could not be 
produced at the time the decree was passed or the order made despite due 
diligence; and secondly, that the new evidence is material to the 
order/decree being reviewed in the sense that if the evidence were 
produced in court when the decree was passed or the order made, the 
decision of the court would have been otherwise. Ultimately, it is for the 
court to decide whether a review sought for by an applicant, if granted, 
would prevent abuse of the process of law and/or miscarriage of justice. 
17. When the ground for review sought is that of discovery of new evidence, 
this Court in State of West Bengal v. Kamal Sengupta22 has clarified that 
 
20 AIR 1954 SC 526 
21 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1090 
22 (2008) 8 SCC 612 

 
17
the same must be evidence which should be materially important to the 
decision taken. The following passage is instructive:  
“21. At this stage it is apposite to observe that where a review is 
sought on the ground of discovery of new matter or evidence, such 
matter or evidence must be relevant and must be of such a character 
that if the same had been produced, it might have altered the 
judgment. In other words, mere discovery of new or important matter 
or evidence is not sufficient ground for review ex debito justitiae. Not 
only this, the party seeking review has also to show that such additional 
matter or evidence was not within its knowledge and even after the 
exercise of due diligence, the same could not be produced before the 
court earlier.” 
(emphasis ours) 
 
18. In the light of the legal position crystalised by the above discussion, we 
proceed to discern the rationale of the High Court in allowing the review 
petition. 
19. The proceedings of these civil appeals, as noted, have the writ petition as 
its genesis and not the civil suit, which was decreed in 2003. It is of utmost 
importance to bear in mind that the Division Bench (review) was called upon 
to review the judgment and order dated 16th August, 2018 of the Division 
Bench (original), which allowed the contempt appeal and the letters patent 
appeal and not any other final decree or order. The Division Bench (review), 
in our opinion, has fundamentally confused both its remit and the subject 
matter of the review; whilst passing the impugned order, it has merged the 
two proceedings (the civil suit and the writ petition) into one to ostensibly 
create necessary grounds of review. The additional documents discovered 
by the first respondent could have constituted a ground to review any other 
decree/order but, most certainly, were of no consequence for the purpose 

 
18
of the review petitions, which were decided by the impugned order. This, 
we hold, for the reasons that follow. 
20. This Court in Aribam Tuleshwar Sharma v. Aribam Pishak Sharma23 
while clarifying the ambit of the review jurisdiction has categorically held 
that a decision cannot be reviewed merely because it is erroneous on 
merits, since that would fall squarely within the province of a court 
exercising appellate jurisdiction. 
21. In Meera Bhanja v. Nirmala Kumari Choudhury24, this Court affirmed 
the ratio in Aribam Tuleshwar Sharma (supra) and further expounded 
that review proceedings were not by way of an appeal, and would have to 
be strictly confined to the scope and ambit of Order XLVII, Rule 1 of the 
CPC. It was further held that an error apparent on the face of the record 
must be such an error which must strike one on mere looking of the record, 
obviating the need for long-drawn reasonings on two possible opinions. This 
Court in Haridas Das v. Usha Rani Banik25, while reiterating the decisions 
in Meera Bhanja (supra) and Aribam Tuleshwar Sharma (supra), drew 
out the narrow contours within which review jurisdiction of this Court had 
to be exercised and held that Order XLVII, CPC does not allow for the 
rehearing of a dispute merely because a party had not highlighted all 
aspects of the case.  
22. The Division Bench (original) had held that the decree was not enforceable 
against the State; this, because the State, though a party defendant 
 
23 (1979) 4 SCC 389 
24 (1995) 1 SCC 170 
25 (2006) 4 SCC 78 

 
19
originally, did not suffer any decree owing to the dismissal of the civil suit 
against the State vide judgment and preliminary decree dated 06th April, 
1959. The said Division Bench in its judgment and order dated 16th August, 
2018 categorically noted that the first respondent committed fraud on the 
Court by obtaining a direction of mutation in the writ proceedings on the 
strength of a final decree rendered in a suit which had been given up against 
the State Government. The Division Bench (original) set aside the direction 
to mutate the name of the first respondent in the revenue records on three 
technical but fundamental grounds – first, that a non-party to a suit could 
not be bound by the decree; secondly, the decision on the title of the subject 
land not having been rendered upon hearing the version of the State, no 
direction of the nature made by the Single Judge could have validly been 
made; and thirdly, that the contempt petition was barred by limitation.  
23. In the light of the present controversy, the additional documents purporting 
to validate the title of the subject land [even if obtained by the first 
respondent belatedly and not in course of the proceedings before the 
Division Bench (original) and howsoever clinching the same might appear 
to be for the lis to be decided in his favour] can neither be considered 
material nor relevant to the central issue, i.e., contempt, if any, of the 
direction contained in the order of disposal of the writ proceedings.  
24. As noted earlier, the Division Bench (original) inter alia proceeded to 
dismiss the contempt petition as time-barred. We propose to consider the 
averments made in the contempt petition in greater depth a little later. 
However, what stands out is that a decision having been rendered by the 
Division Bench (original) upon consideration of the pleadings in the 

 
20
contempt petition vis-à-vis the law relating to limitation contained in the 
Act, such decision was not open to a review on the basis of alleged 
discovery of new evidence since the same did not have any relation with 
the finding that the contempt petition was time-barred. The first 
respondent failed to present any new evidence countering the reasoning of 
the Division Bench (original) that a time-barred contempt petition had been 
entertained by the Single Judge; furthermore, the title documents or orders 
of the Board of Revenue had no bearing on either the factum of the State 
not being a party to the civil suit, or on the question of limitation. Quite 
apart the ground of discovery of new evidence, the decision of the Division 
Bench (original) which was rendered upon an exhaustive analysis of the 
materials on record including the pleadings did not suffer from any error, 
much less any error apparent on the face of the record, warranting a 
review. Even if any error were present, such error could have been rectified 
only in exercise of the court’s appellate jurisdiction and not the review 
jurisdiction.  
25. The grounds of review that the first respondent had urged in the review 
petition have been meticulously looked into by us. They numbered in 
excess of 90 (ninety). The general impression is that more the number of 
grounds, less the likelihood of existence of a case for review. To succeed 
in a motion for review, viewed through the prism of ‘error apparent on the 
face of the record’, it does neither require long-drawn arguments nor an 
elaborate process of reasoning as these may be required, in a given case, 
when exercising the power of merit review. An error apparent on the face 
of the record has to be self-evident. Where, conceivably, two opinions can 

 
21
be formed in a given set of facts and circumstances and one opinion of the 
two has been formed, there is no error apparent on the face of the record. 
However, disabusing our mind of such an impression, we have looked into 
each of the grounds. Not a single ground deserved consideration to embark 
on an exercise to review the judgment and order dated 16th August, 2018 
even on the basis of discovery of new and important matter or evidence. 
We are constrained to observe that there has been usurpation of the power 
of review by the Division Bench (review) to overturn a well-considered and 
well-crafted decision of the Division Bench (original).     
26. No other legitimate cause for review having been made out in the review 
petition before the High Court as well as before us by the first respondent 
and bearing in mind the above, we unhesitatingly hold that there was no 
valid, legal and/or proper ground for the Division Bench (review) to reverse 
the judgment and order under review on the basis of the additional 
documents brought on record by the first respondent during the review 
proceedings.  
27. The first legal issue is, thus, answered in favour of the appellant. 
28. Having held that the review jurisdiction was not available to be exercised 
by the Division Bench (review), reversal of the impugned order is the 
solitary conceivable outcome. However, the importance of the second legal 
issue cannot be over-emphasized. The purpose of the law of contempt is to 
secure public respect and confidence in the judicial process. We have found 
the law on the question of applicability of the principle of “continuous 
wrong/breach/offence” for the purpose of section 20 of the Act not too 

 
22
certain; hence, we feel it expedient to give a brief overview of the law of 
contempt and how such law has evolved and developed as well as chart out 
the course of action to be followed by the high courts while exercising 
contempt jurisdiction not only generally but also on the face of an objection 
as to maintainability of a time-barred action initiated by a party for civil 
contempt.  
29. The power of the Supreme Court and a high court to punish for breach of 
its orders is expressly recognised by Articles 129 and 215 of the 
Constitution, respectively. It is an inherent power, distinguishable from a 
power derived from a statute. In R.L. Kapur v. State of Tamil Nadu26, 
this Court pointed out that the inherent power or jurisdiction was neither 
derived from the statutory law relating to contempt nor did such statutory 
law affect such inherent power or confer a new power or jurisdiction. In 
view of the recognition of such power by the Constitution itself, they partake 
the character of constitutional power and consequentially no law made by 
legislature could take away the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court 
and the high courts. 
30. In Aligarh Municipal Board v. Ekka Tonga Mazdoor Union27, this Court 
observed as follows: 
“5. *** Contempt proceeding against a person who has failed to 
comply with the Court’s order serves a dual purpose: (1) vindication 
of the public interest by punishment of contemptuous conduct and 
(2) coercion to compel the contemner to do what the law requires of 
him. The sentence imposed should effectuate both these purposes. 
***” 
 
26 (1972) 1 SCC 651 
27 (1970) 3 SCC 98 

 
23
31. This Court in Jhareswar Prasad Paul v. Tarak Nath Ganguly28, held 
that: 
11.*** It is to be kept in mind that the court exercising the 
jurisdiction to punish for contempt does not function as an original 
or appellate court for determination of the disputes between the 
parties. The contempt jurisdiction should be confined to the question 
whether there has been any deliberate disobedience of the order of 
the court and if the conduct of the party who is alleged to have 
committed such disobedience is contumacious. The court exercising 
contempt jurisdiction is not entitled to enter into questions which 
have not been dealt with and decided in the judgment or order, 
violation of which is alleged by the applicant. The court has to 
consider the direction issued in the judgment or order and not to 
consider the question as to what the judgment or order should have 
contained. At the cost of repetition, be it stated here that the court 
exercising contempt jurisdiction is primarily concerned with the 
question of contumacious conduct of the party, which is alleged to 
have committed deliberate default in complying with the directions 
in the judgment or order. 
(emphasis ours) 
 
32. In Re: Vinay Chandra Mishra29 is a decision where, referring to Article 
129, this Court observed that the jurisdiction to take cognizance of the 
contempt as well as to award punishment for it being constitutional, it 
cannot be controlled by any statute. 
33. Despite such a power being conferred by the Constitution, what would 
constitute contempt - civil and criminal - and also, what would be the 
procedure for initiating action and how to punish for contempt is provided 
by the Act. The source of power to enact the Act can be traced to Items 77 
and 14 of Lists I and III, respectively, of the Seventh Schedule appended to 
the Constitution. 
 
28 (2002) 5 SCC 352 
29 (1995) 2 SCC 584 

 
24
34. In L.P. Misra (Dr.) v. State of U.P.30, this Court set aside the order under 
challenge (punishing the appellant for criminal contempt committed on the 
face of the court but without extending to him any opportunity to show 
cause). In the process, a three-Judge Bench of this Court had the occasion 
to observe that it “is true that the High Court can invoke powers and 
jurisdiction vested in it under Article 215 of the Constitution of India but 
such a jurisdiction has to be exercised in accordance with the procedure 
prescribed by law”.  
35. In Pallav Sheth (supra) too, a three-Judge Bench of this Court noticed L.P. 
Misra (Dr.) (supra) and reiterated that “the power under Article 129 and/or 
Article 215 should be exercised in consonance with the provisions of a 
validly enacted law”.  
36. Yet again, this Court in Ashok Kumar Aggarwal v. Neeraj Kumar31 
overturned the decision of the high court under challenge which passed an 
order in contempt proceedings solely on merits disregarding the procedural 
objections (including that of limitation). This Court reiterated that high 
courts were obliged to examine whether procedure prescribed by law had 
been complied with when a petition under Article 215 was presented before 
the court. Such examination would also include a scrutiny of whether 
limitation, as prescribed by section 20, was attracted to the facts of the 
case.   
37. The ‘procedure prescribed by law’ or a ‘validly enacted law’ referred to in 
the aforementioned decisions is the one the Act envisages. Proceedings for 
 
30 (1998) 7 SCC 379 
31 (2014) 3 SCC 602 

 
25
contempt being quasi-criminal in nature, no punishment can be ordered by 
any court without strictly adhering to the stringent provisions therefor, 
however needless they may appear to be when a contempt is committed on 
the face of a high court and such court has no two opinions that following 
the course prescribed by the Act to punish for contempt would eventually 
turn out to be a useless formality. 
38. Much water has flown under the bridge since the aforesaid decided cases. 
Having regard to some extreme cases of exercise of contempt power 
increasing over a period of time, a three-Judge Bench of this Court in State 
of Uttar Pradesh v. Association of Retired Supreme Court & High 
Court Judges32 speaking through the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India had 
to devise a Standard Operating Procedure33 for being followed by the high 
courts while summoning public officials, alleged to be in contempt, to be 
physically present in court. Deeply concerned with the lack of self-restraint 
shown in the exercise of contempt power in certain cases, the Bench 
directed framing of rules by all the high courts in terms of the SoP, as 
devised. This Court noted in such decision that mandating the physical 
presence of a contemnor, specifically in the case of public officials, comes 
at a cost to the public interest and efficiency of public administration, and 
thus ought not to be resorted to at the drop of a hat.  
39. We wish to add to this by way of clarification that concomitantly, there lies 
a bounden duty on the contemnor to comply with the court’s order without 
any delay, in a case where legal recourse has not been taken to set 
 
32 (2024) 3 SCC 1 
33 SoP, hereafter 

 
26
aside/review/vacate the order which is alleged to have been breached. A 
public official against whom an allegation of contempt is levelled, upon 
being noticed either by issuance of a rule for contempt or by court notice, 
must work out his remedy in accordance with law if he wishes not to comply 
with the court’s direction. He must not wait for compliance to be secured 
only upon all the phased steps to be taken by the high courts in terms of 
paragraph 44 of State of Uttar Pradesh (supra), forming part of the SoP, 
are complete. A public official who is arrayed as a contemnor is as much 
bound by an unchallenged order of a high court as a private party is, and 
cannot consider himself not bound by the law by virtue of the office he 
holds. Being under a duty to comply with a final and binding order of a high 
court, the contemnor ought not to drag his feet in doing the same until the 
coercive measure of summoning the contemnor to be physically present is 
resorted to by the high court. We are reminded at this stage of what this 
Court in Aligarh Municipal Board (supra) said: 
“5. *** It must also be clearly under stood in this connection that to 
employ a subterfuge to avoid compliance of a court’s order about 
which there could be no reasonable doubt may in certain 
circumstances aggravate the contempt.***” 
(emphasis ours) 
Deliberate delay in effecting compliance with an order could be seen as 
aggravating the contempt resulting in a degree of punishment higher than 
what the court earlier thought of imposing. Be that as it may. 
40. Axiomatically, not only any order imposing punishment for proved contempt 
must be in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Act but 
initiation of the proceedings too has to be in accordance with the three 
modes that the Act envisages. One of these is by presentation of a petition 

 
27
for civil contempt before a high court complaining of wilful and deliberate 
refusal by a person obliged to comply with its final and binding order – a 
situation with which we are concerned. 
41. In Pallav Sheth (supra), a three-Judge Bench of this Court had the 
occasion to consider whether the view taken by a two-Judge Bench in Om 
Prakash Jaiswal v. D.K. Mittal34 was correct. In Om Prakash Jaiswal 
(supra), the Bench had taken the view that filing of an application or petition 
for initiating proceedings for contempt does not amount to initiation of 
proceedings by the court and initiation under section 20 of the Act can only 
be said to have occurred when the court forms the prima facie opinion that 
contempt has been committed and issues notice to the contemner to show 
cause why he should not be punished. Such view did not find favour with 
the Bench in Pallav Sheth (supra). It was observed that a provision like 
section 20 has to be interpreted having regard to the realities of the 
situation, and that, too narrow a view of section 20 had been taken in Om 
Prakash Jaiswal (supra) which did not seem to be warranted; the view 
taken would not only cause hardship but would perpetrate injustice. 
Relevant passages from the decision in Pallav Sheth (supra) read thus: 
“39. … When the judicial procedure requires an application being filed 
either before the court or consent being sought by a person from the 
Advocate-General or a Law Officer, it must logically follow that 
proceedings for contempt are initiated when the applications are made. 
40. In other words, the beginning of the action prescribed for taking 
cognizance of criminal contempt under Section 15 would be initiating 
the proceedings for contempt and the subsequent action taken thereon 
of refusal or issuance of a notice or punishment thereafter are only 
steps following or succeeding such initiation. Similarly, in the case of a 
civil contempt, filing of an application drawing the attention of the court 
 
34 (2000) 3 SCC 171 

 
28
is necessary for further steps to be taken under the Contempt of Courts 
Act, 1971. 
41. One of the principles underlying the law of limitation is that a 
litigant must act diligently and not sleep over its rights. In this 
background such an interpretation should be placed on Section 20 of 
the Act which does not lead to an anomalous result causing hardship 
to the party who may have acted with utmost diligence and because of 
the inaction on the part of the court, a contemner cannot be made to 
suffer. Interpreting the section in the manner canvassed by Mr 
Venugopal would mean that the court would be rendered powerless to 
punish even though it may be fully convinced of the blatant nature of 
the contempt having been committed and the same having been 
brought to the notice of the court soon after the committal of the 
contempt and within the period of one year of the same. Section 20, 
therefore, has to be construed in a manner which would avoid such an 
anomaly and hardship both as regards the litigants as also by placing 
a pointless fetter on the part of the court to punish for its contempt. 
An interpretation of Section 20, like the one canvassed by the 
appellant, which would render the constitutional power of the courts 
nugatory in taking action for contempt even in cases of gross contempt, 
successfully hidden for a period of one year by practising fraud by the 
contemner would render Section 20 as liable to be regarded as being 
in conflict with Article 129 and/or Article 215. Such a rigid 
interpretation must therefore be avoided. 
42. … if the filing of an application before the subordinate court or the 
High Court, making of a reference by a subordinate court on its own 
motion or the filing of an application before an Advocate-General for 
permission to initiate contempt proceedings is regarded as initiation by 
the court for the purposes of Section 20, then such an interpretation 
would not impinge on or stultify the power of the High Court to punish 
for contempt which power, dehors the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 is 
enshrined in Article 215 of the Constitution. Such an interpretation of 
Section 20 would harmonise that section with the powers of the courts 
to punish for contempt which is recognised by the Constitution. 
43. *** 
44. Action for contempt is divisible into two categories, namely, that 
initiated suo motu by the court and that instituted otherwise than on 
the court's own motion. The mode of initiation in each case would 
necessarily be different. While in the case of suo motu proceedings, it 
is the court itself which must initiate by issuing a notice, in the other 
cases initiation can only be by a party filing an application. In our 
opinion, therefore, the proper construction to be placed on Section 20 
must be that action must be initiated, either by filing of an application 
or by the court issuing notice suo motu, within a period of one year 
from the date on which the contempt is alleged to have been 
committed.” 
 

 
29
42. Interpretation of section 20 of the Act, which formed the crux of the 
discussion in Pallav Sheth (supra), has the marginal note ‘limitation for 
actions for contempt’. Section 20 ordains that: 
“20. No court shall initiate any proceedings of contempt, either on its 
own motion or otherwise, after the expiry of a period of one year from 
the date on which the contempt is alleged to have been committed.” 
   
43. The vires of section 20 of the Act has been upheld by Division Benches of 
the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, High Court of Karnataka and the High 
Court at Calcutta in Advocate General v. A.V. Koteswara Rao35, High 
Court of Karnataka v. Y.K. Subanna36 and Arthur Branwell & 
Company Ltd. v. Indian Fibres Ltd.37, respectively.  
44. In upholding the vires of section 20, the High Court of Karnataka in Y.K. 
Subbanna (supra) traced the legislative history of section 20 of the Act. It 
is considered profitable to read the relevant passages therefrom, which are 
as follows: 
“79. The Act for the first time, by enacting Section 20, introduced a 
period of limitation. The Sanyal Committee examined the question 
as to whether any period of limitation should be prescribed in respect 
of contempt proceedings and observed in Paragraph 8 of Chapter X 
of its Report, as under: 
‘8. Limitation:— Contempt procedures are of a summary 
nature and promptness is the essence of such proceedings. 
Any delay should be fatal to such proceedings, though there 
may be exceptional cases when the delay may have to be over 
looked but such cases should be very rare indeed. From this 
point of view we considered whether it is either necessary or 
desirable to specify a period of limitation in respect of 
contempt proceedings. The period, if it is to be fixed by 
statute, will necessarily have to be very short and provision 
may also have to be made for condoning delay in suitable 
cases. We feel that on the whole instead of making any hard 
 
35 1984 Cri. LJ. 1171 
36 1989 SCC OnLine Kar 404 
37 1993 (2) CLJ 182 

 
30
and fast rule on the subject the matter may continue to be 
governed by the discretion of the Courts as hithertofore.’ 
80. The Joint Select Committee of Parliament on Contempt of Court 
(Bhargava Committee) after examining the Report of Sanyal 
Committee on the question of limitation, thought that the contempt 
procedures by their very nature should be initiated and dealt with as 
early as possible and considered it necessary and desirable that 
period of limitation should be specified in respect of actions for 
contempt and, therefore, laid down in the new clause (Clause 20) a 
period of one year at the expiration of which no proceedings for 
contempt should be initiated. The reasons given by the Joint Select 
Committee for introducing Clause 20 in the Bill, as reported by it are 
these: 
‘The Committee are of the opinion that contempt procedures 
by their very nature should be initiated and dealt with as early 
as possible. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that 
in some cases contempt proceedings have been initiated long 
after the alleged contempt had taken place. The Committee 
therefore consider it necessary and desirable that a period of 
limitation should be specified in respect of actions for 
contempt and have accordingly laid down in the new clause a 
period of one year at the expiration of which no proceedings 
for contempt should be initiated.’ 
81. This is the legislative history of Section 20.” 
 
45. We can safely affirm, drawing from our joint experience on the Bench, that 
in the vast majority of cases seeking invocation of the provisions of the Act 
for an alleged civil contempt, institution of proceedings is through a petition 
or an application containing information made available by a party alleging 
that the facts disclosed by him do constitute contempt of court and, thus, 
provide the court the premise for initiating proceedings to commit for 
contempt. The role of such a party, who brings a petition for contempt and 
activates the court’s machinery, is merely that of an informer. Despite such 
a party figuring in the memo of parties as a petitioner, the matter relating 
to entertainment of his petition and the punishment to be imposed, in case 
of a proved contempt, relate to the exclusive jurisdiction and authority of 
the high courts to punish for contempt and is substantially a matter between 

 
31
the court and the alleged contemnor. Whether or not to take the assistance 
of the petitioning informer is a question which invariably must be left 
entirely to the discretion of the court seized of the proceedings.  
46. In exercising its jurisdiction to punish for contempt, the courts in India do 
keep in mind the benefit that could accrue to the petitioning informer (if he 
is a party to the parent proceedings out of which the contempt arises) upon 
implementation of the order alleged to have been wilfully disobeyed; but 
more than anything else, the endeavour is to uphold the majesty, dignity 
and prestige of the courts. Indubitably, the jurisdiction to punish for 
contempt is exercised when the alleged contemnor, by his action(s), shows 
extreme lack of solicitude in complying with an order of court, which has 
attained finality and is binding on him. So long a final order passed by a 
court is not set aside in appeal/revision or recalled in exercise of review 
jurisdiction or an interim order is vacated at a subsequent stage of the 
proceedings, it continues to bind the parties to the proceedings and it would 
amount to subversion of the rule of law if any party, in breach, were 
encouraged to continue such breach. An order of a court has to be complied 
with and it would not amount to a valid defence that in the contemnor’s own 
understanding or because of legal opinion tendered to him, the order did 
not warrant compliance being erroneous. This Court in Commissioner, 
Karnataka Housing Board v. C. Muddaiah38 has held that once a 
direction has been issued by a competent court, it has to be obeyed and 
implemented without reservation; the order of the court cannot be rendered 
 
38 (2007) 7 SCC 689 

 
32
ineffective on the specious plea that no such direction could have been given 
by the court. A party, though perceiving an order to be erroneous, allowing 
it to attain finality by reason of acceptance thereof cannot escape the 
rigours of compliance. He has to pursue his appellate or other remedy to 
escape the consequences that can visit him, should the high court hold him 
guilty of contempt. Such a compliance is insisted upon for securing the 
majesty, dignity and prestige of the court. 
47. Insofar as an interim order is concerned, despite an element of contempt 
being involved, if a defence appearing to be valid in law and having 
substance is raised before the high court by a party in default which shakes 
the very foundation of the order alleged to have been violated and upon the 
high court reaching a satisfaction of such a defence being valid to the extent 
that the subject order ought not to have been passed, it would always be 
open to the said court, depending on the nature of order and the breach 
alleged, to first secure compliance of the order by allowing the contemnor 
to purge the contempt without prejudice to his rights and contentions and, 
after such compliance, to revisit the order as per law and the circumstances 
present before it and then pass appropriate orders. There could be 
exceptional situations where the consequences of complying with an interim 
order, apparently erroneous or without jurisdiction and which has attained 
finality, could bring about irretrievable consequences. In such a case, where 
the high court is satisfied that securing compliance of its order would cause 
more injustice than justice, notwithstanding the finality attached to such 
order, the high court’s authority ought to be conceded to pass such order 
as the justice of the case before it demands. 

 
33
48. Lord Denning in Hadkinson v.  Hadkinson39 had observed: 
“The court would only refuse to hear a party to a cause when the 
contempt impeded the course of justice by making it more difficult 
for the court to ascertain the truth or to enforce its orders and there 
was no other effective means of securing his compliance. The court 
might then in its discretion refuse to hear him until the impediment 
was removed or good reason was shown why it should not be 
removed.” 
 
 
49. This decision was followed by the House of Lords in X Ltd. v. Morgan-
Grampian Ltd.40 which also observes that the court will proceed with the 
contempt where a contemnor not only fails willfully and contumaciously to 
comply with an order of the court, albeit makes it clear that he will continue 
to defy court’s authority. The courts in such circumstances may decline to 
entertain an appeal or hear a party unless they purge themselves. 
50. It will be appropriate here to also quote from Halsbury’s Laws of 
England41, which states: 
“Thus a party in contempt may apply to purge the contempt, he may 
apply with a view to setting aside the order in which his contempt is 
founded, and in some cases he may be entitled to defend himself 
when some application is subsequently made against him. Even the 
plaintiff in contempt has been allowed to prosecute his action, when 
the defendant had not applied to stay the proceedings. Probably the 
true rule is that the party in contempt will not be heard only on those 
occasions when his contempt impedes the course of justice and 
there is no other effective way of enforcing his obedience.” 
 
51. This Court In the Matter of Anil Panjwani42 has observed that it is no 
rule of law and certainly not a statutory rule that a contemnor cannot be 
heard unless the contempt is purged. It has only developed as a rule of 
practice for protecting the sanctity of the court proceedings and the dignity 
 
39 1952 (2) All ER 567 
40 1990 (2) All ER 1 
41 Volume 8, Third Edition 
42 (2003) 7 SCC 375 

 
34
of the court that a person who is prima facie guilty of having attacked the 
court may be deprived of the right of participation in the hearing lest he 
should misuse such an opportunity unless he has agreed to disarm himself. 
The court would not be unjust in denying hearing to one who has shown his 
lack of worth by attacking the court unless he has agreed to beat a retreat 
and the court is convinced of the genuineness of such retreating. It lies 
within the discretion of the court to tell the contemner charged with having 
committed contempt of court that he will not be heard and would not be 
allowed participation in the court proceedings unless the contempt is 
purged. This is a flexible rule of practice and not a rigid rule of law. The 
discretion shall be guided and governed by the facts and circumstances of 
a given case. Where the court may form an opinion that the contemner is 
persisting in his behaviour and initiation of proceedings in contempt has had 
no deterrent or reformatory effect on him and/or if the disobedience by the 
contemner is such that so long as it continues it impedes the course of 
justice and/or renders it impossible for the court to enforce its orders in 
respect of him, the court would be justified in withholding access to the 
court or participation in the proceedings from the contemner. On the other 
hand, the court may form an opinion that the contempt is not so gross as 
to invite an extreme step as above, or where the interests of justice would 
be better served by concluding the main proceedings instead of diverting to 
and giving priority to hearing in contempt proceeding the court may proceed 
to hear both the matters simultaneously or independently of each other or 
in such as it may deem proper.   

 
35
52. Therefore, it would be correct to state that the court’s power when dealing 
with the question of contempt, in a sense, is discretionary. It cannot be 
gainsaid that even in cases where disobedience of the order of the court is 
not disputed, the court may also accept a defence, if raised, of impossibility 
to comply with an order and come to the conclusion that since it is 
impossible to enforce its order, action to punish may not be initiated. That 
apart, refusal may be justified by grave concerns of public policy. Much 
would depend on the facts and circumstances of the case, the nature of the 
contempt under enquiry, etc., which would enable the court to exercise its 
discretion either way. However, to demonstrate his bona fide, the contemnor 
ought to bring any valid defence for his disability to comply with the court’s 
direction to its notice without wasting any time. Whatever be the position 
before it, nothing stands in the way of the high court from passing an order 
to ensure that nothing impedes the course of justice. 
53. Reverting to the point of limitation, even in case of a petition disclosing facts 
constituting contempt, which is civil in nature, the petitioner cannot choose 
a time convenient to him to approach the Court. The statute refers to a 
specific time limit of one year from the date of alleged contempt for 
proceedings to be initiated; meaning thereby, as laid down in Pallav Sheth 
(supra), that the action should be brought within a year, and not beyond, 
irrespective of when the proceedings to punish for contempt are actually 
initiated by the high court.  
54. An action for contempt - though instituted through a petition or an 
application – is essentially in the nature of original proceedings, as held by 
this Court in High Court of Judicature at Allahabad v. Raj Kishore 

 
36
Yadav43; a fortiori, a prayer for condonation of delay in presenting the 
petition/application alleging contempt would not be maintainable. The 
express negative phraseology used in section 20 of the Act, as a legislative 
injunction, places a fetter on the court’s power to initiate proceedings for 
contempt unless the petition/application is presented within the time-frame 
stipulated therein. However, since section 20 also uses the expression “date 
on which the contempt is alleged to be committed” as the starting point of 
the period of one year to be counted for reckoning whether the 
petition/application has been presented within the stipulated period, the 
high courts ought to be wary of crafty and skilful drafting of 
petitions/applications to overcome the delay in presentation thereof.  
55. The Act, which is a special law on the subject of contempt, does not 
expressly or by necessary implication exclude the applicability of sections 4 
to 24 of the 1963 Act. This Court, in State of West Bengal v. Kartick 
Chandra Das44 has held that in terms of section 29(2) of the 1963 Act, 
provisions contained in section 5 of the 1963 Act can be called in aid by a 
party who seeks condonation of delay in presentation of an appeal under 
section 19(1) of the Act. Similarly, in exceptional cases, provisions like 
sections 12, 14, 17, 22, etc. of the 1963 Act could be invoked to seek 
exemption from the law of limitation, which is distinct from condonation of 
delay. In an appropriate case, it would be open to the party who has not 
petitioned the court within the period of one year, as stipulated in section 
20 of the Act, to seek exemption from the law of limitation in line with the 
 
43 (1997) 3 SCC 11 
44 (1996) 5 SCC 342 

 
37
principle flowing from Order VII Rule 6, CPC45, by showing the ground upon 
which such exemption is claimed. We have no hesitation to hold that in a 
case where a civil contempt is alleged by a party by referring to a 
“continuing wrong/breach/offence” and such allegation prima facie satisfies 
the court, the action for contempt is not liable to be nipped in the bud 
merely on the ground of it being presented beyond the period of one year 
as in section 20 of the Act. Applicability of the principle underlying Order 
VII Rule 6, CPC for granting exemption would only be just and proper having 
regard to the object and purpose for which the jurisdiction to punish for 
contempt is exercised by the courts if, of course, the court is satisfied that 
benefit of such an exemption ought to be extended in a given case. At the 
same time, it must be remembered that the court cannot grant exemption 
from limitation on equitable consideration or on the ground of hardship. 
Inspiration in this regard may be drawn from the decision of the Privy 
Council in Maqbul Ahmad v. Onkar Pratap Narain Singh46. However, as 
observed earlier, contempt proceedings being in the nature of original 
proceedings, akin to a suit, application of section 5 of the 1963 Act to seek 
condonation of delay is excluded. 
56. A caveat needs to be added here. For a “continuing wrong/breach/offence” 
to be accepted as a ground for seeking exemption in an action for contempt, 
 
45 Grounds of exemption from limitation law. - Where the suit is instituted after the expiration 
of the period prescribed by the law limitation, the plaint shall show the ground upon which 
exemption from such law is claimed: 
Provided that the Court may permit the plaintiff to claim exemption from the law of limitation on 
any ground not set out in the plaint, if such ground is not inconsistent with the grounds set out 
in the plaint.
 
46 AIR 1935 PC 85 

 
38
the party petitioning the court not only has to comprehend what the phrase 
actually means but would also be required to show, from his pleadings, the 
ground resting whereon he seeks exemption from limitation. Should the 
party fail to satisfy the court, the petition is liable to outright rejection. Also, 
the court has to be vigilant. Stale claims of contempt, camouflaged as a 
“continuing wrong/breach/offence” ought not to be entertained, having 
regard to the legislative intent for introducing section 20 in the Act which 
has been noticed above. Contempt being a personal action directed against 
a particular person alleged to be in contempt, much of the efficacy of the 
proceedings would be lost by passage of time. Even if a contempt is 
committed and within the stipulated period of one year from such 
commission no action is brought before the court on the specious ground 
that the contempt has been continuing, no party should be encouraged to 
wait indefinitely to choose his own time to approach the court. If the bogey 
of “continuing wrong/breach/offence” is mechanically accepted whenever it 
is advanced as a ground for claiming exemption, an applicant may knock 
the doors of the Court any time suiting his convenience. If an action for 
contempt is brought belatedly, say any time after the initial period of 
limitation and years after the date of first breach, it is the prestige of the 
court that would seem to become a casualty during the period the breach 
continues. Once the dignity of the court is lowered in the eyes of the public 
by non-compliance of its order, it would be farcical to suddenly initiate 
proceedings after long lapse of time. Not only would the delay militate 
against the legislative intent of inserting section 20 in the Act (a provision 
not found in the predecessor statutes of the Act) rendering the section a 

 
39
dead letter, the damage caused to the majesty of the court could be 
rendered irreparable. It is, therefore, the essence of justice that in a case 
of proved civil contempt, the contemnor is suitably dealt with, including 
imposition of punishment, and direction as well is issued to bridge the 
breach. 
57. Having thus held, we move on to examine the objection as to maintainability 
of the contempt action initiated by the first respondent upon the inaction of 
the appellant in effecting mutation of the decretal property in his favour in 
the revenue records and also as to whether a case of “continuing 
wrong/breach/ offence” was at all shown by the first respondent in the 
contempt petition. 
58. To recapitulate, the Single Judge had allowed the writ petition of the first 
respondent on 05th March, 2009 with a direction to the Tahsildar to effect 
the necessary mutation in the revenue records in accordance with the final 
decree dated 26th December, 2003. Pertinently, the direction issued to the 
appellant vide the order of disposal of the writ petition did not specifically 
mention a time-frame within which the order was to be implemented.  
59. In view of the absence of a time-frame in the order, much would turn on 
rule 21 of the Writ Rules47. Having read the relevant rule, we presume that 
the learned Single Judge was aware of such a rule and, hence, refrained 
from stipulating a time-frame for compliance of the Court’s order. 
Irrespective of any time-frame fixed in an order, the direction contained 
 
47 Unless the court otherwise directs, the direction or order made or the rule absolute issued 
by the High Court shall be implemented within two months of the receipt of the order. 

 
40
therein would require compliance within the period stipulated in rule 21 if 
the person responsible for such compliance has notice of it even aliunde. 
60. The question of the contempt petition being barred by limitation has to be 
decided keeping section 20 of the Act and rule 21 of the Writ Rules in mind 
together with what constitutes a “continuing wrong/breach/offence”. 
Undisputedly, the contempt petition was instituted on 04th October, 2014, 
more than 5 (five) years after the order (of which contempt had been 
alleged) was passed, i.e., on 05th March, 2009. Notably, the appellant had 
not carried the order dated 05th March, 2009 (disposing of the writ petition) 
in appeal. Therefore, question of operation of the said order remaining 
suspended did not arise and the principle embodied in section 15 of the 
1963 Act was not attracted. The said order required the appellant to effect 
mutation in terms of the decree of the civil court. No time-frame for 
compliance of such order having been stipulated by the Single Judge, it 
would stand to reason that the same required compliance at least by the 
end of the time-frame stipulated by rule 21.  
61. The appellant has asserted before us that the contempt action was time-
barred in view of the fact that limitation for initiation of contempt action 
commenced on 04th May, 2009, i.e., when the two-month period stipulated 
by rule 21 expired and ended on 03rd May, 2010, i.e., in accordance with 
section 20 of the Act. However, the first respondent has contended that the 
contempt petition was not barred by limitation since the act of the appellant 
in not implementing the direction for effecting mutation was in the nature 
of a continuing wrong.  

 
41
62. The date on which service of the order dated 05th March, 2009 disposing 
of the writ petition was effected on the appellant is not stated anywhere 
in the contempt petition by the first respondent. No such date is also 
reflected in the representations that the first respondent claims to have 
made on 11th May, 2009, 12th September, 2009, 22nd October, 2010, 16th 
August, 2012 and 05th February, 2014. It is also not seen from the 
appellant’s counter affidavit that he pleaded non-service of such order. We 
are, thus, inclined to the view that the appellant had notice aliunde of the 
order dated 05th March, 2009. Proceeding on the premise that the order 
must have been served immediately after the same was passed by the 
Single Judge and in the light of rule 21 of the Writ Rules, the appellant had 
2 (two) months’ time from receipt of the order dated 05th March, 2009, i.e., 
say till the end of May, 2009 to implement the direction. The appellant failed 
to effect mutation, as directed, within the aforesaid time-frame and was, 
thus, in breach of the said order dated 05th March, 2009, say from June, 
2009. There does not appear to be any explanation proffered in the 
contempt petition worthy of consideration as to why the contempt petition 
was delayed and not presented within the period of a year of commission 
of the breach when it first occurred, i.e., at least by the end of May, 2010.  
63. The learned Single Judge deciding the contempt petition, vide order dated 
04th October, 2017, was impressed by the arguments advanced by the first 
respondent and while holding that there has been a continuing wrong and 
also that the appellant is in contempt, allowed the contempt petition.  
64. The Division Bench (review) held in favour of the first respondent observing 
that the inaction of the Government officials was a continuing wrong since 

 
42
they did not outrightly refuse to implement the order, rather, till as late as 
2017, assured that they would implement it but failed to do so. 
Furthermore, what weighed with the High Court was the alleged 
misrepresentation with respect to the title of the subject land; such 
misrepresentation being in the nature of fraud, would entitle the High Court 
to recall the primary order on merits. The State authorities were held to 
have misrepresented the title of the suit land inasmuch as they took 
mutually contradictory stands, i.e., on the one hand it was argued that the 
subject land was escheated land, and on the other, it was argued, on the 
strength of revenue entries, that the subject land always belonged to the 
State. The High Court then went on to examine and interpret documents 
produced by the respondents for the first time and accorded title in favour 
of the respondents. 
65. For reasons more than one, the impugned order allowing the contempt 
petition is indefensible.  
66. First, having read the impugned order, we are quite convinced that 
submissions that were advanced before the Division Bench (review) of the 
order dated 05th March, 2009 being in the process of implementation had 
the undesirable effect of shifting the focus of the High Court from adjudging 
the maintainability of the contempt petition as on date the same was 
presented, i.e., 04th October, 2014, to the unacceptable fact of actual non-
compliance of the order of 05th March, 2009 despite indication of 
compliance. No doubt, compliance of an order of the court has to be insisted 
upon but within the four corners of the contempt petition. Non-compliance 
coupled with an assurance in court to comply, after the court has issued 

 
43
notice on the contempt petition, is not sufficient to attract the principle of 
“continuing wrong/breach/offence”. A contemnor on pain of suffering 
consequences for contempt may well give up available defences before the 
court and proceed to obey the order/direction, of which he is alleged to be 
in contempt; but if the jurisdiction to punish is otherwise barred, there is 
no law that prohibits the court from first proceeding to ascertain whether 
the jurisdiction is at all available to be exercised; and, when an objection of 
maintainability based on limitation is raised, it becomes all the more 
essential for the court to decide the objection leaving aside other 
considerations. The Division Bench (review), unfortunately, missed the 
woods for the tree.       
67. Proceeding ahead, we find that as complex as the issues surrounding the 
title of the subject land are, the impugned order of the Division Bench 
(review) is unsustainable in law, for, it has exceeded its contempt 
jurisdiction, which indubitably is limited and finite in the sense that every 
court exercising power to punish for contempt ought to keep itself within 
the boundaries specified by the Act and the judicial pronouncements in this 
behalf. The laborious exercise undertaken to unravel the web of deeds and 
documents so as to determine the question of title was akin to an exercise 
undertaken by a court of first instance or first appeal and, thus, wholly 
unwarranted. It is of the utmost importance to remember that none of the 
documents produced by the first respondent answered the question as to 
whether the contempt petition was barred by limitation, which is the 
question the Division Bench (review) ought to have confined itself to, since 
it was only tasked with exercising review, and not appellate, jurisdiction.  

 
44
68. In our considered view, it further becomes imperative to undertake an 
examination of the contempt petition itself. This exercise reveals that the 
primary grounds taken for the contempt petition being filed belatedly, inter 
alia, were the pendency of collateral proceedings and the continuous filing 
of representations before the Tahsildar by the applicants. Law is well-settled 
that the issue of limitation has to be considered with reference to the 
original cause of action. The period of limitation does not stand extended to 
the last of repeated representations made by a party, if filing of 
representation is not statutorily provided. The contempt petition is, 
however, entirely bereft of any pleading to the effect that the breach 
committed by the Tahsildar is in the nature of a continuing wrong or breach 
or offence, so as to overcome the bar of limitation set by section 20 of the 
Act read with rule 21 of the Writ Rules.  
69. Despite the absence of any pleading as to “continuing wrong/breach/ 
offence”, the Single Judge by placing reliance on the decision in Firm 
Ganpat Ram Rajkumar v. Kalu Ram48 proceeded to hold that the 
Tahsildar’s inaction constituted a continuing wrong, thereby saving the 
petition from being barred by limitation. The Division Bench (review) 
approached the matter in a similar manner, and concluded that the 
contumacious conduct alleged was in the nature of a continuing wrong.  
70. While we are not in disagreement with the view expressed in Firm Ganpat 
Ram Rajkumar (supra) because of the special facts and circumstances 
 
48 1989 Supp (2) SCC 418 

 
45
obtaining therein, the decision of the Division Bench (review) affirming that 
of the Single Judge is wholly unsustainable in law for a few other reasons.  
71. First, it is trite that the court cannot traverse beyond the pleadings and 
make out a case which was never pleaded, such principle having originated 
from the fundamental legal maxim secundum allegata et probate, i.e., the 
court will arrive at its decision on the basis of the claims and proof led by 
the parties. The assertion of the contumacious conduct being in the nature 
of a “continuing wrong/breach/offence” is factual and has to be borne from 
the pleadings on record. Law is, again, well-settled that when a point is not 
traceable in the pleas set out either in a plaint or a written statement, 
findings rendered on such point by the court would be unsustainable as that 
would amount to an altogether new case being made out for the party. 
Absent such pleading of there being a “continuing wrong/breach/offence”, 
the finding returned by the Single Judge, since affirmed by the Division 
Bench (review), cannot be sustained in law.  
72. Even if a point of “continuing wrong/breach/offence” is traceable in the 
pleadings, the court ought not to accept it mechanically; particularly, in 
entertaining an action for contempt, which is quasi-criminal in nature, the 
court should be slow and circumspect and be fully satisfied that there has 
indeed been a “continuing wrong/breach/offence”.  
73. This takes us to the other infirmity in the decision of the High Court 
inasmuch as it held that the disobedience of the mutation order by the 
appellant was in the nature of a continuing wrong. A reference to section 
22 of the 1963 Act would be prudent at this stage. It reads:  

 
46
“22. Continuing breaches and torts - In the case of a continuing breach 
of contract or in the case of a continuing tort, a fresh period of 
limitation begins to run at every moment of the time during which the 
breach or the tort, as the case may be, continues.” 
 
74. While proceeding to examine the nature of the contumacious conduct in 
question, it is considered apposite to commence the discussion with a 
reference to Halsbury’s Laws of India (Damages; Deeds and Other 
Instruments)49 reading thus: 
“[115.032] When cause of action is single and continuing - A cause of 
action may be either single or continuing. When an act is final and 
complete and becomes a cause of action for injury to the plaintiff, it is 
single, arises once and for all and the plaintiff is entitled to sue for 
compensation at one time, for all past, present and future 
consequences of the wrongful act. But if there is repetition of a 
wrongful act or omission, it will comprise a continuing cause of action, 
and if an action is brought by the plaintiff, it will be restricted to 
recovery of damages which have accrued up to the date of suit. In such 
cases the cause of action is said to arise ‘de die in diem’ (from day to 
day). It is inaccurate strictly to speak of a ‘continuing cause of action’, 
but the phrase refers to a cause of action which arises from the 
repetition of acts or omissions of the same kind as that for which the 
action was brought.” 
 
75. The 
English 
Court 
of 
Appeals 
in 
National 
Coal 
Board 
v. 
Galley50 distinguished between the two scenarios by observing that neither 
do repeated breaches of continuing obligations constitute a continuing 
wrong nor intermittent breaches of a continuing obligation; rather there has 
to be present an element of continuance in both, the breach and the 
obligation. 
76. This Court too, as far back as in 1958, with reference to the Limitation Act 
of 
1908, 
discussed 
in 
Balkrishna 
Savalram 
Pujari 
v. 
Shree 
 
49 Volume 9, First Edition 
50 [1958] 1 All ER 9 

 
47
Dnyaneshwar Maharaj Sansthan51 what would constitute a continuing 
wrong. The relevant passage reads thus:  
“20. *** s. 23 refers not to a continuing right but to a continuing 
wrong. It is the very essence of a continuing wrong that it is an act 
which creates a continuing source of injury and renders the doer of the 
act responsible and liable for the continuance of the said injury. If the 
wrongful act causes an injury which is complete, there is no continuing 
wrong even though the damage resulting from the act may continue. 
If, however, a wrongful act is of such a character that the injury caused 
by it itself continues, then the act constitutes a continuing wrong. In 
this connection it is necessary to draw a distinction between the injury 
caused by the wrongful act and what may be described as the effect of 
the said injury. It is only in regard to acts which can be properly 
characterised as continuing wrongs that s. 23 can be invoked.*** 
As soon as the decree was passed and the appellants were 
dispossessed in execution proceedings, their rights had been 
completely injured, and though their dispossession continued, it cannot 
be said that the trustees were committing wrongful acts or acts of tort 
from moment to moment so as to give the appellants a cause of action 
de die in diem. We think there can be no doubt that where the wrongful 
act complained of amounts to ouster, the resulting injury to the right 
is complete at the date of the ouster and so there would be no scope 
for the application of s. 23 in such a case.***”  
(emphasis ours) 
 
77. The decision of this Court in Balkrishna Savalram Pujari (supra) was 
endorsed by this Court in M. Siddiq (Ram Janmabhumi Temple-5 J.) v. 
Suresh Das52 wherein, while concluding that the ouster of shebaitship was 
a single incident and did not constitute a continuing wrong, this Court 
further observed as follows: 
“343. The submission of *** is based on the principle of continuing 
wrong as a defence to the plea of limitation. In assessing the 
submission, a distinction must be made between the source of a legal 
injury and the effect of the injury. The source of a legal injury is 
 
51 AIR 1959 SC 798 
52 (2020) 1 SCC 1 

 
48
founded in a breach of an obligation. A continuing wrong arises where 
there is an obligation imposed by law, agreement or otherwise to 
continue to act or to desist from acting in a particular manner. The 
breach of such an obligation extends beyond a single completed act or 
omission. The breach is of a continuing nature, giving rise to a legal 
injury which assumes the nature of a continuing wrong. For a 
continuing wrong to arise, there must in the first place be a wrong 
which is actionable because in the absence of a wrong, there can be no 
continuing wrong. It is when there is a wrong that a further line of 
enquiry of whether there is a continuing wrong would arise. Without a 
wrong there cannot be a continuing wrong. A wrong postulates a 
breach of an obligation imposed on an individual, where positive or 
negative, to act or desist from acting in a particular manner. The 
obligation on one individual finds a corresponding reflection of a right 
which inheres in another. A continuing wrong postulates a breach of a 
continuing duty or a breach of an obligation which is of a continuing 
nature. … 
… 
Hence, in evaluating whether there is a continuing wrong within the 
meaning of Section 23, the mere fact that the effect of the injury 
caused has continued, is not sufficient to constitute it as a continuing 
wrong. For instance, when the wrong is complete as a result of the act 
or omission which is complained of, no continuing wrong arises even 
though the effect or damage that is sustained may enure in the future. 
What makes a wrong, a wrong of a continuing nature is the breach of 
a duty which has not ceased but which continues to subsist. The breach 
of such a duty creates a continuing wrong and hence a defence to a 
plea of limitation.” 
(emphasis ours) 
78. The order on the writ petition directed the appellant to effect mutation in 
the revenue records in favour of the first respondent, in accordance with 
the final decree. The direction for mutation having been issued on 05th 
March, 2009, the appellant had a period of 2 (two) months therefrom to 
effect such mutation, as stipulated by the Writ Rules, which we shall assume 
the appellant failed or neglected to comply without just reason. From 04th 
May, 2009, i.e., the starting point for the limitation period for initiation of 
contempt action to commence, till 10th February, 2014, i.e., the date of the 
filing of the contempt petition, the appellant failed to effect mutation, as 

 
49
ordered by the Single Judge. Could it be said that every day thereafter that 
the appellant did not effect mutation gave rise to a fresh cause of action so 
as to constitute a “continuing wrong/breach/offence”? To our minds, the 
answer is a clear and unequivocal ‘NO’. Upon application of the test laid 
down by this Court in Balkrishna Savalram Pujari (supra) and M. Siddiq 
(supra), it is evident that when, by 04th May, 2009, the appellant failed to 
implement the direction of the High Court, the act of disobedience was 
complete as on that date itself. Every day thenceforth, the name of the first 
respondent continued to be absent from the revenue records but such 
absence could not be characterised as the injury or wrongful act itself; it 
was merely the damage which flowed from the standalone act of breach 
committed by the appellant – that of not effecting the mutation. The injury 
was not repetitive or in other words, did not arise de die in diem, but rather, 
it was the effect of the injury which continued till the date the first 
respondent presented the contempt petition on 10th February, 2014. 
79.  Having held that the nature of breach or offence committed by the 
appellant was not in the nature of a “continuing wrong/breach/offence”, the 
bar of limitation was rightly pressed by the Division Bench (original) to halt 
the claim of the first respondent at the threshold itself, since the period of 
limitation to initiate the contempt action ended at least by May end of 2010. 
The decision of the Division Bench (original) in dismissing the first 
respondent’s contempt petition as time-barred was unexceptionable and the 
Division Bench (review) acted illegally in reversing the same assuming the 
jurisdiction to review which, on facts and in the circumstances, was not 
available to be exercised.  

 
50
80. The contempt petition was, thus, barred by limitation and no case for 
claiming exemption having been set up, the same deserved outright 
dismissal. 
 
EPILOGUE 
81. Having answered the two legal issues and before recording our conclusion, 
we cannot resist reflecting on the point of fraud having vitiated the 
proceedings. This point, in turn, emerges because the Division Bench 
(review) erroneously held the State to have practised fraud; and this 
discussion is necessitated since, to the contrary, there seems to be sufficient 
reason to hold the first respondent responsible therefor. The writ petition, 
in the form the same had been presented by the first respondent, does 
evince clear suppression of a material fact bordering on fraud on court and 
having the potential to render it not maintainable. But to this too, there is 
a caveat. This question, though quite fundamental in nature, does not 
appear to have been argued by the appellant before the High Court and also 
before us. Thus, argument on the issue of maintainability of the writ petition 
not having been advanced before us by the parties, whatever we observe 
and record hereafter is merely an indication of the direction our decision 
would have taken, if such point were raised or argued. We may not be 
misunderstood of having decided a point without calling upon the parties to 
address on it.  
82. The effect of suppression of a material fact on maintainability of a writ 
petition is too well known. But what is important is, whether suppression of 

 
51
a material fact in a writ petition amounts to fraud on court and whether an 
issue of maintainability based on suppression can be examined if the 
judgment and/or order of disposal of the writ petition has attained finality 
by reason of no appeal being carried therefrom. 
83. This Court in Meghmala v. G. Narasimha Reddy53 observed that 
suppression of any material fact/document amounts to a fraud on the court 
and every court has an inherent power to recall its own order obtained by 
fraud as the order so obtained is non est. 
84. Quite recently, in K. Jayaram v. BDA54, this Court held:  
“10. It is well-settled that the jurisdiction exercised by the High 
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is extraordinary, 
equitable and discretionary and it is imperative that the petitioner 
approaching the writ court must come with clean hands and put 
forward all facts before the court without concealing or suppressing 
anything. A litigant is bound to state all facts which are relevant to 
the litigation. If he withholds some vital or relevant material in order 
to gain advantage over the other side then he would be guilty of 
playing fraud with the court as well as with the opposite parties 
which cannot be countenanced.” 
(emphasis ours) 
 
85. It is also settled law that fraud is an extrinsic collateral act, which vitiates 
the most solemn of proceedings including judicial acts and that a plea of 
fraud can be set up even in a collateral proceeding. We are reminded of 
what this Court said in S.P. Chengalvaraya Naidu v. Jagannath55:  
“The principle of ‘finality of litigation’ cannot be pressed to the extent 
of such an absurdity that it becomes an engine of fraud in the hands 
of dishonest litigants.” 
 
 
53 (2010) 8 SCC 383 
54 (2022) 12 SCC 815 
55 (1994) 1 SCC 1 

 
52
86. The Division Bench (original) noted that the civil suit having been withdrawn 
against the State, the first respondent could not have validly attempted to 
obtain a direction, through the medium of the writ petition, on the strength 
of a decree passed in such a suit where the State was no longer a party, 
yet, the Division Bench (review) held the State to have practised fraud.  
87. A perusal of the averments in the writ petition do not reveal any mention of 
the civil suit having been withdrawn against the State Government. 
Suppression of a material fact on the part of the first respondent is indeed 
discernible which, if pleaded, could have altered the outcome of the writ 
petition. A very innocuous prayer was, however, made for effecting mutation 
in terms of the final decree, without disclosing that mutation was being 
asked for in respect of a piece of land over which the State itself had been 
claiming title and that the civil suit was withdrawn faced with such a claim 
of the State. A writ court being a court of equity, it is needless to observe 
that the parties are bound to approach the court with clean hands. 
Inasmuch as the aforesaid fact of withdrawal was not brought to the writ 
court’s notice, an egregious breach of such principle is noticed. Suppression 
of such a material fact, as in the present case, could legitimately be argued 
to amount to a fraud on court. There can hardly be two opinions that such 
breach would strike at the very root of the matter and since a point of fraud 
can be raised even collaterally, if the point of fraud had been raised, the 
writ petition itself could have been held non-maintainable.  

 
53
88. However, since our decision is premised on the reasons assigned while 
answering the issues formulated in paragraph 8 (supra), we wish to say no 
more.  
CONCLUSION 
89. For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the High Court exceeded both 
its review and contempt jurisdiction. The impugned order is, thus, set aside, 
and the judgment and order of the Division Bench (original) in the contempt 
appeal and the letters patent appeal is restored. 
90. The appeals succeed and are allowed. All pending applications stand 
disposed of. Parties shall, however, bear their own costs.  
91. Determination of the title to the subject land, adjudication on the validity of 
the decrees in favour of the respondents, or decision on any other 
contentious issue are left open for a forum of competent jurisdiction to 
embark upon, if approached by any of the parties. None of the observations 
of this Court, or of the High Court in the impugned order should be treated 
as an expression of opinion in any particular matter or on any factual aspect 
whatsoever.  
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. ___________ OF 2024 
[ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NOS. 19748-19749 OF 2022] 
92. Leave granted. 

 
54
93. These appeals assail the common judgment and order dated 26th 
September, 2022 of the High Court dismissing petitions56 preferred by the 
appellant, seeking recall of the judgment and order dated 27th April, 2022 
of the Division Bench (review). The High Court held that the recall petitions 
were review petitions in disguise; thus, the impugned judgment and order 
was upheld in view of the specific statutory bar of Order XLVII Rule 9, CPC. 
94. The judgment and order 27th April, 2022 having been set aside for the 
reasons assigned above while allowing the civil appeals arising out of SLP 
(Civil) Nos. 19748-19749 of 2022, the order of the High Court dated 26th 
September, 2022 assailed in these appeals upholding the same can no 
longer stand. Resultantly, the impugned order is set aside. The present 
appeals succeed and are allowed on the same terms as the appeals decided 
hereinabove.  
……………………………………J.   
(SANJIV KHANNA) 
 
 
 
 
 
                           
……………………………………J.   
(DIPANKAR DATTA) 
New Delhi; 
22nd July, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
56 I.A. No. 3/2022 in Review I.A. No. 1/2020 in LPA 1/2018 and I.A. No. 10/2022 in Review I.A. 
No. 3/2020 in CA No. 33/2017