2024 INSC 548
Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 1 of 42 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4565 OF 2021 
  
 
BRS Ventures Investments Ltd.    
              … Appellant 
    
 
 
versus 
 
 
 
SREI Infrastructure Finance Ltd. & Anr.        … Respondents 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The 2nd respondent–Gujarat Hydrocarbon and Power 
SEZ Limited, is a corporate debtor.  The corporate debtor 
approached the 1st respondent–SREI Infrastructure Finance 
Limited (the financial creditor), for a grant of a loan.  Under 
the agreement dated 5th January 2011, the financial creditor 
granted the corporate debtor a loan of Rs.100 crores for setting 
up a SEZ project.  The corporate debtor is a subsidiary of M/s. 
Assam Company India Limited (ACIL).  The loan granted by 
the financial creditor to the corporate debtor was secured by a 
mortgage made by the corporate debtor of its leasehold land 
and a pledge of shares of the corporate debtor and ACIL.  The 
loan was also secured by the corporate guarantee dated 5th 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.07.23
18:44:24 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 2 of 42 
 
January 2011 furnished by ACIL.  The financial creditor filed 
an Original Application before the Debt Recovery Tribunal-I, 
Kolkata (for short, ‘the DRT’) to recover the outstanding loan 
amount.  On 24th March 2015, a “debt repayment and 
settlement agreement” was executed to which the financial 
creditor, the corporate debtor and ACIL (the guarantor) were 
parties.  On account of the default committed by the corporate 
debtor, the financial creditor invoked the corporate guarantee 
of ACIL.  Thereafter, an application under Section 7 of the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (for short, ‘the IBC’) 
was filed concerning ACIL as the guarantee was not honoured.  
The adjudicating authority vide order dated 26th October 2017 
admitted the said application.  Thus, the Corporate Insolvency 
Resolution Process (for short, ‘CIRP’) of ACIL commenced.  The 
1st respondent-financial creditor filed a claim of Rs.648.81 
crores, out of which the claim of Rs.357.29 crores was 
admitted towards the claim by the Interim Resolution 
Professional (for short, ‘IRP’).  After the appointment of the 
Resolution Professional (RP), the claim amount of the 1st 
respondent financial creditor was reassessed at Rs.241.27 
crores inclusive of the principal amount of Rs.100 crores.  The 
appellant is the successful Resolution Applicant of ACIL.  The 
appellant submitted a resolution plan.  The resolution plan 
was approved on 13th August 2018 by the Committee of 
Creditors (for short, ‘the COC’), which was approved by the 
adjudicating authority by the order dated 20th September 
2018.  The order of the adjudicating authority was confirmed 
in appeal by the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (for 
short, ‘the NCLAT’).  The appellant paid Rs.38.87 crores to the 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 3 of 42 
 
1st respondent-financial creditor, against the admitted claim 
of Rs.241.27 crores in full and final settlement of all its dues 
and demands submitted in the resolution plan. 
2. 
On 10th February 2020, the 1st respondent financial 
creditor filed an application under Section 7 of the IBC against 
the 2nd respondent corporate debtor.  The claim of the 1st 
respondent-financial creditor was of Rs.1428 crores, which is 
claimed to be the balance amount payable to the financial 
creditor under the loan facility of Rs.100 crores.  By the order 
dated 18th November 2020, the adjudicating authority 
admitted the application under Section 7 of the IBC.  Aggrieved 
by the said order, the appellant preferred an appeal before the 
NCLAT.  A suspended Director of the corporate debtor also 
preferred an appeal against the said order of the adjudicating 
authority.  By the impugned judgment of the NCLAT, both 
appeals have been dismissed. 
3. 
M/s. Zaveri & Co. Pvt. Ltd. has filed I.A. No.11685 of 
2023 for intervention.  It is stated in the application that the 
applicant and other interested parties had submitted the 
resolution plan of the 2nd respondent-corporate debtor.  A final 
resolution plan was submitted by the applicant on 23rd August 
2021, proposing to pay a sum of Rs.135 crores within a period 
of 15 months to the creditors of the 2nd respondent-corporate 
debtor.  The COC of the 2nd respondent-corporate debtor 
approved the resolution plan of the applicant on 30th August 
2021.  As required by the approved resolution plan, the 
applicant has furnished a bank guarantee of Rs.2 crores on 
3rd September 2021. 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 4 of 42 
 
SUBMISSIONS OF THE APPELLANT 
4. 
Mr. Jaideep Gupta, the learned senior counsel appearing 
for the appellant, submitted that in the CIRP of ACIL, the 
appellant’s resolution plan was duly approved. As per the 
resolution plan, a sum of Rs.38.87 crores was paid to the 1st 
respondent-financial creditor, which was in full and final 
settlement of the dues of the 1st respondent-financial creditor.  
He submitted that upon such payment being made by the 
appellant, Section 140 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (for 
short, ‘the Contract Act’) would squarely apply as the rights of 
the 1st respondent-financial creditor shall stand subrogated in 
favour of the appellant.  Therefore, through ACIL, the 
appellant would step into the shoes of the 1st respondent-
financial creditor.  He would, thus, submit that the appellant 
has the right of subrogation over the right of the financial 
creditor over the principal borrower (corporate debtor) in 
respect of its dues as well as the security provided to the 
financial creditor of the mortgage in respect of SEZ land.  He 
submitted that upon payment of Rs.38.87 crores to the 1st 
respondent-financial creditor, as a full and final settlement of 
its total dues of Rs.241.27 crores, the appellant has now 
stepped into the shoes of the 1st respondent-financial creditor.  
He relied on this Court's decision in the case of Amit Lal 
Goverdhan Lalan v. State Bank of Travancore & Ors1. 
5. 
The learned senior counsel further submitted that for 
attracting Section 140 of the Contract Act, the payment by the 
 
1  (1968) 3 SCR 724 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 5 of 42 
 
guarantor does not have to be of the entire amount due from 
the principal debtor. Even a partial payment made in the full 
and final settlement is sufficient to trigger the principle of 
subrogation.  He placed reliance on a decision of the Allahabad 
High Court in the case of Shib Charan Das v. Muqaddam & 
Ors2.  He submitted that the High Court of Karnataka, in the 
case of Kadamba Sugar Industries Pvt. Ltd. v. Devru 
Ganapathi Hegde Bhairi3 has held that acceptance of the 
lesser amount by the creditor under the complete satisfaction 
of the dues paid by the surety, entitled surety to the right of 
subrogation.  The surety is entitled to all the rights of the 
creditor against the principal debtor.  He also relied upon a 
decision of this Court in the case of Economic Transport 
Organization, Delhi v. Charan Spinning Mills Pvt. Ltd. & 
Anr.4. 
6. 
He submitted that upon receipt of Rs.38.87 crores from 
the guarantor, the debt repayable to the 1st respondent 
financial creditor has been discharged. The 1st respondent 
financial creditor is now estopped from enforcing the 
remaining part of the debt from the 2nd respondent-corporate 
debtor in view of Section 63 read with Section 41 of the 
Contract Act.  The 1st respondent financial creditor applied 
Section 7 of the IBC against the 2nd respondent corporate 
debtor, though the entire debt of the 1st respondent financial 
creditor has been discharged.  Moreover, there is a right of 
subrogation.  He relied upon a decision of this Court in the 
 
2  AIR 1936 ALL 62 
3  1993 SCC Online KAR 7 
4  (2010) 4 SCC 114 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 6 of 42 
 
case of Lala Kapurchand Godha & Ors. v. Mir Nawab 
Himayatalikhan Azamjah5. 
SUBMISSIONS OF THE 1ST RESPONDENT – FINANCIAL 
CREDITOR 
7. 
Mr Abhimanyu Bhandari, the learned counsel appearing 
for the 1st respondent-financial creditor, has taken us through 
the impugned orders.  He pointed out that the resolution plan 
of the 2nd respondent-corporate debtor has been approved by 
the adjudicating authority by the order dated 19th September 
2023.  He submitted that no payment was made against the 
claim raised by ACIL as it was an unsecured financial creditor 
primarily because the liquidation value of the 2nd respondent-
corporate debtor is much lower than the total claim amount of 
the secured financial creditors.  He pointed out that the main 
grievance of the appellant is that the institution of corporate 
insolvency has been upheld against the 2nd respondent-
corporate debtor, for the assets allegedly part of the CIRP of 
ACIL, which is the holding company of the 2nd respondent-
corporate debtor.  He pointed out that under Section 36(4) of 
the IBC, the assets of the subsidiary of the corporate debtor 
cannot be included in the liquidation estate assets.  He invited 
our attention to Section 18 of the IBC, which contains the 
duties of IRPs.  He submitted that if there is a resolution of a 
corporate debtor, the assets of any of its subsidiaries will not 
be included in the scope of the resolution process.  He 
submitted that the holding company and its subsidiaries are 
distinct legal persons, and the holding company does not own 
 
5  (1963) 2 SCR 168 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 7 of 42 
 
the subsidiary's assets.  The learned counsel relied upon a 
decision of this Court in the case of Vodafone International 
Holdings BV v. Union of India & Anr6.  He also relied upon 
a decision of this Court in the case of Jaypee Kensington 
Boulevard Apartments Welfare Association & Ors. v. 
NBCC (India) Ltd. & Ors7.  Inviting our attention to the 
information memorandum in the CIRP of ACIL, he submitted 
that the same did not contain the particulars of the assets of 
the 2nd respondent-corporate debtor.  It was specifically stated 
therein that the 2nd respondent-corporate debtor was still to 
unlock the value of the land, that is, the value of the 
investment made by ACIL.  It was disclosed that the 2nd 
respondent-corporate debtor was a 51% subsidiary of ACIL.  
The assets and liabilities of ACIL, disclosed in the information 
memorandum, did not include the assets and liabilities of the 
subsidiaries.  Therefore, the assets and liabilities of the 2nd 
respondent-corporate debtor were not part of CIRP of ACIL.  
He also pointed out the definition clause in the resolution 
plan.  The liquidation value of ACIL was shown as Rs.360 
crores, and the financial value did not include its subsidiaries' 
income.  It is expressly provided in clauses 13.1 and 13.3 of 
the resolution plan that all the assets of ACIL shall stand 
extinguished, and the corporate guarantee of ACIL would also 
be extinguished.  There is a specific clause that no right of 
subrogation shall be available to the existing guarantors.  He 
submitted that only a sum of Rs.38.87 crores was given to the 
1st respondent-financial creditor. Therefore, the liability of the 
 
6  (2012) 6 SCC 613 
7  (2022) 1 SCC 401 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 8 of 42 
 
2nd respondent-corporate debtor concerning the balance 
amount continued to exist. 
8. 
 He invited our attention to the decision of this Court 
dated 21st May 2021 in the case of Lalit Kumar Jain v. Union 
of India & Ors8.  This judgment lays down that it is open for 
the creditors to move against personal guarantors under the 
IBC.  He submitted that because the liability of the guarantor 
is co-extensive with the corporate debtor, this Court held that 
the approval of a resolution plan of the corporate debtor does 
not ipso facto discharge guarantors of the corporate debtor of 
their liabilities under the contract of guarantee.  It was held 
that by involuntary process or due to liquidation or insolvency 
proceedings, corporate guarantors are not absolved of their 
liability, which arises out of an independent contract.  In this 
case, the entire outstanding amount payable by the 2nd 
respondent-corporate debtor has not been recovered from 
ACIL. Therefore, there is no bar on the 1st respondent-financial 
creditor to proceed against the 2nd respondent-corporate 
debtor for the remaining amount.  In this case, the 1st 
respondent-financial 
creditor 
first 
moved 
against 
the 
guarantor and, after exhausting the remedies against the 
guarantor, filed an application under Section 7 against the 2nd 
respondent-corporate debtor.  Merely because the creditor has 
made a partial recovery from the guarantor, it does not absolve 
the corporate debtor of his financial obligations.  Reliance was 
 
8  (2021) 9 SCC 321 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 9 of 42 
 
placed upon a decision of this Court in the case of Maitreya 
Doshi v. Anand Rathi Global Finance Ltd. & Anr9.   
9. 
Regarding the plea of subrogation, the learned counsel 
pointed out that the plea was never raised before the 
adjudicating authority and the NCLAT.  The ground of 
subrogation was made by way of an amendment to the 
memorandum of this appeal; therefore, the contention not 
raised earlier cannot be considered at this stage.  He pointed 
out that the COC and the adjudicating authority have already 
approved the resolution plan for the 2nd respondent-corporate 
debtor.  He submitted that this Court had settled this issue in 
the case of Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel India Ltd. 
v. Satish Kumar Gupta & Ors10.  He relied upon a decision 
of the Hyderabad Bench of the NCLT in the case of State Bank 
of India v. Ghanshyam Surajbali Kurmi11, which covered 
the issue. 
SUBMISSIONS OF INTERVENORS  
10. 
Mr. Darius Khambata, the learned senior counsel 
appearing for the intervenor, also made detailed submissions.  
He pointed out that under Section 128 of the Contract Act, the 
liability of a surety is co-extensive with that of the principal 
debtor unless there is something contrary to that in the 
contract.  He relied upon a decision of this Court in the case 
of Laxmi Pat Surana v. Union of India & Anr12 on this 
 
9  2022 SCC Online SC 1276 
10 2019 SCC Online SC 1478 
11 2022 SCC Online NCLT 14567 
12 (2021) 8 SCC 481 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 10 of 42 
 
behalf.  He submitted that the guarantor's liability is separate 
and distinct from the principal debtor as held by this Court in 
the case of Punjab National Bank Ltd. v. Shri Vikram 
Cotton Mills & Anr.13 This Court held that a binding 
obligation created under a composition under Section 391 of 
the Companies Act, 1956, between the company and its 
creditors, did not affect the liability of surety.  He submitted 
that any variation in the contract between the creditor and 
guarantor does not discharge the principal debtor.  If there is 
a variance made without the guarantor’s consent in the 
contract between the corporate debtor and the creditor, it 
amounts to the discharge of the guarantor as regards the 
transactions subsequent to the variance.  He pointed out 
various provisions of the Contract Act regarding the discharge 
of a guarantor.  Relying upon Section 60(2) of the IBC and a 
decision of this Court in the case of Lalit Kumar Jain8, he 
urged that the IBC permits simultaneous petitions against the 
corporate debtor and corporate guarantor.  He also invited our 
attention to Section 60(2) of the IBC.  He relied upon a decision 
of this Court in the case of State Bank of India v. V. 
Ramakrishnan & Anr14.  He submitted that Section 140 of 
the Contract Act will be applicable only when the guarantor 
pays all that he is liable for under the contract of guarantee.  
He submitted that if the guarantor makes only a part payment 
of the debt, Section 140 will not have any application.  He 
relied upon a decision of the Allahabad High Court in the case 
 
13 (1970) 1 SCC 60 
14 (2018) 17 SCC 394 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 11 of 42 
 
of Darbari Lal & Anr. v. Mahbub Ali Mian & Ors15.  He 
submitted that this proposition finds support even in the 
decision of the Allahabad High Court in the case of Shib 
Charan Das2 relied upon by the appellant.  He pointed out 
that in the information memorandum of ACIL, the assets and 
liabilities of the 2nd respondent-corporate debtor were not 
included.  The assets of the 2nd respondent-corporate debtor 
cannot be treated as a part of ACIL’s assets.  He submitted 
that the resolution plan of ACIL has been prepared based on 
the information memorandum.  He submitted that the 
information memorandum and the resolution plan must be 
consistent with Section 36(4)(d) of the IBC.   
REPLY OF THE APPELLANT 
11. 
Replying to the submissions made by the learned 
counsel appearing for the 1st respondent-financial creditor, 
the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant 
reiterated his submissions on the applicability of Section 140 
of the Contract Act.  His submission is that the information 
memorandum indicates taking over the business of ACIL and 
the 2nd respondent-corporate debtor.  He submitted that the 
business of the 2nd respondent-corporate debtor was included 
in the insolvency plan.  He submitted that by the admission of 
an application under Section 7 against the 2nd respondent-
corporate debtor, a valuable asset of ACIL has been taken 
away. 
 
 
15 (1927) SCC Online ALL 121 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 12 of 42 
 
CONSIDERATION  
12. 
Before we deal with the submissions canvassed across 
the Bar, we must note the issues formulated in the impugned 
judgment of the NCLAT.  Based on the submissions made 
before it, two issues were framed, which read thus: 
“13. Following issues arise in this 
appeal for our consideration: 
(i) Whether 
the 
application 
under 
Section 7 of IBC is barred by 
limitation? 
(ii) Whether 
the 
second 
Application 
under Section 7 of IBC is not 
maintainable against the Corporate 
Debtor as for the same debt and 
default, CIRP has already been taken 
place 
against 
the 
Corporate 
Guarantor 
and 
the 
Financial 
Creditor has accepted the amount in 
full and final settlement of all its 
dues?” 
13. 
The present appellant did not canvas the issue of 
subrogation before the NCLAT.  It is also not urged in the 
memorandum of appeal before the NCLAT.  We may note here 
that the appellant has not seriously pressed the issue of the 
bar of limitation in this appeal.  The NCLAT rendered the 
findings on both issues in favour of the respondents.  There is 
no dispute that the 1st respondent financial creditor had 
granted a loan of Rs.100 crores to the 2nd respondent 
corporate debtor.  The loan was secured by the corporate 
guarantee furnished by ACIL, which is the holding company of 
the corporate debtor.  There is no dispute that the 2nd 
respondent-corporate debtor committed a default in payment 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 13 of 42 
 
of the loan amount. Therefore, the guarantee was invoked by 
the 1st respondent-financial creditor, which led to the filing of 
an application under Section 7 of the IBC against ACIL.  The 
CIRP of ACIL was completed, and the resolution plan was 
approved.  The claim lodged by the 1st respondent-financial 
creditor was of Rs.241.27 crores.  However, as per the 
resolution plan, the 1st respondent-financial creditor had to 
accept a haircut as it was provided therein that the 1st 
respondent-financial creditor would get only a sum of 
Rs.38.87 crores from the resolution applicant.  
LIABILITY OF GUARANTOR / SURETY  
14. 
As far as the guarantee is concerned, the law is very well 
settled.  The liability of the surety and the principal debtor is 
co-extensive.  The creditor has remedies available to recover 
the amount payable by the principal borrower by proceeding 
against both or any of them.  The creditor can proceed against 
the guarantor first without exhausting its remedies against the 
principal borrower.  Chapter VIII of the Contract Act contains 
provisions regarding indemnity and guarantee.  Section 126 is 
relevant for our purposes, which reads thus:  
“126. 
“Contract 
of 
guarantee”, 
“surety”, 
“principal 
debtor” 
and 
“creditor”.— A “contract of guarantee” 
is a contract to perform the promise, or 
discharge the liability, of a third person 
in case of his default. The person who 
gives the guarantee is called the 
“surety”; the person in respect of whose 
default the guarantee is given is called 
the “principal debtor”, and the person to 
whom the guarantee is given is called 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 14 of 42 
 
the “creditor”. A guarantee may be either 
oral or written.” 
A surety is also known as a guarantor.  Section 128 reads 
thus: 
“128. Surety’s liability.— The liability 
of the surety is co- extensive with that of 
the principal debtor, unless it is 
otherwise provided by the contract.” 
It lays down the fundamental principle that the liability of the 
surety is co-extensive with that of the principal debtor unless 
otherwise provided by the contract.  Sections 133 to 139 deal 
with the discharge of surety, which read thus: 
“133.Discharge of surety by variance 
in terms of contract.— Any variance, 
made without the surety’s consent, in 
the terms of the contract between the 
principal 
debtor 
and 
the 
creditor, 
discharges the surety as to transactions 
subsequent to the variance. 
134.Discharge of surety by release or 
discharge of principal debtor.— The 
surety is discharged by any contract 
between the creditor and the principal 
debtor, by which the principal debtor is 
released, or by any act or omission of the 
creditor, the legal consequence of which 
is the discharge of the principal debtor. 
135. 
Discharge 
of 
surety 
when 
creditor compounds with, gives time 
to, or agrees not to sue, principal 
debtor.— 
A 
contract 
between 
the 
creditor and the principal debtor, by 
which the creditor makes a composition 
with, or promises to give time to, or not 
to sue, the principal debtor, discharges 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 15 of 42 
 
the surety, unless the surety assents to 
such contract.  
136. Surety not discharged when 
agreement made with third person to 
give time to principal debtor.— Where 
a contract to give time to the principal 
debtor is made by the creditor with a 
third person, and not with the principal 
debtor, the surety is not discharged. 
137. Creditor’s forbearance to sue 
does not discharge surety.— Mere 
forbearance on the part of the creditor to 
sue the principal debtor or to enforce 
any other remedy against him does not, 
in the absence of any provision in the 
guarantee to the contrary, discharge the 
surety. 
138.Release of one co-surety does not 
discharge others.— Where there are co-
sureties, a release by the creditor of one 
of them does not discharge the others; 
neither does it free the surety so released 
from his responsibility to the other 
sureties. 
139. Discharge of surety by creditor’s 
act or omission impairing surety’s 
eventual remedy.— If the creditor does 
any act which is inconsistent with the 
rights of the surety, or omits to do any 
act which his duty to the surety requires 
him to do, and the eventual remedy of 
the surety himself against the principal 
debtor is thereby impaired, the surety is 
discharged.” 
Thus, the law provides that if any variance is made without 
surety’s consent in the terms of the contract between the 
principal debtor and the creditor, it amounts to discharge of 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 16 of 42 
 
the surety as to the transactions subsequent to the variance.  
Under the provisions of Section 133, surety can be discharged 
only when there is a variance made in the terms of the contract 
between the principal debtor and the creditor.  Section 134 
contemplates a situation where the principal debtor is 
released by a contract between the creditor and the principal 
debtor.  In such a case, the surety is discharged.  If by any act 
or omission on the part of the creditor, the legal consequence 
of which is the discharge of the principal debtor, the surety 
stands discharged.  Section 135 is based on the same principle 
on which Section 133 is based.  If there is a contract between 
the creditor and the principal debtor by which the creditor 
makes a composition or promise with the principal debtor, or 
gives time to the principal debtor or agrees not to sue the 
principal debtor, it amounts to discharge of the surety 
provided the surety has not assented to such a contract.  If 
the creditor contracts with a third party to give time to the 
principal debtor, and when the principal debtor is not a party 
to such a contract, the surety is not discharged.  Section 137 
lays down a settled principle that it is not necessary for the 
creditor to first sue the principal debtor or adopt a remedy 
against him.  If the creditor omits to do that, unless there is a 
contract to the contrary, it will not amount to discharge of the 
surety.  This means that without proceeding to recover the 
debt against the principal debtor, the creditor can proceed 
against the surety unless there is a contract to the contrary.  
Even if the creditor discharges one surety, it will not amount 
to the discharge of the other surety.  There are two other 
contingencies provided under Sections 138 and 139.  We are 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 17 of 42 
 
not concerned with these two contingencies in the present 
case. 
15. 
If the creditor recovers a part of the amount guaranteed 
by the surety from the surety and agrees not to proceed 
against the surety for the balance amount, that will not 
extinguish the remaining debt payable by the principal 
borrower.  In such a case, the creditor can proceed against the 
principal borrower to recover the balance amount.  Similarly, 
if there is a compromise or settlement between the creditor 
and the surety to which the principal borrower is not a 
consenting party, the liability of the borrower qua the creditor 
will remain unaffected.  The provisions regarding the 
discharge of the surety discussed above show that involuntary 
acts of the principal borrower or creditor do not result in the 
discharge of surety. 
16. 
In the case of Lalit Kumar Jain8, this Court dealt with 
the legal effect of approving the resolution plan in CIRP of the 
corporate debtor on the liability of the surety.  This is in the 
context of Section 135 of the Contract Act, which provides that 
if the creditor compounds with or gives time or agrees not to 
sue the principal debtor, it amounts to discharge of the surety.  
In paragraphs 122 to 125 of the said decision, this Court held 
thus: 
“122. It is therefore, clear that the 
sanction of a resolution plan and finality 
imparted to it by Section 31 does not per 
se operate 
as 
a 
discharge 
of 
the 
guarantor's liability. As to the nature 
and extent of the liability, much would 
depend on the terms of the guarantee 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 18 of 42 
 
itself. 
However, 
this 
Court 
has 
indicated, time and again, that an 
involuntary 
act 
of 
the 
principal 
debtor leading to loss of security, 
would not absolve a guarantor of its 
liability. 
In Maharashtra 
SEB [Maharashtra 
SEB v. Official 
Liquidator, (1982) 3 SCC 358] the 
liability of the guarantor (in a case 
where liability of the principal debtor 
was discharged under the Insolvency 
law 
or 
the 
Company 
law), 
was 
considered. It was held that in view of 
the 
unequivocal 
guarantee, 
such 
liability of the guarantor continues 
and the creditor can realise the same 
from the guarantor in view of the 
language of Section 128 of the 
Contract Act, 1872 as there is no 
discharge under Section 134 of that 
Act. This Court observed as follows : 
(SCC pp. 362-63, para 7) 
“7. Under the bank guarantee in 
question the Bank has undertaken 
to pay the Electricity Board any 
sum up to Rs 50,000 and in order 
to realise it all that the Electricity 
Board has to do is to make a 
demand. Within forty-eight hours of 
such demand the Bank has to pay 
the amount to the Electricity Board 
which is not under any obligation to 
prove any default on the part of the 
Company in liquidation before the 
amount demanded is paid. The 
Bank cannot raise the plea that it is 
liable only to the extent of any loss 
that may have been sustained by 
the Electricity Board owing to any 
default on the part of the supplier of 
goods 
i.e. 
the 
Company 
in 
liquidation. The liability is absolute 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 19 of 42 
 
and unconditional. The fact that the 
Company in liquidation i.e. the 
principal debtor has gone into 
liquidation also would not have any 
effect on the liability of the Bank i.e. 
the guarantor. Under Section 128 of 
the Contract Act, 1872, the liability 
of the surety is coextensive with 
that of the principal debtor unless it 
is 
otherwise 
provided 
by 
the 
contract. A surety is no doubt 
discharged under Section 134 of the 
Contract Act, 1872 by any contract 
between 
the 
creditor 
and 
the 
principal debtor by which the 
principal debtor is released or by 
any act or omission of the creditor, 
the legal consequence of which is 
the discharge of the principal 
debtor. But a discharge which the 
principal debtor may secure by 
operation of law in bankruptcy (or 
in liquidation proceedings in the 
case of a company) does not 
absolve the surety of his liability 
(see Jagannath 
Ganeshram 
Agarwale v. Shivnarayan 
Bhagirath [Jagannath Ganeshram 
Agarwale v. Shivnarayan 
Bhagirath, 1939 SCC OnLine Bom 
65:AIR 
1940 
Bom 
247]; see also Fitzgeorge, 
In 
re [Fitzgeorge, In re,(1905)1KB462] 
).” 
123. This legal position was noticed and 
approved later in Industrial Finance 
Corpn. of India Ltd. v. Cannanore Spg. 
& Wvg. Mills Ltd. [Industrial Finance 
Corpn. of India Ltd. v. Cannanore Spg. 
& Wvg. Mills Ltd., (2002) 5 SCC 54] An 
earlier 
decision 
of 
three 
Judges 
in Punjab National Bank v. State of 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 20 of 42 
 
U.P. [Punjab National Bank v. State of 
U.P., (2002) 5 SCC 80] pertains to the 
issues regarding a guarantor and the 
principal debtor. The Court observed as 
follows 
: 
(Punjab 
National 
Bank 
case [Punjab National Bank v. State of 
U.P., (2002) 5 SCC 80] , SCC p. 80-81, 
paras 1-6) 
“1. 
The 
appellant 
had, 
after 
Respondent 4's management was 
taken over by U.P. State Textile 
Corporation Ltd. (Respondent 3) 
under the Industries (Development 
and Regulation) Act, advanced some 
money to the said Respondent 4. In 
respect of the advance so made, 
Respondents 1, 2 and 3 executed 
deeds of guarantee undertaking to 
pay the amount due to the Bank as 
guarantors in the event of the 
principal borrower being unable to 
pay the same. 
2. Subsequently, Respondent 3 
which 
had 
taken 
over 
the 
management 
of 
Respondent 
4 
became sick and proceedings were 
initiated under the Sick Textile 
Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 
1974 (for short “the Act”). The 
appellant filed suit for recovery 
against the guarantors and the 
principal debtor of the amount 
claimed by it. 
3. The following preliminary issue 
was, on the pleadings of the parties, 
framed: 
‘Whether the claim of the plaintiff is 
not maintainable in view of the 
provisions of Act 57 of 1974 as 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 21 of 42 
 
alleged in Para 25 of the written 
statement of Defendant 2?’ 
4. The trial court as well as the High 
Court, both came to the conclusion 
that in view of the provisions of 
Section 29 of the Act, the suit of the 
appellant was not maintainable. 
5. We have gone through the 
provisions of the said Act and in our 
opinion the decision of the courts 
below is not correct. Section 5 of the 
said Act provides for the owner to be 
liable for certain prior liabilities and 
Section 29 states that the said Act 
will have an overriding effect over all 
other enactments. This Act only 
deals with the liabilities of a 
company which is nationalised and 
there is no provision therein which 
in any way affects the liability of a 
guarantor who is bound by the deed 
of guarantee executed by it. The 
High Court has referred to a 
decision 
of 
this 
Court 
in Maharashtra 
SEB v. Official 
Liquidator [Maharashtra 
SEB v. Official Liquidator, (1982) 3 
SCC 358] where the liability of the 
guarantor in a case where liability of 
the principal debtor was discharged 
under the Insolvency law or the 
Company law, was considered. It 
was held in this case that in view 
of the unequivocal guarantee, 
such liability of the guarantor 
continues and the creditor can 
realise 
the 
same 
from 
the 
guarantor in view of the language 
of Section 128 of the Contract 
Act, 1872 as there is no discharge 
under Section 134 of that Act. 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 22 of 42 
 
6. In our opinion, the principle of 
the aforesaid decision of this Court 
is equally applicable in the present 
case. The right of the appellant to 
recover money from Respondents 1, 
2 and 3 who stood guarantors arises 
out of the terms of the deeds of 
guarantee which are not in any way 
superseded or brought to a naught 
merely because the appellant may 
not have been able to recover money 
from the principal borrower. It may 
here be added that even as a result 
of the Nationalisation 
Act the 
liability of the principal borrower 
does not come to an end. It is only 
the mode of recovery which is 
referred to in the said Act.” 
124. In Kaupthing Singer & Friedlander 
Ltd. [Kaupthing Singer & Friedlander 
Ltd. (No. 2), In re, (2012) 1 AC 804 : 
(2011) 3 WLR 939 : (2012) 1 All ER 883, 
paras 11, 12, 53-54] the UK Supreme 
Court reviewed a large number of 
previous authorities on the concept of 
double 
proof 
i.e. 
recovery 
from 
guarantors in the context of insolvency 
proceedings. The Court held that: (AC p. 
814, para 11) 
“11. The function of the rule is not 
to prevent a double proof of the 
same debt against two separate 
estates (that is what insolvency 
practitioners call “double dip”). The 
rule prevents a double proof of what 
is in substance the same debt being 
made against the same estate, 
leading to the payment of a double 
dividend out of one estate. It is for 
that reason sometimes called the 
rule against double dividend. In the 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 23 of 42 
 
simplest case of suretyship (where 
the surety has neither given nor 
been provided with security, and 
has an unlimited liability) there is a 
triangle of rights and liabilities 
between the principal debtor (“PD”), 
the surety (“S”) and the creditor 
(“C”). PD has the primary obligation 
to C and a secondary obligation to 
indemnify S if and so far as S 
discharges PD's liability, but if PD is 
insolvent S may not enforce that 
right in competition with C. S has 
an obligation to C to answer for PD's 
liability, and the secondary right of 
obtaining an indemnity from PD. C 
can (after due notice) proceed 
against either or both of PD and S. 
If both PD and S are in insolvent 
liquidation, C can prove against 
each for 100p in the pound but may 
not recover more than 100p in the 
pound in all.” 
125. In view of the above discussion, it 
is held that approval of a resolution 
plan does not ipso facto discharge a 
personal guarantor (of a corporate 
debtor) of her or his liabilities under 
the contract of guarantee. As held by 
this Court, the release or discharge of 
a principal borrower from the debt 
owed by it to its creditor, by an 
involuntary process i.e. by operation 
of law, or due to liquidation or 
insolvency 
proceeding, does 
not 
absolve the surety/guarantor of his or 
her liability, which arises out of an 
independent contract.” 
(emphasis added) 
This Court dealt with a situation where a resolution plan for 
the principal borrower was approved in CIRP, and the 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 24 of 42 
 
principal borrower was discharged from the debt by operation 
of law through an involuntary process.  It was held that the 
contract between the creditor and the surety is independent; 
therefore, the approval of the resolution plan of the principal 
borrower will not amount to the discharge of the surety.  The 
same principles will apply when the resolution plan is 
approved in CIRP of the surety. In such a case, the surety gets 
a discharge from his liability under the guarantee by operation 
of law or by involuntary process.  It will not amount to the 
discharge of the principal borrower. 
17. 
Section 31 of the IBC reads thus: 
“31.Approval of resolution plan.–  
(1) If the Adjudicating Authority is 
satisfied that the resolution plan as 
approved by the committee of creditors 
under sub-section (4) of section 30 
meets the requirements as referred to in 
sub-section (2) of section 30, it shall by 
order approve the resolution plan 
which 
shall 
be 
binding 
on 
the 
corporate debtor and its employees, 
members, creditors, including the 
Central 
Government, 
any 
State 
Government or any local authority to 
whom a debt in respect of the 
payment of dues arising under any 
law for the time being in force, such 
as authorities to whom statutory dues 
are 
owed, 
guarantors 
and 
other 
stakeholders 
involved 
in 
the 
resolution plan. 
Provided that the Adjudicating Authority 
shall, before passing an order for 
approval of resolution plan under this 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 25 of 42 
 
sub-section, satisfy that the resolution 
plan has provisions for its effective 
implementation. 
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority is 
satisfied that the resolution plan does 
not confirm to the requirements referred 
to in sub-section (1), it may, by an order, 
reject the resolution plan.  
(3) After the order of approval under sub-
section (1),- 
(a) the moratorium order passed by 
the Adjudicating Authority under 
section 14 shall cease to have effect; 
and  
(b) the resolution professional shall 
forward all records relating to the 
conduct of the corporate insolvency 
resolution 
process 
and 
the 
resolution plan to the Board to be 
recorded on its database.  
(4) The resolution applicant shall, 
pursuant 
to 
the 
resolution 
plan 
approved under sub-section (1), obtain 
the necessary approval required under 
any law for the time being in force within 
a period of one year from the date of 
approval of the resolution plan by the 
Adjudicating 
Authority 
under 
sub-
section (1) or within such period as 
provided for in such law, whichever is 
later:  
Provided that where the resolution plan 
contains a provision for combination, as 
referred 
to 
in 
section 
5 
of 
the 
Competition Act, 2002, the resolution 
applicant shall obtain the approval of 
the Competition Commission of India 
under that Act prior to the approval of 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 26 of 42 
 
such resolution plan by the committee of 
creditors.” 
(emphasis added) 
The resolution plan of the corporate debtor approved by the 
adjudicating authority binds the corporate debtor, its 
employees, 
members, 
creditors, 
guarantor 
and 
other 
stakeholders.  Therefore, where a company furnishes a 
corporate guarantee for securing a loan taken by another 
company and if the CIRP of the corporate guarantor ends in a 
resolution plan, it will bind the creditor of the corporate 
guarantor.  The corporate guarantor's liability may end in 
such a case by operation of law.  However, such a resolution 
plan of the corporate guarantor will not affect the liability of 
the principal borrower to repay the loan amount to the creditor 
after deducting the amount recovered from the corporate 
guarantor or the amount paid by the resolution applicant on 
behalf of the corporate guarantor as per the resolution plan. 
18. 
As observed earlier, in such a loan transaction secured 
by a guarantee, the guarantor has an obligation to repay the 
loan amount to the creditor, and there is a separate and 
distinct obligation on the borrower to pay the amount to the 
creditor.  Such a transaction creates a right in favour of the 
creditor to proceed against the guarantor and borrower for 
recovery.  However, he has the right to recover the amount 
only to the extent of the loan amount payable by the borrower. 
 
 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 27 of 42 
 
SIMULTANEOUS PROCEEDINGS UNDER THE IBC AGAINST 
THE CORPORATE DEBTOR AND GUARANTOR 
19. 
Now, we turn to the provisions of the IBC.  Sub-section 
(8) of Section 5 defines ‘financial debt’.  Clauses (a) and (i) of 
sub-section (8) show that the money borrowed against the 
payment of interest and the amount of any liability in respect 
of any guarantee for repayment of the  loan covered by clause 
(a)  have been put under separate headings.  Thus, the liability 
of the guarantor or surety is a financial debt, and even the 
money borrowed against the payment of interest is also a 
financial debt.  In the light of these provisions, Section 60 of 
the IBC is relevant, which reads thus: 
“60. 
Adjudicating 
Authority 
for 
corporate persons. -  
(1) 
The 
Adjudicating 
Authority, 
in 
relation to insolvency resolution and 
liquidation 
for 
corporate 
persons 
including 
corporate 
debtors 
and 
personal guarantors thereof shall be the 
National Company Law Tribunal having 
territorial jurisdiction over the place 
where the registered office of a corporate 
person is located.  
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1) 
and notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in this Code, where 
a corporate insolvency resolution 
process or liquidation proceeding of a 
corporate debtor is pending before a 
National Company Law Tribunal, an 
application relating to the insolvency 
resolution 
or 
liquidation 
or 
bankruptcy of a corporate guarantor 
or personal guarantor, as the case 
may be, of such corporate debtor shall 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 28 of 42 
 
be filed before the National Company 
Law Tribunal.  
(3) An insolvency resolution process 
or 
liquidation 
or 
bankruptcy 
proceeding of a corporate guarantor 
or personal guarantor, as the case 
may be, of the corporate debtor 
pending in any court or tribunal shall 
stand transferred to the Adjudicating 
Authority dealing with insolvency 
resolution 
process 
or 
liquidation 
proceeding of such corporate debtor. 
(4) The National Company Law Tribunal 
shall be vested with all the powers of the 
Debt Recovery Tribunal as contemplated 
under Part III of this Code for the 
purpose of sub-section (2). 
(5) Notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, the National 
Company Law Tribunal shall have 
jurisdiction to entertain or dispose of –  
(a) any application or proceeding by 
or against the corporate debtor or 
corporate person;  
(b) any claim made by or against the 
corporate 
debtor 
or 
corporate 
person, including claims by or 
against any of its subsidiaries 
situated in India; and  
(c) any question of priorities or any 
question of law or facts, arising out 
of or in relation to the insolvency 
resolution 
or 
liquidation 
proceedings of the corporate debtor 
or corporate person under this 
Code.  

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 29 of 42 
 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Limitation Act, 1963 or in any 
other law for the time being in force, in 
computing the period of limitation 
specified for any suit or application by or 
against a corporate debtor for which an 
order of moratorium has been made 
under this Part, the period during which 
such moratorium is in place shall be 
excluded.” 
(emphasis added) 
Sub-section (2) of Section 60 contemplates separate or 
simultaneous insolvency proceedings against the corporate 
debtor and guarantor.  Therefore, sub-section (3) of Section 60 
provides that if CIRP in respect of the corporate guarantor is 
pending before an adjudicating authority and if the CIRP 
against the corporate debtor is pending before another 
adjudicating 
authority, 
CIRP 
proceedings 
against 
the 
corporate guarantor must be transferred to the adjudicating 
authority before whom CIRP in respect of the corporate debtor 
is pending.  Thus, consistent with the basic principles of the 
Contract Act that the liability of the principal borrower and 
surety is co-extensive, the IBC permits separate or 
simultaneous proceedings to be initiated under Section 7 by a 
financial creditor against the corporate debtor and the 
corporate guarantor. 
WHETHER THE ASSETS OF THE CORPORATE DEBTOR 
WERE PART OF CIRP IN RESPECT OF ACIL – CORPORATE 
GUARANTOR 
20. 
Now, we will deal with the submissions made by the 
appellant that the assets of the 2nd respondent-corporate 
debtor were also a part of the CIRP in respect of ACIL.  This 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 30 of 42 
 
submission was made on the ground that according to the 
appellant, the information memorandum published in 
accordance with Section 29 of the IBC indicates taking over of 
the business of ACIL and the 2nd respondent-corporate debtor.  
Clause 3, under the heading “SEZ Business” in the 
information memorandum, specifically mentions that ACIL 
has acquired, through its subsidiary (2nd respondent-
corporate debtor), 296 hectares of land for setting up the SEZ 
project.  It is further stated that the entire project cost of SEZ, 
inclusive of land acquisition, was financed through equity and 
unsecured loans contributed by ACIL.  It further records that 
SEZ is a separate company.  However, it is stated that the 
financial obligations of the SEZ units are on ACIL.  As SEZ is 
stated to be a separate company, it is not included in the 
resolution plan, which was duly approved.  As rightly found 
by the NCLAT, the resolution plan takes care only of the 
investments of ACIL in the subsidiaries and not the assets of 
subsidiaries.  As indicated in the subsequent paragraphs, 
considering the scheme of the IBC, assets of a subsidiary 
company cannot be part of the resolution plan of the holding 
company.  
21. 
It is necessary to take notice of the two critical provisions 
of the IBC, which are Sections 18 and 36. Section 18 and 
Section 36 read thus: 
“18. Duties of interim resolution 
professional.- 
The interim resolution professional shall 
perform the following duties, namely: -  

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 31 of 42 
 
(a) collect all information relating to the 
assets, finances and operations of the 
corporate debtor for determining the 
financial position of the corporate 
debtor, including information relating 
to- 
(i) business operations for the 
previous two years; 
(ii) 
financial 
and 
operational 
payments for the previous two 
years;  
(iii) list of assets and liabilities as on 
the initiation date; and  
(iv) such other matters as may be 
specified;  
(b) receive and collate all the claims 
submitted by creditors to him, pursuant 
to the public announcement made 
under sections 13 and 15;  
(c) constitute a committee of creditors;  
(d) monitor the assets of the corporate 
debtor and manage its operations until 
a resolution professional is appointed by 
the committee of creditors;  
(e) file information collected with the 
information utility, if necessary; and  
(f) take control and custody of any asset 
over which the corporate debtor has 
ownership rights as recorded in the 
balance sheet of the corporate debtor, or 
with information utility or the depository 
of securities or any other registry that 
records 
the 
ownership 
of 
assets 
including –  

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 32 of 42 
 
(i) assets over which the corporate 
debtor has ownership rights which 
may be located in a foreign country;  
(ii) assets that may or may not be in 
possession of the corporate debtor;  
(iii) 
tangible 
assets, 
whether 
movable or immovable;  
(iv) 
intangible 
assets 
including 
intellectual property;  
(v) securities including shares held 
in any subsidiary of the corporate 
debtor, 
financial 
instruments, 
insurance policies; 
(vi) 
assets 
subject 
to 
the 
determination of ownership by a 
court or authority;  
(g) to perform such other duties as may 
be specified by the Board.  
Explanation. – For the purposes of 
this, the term “assets” shall not 
include the following, namely: -  
(a) assets owned by a third party 
in possession of the corporate 
debtor held under trust or under 
contractual 
arrangements 
including bailment;  
(b) assets of any Indian or foreign 
subsidiary 
of 
the 
corporate 
debtor; and  
(c) such other assets as may be 
notified by the Central Government 
in consultation with any financial 
sector regulator. 
.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 
(emphasis added) 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 33 of 42 
 
36. Liquidation estate. –  
(1) For the purposes of liquidation, the 
liquidator shall form an estate of the 
assets mentioned in sub-section (3), 
which will be called the liquidation 
estate in relation to the corporate debtor.  
(2) 
The 
liquidator 
shall 
hold 
the 
liquidation estate as a fiduciary for the 
benefit of all the creditors.  
(3) Subject to sub-section (4), the 
liquidation estate shall comprise all 
liquidation estate assets which shall 
include the following: -  
(a) any assets over which the 
corporate debtor has ownership 
rights, including all rights and 
interests therein as evidenced in the 
balance sheet of the corporate 
debtor or an information utility or 
records in the registry or any 
depository recording securities of 
the corporate debtor or by any other 
means as may be specified by the 
Board, including shares held in any 
subsidiary of the corporate debtor;  
(b) assets that may or may not be in 
possession of the corporate debtor 
including 
but 
not 
limited 
to 
encumbered assets;  
(c) tangible assets, whether movable 
or immovable;  
(d) intangible assets including but 
not limited to intellectual property, 
securities (including shares held in 
a subsidiary of the corporate debtor) 
and 
financial 
instruments, 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 34 of 42 
 
insurance 
policies, 
contractual 
rights;  
(e) 
assets 
subject 
to 
the 
determination of ownership by the 
court or authority;  
(f) 
any 
assets 
or 
their 
value 
recovered through proceedings for 
avoidance 
of 
transactions 
in 
accordance with this Chapter;  
(g) any asset of the corporate debtor 
in respect of which a secured 
creditor has relinquished security 
interest;  
(h) any other property belonging to 
or vested in the corporate debtor at 
the 
insolvency 
commencement 
date; and  
(i) all proceeds of liquidation as and 
when they are realised.  
(4) The following shall not be included 
in the liquidation estate assets and 
shall not be used for recovery in the 
liquidation: -  
(a) assets owned by a third party 
which are in possession of the 
corporate debtor, including –  
(i) assets held in trust for any third 
party; 
(ii) bailment contracts;  
(iii) all sums due to any workmen or 
employee from the provident fund, 
the pension fund and the gratuity 
fund;  

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 35 of 42 
 
(iv) other contractual arrangements 
which do not stipulate transfer of 
title but only use of the assets; and  
(v) such other assets as may be 
notified by the Central Government 
in consultation with any financial 
sector regulator;  
(b) assets in security collateral held by 
financial services providers and are 
subject to netting and set-off in multi-
lateral 
trading 
or 
clearing 
transactions; 
(c) personal assets of any shareholder 
or partner of a corporate debtor as the 
case may be provided such assets are 
not held on account of avoidance 
transactions that may be avoided 
under this Chapter;  
(d) assets of any Indian or foreign 
subsidiary of the corporate debtor; 
or  
(e) any other assets as may be 
specified by the Board, including 
assets which could be subject to set-
off on account of mutual dealings 
between the corporate debtor and any 
creditor.” 
(emphasis added) 
There is a mandate of clause (d) of sub-section (4) of Section 
36 of the IBC that the assets of an Indian subsidiary of the 
corporate debtor shall not be included in the liquidation estate 
assets and shall not be used for the recovery in liquidation.  
Section 18 entrusts several duties to the IRPs concerning the 
corporate debtor's assets.  Consistent with the provisions of 
Section 36(4)(d), the explanation (b) to Section 18(1) provides 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 36 of 42 
 
that the term ‘assets’ used in Section 18 shall not include the 
assets of any Indian subsidiary of the corporate debtor.  
Perhaps the reason for including these two provisions is that 
it is well-settled that a shareholder has no interest in the 
company's assets.  This view has been taken by this Court in 
paragraph 10 of its decision in the case of Bacha F. Guzdar 
v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay16, which reads 
thus: 
“10. The interest of a shareholder vis-à-
vis 
the 
company 
was 
explained 
in Charanjit Lal Chowdhury v.Union of 
India [CharanjitLal Chowdhury v. Union 
of India, 1950 SCC 833 at p. 862 : 1950 
SCR 869 at p. 904]. That judgment 
negatives the position taken up on 
behalf 
of 
the 
appellant 
that 
a 
shareholder has got a right in the 
property of the company. It is true that 
the shareholders of the company have 
the 
sole 
determining 
voice 
in 
administering 
the 
affairs 
of 
the 
company and are entitled, as provided 
by the articles of association, to 
declare that dividends should be 
distributed out of the profits of the 
company to the shareholders but the 
interest of the shareholder either 
individually or collectively does not 
amount to more than a right to 
participate in the profits of the 
company. The company is a juristic 
person and is distinct from the 
shareholders. It is the company which 
owns the property and not the 
shareholders. The dividend is a share 
of 
the 
profits 
declared 
by 
the 
 
16 (1955) 1 SCR 876 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 37 of 42 
 
company as liable to be distributed 
among the shareholders.” 
(emphasis added) 
A holding company and its subsidiary are always distinct legal 
entities.  The holding company would own shares of the 
subsidiary company.   That does not make the holding 
company the owner of the subsidiary's assets.  In the case of 
Vodafone International Holdings BV6, this Court took the 
view that if a subsidiary company is wound up, its assets do 
not belong to the holding company but to the liquidator. As 
mentioned in the decision, the reason is that a company is a 
separate legal persona and the fact that the parent company 
owns all its share has nothing to do with its separate legal 
existence.  Therefore, the assets of the subsidiary company of 
the corporate debtor cannot be part of the resolution plan of the 
corporate debtor. 
22. 
In the impugned judgment, the NCLAT has referred to 
various clauses in the revised resolution plan of ACIL, 
including clauses 12.3 and 13.3 and held that these clauses 
do not suggest that the 1st respondent-financial creditor 
accepted the amount as full and final settlement of all its dues.  
It was held that the effect of approval of the resolution plan is 
that the right to recover the loan amount from the corporate 
guarantor stands extinguished.  Chapter VI, under the 
heading ‘financial, value and projections’ in the approved 
resolution plan, records as follows: 
“The projections have been made on the 
basis that ACIL shall continue to operate 
all the businesses. Provided that the 
investments of ACIL in the subsidiaries 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 38 of 42 
 
may be discontinued/liquidated sold 
depending 
a 
business 
exigency.  
Therefore, the business plan financial 
projections do not include income 
that the subsidiaries.”  
(emphasis added) 
Clause 13.3 of the approved resolution plan reads thus: 
“13.3 
All 
corporate 
guarantees, 
indemnities, 
letters 
of 
comfort, 
undertakings provided by ACIL., in 
respect of any third party liability 
(including of subsidiaries) shall stand 
revoked 
and 
extinguished 
on 
the 
effective date pursuant to approval of the 
resolution plan by the order of the NCLT, 
without the requirement of any further 
act or deed by the Resolution Applicant 
and/or ACIL.” 
The effect of the said clause is that the liabilities of ACIL in 
respect of the third parties including the subsidiaries shall 
stand revoked and extinguished with effect from the effective 
date. 
23. 
Thus, by virtue of the CIRP process of ACIL (corporate 
guarantor), the 2nd respondent-corporate debtor does not get 
a discharge, and its liability to repay the loan amount to the 
extent to which it is not recovered from the corporate 
guarantor is not extinguished.  
SUBROGATION UNDER SECTION 140 OF THE CONTRACT 
ACT  
24. 
Now, we come to the argument based on subrogation as 
provided under Section 140 of the Contract Act.  Reliance was 
placed by both parties on conflicting decisions of different High 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 39 of 42 
 
Courts.  Therefore, this issue will have to be resolved.  Section 
140 is relevant which reads thus: 
“140.Rights of surety on payment or 
performance.— Where a guaranteed 
debt has become due, or default of the 
principal debtor to perform a guaranteed 
duty has taken place, the surety upon 
payment or performance of all that he is 
liable for is invested with all the rights 
which the creditor had against the 
principal debtor.” 
The words used in Section 140 are “upon payment or 
performance of all that he is liable for”.  When the principal 
debtor commits a default and when the liability under the deed 
of guarantee of the surety is not limited to a particular 
amount, its liability is in respect of the entire amount 
repayable by the principal debtor to the creditor.  The words 
‘all that he is liable’ used under Section 140 cannot be ignored. 
The principal borrower must continuously indemnify the 
surety. Section 140 of the Contract Act may be founded on the 
said obligation. The 1st respondent-financial creditor relied 
upon a decision of this Court in the case of Economic 
Transport Corporation, Delhi4, which holds that the 
doctrine of subrogation is a creature of equity. Therefore, the 
Section will have to be interpreted having regard to the 
equitable principles.  If the surety pays the entirety of the 
amount payable under guarantee to the creditor, Section 140 
provides a remedy to the surety to recover the entire amount 
paid by him in the discharge of his obligations.  Therefore, the 
surety gets invested with the rights of the creditor to recover 
from the principal debtor the amount which was paid as per 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 40 of 42 
 
the guarantee.  If the surety pays only a part of the amount 
payable to the creditor, the equitable right the surety gets 
under Section 140 will be confined to the debt he cleared.  
25. 
Under the corporate guarantee, in the facts of this case, 
the liability of ACIL was to the extent of the entire amount 
repayable by the 2nd respondent-corporate debtor to the 
corporate creditor.  In the CIRP of ACIL, the appellant paid a 
sum of Rs.38.87 crores only to the 1st respondent-financial 
creditor. The amount was paid by the appellant on behalf of 
ACIL, the corporate guarantor. For the rest of the amount 
payable as per the guarantee, the 1st respondent-financial 
creditor had to take a haircut because of the involuntary 
process by operation of law.  Only the liability of ACIL under 
the corporate guarantee to repay the loan to the 1st 
respondent-financial creditor has been extinguished on the 
payment of Rs.38.87 crores.  By the involuntary act of the 
creditor of accepting part of the amount from the surety in the 
discharge of the entire liability of the surety, even if Section 
140 is attracted, it will confer on the guarantor or the 
appellant the right to recover only the amount mentioned 
above from the corporate debtor.  The subrogation will be only 
to the extent of the amount recovered by the creditor from the 
surety. Notwithstanding the subrogation to the extent of the 
amount paid on behalf of the corporate guarantor by the 
resolution applicant, the right of the financial creditor to 
recover the balance debt payable by the corporate debtor is in 
no way extinguished.  

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 41 of 42 
 
26. 
In the circumstances, we cannot accept the submissions 
made by the learned counsel appearing for the appellant based 
on Section 140 of the Contract Act.  As stated earlier, the issue 
of the subrogation canvassed before us has not been pressed 
into service by the appellant, as can be seen even from the 
written submissions. 
27. 
The last argument sought to be canvassed was that by 
the admission of an application under Section 7 of the IBC 
against the 2nd respondent-corporate debtor, the valuable 
assets of ACIL have been taken away.  As observed earlier, the 
assets of the subsidiary company of ACIL cannot form part of 
the CIRP process of ACIL, and factually, the assets of the 2nd 
respondent-corporate debtor were not part of the resolution 
plan approved in the CIRP of ACIL.   
28. 
Hence, we summarize some of our conclusions as under: 
a. Payment of the sum of Rs.38.87 crores to the 1st 
respondent-financial creditor under the resolution 
plan of the corporate guarantor-ACIL will not 
extinguish the liability of the 2nd respondent-
principal borrower/corporate debtor to pay the entire 
amount payable under the loan transaction after 
deducting the amount paid on behalf of the corporate 
guarantor in terms of its resolution plan; 
b. A holding company is not the owner of the assets of 
its subsidiary.  Therefore, the assets of the 
subsidiaries cannot be included in the resolution 
plan of the holding company, and 

Civil Appeal No.4565 of 2021 
 
Page 42 of 42 
 
c. The financial creditor can always file separate 
applications under Section 7 of the IBC against the 
corporate debtor and the corporate guarantor. The 
applications can be filed simultaneously as well; 
29. 
Thus, the view taken by NCLAT cannot be faulted.  
Accordingly, the appeal is hereby dismissed with no order as 
to costs. 
 
……………………..J. 
 
 
 
 
 
      (Abhay S. Oka) 
 
 
 
 
……………………..J. 
 
 
 
 
 
     (Pankaj Mithal) 
New Delhi; 
July 23, 2024.