2024 INSC 547
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1024 OF 2014 
  
M/S NAVAYUGA ENGINEERING CO. LTD.     ...APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
UNION OF INDIA & ANR.        
               …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
1. Introduction: ........................................................................................................ 2 
2. Facts: ................................................................................................................... 3 
3. Sections 11 and 12 of the Act:............................................................................ 6 
4. Section 28 of the Act: .......................................................................................... 7 
5. Confiscation of goods under Chapter XIV of the Act:   ...................................... 8 
6. Section 125 of the Act: ........................................................................................ 9 
7. Issues: ............................................................................................................... 11 
8. Re: Whether there is a liability to pay customs duty, when the confiscated 
goods are redeemed after payment of fine under section 125 of the Act? ..... 11 
9. Re: What is the true and correct ratio of the decision in Jagdish Cancer  
case?. ................................................................................................................. 18 
10. Re: Whether the liability to pay such duty will include the liability to pay 
interest on delayed payment under section 28AB of the Act? ........................ 21 
11.Conclusion:. ........................................................................................................ 22 
 
 
 
 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.07.23
17:54:17 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
J U D G M E N T 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
Introduction: “The following two questions arose for our 
consideration; i) Whether there is a liability to pay customs duty 
when the confiscated goods are redeemed after payment of fine under 
Section 125 of the Customs Act, 19621?  ii) Whether, the liability to 
pay such duty will include the liability to pay interest on delayed 
payment under Section 28AB of the Act? Adjudication of these 
questions brought to light certain seemingly contradictory decisions 
on this question, and this requires us to reflect on the correct ratio 
of the decision of this Court in Commr. of Customs (Import) v. Jagdish 
Cancer and Research Centre2. Therefore, the third question that fell 
for our consideration is; iii) What is the true and correct ratio of the 
decision in Jagdish Cancer case?” 
1.1. For the reasons to follow, we have held that the owner of goods 
has a liability to pay customs duty, even after confiscated goods are 
redeemed after payment of fine under Section 125 of the Act. 
Furthermore, when confiscation proceedings are initiated under 
Section 124 of the Act, the obligation to pay duty and other charges 
under Section 125 will arise only when the owner of goods exercises 
 
1  Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’. 
2  (2001) 6 SCC 483, hereinafter referred to as Jagdish Cancer case. 

3 
 
the option to pay fine for redemption of goods and the Department 
accepts it. Liability to pay customs duty in such confiscation 
proceedings under Section 125(2) is distinct from the assessment 
and determination of duty, which can rise only under Section 28. The 
duty liability arising under Section 125(2) must be assessed under 
Section 28. Thus, we answered the second question by holding that 
once Section 28 applies for determination of duty, interest on delayed 
payment of duty under Section 28AB follows. We have also clarified 
that Jagdish Cancer case is not an authority for the proposition that 
when the liability to pay customs duty arises under Section 125(2), 
the calculation, determination or the assessment of such duty cannot 
be made under Section 28.   
1.2. The facts relevant for consideration of the issues are as follows. 
2. 
Facts:  Between 30.11.2003 to 18.04.2007, the appellant 
availed the benefit of exemption from payment of customs duty under 
a notification dated 01.03.2002, as per which certain self-propelled 
hydraulic piling rigs were to be utilised exclusively for the 
construction of roads, bridges etc. for NHAI3 and PWD4. When 
investigations revealed that the appellant has violated the import 
conditions, even before a show-cause notice was issued, the 
 
3  National Highways Authority of India. 
4 Public Works Department. 

4 
 
appellant 
deposited 
Rs.16,29,22,282/- 
and 
interest 
of 
Rs. 
1,84,39,696/- between May, 2007 to August, 2007. Thereafter, a 
show-cause notice5 was issued on 23.01.2008 proposing confiscation 
under Section 111(o) with respect to goods that were valued at Rs. 
48.55 crores involving duty liability of Rs. 17,37,57,039/- under 
Section 28, interest under Section 28AB and penalties under 
Sections 112(a) and (b) and 114A of the Act. The appellant filed an 
application under Section 127B of the Act before the Settlement 
Commission claiming that it has not violated any condition of the 
notification dated 01.03.2002 and further claimed that in order to 
avoid prolonged litigation, they had accepted the liability subject to 
further adjustments as may be approved by the Settlement 
Commission. The appellant also asserted that the claim for interest 
under Section 28AB is impermissible as the proceedings were 
initiated with show cause notice under Section 124 and not under 
Section 28. 
2.1. The Settlement Commission upheld the duty liability and 
directed it to be recovered. The penalty and fine were waived in full 
in view of the finding that this is not a case of brazen defiance of law 
and also that there is no contumacious conduct such as 
 
5  The show cause notice is purportedly issued under Section 124 read with Section 28 of the 
Act. 

5 
 
misdeclaration or manipulation of documents to evade payment of 
duty. On payment of interest under Section 28AB, the Settlement 
Commission held that, for violation of post-importation conditions, 
imported goods become liable for confiscation but are redeemable on 
payment of fine in lieu of confiscation and the duty becomes payable 
under Section 125(2). Following the decision of this Court in Jagdish 
Cancer case, the Commission held that as Section 28 is inapplicable 
in confiscation proceedings, Section 28AB will also not be attracted. 
The interest deposited by the appellant was, therefore, directed to be 
refunded. 
2.2.  The writ petitions filed by the Customs Department were allowed 
by the order impugned before us. The High Court held that i) interest 
can be levied only when there is a substantive provision enabling it, 
ii) Section 125 has no such enabling provision, not even the 
procedure to assess duty, therefore, iii) assessment of duty must 
necessarily be done under Section 28 and iv) once Section 28 
procedure is adopted, application of Section 28AB is inevitable. The 
High Court, therefore, distinguished Jagdish Cancer case and held 
that interest under Section 28AB is payable even for proceedings 
under Section 125 and remanded the matter to the Settlement 
Commission to calculate and recover interest under Section 28AB. 

6 
 
2.3.  Ms. Charanya Lakshmikumaran and Mr. V C Bharathi 
appeared for the Appellant and the Custom Department respectively. 
They have not only enhanced our understanding of the subject and 
the issue, but have elevated the debate.  
3. 
Sections 11 and 12 of the Act: Section 11 of the Customs Act6 
vests the power in the Central Government to prohibit absolutely or 
subject to such conditions, as may be specified in the notification, 
the import or export of goods into or out of India. Under Section 45 
of the Act, all imported goods unloaded in a customs area shall 
remain in the custody of the customs authorities. The importer shall 
present a bill of entry under Section 46 and self-assess the duty 
under Section 17.  Alternatively, under Section 47 the goods are 
provisionally assessed by the authority under Section 18 and cleared 
for home consumption. Goods are cleared for home consumption 
only after the customs officer is satisfied that the goods are not 
prohibited for home consumption and the import duty is paid. Duties 
of customs shall be levied under Section 127 on goods that are 
 
6  Section 11: Power to prohibit importation or exportation of goods.—(1) If the Central 
Government is satisfied that it is necessary so to do for any of the purposes specified in sub-
section (2), it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit either absolutely or subject 
to such conditions (to be fulfilled before or after clearance) as may be specified in the 
notification, the import or export of goods of any specified description. 
(2) … 
(3) … 
 
7 Section 12: Dutiable goods.—(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, or any other 
law for the time being in force, duties of customs shall be levied at such rates as may be 
specified under [the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975)], or any other law for the time 
being in force, on goods imported into, or exported from, India. 

7 
 
imported into or exported from India at such rates as are specified 
under the Customs Tariffs Act, 1975. 
4. 
Section 28 of the Act: If duties are, i) not levied, ii) not paid, iii) 
short levied, iv) short paid, v) erroneously refunded, vi) interest not 
paid, vii) interest, part paid or viii) interest erroneously refunded, a 
distinct procedure is provided in Section 28 of the Act. This very 
section provides a slightly varied procedure for recovery in  
sub-Section (4) for instances, where duties are not paid due to,  
i) collusion, ii) wilful misstatement or iii) suppression of facts. The 
distinction in the procedure includes different periods of limitation 
for initiation of recovery process. Section 28 to the extent, it is 
relevant for us is as under: 
“Section 28. Recovery of duties not levied or not paid 
or 
short-levied 
or 
short-paid 
or 
erroneously 
refunded.—(1) Where any [duty has not been levied or not 
paid or has been short-levied or short-paid] or erroneously 
refunded, or any interest payable has not been paid, part-
paid or erroneously refunded, for any reason other than the 
reasons of collusion or any wilful mis-statement or 
suppression of facts,— 
(a) the proper officer shall, within [two years] from the 
relevant date, serve notice on the person chargeable with 
the duty or interest which has not been so levied [or paid] or 
which has been short-levied or short-paid or to whom the 
refund has erroneously been made, requiring him to show 
cause why he should not pay the amount specified in the 
notice: 
[Provided that before issuing notice, the proper officer shall 
hold pre-notice consultation with the person chargeable 
with duty or interest in such manner as may be prescribed;] 
 
[(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of all goods belonging to 
Government as they apply in respect of goods not belonging to Government.] 
 

8 
 
(b) the person chargeable with the duty or interest, may pay 
before service of notice under clause (a) on the basis of,— 
(i) his own ascertainment of such duty; or 
(ii) the duty ascertained by the proper officer,  
the amount of duty along with the interest payable thereon 
under section 28AA or the amount of interest which has not 
been so paid or part-paid. 
[Provided that the proper officer shall not serve such show 
cause notice, where the amount involved is less than rupees 
one hundred.] 
(2) […] 
(3) […] 
 
(4) Where any duty has not been [levied or not paid or has 
been short-levied or short-paid] or erroneously refunded, or 
interest payable has not been paid, part-paid or erroneously 
refunded, by reason of,— 
(a) collusion; or 
(b) any wilful mis-statement; or 
(c) suppression of facts,  
by the importer or the exporter or the agent or employee of 
the importer or exporter, the proper officer shall, within five 
years from the relevant date, serve notice on the person 
chargeable with duty or interest which has not been [so 
levied or not paid] or which has been so short-levied or 
short-paid or to whom the refund has erroneously been 
made, requiring him to show cause why he should not pay 
the amount specified in the notice.” 
 
5. 
Confiscation of goods under Chapter XIV of the Act:  The third 
circumstance where duty is collected is when goods are improperly 
imported into or exported out of India. Chapter XIV of the Act 
provides for confiscation of such goods and imposition of penalties 
under Sections 1118 to 114. Section 111(o) is the specific instance 
 
8 Section 111.Confiscation of improperly imported goods, etc.—The following goods 
brought from a place outside India shall be liable to confiscation:— 
(a) …(n) 
(o) any goods exempted, subject to any condition, from duty or any prohibition in 
respect of the import thereof under this Act or any other law for the time being in force, 
in respect of which the condition is not observed unless the non-observance of the 
condition was sanctioned by the proper officer; 
 

9 
 
for confiscation of goods for violation of conditions of exemption from 
payment of duty after the importation. These goods were not 
subjected to levy and collection of duty as they enjoyed the benefit of 
exemption. Upon detection of a violation, the legal consequences 
must and will follow and Chapter XIV provides for confiscations and 
penalties. 
5.1. Confiscation of goods is appropriation of property by the 
revenue. The right, title and interest in the property, if any, is 
transferred and vested in the state under Section 126. Considering 
the serious consequences of such an action, authority and process 
of law mandated Article 300A9, Parliament prescribed the procedure 
under Section 122A, adjudicatory authority under Section 122, 
obligated issuance of a show-cause notice under Section 124 before 
confiscation. 
6. 
Section 125 of the Act:  Alternatively, there is also the option of 
redemption of the confiscated goods under Section 125, the statute 
specifically empowers the owner of the goods to exercise an option of 
legitimising the importation by paying fine, duty and other charges. 
The procedure prescribed is simple; i) confiscation must be 
authorised, ii) those goods should not be prohibited goods, iii) the 
 
9  Article 300A. Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of law.— No 
person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law. 

10 
 
officer shall give an option to redeem the goods in lieu of fine, iv) the 
owner or the possessor must exercise the option and v) pay the fine 
vi) within 120 days. The purpose and object of Section 125 is to 
enable a transition from ‘illegality’ to ‘compliance’ of laws. It grants 
an opportunity to the owner or possessor of the confiscated goods to 
regularise the transaction by payment of fine. This provision is based 
on a public policy consideration that balances crime and punishment 
and achieves the twin objectives of enabling a citizen to remain on 
the right side of law by adopting a prescribed measure and amicable 
settlement of disputes through resolution. Section 125 is extracted 
herein below for ready reference: 
“Sec 125. Option to pay fine in lieu of confiscation. 
(1) Whenever confiscation of any goods is authorised by this 
Act, the officer adjudging it may, in the case of any goods, 
the importation or exportation whereof is prohibited under 
this Act or under any other law for the time being in force, 
and shall, in the case of any other goods, give to the owner 
of the goods [or, where such owner is not known, the person 
from whose possession or custody such goods have been 
seized,] an option to pay in lieu of confiscation such fine as 
the said officer thinks fit. 
Provided that where the proceedings are deemed to be 
concluded under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 28 
or under clause (i) of sub-section (6) of that section in respect 
of the goods which are not prohibited or restricted, the 
provisions of this section shall not apply: 
 
[Provided further that], without prejudice to the provisions of 
the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 115, such fine shall 
not exceed the market price of the goods confiscated, less in 
the case of imported goods the duty chargeable thereon. 
 
[(2) Where any fine in lieu of confiscation of goods is imposed 
under sub-section (1), the owner of such goods or the person 

11 
 
referred to in sub-section (1), shall, in addition, be liable to 
any duty and charges payable in respect of such goods.] 
 
[(3) Where the fine imposed under sub-section (1) is not paid 
within a period of one hundred and twenty days from the 
date of option given thereunder, such option shall become 
void, unless an appeal against such order is pending. 
Explanation.—……”] 
 
7. 
Issues: It is in the above referred ‘context’ that we will now 
interpret the ‘text’ of Section 125 to examine the following issues: 
 i) Whether there is a liability to pay customs duty when 
confiscated goods are redeemed after payment of fine under 
Section 125 of the Act?   
 
ii) Whether, the liability to pay such duty will include the liability 
to pay interest on delayed payment under Section 28AB of the 
Act? 
 
7.1 While answering these questions, we will have to explain the 
decision of this court in Jagdish Cancer case as it is argued to have 
ruled that duty in confiscation proceedings is payable only under 
Section 125 and not under Section 28, and if Section 28 does not 
apply, Section 28AB also will not apply. Therefore, the third question 
is: 
iii) What is the true and correct ratio of the decision in Jagdish 
Cancer case? 
8. 
Re: Whether there is a liability to pay customs duty, when the 
confiscated goods are redeemed after payment of fine under section 
125 of the Act? 
 

12 
 
8.1. This issue is no more res integra. The uncertainty about the 
liability to impose and collect duties in confiscation proceedings was 
resolved in 1976 by a decision of this court in Union of India v. M/s 
Security and Finance (P) Ltd.10 while interpreting identical provisions, 
as they stood under the Sea Customs Act, 1878. In this case, the 
court was dealing with confiscation of goods that were imported 
without a proper license which was and is prohibited by law. Though 
the goods were confiscated, they were released to the importer, who 
exercised the option to redeem them under Section 183 of the 
repealed Act. Consequently, Customs Department sought to collect 
the duty payable on such goods. The High Court accepted the 
importer’s challenge to imposition and collection of duty on the 
ground that Section 183 proceedings authorised only a fine and not 
customs duty. This court allowed the appeal of the Custom 
Departments by drawing a distinction between the power to impose 
or recover duty under Section 20 (Section 12/28 of our Act) on one 
hand, and the power to impose penalty and/or fine under Section 
183 (Section 125 of our Act).  This Court held that they are distinct 
and operate independently. The relevant portion of the judgement is 
as under: 
“5.   Does the order under Section 183 preclude him from 
levying duty under Section 20? This is the short issue before 
 
10 (1976) 1 SCC 166, hereinafter referred to as Security Finance case. 

13 
 
us. A close study of the scheme of the relevant provisions, 
powers and levies discloses a clear dichotomy which has 
escaped the attention of the High Court. Import/Export duty 
is an obligation cast by Section 20 of the Act. It is a tax, not 
a penalty; it is an innocent levy once the exigible event 
occurs; it is not a punitive impost for a contravention of the 
law. Confiscation, penalty and fine provided for under 
Sections 167 (item 8) and 183 are of the species of 
punishment for violation of the scheme of prohibition and 
control. Once this distinction and duality are remembered, 
the interpretative process simplifies itself. 
8.   ….In the present case, the Deputy Collector, the 
competent authority, has chosen to give the owner of the 
goods, the respondent, option to pay, in lieu of confiscation, 
a fine. He has not confiscated the goods and, therefore, 
Section 184 is not operational in this context. In short, the 
obligation under Section 20 is independent of the liability 
under Section 183. The order, dual in character, although 
clubbed together in a single document, is therefore valid in 
entirety. Even so, the confusion has been caused by the 
Deputy Collector failing to keep distinct the two powers and 
the two liabilities and thereby leading to avoidable 
jumbling. 
10.  
However, we are prepared to gather from the order 
under attack two levies imposed in exercise of two distinct 
powers, as earlier explained. The import duty has been 
made a condition for the clearance of the goods. This is right 
and it is impossible to say that the said payment is not 
justified by Section 20. Likewise, the authority when it 
imposed a fine, was exercising its power under Section 183. 
We can readily see that he did not mean to confiscate the 
goods. He only proposed to confiscate and proceeded to fix 
a fine in lieu thereof. Non-felicitous and inept expressions 
used in the order are perhaps apt to mislead, but the 
intendment is clear that what was done was not 
confiscation but giving an option to pay a quantified fine in 
place of confiscation. The order was a composite one, when 
read in the sense we have explained, and is quite legal. 
Therefore, we reach the conclusion that the appellant is 
entitled to win and the High Court was in error.” 
 
8.2.  The Act must always be read as a whole. Once the liability of 
confiscation is withdrawn after the option to pay fine is exercised and 
the goods are redeemed, it is natural for the goods to be subjected to 
duty. The power and the machinery provisions for imposition and 

14 
 
collection of duty liability exist only under Section 12 and/or Section 
28 and not under Section 125. The essence of the judgment in 
Security Finance case is in the following sentence: “The import duty 
has been made a condition for the clearance of the goods. This is right 
and it is impossible to say that the said payment is not justified by 
Section 20”. 
8.3.  The scope of enquiry in this judgement was limited to 
answering whether there is a liability to pay customs duty in 
confiscation proceedings when goods are redeemed upon payment of 
fine. This judgment is not concerned with instances like in the 
present case where goods are imported without payment of duty 
under an exemption notification.  
8.4.  The above referred judicial interpretation has attained statutory 
recognition in 1985 when the Parliament introduced subsection (2) 
to Section 125 to clarify and declare that the owner of goods, in 
addition to payment of fine, shall also be liable to pay duty and other 
charges upon exercising the option to pay fine to redeem goods. Thus, 
the owner of goods has a liability to pay customs duty, even after 
confiscated goods are redeemed after payment of fine and other 
charges under Section 125 of the Act. This is the first principle. 

15 
 
8.5.  In our view, this position gleaned from Security Finance case 
has remained consistent with amendments introduced to Section 
125 in the year 1985. The customs duty obligation on once exempted 
goods, liable to be confiscated for violation of conditions, arises only 
after the option to redeem them is exercised under Section 125. Once 
the option is exercised, the acceptance is subject to the conditions 
specified in Section 125. The primary condition is payment of fine in 
lieu of confiscation. Thus, this duty obligation is inextricably 
connected to the option to redeem the confiscated goods. In other 
words, it is a precondition for redemption.  
8.6.  The decision of this court in Fortis Hospital Ltd v. Commr. of 
Customs, Import11 affirms this position.  In Fortis Hospital case, the 
owner of the confiscated goods chose not to exercise the option under 
Section 125. However, the revenue sought to recover the duty payable 
under Section 28 of the Act. Holding that this is impermissible, the 
court held that: 
“9…… It may be seen from the bare reading of the aforesaid 
Section that under Section 125(1) of the Act, option is given 
to the importer whose goods are confiscated, to pay the fine 
in lieu of confiscation and redeem the confiscated goods. 
Before this action is taken, show-cause notice is to be issued 
under the provision of Section 124 of the said Act. This 
provision pertains to confiscation of goods and provides 
procedural safeguards inasmuch as there cannot be any 
order of confiscating any goods or imposing any penalty on 
any person without complying with the procedure contained 
in Section 124. Section 124 mandates issuance of the show- 
 
11 (2015) 12 SCC 715, hereinafter referred to as Fortis Hospital case. 

16 
 
cause notice before passing any such order and 
contemplates two actions: first, relating to confiscating of 
the goods and second, pertaining to imposition of penalty. 
Pertinently, this action does not deal with payment of import 
duty at all. 
 
10.  
It is not in dispute that show-cause notice in the 
instant case was issued under Section 124 of the Act. Once 
such a show-cause notice was issued and as can be seen 
from the proposed action which was contemplated in this 
provision (as has been taken note of above), it was also 
confined to confiscation of the imported machinery and 
imposition of penalty. Nothing was stated about the 
payment of duty. However, in spite of the fact that show- 
cause notice was limited to confiscation of the goods and 
imposition of penalty, the final order which was passed 
included the direction to pay the customs duty as well. It is 
clear that when such an action was not contemplated, 
which even otherwise could not be done while exercising the 
powers under Section 124 of the Act, in the final order there 
could not have been direction to pay the duty. 
 
 
11.  
Notwithstanding the aforesaid position, as pointed 
out above, the Department is taking shelter under the 
provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 125 of the Act. 
However, on a plain reading of the said provision, we are of 
the view that such a provision would not apply in case 
where option to pay fine in lieu of confiscation is not 
exercised by the importer. Trigger point is the exercise of a 
positive option to pay the fine and redeem the confiscated 
goods. Only when this contingency is met, the duty becomes 
payable. In the present case, admittedly, such an option 
was not exercised and the confiscated machinery was not 
redeemed by the Institute. As a matter of fact, thus, no fine 
has been paid.” 
 
8.7.  This judgment also explains the position when the Customs 
Department wants to recover duty through ways, other than 
confiscation at the Chapter XIV. Explaining the alternative modes of 
recovery of customs duty, the court observed as follows; 
“16.   It is not that the Department is without any remedy. 
We have gone through the provisions of notification No. 64 
of 1988 dated 01.03.1988. As pointed out above, importer 

17 
 
would be exempted from payment of import duty on hospital 
equipment only when the conditions contained in the said 
notification are satisfied. Some of the conditions, as pointed 
out above, are to be fulfilled in future. If that is not done and 
the importer is found to have violated those conditions, 
show-cause notice could always be given under the said 
notification on payment of duty, independent of the action 
which is permissible under Section 124 and Section 125 of 
the Act. It is also important to mention that under certain 
circumstances mentioned in the notification, the importer 
can be asked to execute a bond as well. In those cases, 
action can be taken under the said bond when the 
conditions contained therein are violated. Therefore, if the 
Department wanted the Institute to pay the duty, which 
may have become payable, it could have taken independent 
action; de hors Section 124 of the Act, for payment of duty, 
simultaneously with the notice under Section 124 of the Act 
or by issuing composite notice for such an action. No doubt, 
it could have waited for option to be exercised by the 
Institute under Section 125(1) of the Act as well and in that 
eventuality, duty would have automatically become 
payable under Section 125(2) of the Act. But when such an 
option was not exercised, it could have taken separate and 
independent action by issuing a show-cause notice to the 
effect that the Institute had violated the terms of exemption 
notification and therefore, was liable to pay duty.” 
 
8.8. We can thus conclude the second principle that, when 
confiscation proceedings are initiated under Section 124 of the Act, the 
obligation to pay duty and other charges under Section 125(2) will 
arise only when the owner of goods exercises the option to pay fine for 
redemption of goods and the Department accepting it. 
8.9. An important principle that needs to be recognised is that, the 
customs duty obligation in confiscation proceedings does not 
occasion either under Section 12 or 28. It has arisen because of the 
option available and exercised under Section 125. This obligation 
should not be confused with the method and procedure by which that 

18 
 
customs duty is assessed and determined, which is provided under 
Section 28. It is in this context that we need to consider and explain 
the decision of this court in Jagdish Cancer case. 
9. 
Re: What is the true and correct ratio of the decision in Jagdish 
Cancer case? 
 
9.1.  The real contest in this case is about the correct ratio of the 
judgement in Jagdish Cancer case. According to the appellant, as this 
judgment holds that duty liability in confiscation proceedings arises 
because of Section 125 and not Section 28, there is no liability to pay 
interest on delayed payments under Section 28AB. The facts of this 
case are necessary to be recounted for a clear understanding of the 
ratio of this decision. In this case, the department issued a show-
cause notice under Section 124 of the Customs Act demanding 
customs duty and proposed confiscation under Section 111(o) and 
penalty under Section 112. 
9.2. The importer contended that as there is no notice under Section 
28, the demand and collection of duty are impermissible. We will 
extract the submission as recorded by this court in para 9 of the 
judgment, as it is important to know what was argued and what was 
decided:  
“9. […] Section 28 of the Act which falls in Chapter V 
provides for notice for payment of duties which has been 

19 
 
demanded by the notice in this case. Therefore, it is 
submitted on behalf of the Centre that demand of customs 
duty and the order for payment of the same is relatable to 
only Section 28(1) of the Customs Act, as also found by the 
CEGAT. That being the position, the notice was beyond time 
and not by a competent officer authorised to issue the same. 
The argument, as advanced, though seems to be attractive 
but on scrutiny, we find no merit in it […]”  
 
9.3.  On the other hand, the Department defended its position by 
submitting as follows:  
“8. […] It is submitted that the copy of the notice, as 
annexed, does not mention Section 28(1) of the Customs 
Act, in any case if it is taken to be there, as contended, that 
would make no difference. The submission is that sub-
section (2) of Section 125 of the Customs Act provides that 
where any fine in lieu of confiscation of goods is imposed, 
the importer shall also, in addition, be liable to any duty 
and charges payable in respect of such goods.” 
 
9.4.  It is in the context of the above-referred submissions, that the 
court considered the fact that an option under Section 125 was given 
and it was in fact exercised. Thus, the liability to pay customs duty 
arose under Section 125(2) and therefore, the court held that the 
separate notice under Section 28 is not required. This is exactly what 
the court ruled by holding:  
“12. Whenever an order confiscating the imported goods is 
passed, an option, as provided under sub-section (1) of 
Section 125 of the Customs Act, is to be given to the person 
to pay fine in lieu of the confiscation and on such an order 
being passed according to sub-section (2) of Section 125, the 
person “shall in addition be liable to any duty and charges 
payable in respect of such goods” […]”.  
 

20 
 
9.5.  Again, in the same paragraph, the court notes that the occasion, 
origin, or the circumstance in which the liability to pay duty arose in 
the confiscation proceedings under Section 125 (2). In this case, the 
court was considering and rejecting the submission made on a 
misplaced premise that the proceedings have originated under  
Section 28. Payment of customs duty has not arisen either under 
Section 12 or Section 28, it has arisen because of Section 125(2).  
Therefore, a notice under Section 28 is not necessary. This is how the 
judgment needs to be understood, and it is in this perspective that 
the court has in fact rejected the importer’s objection to the payment 
of duty. 
“12. Whenever an order confiscating the imported goods is 
passed, an option, as provided under sub-section (1) of 
Section 125 of the Customs Act, is to be given to the person 
to pay fine in lieu of the confiscation and on such an order 
being passed according to sub-section (2) of Section 125, the 
person “shall in addition be liable to any duty and charges 
payable in respect of such goods.” A reading of sub-section 
(1) and (2) of Section 125 together makes it clear that 
liability to pay duty arises under sub-section (2) in addition 
to the fine under sub-section (1). Therefore, where an order 
is passed for payment of customs duty along with an order 
of imposition of fine in lieu of confiscation of goods, it shall 
only be referable to sub-section (2) of Section 125 of the 
Customs Act. It would not attract Section 28(1) of the 
Customs Act which covers the cases of duty not levied, 
short- levied or erroneously refunded etc. The order for 
payment of duty under Section 125(2) would be an integral 
part 
of 
proceedings 
relating 
to 
confiscation 
and 
consequential orders thereon, on the ground as in this case 
that the importer had violated the conditions of notification 
subject to which exemption of goods was granted, without 
attracting the provisions of Section 28(1) of the Customs 
Act.” 
 

21 
 
9.6. We conclude by holding that Jagdish Cancer case is not an 
authority for the proposition that when the liability to pay customs duty 
has occasioned under Section 125, the calculation, determination or 
the assessment of such duty cannot be made under Section 28. 
10. Re: Whether the liability to pay such duty will include the liability 
to pay interest on delayed payment under section 28AB of the Act? 
 
10.1.    The text of Section 125(2) clearly provides that, where any 
fine in lieu of confiscation of goods is imposed under sub-Section (1), 
the owner of such goods shall be ‘liable to any duty and charges 
payable with respect to such goods’. The sub-section provides that 
the liability to any duty and charges, that are payable, shall be paid 
in addition to the fine. We have held that Section 28 would come into 
operation for assessing and determining the duty and other charges 
payable with respect to goods redeemed under Section 125(2). Once 
Section 28 applies for determination of duty obligation arising under 
Section 125(2), the interest on delayed payment of duty arises under 
Section 28AB. The said provision obligates payment of interest in 
addition to the duty. We thus answer the last issue by holding that 
the interest liability under Section 28 AB is also attracted. 

22 
 
11.  Conclusion: For the reasons mentioned hereinabove, we uphold 
the decision of the High Court in Writ Petition Lodging No. 1387 of 
2009 dated 29.08.2009 and dispose of the present Civil Appeal No. 
1024 of 2014. No order as to costs. 
 
 
………………………………....J. 
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 
 
………………………………....J. 
[ARAVIND KUMAR] 
NEW DELHI; 
JULY 23, 2024.