2024 INSC 561
NON-REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 4384-4385/2023
THE GOA FOUNDATION                                  
APPELLANT(S)
                                VERSUS
THE GOA STATE ENVIRONMENT IMPACT 
ASSESSMENT AUTHORITY & ORS.
RESPONDENT(S)
J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.
We have heard the learned senior counsel appearing for the
appellant,  the  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  first  and  the
second  respondents,  the  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  third
respondent, and the learned ASG appearing for the sixth respondent.
2.
An original application was filed by the appellant before the
National Green Tribunal (for short, “the Tribunal”) under Sections
14 and 15 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 (for short, “the
2010 Act”), taking objection to the construction of Tiracol Bridge
which was proposed to be erected on the Querim Beach in Goa.  The
objection was raised on various grounds, including the ground that
there  is  a  violation  of  CRZ  Notification  which  requires  prior
approval of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
(MoEFCC)/SEIAA.  Another  objection  was  that  the  construction  was
proposed to be carried out in a No Development Zone (NDZ) and no
mitigation measures were taken.  The Tribunal passed an interim
order  of  status  quo and,  thereafter,  sought  a  report  from  the
1
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.07.31
10:22:38 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

National  Institute  of  Ocean  Technology,  Chennai  (for  short,
“NIOT”).  By the first impugned order dated 22nd January, 2020, the
Tribunal referred to the observations made in the report of the
NIOT and disposed of the Original Application by directing that the
work of construction of the Bridge may proceed after taking all due
precautions in accordance with law and, particularly, as suggested
in the report of the NIOT.  
3.
We may note here that after the report was submitted by NIOT,
objections to the report in the form of an affidavit were filed by
the appellant on 30th March, 2016.  The report of the NIOT was filed
on 8th February, 2016.  The first impugned order dated 22nd January,
2020 does not even refer to the objections raised to the report by
the  appellant.   The  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  third
respondent pointed out that an affidavit was filed by the third
respondent dealing with the objections raised by the appellant.  We
find that there is no reference to the said affidavit in the first
impugned order.  Not giving an opportunity to the parties to make
submissions on the report amounts to the breach of the principles
of natural justice.
4.
The second impugned order dated 17th January, 2022 has been
passed on a misc. application filed by the appellant for recall of
the  order  dated  22nd January,  2020.   The  Misc.  Application  for
recall was filed pursuant to the liberty granted by the High Court
vide  order dated 11th March, 2021 in a writ petition filed by the
appellant.
2

5.
With the assistance of the learned senior counsel appearing
for the appellant and the learned counsel appearing for the third
respondent, we have perused the second impugned order.  According
to us, the only course open for the Tribunal was to recall its
earlier  order  as  the  appellant  was  not  given  an  opportunity  to
argue in support of the objections raised by it to the report of
NIOT. As the appellant was not heard on its objections, even the
third respondent was not heard on the subject.  Therefore, we are
of the view that the Tribunal ought to have recalled its first
order dated 22nd January, 2020 and kept the Original Application for
hearing.  However, that was not done.
6.
One  of  the  main  objects  of  the  2010  Act  is  to  uphold  and
protect the right of the citizens to healthy environment which is a
part  of  the  right  to  life  guaranteed  under  Article  21  of  the
Constitution of India.  The objects and reasons of the 2010 Act
indicate that the object of setting up the Tribunal was to protect
the said fundamental right.  In this case, it was the duty of the
Tribunal to address the issues raised by the appellant on merits.
The duty of the Tribunal was to decide the issues especially when
the contention of the appellant was that the construction of the
proposed bridge will cause harm to the environment.
7.
Our attention is invited to a judgment dated 21st September,
2022 in PIL Writ Petition No. 4 of 2022 passed by the Full Bench of
the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Goa Seat, which holds that
only the Western Zonal Bench of the Tribunal can hear the matters
3

arising from Goa and Maharashtra.  In view of this decision of the
Full Bench of the Bombay High Court, now after the order of remand,
the Original Application will have to be heard by the Western Zonal
Bench of the Tribunal.
8.
Accordingly, the impugned orders are hereby quashed and set
aside.  Original Application No.33/2015 (WZ) is restored to its
original  number  to  the  file  of  the  National  Green  Tribunal,
Principal Bench at New Delhi.  The Principal Bench shall transfer
the restored Original Application to its Western Zonal Bench at
Pune for hearing.
9.
The Registry is directed to forward a copy of this order to
the Registrar of the National Green Tribunal, Principal Bench, New
Delhi, who will ensure that the restored Original Application is
transferred to the Western Zonal Bench of the Tribunal within three
weeks from the date of receipt of the copy of this order.
10.
We direct the parties to appear before the Western Zonal Bench
of the National Green Tribunal at Pune on 9th September, 2024 at
10:30 a.m.  The parties which are represented today shall not be
issued any further notice and they will be under an obligation to
appear before the Tribunal.  Considering the lapse of time, the
Tribunal will permit the parties to file additional pleadings if
they so desire.
11.
Till the disposal of the Original Application by the Tribunal,
the interim relief granted by this Court on 10th July, 2023 will
4

continue to operate.
12.
As a result of the interim order, the construction of Tiracol
Bridge has not commenced.  It will be always open for the third
respondent and the State of Goa to request the Tribunal to give an
out  of  turn  priority  to  the  hearing  of  the  restored  Original
Application.
13.
The Appeals are partly allowed on the above terms.
14.
All questions are left open to be decided by the Western Zonal
Bench of the National Green Tribunal at Pune.  
..........................J.
      (ABHAY S. OKA)
        
                   
 ..........................J.
      (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH) 
NEW DELHI;
JULY 23, 2024.
5