2024 INSC 550
CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 25 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7933 OF 2024     
ARISING OUT OF  
PETITION FOR SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CIVIL) NO.  25631 of 2019 
 
 
 
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS  
 
 
                 ..…APPELLANTS  
 
 
Versus 
 
 
SHISHU PAL @ SHIV PAL  
 
 
 
  
     …..RESPONDENT 
 
 
J U D G E M E N T 
 
 
HIMA KOHLI, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The appellants – Director General, Central Reserve Police Force1 and others 
have preferred the present appeal against the judgment and order dated 7th February, 
2019 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Gauhati in a writ appeal2 
upholding the order dated 27th March, 2018 passed by the learned Single Judge in a 
writ petition3 setting aside the order of termination of services of the respondent by the 
 
1 For short ‘the CRPF’ 
2 Writ Appeal No.248 of 2018 
3 WP(C) No. 5986/2014 
REPORTABLE 
Digitally signed by
KAVITA PAHUJA
Date: 2024.07.23
19:02:23 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 25 
 
Disciplinary Authority vide order dated 24th June, 2014 duly upheld by the Appellate 
Authority on 23rd September, 2014.    Resultantly, the appellants were directed to 
reinstate the respondent in service with all consequential benefits and 50% back-wages.  
However, liberty was granted to the appellants to impose a minor punishment on the 
respondent instead of terminating his services.  The appeal preferred by the appellants 
against the judgment of the learned Single Judge has been dismissed by the Division 
Bench that was of the opinion that as on 30th November, 2011, when the respondent 
was issued an appointment order and he had filled up the Verification Roll, no summons 
had been issued against him in a criminal case registered on 4th September, 2011 nor 
was he aware of the pendency of the said proceedings and therefore, there was no 
question of his having deliberately withheld any material information regarding his 
antecedents from his employer.    Aggrieved by the said judgment, the appellants have 
preferred the present appeal.  
 
Factual Matrix 
3. 
The respondent was appointed on the post of a Constable (GD) in the CRPF 
and inducted in Group Centre, CRPF, Lucknow.  On completion of his basic training, he 
reported to 149 Battalion.  At the time of his recruitment on 17th November, 2011, the 
respondent submitted his character certificate and antecedent certificate, issued by the 
District Magistrate, District Mainpuri (Uttar Pradesh).    

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 25 
 
4. 
As a part of completion of requisite formalities related to recruitment, Group 
Centre, Lucknow directed all employees including the respondent herein to fill up the 
Verification Roll.   The said Verification Roll stated that if it was found during the service 
period that the employee had given incorrect details in the verification letter or 
concealed any correct information, his services could be terminated. Column 12 of the 
Verification Roll specifically directed the employees to state in clear terms whether he 
had ever been arrested or prosecuted or whether any case was pending against him in 
any Court of law at the time of filling up the form. The answer to a series of questions 
on the same lines was required to be given in a ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ format while again 
cautioning the employee that furnishing of any false information or suppression of any 
factual information would be a disqualification and likely to render the employee unfit 
for employment under the government. A warning was also issued that if any false 
information was furnished or there was suppression of any factual information that came 
to the notice of the employer during the course of service of a person, his services would 
be liable to be terminated.  
5. 
The respondent filled up the Verification Roll and gave a reply in the negative in 
response to all the questions posed in column 12 of the form. Thereafter, verification of 
the character and antecedents of the respondent was undertaken by the appellants who 
approached the District Magistrate, Mainpuri, U.P. vide letter dated 19th December, 
2011. A reply was received on 21st March, 2012 stating inter alia that no adverse 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 25 
 
remarks were found against the respondent which could disqualify him from service in 
the CRPF.  
6. 
Subsequently, a letter dated 29th December, 2012 was received in the office of 
the appellant No. 3 - Commandant, 149 Battalion stating inter alia that the respondent 
had concealed information regarding some cases registered against him on the basis 
of a First Information Report4 under Sections 147/148/149/447/332/427/504/506 of the 
Indian Penal Code5 and under Section 3(1) of the Uttar Pradesh Control of Goondas 
Act, 19706.  Based on the said letter, steps were taken to re-verify the character and 
antecedents of the respondent.  In the reverification process, the District Magistrate, 
Mainpuri confirmed that Criminal Case No. 459/2011 had been registered against the 
respondent and the matter was pending before the Court.   A show cause notice was 
issued to the respondent, vide Memorandum dated 9th July, 2013 detailing the charges 
levelled against him.  Vide reply dated 1st August, 2013, the respondent categorically 
denied all the charges as false.  This led to initiation of an inquiry against the 
respondent.   
 
 
 
4 Criminal Case No. 459/2011 and Criminal Case No. 537/2011 @ FIR No. 76 of 2011 dated 4th September, 
2011 at Barnhal Police Station, District Mainpuri, U.P.  
5 For short ‘IPC’; 
6 For short ‘UP Goondas Act’ 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 25 
 
DOMESTIC ENQUIRY PROCEEDINGS 
7. 
The Inquiry Officer submitted his report stating inter alia that on examining 
various documents presented before him and on hearing the respondent, it transpired 
that not only had he withheld material information in respect of Criminal Case No. 
459/2011 and Criminal Case No. 537/2011 registered against him at Barnahal Police 
Station, Mainpuri which were pending in the Court, he had also furnished  fake reports 
purportedly issued by the SHO of the area on 10th October, 2013, 14th November, 2013 
and 20th March, 2014 and that on enquiring, the Station House Officer7 had given in 
writing that neither had he prepared the reports purportedly submitted to the authorities 
in his writing, nor had he signed them and the said reports were not even issued by the 
concerned Police Station.   It is noteworthy that the said reports were submitted by the 
respondent to the appellants and they recorded that the respondent was unaware of the 
case registered against him in respect of Criminal Case No.459/2011 and that the said 
case was closed on a compromise being arrived at with the complainant.  
8. 
On examining the authenticated verification reports received subsequently from 
the District Officer, District Mainpuri, U.P., Superintendent of Police, District Mainpuri, 
U.P. and the SHO, Barnhal Police Station, District Mainpuri, U.P., the Inquiry Officer 
concluded as follows: 
 
7 For short ‘SHO’ 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 25 
 
“Report of Investigating Officer 
Under Office Order No. P. VIII-2/2013- 149-Establishment -Two (S. Pal) 
dated 08.03.2014 of Commandant- 140 Battalion CRPF undersigned providing 
a copy of the charges leveled against Force No. 115184265 Constable/GD 
Shishupal F/ 149 Battalion, CRPF under Rule 27 of the Central Reserve Police 
Force Rules, 1955 read with Rule 15 of CCS (CCA) Rules 1965 and the 
ongoing departmental inquiry proceedings against him order for completion 
was received. I have concluded the investigation on the basis of all the 
witnesses, relevanl documents and evidence presented before me during the 
departmental inquiry, the departmental inquiry report prepared by me is as 
follows - 
xxx 
  
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
8.   On the basis of authenticated verification reports received from District 
Officer District Mainpuri U.P., Superintendent of Police District Nainpuri UP, 
SHO Barnhal Police Station District Mainpuri Uttar Pradesh, the following facts 
come to light:- 
 
A) According to the report dated 05.05.2014 sent by the Court Additional 
District Magistrate Mainpuri, after receiving the police report against Shri 
Shishupal alias Shivpal son of Bharat Singh resident of Emahasan Nagar 
police station Barnhal district Mainpuri (accused), registering case no. 236 
under Goonda Act notice dated 11.11.2011 was issued and instructions 
were given to appear in the court on 19.11.2011 but the accused did not 
appear in the court on the appointed date. The accused had stated in his 
statement given during his first examination that he was staying in 
Shikohabad for taking SSC coaching from 03.06.2011 at Lakshy 
Competition Classes, near Pratappur Chauraha, Shikohabad, District 
Firozabad, Uttar Pradesh due to which he was not aware of the facts of the 
case being filed against him.The accused had produced a copy of the 
certificate dated 08.10.2013 issued by Lakshy Competition Classes 
Shikohabad, Firozabad in evidence of his statement. In which it was shown 
that Shishupal son of Bharat Singh, is a native of Emahasan Nagar police 
station, Barnhal district, Mainpuri. He was studying coaching at his place 
since last year. While doing coaching, there was a dispute between them 
and at that time he was implicated in the dispute. He was doing coaching at 
that time. He used to come to study daily from 30.06.2011 (Evidence No.09) 
but after verification by the special messenger, no such coaching institute 
was found at the address given in the certificate. This makes it clear that 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 25 
 
during the said period the accused was present in his hometown and even 
after the case registered against him in the Barnahal police station was in 
his knowledge, he joined CRPF on 30.11.2011 while filling his verification 
letter, he did not disclose the said case and has deliberately hidden this fact. 
B) From the time of joining this force and filling the verification form till now, the 
accused has been submitting various fake documents to protect his job (to 
achieve his personal interest) and has given false statements to prove 
himself innocent. Therefore, the accused is also accused of presenting 
wrong facts and making and presenting fake documents. 
C) During verification of the copies of police reports dated 10.10.2013, 
14.11.2013 and dated 20.03.2014 issued by the police station Barnhal 
presented by the accused in his defence, SHO Barnhal Mainpuri declared 
those reports as fake and stated that these certificates were neither in his 
knowledge nor have the SHO signed them nor have these reports been 
issued by the Barnahal Mainpuri police station. Rather, this department has 
also been misled by the accused personnel by preparing it in a completely 
fake manner. Therefore, this act of the accused completely proves his 
criminal mentality and at present he has presented wrong facts even during 
the departmental investigation. 
9. 
It is clear from the verification certification reports of the documents 
submitted by the accused that the accused has either prepared or got the 
documentary evidence prepared in a fake manner and from the beginning of 
this departmental investigation till now, the accused has been presenting as 
per his wish from time to time during his trial and re-trial. Therefore, the facts 
and documents presented by the accused during the investigation are beyond 
veracity and cannot be trusted. Therefore, the allegation leveled against the 
accused in Item -1 of Clause- I is completely proved beyond any doubt.” 
 
 
DECISION OF THE DISCIPLINARY AUTHORITY AND APPELLATE AUTHORITY 
 
9. 
The said Inquiry Report was placed before the Disciplinary Authority namely, 
appellant No. 3 – Commandant, 149 Battalion who observed that while filling his 
character and antecedent Verification Roll at the time of his appointment, the 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 25 
 
respondent had deliberately concealed registration of two cases against him namely, 
Criminal Case No. 459/2011 and Criminal Case No. 537/2011 and submitted 
photocopies of fake documents purportedly issued by various authorities.   As a result, 
an order was passed directing the respondent to be removed from service forthwith.  
10. 
Aggrieved by the dismissal order dated 24th June, 2014, passed by the 
Disciplinary Authority, the respondent preferred an appeal before the Appellate 
Authority namely, appellant No. 2 - Deputy Inspector  General, CRPF Group Centre, 
Silchar, Assam which was also rejected vide order dated 23rd September, 2014 
observing that the punishment of removal from service imposed upon him was 
proportionate to the severity of his crime.  
 
FINDINGS OF THE HIGH COURT 
11. 
The aforesaid decisions were challenged by the respondent in a writ petition8 
filed before the High Court of Gauhati which was allowed by the learned Single Judge 
vide judgment dated 27th March, 2018. The learned Single Judge set aside the 
dismissal order passed by the appellants against the respondent on the ground that 
when the respondent was selected for appointment to the post of Constable(GD) and 
had filled up his Verification Roll stating inter alia there was no criminal case pending 
 
8 Writ Petion No. 5986 of 2014 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 25 
 
against him, he was not aware of the said criminal cases and it was only after the order 
was passed by the appellants on 24th June, 2014, removing him from service that he 
made inquiries about the criminal case pending against him and that later on, he had 
been acquitted by the learned Additional Civil Judge(Junior Division), Mainpuri in 
Criminal Case No. 459/2011. It was also observed that the respondent was fairly young 
when the incident had taken place and there was possibility of his having committed an 
indiscretion while furnishing incorrect information in the Verification Roll but not enough 
for the appellants to have adopted an unduly harsh approach which was 
disproportionate to the offence allegedly committed by the respondent. As a 
consequence, the order date 24th June, 2014 passed by the Disciplinary Authority and 
the order dated 23rd September, 2014 passed by the Appellate Authority were quashed 
and set aside and the appellants were directed to reinstate the respondent in service 
with all consequential benefits along with 50% backwages.   At the same time, liberty 
was granted to the appellants to reconsider the matter and impose a minor punishment 
on the respondent, as prescribed under Section 11 of the CRPF Act, 1949, if so advised. 
The aforesaid order was unsuccessfully challenged by the appellants in an Intra-Court 
Appeal9 filed by them which order is the subject matter of consideration in the present 
appeal.  
 
9 Writ Appeal No. 248 of 2018 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 25 
 
 
 
ARGUMENTS ADVANCED BY LEARNED COUNSEL FOR THE APPELLANTS 
 
12. 
Ms. Nidhi Gupta, learned counsel for the appellants has assailed the impugned 
judgment on the ground that the High Court has failed to appreciate that the respondent 
had committed grave misconduct by suppressing material facts in his Verification Roll 
about his involvement in Criminal Case No. 459/2011 and Criminal Case No. 537/2011; 
that the appellants were justified in removing the respondent from service on the ground 
of suppression of material facts and even on the date when he was removed from 
service, Criminal Case No. 537/2011 was pending against him and it was only 
subsequently that he was acquitted in the said case on 22nd October, 2014 which alone 
could not improve his case of suppression of material facts; that the offences mentioned 
in Criminal Cases No. 459/2011 and 537/2011 were grave in nature and the respondent 
was well aware of the pendency of the said cases at the time of filling up the Verification 
Roll.   Learned counsel contended that the High Court has failed to appreciate that when 
it comes to uniformed service, suppression or false information is taken seriously as 
such a service requires a higher level of integrity.  The respondent cannot claim a right 
of service or appointment or continuity of service when it has been established that he 
had deliberately withheld material information relating to his antecedents. Any 
relaxation given to the respondent would run against the settled procedure established 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 25 
 
under the CRPF Act, 1949 and CRPF Rules, 1955 as also OM dated 19th May, 1993 
issued by the Department of Personnel and Training, Government of India read with 
Rule 11 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 196510 
which mandates that when a government servant furnishes false information to secure 
appointment, he should not be retained in service and should be dismissed after 
conducting an inquiry.  
 
ARGUMENTS ADVANCED BY LEARNED COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENT  
13. 
On his part, Mr. Brijesh Kumar Gupta, learned counsel for the respondent has 
supported the impugned judgment dated 07th February, 2019 and the findings returned 
by the learned Single Judge in the judgment dated 27th March, 2018 and urged that 
while setting aside the order of dismissal from service, an option was given to the 
appellants to reconsider the case of the respondent and award him lesser punishment 
as against the major punishment of removal from service imposed on him, which option 
is still available.  Learned counsel stated that the crime in question that resulted in 
registration of a FIR against the respondent and his family members was related to a 
land dispute amongst the villagers and the Criminal Court had subsequently acquitted 
the respondent vide order 22nd October, 2014; that it was only after the inquiry was 
 
10 CCS(CCA) Rules 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 25 
 
initiated  against the respondent on the basis of the Memorandum of Charges dated 
09th July, 2013, that he made inquiries at his level and for the first time gathered 
knowledge about the case relating to a quarrel between two parties in the village over 
a plot of land under the possession of his family members where his name was also 
falsely included. Learned counsel asserted that no warrant or summon had been issued 
against the respondent which fact was ignored by the appellants at the time of 
terminating his service.  In fact, respondent had been falsely implicated in the criminal 
cases and deserves leniency. 
 
DISCUSSION 
14. 
We have heard the arguments advanced by learned counsel for the parties, 
gone through the records and perused the impugned judgment.   The question that 
arises for consideration in the instant case is whether the appellants were justified in 
terminating the services of the respondent on the post of Constable (GD) in the CRPF 
after conducting a departmental inquiry against him on receiving information that he 
had deliberately failed to reveal in his Verification Roll that two criminal cases were 
pending against him. 
15. 
It is an admitted position that the respondent was required to furnish all the 
relevant factual information as required in the Verification Roll issued by the CRPF.  The 
Verification Roll started with three sets of warnings that are extracted below : 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 25 
 
“Warning 
 
1. The furnishing of false information or suppression of any factual 
information in the verification Roll would be a disqualification and is 
likely to render the candidate unfit for employment under the 
Government.  
 
2.   If detained, convicted, debarred etc. subsequent to the completion 
and submission of this Form the details should be communicated 
immediately to the authority to whom the Verification Roll has been 
sent earlier failing which it will be deemed to be a suppression of 
factual information. 
 
3.    If the fact that false information has been furnished or that there has 
been suppression of any factual information in the Verification Roll 
comes to notice at any time during the service of a person, his 
services would be liable to be terminated.” 
 
At the end of the Verification Roll, the employee was required to reply in the affirmative 
or in the negative to specific queries as extracted below:   
“(a) Have you ever been arrested? 
(b) Have you ever been prosecuted? 
(c) Have you ever been kept under detention? 
(d) Have you ever been bound down? 
(e) Have you ever been fined by a court of law? 
(f) Have you ever been convicted by a Court of Law for any offence? 
(g) Have you ever been debarred from any examination or rusticated by 
any University or any other educational Authority /institution? 
(h) Have you ever been debarred /disqualified by any Public Service 
Commission/Staff Selection Board for any of its examination /selection? 
(i) Is any case pending against you in any court of law at the time of filling 
up this Verification Roll? 
(j) Is any case pending against you in any University or any other 
Educational Authority/Institution at the time of filling up this Verification 
Roll? 
(k) Whether discharged/expelled/withdrawn from any Training Institution 
under the Government or otherwise? 
 
If the answer to any of the above mentioned questions is 'Yes' given 
full 
particulars 
of 
the 
case/ 
arrest/ 
Detention 
/fine/ 
conviction/sentence/punishment etc. and/or the nature of the case 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 25 
 
pending in the Court/ University/Educational Authority etc. at the time of 
filling up this Form.” 
 
16. 
The respondent herein filled up the Verification Roll on 30th November, 2011 and 
in response to the specific queries posed in the last two pages, elected to reply in the 
negative. Subsequently, when a private party submitted a written complaint to the 
appellants that the respondent had deliberately withheld material information in relation 
to two criminal cases registered against him at PS, Barnhal, District Mainpuri, U.P. 
under several sections of the IPC  and the U.P. Goondas Act, a show cause notice 
dated 03rd May, 2013 was issued to the respondent enclosing therewith all the relevant 
information to which he responded on 13th May, 2013, specifically denying the fact that 
no case was registered against him or was pending trial or that he had never been 
arrested by the police or detained in judicial custody.  
17. 
The records however reveal that the respondent was arrayed as a co-accused 
in Criminal Case No. 459/2011. He was taken into judicial custody and was granted bail 
by the trial Court on 04th October, 2011. On 13th November, 2013 charges were framed 
against the respondent and the other co-accused and the matter was set down to trial. 
All the incidents relating to registration of the FIR, detention of the respondent, his 
having applied for bail while in judicial custody and being granting bail vide order dated 
04th October, 2011 had transpired much before he was called upon by the appellants to 
fill up the Verification Roll, i.e., well before 30th November, 2011. Despite that, the 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 25 
 
respondent elected not to disclose the information pertaining to the aforesaid cases to 
the appellants and replied in the negative to the specific queries posed to him in the 
Verification Roll, as have been extracted above. He adopted the same stand even after 
a notice to show cause was issued to him by the appellants calling upon him to explain 
his conduct.   On his categorically denying the allegations levelled against him, the 
appellants proceeded to follow the prescribed procedure of conducting a departmental 
inquiry against the respondent for which purpose, an Inquiry Officer was appointed.  
18. 
A perusal of the Inquiry Report submitted by the Inquiry Officer reveals that the 
respondent had duly participated in the departmental inquiry from the beginning to the 
end, the statements of all the prosecution witnesses were recorded in his presence and 
the respondent was also afforded an opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses.  He 
was duly furnished copies of the statements of all the prosecution witnesses and was 
permitted to lead evidence in his defence, which he did. Only after conducting a full-
fledged inquiry did the Inquiry Officer submit his report clearly stating therein that the 
allegations levelled against the respondent in the Office Memorandum dated 9th July, 
2013 to the effect that he had committed misconduct and concealed the fact that two 
criminal cases were pending against him when he had furnished the information in the 
Verification Roll, were correct.  Further, the departmental inquiry recorded the fact that 
the respondent had prepared or got prepared forged police reports and certificates 
favouring him which were in fact never prepared or issued by the SHO, P.S., Barnhal.  

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 25 
 
19. 
The aforesaid sequence of events demolishes the plea taken by the respondent 
that he was innocent and had no knowledge of his implication in the criminal cases 
mentioned in the charge memo and therefore, there was no occasion for him to have 
concealed material facts at the time of filling up the Verification Rolls.  Not only was the 
respondent aware of the fact that he had been named in the FIR, he was taken into 
judicial custody and had applied for bail which was granted by the trial Court on 04th 
October, 2011, much before the date he filled up the Verification Roll.  The other plea 
taken by learned counsel for the respondent that in any case, the Criminal Court did not 
find any merit in the case that was trivial in nature and the respondent was accordingly 
acquitted vide order dated 22nd October, 2014 passed by the learned Judicial 
Magistrate, Mainpuri also does not hold any water inasmuch as the judgment itself notes 
that the prosecution had failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and for that 
reason, it was considered appropriate to absolve the respondent and the other co-
accused by giving them benefit of doubt. In other words, it was not a case of clean 
acquittal but a case of paucity of evidence that led to the acquittal of the respondent 
and the other co-accused. In any event, in our opinion, not much would turn on the 
subsequent acquittal of the respondent on the basis of the judgment dated 22nd October, 
2014 for the reason that the termination of his  services is not premised on the pendency 
of the criminal cases or their outcome, but on the failure on the part of the respondent 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 25 
 
to have truthfully disclosed in the Verification Roll that criminal cases were pending 
against him at the relevant point in time. 
 
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS AND THEIR APPLICATION   
20. 
Without burdening this judgment with a catena of judicial precedents on the 
aspect of suppression of material information, submission of false information in the 
Verification Roll by an aspirant of a job when the incumbent has faced criminal 
prosecution or has been arrested or on account of pendency of a criminal case, we may 
directly cite the much quoted decision of a three-Judges Bench of this Court in Avtar 
Singh v. Union of India and Others11  where broad guidelines were laid down 
regarding the yardstick to be applied for verification of disclosures made by a candidate 
to the employer so as to decide as to whether the applicant would be fit for appointment 
or not. Following were the pertinent observations made in Avatar Singh (supra): 
“29. The verification of antecedents is necessary to find out fitness of 
incumbent, in the process if a declarant is found to be of good moral 
character on due verification of antecedents, merely by suppression of 
involvement in trivial offence which was not pending on date of filling 
attestation form, whether he may be deprived of employment? There may 
be case of involving moral turpitude/serious offence in which employee 
has been acquitted but due to technical reasons or giving benefit of 
doubt. There may be situation when person has been convicted of an offence 
before filling verification form or case is pending and information regarding it 
has been suppressed, whether employer should wait till outcome of pending 
criminal case to take a decision or in case when action has been initiated there 
is already conclusion of criminal case resulting in conviction/acquittal as the 
case may be. The situation may arise for consideration of various aspects in a 
 
11 (2016) 8 SCC 471 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 25 
 
case where disclosure has been made truthfully of required information, then 
also authority is required to consider and verify fitness for appointment. 
Similarly in case of suppression also, if in the process of verification of 
information, certain information comes to notice then also employer is required 
to take a decision considering various aspects before holding incumbent as 
unfit. If on verification of antecedents a person is found fit at the same time 
authority has to consider effect of suppression of a fact that he was tried for 
trivial offence which does not render him unfit, what importance to be attached 
to such non-disclosure. Can there be single yardstick to deal with all kinds of 
cases? 
xxx  
xxx 
 
xxx 
36. What yardstick is to be applied has to depend upon the nature of post, 
higher post would involve more rigorous criteria for all services, not only 
to uniformed service. For lower posts which are not sensitive, nature of 
duties, impact of suppression on suitability has to be considered by 
authorities concerned considering post/nature of duties/services and 
power has to be exercised on due consideration of various aspects. 
xxx  
xxx 
 
xxx 
38. We have noticed various decisions and tried to explain and reconcile them 
as far as possible. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we summarise our 
conclusion thus: 
 
38.1. Information given to the employer by a candidate as to 
conviction, acquittal or arrest, or pendency of a criminal case, 
whether before or after entering into service must be true and there 
should be no suppression or false mention of required information. 
38.2. While passing order of termination of services or cancellation of 
candidature for giving false information, the employer may take notice of 
special circumstances of the case, if any, while giving such information. 
38.3. The employer shall take into consideration the government 
orders/instructions/rules, applicable to the employee, at the time of taking 
the decision. 
38.4. In case there is suppression or false information of involvement in a 
criminal case where conviction or acquittal had already been recorded 
before filling of the application/verification form and such fact later comes 
to knowledge of employer, any of the following recourses appropriate to 
the case may be adopted: 
38.4.1. In a case trivial in nature in which conviction had been recorded, 
such as shouting slogans at young age or for a petty offence which if 
disclosed would not have rendered an incumbent unfit for post in question, 
the employer may, in its discretion, ignore such suppression of fact or false 
information by condoning the lapse. 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 25 
 
38.4.2. Where conviction has been recorded in case which is not trivial in 
nature, employer may cancel candidature or terminate services of the 
employee. 
38.4.3. If acquittal had already been recorded in a case involving moral 
turpitude or offence of heinous/serious nature, on technical ground and it 
is not a case of clean acquittal, or benefit of reasonable doubt has been 
given, the employer may consider all relevant facts available as to 
antecedents, and may take appropriate decision as to the continuance of 
the employee. 
38.5. In a case where the employee has made declaration truthfully of a 
concluded criminal case, the employer still has the right to consider 
antecedents, and cannot be compelled to appoint the candidate. 
38.6. In case when fact has been truthfully declared in character 
verification form regarding pendency of a criminal case of trivial nature, 
employer, in facts and circumstances of the case, in its discretion, may 
appoint the candidate subject to decision of such case. 
38.7. In a case of deliberate suppression of fact with respect to 
multiple pending cases such false information by itself will assume 
significance and an employer may pass appropriate order cancelling 
candidature or terminating services as appointment of a person 
against whom multiple criminal cases were pending may not be 
proper. 
38.8. If criminal case was pending but not known to the candidate at the 
time of filling the form, still it may have adverse impact and the appointing 
authority would take decision after considering the seriousness of the 
crime. 
38.9. In case the employee is confirmed in service, holding 
departmental enquiry would be necessary before passing order of 
termination/removal or dismissal on the ground of suppression or 
submitting false information in verification form. 
38.10. For determining suppression or false information attestation/ 
verification form has to be specific, not vague. Only such information which 
was required to be specifically mentioned has to be disclosed. If 
information not asked for but is relevant comes to knowledge of the 
employer the same can be considered in an objective manner while 
addressing the question of fitness. However, in such cases action cannot 
be taken on basis of suppression or submitting false information as to a 
fact which was not even asked for. 
38.11. Before a person is held guilty of suppressio veri or suggestio falsi, 
knowledge of the fact must be attributable to him.” 
      (emphasis added) 
 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 25 
 
21. 
Ultimately, the purpose of seeking the relevant information with respect to the 
antecedents of a candidate/employee is to enable the employer to ascertain the 
suitability of  the candidate/employee for the subject post. In The State of Madhya 
Pradesh and Others v. Bhupendra Yadav12 (authored by one of us, Hima Kohli, J), 
citing the decision in Avtar Singh (supra), the following observations were made:  
“16. As can be discerned from the above decision, an employer has the 
discretion to terminate or condone an omission in the disclosure made by a 
candidate. While doing so, the employer must act with prudence, keep in mind 
the nature of the post and the duties required to be discharged. Higher the post, 
more stringent ought to be the standards to be applied. Even if a truthful 
disclosure has been made, the employer is well within its right to examine the 
fitness of a candidate and in a concluded criminal case, keep in mind the nature 
of the offence and verify whether the acquittal is honourable or benefit has been 
extended on technical reasons. If the employer arrives at a conclusion that the 
incumbent is of a suspect character or unfit for the post, he may not be 
appointed or continued in service.” 
22. 
We may also profitably cite the decision in Daya Shankar Yadav v. Union of 
India and Others13 where the consequences of examining the information received 
from a candidate with respect to his/her antecedents regarding suitability for the post 
have been discussed as follows:  
 
“15. When an employee or a prospective employee declares in a verification 
form, answers to the queries relating to character and antecedents, the 
verification thereof can therefore lead to any of the following consequences: 
(a) If the declarant has answered the questions in the affirmative and furnished 
the details of any criminal case (wherein he was convicted or acquitted by giving 
 
12 (2023) SCC Online SC 1181/ 2023INSC837 
13 (2010) 14 SCC 103  

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 25 
 
benefit of doubt for want of evidence), the employer may refuse to offer him 
employment (or if already employed on probation, discharge him from service), 
if he is found to be unfit having regard to the nature and gravity of the 
offence/crime in which he was involved. 
(b) On the other hand, if the employer finds that the criminal case disclosed by 
the declarant related to offences which were technical, or of a nature that would 
not affect the declarant's fitness for employment, or where the declarant had 
been honourably acquitted and exonerated, the employer may ignore the fact 
that the declarant had been prosecuted in a criminal case and proceed to 
appoint him or continue him in employment. 
(c) Where the declarant has answered the questions in the negative and 
on verification it is found that the answers were false, the employer may 
refuse to employ the declarant (or discharge him, if already employed), 
even if the declarant had been cleared of the charges or is acquitted. This 
is because when there is suppression or non-disclosure of material 
information bearing on his character, that itself becomes a reason for not 
employing the declarant. 
(d) Where the attestation form or verification form does not contain proper or 
adequate queries requiring the declarant to disclose his involvement in any 
criminal proceedings, or where the candidate was unaware of initiation of 
criminal proceedings when he gave the declarations in the verification 
roll/attestation form, then the candidate cannot be found fault with, for not 
furnishing the relevant information. But if the employer by other means (say 
police verification or complaints, etc.) learns about the involvement of the 
declarant, the employer can have recourse to courses (a) or (b) above.” 
 (emphasis added) 
 
 
23. 
In Rajasthan Rajya Vidhut Prasaran Nigam Limited and Another v. Anil 
Kanwaria14, this Court had opined that even where there was a subsequent acquittal, 
an employee cannot claim appointment as a matter of right having furnished false 
information or having indulged in suppression of material facts relating to a pending 
 
14 (2021) 10 SCC 136 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 25 
 
criminal case. A dent in the credibility of such an employee from the perspective of the 
employer has been mentioned in the following words: 
“14. The issue/question may be considered from another angle, from the 
employer's point of view. The question is not about whether an employee was 
involved in a dispute of trivial nature and whether he has been subsequently 
acquitted or not. The question is about the credibility and/or 
trustworthiness of such an employee who at the initial stage of the 
employment i.e. while submitting the declaration/verification and/or 
applying for a post made false declaration and/or not disclosing and/or 
suppressing material fact of having involved in a criminal case. If the 
correct facts would have been disclosed, the employer might not have 
appointed him. Then the question is of trust. Therefore, in such a situation, 
where the employer feels that an employee who at the initial stage itself has 
made a false statement and/or not disclosed the material facts and/or 
suppressed the material facts and therefore he cannot be continued in service 
because such an employee cannot be relied upon even in future, the employer 
cannot be forced to continue such an employee. The choice/option whether 
to continue or not to continue such an employee always must be given to 
the employer. At the cost of repetition, it is observed and as observed 
hereinabove in catena of decision such an employee cannot claim the 
appointment and/or continue to be in service as a matter of right.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
24. 
In the case at hand, the learned Single Judge has erred in accepting the 
submission made on behalf of the respondent that it was only after the appellants 
passed the order dated 24th June, 2014 removing him from service that he had inquired 
about the criminal case pending against him and later on, the respondent was acquitted 
in Criminal Case No. 459/2011.   As noted above, the said observations run contrary to 
the record itself that clearly reveals that the respondent was well-aware of the fact that 
a criminal case had been registered against him, he was taken into judicial custody and 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 25 
 
had subsequently applied for bail along with other co-accused in the said case which 
was granted by the trial Court on 04th October, 2011. All the aforesaid events had 
occurred well before 30th November, 2011, the date on which the respondent had filled 
up the Verification Roll.  Therefore, it has to be observed that the respondent had 
complete knowledge of the registration of the FIR and pendency of the criminal cases.  
Despite that, he had wilfully withheld material information from the appellants while 
filling up the Verification Roll.   He had further misconducted himself when the appellants 
issued him a show-cause notice calling upon him to explain his position and falsely 
denied the allegations levelled against him in his reply to the notice to show cause that 
ultimately led to initiation of disciplinary proceedings against him.  
25. 
As for the observations made by the learned Single Judge that the respondent 
was a young man and his indiscretion ought to be condoned by imposing a minor 
penalty upon him instead of removing him from service, the answer lies in the following 
observations made in Bhupendra Yadav(supra): 
 
“24.…..The yardstick to be applied in cases where the appointment sought 
relates to a Law Enforcement Agency, ought to be much more stringent than 
those applied to a routine vacancy. One must be mindful of the fact that once 
appointed to such a post, a responsibility would be cast on the respondent of 
maintaining law and order in the society, enforcing the law, dealing with arms 
and ammunitions, apprehending suspected criminals and protecting the life and 
property of the public at large. Therefore, the standard of rectitude to be applied 
to any person seeking appointment in a Law Enforcement Agency must always 
be higher and more rigourous for the simple reason that possession of a higher 
moral conduct is one of the basic requirements for appointment to a post as 
sensitive as that in the police service.” 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 25 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
26. 
Given the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the present case, we are of the 
firm view that there was no occasion for the learned Single Judge to have interfered in 
the orders dated 24th June, 2014 passed by the Disciplinary Authority terminating the 
service of the respondent, duly upheld by the Appellate Authority vide order dated 23rd 
September, 2014. The Appellate Court fell into the same error when it observed that it 
was incumbent for the appellants to have proven the fact that pendency of the criminal 
case was within the knowledge of the respondent and the said information had been 
deliberately withheld by him.   The records speak to the contrary and make short shrift 
of such a plea taken by the respondent. The respondent does not deserve any latitude 
as it has been established beyond doubt that he was all along aware of the FIR 
registered against him with Barnhal Police Station, Mainpuri, Uttar Pradesh and the 
ensuing criminal cases.  Not just that, the respondent failed to disclose that he had 
remained in judicial custody and on moving an application, was released on bail by the 
trial Court along with other co-accused.  
27. 
In our opinion, the appellants have exercised their discretion as employers in a 
reasonable manner.  On receiving a complaint against the respondent, not only was a 
show cause notice issued to him, all the relevant information was also furnished.  On 
receiving his categorical denial in reply, the appellants proceeded with disciplinary 
proceedings against the respondent.  The said proceedings were conducted in a fair 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF  2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.  25631 OF 2019 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 25 
 
manner and taken to their logical conclusion.  Only thereafter did the Disciplinary 
Authority pass an order terminating the services of the respondent which order was 
upheld by the Appellant Authority, for just and valid reasons. Therefore, it cannot be 
urged that the decision of the appellants to terminate the services of the respondent 
was unjustified, tainted by any malafides or arbitrariness or too harsh. 
28. 
As a result, we have no hesitation in quashing and setting aside the impugned 
judgment dated 07th February, 2019 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court 
upholding the judgment dated 27th March, 2018 passed by the learned Single Judge.  
The order dated 24th June, 2014 passed by the Disciplinary Authority and endorsed by 
the Appellate Authority vide order dated 23rd September, 2014, are restored and upheld. 
The present appeal is allowed. Parties are left to bear their own expenses.   
 
     
…………………………………….J. 
  
 
 
 
 
    [HIMA KOHLI] 
 
 
       
 
             
  
 
 
 
 
……………………………………….J. 
 
[AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH] 
 
NEW DELHI, 
23rd JULY, 2024