2024 INSC 557
1 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  8985 OF 2022 
 
 
 
VIDYA AND OTHERS 
 
                  …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
M/S PARSVNATH DEVELOPERS LTD. 
…RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
 
1. 
This appeal challenges the order dated 29th September, 
2022 passed by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission, New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the 
‘Commission’) in Consumer Case No. 1557 of 2016 wherein 
the Commission partly allowed the complaint preferred by 
the complainants-appellants herein and directed the sole 
respondent herein, to refund the entire sum deposited by the 
complainants-appellants with interest at the rate of 9% per 
annum from the date of respective deposit till the date of 
refund, within a period of two months from the date of the 
said order. 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2024.07.29
15:54:30 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
2. 
The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeal are 
as under: 
2.1. M/s Parsvnath Developers Limited (hereinafter referred 
to as the ‘Developer’), a company registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956, and engaged in the business of 
development and construction of inter alia residential 
projects as well as projects for the Delhi Metro Rail 
Corporation, launched a group housing project (hereinafter 
referred to as ‘the project’) titled ‘Parsvnath Paramount’ at 
Subhash Nagar (near Subhash Nagar Metro Station), New 
Delhi in the year 2008 and widely publicized the same. 
2.2. Upon 
gaining 
knowledge 
of 
the 
project, 
the 
complainants-appellants booked a 3BHK flat in the said 
project and to that end, deposited a sum of Rs.16,03,066/- 
on 15th July, 2008. Subsequently, the complainants-
appellants paid second instalment of an identical sum on 
14th August, 2008. 
2.3. Subsequently, the complainants-appellants and the 
respondent-Developer entered into a Flat Buyer Agreement 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘the Agreement’) on 10th October, 
2008 and in furtherance of the same, the complainants-

3 
appellants were allotted Flat No. 301 situated in Tower 3 of 
the project, which had an approximate area of 1805 sq. ft. 
The total payable price of the flat was determined to be Rs. 
1,28,24,525/- calculated at the rate of Rs. 7105/- per sq. ft. 
of the saleable/super built-up area. An additional sum of Rs. 
3,00,000/- was to be paid for the mandatory covered car 
parking space in the concerned tower. Clause 11(a) of the 
Agreement clarified that the construction of the flat would be 
completed within a period of 30 months of commencement of 
construction of the particular Tower in which the flat was 
located, with a further grace period of 6 months. 
2.4. The complainants-appellants opted for a ‘Construction 
Linked Payment Plan’ under which 25% of the sale price was 
payable within 30 days of booking, 60% of the sale price and 
the additional sum for the covered car parking space was 
payable in 6 installments and 15% of the sale price was 
payable in another 3 installments. In pursuance of the same, 
the 
complainants-appellants 
paid 
a 
total 
sum 
of 
Rs.1,30,62,971/- in the intervening period between 15th July, 
2008 and 21st December, 2013, as per the demand of the 
respondent-Developer. The aforesaid amount deposited by 

4 
the complainants-appellants amounted to about 95% of the 
total sale price of the flat. 
2.5. In the meanwhile, the respondent-Developer unilaterally 
transferred the said Flat No. 301 situated in Tower 3, which 
had been initially allotted to the complainants-appellants, to 
Flat No. 702 situated in Tower 2, admeasuring 1942 sq. ft., 
in April, 2011. 
2.6. Subsequently, 
the 
respondent-Developer 
raised 
a 
demand for the payment of VAT amounting to Rs. 60,141/- 
which was duly paid by the complainants-appellants on 29th 
January, 2014. A second payment of an identical sum was 
made on 13th March, 2014. 
2.7. In the interregnum, the period of 36 months set out in 
the Agreement, including the grace period of 6 months, had 
expired.  
2.8. On failure of the respondent-Developer to handover the 
possession of the flat within the expected deadline, despite 
timely payments, the complainants-appellants made several 
attempts to contact the respondent-Developer to enquire 
about the progress of the project but received no substantial 
update. Thereafter, the complainants-appellants visited the 

5 
site in June, 2015 and discovered that no construction work 
was ongoing. 
2.9. Aggrieved by the halt in construction, the complainants-
appellants in a letter dated 15th June, 2015, addressed to the 
respondent-Developer, enquired about the time-frame within 
which the construction would be completed and possession 
would be handed over to them. Further, the complainants-
appellants enquired about the manner in which they would 
be compensated on account of the delay in delivery of 
possession. 
2.10. 
The respondent-Developer in subsequent letters 
dated 29th June, 2015 and 5th July, 2015 informed the 
complainants-appellants that the delay in construction was 
on account of technical issues and recession in the real-
estate sector owing to which construction for the project had 
suffered. However, the respondent-Developer, assured the 
complainants-appellants that they had persisted with the 
construction and the same would be completed at the 
earliest and the complainants-appellants would be informed 
about the tentative date for making an offer of possession, 
thereafter. So far as the compensation claimed for was 

6 
concerned, the same was to be governed by the terms and 
conditions laid down in the Agreement. However, the 
respondent-Developer failed to directly address the specific 
queries that had been raised by the complainants-appellants. 
2.11. 
Subsequently, 
the 
complainants-appellants 
addressed two further letters to the respondent-Developer on 
28th October, 2015 and 6th January, 2016, respectively, once 
again raising queries as to when the construction would be 
completed and the possession would be handed over to them, 
whether the construction would be completed at all and the 
manner in which the complainants-appellants would be 
compensated for the delay in conclusion of the project. 
However, the respondent-Developer did not respond to the 
said letters. 
2.12. 
Aggrieved thereby, the complainants-appellants 
filed a complaint before the Commission being Consumer 
Case No. 1557 of 2016 praying for a refund of the entire 
amount paid by them as per the current market value along 
with interest at the rate of 24% per annum, thereon, from the 
date of booking the flat till the date of payment as well as 
compensation amounting to Rs. 1,37,36,350/- along with 

7 
interest at the rate of 24% per annum thereon, among other 
reliefs.  
2.13. 
The learned Commission, by the impugned order, 
partly allowed the said Consumer Case No. 1557 of 2016 in 
the afore-stated terms, with costs of Rs. 1 lakh. 
3. 
Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal. 
4. 
We have heard Shri Sanjay Jain, learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the complainants-appellants and Shri 
Jayant Muth Raj, learned Senior Counsel appearing on 
behalf  of the respondent-Developer. 
5. 
Shri 
Jain, 
learned 
counsel 
appearing 
for 
the 
complainants-appellants 
submitted 
that 
the 
learned 
Commission erred in awarding the interest only at the rate of 
9% per annum.  He submitted that the Agreement provided 
that, in case there is delay in payment by the flat purchaser, 
the respondent-Developer was entitled to condone the same 
by charging interest at the rate of 24% per annum of the 
amount in default.  He further submitted that the proforma 
agreement was fully tilted in favour of the respondent-
Developer.  The Agreement provided that, in case of delay in 
completion of the project by the respondent-Developer, it was 

8 
liable to pay interest only at the rate of 12% per annum.  It is 
submitted that there is no logic in making the flat purchaser 
liable for payment of interest at the rate of 24% per annum 
whereas the respondent-Developer was liable to pay interest 
only at the rate of 12% per annum. 
6. 
Shri Jain therefore submitted that, applying the 
principle of parity, the learned Commission ought to have 
awarded the interest at the rate of 24% per annum.  It is 
submitted that, in any case the interest at the rate of only 9% 
per annum is not sustainable in law. 
7. 
Per contra, Shri Jayant Muth Raj, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-Developer 
submitted that the delay in completion of the project was not 
deliberate.  He submitted that, since there was a delay in 
sanctioning of the plans by the Delhi Development Authority, 
the project could not be completed. It is therefore submitted 
that the case was duly covered under the force majeure 
clause and as such, interest even at the rate of 9% was not 
liable to be imposed upon the respondent-Developer. 
8. 
We have perused the order passed by the learned 
Commission.  Insofar as the contention of the respondent-

9 
Developer that since there was a delay in sanctioning the 
layout plans, it was covered under force majeure clause is 
concerned, this Court, in the case of DLF Home Developers 
Limited (earlier known as DLF Universal Limited) and 
Another v. Capital Greens Flat Buyers Association and 
Others1 has held to the contrary. Therefore, the contention 
in that regard is without substance.  We find that the learned 
Commission has rightly directed the respondent-Developer to 
refund the entire amount deposited by the complainants-
appellants.  However, we find that, insofar as award of 
interest at the rate of 9% per annum is concerned, the 
learned Commission was not justified in the facts of the case 
to award a lesser interest than even the one agreed upon in 
the Agreement.  Undisputedly, the facts of the case show that 
the project was delayed inordinately.  The complainants-
appellants were made to suffer for long, for no fault of them.  
In spite of making the entire payment, they were deprived of 
the possession within the stipulated time. 
 
1 (2021) 5 SCC 537 

10 
9. 
In our view, the learned Commission, at least, ought to 
have awarded interest at the rate of 12% per annum in view 
of clause 7(b) of the Agreement. 
10. In the result, the appeal is partly allowed.  The direction 
made by the learned Commission for refund of the entire 
amount deposited by the complainants-appellants is upheld.  
However, the direction with regard to interest is modified to 
the extent that it shall be paid at the rate of 12% per annum 
from the date of respective deposit till the date of refund.  
The unpaid amount in terms of the aforesaid shall be paid 
within a period of three months from the date of this 
judgment. 
11. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
..............................J.              
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
..............................J.   
(SANDEEP MEHTA)   
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
JULY 29, 2024