2024 INSC 559
 
1 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE/INHERENT JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8127 OF 2024 
ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 20844 OF 2022 
 
YASH DEVELOPERS 
 
  
                ...APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
HARIHAR KRUPA CO-OPERATIVE HOUSING  
SOCIETY LIMITED & ORS.       
 
     …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 217 OF 2024 
IN 
SLP (C) NO. 20844 OF 2022 
 
Table of Contents 
I. Introduction : ................................................................................ 2 
II. 
Scope of Judicial Review against an order under Section 13 of 
the Act: ............................................................................................... 4 
III. 
Accountability of officers exercising power coupled with duty 
under Section 13: ............................................................................. 11 
IV.  Submissions and Analysis: ...................................................... 13 
(i) The first phase of delay is between 2003 and 2011. ............... 14 
(ii) The second phase relates to the delay in obtaining necessary 
permissions, approvals and environmental clearances from 2011 
to 2014.. ........................................................................................ 17 
(iii) The third phase of delay relates to the alleged non-cooperation 
of certain slum dwellers leading to the stalling of the project from 
2014 to 2019.. ............................................................................... 18 
(iv) The next period of inaction is from 2015 to 2017. This is sought 
to be justified on the ground that the Municipal Corporation 
sanctioned a road that may pass through the property and 
published the draft development plan (DP) on 25.02.2015. ......... 20 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.07.30
19:46:09 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
2 
(v) Re: Appellant did not have the financial resources.. .............. 21 
(vi) Re: Submission on maintainability of proceedings before AGRC.25 
(vii) Re: Locus or conflict of respondent no.6. .............................. 27 
V. 
Findings:................................................................................... 28 
VI. 
Conclusion: ................................................................................ 32 
VII. Re : Performance audit of statute: ............................................. 32 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
I. 
Introduction : 
2. 
The present controversy is a manifestation of common 
battles between competing real estate developers under the 
pretext of rehabilitating slum dwellers under the Maharashtra 
Slum Areas (Improvement, Clearance and Redevelopment) Act, 
19711. In the year 2003, the appellant was appointed as a 
developer by respondent no. 1, a co-operative Housing Society 
of slum dwellers having their hutments on the subject land in 
Borivali, Mumbai which was declared as a ‘slum area’ under the 
Act. As the development was unduly prolonged for over two 
decades, the development agreement in favour of the appellant 
 
1 Hereinafter, referred to as the “Act”. 

 
3 
was terminated by the Apex Grievance Redressal Committee2 by 
its order dated 04.08.2021. The order of termination was 
challenged by the appellant before the Bombay High Court3.  
3. 
The Bombay High Court formulated the following issues: 
 “(i) A developer being removed on the non-fulfillment of the 
basic requirement to commence construction of a slum 
rehabilitation building for a long period of 18 years, whether 
is not fatal to the object and intention of a statutory intent 
behind a Slum Rehabilitation Scheme. 
 
(ii) Another question would be as to whether the right to shelter 
which is part of the slum dwellers’ right to livelihood 
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution, can be 
continued to be nullified by such actions of unconscionable 
delay on the part of the developer, in not commencing 
construction of the slum project even by an inch more 
particularly when the nature of such work awarded to a 
developer for him is purely a commercial venture, for profit.”  
 
4. 
Apart from the above two issues, the High Court 
highlighted the limited scope of judicial review under Article 226 
of the Constitution against the decision of the statutory 
authority-AGRC. The High Court, however, proceeded to 
examine the facts in full detail and dismissed the writ petition 
on facts, as well as on law4. Thus, the present appeal.  
5. 
Even before us, the appellant argued the case only on 
facts, to the extent that we were under an illusion that we were 
 
2 For short, the ‘AGRC’. 
3 Writ Petition (L) No. 18022 of 2021. 
4 By judgment dated 14.10.2022, reported as 2022 SCC Online Bom 3712, hereinafter referred 
to as the impugned Judgment.  

 
4 
hearing suit for specific performance involving an issue of ready 
and willingness. Having heard the learned counsels for the 
parties at length on facts, we will certainly deal with their 
submissions, but before that we must reiterate the limited scope 
of inquiry under Article 226 of the Constitution. 
II. 
Scope of Judicial Review against an order under 
Section 13 of the Act: 
 
6. 
In this case, as in any other public law proceedings, we are 
concerned with the legality and validity of the power exercised 
by the AGRC in terminating the development agreement with 
the appellant by its order dated 04.08.2021. This order is in 
exercise of power under Section 13 of the Act which is as under: 
“13. Power of Competent Authority to redevelop 
clearance area: 
(1) 
 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1) of Section 12 the Competent Authority may, 
at any time, after the land has been cleared of 
buildings in accordance with a clearance order, but 
before the work of redevelopment of that land has been 
commenced by the owner, by order, determine to 
redevelop the land at its own cost, if that Authority is 
satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest to 
do so. 
(2) 
   Where land has been cleared of the buildings 
in accordance with a clearance order, the Competent 
Authority, if it is satisfied that the land has been, 
or is being, redeveloped by the owner thereof in 
contravention of plans duly approved, or any 
restrictions or conditions imposed under sub-section 
(10) of Section 12, or has not been redeveloped 
within the time, if any, specified under such 
conditions, may, by order, determine to redevelop 
the land at its own cost. 
 

 
5 
Provided that, before passing such order, the owner 
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause why the order should not be passed.” 
  
 
 
 
             (emphasis supplied) 
 
7. 
Section 13(2) of the Act specifically empowers the 
competent authority to re-determine the agreement if it is 
satisfied that the re-development has not been done within the 
time 
specified. 
The 
provision 
is 
certainly 
a 
statutory 
incorporation of time integrity in the performance of the duty. 
We recognise this as a statutory duty of the competent authority 
to ensure that the project is completed within the prescribed 
time. We have no hesitation even in holding that a writ of 
mandamus would lie against the concerned authorities if they 
do not perform the statutory duty of ensuring that the project is 
completed within the time prescribed.  
8. 
In Susme Builders Pvt. Ltd. v. CEO, Slum Rehabilitation 
Authority & Ors.5, this Court held that Section 13(2) of the Act 
empowers the statutory authorities to take action and hand over 
the project to some other agency if the development is being 
delayed. The relevant portions of the judgment are as under:- 
“49.  Otherwise, there would be an anomalous 
situation where the Society would have terminated its 
contract with Susme but the letter of intent issued by 
the SRA would continue to hold the field and it would 
be 
entitled 
to 
develop 
the 
land. 
The 
Society 
 
5 2018 (2) SCC 230. 

 
6 
approached the SRA, in fact, asking it to take action 
against Susme. Since the SRA is the authority which 
issued the letter of intent, it will definitely have the 
power to cancel the letter of intent... 
… 
52.   A bare reading of these provisions shows that in 
terms of clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (3) of Section 
3-A of the Slum Act, the SRA not only has the power, 
but it is duty-bound to get the slum rehabilitation 
scheme implemented and to do all such other acts and 
things as will be necessary for achieving the object of 
rehabilitation of slums. In this case, the SRA was 
faced with a situation where the slum-dwellers were 
suffering for more than 25 years and, therefore the 
action taken by SRA to remove Susme for the 
unjustified delay was totally justified.” 
 
9. 
Case after case, the Bombay High Court has been ruling 
that, a) the developer is duty-bound to complete the project 
within the stipulated time and that b) the Slum Rehabilitation 
Authority (SRA) has not merely the power but a broader duty to 
ensure that the developer completes the project within time. We 
will refer to those judgments, not so much to certify that the 
issue is no more res-integra, but to emphasise that the rulings 
have not had the desired impact, much less compliance. The 
reason is that, neither the developer nor the authority is asked 
to face the consequences of their derelictions. That Section 13(2) 
is a power coupled with duty is clear from the judgments of this 
Court and many other judgments of the High Courts, however 
experience tells us that this recognition of a statutory duty in 

 
7 
itself is not sufficient. Until and unless duty is identified with 
accountability, judicial review is ineffective.  
10. In Galaxy Enterprises v. State of Maharashtra6, the Bombay 
High Court observed: 
“53. The record reveals that what M/s Saral could do in eight 
years of its appointment, was to get the Annexure II, namely the 
list of the 73 eligible occupants certified from the MHADA. It was, 
thus, expected from the petitioner that the revalidation of 
Annexure II, which was possibly not a complex formality be 
undertaken at the earliest. However this certainly did not 
happen and citing various reasons, which cannot be believed to 
be not attributable to the petitioner, ultimately, the petitioner 
could not get the Annexure II certified only on 23 December 
2013, which is after about eight years of the petitioner's 
appointment. This fact itself raises a serious doubt as to the real 
intentions of the petitioner to undertake the scheme. The 
petitioner could not have simply blamed the authorities for the 
delay, as there is complete lack of concrete and/or any real 
steps which were to be taken by the petitioner to effectively seek 
different approvals, once the society had put the petitioner in the 
driver's seat, in complete control of the project as rightly 
commented, in the impugned orders. Thus, the case of the 
petitioner, that from time to time steps were taken to implement 
the slum scheme as entrusted to it be the society cannot be 
accepted. These are the contentions of the petitioner, merely 
pointing out some movement of the files with the authorities. This 
was certainly not sufficient and what was required and 
expected by the petitioner was to take real effective steps to 
progress the slum redevelopment. The petitioner was expected 
to expeditiously obtain an Annexure II, as certified by the 
MHADA, 
thereafter 
obtain 
a 
LOI 
and 
then 
obtain 
a 
Commencement Certificate to start with the constructions and 
before that make a provision for temporary alternate 
accommodation for the slum dwellers to reside till completion of 
the scheme. There is not an iota of material to show that any 
such steps much less expeditiously were taken by the petitioner 
which will show the real bonafides of the petitioner to undertake 
the scheme. 
54. In fact the petitioner kept the slum dwellers/society in dark 
on any of the steps alleged to be taken by the petitioner. There 
was no transparency in the petitioner's approach with the slum-
 
6 2019 SCC OnLine Bom 897. 

 
8 
dwellers whose anxious, impatient and painful wait of so many 
years for the slum scheme to start was continuously staring at 
the petitioner's right from the word go. This was not what was 
expected of a diligent developer. The slum schemes are expected 
to be taken and pursued by the developers for genuine and 
bonafide object and purpose to redevelop the slums as reflected 
in the rules which is for the mutual benefit namely the benefit of 
the slum dwellers of being provided a permanent alternate 
accommodation and so far as the developer, to exploit the free 
sale component, which is nothing but a business consideration 
for the developer. If this be the long and short of a slum scheme 
what can be the intention of a developer to sit tight on a slum 
scheme and not take expeditious measures to undertake and 
complete the scheme. The reasons can be innumerable, if the 
reasons are attributable to the authorities, the developer has 
certainly remedies in law to be immediately resorted. No forum 
competent to entertain such complaints would refuse to look into 
such grievances when the very right to livelihood of the slum 
dwellers who are living in inhuman conditions, being a 
concomitant of Article 21 of the Constitution, is involved and 
which becomes a matter of urgent concern and of utmost priority. 
A developer cannot shut his eyes to all these factors and 
attributes, once appointed by the society. For the developer, 
there has be relentless action on day to day basis as any delay 
in not implementing the slum scheme is not only detrimental to 
the slum dwellers, but to the society at large. Delay in effective 
implementation of the slum scheme would defeat the very goal, 
the ideals and the purpose of the slum redevelopment scheme. 
55. A perusal of the record indicates that the society is correct in 
contending that during the period from 2006 to 2016 i.e. for 
about 10 years the petitioner did not take any concrete steps 
towards implementation of the slum rehabilitation scheme and 
the petitioner had clearly failed to obtain a LOI for such a long 
period. The society, thus, was constrained to file the application 
dated 15 March 2016, under Section 13(2) of the Slums Act, 
praying for change of the petitioner as the developer. It is correct 
that Annexure-II was originally issued by MHADA on 16 April 
1998. The petitioner was appointed as developer in the month 
of June 2006 and it clearly took about seven to eight years for 
the petitioner to obtain revised Annexure-II which was obtained 
on 23 December 2013. Before the Chief Executive Officer and 
even before the appellate authority the petitioner has failed to 
show any justifiable reason as to why it took these many years 
for the petitioner to simply obtain a revised Annexure-II when as 
per norms issued by the Slum Rehabilitation Authority 
Annexure-II is required to be finalised within a period of four 
months when the hutment dwellers are below 500 in number. 
Further the record clearly indicates that even after obtaining the 

 
9 
revised Annexure II, on 23 December 2013, the petitioner did not 
initiate immediate steps to obtain LOI for the next three years. 
There is, thus, much substance in the contention of the society 
that only after the society initiated proceedings under Section 
13(2) of the Slums Act, the petitioner initiated steps to obtain a 
LOI. 
... 
57. There cannot be a myopic approach to these issues of a 
delay in implementation of a slum rehabilitation scheme. Things 
as they stand are required to be seen in their entirety. The only 
mantra for the slum schemes to be implemented is it's time 
bound completion and a machinery to be evolved by the 
authorities, to have effective measures in that direction to 
monitor the schemes as a part of their statutory obligation to 
avoid delays. Non-commencement of the slum scheme for long 
years and substantial delay in completion of the slum schemes 
should be a thing of the past. In the present case, looked from 
any angle there is no plausible explanation forthcoming for the 
delay of so many years at the hands of the petitioner to take 
bare minimum steps to commence construction. 
58. The authorities should weed away and reprimand persons 
who are not genuine developers and who are merely agents and 
dealers in slum schemes. These persons after get themselves 
appointed as developers, to ultimately deal/sell the slum 
schemes, as if it is a commodity. Any loopholes in the rules to 
this effect, therefore, are required to be sealed. 
... 
64. Thus, it is quite clear that inordinate delay is a sufficient 
ground for removal of a developer. There is neither any 
perversity nor any illegality in the findings as recorded by both 
authorities below, in observing that the petitioner had grossly 
delayed the implementation of the slum scheme in question. The 
findings as recorded in the impugned order passed by the Apex 
Grievance Redressal Committee are also sufficiently borne out 
by the files produced before this Court…" 
(emphasis supplied) 
11. A Full Bench of the Bombay High Court in Tulsiwadi 
Navnirman Co-op Housing Society Ltd. & Anr. v. State of 
Maharashtra & Ors.7, held that the SRA has been conferred with 
 
7 2008(1) Bom.C.R.1. 

 
10
certain powers and each one of them is coupled with a duty. If 
the slum dwellers are eligible to be rehabilitated at the site and 
within a reasonable period, they cannot be left at the mercy of 
developers and builders. The slum dwellers cannot be expected 
to occupy a transit accommodation endlessly, without proper 
maintenance, and hygiene. An independent and impartial 
implementation, supervision and monitoring of the projects is 
the purpose for which the authority has been set up under the 
Act.  
12. In New Janta SRA CHS Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra8, the 
High Court considered the dispute between two rival societies 
claiming rights over a slum scheme. The Court observed as 
under:- 
“187. It thus cannot be accepted more particularly 
considering the provisions of Section 13(2) of the Slums Act 
that a slum society at its sole discretion and/or without any 
control and regulations by SRA can change the developer. If 
such a course of action is made permissible, considering the 
hard realities and the hundreds of developers being 
available to take over such schemes, it would create a chaos 
and it is likely that a situation is created, that the slum 
rehabilitation scheme never takes off and it is entangled into 
fights between two factions within the society and/or two 
rival developers. This is certainly not the object of the 
legislation. It would be too farfetched to read such 
draconian rights available to the Managing Committee or to 
general body of a society without any regulation, 
supervision and control of the SRA to change the developer. 
The SRA has all the powers not only to regulate and control 
such situations but to take a decision as to what is in the 
 
8  2019 SCC Online Bom 3896. 

 
11
best interest of the slum dwellers and intended to achieve 
the object of the legislation. 
188.  Secondly it is not in dispute that the application of the 
petitioner for change of respondent no.5-developer was 
under Section 13(2) of the Slums Act. Having noted this 
provision in the foregoing paragraphs, Section 13(2) of the 
Slums Act would come into play only when the developer 
fails to adhere to the provisions of the development 
permissions granted by the SRA and a change of developer 
can be sought only when there is an inordinate delay or the 
construction carried on, is contrary to the sanctioned plans 
and/or the permissions. Considering this clear position 
falling under Section 13(2), in the context of this factual 
controversy as raised by the petitioner in regard to the 
consent of 70% of the slum dwellers being not available to 
respondent no.5, 1 am of the clear opinion that the view 
taken by both the authorities, in not accepting the 
petitioner's contention, is required to be held to be correct 
and valid. " 
III. Accountability of officers exercising power coupled 
with duty under Section 13: 
 
13. Two facets of Section 13 (2) of the Act are that; a) the SRA 
has the power to redevelop the project if it is satisfied that the 
development is not proceeding within the time specified, and  
b) that power of SRA is coupled with a duty to ensure that the 
project is completed within time. We hold that the SRA is 
accountable for the performance of this duty. Accountability 
need not be superimposed by the text of a statute, it exists 
wherever power is granted to accomplish statutory purpose.  In 
Vijay Rajmohan v. CBI9, this Court held:- 
 
9 (2023) 1 SCC 329. 

 
12
“34. Accountability in itself is an essential principle of 
administrative law. Judicial review of administrative action 
will be effective and meaningful by ensuring accountability 
of the officer or authority in charge. 
35. The principle of accountability is considered as a 
cornerstone of the human rights framework. It is a crucial 
feature that must govern the relationship between “duty 
bearers” in authority and “right holders” affected by their 
actions. Accountability of institutions is also one of the 
development goals adopted by the United Nations in 201510 
and is also recognised as one of the six principles of the 
Citizens Charter Movement11. 
36. Accountability 
has 
three 
essential 
constituent 
dimensions: 
(i) responsibility, 
(ii) answerability, 
and 
(iii) enforceability. Responsibility requires the identification 
of duties and performance obligations of individuals in 
authority 
and 
with 
authorities. Answerability requires 
reasoned decision-making so that those affected by their 
decisions, including the public, are aware of the 
same. Enforceability requires appropriate corrective and 
remedial action against lack of responsibility 
and 
accountability to be taken12. Accountability has a corrective 
function, making it possible to address individual or 
collective grievances. It enables action against officials or 
institutions for dereliction of duty. It also has a preventive 
function that helps to identify the procedure or policy which 
has become non-functional and to improve upon it.” 
 
14. For 
effective 
implementation 
of 
the 
principle 
of 
accountability of power under the Act, we identify the duties and 
performance obligations of the CEO. It is evident from the 
statutory scheme that the responsibility vests in the CEO, 
defined under Section 2 (b+a) read with Section 3A(2) of the Act. 
 
10 United Nations General Assembly Resolution 70/1 dated 25-9-2015. 
11 Citizens Charter adopted by the Government in the “Conference of Chief Ministers of various 
States and Union Territories” held in May 1997 in New Delhi, available from 
https://goicharters.nic.in/public/website/home. 
12 See Office of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Who will be 
Accountable? Human Rights and the Post-2015 Development Agenda, available from 
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/WhoWillBeAccountable.pdf 

 
13
The CEO reports to the SRA, the duty of which is defined under 
Section 3B of the Act. One of the most important duties of the 
SRA is to ensure that the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme is 
implemented.  
14.1.  
The primary responsibility to implement Section 13 of 
the Act and allied provisions and to monitor compliances of 
schemes and agreements vests with the CEO. If the actions of 
CEO are based on the directions of the SRA, then the SRA must 
equally bear the responsibility. The CEO and/or the SRA must 
explain the delay in implementation, failing which, the 
consequences as determined by the court will follow.  
 
PART-II 
IV.  Submissions and Analysis: 
15. Returning to facts of the case, Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned 
senior counsel, appearing on behalf of the appellant, articulated 
the allegation of delay into six parts and in his inimitable style 
proceeded to explain how in each part, the appellant had no role 
and not at all responsible. We will deal with each phase of delay 
in the same manner as Mr. Sibal has presented the case before 
us.   

 
14
16. (i) The first phase of delay is between 2003 and 2011. The 
relevant facts are as follows.  
16.1. 
The appellant was appointed by respondent no.1 to 
develop the Project under a development agreement dated 
20.08.2003, following which the appellant made a proposal for 
development on 11.12.2003. The Municipal Corporation of 
Greater Mumbai, however, assigned the re-development to a 
rival society, namely Omkareshwar Co-Operative Housing 
Society13 and a developer, namely Siddhivinayak Developers14 
on 06.05.2004. Pursuant to this, on 07.09.2004, the SRA 
accepted 
the 
proposal 
given 
by 
Omkareshwar 
and 
Siddhivinayak for the development of the Property.  After a long-
drawn litigation between the appellant and respondent no. 1 on 
one side, and Omkareshwar and Siddhivinayak on the other, 
the CEO, SRA finally settled the dispute by its order dated 
07.06.2011 and held that the appellant had the required 70% 
consent of individual slum dwellers to implement the project 
and also that the proposal of Omkareshwar was not valid as it 
was made after the proposal of respondent no.1. Dealing with 
the period, Mr. Sibal has submitted that multiple proceedings 
 
13 Hereinafter, referred to as “Omkareshwar”. 
14 Hereinafter, referred to as “Siddhivinayak”. 

 
15
between the appellant and respondent no. 1 on one side and 
Omkareshwar and Siddhivinayak on the other consumed lot of 
time. While the High Court initially disposed of a writ petition 
recording a settlement that appellant and respondent no.1 are 
entitled to develop the Property, Omkareshwar challenged it 
leading to several rounds of litigation before the High-Powered 
Committee15 and the High Court. The issue was laid to rest only 
on 07.06.2011 by an order of the CEO, SRA holding that the 
appellant enjoyed the consent of 70% of eligible slum dwellers and 
hence was qualified to be the developer. Mr. Sibal has submitted 
that the consequence of this litigation is that the LOI could be 
issued in favour of the appellant only on 29.06.2011, i.e. after this 
dispute was settled. The eight years’ delay in obtaining the LOI was 
inevitable and was not due to any fault of the appellant. 
16.2. 
Per contra, Mr. C A  Sundaram, learned senior counsel, 
appearing for the respondent no.6-Veena Developers, has 
submitted that the appellant did not have the financial capacity or 
the technical expertise to complete the project within the 
prescribed time of 3 years. It is due to this reason that the 
appellant was unable to commence construction even when all the 
 
15 Hereinafter, referred to as the “HPC”. 

 
16
requisite permissions and approvals had been obtained. Further, 
Mr. Huzefa Ahmadi, learned senior counsel, appearing for 
respondent nos.8-48, who are some of the slum dwellers, has 
submitted that the delay in the construction is entirely 
attributable to the appellant. He submitted that the appellant 
did not take any action to obtain the LOI anytime between 2003-
2011. 
16.3. 
While adjudicating on the delay in implementation of 
the project during 2003-2011, the AGRC relied on clause 11 of 
the development agreement dated 20.08.2003 requiring the 
appellant to complete the development of the project within 
three years from the issuance of the Commencement Certificate 
dated 14.07.2014. 
16.4. 
On the issue of delay from 2003 to 2011, the High 
Court examined the facts independently and upheld the 
findings of the AGRC. The High Court held that a delay cannot 
be viewed as reasonable. Further, the High Court held that the 
litigation with Omkareshwar did not prevent the appellant from 
starting the project, especially when the appellant had the 
consent of more than 70% of the slum dwellers at all material 

 
17
times. The High Court also observed that the appellant was not 
diligent in procuring the LOI. 
17. (ii) The second phase relates to the delay in obtaining 
necessary permissions, approvals and environmental clearances 
from 2011 to 2014. The SRA issued Annexure-III, certifying the 
financial capability of a developer on 21.06.2011 and this was 
followed by issuance of LOI dated 29.06.2011. The appellant 
applied for Environmental Clearance16 on 15.12.2011 and 
obtained it only on 28.04.2014. The Commencement Certificate 
for the construction of the rehabilitation building and the high-
rise clearance by the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai 
were issued to the appellant on 14.07.2014 and 09.10.2014, 
respectively. 
17.1. 
In the above referred background, Mr. Sibal submitted 
that the EC had to be obtained before the Commencement 
Certificate could be issued for the construction of the 
rehabilitation building. For on-site construction of more than 
20,000 square meters, EC is required and for this, he relied on 
condition no. 51 of the LOI dated 29.06.2011 and condition no. 38 
of the intimation of approval dated 21.04.2012. While the 
 
16 Hereinafter, referred to as “EC”.  

 
18
appellant made an application for EC in the year 2011, it was 
granted only on 28.04.2014. He has submitted that the delay 
between 2011-2014 was again unavoidable as certain mandatory 
permissions were required. Per contra, Mr. Ahmadi submitted 
that an EC was not required to commence construction of the 
rehabilitation building as the on-site construction did not 
exceed 20,000 square meters. 
17.2. 
Upon perusing the record, the AGRC found that the 
delay was indeed attributable to the appellant. The High Court 
also noticed that the appellant did not commence the 
construction after getting the necessary approvals but waited 
for the EC. The High Court also noted that some parts of the 
project like the rehabilitation building did not require an EC for 
commencing construction.  
18. (iii) The third phase of delay relates to the alleged non-
cooperation of certain slum dwellers leading to the stalling of the 
project from 2014 to 2019. Mr. Sibal submitted that as some of 
the slum dwellers were not cooperative, applications under 
Sections 33 and 38 of the Act for eviction were made to the 
Assistant Municipal Commissioner, MCGM. Initially, the 
Deputy Collector passed orders on 05.11.2020 observing that 

 
19
the eviction proceedings can be taken forward only after 
directions from the High Court and in the meanwhile directed 
the appellant to deposit 11 months rent concerning 30 non-
cooperating slum dwellers. These applications under Sections 
33 and 38 of the Act came to be decided only in 2021, and that 
is how, it is submitted, the project got delayed for reasons 
beyond the control of the appellant.  
18.1. 
Mr. Ahmadi submitted that the pendency of the 
eviction applications does not justify the extraordinary delay of 
5 years on the part of the appellant. Mr. Sundaram submitted 
that the mere filing of applications under Sections 33 and 38 of 
the Act is not sufficient to justify the delay. It is submitted that 
the appellant has failed to take active steps in getting the 
applications disposed of. This inaction suited the appellant as 
it did not have the capacity or the capability to complete the 
project. 
18.2. 
Affirming the findings of the AGRC, the High Court 
observed that the appellant went into deep slumber after filing 
applications for eviction of non-cooperating slum dwellers 
between 2014-2015. 

 
20
18.3.    
The fact that the appellant had to initiate proceedings 
against certain non-cooperating members and that the 
proceedings were pending for a long time, whether justified or 
not, should not have a bearing on the obligations of the 
appellant to complete and handover the project as per the 
development agreement. Under no circumstance, litigation of 
this nature would justify inaction from 2014 to 2019. 
19. (iv) The next period of inaction is from 2015 to 2017. This is 
sought to be justified on the ground that the Municipal 
Corporation sanctioned a road that may pass through the 
property and published the draft development plan (DP) on 
25.02.2015.  
19.1. 
The objections filed by the appellant on 03.04.2015 
eventually came to be disposed of only on 12.11.2018 when the 
said road was deleted from the development plan. This period, 
Mr. Sibal submits, must be excluded as no development, much 
less any construction, is permissible once the draft plan is 
published. 
19.2.    Mr. Sundaram submitted that if the appellant had 
commenced 
the 
construction 
after 
the 
commencement 
certificate dated 14.07.2014, the draft development plan 

 
21
published in 2015 could never have affected the re-development 
at all. He further submitted that as LOI and IOA were issued in 
2011 and 2012, the so-called draft DP published in 2015 cannot 
be a justification. Mr. Ahmadi has submitted that except for 2 
months between 25.02.2015 and 23.04.2015, there was no 
proposed development plan road in any of the plans. He would 
submit that the proposed DP road affected only the proposed 
sale building, not the entire project. In any event, he would 
submit that the sale building could not have commenced till 
substantial progress in rehabilitation building was made. 
19.3.    The observations of AGRC also go to show that draft DP 
could justify 2 years’ delay and no more. The High Court 
observed that the notification dated 25.02.2015 under no 
circumstances 
precluded 
the 
appellant 
from 
starting 
construction of other parts of the Property. 
20. (v) Re: Appellant did not have the financial resources. 
Dealing with the findings of the AGRC and the High Court that 
the appellant did not have the financial resources as evidenced 
by the agreements that they have executed in favour of third 
parties, Mr. Sibal submitted that this issue was never raised in 
the show-cause notice dated 04.12.2020, which initiated the 

 
22
proceedings leading to the termination of the development 
agreement of the appellant. The factual background is that from 
2017 onwards, the appellant executed certain financial 
agreements with third parties. On 17.02.2017, an agreement 
with M/s Rajesh Habitat Private Limited was executed as per 
which the saleable rights under the project were transferred in 
favour of Rajesh Habitat in lieu of finance of Rs. 30 crores. 
Further, Rajesh Habitat mortgaged their rights in favour of M/s 
Vistra ITCL by a deed dated 22.03.2017, which later came to be 
cancelled on 08.02.2019 and a deed of reconveyance between 
the appellant and Vistra was entered into. Later, one M/s 
Sanghvi Associates provided financial assistance of Rs. 50 
crores to the appellant by way of a mortgage deed. In pursuance 
of these financing arrangements, Sanghvi Associates gave no 
objection to the appellant entering into an agreement with 
respondent no.6-Veena Developers. Following this, a joint 
development agreement dated 18.10.2019 was entered into 
between the appellant and respondent no. 6. 
20.1. 
Mr. Sibal contended that the appellant has the 
requisite financial capacity of technical expertise to complete 
the project. He would submit that these agreements do not 

 
23
establish that the appellant does not have the financial capacity 
or the technical expertise to undertake and complete the 
project. That the appellant had the capacity is evidenced by the 
deposit of rents due to the slum dwellers and in fact, the SRA 
has certified the appellant’s financial capacity on 21.12.2019. 
20.2. 
Mr. Sundaram submitted that all the documents were 
before the SRA and that the parties have made submissions on 
all aspects of the matter. He has taken us through the various 
findings of the High Court on the finances and the clauses in 
the agreements entered into with the third parties. The following 
findings of the High Court were referred to: 
“57. 
In any case, the petitioner struggled to avail 
finance and was facing severe financial crisis, this 
itself was material for the Chief Executive Officer of the 
SRA to come to a conclusion that it may not be possible 
for the petitioner to execute the scheme. The Chief 
Executive Officer however did not call upon the 
petitioner to satisfy that it had the appropriate 
finances to undertake the “entire scheme”. The Chief 
Executive Officer merely asking the petitioner to 
deposit the arrears of rent, can in no manner, 
whatsoever, be accepted as a certificate to the 
petitioner possessing a financial capacity to complete 
the project. 
58. 
It is crystal clear from the petitioner’s own 
showing that the petitioner was required to take the 
crutches/financial assistance initially from Rajesh 
Habitat Pvt. Ltd., who in turn looked at Vistra ITCL 
India Ltd. and thereafter having failed with both these 
entities, with one M/s Sanghvi Associates, which is 
not for a small amount but for a substantial amount of 
Rs. 50 crores. Things however would not stop at this 

 
24
and subsequently it appears that now respondent 
no.6-Veena Developers was roped in, to provide 
working capital for the entire project described to be 
the 
business 
partners/joint 
developers 
of 
the 
petitioner as in para 1 of the petition.” 
 
20.3.     
Mr. Sundaram also brought to our notice certain 
clauses in agreements with third parties and submitted that 
this amounts to complete subversion of the scheme. High Court 
has reflected on these clauses. The following findings of the High 
Court are important: 
“73. 
Certainly, 
the 
period 
of 
two 
years 
as 
contractually 
agreed, 
under 
the 
development 
agreement cannot be stretched to such a long period of 
almost 17 to 18 years as in the present case, despite 
these circumstances, an attempt on the part of the 
petitioner to justify that such delay was not 
attributable to the petitioner, at least in the facts of the 
case, is wholly untenable. The AGRC examined the 
case of the petitioner and of the society and the 
situation persisting at the ground level. The AGRC 
however not agreeing with the findings of the Chief 
Executive Officer-SRA, has reached a conclusion that 
the petitioner could not take the project forward for 
reasons which were borne out by the record. 
74. 
In these circumstances to upset the decision of 
the AGRC would amount to rewarding the petitioner of 
its defaults and the breaches committed by it, not only 
of the very terms and conditions of the Development 
Agreement, but also, the clear statutory mandate in 
undertaking Slums Rehabilitation Schemes. In fact, 
the petitioner has betrayed 
the 
trust of the 
society/slum dwellers. Even otherwise, a closer 
scrutiny of the petitioner’s actions clearly hint of the 
petitioner’s interest not in the rehabilitation of the slum 
dwellers but in its own private interest, solely in 
relation to the sale component. There cannot be a 

 
25
space for a pure commercial greed in taking up such 
projects which involves the basic rights of the slum 
dwellers.” 
21. (vi) Re: Submission on maintainability of proceedings before 
AGRC.  Finally, Mr. Sibal submitted that the complaints filed by 
the 12 members of the managing committee of respondent no.1 on 
18.11.2019 were withdrawn by 8 members on 31.12.2019 and by 
another member on 14.01.2020. Consequently, the show-cause 
notice dated 04.12.2020, based on these complaints, was rightly 
withdrawn on 16.03.2021. Secondly, although the managing 
committee of respondent no. 1 had initially terminated the 
development agreement on 02.02.2020, this termination was 
revoked on 28.02.2021. The revocation of termination was because 
the agreement was terminated by Mr. Rai, who did not have the 
requisite authorisation. Mr. Sibal has relied on the above to submit 
that respondent no.1 did not object to the withdrawal of the 
termination of the development agreement of the appellant, and in 
fact, wanted the appellant to continue as the developer. He would 
further submit that Mr. Rai was acting without the authorisation 
of the other members, and hence, he also could not have filed an 
appeal before the AGRC on behalf of respondent no.1 against the 
order of the respondent no. 3 – CEO, SRA dated 16.03.2021 that 

 
26
dropped the proceedings against the appellant. Mr. Navare, learned 
senior counsel, appearing for some of the slum dwellers, supported 
the submissions put forth by Mr. Sibal regarding the lack of 
authorisation of Mr. Rai to act on behalf of respondent no. 1.  
21.1. 
Mr. Sundaram submitted that the appeal before the 
AGRC against the order dated 16.03.2021 was maintainable even 
if some of the complaints filed on 18.11.2019 were withdrawn. He 
submits that Mr. Rai, who filed the appeal, had the requisite locus 
because he, along with some others, had also filed complaints that 
were not withdrawn. It is submitted that Mr. Rai was still a slum 
dweller and a member of respondent no.1 and hence, was an 
‘aggrieved person’ against the order dated 16.03.2021. There were 
also, as many as 132 complaints against the appellant by other 
slum dwellers who filed complaints in January and February, 2021 
before the SRA under Section 13(2) of the Act alleging non-
payment of rent. Lastly, he submits that in any case, the SRA has 
the power to suo moto proceed against the appellant under Section 
13(2) of the Act and therefore the withdrawal of complaints is not 
fatal to proceeding against the appellant and does not preclude the 
AGRC from deciding the appeal. Mr. Ahmadi made a submission 
along the same lines and to the same effect.  

 
27
21.2. 
Answering the question regarding the maintainability 
of the proceedings after the complaints dated 18.11.2019 were 
withdrawn, the High Court held that even if many complaints 
before the SRA were withdrawn, the complaint filed by Mr. Rai 
survived to be adjudicated. Further, the High Court rejected the 
contention of the appellant that Mr. Rai was not authorised by 
respondent no. 1 to take any action against the appellant. In 
order to reach this conclusion, the High Court observed that if 
the contention of the appellant was true, then respondent no. 1 
would have supported the appellant before the High Court; 
however, this was not the case. The High Court also held that 
in any case, the SRA and the AGRC have the requisite power 
under Section 13(2) of the Act to suo moto examine the delay 
caused by the appellant in implementing the project. 
22. (vii) Re: Locus or conflict of respondent no.6: Mr. Sibal 
concluded his submissions by arguing that respondent no.6 
does not have the locus to take a stand contrary to that of the 
appellant as it has been involved with the venture from the time 
of the joint development agreement dated 18.10.2019. For this 
reason, he would submit that the findings of AGRC and the High 
Court must apply to respondent no. 6 as well. 

 
28
22.1. 
Mr. Dhruv Mehta, learned senior counsel, appearing 
for the administrator of respondent no.1 has argued that 
Section 13(2) of the Act empowers and places an obligation upon 
the SRA to take action against the developer when the project is 
not being implemented. Therefore, he submits that even if some 
of the complaints have been withdrawn, the termination of the 
development agreement is valid. 
V. 
Findings: 
23. Having considered the findings of the AGRC and the High 
Court in detail, we have found them to be correct on law and 
fact. Further, having independently considered the detailed 
submissions of the appellant and the respondents, on delay as 
well as on lack of financial and technical capabilities and 
maintainability of the appeal, we proceed to analyse and discuss 
them as follows. 
24. Admittedly, the delay in executing the project, by the time 
of the termination order is more than 16 years. This period is 
sought to be explained by fragmenting it into bits and pieces 
falling between 2003 to 2011, 2011 to 2014 and 2014 to 2019. 
25.  What amuses us is that we are called upon to hold that the 
order of termination for delaying the project for 16 years must 

 
29
be held to be bad by examining each episode of delay as 
independent and stand alone. Judicial Review Courts enquiring 
into these allegations would only examine whether it would be 
arbitrary and/or unreasonable to exclude the delay caused 
because of the incidents that occurred from 2003 to 2019. In 
other words, the inquiry must be to see whether it would be 
unjust if we do not account for the long-drawn litigation with a 
competing builder between 2003 to 2011, the delay in obtaining 
the environmental clearances from 2011 to 2014, or the delay 
caused due to non-cooperation of certain slum dwellers.  
26.  Having examined the matter, we are of the opinion that 
the delay of 8 years in resolving disputes with a competing 
builder cannot be a justification under any circumstance. The 
appellant is a developer and fully understands the process of 
obtaining environmental clearances while other sanctions and 
permissions are pending, and it is for him to make all the 
necessary arrangements.  To say the least, the non-cooperation 
of some of the members cannot be a ground for delaying the 
project from 2014 to 2019. The findings of the AGRC and the 
High Court are very clear, they have correctly held that the delay 
caused due to the sanction of the draft DP for the construction 

 
30
of the road cannot be a justification for delaying the project from 
2015 to 2019. 
27. In any event, execution of the project under the Slum 
Rehabilitation Scheme cannot be viewed as a real estate 
development project. There is a public purpose involved, and 
that is inextricably connected to the right to life of some of our 
brother and sister citizens who are living in pathetic conditions. 
While we reject the justifications given by the appellant for 
delaying the project, we are fully conscious of the dereliction of 
the statutory duty of the SRA in ensuring that the project is 
completed within time. We have already expressed our opinion 
that the CEO and the SRA are accountable for their actions. 
While we reject the justification for delay, we record our 
dissatisfaction about the indifference, amounting to negligence 
on the part of CEO and the SRA. 
28. So far as the submissions relating to the financial 
resources are concerned, we have seen the number of 
agreements that the appellants have entered into. We need not 
examine this aspect independently as the findings are 
concurrent and thorough. The following findings of the High 
Court are sufficient for disposing of this issue: 

 
31
“59. 
The 
petitioner 
time 
and 
again 
having 
approached third parties for financial requirements in 
the manner as discussed above, in fact was quite fatal 
and counter productive to the implementation of the 
slum scheme, for the reason that if any of the financers 
were to withdraw from their financial support and the 
commitments as made to the petitioner, the same 
would leave the petitioner with no remedy but to 
wander further hunting for fresh finance. Such 
financial instability of a developer certainly would 
have a devastating effect on the implementation of the 
slum scheme which could also result in the total 
collapse of the slum scheme being implemented and in 
fact a death knell for the slum scheme. It is for such 
reason, the real wherewithal and financial stability of 
a developer plays an extremely pivotal role, as finance 
is the very lifeline for successful implementation and 
completion of the slum scheme. The present case is a 
classic case of how the petitioner is running helter-
skelter to secure finance, that too without taking the 
society into confidence much less the authorities. This 
on the basis of a solitary clause in the Development 
Agreement which is being discussed hereafter.” 
 
29. We will now deal with the submission on the maintainability 
of the appeal before the AGRC and that respondent no. 6 who was 
the collaborator of the appellant must face the same consequence 
as that of the appellant. This submission proceeds on the 
assumption that the statutory power under Section 13(2) of the 
Act is to be exercised only upon an application made to the 
authority. This is a complete misconception. We have already dealt 
with the scope and ambit of Section 13 of the Act, and in particular 
the duty followed by accountability of the SRA under the said 
provision. Irrespective of whether anybody applied or not, the 

 
32
authority is bound to ensure that the project is completed within 
the time stipulated. In any event, as the dispute before us is 
confined to the legality and propriety of the termination order, we 
are not concerned about the relationship of the appellant with 
respondent no. 6. 
VI. Conclusion: 
30. For the reasons stated above, there is no merit in this appeal, 
and we dismiss the Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 20844 
of 2022 with costs quantified at Rs. 1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lakh) 
payable to Supreme Court Mediation and Conciliation Project 
Committee. In view of our decision, no further orders are 
necessary in the Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 217 of 2024. 
31. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 
VII. Re : Performance audit of statute: 
32. Though we have disposed of this Civil Appeal by dismissing 
it, we must record that this case has provoked us to reflect on the 
working of this Act.  
33. The Act came into being in 1971 and since then, for over five 
decades, the High Court has been exercising judicial review 
jurisdiction, disposing of Writ Petitions raising claims or 
challenges to the exercise of powers or dereliction of duties by 

 
33
Authorities under the Act. Data fetched from National Judicial 
Data Grid (NJDG) reveals that a total of 1612 cases involving 
disputes arising under the Act are pending before the Bombay 
High Court. Of these, 135 cases are more than 10 years old. In the 
last 20 years, 4488 cases have been filed and disposed of under 
the said Act. Latest data from the Bombay High Court reveal that 
about 923 cases on the Appellate side and 738 on the Original Side 
are pending adjudication. The Act is a beneficial legislation, 
intended to materialize the Constitutional assurance of dignity of 
the individual by providing basic housing, so integral to human 
life. However, the propensity and the proclivity of the statute to 
generate litigation are worrisome. There seems to be a problem 
with the statutory framework for realizing the purpose and object 
of the statute. In M/s. Galaxy Enterprises v. State of Maharashtra 
(supra) the Bombay High Court has remarked that: 
“3. …Nonetheless, considering the volumes of disputes 
still reaching the Courts, it can certainly be said that time 
is ripe, if not too late, to ponder, whether things are 
realistically working in the right direction, to eradicate 
slums and rehabilitate the slum dwellers, with the 
desired efficacy and expedition. This not only at the 
hands of the authorities but also at the hands of the other 
stake holders. The vital issue which has often led to 
controversy and disputes, is on the rules permitting, the 
selection and appointment of developers to undertake a 
Slum Rehabilitation Scheme, being conferred on the slum 
dwellers, who are hardly expected to know the nitty-
gritty of the slum redevelopment schemes. It is seen that 
the so called leaders of the slum dwellers who are 

 
34
themselves in need to be rehabilitated, are often lured by 
developers and their agents, and once a developer is 
appointed, what normally prevails is a constant fear of 
incertitude and scepticism amongst the slum dwellers, 
leading to disputes on variety of issues affecting their 
final rehabilitation. Such issues not only frustrate the 
very object of a speedy slum redevelopment but 
completely derail the slum schemes. It can be seen that 
scores of slum schemes have remained incomplete for 
years together and are languishing on such issues, either 
in litigation before Courts and/or before the authorities. 
These schemes need not face such ordeal, including of 
an unending litigation. To change the developer is no 
answer as even this process involves dispute resolution 
and ultimately lengthy litigation from one forum to 
another.”  
 
33.1.  
Further, referring to the statutory scheme, as per which 
development is possible only when the slum dwellers feel the need 
and seek development, the High Court pointed out yet another 
problem about the statutory framework in the following terms; 
“…It cannot be countenanced that the slums be 
redeveloped only when the slum dwellers feel the need 
of a redevelopment and the Government Authorities 
cannot initiate redevelopment and cannot initiate a suo 
motu action in that behalf. It is hence, for the Government 
and the Slum Authority to give its anxious consideration 
to these issues and in its wisdom to device a substantial, 
nay a full proof mechanism, by undertaking a study and 
identify these grey areas, so that the helping hand as 
extended by the legislature in providing this beneficial 
law as far back in 1971 that is almost 50 years back is 
held strongly and firmly by all concerned. It is never too 
late.” 
 
34. The exasperation of the High Court about working of the Act 
is understandable. The present appeal is a classic example of why 
the High Court’s concern is genuine. It has been noticed that the 

 
35
statutory scheme is problematic with respect to: i) Identification 
and declaration of land as a slum. This problem involves an 
examination of the role of authorities in giving such recognition, 
insidious intervention of builders in the said process cast doubts 
on the independence and integrity in the decision-making process; 
ii) Identification of slum dwellers: This involves a complicated 
process of proof of such a status, the attendant problem of 
groupism, giving rise to competing claims inevitably leading to 
litigation; iii) Selection of a developer: The Act leaves this decision 
to the cooperative society of slum dwellers and the majority 
decision is manipulated by competing and rival developers; iv) 
Apportionment of the slum land between redevelopment area and 
sale area: This is yet another area where court has witnessed 
developers seeking to increase the proportion of the sale area, 
leading to contestation; v) Obligation to provide transit 
accommodation for the slum dwellers pending redevelopment: 
Invariably, we see instances where the developer does not provide 
transit accommodation within time or provides an inadequate 
alternative in the form of a quantified amount towards rent, On 
the other hand, there are instances where some slum dwellers 
refuse to vacate the premises on the ground that the transit 

 
36
accommodation is either inconvenient or the amount offered is 
insufficient; vi) There are also issues of lack of independence and 
objectivity in the functioning of statutory authorities: This is a 
matter of serious concern. Courts have witnesses that the 
authorities have no independence and, their tenure is also short. 
Additionally, the functioning of these statutory authorities gives an 
indication that there could be a regulatory capture; vii) Another 
concern which exists is about the effectiveness of statutory 
remedies: Statutory remedies are ineffective and at the same time, 
lacking in accountability and vii) Judicial review proceedings 
under Art. 226 cannot be a long-term solution: We have given 
details of the number of writ petitions pending before the High 
Court in Para 33.  
35. The above-referred problems arising out of the statutory 
scheme and policy framework should have come under review by 
the State of Maharashtra. Assessment of the working of the statute 
to realise if its purpose and objective achieved or not is the implied 
duty of the executive government. Reviewing and assessing the 
implementation of a statute is an integral part of Rule of Law. It is 
in recognition of this obligation of the executive government that 

 
37
the constitutional courts have directed governments to carry 
performance audit of statutes. 
36. Four aspects for achieving justice are well founded and 
articulated as, i) distribution of advantages and disadvantages of 
society, ii) curbing the abuse of power and liberty, iii) deciding 
disputes and, iv) adapting to change17. Adapting to change is 
important for achieving justice, as failure to adapt produces 
injustice and is, in a sense, an abuse of power. Thus, failure to use 
power to adapt to change is in its own way an abuse of power. In 
fact, the issue is not one of change or not to change, but of the 
direction and the speed of change and such a change may come in 
various ways, and most effectively through legislation. Legal 
reform through legislative correction improves the legal system 
and it would require assessment of the working of the law, its 
accessibility, utility and abuse as well. The Executive branch has 
a constitutional duty to ensure that the purpose and object of a 
statute is accomplished while implementing it. It has the 
additional duty to closely monitor the working of a statute and 
must have a continuous and a real time assessment of the impact 
that the statute is having. As stated above, reviewing and 
 
17 See: Justice in Adapting to Change, in R.W.M. Dias, JURISPRUDENCE, 305-327 (5th edn., 
2013). 

 
38
assessing the implementation of a statute is an integral part of 
Rule of Law. The purpose of such review is to ensure that a law is 
working out in practice as it was intended. If not, to understand the 
reason and address it quickly. It is in this perspective that this 
court has, in a number of cases, directed the Executive to carry a 
performance/assessment audit of a statute or has suggested 
amendments to the provisions of a particular enactment so as to 
remove perceived infirmities in its working.18 
37. Constitutional courts are fully justified in giving such 
directions as they are in a unique position of perceiving the 
working of a statute while exercising judicial review, during 
which they could identify the fault-lines in the implementation 
of a statute. This extraordinary capacity to assess the working 
of a statute is available to the judicial institution because of its 
unique position where, i) disputes, based on the statutory 
provisions unfold before it, ii) claims of rights or allegations of 
dereliction of duties are raised with varied, and sometimes, 
contradictory interpretations of the same text of the statute, iii) 
submissions of lawyers opens up a debate and as officers of the 
 
18 State of Haryana v. Mukesh Kumar, (2011) 10 SCC 404; Pravin Electricals (P) Ltd. v. Galaxy 
Infra & Engineering (P) Ltd. (2021) 5 SCC 671; Preeti Gupta v. State of Jharkhand, (2010) 7 
SCC 667; Arif Azim Co. Ltd. v. Aptech Ltd., (2024) 5 SCC 313; Public Interest Foundation v. 
Union of India, (2019) 3 SCC 224. 

 
39
Court experienced lawyers would lay bare the fault-lines in the 
statutory scheme, iv) many a times court silently witnesses the 
play of statutory power relegating the deserving to the backseat, 
and the undeserving taking away all the benefits.  
38. Laws that are made by Parliament or the legislative 
assemblies create rights, entitlements, duties or liabilities. 
Application of such empowerments or disabilities gives rise to 
competing claims or conflicting interests. For resolution of these 
disputes, constitutional courts provide public law remedies19 
where claims and contestations are decided by High Courts on 
a case by case basis. Judicial review is generally episodic, and 
is intended to resolve the lis on a case-to-case basis. Though 
cases are decided on their own merit and the lis disposed of, 
what is left behind is the institutional memory of the Court 
about the working of the statute and its interpretation preserved 
as precedents. Over a period of time, a critical mass of 
adjudicatory determinations on the working of the statute is 
 
19 Judicial control of administrative action in our country, the effective and the most 
prolific, has evolved from its classical scrutiny of ultra vires exercise of power, to a whole 
set of procedural and substantive principles, such as: legality, procedural propriety, 
reasonableness, legitimate expectation, proportionality, transparency, legal certainty, 
accountability, level playing field, consultation or participation etc.  These principles 
are now well entrenched in our judicial review processes and are part of our 
administrative law. In fact, bulk of judicial review proceedings initiate before the High 
Courts examine if the power exercised is with its bounds. 
 

 
40
built. This critical mass, coupled with the experiences gained 
by the Judges and the Court on the working of the statute, is of 
immense value for auditing the working of the legislation. It 
enables the court to assess whether the purpose and object of 
the Act is being achieved or not.  
39. The traditional perception of the constitutional role of writ 
courts was confined to judicial review of executive and legislative 
action. In that role, the courts were to decide the vires of the 
legislative and executive actions based on constitutional 
parameters. Not only have the tools of judicial review been 
reinvented (the rise of the proportionality and arbitrariness 
doctrines) but also the breadth of the judicial power has 
substantially expanded to areas that were hitherto forbidden 
(review of policy decisions, constitutional amendments and 
continuing mandamus being prime examples). However, even this 
expansive reading of judicial review does not capture the essence 
of the judicial branch in its entirety.  
40. There is yet another role which the judiciary can and ought 
to perform- that of facilitator of access to justice and effective 
functioning of constitutional bodies. In this role, the judiciary does 
not review executive and legislative actions, but only nudges and 

 
41
provides impetus to systemic reforms. The statute in question is 
one which was intended to benefit the marginalised and the 
impoverished. It is not easy for the intended beneficiaries of this 
legislation to carry their voice to legislative branch for effective 
reform. The exercise that this Court intends to direct presently is 
aimed at facilitating their access to legislative and executive 
reform, which this court believes is an essential component of 
constitutional justice. That all justice is to be achieved only 
through courtroom debates is too myopic an understanding of 
constitutional justice. The facilitative role is not just inspired from 
the institutional role that the judiciary perceives for itself, but is 
also a directive of many of the fundamental rights in Part III and 
the cherished preambular vision of justice- social, economic and 
political.  
41. A peculiar feature of how our legislative system works is that 
an overwhelming majority of legislations are introduced and 
carried through by the Government, with very few private member 
bills being introduced and debated. In such circumstances, the 
judicial role does encompass, in this court’s understanding, the 
power, nay the duty to direct the executive branch to review the 
working of statutes and audit the statutory impact. It is not 

 
42
possible to exhaustively enlist the circumstances and standards 
that will trigger such a judicial direction. One can only state that 
this direction must be predicated on a finding that the statute has 
through demonstrable judicial data or other cogent material failed 
to ameliorate the conditions of the beneficiaries. The courts will 
also do well, to arrive the very least, at a prima facie finding that 
much statutory schemes and procedures are gridlocked in 
bureaucratic or judicial quagmires that impede or delay statutory 
objectives. This facilitative role the judiciary compels audit of the 
legislation, promote debate and discussion but does not and 
cannot compel legislative reforms.  
42. In light of the foregoing, considering that the Act is a state-
legislation, implementation of which lies with the State of 
Maharashtra, and till date no comprehensive statutory audit has 
been undertaken, we request the Ld. Chief Justice of the Bombay 
High Court to constitute a bench to initiate suo motu proceedings 
for reviewing the working of the statute to identify the cause of the 
problems indicated in Paragraph 34.  The concerned bench will 
hear the government, the statutory authorities, the necessary 
stakeholders including intended beneficiaries and perhaps take 
the assistance of some senior members of the bar specialising in 

 
43
this area as amici curae. We leave it to the High Court to devise 
such methods as it deems fit and appropriate. Having examined 
the matter, the bench may consider directing the government to 
constitute a committee for performance audit of the Act. The 
court’s jurisdiction extends only to that extent, and no further. The 
law-making, including amendments, is the exclusive domain of the 
legislature. 
  
………………………………....J. 
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 
 
………………………………....J. 
[ARAVIND KUMAR] 
NEW DELHI; 
JULY 30, 2024.