2024 INSC 597
NON-REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).3324 OF 2024
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO.4965/2023)
YUGAL SIKRI & ORS.                                 …APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF U.P. & ANR.                              …RESPONDENT(S)
J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.
Leave granted.
FACTS
2.
By impugned judgment, the High Court dismissed the petition
filed  by  the  appellants  under  Section  482  of  the  Code  of
Criminal  Procedure,  1973  (for  short,  “the  Cr.  PC”).   The
petition  was  filed  to  quash  a  complaint  filed  in  a  criminal
Court  by  the  second  respondent  alleging  the  commission  of  an
offence punishable under Section 29 read with Sections 32 and 34
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, “the ID Act”).
Cognizance  was  taken  of  the  alleged  offence  on  the  said
complaint.  A perusal of the impugned judgment shows that the
High Court has dismissed the petition without considering the
merits of the challenge to the complaint.
1
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.08.09
17:49:56 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
3.
The  learned  senior  counsel  appearing  for  the  appellants
submitted that Section 29 of the ID Act is attracted when there
is a breach of any settlement or award binding on the accused
under the provisions of the ID Act.  He submitted that there is
no averment in the complaint about the breach of any particular
settlement or award.  He further submitted that under Section
34(1) of the ID Act, cognizance of any offence punishable under
the ID Act can be taken based only on a complaint made by or
under the authority of the appropriate Government.  He submitted
that no private person can be authorised under Section 34(1) of
the ID Act to file a complaint.  He pointed out that the order
under Section 34 of the ID Act does not refer to any violation
of Section 29 at all, and it only refers to the breach of an
affidavit and the provisions of Section 9A of the ID Act.
4.
On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the
second  respondent  submitted  that  in  paragraph  8  of  the
complaint,  it  is  specifically  alleged  that  an  agreement  was
incorporated in the joint affidavit of the parties filed before
the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad on 9th December 2015
and what is alleged is the violation of the said agreement.  He
submitted that what is stated in the affidavit is an agreement
and,  therefore,  what  was  alleged  was  the  violation  of  the
agreement incorporated in the joint affidavit of the parties.
2

He further submitted that the High Court dealing with a petition
under  Section  482  of  the  Cr.PC  should  be  very  slow  in
interfering with the order of the issue of process.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
5.
Sections 29 and 34 of the ID Act are material which read
thus:
“29. Penalty for breach of settlement or award.-
Any person who commits a breach of any term of
any settlement or award, which is binding on him
under  this  Act,  shall  be  punishable  with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both and where the
breach is a continuing one, with a further fine
which may extend to two hundred rupees for every
day during which the breach continues after the
conviction  for  the  first  and  the  Court  trying
the  offence,  if  it  fines  the  offender,  may
direct that the whole or any part of the fine
realised  from  him  shall  be  paid  by  way  of
compensation, to any person who, in its opinion,
has been injured by such breach.” 
.. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
“34. Cognizance of offences- (1)  No Court shall
take cognizance of any offence punishable under
this  Act,  or  of  the  abetment  of  any  such
offence, save on complaint made by or under the
authority of the appropriate Government.
(2)  No  Court  inferior  to  that  of  1[a
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate
of  the  first  class  shall  try  any  offence
punishable under this Act.”
             (underlines supplied)
6.
Section 29 is applicable when any person commits a breach of
any term of any settlement or award binding on him under the ID
Act. Therefore, in the complaint alleging the commission of an
3

offence punishable under Section 29 of the ID Act, there must be
a specific averment regarding the existence of a settlement or
award binding on the accused under the ID Act and how the same
has been breached. Settlement is defined under Section 2(p) of
the ID Act. 
7.
Before we go into the joint affidavit relied upon by the
learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  second  respondent,  we  must
refer to the statement of the second respondent recorded under
Section  200  of  the  Cr.PC  on  the  complaint.   The  statement
contains a vague reference to “my settlement made in 2015”, the
settlement for the online reporting and MTP, and the settlement
of the expenses bill in an Excel sheet.  Further allegations are
of change of conditions of service alleging a breach of Section
9A of the ID Act. In the verification statement under Section
200 of the Cr.PC, the second respondent, has not referred to the
settlement in the form of the joint affidavit dated 9th December
2015 filed before the High Court. He has not stated whether the
settlements he referred therein were in writing.  Apart from the
said statement of the second respondent, the statement of one
Rajiv Kumar Bhatnagar was also recorded under Section 202 of the
Cr.PC  by  the  criminal  Court.   Even  in  this  statement,  the
witness does not allege a breach of the agreement incorporated
in the joint affidavit dated 9th December 2015.  Therefore, the
learned  Magistrate  could  not  have  issued  a  process  for  the
4

offence punishable under Section 29 of the ID Act based on the
statement made by the second respondent under Section 200 of the
Cr.  PC.   It  is  well-settled  that  the  object  of  recording  a
statement of the complainant under Section 200 of the Cr.PC is
to bring the truth on record.
8.
Now, we come to the joint affidavit, which is relied upon by
the second respondent.  We have perused the said affidavit.  The
affidavit  refers  to  a  written  memorandum  of  settlement  dated
30th August 1996.  The affidavit vaguely refers to a settlement
arrived at between the parties.  The memorandum of settlement
dated 30th August 1996 referred to in the joint affidavit is not
even referred to and relied upon in the complaint.  A copy of
the same has not been produced along with the complaint. 
9.
Section 2(p) of the ID Act reads thus:
“Settlement” means a settlement arrived at
in  the  course  of  conciliation  proceeding
and  includes  a  written  agreement  between
the  employer  and  workmen  arrived  at
otherwise  than  in  the  course  of
conciliation
 
proceeding
 
where
 
such
agreement  has  been  signed  by  the  parties
thereto in such manner as may be prescribed
and  a  copy  thereof  has  been  sent  to  an
officer  authorised  in  this  behalf  by  the
appropriate Government and the conciliation
officer.”
Therefore,  on  a  plain  reading  of  the  complaint,  there  is  no
doubt that the second respondent has not been able to place on
record, along with the complaint, any written settlement within
the meaning of  Section 2(p) of the ID Act between the parties
5

which is binding under the ID Act.  It is not even the case made
out in the complaint that there is any breach of any award by
the appellants.  Thus, on a plain reading of the complaint, the
statement of the second respondent recorded under Section 200 of
the  Cr.PC  and  the  statement  of  a  witness  of  the  second
respondent recorded under Section 202 of the Cr.PC, we find that
the  second  respondent  made  out  no  case  of  breach  of  any
settlement.
10.
Moreover, the order purportedly passed in the exercise of
powers under Section 34(1) of the ID Act does not even refer to
the commission of an offence punishable under Section 29 of the
ID  Act.  The  grant  of  authority  under  Section  34(1)  is  a
condition precedent for filing a complaint under Section 34(2)
of the ID Act. The authority granted under Section 34(1) must be
in  respect  of  a  specific  offence  for  which  a  complaint  is
intended to be filed.  The order refers only to a violation of
Section 9A of the ID Act. The complaint alleges a violation of
Section 29 of the ID Act. But still, there is no reference to a
violation  of  Section  29  in  the  order.   Therefore,  while
exercising  power   under   Section   34(1)  of  the  ID  Act  of
granting authority, there is a complete non-application of mind.
If such authority is issued without any application of mind, the
very  object  of  providing  a  safeguard  in  the  form  of  Section
34(1)  will  be  frustrated.  The  object  of  the  provision  is  to
6

prevent  frivolous  complaints  from  being  filed.   Grant  of
authority is not an empty formality.  We are not going into the
wider question of whether an authority could have been conferred
on the second respondent to file a complaint. In the facts of
the  present  case,  it  is  unnecessary  for  us  to  go  into  the
question.
DUTY OF THE COURT
11.
The learned Magistrate should have considered the averments
made  in  the  complaint  and  the  statements  of  the  second
respondent  and  his  witness  recorded  by  him  before  deciding
whether  a  prima  facie case  of  commission  of  an  offence
punishable under Section 29 of the ID Act is made out. He ought
to have verified whether a lawful authority was granted to the
second respondent to file a complaint alleging a violation of
Section 29 of the ID Act. Setting criminal law in motion has
serious consequences. It cannot be done casually by the learned
Magistrate.  Therefore,  careful  application  of  mind  by  the
learned  Magistrate  was  necessary  before  deciding  to  take
cognizance.  However, that was not done in the present case.
ORDER
12.
Hence, we set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court
and  quash  the  proceedings  of  Complaint  Case  No.85479  of  2022
(CNR No.UPKN040875842022) pending in the Court of the learned
Chief  Metropolitan  Magistrate,  Kanpur  Nagar,  Uttar  Pradesh.
7

Consequently,  the  summoning  order  will  stand  set  aside.   We,
however, make it clear that remedies, if any, available in law
to the second respondent are expressly kept open.
13.
The Appeal is, accordingly, allowed.
..........................J.
      (ABHAY S. OKA)
                          
..........................J.
      (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH) 
NEW DELHI;
JULY 30, 2024.
8