2024 INSC 565
1 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 REPORTABLE 
 
 
  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO …. OF 2024 
  (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 7898 OF 2024) 
 
M/S. PRO KNITS 
 
 
 
     
 
     .....APPELLANT(S) 
  
        
 
 
        VERSUS 
 
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF CANARA  
BANK & ORS. 
 
 
 
  
                     ....RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 WITH 
 
          CIVIL APPEAL NO …. OF 2024 
  (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 3801 OF 2024) 
 
MR. ZUHAIR MOHAMEDALI MERCHANT 
              .....APPELLANT(S) 
 
        
 
 
        VERSUS 
 
IDFC BANK & ORS.  
 
 
  
            ....RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH  
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO …. OF 2024 
  (SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. ….. OF 2024 (@ 
DIARY NO. 16667 OF 2024  
 
NILESH SHAH                                                              .....APPELLANT(S) 
 
        
 
 
        VERSUS 
 
BANK OF BARODA & ORS. 
 
 
            ....RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
 
 
 
 
Digitally signed by
Nisha Khulbey
Date: 2024.08.01
17:20:49 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO …. OF 2024 
  (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 9594 OF 2024) 
 
SADHANA BHARAT RAI 
                                          .....APPELLANT(S) 
 
        
 
 
        VERSUS 
 
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF KOTAK 
MAHINDRA BANK & ORS.  
 
 
            ....RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
  
          CIVIL APPEAL NO …. OF 2024 
  (SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. ………OF 2024 (@ 
DIARY NO. 19108 OF 2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M/S. A. NAVINCHANDRA STEELS PVT.  
LTD. & ANR. 
                                                             .....APPELLANT(S) 
 
        
 
 
        VERSUS 
 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. 
 
 
 
  
   ....RESPONDENT(S) 
 
AND 
 
                    CIVIL APPEAL NO …. OF 2024 
    (SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. ………OF 2024 (@ 
DIARY NO. 19341 OF 2024) 
 
M/S. SHREE SHANTINATH STEELS & ANR.               .....APPELLANT(S) 
 
        
 
 
        VERSUS 
 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. 
 
 
 
  
   ....RESPONDENT(S) 
           
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
 
1. Leave granted. 

3 
 
2. The Appellants in this batch of Appeals, who claim themselves to be 
the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) registered under 
the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 
(hereinafter referred to as the “MSMED Act”), have challenged the 
impugned common order dated 11.01.2024 passed by the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition (L) No. 20100 of 2023 and 
Others, whereby the High Court has dismissed the said Writ Petitions 
by holding that the Banks/ Non-Banking Financial Companies 
(NBFCs) are not obliged to adopt the restructuring process as 
contemplated in the Notification dated 29th May, 2015 issued by the 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, on its own without 
there being any application by the Petitioners/ MSMEs. The High 
Court without expressing any opinion on the merits or the factual 
aspects of the writ petitions granted leave to the Appellants – Writ 
Petitioners to agitate the other issues by adopting alternative 
remedies as may be available to them under the law.  
3. The learned Counsels for the parties in the instant Appeals have also 
restricted their submissions only to the said issue decided by the High 
Court, without addressing other issues on the facts and merits 
involved in the writ petitions.  

4 
 
4. The Appellants who were the Writ Petitioners before the High Court 
had basically challenged the actions of the Respondents Banks/ 
NBFCs taken by them against the appellants under the provisions 
contained in The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial 
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (hereinafter 
referred to as the “SARFAESI Act”). The bone of contention raised by 
the learned Counsel Mr. Mathews Nedumpara appearing for the 
Appellants in all the Appeals is that the respondents-Banks could not 
have classified the loan accounts of the appellants who were the 
MSMEs, as Non-Performing Assets (NPA), without following the 
procedure laid down in the Instructions for Framework for Revival and 
Rehabilitation of MSMEs issued vide the Notification dated 29th May, 
2015 by the Ministry of MSME, in exercise of the powers conferred 
under Section 9 of the MSMED Act. According to him, it was 
incumbent on the part of the Respondents Banks/ NBFCs to identify 
incipient stress in the account by creating three sub categories as 
mentioned in the said Notification and to explore various options to 
resolve the stress in the account as contemplated in the said 
Notification. He further submitted that the said Notification and the 
subsequent Instructions/Directions issued by the Central Government 
and the Reserve Bank of India are for the purpose of facilitating the 
promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of 

5 
 
MSMEs and therefore it was mandatory on the part of the 
respondents to follow the same. Non-observance of the mandatory 
Instructions contained in the said Notification has rendered all the 
subsequent actions taken by the respondents under the SARFAESI 
Act, illegal and void ab initio.  
5. However, the learned Counsels appearing for the Respondents 
Banks/ NBFCs contended that the High Court has rightly not 
considered the process or procedure laid down in the Notification 
dated 29.05.2015 as mandatory, in as much as the provisions 
contained in the SARFAESI Act override the provisions of the other 
Acts including the MSME Act as per Section 35 of the said Act. In the 
instant cases, the concerned appellants had not applied to the 
Respondents Banks to avail the benefit of the said Notification at the 
relevant time and the Respondents Banks have already initiated and 
in certain cases concluded the proceedings undertaken under the 
SARFAESI Act after following the due process of law. They further 
submitted that the process of restructuring as contemplated in the 
said Notification and classification of borrower’s account as NPA are 
two independent subjects and therefore it can not be interpreted that 
unless the procedure under the said Notification for restructuring is 
adopted, the appellants accounts could not have been classified as 
NPAs. According to them, the Instructions issued under Section 9 of 

6 
 
the MSMED Act are mere directory and not mandatory nor do they 
have any statutory force. 
6. Before delving into the issue involved in the instant appeals as to 
whether the Notification dated 29.05.2015 issued by the Central 
Government in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 9 of 
the MSMED Act, as revised from time to time, is mandatory or 
directory, let us have a glance over the relevant provisions of the 
MSMED Act. It may be noted that the very object and purpose of the 
MSMED Act is to provide for facilitating the promotion and 
development and enhancing the competitiveness of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises and for matters connected therewith and 
incidental thereto. Section 9 thereof empowers the Central 
Government to take measures for the purpose of facilitating such 
promotion and development and enhancing competitiveness of 
MSMEs by specifying the programmes, guidelines or instructions as 
it may deem fit, by issuing Notifications.  
7. Section 10 of the MSMED Act states that the policies and practices in 
respect of the credit to the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises shall 
be progressive and such as may be specified in the guidelines or 
instructions issued by the Reserve Bank, from time to time, to ensure 
timely and smooth flow of credit to such enterprises, minimize the 

7 
 
incidence of sickness among and enhance the competitiveness of 
such enterprises. 
8. At this juncture, it would also be apt to refer to the relevant provisions 
contained in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. Section 21 of the said 
Act empowers the Reserve Bank of India to control advances by 
Banking companies. The said section inter alia provides that where 
the Reserve Bank is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient in the 
public interest or in the interest of the depositors or banking policy so 
to do, it may determine the policy in relation to advances to be 
followed by banking companies generally or by any company in 
particular and when the policy has been so determined, all banking 
companies or the banking company concerned, as the case may be, 
shall be bound to follow the policy as so determined. Sub-section (3) 
of Section 21 states that every banking company shall be bound to 
comply with any directions given to it under the said Section. Further, 
Section 35A of the said Banking Regulation Act reads as under: - 
 
“35A. Power of the Reserve Bank to give directions. — 
 
(1) 
Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that- 
 
(a) 
in the public interest; or 
 
(aa) in the interest of banking policy; or 
 
(b) 
to prevent the affairs of any banking company being 
conducted in a manner detrimental to the interests of the 
depositors or in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the 
banking company; or 

8 
 
 
(c) to secure the proper management of any banking company 
generally, 
it is necessary to issue directions to banking companies generally 
or to any banking company in particular, it may, from time to time, 
issue such directions as it deems fit, and the banking companies 
or the banking company, as the case may be, shall be bound to 
comply with such directions. 
 
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on representation made to it or on its 
own motion, modify or cancel any direction issued under sub-
section (1), and in so modifying or cancelling any direction may 
impose such conditions as it thinks fit, subject to which the 
modification or cancellation shall have effect.” 
 
 
9. Thus, Section 21 read with Section 35A makes it clear that the 
directions issued by the Reserve Bank of India to the Banking 
companies are binding on them and they are bound to comply with 
such directions. 
10. As stated earlier, the whole controversy in the instant appeals centers 
around the Notification dated 29.05.2015 issued by the Central 
Government in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 9 of the 
MSMED Act. The said Notification contains the Instructions for the 
“Framework for Revival and Rehabilitation of MSMEs”. The relevant 
part thereof with regard to the identification of the incipient stress and 
the committees for stressed MSMEs being relevant are reproduced 
hereunder: - 
 
“NOTIFICATION 
 
S.O.(E). 1432 In exercise of the powers conferred in section 9 of the 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, the 
Central Government, for the purpose of facilitating the promotion and 

9 
 
development of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, hereby notifies 
the instructions for the Framework for Revival and Rehabilitation of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (hereinafter referred to as the 
"Framework"), which shall come into force on the date of its publication 
in the official Gazette, namely the Framework for Revival and 
Rehabilitation of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
1. Identification of incipient stress 
 
(1) Identification by Banks or creditors - Before a loan account of a 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise turns into a Non-Performing 
Asset (NPA), banks or creditors are required to identify incipient 
stress in the account by creating three sub - categories under the 
Special Mention Account (SMA) category as given in the Table 
below: 
 
         Special Mention        
Account 
 
Sub-categories 
Basis for 
classification 
 
(1) 
 
(2) 
 
SMA-0 
 
Principal or interest payment 
not overdue for more than 30 
days but account showing 
signs of incipient stress 
 
SMA-1 
 
Principal or interest payment 
overdue between 31-60 days 
 
SMA-2 
 
Principal or interest payment 
overdue between 61-90 days 
 
 
 
2) Identification by the Enterprise - Any Micro, Small or Medium 
Enterprise may voluntarily initiate proceedings under this Framework 
if enterprise reasonably apprehends failure or its business or its 
inability or likely inability to pay debts and before the accumulated 
losses of the enterprise equals to half or more of its entire net worth. 
 
(3) The application for initiation of the proceedings under this 
Framework shall be verified by an affidavit of authorised person. 
 
(4) When such a request is received by lender, the account should be 
processed as SMA-0 and the Committee under this Framework should 
be formed immediately. 
 

10 
 
2. Committees for Stressed Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises. 
 
(1) Subject to any regulations prescribed by the Reserve Bank of India 
for this Framework, all banks shall constitute one or more Committees 
at such locations as may be considered necessary by the board of 
directors of such bank to provide reasonable access, to all eligible 
Micro, Small and Medium enterprises which have availed of credit 
facilities from such bank. 
 
(2) Subject to inclusion in categories referred to in paragraph 1, 
stressed Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises shall have access to 
the Committee for stressed Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for 
deciding on a corrective action plan and determining the terms thereof 
in accordance with regulations prescribed in this Framework 
 
Provided that where the Committee decides that recovery is to be 
made as part of the corrective action plan, the manner and method of 
recovery shall be in accordance with the existing policies approved by 
the board of directors of the bank which has extended credit facilities 
to the enterprise, subject to any regulations prescribed by the Reserve 
Bank of India. 
 
3-16 ...….” 
 
 
11.  The RBI in order to make the said Framework contained in the 
Notification dated 29.05.2015 compatible with the existing regulatory 
guidelines on “Income Recognition, Asset Classification and 
provisioning pertaining to Advances” issued to the banks by the RBI, 
had made certain changes in the said Framework, in consultation with 
the Central Government and issued revised Framework along with 
the operating Instructions vide the Communication dated 17th March, 
2016, addressed to all the Scheduled Commercial Banks.  
12. It is pertinent to note that in exercise of the powers conferred by 
Section 21 and 35A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Reserve 

11 
 
Bank of India, after having being satisfied that it was necessary and 
expedient in the public interest to do so, had issued the Master 
Direction, called the “Reserve Bank of India [Lending to Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises (MSME) Sector] Directions, 2016,” vide the 
Notification dated 21st July, 2016. The said Directions have been 
made applicable to every Scheduled Commercial Bank excluding 
Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) licensed to operate in India by the 
Reserve Bank of India. Amongst the other Directions, the Direction 4 
contained in Chapter IV thereof, pertained to the common 
guidelines/instructions for lending to MSME Sector. While advising all 
the Scheduled Commercial Banks to follow the guidelines/ 
instructions pertaining to MSMEs, it was directed in the Direction 4.8 
as under: - 
“4.8 Framework for Revival and Rehabilitation of MSMEs. 
 
The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, 
Government of India, vide their Gazette Notification dated May 
29, 2015 had notified a ‘Framework for Revival and Rehabilitation 
of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises’ to provide a simpler and 
faster mechanism to address the stress in the accounts of 
MSMEs and to facilitate the promotion and development of 
MSMEs. The Reserve Bank was advised to issue necessary 
instructions to banks for effective implementation and monitoring 
of the said Framework. After carrying out certain changes in the 
captioned Framework in consultation with the Government of 
India, Ministry of MSME so as to make it compatible with the 
existing regulatory guidelines on ‘Income Recognition, Asset 
Classification and provisioning pertaining to Advances’ issued to 
banks by RBI, the guidelines on the captioned Framework along 
with operating instructions were issued to banks on March 17, 

12 
 
2016. The revival and rehabilitation of MSME units having loan 
limits up to Rs.25 crore would be undertaken under this 
Framework. Banks were required to put in place their own Board 
approved policy to operationalize the Framework not later than 
June 30, 2016. The revised Framework supersedes our earlier 
Guidelines on Rehabilitation of Sick Micro and Small Enterprises 
issued 
vide 
our 
circular 
RPCD. 
CO. 
MSME 
& 
NFS.BC.40/06.02.31/2012-2013 dated November 1, 2012, 
except those relating to Reliefs and Concessions for 
Rehabilitation of Potentially Viable Units and One Time 
Settlement, mentioned in the said circular. 
 
The salient features of the Framework are as under: 
i) 
Before a loan account of an MSME turns into a Non-
Performing Asset (NPA), banks or creditors should identify 
incipient stress in the account by creating three sub-
categories under the Special Mention Account (SMA) 
category as given in the Framework. 
ii) Any 
MSME 
borrower 
may 
also 
voluntarily 
initiate 
proceedings under this Framework. 
iii) Committee approach to be adopted for deciding corrective 
action plan. 
iv) Time lines have been fixed for taking various decisions under 
the Framework.”   
 
 
13. In view of the above, it is absolutely clear that the Instructions for the 
Framework for Revival and Rehabilitation of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises as notified by the Central Government vide the 
Notification dated 29th May, 2015 in exercise of the powers conferred 
under Section 9 of the MSMED Act, as revised by the RBI Notification 
dated 17th March, 2016, and the Master Directions i.e. the Reserve 
Bank of India (Lending to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Sector) Directions, 2016, issued by the Reserve Bank of India in 
exercise of the powers conferred by Section 21 and 35(A) of the 

13 
 
Banking Regulation Act, having statutory force, are binding to all 
Scheduled Commercial Banks, licensed to operate in India by the 
Reserve Bank of India, as stated in the said Directions. It cannot be 
gainsaid that the Banking Regulation Act 1949 basically seeks to 
regulate banking business and mandates a statutory comprehensive 
and formal structure of banking regulation and supervision in India. 
Section 21 and Section 35A of the said Act empower the Reserve 
Bank of India to frame the policy and give directions to the banking 
companies in relation to the advances to be followed by the banking 
companies. Such directions have got to be read as supplement to the 
provisions of the Banking Regulation Act and accordingly are required 
to be construed as having statutory force and mandatory. 
14. As transpiring from the said Instructions/Directions, the entire 
exercise as contained in the “Framework for Revival and 
Rehabilitation of MSMEs” is required to be carried out by the banking 
companies before the accounts of MSMEs turn into Non-Performing 
Asset. It is true that the security interest created in favour of any Bank 
or secured creditor may be enforced by such creditor in accordance 
with the provisions contained in Chapter-III of the SARFAESI Act, and 
that as per Section 35 of the SARFAESI Act, the provisions of the said 
Act have the effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrument 

14 
 
having effect by virtue of any such law. However, pertinently the whole 
process of enforcement of security interest as contained in Chapter 
III of the SARFAESI Act, could be initiated only when the borrower 
makes any default in repayment of secured debt or any instalment 
thereof, and his account in respect of such debt is classified by the 
secured creditor as non-performing asset, in view of Section 13(2) of 
the said Act. 
15. What is contemplated in the “Framework for Revival and 
Rehabilitation of MSMEs” contained in the Instructions/ Directions 
stated hereinabove, is required to be followed prior to the 
classification of the borrower’s account, (in the instant case MSMEs 
loan account), as Non-Performing Assets. The said Instructions 
contained in the Notification dated 29.05.2015 as part of measures 
taken for facilitating the promotion and development of MSMEs 
issued by the Central Government in exercise of powers conferred 
under Section 9 of the MSMED Act, followed by the Directions issued 
by the RBI in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 21 and 
35A of the Banking Regulation Act, the Banking companies though 
may be ‘secured creditors’ as per the definition contained in Section 
2 (zd) of the SARFAESI Act, are bound to follow the same, before 
classifying the loan account of MSME as NPA.  

15 
 
16.  We may hasten to add that under the “Framework for Revival and 
Rehabilitation of MSMEs”, the banks or creditors are required to 
identify the incipient stress in the account of the Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises, before their accounts turn into non-performing 
assets, by creating three sub-categories under the “Special Mention 
Account” Category, however, while creating such sub-categories, the 
Banks must have some authenticated and verifiable material with 
them as produced by the concerned MSME to show that loan account 
is of a Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise, classified and registered 
as such under the MSMED Act. The said Framework also enables the 
Micro, Small or Medium Enterprise to voluntarily initiate the 
proceedings under the said Framework, by filing an application along 
with the affidavit of an authorized person. Therefore, the stage of 
identification of incipient stress in the loan account of MSMEs and 
categorization under the Special Mention Account category, before 
the loan account of MSME turns into NPA is a very crucial stage, and 
therefore it would be incumbent on the part of the concerned MSME 
also to produce authenticated and verifiable doucments/material for 
substantiating its claim of being MSME, before its account is classified 
as NPA. If that is not done, and once the account is classified as NPA, 
the banks i.e. secured creditors would be entitled to take the recourse 

16 
 
to Chapter III of the SARFAESI Act for the enforcement of the security 
interest.  
17. It is also pertinent to note that sufficient safeguards have been 
provided under the said Chapter for safeguarding the interest of the 
Defaulters-Borrowers for giving them opportunities to discharge their 
debt. However, if at the stage of classification of the loan account of 
the borrower as NPA, the borrower does not bring to the notice of the 
concerned bank/creditor that it is a Micro, Small or Medium Enterprise 
under the MSMED Act and if such an Enterprise allows the entire 
process for enforcement of security interest under the SARFAESI Act 
to be over, or it having challenged such action of the concerned 
bank/creditor in the court of law/tribunal and having failed, such an 
Enterprise could not be permitted to misuse the process of law for 
thwarting the actions taken under the SARFAESI Act by raising the 
plea of being an MSME at a belated stage. Suffice it to say, when it is 
mandatory or obligatory on the part of the Banks to follow the 
Instructions/Directions issued by the Central Government and the 
Reserve Bank of India with regard to the Framework for Revival and 
Rehabilitation of MSMEs, it would be equally incumbent on the part 
of the concerned MSMEs to be vigilant enough to follow the process 
laid down under the said Framework, and bring to the notice of the 
concerned Banks, by producing authenticated and verifiable 

17 
 
documents/material to show its eligibility to get the benefit of the said 
Framework. 
18.  In that view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the findings 
recorded by the High Court in the impugned order that the Banks are 
not obliged to adopt the restructuring process on its own or that the 
Framework contained in the Notification dated 29.05.2015, as revised 
from time to time could not be said to be mandatory in nature, are 
highly 
erroneous 
and 
cannot 
be 
countenanced. 
The 
Instructions/Directions issued by the Central Government under 
Section 9 of the MSMED Act and by the RBI under Section 21 and 
Section 35A have statutory force and are binding to all the Banking 
companies. 
19. The impugned order therefore is set aside. Since, it has been 
submitted by the Learned Counsels for the Respondents-banks that 
in all the cases, the proceedings under the SARFAESI Act have 
already been concluded and the possession of the respective 
premises of the petitioners has already been taken over, we do not 
propose to remand the matters to the High Court for deciding the Writ 
Petitions afresh. However, since the High Court has not dealt with the 
other issues based on the factual aspects of the writ petitions, we 
clarify that it would be open for the appellants to take recourse to any 

18 
 
remedy as may be legally available to them for agitating the issues 
not decided by the High Court in the impugned order. All the appeals 
stand allowed to the aforesaid extent. 
 
…..................................J. 
                                                                                  [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 
 
 
 
                                                                            .…..................................J. 
                                                                                  [R. MAHADEVAN] 
NEW DELHI; 
AUGUST, 01ST 2024.