2024 INSC 563
1|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4434-4437 OF 2014 
 
 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. ETC. 
 
… 
APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
PROHLAD GUHA ETC.  
  
 
…  RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
WITH  
 
    CIVIL APPEAL NO.4445 OF 2014 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
 
SANJAY KAROL, J. 
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4434-4437 OF 2014 : 
 
 
1. 
The extant appeals filed by the Union of India1 take exception to a common 
judgment and order dated 2nd August 20122 passed in WPCT Nos.207, 213, 214, 
 
1 Appellant-Employer  
2 Impugned Judgment  
Digitally signed by Dr.
Naveen Rawal
Date: 2024.08.01
12:56:53 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
and 215 of 2012, by the High Court of Calcutta whereby the common order 
passed in Original Application Nos.794, 797, 795, and 796 of 2008, respectively, 
passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Calcutta Bench,  was reversed and 
relief claimed by the respondents were allowed. 
2. 
A brief review of facts giving rise to the present appeals, is necessary.   
2.1 Respondent-employees were appointed on compassionate ground 
with the Engineering Department, Howrah Division, Eastern Railway.  
The disciplinary authority placed the respondents under suspension due 
to contemplation/pendency of departmental enquiry3.  
2.2 On issuing show cause notice4, information was sought as to why 
their appointments on compassionate ground should not be terminated as 
it was based on forged and fabricated documents with respect to the 
employment of their respective fathers.  After receiving their responses, 
the authority found that their appointments were based on 
forged/fabricated and bogus documents, however, terminated their 
services. 
2.3 On filing appeals against the order of termination, they were 
dismissed by the appellate authority, vide order5 reproduced as under - 
“…Sri Biswanath Biswas, however, could not able to produce an’ 
documents to establish his initial appointment on compassionate 
ground against death of his father while in service or any other 
relevant details regarding his father’s identity, proof of working in 
 
 
3 Suspension order dated 29th August 2005 in respect of Sri Biswanath Biswas 
4 Show Cause notice dated 11th November, 2005 in respect of Sri Biswanath Biswas 
5 Order of Appellate Authority dated 31st March 2008 in respect of Sri Biswanath Biswas 

3|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
the Railways, Station and place of posting, relevant documents viz. 
Identity, Medical Card of his deceased father. There is also whisper 
about retiral benefits received by the family on account of pre-
mature death of his deceased father.  
Therefore, the Disciplinary Authority has arrive at a 
conclusion that grounds exposed in the show cause notice have been 
proyed and accordingly decided to terminate him from Railway 
Service. 
Sri Biswanath Biswas, cannot claim any protection under the 
Discipline & Appeals Rule since his initial appointment was itself 
by fraudulent means.”   
 
2.4 On filing original applications before the Central Administrative 
Tribunal against the termination order and the Appellate Authority’s 
order, the Tribunal dismissed the applications by a common order dated 
21st September, 2010, observing thus:- 
“9. 
In the OA also the applicants have not stated about the 
service particulars of their fathers viz where their father working  or 
whom they retired etc as referred to in the appellate order.  It is the 
settled position of law that a person who has not come up with clean 
hands cannot get equity from a court of law.  The only point the 
applicant have raised is that no protection under 311 of the 
Constitution was given and no enquiry was held.  We are not inclined 
accept these contention because job obtained fraudulently is void ab 
initio and such a person cannot get protection under the constitution.  
Moreover FIR was also lodge against them and the matter is pending 
before appropriate Court of Law.” 
3. 
The respondent-employees preferred writ petitions wherein the High Court 
held that the order of the Tribunal was untenable.  It was observed that the 
Railway Servants (Discipline & Appeal) Rules, 19686 have been misinterpreted 
because as per circular of the Railway Board, Rule 14 thereof only provides for 
dismissal of government servants upon the charges levelled against them being 
proved when they are temporary employees.  The Rule, however, does not 
 
6 Hereinafter ‘Discipline Rules’ 

4|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
indicate that when a person is in regular service the dismissal can take place sans 
any disciplinary inquiry.  The appellant-employers were directed to reinstate the 
respondent-employees with the liberty to place them under suspension if they 
choose to hold a departmental inquiry in accordance with the Discipline Rules.  
Further, it was directed that during the period of such suspension, subsistence 
allowance would have to be paid. 
4. 
Having perused the record, the question that arises for our consideration is 
that whether the dismissal from service handed down to the respondent- 
employees is legally sustainable or not. 
5.  
The undisputed position is that ever since the suspension orders were 
issued qua the respondent-employees, they have not rendered any service to the 
appellant-employer. It is further not in dispute that the original order of 
termination was not stayed either by the High Court or this Court. The impugned 
judgment was stayed by this Court vide order dated 29th July 2013 which has been 
extended at regular intervals.  
6.  
Prior to delving into analysis, certain well-established principles may be 
recalled putting the controversy in question, in context -  
6.1 The principles of natural justice, the violation of which is alleged, 
have been noticed as essential, in Biecco Lawrie Ltd. v. State of W.B.7 in 
the following terms:-  
“24. It is fundamental to fair procedure that both sides should be 
heard—audi alteram partem i.e. hear the other side and it is often 
 
7 (2009) 10 SCC 32 

5|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
considered that it is broad enough to include the rule against bias 
since a fair hearing must be an unbiased hearing. One of the essential 
ingredients of fair hearing is that a person should be served with a 
proper notice i.e. a person has a right to notice. Notice should be 
clear and precise so as to give the other party adequate information 
of the case he has to meet and make an effective defence. Denial of 
notice and opportunity to respond result in making the administrative 
decision as vitiated.” 
 
6.2 The principle of compassionate appointment has been stated by this 
Court in Central Coalfields Ltd. v. Parden Oraon8, as follows- 
“8. The whole object of granting compassionate appointment is to 
enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis which arises due to 
the death of the sole breadwinner. The mere death of an employee in 
harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood. The 
authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the 
family of the deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied that but for the 
provision of employment, the family will not be able to meet the 
crisis that the job is offered to the eligible member of the family 
[Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, (1994) 4 SCC 138 : 
1994 SCC (L&S) 930] . It was further asseverated in the said 
judgment that compassionate employment cannot be granted after a 
lapse of reasonable period as the consideration of such employment 
is not a vested right which can be exercised at any time in the future. 
It was further held that the object of compassionate appointment is 
to enable the family to get over the financial crisis that it faces at the 
time of the death of sole breadwinner, compassionate appointment 
cannot be claimed or offered after a significant lapse of time and 
after the crisis is over.”  
 
6.3  The relationship of ‘compassionate appointment’ with constitutional 
principles has been discussed in SAIL v. Madhusudan Das9, wherein it 
was held that  
“15. This Court in a large number of decisions has held that the 
appointment on compassionate ground cannot be claimed as a 
matter of right. It must be provided for in the rules. The criteria laid 
down therefor viz. that the death of the sole bread earner of the 
family, must be established. It is meant to provide for a minimum 
relief. When such contentions are raised, the constitutional 
philosophy of equality behind making such a scheme be taken into 
consideration. Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India 
mandate that all eligible candidates should be considered for 
 
8(2021) 16 SCC 384   
9 (2008) 15 SCC 560 

6|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
appointment in the posts which have fallen vacant. Appointment 
on compassionate ground offered to a dependant of a deceased 
employee is an exception to the said rule. It is a concession, not a 
right. (See SBI v. Anju Jain [(2008) 8 SCC 475 : (2008) 2 SCC 
(L&S) 724] , SCC para 33.)” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
  
6.4 The Tribunal observed that the respondent-employees had not 
approached the Court ‘with clean hands’. About this principle, a Bench of 
two learned Judges of this Court in Dalip Singh v. State of U.P.10, has 
observed: 
“1. For many centuries Indian society cherished two basic values of 
life i.e. “satya” (truth) and “ahimsa” (non-violence). Mahavir, 
Gautam Buddha and Mahatma Gandhi guided the people to ingrain 
these values in their daily life. Truth constituted an integral part of 
the justice-delivery system which was in vogue in the pre-
Independence era and the people used to feel proud to tell truth in 
the courts irrespective of the consequences. However, post-
Independence period has seen drastic changes in our value system. 
The materialism has overshadowed the old ethos and the quest for 
personal gain has become so intense that those involved in litigation 
do not hesitate to take shelter of falsehood, misrepresentation and 
suppression of facts in the court proceedings. 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
3. In Hari Narain v. Badri Das [AIR 1963 SC 1558] this Court 
adverted to the aforesaid rule and revoked the leave granted to the 
appellant by making the following observations: (AIR p. 1558) 
“It is of utmost importance that in making material statements and 
setting forth grounds in applications for special leave made under 
Article 136 of the Constitution, care must be taken not to make any 
statements which are inaccurate, untrue or misleading. In dealing 
with applications for special leave, the Court naturally takes 
statements of fact and grounds of fact contained in the petitions at 
their face value and it would be unfair to betray the confidence of the 
Court by making statements which are untrue and misleading… 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
7. In Prestige Lights Ltd. v. SBI [(2007) 8 SCC 449] it was held that 
in exercising power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India 
the High Court is not just a court of law, but is also a court of equity 
and a person who invokes the High Court's jurisdiction under Article 
226 of the Constitution is duty-bound to place all the facts before the 
Court without any reservation. If there is suppression of material 
 
10 (2010) 2 SCC 114 

7|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
facts or twisted facts have been placed before the High Court then it 
will be fully justified in refusing to entertain a petition filed under 
Article 226 of the Constitution. This Court referred to the judgment 
of 
Scrutton, 
L.J. 
in R. v. Kensington 
Income 
Tax 
Commissioners [(1917) 1 KB 486 (CA)] , and observed: (Prestige 
Lights Ltd. case [(2007) 8 SCC 449] , SCC p. 462, para 35) 
 
In exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, the 
High Court will always keep in mind the conduct of the party who is 
invoking such jurisdiction. If the applicant does not disclose full 
facts or suppresses relevant materials or is otherwise guilty of 
misleading the court, then the Court may dismiss the action without 
adjudicating the matter on merits. The rule has been evolved in larger 
public interest to deter unscrupulous litigants from abusing the 
process of court by deceiving it. The very basis of the writ 
jurisdiction rests in disclosure of true, complete and correct facts. If 
the material facts are not candidly stated or are suppressed or are 
distorted, the very functioning of the writ courts would become 
impossible.” 
 
7.  
The principle of compassionate appointment, as we have noticed above, 
has been put in place to ameliorate suffering that is cast upon members of a family 
upon the sudden death of the earning member.  An equally well-recognized 
principle is that compassionate appointment cannot be claimed as a matter of 
right.   It is therefore clear that a person, claiming an appointment on such ground, 
has to demonstrate his relationship to the deceased person and eligibility for 
appointment.  The same cannot be done without placing all relevant documents 
before the competent authority.  The Tribunal as also the authority has recorded 
a categorical finding that the respondent-employees had not submitted any 
document to establish their claim and submitted forged and bogus documents.   
8. 
On the aspect of non-compliance of the principles of natural justice, we 
find that the authority had issued show-cause notices to the respondent-
employees, to which they responded. It was subsequent thereto, upon finding the 

8|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
responses to be unsatisfactory, they were removed from the service. On 
approaching the Tribunal and receiving favorable orders, their appeals against 
such dismissal were heard and acted upon by the authority, with the dismissal  
being confirmed.  Before the High Court, it was averred that the respondent-
employees were not given an opportunity to prove their innocence, nor were any 
documents, on the basis of which the impugned order of dismissal was passed, 
provided to them.  All of this, it was submitted, flies against the protection 
envisaged under Article 311 of the Constitution of India.   
9. 
It is difficult to find substance in the averments made.  The respondent-
employees have, at every stage, actively participated in the adjudication process 
of their alleged improper and illegal appointments.  The Tribunal records that 
they did not produce any document, as they were asked to, instead they 
questioned the procedure adopted.  This in itself does not absolve them from 
producing documents as asked for.  In the Original Applications filed by the 
respondent-employees also, the service particulars of their fathers in place of 
whom such employment was sought, have not been disclosed, as recorded by the 
Tribunal.  So, whereas a respondent-employee may state that onus of proof on the 
part of the appellant-employer was not discharged properly in respect of the 
disciplinary proceedings initiated by the latter, as far as the O.As. were 
concerned, the respondent-employees were the ones pleading their case before a 
judicial or quasi-judicial authority.  Therefore, it was incumbent upon them to 
produce all documents, on the basis of which they could have said that their 

9|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
dismissal from service on the part of the appellant-employer was incorrect and 
unjust in law.   
10. 
It is apparent from record that the respondent-employees did not furnish 
any document as part of the O.As.  When the claim made before the Tribunal 
itself is not clear, unequivocal and supported by relevant material, the same being 
rejected is not a matter of surprise.  The very basis upon which the relief claimed 
rests is found to be circumspect then the relief, if awarded, suffers from the vice 
of being improper.     
11. 
Whether or not the Tribunal ought to have heard the matter together or 
separately is to be decided solely by the adjudicating authority.  Comments by 
the High Court in this regard do not appear to be just.  Before parting with the 
matter, however, in the facts of this case, we express our surprise towards the 
actions of the appellant-employer who appointed the respondent-employees on 
the basis of questionable documentation, which was later found to be forged, 
fabricated and bogus.  How could someone be appointed to a government job 
without proper checking and verification of documents?  The Railways are 
recorded to be one of the largest employers in the country and yet such incidents 
falling through the cracks, ought to be checked.   
12. 
Upon it being discovered that the respondent-employees had secured 
appointments on the basis of forged and fabricated documents, an FIR bearing 
No.29/05 dated 17th December 2005 stood registered against them under Sections 

10|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
467, 468, 471, 419, 420 and 120-B Indian Penal Code, 1860.  There is no bar, as 
has been held in M. Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd.11 and as recently 
reiterated in State Bank of India & Ors. v. P. Zadenga12 for departmental and 
criminal proceedings to continue simultaneously. As such, the criminal 
proceedings initiated as a result of alleged fraud committed by the respondent-
employees are independent of the proceedings initiated by the appellant-
employer.  It has been held that in certain cases it would be ideal if the criminal 
proceedings were stayed in the pendency of the departmental proceedings, 
however, no such prayer having been made, is on record.   
13. The impugned judgment is liable to be set aside on a further ground, since the 
requisite to establish eligibility for compassionate appointment was not properly 
fulfilled, they were appointed on the basis of false claims and fabricated 
documents.   It then becomes imperative to discuss what constitutes fraud and 
what is its impact on an act afflicted by such vice.  R.M. Sahai, J. writing in 
Shrisht Dhawan (Smt.) v. M/s. Shaw Brothers13 observed - 
 
“20. Fraud and collusion vitiate even the most solemn proceedings 
in any civilised system of jurisprudence. It is a concept descriptive of 
human conduct. Michael Levi likens a fraudster to Milton's sorcerer, 
Comus, who exulted in his ability to, ‘wing me into the easy-hearted 
man and trap him into snares’. It has been defined as an act of trickery 
or deceit. In Webster's Third New International Dictionary fraud in 
equity has been defined as an act or omission to act or concealment by 
which one person obtains an advantage against conscience over another 
or which equity or public policy forbids as being prejudicial to another. 
In Black's Legal Dictionary, fraud is defined as an intentional 
perversion of truth for the purpose of inducing another in reliance upon 
 
11 (1999) 3 SCC 679 
12 (2023) 10 SCC 675 
13 (1992) 1 SCC 534 

11|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
it to part with some valuable thing belonging to him or surrender a legal 
right; a false representation of a matter of fact whether by words or by 
conduct, by false or misleading allegations, or by concealment of that 
which should have been disclosed, which deceives and is intended to 
deceive another so that he shall act upon it to his legal injury. In Concise 
Oxford Dictionary, it has been defined as criminal deception, use of 
false representation to gain unjust advantage; dishonest artifice or trick. 
According to Halsbury's Laws of England, a representation is deemed 
to have been false, and therefore a misrepresentation, if it was at the 
material date false in substance and in fact. …From dictionary meaning 
or even otherwise fraud arises out of deliberate active role of 
representator about a fact which he knows to be untrue yet he succeeds 
in misleading the representee by making him believe it to be true. The 
representation to become fraudulent must be of a fact with knowledge 
that it was false.  
…..The colour of fraud in public law or administrative law, 
as it is developing, is assuming different shades. It arises 
from a deception committed by disclosure of incorrect facts 
knowingly and deliberately to invoke exercise of power and 
procure an order from an authority or tribunal. It must result 
in exercise of jurisdiction which otherwise would not have 
been exercised. That is misrepresentation must be in 
relation to the conditions provided in a section on existence 
or non-existence of which power can be exercised.” 
 
13.1 
The words of Denning L.J. in Lazarus Estates Ltd. v. Beasley14  are 
of importance qua the impact of fraud.  He wrote – 
“…..I cannot accede to this argument for a moment.  No Court in 
this land will allow a person to keep an advantage he has obtained 
by fraud.  No judgment of a Court, no order of a Minister, can be 
allowed to stand if it has been obtained by fraud.  Fraud unravels 
everything.  The Court is careful not to find fraud unless it is 
distinctly pleaded and proved; but once it is proved, it vitiates 
judgment, contract and all transactions whatsoever….” 
 
13.2  
‘Fraud’ is conduct expressed by letter or by word, inducing the other 
party to take a definite stand as a response to the conduct of the doer of such 
 
14 (1956) 1 QB 702 

12|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
fraud.  [See; Derry v. Peek15; Ram Preeti Yadav v. U.P. Board of High 
School of Intermediate Education16]   
13.3 
In R. Vishwanatha Pillai v. State of Kerala & Ors.17, a Bench of 
three learned Judges observed that a person who held a post which he had 
obtained by fraud, could not be said to be holding a post within the meaning 
of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.  In this case, a person who was 
not a member of Scheduled Castes, obtained a false certificate of belonging 
to such category and, as a result thereof, was appointed to a position in the 
Indian Police Service reserved for applicants from such category.  
14. 
The above discussion reiterates that fraud vitiates all proceedings.  
Compassionate appointment is granted to those persons whose families are left 
deeply troubled or destitute by the primary breadwinner either having been 
incapacitated or having passed away.  So when persons seeking appointment on 
such ground attempt to falsely establish their eligibility, as has been done in this 
case, such positions cannot be allowed to be retained.  So far as the submission 
of non-compliance of the Rules is concerned, the judgment in Vishwanatha Pillai 
(supra) answers the question.  The respondent-employees in the present case, 
having obtained their position by fraud, would not be considered to be holding a 
post for the purpose of the protections under the Constitution.  We are supported 
 
15 (1889) 14 AC 337 
16 (2003) 8 SCC 311 
17 (2004) 2 SCC 105 

13|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
in this conclusion by the observations made in Devendra Kumar v. State of 
Uttaranchal18.  In paragraph 25 thereof it was observed – 
“25. More so, if the initial action is not in consonance with law, the 
subsequent conduct of a party cannot sanctify the same. Sublato 
fundamento cadit opus — a foundation being removed, the 
superstructure falls. A person having done wrong cannot take advantage 
of his own wrong and plead bar of any law to frustrate the lawful trial 
by a competent court. In such a case the legal maxim nullus commodum 
capere potest de injuria sua propria applies. The persons violating the 
law cannot be permitted to urge that their offence cannot be subjected 
to inquiry, trial or investigation. (Vide Union of India v. Major General 
Madan Lal Yadav [(1996) 4 SCC 127 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 592 : AIR 1996 
SC 1340] and Lily Thomas v. Union of India [(2000) 6 SCC 224 : 2000 
SCC (Cri) 1056] .) Nor can a person claim any right arising out of his 
own wrongdoing (jus ex injuria non oritur). 
(Emphasis supplied) 
15. 
The impugned judgment passed by the High Court, in view of the above 
discussion, is set aside and the order passed by the Tribunal dismissing the 
respondent-employees’ Original Applications is restored.   The respondent-
employees were rightly dismissed from service by the appellant-employer.  It is 
clarified that the observations made herein are only with respect to the dismissal 
from service, of the respondent-employees and shall have no bearing on the 
criminal proceedings pending in the concerned Court.   The said case(s) is to be 
decided on its merits uninfluenced by the observations made hereinabove.  
16. 
As such, the appeals are allowed.   Pending application(s), if any, shall 
stand disposed of with costs made easy.   
 
 
18 (2013) 9 SCC 363 

14|CA Nos.4434-4437 of 2014 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.4445 OF 2014 : 
17. 
In view of the foregoing discussion made in Civil Appeal Nos.4434-4437 
of 2014, this appeal is also, on similar facts, allowed accordingly.  Pending 
application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.  
 
  
 
 
 
………………………… J. 
  
 
 
 
[J.K. MAHESHWARI] 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
……………………….. J. 
  
 
 
 
[SANJAY KAROL] 
New Delhi; 
August 1, 2024.