2024 INSC 570
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  8355  OF 2024
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No.12976 of 2015)
City Montessori School                           
      … Appellant
versus
State of U.P. & Ors.
      
… Respondents
WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8356  OF 2024
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No.2612 of 2015)
J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.
Leave granted.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
2.
These appeals take an exception to the same judgment
of a Division Bench of Allahabad High Court.  The dispute is
essentially between the City Montessori School (for short, ‘the
school’) and one Shri M.M. Batra regarding plot no.90-A/A-
754,  measuring  2238.5  sq.  ft.  situated  at  Maha  Nagar,
Lucknow (for short, ‘the plot’).  It is not in dispute that the
plot vests in the State Government.  By a lease dated 4th
January  1961,  the  Hon’ble  Governor  of  Uttar  Pradesh,
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 1 of 16
Digitally signed by
KAVITA PAHUJA
Date: 2024.08.02
18:03:33 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

through Nazul Officer, Lucknow, granted the lease of the plot
to one Gursharan Lal Srivastava which was described as a
‘garden lease’  A separate lease was granted on the same day
in respect of the building on the plot. By a registered sale deed
dated  26th June  1962,  Gursharan  Lal  Srivastava  sold  his
leasehold interest in the plot to Shri M.M. Batra (the alleged
lessee).  Rajat Batra and Raman Batra are the sons of the
alleged lessee.  It appears that the plot is a Nazul property.
Several Government Orders (G.Os.) have been issued, either
providing for the conversion of leasehold lands into freehold or
auction thereof.
3.
The alleged lessee filed a Civil Suit in the year 1994 in
the Civil Court.  The suit was filed to protect possession.
Later on, by amendment, he sought the benefit of G.O. of 17th
February 1996 and 1st December 1998, which permitted the
conversion of Nazul properties given on lease into freehold
properties.   On  13th March  1995,  an  auction  notice  was
published for the auction of various Nazul lands, including
the  plot.  The  school  and  the  sons  of  the  alleged  lessee
submitted their bids.  The school was found to be the highest
bidder  and  therefore,  the  bid  offered  by  the  school  was
accepted.  As provided in the auction notice/tender notice, the
tender document had to be purchased by 23rd March 1995
since 24th March 1995 was a holiday, and the auction was
fixed for 25th March 1995.   It was alleged that the school
purchased the tender document on 25th March 1995.  The
acceptance of the school's bid was cancelled.  However, the
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 2 of 16

authorities again called upon the school to deposit the bid
amount.   Ultimately,  on  20th June  1996,  the  State
Government cancelled the bid offered by the school on the
ground of the failure to purchase the tender form within the
outer limit provided in the tender notice.  While cancelling the
school's bid, the State Government decided to accept the bid
offered by the sons of the alleged lessee. 
4.
Aggrieved by the action of the rejection of the bid, the
school  filed  a  Writ  Petition  under  Article  226  of  the
Constitution of India before the Allahabad High Court.  The
impugned judgment is the final judgment in the said Writ
Petition.  By an interim order dated 18th July 1996, Allahabad
High Court directed the status quo to be maintained with
respect  to  the  plot.  Also,  it  directed  that  the  Lucknow
Development Authority (for short, ‘the authority’) shall not
execute the sale deed in favour of the sons of the alleged
lessee.  The school applied for impleadment in the suit filed by
the  alleged  lessee.   The  said  application  was  rejected.
However,  on  3rd February  2011,  the  school  impleaded  the
alleged lessee as a party to the Writ Petition.   The alleged
lessee’s suit was dismissed by the Civil Court by judgment
dated 24th July 2000. The alleged lessee preferred an appeal
against the decree of dismissal of the suit before the High
Court. By recording statements of the counsel representing
the alleged lessee and the authority, a Division Bench of the
High Court, by order dated 6th December 2000, disposed of
the appeal by directing the authority to expeditiously consider
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 3 of 16

the  application  of  the  alleged  lessee  for  conversion  of  his
leasehold rights into freehold in accordance with law.  The
High  Court  also  directed  that  the  alleged  lessee  can  be
dispossessed only in accordance with the law.  However, the
High Court did not interfere with the findings recorded by the
Trial Court on merits.  
5.
Based on the application made by the alleged lessee on
26th November 2001, the Special Nazul Officer of the authority
converted the plot into freehold subject to the alleged lessee
depositing a total amount of Rs.67,022.21.  On the basis of
the said order, on 29th January 2002, a deed of freehold was
executed on behalf of the Governor of the State in respect of
the said plot in favour of the alleged lessee.  After becoming
aware  of  the  deed  and  conversion  of  the  plot  during  the
pendency  of  the  Writ  Petition,  the  school  applied  for
amendment of the Writ Petition seeking to incorporate the
additional prayers for challenging the order dated 20th June
1996  of  cancellation  of  the  highest  bid  of  the  school,  for
challenging the order of conversion in favour of the alleged
lessee and consequently, the deed dated 29th January 2002.
There is some controversy about whether the amendment was
allowed.  By the impugned judgment, the High Court held
that the order of conversion from leasehold to freehold was
illegal as even the market value of the plot was not ordered to
be paid by the alleged lessee.  Therefore, the High Court held
that the deed executed in favour of the alleged lessee was a
nullity.  However, the High Court kept open the question of
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 4 of 16

whether the plot could be subjected to a fresh auction.  Both
the school and the alleged lessee have filed these two appeals.
SUBMISSIONS
6.
Shri Vinay Navare, the learned senior counsel appearing
for the school, has taken us through the relevant documents.
He also pointed out that the plot is a garden plot, which is
adjacent to the land held by the school.  He pointed out that
the High Court has not accepted that the bid offered by the
school  could  have  been  cancelled  on  the  ground  that  the
school purchased the tender document on the last date.  The
learned counsel submitted that the order dated 6th December
2000 passed by the Allahabad High Court in the appeal filed
by the alleged lessee against dismissal of his suit is a collusive
order.  He submitted that the Trial Court decided all issues
framed  against  the  alleged  lessee  except  the  issue  of  his
possession. The learned counsel urged that the lease claimed
by the alleged lessee is not in subsistence.  He pointed out
that the alleged lessee is a defaulter who has not paid rent for
a long time.  He submitted that, in any case, the original
lessee  could  not  have  transferred  the  leasehold  rights
regarding the plot to the alleged lessee.  The learned senior
counsel,  therefore,  submitted  that,  firstly,  the  order  of
cancellation of the highest bid offered by the school was bad
in law.  Secondly, during the pendency of the Writ Petition,
the authority had no right to consider the prayer made by the
alleged  lessee  for  conversion.   He  submitted  that  the
conversion order and consequent deed executed in favour of
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 5 of 16

the alleged lessee are entirely illegal.  He would, therefore,
submit that the order of acceptance of the bid offered by the
school be passed. 
7.
Shri Jayant Bhushan, the learned counsel representing
the alleged lessee and his sons, submitted that the order of
conversion was passed in favour of the alleged lessee in terms
of the prevailing policy of the State Government and there is
nothing illegal about the same.  He submitted that the deed
executed based on the order of conversion is legal and valid.
He submitted that the school belatedly made the application
for  amendment  of  the  Writ  Petition  for  challenging  the
conversion and for the sale deed, which was never allowed.
Therefore, the High Court committed gross illegality by setting
aside the order of conversion and the sale deed executed by
the authority in favour of the alleged lessee.  He submitted
that there was a delay on the part of the school in purchasing
the tender document, and as the same was purchased after
the expiry of the outer limit provided in the tender notice, the
school’s bid could not have been accepted.  He urged that, as
the alleged lessee has been in possession for decades, the
conversion order cannot be faulted.  Shri Ravindra Raizada,
learned senior counsel representing the State Government,
stated that the present legal position is that such leasehold
plots  cannot  be  converted  to  freehold  and  cannot  be
auctioned. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 6 of 16

GRANT OF STATE LARGESSE
8.
Before  we  consider  the  rival  contentions,  the  legal
position regarding the State largesse succinctly laid down by
this  Court  in  the  case  of  Akhil  Bhartiya  Upbhokta
Congress v. State of Madhya Pradesh and Others1 needs to
be reiterated.  In paragraphs 65 to 67 of the said decision,
this Court held thus: 
“65.
What needs to be emphasised is that
the
 
State
 
and/or
 
its
agencies/instrumentalities  cannot  give
largesse  to  any  person according  to  the
sweet  will  and  whims  of  the  political
entities and/or officers of the State. Every
action/decision of the State and/or its
agencies/instrumentalities  to  give
largesse  or  confer  benefit  must  be
founded  on  a  sound,  transparent,
discernible  and  well-defined  policy,
which  shall  be  made  known  to  the
public  by  publication  in  the  Official
Gazette and other recognised modes of
publicity  and  such  policy  must  be
implemented/executed  by  adopting  a
non-discriminatory  and  non-arbitrary
method  irrespective  of  the  class  or
category  of  persons  proposed  to  be
benefited  by  the  policy.  The
distribution of largesse like allotment
of land, grant of quota, permit licence,
etc.
 
by
 
the
 
State
 
and
 
its
agencies/instrumentalities
 
should
always be done in a fair and equitable
1 (2011) 5 SCC 29
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 7 of 16

manner and the element of favouritism or
nepotism shall not influence the exercise
of discretion, if any, conferred upon the
particular  functionary  or  officer  of  the
State.
66. We may add that there cannot be any
policy,  much  less,  a  rational  policy  of
allotting land on the basis of applications
made by individuals, bodies, organisations
or  institutions  dehors  an  invitation  or
advertisement  by  the  State  or  its
agency/instrumentality.  By  entertaining
applications  made  by  individuals,
organisations or institutions for allotment
of land or for grant of any other type of
largesse  the  State  cannot  exclude  other
eligible  persons  from  lodging  competing
claim. Any allotment of land or grant of
other form of largesse by the State or
its
 
agencies/instrumentalities
 
by
treating  the  exercise  as  a  private
venture  is  liable  to  be  treated  as
arbitrary, discriminatory and an act of
favouritism and/or nepotism violating
the  soul  of  the  equality  clause
embodied  in  Article  14  of  the
Constitution.
67.  This, however, does not mean that the
State  can  never  allot  land  to  the
institutions/organisations  engaged  in
educational,
 
cultural,
 
social
 
or
philanthropic  activities  or  are  rendering
service  to  the  society  except  by  way  of
auction.  Nevertheless,  it  is  necessary  to
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 8 of 16

observe  that  once  a  piece  of  land  is
earmarked  or  identified  for  allotment  to
institutions/organisations engaged in any
such  activity,  the  actual  exercise  of
allotment  must  be  done  in  a  manner
consistent with  the  doctrine of  equality.
The  competent  authority  should,  as  a
matter of course, issue an advertisement
incorporating  therein  the  conditions  of
eligibility  so  as  to  enable  all  similarly
situated
 
eligible
 
persons,
institutions/organisations  to  participate
in  the  process  of  allotment,  whether  by
way of auction  or otherwise. In a  given
case the Government may allot land at a
fixed price but in that case also allotment
must be preceded by a wholesome exercise
consistent  with  Article  14  of  the
Constitution.”
(emphasis added)
9.
In the facts of the case, there is no dispute that the plot
vests in the State.  Even assuming that the alleged lessee has
leasehold rights concerning the plot, the rights of the State as
the owner and lessor can be transferred only by adopting a
fair and transparent process by which the State fetches the
best possible price.  In case of the sale of a leasehold plot by
the lessor, the rights of the lawful lessees do not get affected,
as their tenancy will be attorned to the purchaser in view of
Section 109 of the Transfer of Property Act,1882.  Therefore,
the rights of the State as the lessor can only be sold by a
public auction or by any other transparent method by which,
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 9 of 16

apart from the lessee, others too get a right to submit their
offer. Selling the plot to its alleged lessee at a nominal price
will not be a fair and transparent method at all.  It will be
arbitrary  and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution  of
India.
ISSUE OF AMENDMENT OF THE WRIT PETITION
10.
There  is  a  controversy  raised  by  the  alleged  lessee
about  whether  the  application  to  amend  the  Writ  Petition
made  by  the  school  to  incorporate  the  challenge  to  the
conversion and the deed was allowed. However, on page 12 of
the  impugned  judgment,  the  High  Court  recorded  the
submission of the learned counsel for the alleged lessee that
there was a delay on the part of the school in challenging the
order  of  conversion.  The  submissions  recorded  in  the
impugned judgment show that the parties proceeded on the
footing that there was a challenge to the conversion order. The
counter  filed  by  the  alleged  lessee  before  the  High  Court
shows  that  it  refers  to  the  amended  Writ  Petition  and
paragraph 45 of the counter raises a contention of the delay
in challenging the conversion deed.  Therefore, the argument
that the amendment was not allowed need not detain us. 
ON MERITS
11.
Coming back to the facts of the case, the plot was put to
auction  in  1995.   The  Special  Nazul  Officer  accepted  the
highest bid offered by the school of Rs. 8,51,043.15, out of
which a sum of Rs. 85,105 was paid along with the tender.
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 10 of 16

We have already stated the facts leading to the cancellation of
the highest bid of the school and acceptance of the second-
highest bid of the sons of the alleged lessee.   It is important
to note that the Special Nazul officer passed an order on 26th
November 2001, by which the consideration  for converting
leasehold  rights  into  freehold  rights  was  fixed  at
Rs.67,022.21.  This amount was less than 10% of the bid
offered by the school about 16 years before the order dated
26th November 2001.  On the face of it, this cannot be a fair
and transparent process of transferring the State's ownership
rights. 
12.
We have perused the judgment of the Civil Court dated
24th July 2000 which dismissed the suit filed by the alleged
lessee.  The Trial Court held that the alleged lessee was not
entitled to the benefits of G.Os. dated 17th February 1996 and
1st December 1998.  In the suit, the alleged lessee sought
conversion  from  leasehold  to  freehold  based  on  these  two
G.Os.  All findings were recorded against the alleged lessee
except  the  finding  that  he  was  in  possession  of  the  plot.
Being aggrieved by the decree of dismissal of the suit, the
alleged  lessee  preferred  First  Appeal  No.81  of  2000.   The
appeal was disposed of by the order dated 6th December 2000.
The said order makes an interesting reading.  The High Court
heard the counsel for the alleged lessee, the authority, and
the  State  Government.   The  first  paragraph  refers  to  the
appearances of the learned counsel. The second paragraph
gives the facts in brief. The same paragraph also notes that
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 11 of 16

the alleged lessee sought the relief of mandatory injunction for
the  grant  of  conversion  in  terms  of  the  G.Os.  dated  17th
February 1996 and 1st December 1998 and that the Trial
Court  declined  to  grant  the  said  relief.   The  further
paragraphs of the said order, which are relevant, read thus: 
“……………………………………
During  the  course  of  hearing  learned
Counsel for the Parties agreed that in case
the Plaintiff makes an application to the
Vice  Chairman  of  the  Lucknow
Development Authority, Respondent No. 3,
in terms of the Government Orders dated
17.2.1996 and 1.12.1998, the same shall
be  considered  by  the  Vice-Chairman,
Lucknow  Development  Authority  in
accordance with law expeditiously. It was
further  stated  on  behalf  of  the
Respondents that they shall not evict the
Plaintiff  from  the  property  in  question
except in accordance with law. 
In this view of the matter, although we
do  not  consider  it  expedient  to
interfere in the findings recorded in the
Trial  Court, 
yet  in  view  of  the
statements  made  at  Bar,  the  Vice-
Chairman,
 
Lucknow
 
Development
Authority
 has
 to
 consideration
application  of  the  Plaintiff  for
conversion  of  leasehold  into  Freehold
rights in respect of the Garden Lease in
question  and  pass  appropriate  order
expeditiously and it goes without saying
that the Respondents entitled to evict the
Plaintiff-Appellant, as stated by them only
in accordance with law. 
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 12 of 16

Subject to these observations, the Appeal
is dismissed. No order as to costs.”
(emphasis added)
13.
Thus, only the statements of the parties were recorded,
and it was observed that the authority would have to consider
the application made by the alleged lessee for the conversion
of  leasehold  rights  into  freehold  rights  and  to  pass
appropriate orders expeditiously.  It is important to note that
the High Court specifically recorded that it did not interfere
with the findings recorded by the Trial Court. Subject to the
direction  to  consider  the  application  made  by  the  alleged
lessee to the authority for conversion in accordance with the
law, the appeal preferred by the alleged lessee was dismissed.
There was no binding order passed by the High Court giving a
mandate to the authority or to the State Government to grant
the  application  which  the  alleged  lessee  may  make  for
conversion.   On  the  contrary,  the  High  Court  upheld  the
decree passed by the Trial Court, which held that the alleged
lessee was disentitled to the benefit of G.Os. issued in 1996
and 1998.
14.
The order dated 26th November 2001 does not refer to
any  G.O.  under  which  conversion  was  permitted.  The
conversion was allowed against payment of the consideration,
which was less than 10% of the price offered in a public
auction, 16 years back.  Therefore, we agree with the High
Court that the order was illegal.  There is another aspect of
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 13 of 16

the  matter.   When  the  aforesaid  order  and  the  order  of
conversion were passed, the Writ Petition filed by the school
was pending. The alleged lessee’s sons were parties to the
Writ Petition. After hearing all the parties, on 18th July 1996,
an interim order was passed in the Writ Petition directing
maintenance  of  the  status  quo  and  restraining  the  State
Government and the authority from executing a sale deed in
favour of the alleged lessee’s sons.  It was the duty of the
State Government and the authority who were parties to the
appeal preferred by the alleged lessee to point out to the Court
that a Writ Petition filed  by the school arising  out  of the
auction of the plot was pending. The said fact was suppressed
from the High Court by all the parties to the appeal. When
the Writ Petition was pending, the propriety demanded that
before directing conversion in favour of the alleged lessee, the
State Government should have applied to the High Court, to
seek permission to do so, in the pending Writ Petition.  That
was  not done.   The  alleged  lessee cannot  plead  ignorance
about the knowledge of the Writ Petition as the interim orders
were passed in the Writ Petition after hearing his sons. The
alleged  lessee  and  his  sons  were  together,  and  the  same
counsel represented them even before this Court.  The order
passed by the State Government of conversion is a  covert
method of defeating the High Court's interim order of 18th
July 1996.
15.
Now, we come to the school's argument to restore the
earlier order of 1995 accepting the bid offered by it.  We must
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 14 of 16

note that more than 20 years have passed since the auction.
During this period, the property prices in Lucknow must have
been  substantially  increased.   Even  assuming  that  the
learned senior counsel appearing for the school is right in
contending that illegality has been committed by setting aside
the highest bid of the school, now it will be unjust to restore
the order of acceptance of the bid passed in favour of the
school, about 20 years back.  If, at this stage, the school is
allowed to purchase the plot at the price offered by the school
20 years back, the sale will not be fair, as it is a property of
the State.
16.
Therefore, in our view, the impugned judgment of the
High Court, by which the order of conversion and the deed of
conversion in favour of the alleged lessee were set aside, calls
for no interference. 
17.
We, therefore, dismiss both the appeals.  Whether the
lease claimed by the alleged lessee is valid and subsisting and
whether the plot can be put to auction are the questions left
open  which  can  be  agitated  by  the  parties  in  appropriate
proceedings.  However,  the  alleged  lessee  shall  not  be
dispossessed without due process of law. It is for the State
Government to decide, whether it is permissible to put the
plot to fresh auction in the light of the current policies/laws
prevailing. It will be open to the school to apply for a refund of
the money paid towards the bid amount. It will also be open
to the alleged lessee to apply for a refund of the amount paid
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 15 of 16

for converting the plot from leasehold to freehold. The State
Government/authority will issue the necessary refund within
six weeks of making such applications. 
18.
There will be no order as to costs. 
,,,,……………………………..J.
      (Abhay S. Oka)
,,,……………………………..J.
        (Augustine George Masih)
New Delhi;
August 2, 2024
CA @ SLP (Civil) 12976 of 2015 etc.
Page 16 of 16