2024 INSC 576
1 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.               OF 2024 
[Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.11919 of 
2022] 
 
DEVENDRA SINGH  
 
 
 
    ...APPELLANT (S) 
  
VERSUS 
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH  
 
 ...RESPONDENT (S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
This appeal challenges the judgment and order dated 08th 
January, 2019 passed by the Division Bench of the Allahabad 
High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 302 of 1987 wherein the 
Division Bench dismissed the Criminal Appeal preferred by the 
appellant-Devendra Singh and upheld the order of conviction 
under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“IPC” for 
short) and sentence of life imprisonment dated 17th January, 
1987 as recorded by the learned Sessions Judge, Bijnor 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2024.08.05
10:10:15 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
(hereinafter referred to as “the trial court”) in S.T. No. 166 of 
1986. 
3. 
Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeal are 
as under:- 
3.1 On 29th May, 1986, one Dharam Pal Singh (PW-1) lodged a 
written report at P.S. Afzalgarh at about 11:15 p.m. wherein 
he stated that pursuant to a previous dispute, the appellant 
and his co-accused Yogendra Pratap Singh stabbed Parpoor 
Singh (hereinafter referred to as ‘the deceased’) who 
eventually succumbed to his injuries on the very same day.  
On the basis of the written report, a First Information 
Report (‘FIR’ for short) being Crime No. 70 of 1986 came to 
be registered at Police Station, Afzalgarh for the offence 
punishable under Section 302 of the IPC, against the 
appellant and his co-accused. On the conclusion of a 
preliminary investigation, the Police arrested the accused 
persons on 30th May, 1986. At the instance of the appellant, 
the police recovered a blood-stained knife which had been 
allegedly used in the commission of the crime. It is notable 

3 
 
that at the time of their arrest, both the accused persons 
had injuries on their body. On 31st May, 1986, the accused 
persons had their injuries examined at the State 
Dispensary, Qadrabad whereupon they were found to have 
lacerated wounds and abrasions on their bodies. In the 
interim, the post-mortem of the deceased was conducted 
and the cause of death was ascertained to be shock and 
hemorrhage as a result of ante-mortem injuries. 
3.2 The prosecution case is that a few days prior to the date of 
the incident, the appellant had molested the wife of Dharam 
Pal Singh (PW-1), the elder brother of the deceased. 
Angered, the deceased forbade the appellant from 
misbehaving with his sister-in-law in the future and further 
warned the appellant of dire consequences were he to repeat 
his actions. On the day of the incident, at about 09:30 p.m., 
a marriage procession was passing through Village 
Qadrabad, of which the deceased was one of the attendees. 
Owing to the marriage procession, the area was lit up with 
decorative lights which were powered by a high-power 

4 
 
generator. In the meanwhile, the appellant and his co-
accused reached the spot and picked up a quarrel with the 
deceased by bringing up their previous altercation. Being 
riled up about the fact that the deceased was acting as the 
protector of his family, the appellant exhorted to kill him. 
Amidst the scuffle that subsequently ensued between them, 
the co-accused Yogendra Pratap Singh caught hold of the 
deceased while the appellant stabbed him with a knife. On 
being struck, the deceased fell to the ground. Thereafter, in 
an attempt to save the deceased, Manjit Singh (PW-3) beat 
the accused persons with a lathi whereupon, the accused 
persons fled the scene.  In addition to Manjit Singh (PW-3), 
this entire incident was also witnessed by Dharam Pal 
Singh (PW-1) and Kernail Singh (PW-4) who rushed over to 
the deceased and took him to the Government Dispensary, 
Qadrabad, where he was declared dead on arrival. 
3.3 Upon the conclusion of the investigation, a chargesheet 
came to be filed before the Court of the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, Bijnor. Since the case was exclusively triable by 

5 
 
the Sessions Court, the same came to be committed to the 
trial court. 
3.4 Charges came to be framed by the trial court against the 
appellant for the offence punishable under Section 302 of 
the IPC and against his co-accused for the offence 
punishable under Section 302 of the IPC read with Section 
114 of the IPC. The accused persons pleaded not guilty and 
claimed to be tried. 
3.5 The prosecution examined 08 witnesses to bring home the 
guilt of the accused. The accused persons denied the 
allegations against them and alleged that they had been 
falsely implicated in the case. The appellant also stated that 
litigation arising out of land disputes was pending between 
him and Kernail Singh (PW-4). The accused persons chose 
not to lead any oral evidence, however, they relied on certain 
documentary evidence. 
3.6 At the conclusion of the trial, the trial Court found that the 
prosecution had proved the case against the accused 
persons 
beyond 
reasonable 
doubt 
and 
accordingly 

6 
 
convicted the appellant for the offence punishable under 
Section 302 of the IPC and the co-accused for the offences 
punishable under Section 302 read with Section 114 of the 
IPC sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 
life. 
3.7 Being aggrieved thereby, the accused persons preferred a 
Criminal Appeal before the High Court. During the 
pendency of the appeal, the co-accused Yogendra Pratap 
Singh passed away whereafter his appeal stood dismissed 
vide order dated 25th September, 2018. On the conclusion 
of the hearings qua the appellant, the High Court by the 
impugned judgment dismissed the Criminal Appeal and 
affirmed the order of conviction and sentence awarded by 
the trial Court. 
3.8 Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal. 
4. 
We have heard Ms. Rukhmini Bobde, learned counsel 
appearing for the appellant and Ms. Garima Prashad, learned Sr. 
A.A.G. appearing for the respondent-State. 

7 
 
5. 
Ms. Rukhmini Bobde, learned counsel, submits that though 
the present case is a case of acquittal, since this Court has issued 
notice, limited to the question as to whether the conviction under 
Section 302 of IPC can be converted either under Section 304 
Part-I or under Section 304 Part-II of IPC, she is not arguing on 
the correctness of the conviction.   
6. 
Ms. Bobde submits that a perusal of the testimony of all the 
witnesses would reveal that there was no premeditation.  The 
incident occurred in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon 
a sudden quarrel.  She submits that the weapon used in the 
crime was a pocketknife.  She further submits that a single injury 
has been caused with the use of the said knife.  She, therefore, 
submits that the present case would squarely fall under Part-II 
of Section 304 IPC inasmuch as, the appellant had no intention 
to cause death of the deceased.  She further submits that the 
prosecution has failed to explain the injuries sustained by the 
deceased and as such an adverse inference needs to be drawn on 
account of the same.  

8 
 
7. 
Ms. Garima Prashad, learned Sr. A.A.G., on the contrary, 
would submit that both the trial court as well as the High Court, 
upon correct appreciation of evidence, have found the appellant 
guilty for the offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC.  It 
is submitted that on account of previous enmity arising out of 
the appellant molesting the wife of the deceased’s elder brother 
and the deceased’s questioning the appellant about the same, the 
appellant had intentionally committed the crime.  She, therefore, 
submits that no interference is warranted in the present appeal.   
8. 
PW-1-Dharam Pal Singh has stated in his evidence that on 
the date of the incident there was marriage procession of the 
grand-daughter of Thakur Vijay Pal Singh.  He stated that many 
persons in the village witnessed the marriage procession.  He 
further stated that both the accused came near the house of 
Virendra Tomar and started indulging in ‘marpeet’ with the 
deceased.  He stated that Yogendra Pratap Singh caught hold of 
the deceased whereas the appellant assaulted the deceased with 
a knife, which hit the left side of his chest.   

9 
 
9. 
In his cross-examination, PW-1 has admitted that the 
deceased received only one knife blow.  He has further admitted 
that the appellant took out knife from the pocket of his ‘Pajama’. 
10. PW-3-Manjit Singh, in his evidence, stated that in the 
marriage procession, accused persons came from the north side 
and started scuffle with the deceased and told that, “Tu Ghar Ka 
Rakhwala Banta Hai, Aaj Tujhe Jan Se Maar Denge”.  Thereafter, 
Yogendra Pratap Singh caught hold of the deceased and the 
appellant took out the knife from the pocket of his ‘Pajama’ and 
assaulted the deceased.  He stated that he assaulted both the 
accused persons with ‘Danda’.  He has also admitted in his cross-
examination that a ‘marpeet’ took place between the deceased 
and the appellant and Yogendra Pratap Singh. 
11. To the similar effect is the evidence of PW-4-Kernail Singh.  
12. It will be relevant to note that the appellant has sustained 
the following injuries: 
“(1) Lacerated wound 5 cm. x 1/2 cm. x  
skin deep obliquely placed on the left side 
scalp, 4 cm. behind the forehead, 14 cm. 
above the ear.  
 

10 
 
(2) Abrasion 2 cm. x 1.5 cm. longitudinally 
placed on the right side, scalp just above 
the forehead.  
 
(3) Abraded contusion 8 cm. x 2 cm. 
obliquely placed on the back of the tight 
shoulder, 7 cm. right from the back bone.  
 
(4) Abrasion 2 cm x 1 cm. transversally 
placed on the lateral side of the right whist 
above the index finger.” 
 
13. Yogendra Pratap Singh, who was co-accused in the crime 
has also received the following injuries: 
“ 
(1) 
Lacerated wound 4 cm. x 1/2 cm. x 
skin deep longitudinally placed on 
the left side scalp just above the 
forehead.  
 
(2) 
Complaining pain on the right side 
back, but no superficial injury mark 
is present.  
 
(3) 
Lacerated wound 1 cm. x .5 cm. x 
skin deep on the lateral side of the 
right little finger in the junction of 1st 
and 2nd digit.  
 
(4) 
Complaining pain on the lateral side 
of the left wrist but no superficial 
injury mark is present.  
 

11 
 
(5) 
Abrasion 8 cm. x .25 cm. obliquely 
placed on the palmer side of the left 
forearm, 3 cm. above the wrist.” 
 
14. It could thus be seen that both the accused persons have 
received injuries in the incident.  In the evidence, PW-3-Manjit 
Singh has stated that he had a ‘Danda’ and he had assaulted 
both the accused with ‘Danda’.  As such, the possibility of a 
scuffle between the two groups cannot be ruled out.  
15. The injuries sustained by the deceased are thus: 
“(1)  Incised wound/5 cm. x 3 cm. x 
cavity, deep on the front of left side 
chest lower part extending over to the 
epigastrium, 
obliquely 
placed 
underlying. left 9th and left 10 ribs 
were 
clean 
cut. 
Intervening 
intercostal space was also clean cut. 
Wound was 11 cm. below the left 
nipple at 7 O'clock position. On 
exposure, the wound was found 
directing upwards, backwards and 
laterally (cut -wound).  
 
(2)  Multiple abrasions in an area of 8 
cm. x 6 cm on the outer aspect upper 
part of left arm.  
 
(3)  Contusion 8 cm. x 1.5 cm. on the top 
of left shoulder extending to the front 
of left side chest.  

12 
 
(4)  Abrasion 3 cm. x 1 cm. on right side 
front of abdomen, 10 cm. from 
umbilicus at 9 o'clock position.  
 
(5)  Linear abrasion on the back of left 
side abdomen 17 cm. in length 11 
cm. to the left from midline.  
 
(6) 
Abrasion, 7 cm. 1.5 cm. on the back 
of left side abdomen upper part, 8 
cm. towards right from midline at the 
level of T12 L1.” 
 
16. It could thus be seen that except the injury at serial no.1, 
which can be said to be caused by the knife, all other injuries are 
abrasions and contusion.  
17. Taking into consideration the nature of injuries sustained 
by both the accused persons as well as the deceased, the 
possibility of the incident taking place in a sudden fight in the 
heat of passion, upon a sudden quarrel cannot be ruled out.   
18. It is further to be seen that there is no evidence to show that 
the appellant has taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or 
unusual manner.  It is further to be seen that the weapon used 
is a pocketknife.  The injury caused by the said knife is a single 
injury.   

13 
 
19. We, therefore, find that, in the totality of the circumstances 
and, particularly, on account of the injuries sustained by the 
accused persons, the appellant is entitled to the benefit of 
Exception 4 to Section 300 IPC.  We are, therefore, inclined to 
partly allow the present appeal. It is ordered accordingly.  
20. The conviction of the appellant under Section 302 IPC is 
altered to the one under Part-I of Section 304 IPC. The appellant 
is sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 8 years for the 
said offence.   
21. The appeal is partly allowed in the above terms.  
 
 
 
 
 
…….........................J.        
[B.R. GAVAI] 
 
 
…….........................J.        
[SANJAY KAROL] 
 
 
 
 
 
…….........................J.        
[K.V. VISWANATHAN] 
NEW DELHI; 
AUGUST 02, 2024