2024 INSC 624
1 
 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).     OF 2024  
               (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 6427 of 2019) 
 
 
USHABEN JOSHI                                           .…APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS 
            ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
O R D E R 
 
1. 
Heard. 
2. 
Leave granted. 
3. 
This appeal takes exception to the judgment dated 5th April, 
2018 passed by learned Division Bench of the High Court of 
Gujarat, dismissing the Special Civil Application No. 5115 of 2018 
preferred by the appellant and affirming the order dated 29th June, 
2016 
passed 
by 
the 
Central 
Administrative 
Tribunal, 
Ahmedabad(hereinafter referred to as the ‘CAT’), rejecting the 
Original Application No. 50 of 2012 preferred by the appellant with 
a prayer that the respondents be directed to regularise her services 
in the Group ‘D’ post.   
Digitally signed by
KAVITA PAHUJA
Date: 2024.08.23
15:41:47 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
4. 
As per admitted facts obtaining from record, the appellant 
was engaged as a ‘water woman’ in the office of respondent No. 3-
Superintendent of Post Offices, Kutch Division, Bhuj, in February, 
1986.  Another lady namely, Smt. K.M. Vaghela joined services in 
the same office as a ‘Safai Karamchari’ in the year 1991.  
Indisputably, the appellant as well as Smt. Vaghela were both 
performing duties as contingency workers.  Having continuously 
served in the Posts and Telegraphs Department for more than 
sixteen years, the appellant submitted a representation dated 27th 
January, 2003 to the concerned authorities, requesting to consider 
her case for regularization and to grant her a temporary status in 
the Group ‘D’ cadre in terms of the judgment of this Court in the 
case of Daily Rated Casual Labour v. Union of India1.  The 
departmental authority communicated the rejection of the said 
representation to the appellant vide letter dated 31st January, 
2023 upon which the appellant approached the CAT by filing 
Original Application No. 530 of 2003, seeking a direction upon the 
respondents to regularise the appellant in the Group ‘D’ post with 
consequential benefits.  The CAT disposed of the Original 
Application No. 530 of 2003 vide order dated 20th October, 2004, 
 
1 (1988) 1 SCC 122 

3 
 
directing the respondent-authorities to consider the appellant’s 
case for conversion to a full time employee in terms of the circular 
issued in the year 1992 within a period of three months.  The 
circular dated 16th September, 1992 provided a scheme for 
regularisation of the part-time labourers as ‘full time’, with a 
stipulation that if part-time casual labourers are working for five 
hours or more, it may be examined as to whether they can be made 
full-time by readjustment or a combination of duties.  However, 
there should be no engagement of fresh casual labourers. 
5. 
Pursuant to the CAT’s order, the appellant filed a 
representation to the concerned authorities. However, the 
authorities rejected the representation vide communication dated 
29th December, 2004, observing that the appellant was a 
contingency paid part-time ‘water woman’ doing four hours of work 
each day.  She was being paid Rs.1796/- per month as a 
contingency allowance calculated on the basis of the number of 
working hours and thus, she was not entitled to any benefit under 
the scheme/circular.  It was further observed that neither the 1999 
scheme, 
which 
was 
applicable 
to 
the 
Department 
of 
Telecommunication, nor the 1984 circular, applied to the 

4 
 
appellant, and that there were no rules or instructions pertaining 
to the Posts and Telegraph Department covering her case.  
6. 
Being aggrieved by the aforesaid communication, the 
appellant preferred Special Civil Application No. 9398 of 2005 in 
the High Court which, however, was withdrawn with a liberty to 
challenge the communication dated 29th December, 2004 before 
the CAT.  Accordingly, the appellant filed a fresh Original 
Application No. 50 of 2012 before the CAT, seeking the relief of 
grant of temporary status and absorption in terms of the scheme 
framed pursuant to the judgment of this Court in the case of Daily 
Rated Casual Labour(supra). The CAT rejected the Original 
Application filed by the appellant vide judgment dated 29th June, 
2016.  The appellant then filed a Review Application No. 11 of 2005 
before the CAT, which too came to be rejected by CAT on the 
ground that the same was not maintainable. 
7. 
Being aggrieved, the appellant filed Civil Application No. 5115 
of 2018 before the High Court of Gujarat with a prayer to mandate 
the respondents to regularise and grant the minimum of pay scale 
to the appellant with permissible allowances payable to Class IV 
employees of the respondent-Department, with consequential 
benefits including arrears of pay with interest.  The High Court 

5 
 
dismissed the said Special Civil Application vide order dated 5th 
April, 2018, observing that the writ petitioner i.e., the appellant 
herein, was a contingency paid part-time ‘water woman’ working 
only for four hours a day.  The High Court further held that the 
claim of the appellant that she was working full-time has not been 
established and proved, and thus, the appellant was not entitled 
to the relief claimed for by virtue of the judgment in the case of 
Secretary, State of Karnataka and Ors. v. Uma Devi (3) (2006) 
4 SCC 1, and Union of India and Ors. v. A.S. Pillai and Others 
(2010) 13 SCC 448.  Being aggrieved, the appellant has 
approached this Court by way of this appeal by special leave. 
  
8. 
Learned counsel for the appellant, vehemently and fervently 
contended before us that the appellant has continued to serve the 
respondent-Department as a water woman for a period of more 
than 30 years without any break.  The Department has regularised 
the services of one Smt. K.M. Vaghela, an employee performing 
duties similar to the appellant, who joined the services in the office 
of Superintendent of Post Offices, Kutch Division, Bhuj six years 
after the appellant, i.e. in the year 1991.  Indisputably, the 
appellant as well as Smt. K.M. Vaghela were contingency workers, 
and since a person much junior in length of service has been 

6 
 
regularised, manifestly the appellant has been discriminated vis-
a-vis Smt. K.M. Vaghela and hence, she is entitled to the same 
relief. In order to buttress this contention, the appellant has filed 
a rejoinder affidavit highlighting the contents of para 15 of the 
reply affidavit dated 9th May, 2024 filed by the respondents.  The 
said para of the reply affidavit filed by respondents is quoted 
hereinbelow for ready reference: - 
 
“Para 15.  It is respectfully submitted that in compliance 
of the order dated 28.07.2015 passed by the Hon’ble CAT in OA 
No. 51/2013, Smt. K.M. Vaghela was selected as MTS during 
DPC whereas the case of Smt. Ushaben Joshi was rejected by 
both the Hon’ble CAT as well as by the Hon’ble High Court.  It 
is therefore respectfully submitted that the present petitioner 
has not been discriminated by the respondents.  It is further 
submitted that the petitioner does not fall within the purview of 
Casual Labour as well as does not(sic) fulfil the conditions as 
required under Recruitment Rules.” 
 
 
9. 
Learned counsel submitted that the bare perusal of the order 
dated 28th July, 2015 passed by CAT in the case of Smt. K.M. 
Vaghela would make it clear that no such mandate was given by 
the Tribunal that the respondents should regularise the services 
of Smt. K.M. Vaghela.  The only direction of the CAT was to 
consider her case. The DPC took an independent decision 
uninfluenced by the direction given by the CAT to regularise the 
services of Smt. K.M. Vaghela.   

7 
 
10. Learned counsel for the appellant, submitted that it is clear 
that the Department has discriminated between two similarly 
placed employees without any justification, inasmuch as Smt. 
K.M. Vaghela, whose services were regularised, joined the 
Department as a contingency-paid part-time ‘Safai Karamchari’ 
only in the year 1991.  It was urged by the learned counsel that 
the appellant having served in the Department for a period of more 
than 30 years is entitled for the relief prayed for. 
11. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents, vehemently 
and fervently opposed the submissions advanced by learned 
counsel for the appellant.  He urged that Smt. K.M. Vaghela was 
engaged as Water/Sweeper woman at the Superintendent of Post 
Offices, Kutch, Bhuj and that her services were confirmed in 
compliance of the direction given by CAT vide order dated 28th 
July, 2015.   
12. We have considered the submissions advanced at bar and 
have gone through the material available on record. 
13. The central issue requiring adjudication in the matter is as 
to whether the respondents have discriminated between two 
similarly placed employees.  

8 
 
14. The fulcrum of the respondents’ case for justifying the 
decision to regularise the services of Smt. K.M. Vaghela is that the 
said decision was taken in purported compliance of the order 
passed by CAT, whereas the appellant did not have any such order 
in her favour.  
15. On going through the record, it is evident that in the case of 
Smt. K.M. Vaghela, the CAT vide order dated 28th July, 2015, had 
simply directed the respondent-Department to consider the case of 
Smt. K.M. Vaghela for appointment to the post of Multi-Tasking 
Staff(in short ‘MTS’). The CAT never mandated the respondent-
Department to regularise her services. A careful perusal of Minutes 
of Meeting of DPC dated 18th October, 2016 held regarding direct 
recruitment to the cadre of MTS for the year 2016-17 makes it clear 
that 
Smt. 
K.M. 
Vaghela 
was 
found 
eligible 
and 
was 
selected/appointed as MTS without being influenced by the order 
passed by the CAT. The relevant extracts from the minutes of 
meeting dated 18th October, 2016 are reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“ 
DPC has gone through all relevant records and found that 
Smt K M Vaghela contingent paid worker o/o SPOs Bhuj is 
found eligible after giving age relaxation vide Para 8 of GI Dept. 
of Post OM No. 51016/2/90/Estt. (c) dated 10-09-1993 and 
selected as MTS as detailed below. 
 

9 
 
S.No. 
Name of 
casual 
labourers 
Category 
Edu. 
Quali. 
Date of 
Birth 
Date of 
entry in 
the 
Deptt. 
Rema
rks 
 
1. 
Smt. KM 
Vaghela 
Water/sweep
er woman DO 
Bhuj 
OC 
III 
01-06-1964 
Jan-
1991 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
” 
16. Evidently, the decision to regularise the services of Smt. K.M. 
Vaghela and in appointing her as an MTS was an independent 
decision of respondent-Department uninfluenced by the CAT’s 
order. Hence, the argument advanced by the learned counsel for 
the appellant that she has been discriminated vis-à-vis Smt. K.M. 
Vaghela who has been given the benefit of regularization is 
substantiated and established from record. 
17. The respondents have not indicated anything in the affidavit 
filed in pursuance of the order dated 27th February, 2024, that the 
nature of duties or the hours of work being performed by Smt. K.M. 
Vaghela were any different from that of the appellant.  Thus, the 
defence taken by the respondents for their decision not to confirm 
the appellant in services that she was only performing duties as a 
contingency worker(water woman) for four hours a day is not 
substantiated 
from 
any 
acceptable 
material 
on 
record.  
Indisputably, the appellant continuously served the Department 

10 
 
for more than three decades as a contingency ‘water woman’. 
Keeping in view the fact that an employee similarly placed but 
inducted in service after nearly six years from the date of 
employment of the appellant with the respondent-Department has 
been conferred the benefits of confirmation in service by way of 
appointment to the post of MTS, the appellant is entitled to claim 
the same benefits. 
18. The prevailing circulars applicable to the Posts and 
Telegraphs Department mandate that a temporary employee who 
has worked in the Department continuously for more than 240 
days in the preceding 12 months would be entitled to claim the 
relief of regularisation under the extant rules and regulations. 
19. In view of the foregoing discussion, the impugned orders are 
set aside.  The respondents are directed to treat the appellant at 
par with Smt. K.M. Vaghela and shall pass the order of 
regularisation/appointment as MTS in favour of the appellant, on 
similar terms as was done in the case of Smt. K.M. Vaghela. The 
order of regularisation will be effective from the date on which, 
Smt. K.M. Vaghela was appointed as MTS with all consequential 
benefits. Compliance of this order shall be effected within a period 
of three months from the date of this order. 

11 
 
20. The appeal stands allowed accordingly. 
21.  Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(HIMA KOHLI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
August 02, 2024