2024 INSC 578
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 348 OF 2023 
GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI                                    ...PETITIONER(S) 
VERSUS 
OFFICE OF LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR OF DELHI             …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
Section 3(3)(b)(i) of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 19571 provides that 
the Lieutenant Governor2 of National Capital Territory of Delhi3 shall nominate 10 
persons with special knowledge in municipal administration to the DMC. The question 
for our consideration is whether the Lt. Governor can exercise that power of 
nomination as a statutory duty attached to his office or he is bound by the aid and 
advice of the Council of Ministers of NCTD as provided in Article 239AA(4) of the 
Constitution.  
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘DMC Act’ and ‘DMC’ for Delhi Municipal Corporation. 
2 After the establishment of Legislative Assembly for the Union Territory of Delhi, the Administrator is     
redesignated as Lieutenant Governor. 
3 Hereinafter referred to as NCTD. 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.08.06
12:47:43 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
 
2. 
Facts: Before we take up a detailed analysis of the law and precedents on the 
subject, a short reference to the facts leading to the filing of the present writ petition 
is necessary to understand the contextual relevance of the issue under consideration. 
Delhi Municipal Corporation is composed of: (a) councillors chosen by direct elections 
from the wards4 and (b) persons represented through nominations.5  
3. 
In the recent elections to the DMC held on 4th December, 2022, Aam Aadmi 
Party obtained simple majority by winning 134 out of 250 wards and Bharatiya Janata 
Party came second winning 104 wards. By the end of the month, i.e., 02.01.2023, 
Municipal Secretary, DMC sent a note, countersigned by the Commissioner, DMC that 
Lt. Governor will nominate ten persons to the Corporation as provided under Section 
3(3)(b)(i) of the DMC Act. In fact, on the very next day, by his order dated 03.01.2023, 
the Lt. Governor nominated ten members and it was notified in the Delhi Gazette. 
There was a minor correction and the same was carried out and the corrigendum was 
also published in the Gazette on the next day, i.e., on 04.01.2023.  
4. 
Challenging the legality and propriety of nominations by the Lt. Governor, the 
instant writ petition was filed by the Government of NCTD under Article 32 for a Writ 
of Certiorari to quash the notifications dated 03.01.2023 and 04.01.2023 and also for 
a direction to the Lt. Governor to nominate persons under Section 3(3)(b)(i) only in 
accordance with the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers. 
 
4 Under Section 3(3)(a) 
5 Under Section 3(3)(b) 

3 
 
5. 
Submissions: Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, learned Senior Advocate assisted 
by Shri Shadan Farasat, AOR, appearing on behalf of the Government of NCTD 
submitted that the ‘Lt. Governor can act in his discretion only when it is expressly 
provided by a law or where no other interpretation of a legal provision is possible’. 
After taking us through the mandate of Article 239AA, in particular, sub-Article (4), 
read in conjunction with Section 41 of the Government of National Capital Territory 
Act of 1991,6 he submitted that these provisions mirror Article 163 of the Constitution, 
requiring the Governor to act only on the aid and advice of the popularly elected 
Government. For this purpose, the principles laid down in Samsher Singh v. State of 
Punjab7 and Nabam Rebia and Bamang Felix v. Deputy Speaker, Arunachal Pradesh 
Legislative Assembly8 were relied on to put forth the point that the satisfaction of the 
Lt. Governor in the cabinet system of Government is the satisfaction of his Council of 
Ministers. 
5.1 
Referring to Section 3(3)(b)(i) of the DMC Act, it is also argued that the provision 
cannot be construed as expressly vesting any discretion in the Lt. Governor to 
nominate persons to the Corporation. He further submitted that the issue, if any, is 
conclusively decided by the Constitution Bench decisions of this Court in State (NCT 
of Delhi) v. Union of India,9 and the recent pronouncement in the case of Government 
of NCT of Delhi v. Union of India.10  
 
6 Hereinafter referred to as GNCTD Act. 
7 (1974) 2 SCC 831 
8 (2016) 8 SCC 1 
9 (2018) 8 SCC 501 
10 (2023) 9 SCC 1 

4 
 
6. 
Shri Sanjay Jain, Learned Additional Solicitor General, representing the Lt. 
Governor has not joined issue on the interpretation of Article 239AA, or on the ratio in 
Samsher Singh (supra) and the two Constitution Bench Judgments of this Court on 
Article 239AA. It is his submission that the relevant provision of the DMC Act must be 
read in consonance with Part IXA of the Constitution relating to grant of Constitutional 
Status to ‘Municipalities’.  
6.1 
Mr. Jain has taken us through certain provisions of the GNCTD Act, as well as 
the DMC Act to demonstrate the distribution of powers and duties among various 
authorities. Interpreted in this context, he submitted it will be evident that the Lt. 
Governor is specifically empowered under Section 3(3)(b)(i) to nominate persons of 
his own accord and that obligation does not fall within the duty to act on the aid and 
advice of the Council of Ministers.  
7. 
In rejoinder, Dr. Singhvi submitted that there is a long-standing practice of over 
30 years of the Administrator/Lt. Governor nominating councillors only on the aid and 
advice of the Council of Ministers and that there is no justification for deviating from 
the established past practice. 
Legislative history of election and nomination of Aldermen:11 
 
8. 
Municipal administration in Delhi is governed by and under the DMC Act 
enacted by the Parliament in 1957. Interestingly, there was no provision for 
 
11 DMC Act initially used the expression ‘Aldermen’ to represent persons other than councillors who were 
represented in the Corporation. However, after the 1993 Amendment to the DMC Act, the term ‘Aldermen’ 
was dropped and substituted by the descriptive language-‘persons who have special knowledge and 
experience in municipal administration’. 

5 
 
appointment or nomination of Aldermen in the Delhi Municipal Corporation Bill12 as it 
was originally introduced in the Parliament by Shri Govind Ballabh Pant on 2nd 
September, 1957. However, when the Act was notified on 28th December, 1957, 
Section 313 relating to Constitution of the Corporation comprised of councillors as well 
as Aldermen was introduced. The procedure for election of Aldermen was provided in 
Section 1314 of the Act, as per which they were to be elected by the councillors from 
 
12 “3. Establishment of the Corporation  
(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official    Gazette, 
appoint, there shall be a Corporation charged with the municipal government of Delhi, to be known as 
the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.  
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and 
a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property 
and may by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Corporation shall consist of eighty councillors chosen by direct election on the basis of adult 
suffrage from various wards into which Delhi shall be divided in accordance with the provisions of section 
5: 
Provided that twelve out of the eighty seats of councillors shall be reserved for the members of the 
Scheduled Castes.”  
Gazette of India Extraordinary, Jan-Dec 1957, Part 2 Section 2 pg. 552. 
 
13 “3. Establishment of the Corporation  
(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official  Gazette, 
appoint, there shall be a Corporation charged with the municipal government of Delhi, to be known as 
the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.  
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and 
a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property 
and may by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Corporation shall be composed of councillors and aldermen. 
(4) ……… 
(5) ……… 
(6) ……… 
(7) The total number of aldermen shall always be six.”  
Gazette of India Extraordinary, Jan-Dec 1957, Part 2 Section 1 pg. 696. 
 
14 “13. (1) The six aldermen referred to in sub-section (7) of section-3 shall be elected at a meeting of the 
councillors immediately after the publication of the results of the general election of councillors under 
section 14. or  
(2) No person shall be entitled to stand as a candidate at any election of an alderman if at any election 
of a councillor immediately preceding the election of any alderman he stood as a candidate and failed 
to be elected as a councillor. 
(3) In the case of an equality of votes at any election of an alderman the person presiding at the meeting 
whether or not entitled to vote in the first instance shall have and exercise a casting vote. 
(4) As many persons as there are vacancies to be filled being persons who have the largest number of 
votes shall be declared by the person presiding at the meeting to be elected. 

6 
 
persons who are qualified to be councillors, but were neither councillors nor had 
contested in the election to the post of councillors.   
 
Constitution (Sixty-Ninth) Amendment and establishment of Legislative 
Assembly for NCTD and introduction of Articles 239AA and 239AB: 
9. 
A little after three decades of passing of the DMC Act, the Union Government 
felt the need to reorganize the administrative and municipal authorities in the Union 
Territory of Delhi and constituted a committee (popularly referred to as the 
Balakrishnan Committee) to study and make recommendations on the same. The 
Committee recommended the decentralization of Delhi administration and the 
constitution of a legislative assembly for NCTD by way of a Constitutional 
Amendment. In so far as municipal administration is concerned, the Committee inter-
alia touched upon the then position relating to election of Aldermen and made certain 
recommendations.15  
 
(5) As soon as may be after the occurrence of any casual vacancy in the office of an alderman election 
shall be held to fill such casual vacancy.” 
 
15 “11.6.5. The Act makes provision for the election of six Aldermen by the elected members of the 
Corporation. The only qualification for an Alderman prescribed by the Act is that every such person should 
be qualified to be elected as a Councillor and should, not already be a Councillor. This means that the 
Aldermen are no different from Councillors, except for their mode                         of election. There is obviously no apparent 
purpose in providing for the institution of Aldermen     if they are also to belong to the same category of persons 
as the Councillors. It only stands to reason that Aldermen should be elderly men with a measure of maturity, 
experience and standing in the public so as to enable them to provide a valuable input to the deliberations 
of the Corporations by reason of their expertise or experience in public affairs. The present provisions in 
the Act do not ensure this. We consider that an Alderman, if he is to play any useful role, should be a person 
elected from members of the public, residing within the limits of the Corporation concerned, with adequate 
knowledge, reputation and experience of public affairs and with a background of public service. They can 
be chosen from persons who have retired after rendering service as teachers, doctors, engineers or 
government servants. Delhi is full of such men of experience and it will be in the public interest that the 
talents of such experienced men should be utilized usefully in the civic administration. We recommend that 
the Act should prescribe these qualifications. The Aldermen should be elected by the Councillors from 
among persons so qualified by the method of proportional representation by   means of a single transferable 
vote. We recommend accordingly. We also recommend that the        actual number of Alderman may be fixed 
for each corporation at a figure not less than two but          more than four.” Committee on Reorganisation of Delhi 
Set-up Report, December 1989 Part II.”  

7 
 
10. 
Following acceptance of Balakrishnan Committee Report on decentralization, 
through the Constitution (Sixty-Ninth Amendment) Act, 1991, Articles 239AA and 
239AB were introduced in Part VII of the Constitution. This led to the constitution of a 
Legislative Assembly for the NCTD under Article 239AA with certain special features 
including redesignation of the Administrator as Lt. Governor.  
11. 
The provision relevant for the purpose of this case is sub-Article (4) of Article 
239AA, as per which the Council of Ministers are to aid and advice the Lt. Governor 
in relation to matters where the Legislative Assembly has the power to make laws. 
The same sub-Article also provides an exception to this rule, that is where the Lt. 
Governor is, by or under any law, required to act in his discretion. Article 239AA, being 
crucial for our determination, is reproduced hereinbelow for ready reference: 
“Article 239AA. Special provisions with respect to Delhi-: 
(1) As from the date of commencement of the Constitution (Sixty-
ninth Amendment) Act, 1991, the Union territory of Delhi shall be 
called the National Capital Territory of Delhi (hereafter in this Part 
referred to as the National Capital Territory) and the administrator 
thereof appointed under article 239 shall be designated as the 
Lieutenant Governor.” 
(2) (a) There shall be a Legislative Assembly for the National Capital 
Territory and the seats in such Assembly shall be filled by members 
chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the 
National Capital Territory. 
 
(b)… 
 
(c)… 
(3) (a) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislative 
Assembly shall have power to make laws for the whole or any part 
of the National Capital Territory with respect to any of the matters 
enumerated in the State List or in the Concurrent List in so far as any 
such matter is applicable to Union territories except matters with 
respect to Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State List and Entries 64, 65 
and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to the said Entries 1, 2 and 
18. 
(b) Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall derogate from the powers of 
Parliament under this Constitution to make laws with respect to any 
matter for a Union territory or any part thereof. 

8 
 
(c) If any provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly with 
respect to any matter is repugnant to any provision of a law made by 
Parliament with respect to that matter, whether passed before or 
after the law made by the Legislative Assembly, or of an earlier law, 
other than a law made by the Legislative Assembly, then, in either 
case, the law made by Parliament, or, as the case may be, such 
earlier law, shall prevail and the law made by the Legislative 
Assembly shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void: 
Provided that if any such law made by the Legislative Assembly has 
been reserved for the consideration of the President and has 
received his assent, such law shall prevail in the National Capital 
Territory: 
Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall prevent 
Parliament from enacting at any time any law with respect to the 
same matter including a law adding to, amending, varying or 
repealing the law so made by the Legislative Assembly. 
(4) There shall be a Council of Ministers consisting of not more than 
ten per cent of the total number of members in the Legislative 
Assembly, with the Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the 
Lt. Governor in the exercise of his functions in relation to matters with 
respect to which the Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, 
except in so far as he is, by or under any law, required to act in his 
discretion.  
Provided that in the case of difference of opinion between the 
Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers on any matter, the Lieutenant 
Governor shall refer it to the President for decision and act according 
to the decision given thereon by the President and pending such 
decision it shall be competent for the Lieutenant Governor in any 
case where the matter, in his opinion, is so urgent that it is necessary 
for him to take immediate action, to take such action or to give such 
direction in the matter as he deems necessary. 
(5)… 
(6)…” 
 
12. 
Following the introduction of Articles 239AA and 239AB, Parliament enacted 
the GNCTD Act, 1991 to give full effect to the constitutional amendment. Part IV of 
the GNCTD Act relates to ‘Lieutenant Governor and Ministers’ and Sections 41 to 45 
falling under this Part are relevant for our purpose and we will refer them at the 
relevant place. 
 
 

9 
 
Judicial Interpretation of Article 239AA and GNCTD Act: 
13. 
The distribution of legislative powers between the Parliament and the 
Legislative Assembly of NCTD, as well as the distribution of the executive powers 
between the Union Government and the Government of NCTD was discussed and 
basic principles were laid down in the two Constitution Bench judgments of 2018 in 
State (NCT of Delhi) v. Union of India16 and of 2023 in Government of NCT of Delhi v. 
Union of India.17  
14. 
The 2023 decision of the Constitution Bench in Government of NCT of Delhi v. 
Union of India reaffirmed the unique position of NCTD enunciated in the 2018 
decision- that its Legislative Assembly has competence to make laws for all matters 
enumerated in List II and List III (except with respect to entries 1, 2 & 18 of List II). 
While Union has executive power with respect to matters concerning entries 1, 2 & 18 
of List II, the Government of NCTD has executive power with respect to all matters in 
List II as well as List III (except of course for matters with respect to entries 1, 2 & 18 
of List II). 
15. 
Article 239AA(3)(b) confers legislative power on the Parliament to make laws 
on any and all matters in Lists II and III. Article 239AA(3)(c) further provides that in 
case the Parliament exercises such legislative power, any law passed by the 
Legislative Assembly of NCTD shall be void to the extent of repugnancy with the 
Parliamentary law. Paragraphs 22 to 27 of the 2023 judgment authored by the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice (Dr. D Y Chandrachud) are relevant for our consideration and the same 
 
16  Supra no. 9 
17  Supra no. 10 

10 
 
are reproduced herein for ready reference. These will conclusively establish the 
principle that if the Parliament makes a law in relation to any subject in List II and List 
III, the executive power of GNCTD shall then be limited by the law enacted by the 
Parliament. 
“Legislative and executive power of NCTD 
22. Article 239AA(3)(a) stipulates that the Legislative Assembly of Delhi 
shall have the power to make laws for the whole or any part of NCTD with 
respect to matters in the State List and the Concurrent List “insofar as 
any such matter is applicable to Union Territories” except for certain 
subjects expressly excluded. The provisions expressly                        excludes entries 1, 
2, and 18 of the State List, and entries 64, 65 and 66 of List II insofar as 
they relate to the entries 1, 2, and 18. Article 239AA(3)(b) confers on 
Parliament the power “to make laws with respect to any matter” for a Union 
Territory or any part of it. Thus, while the Legislative Assembly of NCTD has 
legislative competence over entries in List II and List III except for the 
excluded entries of List II, Parliament has legislative competence over all 
matters in List II and List III in relation to NCTD, including the entries which 
have been kept           out of the legislative domain of NCTD by virtue of Article 
239AA(3)(a). This is where   there is a departure from the legislative powers 
of Parliament with respect to States. While Parliament does not have 
legislative competence over entries in List                  II for States, it has the power to 
make laws on entries in List II for NCTD. This was           the view taken in the 
2018 Constitution Bench judgment.  
 
23.  As the concurring opinion of Justice Chandrachud held: 
“316… Unlike State Legislative Assemblies which wield 
legislative power exclusively over the State List, under the 
provisions of Article 246(3), the legislative assembly for NCT 
does not possess exclusive legislative competence over State 
List          subjects. By a constitutional fiction, as if it were, Parliament 
has legislative power over Concurrent as well as State List 
subjects in the Seventh Schedule. Sub Clause (c) of Clause 3 
of Article 239AA contains a provision for repugnancy, similar 
to Article 254. A law enacted by the legislative assembly would 
be void to the extent of a repugnancy with a law enacted by 
Parliament unless it has received the assent of the President. 
Moreover, the assent of the President would not preclude 
Parliament from enacting legislation in future to override or 
modify the law enacted by the legislative assembly… ” 
24. The 2018 Constitution Bench judgment held that the executive power 
of NCTD is co-extensive with its legislative power, that is, it shall extend to 
all matters with respect to which it has the power to legislate. Article 
239AA(4) provides that the Council of Ministers shall aid and advise the 
Lieutenant Governor in the exercise of the functions of the latter in relation 
to matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly has the power to 
make laws. Thus, the executive power of NCTD shall extend over entries 

11 
 
in List II, except the excluded entries. After analysing the provision of Article 
239AA(4), it was held in the opinion of the majority in the 2018 Constitution 
Bench judgment that the Union has executive power only over the three 
entries in List II over which NCTD does not have legislative competence, 
that is, entries 1,2, and 18 in List II. It was held: 
“222. A conjoint reading of Article 239-AA(3)(a) and Article 
239-AA(4) reveals that the executive power of the Government 
of NCT of Delhi is coextensive with the legislative power of the 
Delhi Legislative Assembly which is envisaged in Article 239- 
AA(3) and which extends over all but three subjects in the 
State List and all subjects in the Concurrent List and, thus, 
Article 239-AA(4) confers executive power on the Council of 
Ministers over all those subjects for which the Delhi Legislative 
Assembly has legislative power. 
223. Article 239-AA(3)(a) reserves Parliament's legislative 
power on all matters in the State List and Concurrent List, but 
clause (4) nowhere reserves the executive powers of the 
Union with respect to such matters. On the contrary, clause (4) 
explicitly grants to the Government of Delhi executive powers 
in relation to matters for which the Legislative Assembly has 
power to legislate. The legislative power is conferred upon the 
Assembly to enact whereas the policy of the legislation has to 
be given effect to by the executive for which the Government 
of Delhi has to have coextensive executive powers… 
224. Article 239-AA(4) confers executive powers on the 
Government of NCT of Delhi whereas the executive power of 
the Union stems   from Article 73 and is coextensive with 
Parliament's legislative power. Further, the ideas of pragmatic 
federalism and collaborative federalism will fall to the ground if 
we are to say that the Union has overriding executive powers 
even in respect of matters for which the Delhi Legislative 
Assembly has legislative powers. Thus, it can be very well said 
that the executive power of the Union in respect of NCT of 
Delhi is confined to the three matters in the State List for which 
the legislative power of the Delhi Legislative Assembly has 
been excluded under Article 239-AA(3)(a). Such an 
interpretation would thwart any attempt on the part of the 
Union Government to seize all control and allow the concepts 
of pragmatic federalism and federal balance to prevail by 
giving NCT of Delhi some degree of required independence in 
its functioning subject to the limitations imposed by the 
Constitution… 
284.16. As a natural corollary, the Union of India has exclusive 
executive power with respect to NCT of Delhi relating to the 
three matters in the State List in respect of which the power of 
the Delhi Legislative Assembly has been excluded. In respect 
of other matters, the executive power is to be exercised by the 
Government of NCT of Delhi. This, however, is subject to the 
proviso   to   Article 239-AA(4) of the Constitution. Such an 

12 
 
interpretation would be in consonance with the concepts of 
pragmatic federalism and federal balance by giving the 
Government of NCT of Delhi some required degree of 
independence subject to the limitations imposed by 
the
 Constitution.” 
25. 
The judgment of the majority, however, clarified that if Parliament 
makes a law in relation to any subject in List II and List III, the executive 
power of GNCTD shall then be limited by the law enacted by Parliament. It 
was held: 
“284.15. A conjoint reading of clauses (3)(a) and (4) of Article 
239-AA divulges that the executive power of the Government 
of NCTD is coextensive with the legislative power of the Delhi 
Legislative Assembly and, accordingly, the executive power of 
the Council of Ministers of Delhi spans over all subjects in the 
Concurrent List and all, but three excluded subjects, in the 
State List. However, if Parliament makes law in respect of 
certain subjects falling in the State List or the Concurrent List, 
the executive action of the State must conform to the law made 
by Parliament. (sic)” 
26.  
The above view was also taken by Justice Chandrachud in his 
concurring opinion: 
“316.   the provisions of Clause 2 and Clause 3 of Article 
239AA indicate that while conferring a constitutional status 
upon the legislative assembly of NCT, the Constitution has 
circumscribed the ambit of its legislative Powers firstly, by 
carving out certain subjects from its competence (vesting them 
in Parliament) and secondly, by enabling Parliament to enact 
law on matters falling both in the State and Concurrent lists. 
Moreover, in the subjects which have been assigned to it, the 
legislative authority of the Assembly is not exclusive and is 
subject to laws which are enacted by Parliament.” 
27. 
The 2018 Constitution Bench judgment authoritatively held that the 
legislative and executive power of NCTD extends to all subjects in Lists II 
and III, except those explicitly excluded. However, in view of Article 
239AA(3)(b), Parliament has the power to make laws with respect to all 
subjects in List II and III for NCTD.” 
 
 
16. 
It is in the above referred constitutional position of NCTD that we will examine 
the law enacted by the Parliament on Municipality, i.e. the Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Act, 1957.  
 

13 
 
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act 1957, as amended by Act 67/93: 
17. 
The Delhi Municipal Corporation Act is a law which relates to Entry 5 of State 
List.18 This is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the Municipal 
Government of Delhi.  We are concerned with Section 3(3)(b)(i) of the Act, introduced 
by an amendment in 1993, after introduction of Article 239AA in 1991, which requires 
the Lt. Governor to nominate persons to be represented in the Corporation. Section 3 
being central to our consideration, we will extract a substantial part of it for ready 
reference:- 
“3. Establishment of the Corporation  
(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be a 
Corporation charged with the municipal Government of Delhi, to be 
known as the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.  
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate with the name 
aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal with 
power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property and may by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) (a) The Corporation shall be composed of the councillors;  
(b) the following persons shall be represented in the Corporation, 
namely:— 
 (i) ten persons, who are not less than 25 years of age and who have 
special knowledge or experience in municipal administration, to be 
nominated by the Administrator:  
Provided that the persons nominated under this sub-clause shall not 
have the right to vote in the meetings of the Corporation;  
(ii) members of the House of the People representing constituencies 
which comprise wholly or partly the area of the Corporation and the 
members of the Council of States registered as electors within the 
area of the Corporation;  
(iii) as nearly as possible one-fifth of the members of the Legislative 
Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi representing 
constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the area of the 
Corporation to be nominated by the Speaker of that Legislative 
Assembly, by rotation, every year:  
Provided that while nominating such members, by rotation, the 
Speaker shall ensure that as far as possible all the members are 
given an opportunity of being represented in the Corporation at least 
once during the duration of the Corporation; (iv) the Chairpersons of 
 
18 This is an admitted position as can be seen from para 2.2 of the written submission of Dr. Singhvi that, 
“In the present case, the DMC Act relates to Entry 5 of State List”. 

14 
 
the Committees, if any, constituted under sections 39, 40 and 45, if 
they are not councillors.  
(4) Councillors shall be chosen by direct election on the basis of adult 
suffrage from various wards into which Delhi shall be divided in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act ***.” 
 
 
18. 
The Parliamentary enactment on the subject of Municipality for Delhi, being the 
DMC Act as amended in 1993, the legislative power of the Legislative Assembly of 
NCTD to make laws is to be considered. The ‘Sui Generis’ status of NCTD has been 
analysed and declared by both the Constitution Bench judgments. In the 2018 
Constitution Bench Judgment on NCT, Delhi, Justice Dipak Misra, speaking for the 
majority held: 
“284.15. However, if Parliament makes law in respect of certain 
subjects falling in the State List or the Concurrent List, the executive 
action of the State must conform to the law made by Parliament.” 
 
19. 
A similar observation is made by Justice D.Y. Chandrachud in his concurring 
Judgment. In Para 316 of the Judgment, it is observed that; 
“316. The provisions of Clause 2 and Clause 3 of Article 239AA 
indicate that while conferring a constitutional status upon the 
legislative assembly of NCT, the Constitution has circumscribed the 
ambit of its legislative Powers firstly, by carving out certain subjects 
from its competence (vesting them in Parliament) and secondly, by 
enabling Parliament to enact law on matters falling both in the State 
and Concurrent lists. Moreover, in the subjects which have been 
assigned to it, the legislative authority of the Assembly is not 
exclusive and is subject to laws which are enacted by Parliament.” 
 
20. 
Reiterating the same position, even in the 2023 Constitution Bench Judgment, 
Chief Justice Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud observed that:  
“The judgment of the majority, however, clarified that if Parliament 
makes a law in relation to any subject in List II and List III, the 
executive power of GNCTD shall then be limited by the law enacted 
by Parliament.” 
 

15 
 
21. 
In view of the distinct constitutional position as it exists for NCTD, we cannot 
agree with the submissions of Dr. Singhvi that the position of Lt. Governor is akin to 
that of a Governor in a State under Article 163 of the Constitution. There is a clear 
distinction between the discretionary power of the Governor under Article 163 and that 
of the Lt. Governor under Article 239AA(4). While Article 163 requires Governor of a 
State to act on the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers, ‘except in so far as he 
is by or under this Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in his 
discretion’, the exception in so far as the Lt. Governor, under Article 239AA(4) is 
concerned, he will act in his discretion, ‘in so far as he is required by or under any 
law’. Article 239AA of the Constitution takes into account the unique position of NCTD 
and therefore adopts the mandate of ‘law’ as a distinct feature for exercise of 
discretion.  
22. 
In view of the constitutional position and the decisions of this Court, a 
restatement of the relations between the Union and the NCTD is necessary before we 
proceed to interpret Section 3(3)(b)(i) of DMC Act to consider whether the Lt. 
Governor is to nominate on the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers or is to act 
as per his discretion.  
A. Legislative Relationship 
(i) 
Legislative Assembly of NCTD shall have power to make laws 
(legislative power) for NCTD with respect to ‘any of the matters’ 
enumerated in State List or Concurrent List. (except entries 1, 2 and 18 
of State List). (Article 239AA(3)(a)). 

16 
 
(ii) 
Notwithstanding the above, Parliament shall have power to make laws 
(legislative power) for NCTD with respect to ‘any matter’ in the three lists. 
This is where there is a departure from the legislative powers of 
Parliament with respect to States. While Parliament does not have 
legislative competence over entries in List II for States, it has the power 
to make laws even with respect to matters enumerated in List II for NCTD 
[(Article 239AA(3)(b)]. 
(iii) 
Law made by the Parliament shall prevail, whether made before or after 
any law made by the Legislative Assembly of NCTD, and the law made 
by the Legislative Assembly, to the extent of repugnancy, shall be void. 
Only exception is when the law made by Legislative Assembly of NCTD 
receives Presidential assent. (proviso to Article 239AA(3)(c)) 
(iv) 
Once Parliament exercises its legislative power and makes a law on a 
subject in List II or List III, the Legislative Assembly of NCTD is denuded 
of its legislative competence to make laws with respect to that subject. 
Once there is no legislative power for Legislative Assembly of NCTD, 
there would be no executive power as executive power is always co-
extensive and coterminous with legislative power. 
B. Executive Relationship 
(v) 
Government of NCTD has the executive power in relation to all matters 
with respect to which Legislative Assembly of NCTD has power to make 

17 
 
laws. The executive power extends to all matters enumerated in the 
Concurrent List as well as State List (Except Entries 1, 2 and 18 of State 
List). 
(vi) 
Union of India shall have exclusive executive power with respect to 
matters in Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State List, which are specifically 
excluded from the legislative power of NCTD. 
(vii) 
The executive power of Government of NCTD shall be exercised through 
the Lt. Governor who shall act on the aid and advice of the Council of 
Ministers [Art 239AA(4)] read with Section 44 of the GNCTD Act. Another 
constitutionally recognized departure for NCTD is that while Governor of 
a State under Article 163 acts on the aid and advice of Council of 
Ministers on all matters except when he is by or under the Constitution 
required to exercise his functions in his discretion, the Lt. Governor, 
under Article 239AA(4) is to exercise discretion, ‘in so far as he is, by or 
under any law, required to act in his discretion’. ‘Law’ requiring him to act 
in his discretion could be a law of the Legislative Assembly of NCTD or 
a Parliamentary law.  
C. Statutory Regulation 
(viii) 
Once Parliament makes Law on a subject over which NCTD also has 
legislative competence and consequently executive power, the powers, 
duties and obligations of the authorities will then be governed by the 
mandate of the Law made. This position is already mentioned in 

18 
 
statements (iii) and (iv). If the Law vests a power, duty or an obligation 
on the Lt. Governor, the Lt. Governor will act under the mandate of the 
Act and not as per the ‘executive power’ of Government of NCTD. 
Therefore, statutory provision alone will determine whether the power 
is intended to be exercised by the Lt. Governor on his own accord or 
on the aid and advise of the Council of Ministers. 
23. 
Before examining the statute, i.e., DMC Act in detail, we will deal with yet 
another submission of the petitioner. It is argued by Dr. Singhvi that vesting of power 
in the name of Administrator/Lt. Governor in Section 3(3)(b)(i) is nothing but a 
‘semantic lottery’, as the word ‘administrator’ has been used in many pre-1991 
legislations which relate to subjects that now fall within the purview of the Legislative 
Assembly of NCTD.  
24. 
We will examine if this apparent vesting of the power in the name of 
Administrator, to nominate councillors under Section 3(3)(b)(i) is by default, as the old 
statutory regime would have continued without incorporating the Legislative status for 
NCTD after the introduction of Article 239AA in 1991. 
25. 
For giving effect to the Constitutional 69th Amendment introducing Articles 
239AA and 239AB and the specific recommendations of Balakrishnan Committee for 
reorganizing municipalities, the Delhi Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 1992 
was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 24th November, 1992. 

19 
 
26. 
While the Bill was pending consideration, another constitutional development 
took place. In its Winter Session, Parliament passed the Constitution (Seventy-fourth 
Amendment) Bill relating to ‘Panchayats’ and ‘Municipalities’. Part IX-A relating to 
Municipalities comprising of Articles 243P to Articles 243ZG came into effect from 
01.06.1993. The Constitutional recognition of Municipalities, coupled with provisions 
granting autonomy for municipal administration, its elections, composition, duration, 
reservation, etc. had to be incorporated in the DMC Act. In order to ‘harmonize’ the 
position, Government withdrew the pending Bill and introduced the new Bill No. 66 of 
1993. The Bill was passed and was notified on 17.09.1993 as the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation (Amended) Act No. 67 of 1993. 
27. 
The DMC Act, as amended in 1993 is of seminal importance. The amendment 
gives effect to two Constitutional developments. While the first relates to the 
recognition and grant of quasi-statehood to Delhi with the introduction of Articles 
239AA and 239AB, the other relates to grant of a Constitutional status to the 
Municipalities. The statement of objects and reasons of Amendment Act 67 of 1993 
record the circumstance in which amendments to the principal Act were brought 
about: 
“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
The need for reorganization of administrative and municipal set up 
in Delhi was being felt and the matter has been under the 
consideration of the Government for some time. For making an in-
depth study, the Government appointed a Committee to go into the 
various issues connected with the administrative and municipal set 
up of Delhi and to recommend measures, inter alia, for streamlining 
of the municipal set up. The Committee on re-organisation of the 
Delhi set up (popularly known as Balakrishnan Committee) went into 

20 
 
the matter in great detail and recommended a decentralized 
municipal administration. 
 
2. To give effect to the recommendation of the Committee, and 
decision of the Government thereto, the Delhi Municipal Corporation 
(Amendment) Bill, 1992 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 24th 
November, 1992. Meanwhile, during the Winter Session of the 
Parliament, the Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Bill, 
1992 relating to Panchayats and the Constitution (Seventy-third 
Amendment) Bill, 1992, relating to the municipalities were passed. 
These Bills have now become Acts. As the provisions of the 
aforesaid two Constitutional Amendments have a bearing on the 
composition, duration reservation of seats and responsibilities of 
Panchayats and Municipalities, it has become necessary to make 
further changes in the Delhi Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 
1992 so as to harmonise the provisions of the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957 with the provisions of the aforesaid two 
Constitutional Amendments.  
 
3. Government has, therefore, proposed to withdraw the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 1992 to introduce a new 
Amendment Bill in harmony with aforesaid Constitution Amendment 
Acts, with such modifications as are necessary in view of the special 
requirements of the Union Territory of Delhi.  
 
 
4. The important changes sought to be brought about by the Bill are- 
 (i), (ii)……. 
(iii) Provision has been made for ten persons of not less than 25 
years of age and possessing special knowledge or experience in 
municipal administration, to be nominated by the Administrator to 
the Corporation; 
(iv) to (xv)………. 
 
Notes on Clauses 
Many of the clauses of the Bill provide for amendments to the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 in order to bring its provisions, as 
far as possible, in consonance with the provisions contained in the 
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 and the 
Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 as well as 
consequent on the transfer of certain functions now being performed 
by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi to other agencies. 
 
Clause 3 provides for the increase in the number of Councillors 
from one hundred to one hundred and thirty-four. It also provides for 
representation of ten persons, having special knowledge or 
experience in municipal administration (without voting right) to be 
nominated by the Administrator and representation of MPs from 
Delhi and Members of Legislative Assembly of Delhi….” 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
The 1993 Amendment to the DMC Act: 
28. 
The DMC Act, as amended in 1993 (by Act 67/93) recognizes five authorities 
exercising distinct powers and duties under the Act. They are the, i) Central 
Government, ii) Government of NCTD, iii) Administrator, iv) Corporation, and v) the 
Commissioner. These authorities are also defined under the Act. Section 2(21A) 
defines ‘Government’ as ‘the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi’, 
‘Administrator’ is defined under Section 2(1) as ‘the Lt. Governor of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi’, the ‘Corporation’ is defined under Section 2(7) as ‘the 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi’ and finally the ‘Commissioner’ is defined under Section 
2(6) as ‘the Commissioner of the Corporation appointed under Section 54 of the Act’.  
29. 
The (Amendment) Act carries out as many as 136 amendments to the principal 
Act to give effect to a scheme by which powers, duties, and responsibilities are 
allocated to the authorities, depending on the functions that they perform under the 
Act. This also includes comprehensive amendments to Section 3(3)(b)(i) of the Act. 
For instance, while the power of nomination of Aldermen is given to the Lt. Governor 
under Section 3(3)(b)(i), the power of nomination of MLA’s is given to the Speaker of 
the House under this very Section. It is therefore incorrect to suggest that the power 
vested in the Lt. Governor continued by default or ‘Semantic Lottery’. In fact, the power 
to nominate is brought into the Statute for the first time with the introduction of the 
1993 amendment to the DMC Act. This submission is therefore rejected as it is 
oblivious of the 1993 amendment to the Act. 
 

22 
 
The ‘Text’ and the ‘Context’ of Section 3(3)(b)(i) of DMC Act: 
30. 
We will now examine Section 3(3)(b)(i) and also the ‘context’ in which it is 
located with other provisions of the Act to gather the true purpose and intention of the 
Parliament. The text of the provision is clear. Section 3(3)(b)(i) provides that ‘ten 
persons to be nominated by the Administrator’. 
31. 
It is now necessary to refer to the statutory scheme involving power, functions 
and duties of the Lt. Governor and that of the Government of NCTD in order to 
appreciate the true intendment behind Section 3(3)(b)(i), i.e., whether the power is to 
be exercised by the Lt. Governor on the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers or 
it is a statutory duty to be exercised at its own discretion as the Lt. Governor.  
32. 
Provisions of the DMC Act imposing certain duties on the Lt. Governor are as 
follows: 
(i) 
Section 3(3)(b)(i) provides that ten persons who have special knowledge 
and experience in municipal administration are to be nominated by the 
Administrator. 
(ii) 
Section 7 relates to the duty, superintendence, direction and control of 
elections by the Election Commissioner and the Administrator is given 
the duty to appoint the Election Commissioner. The other power relates 
to a duty to maintain the integrity of the elections.  
(iii) 
Section 33 relates to the duty to decide if any councillor has become 
subject to disqualification. The duty is entrusted to the Administrator and 
the Section provides that “the question shall be referred to the decision 
of the Administrator and his decision shall be final”. Sub-Section 4 of the 
same Section provides that before giving any decision on the question, 
the Administrator shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commissioner 
and the Lt. Governor shall act in accordance with the opinion of the 
Election Commission. 
(iv) 
Section 73 relates to the duty of the Administrator to convene the first 
meeting of the Corporation after the General Elections.  

23 
 
(v) 
Section 77 prescribes the duty of the Administrator to nominate a 
presiding officer for the election of the Mayor. This duty is prescribed in 
terms that the “Administrator shall nominate a Councillor”. 
(vi) 
Section 82 relates to the power of the Lt. Governor to decide the time, 
place and procedure of the first meeting of the Corporation after the 
General Elections. 
(vii) 
Section 95 provides for the Administrator being the Appellate Authority 
against imposition of punishment on municipal officer and other 
employees who are appointed by the Commissioner.  
(viii) Section 107A provides that the Administrator shall constitute the Finance 
Commission.  
(ix) 
Section 347D also provides an appeal to the Administrator for 
adjudicating disputes against the order of the Appellate Tribunal made 
under Section 343 or 347B. 
 
33. 
In contrast, we will now examine the powers and duties entrusted to the 
Government of NCTD by the DMC Act. 
(i) 
Under Section 479, the Government of NCTD has the power to make 
Rules. The Government also has the power to approve Bye-Laws made 
by the Corporation. 
(ii) 
 Section 7B relates to the preparation of Electoral Rolls in which the 
Electoral Registration Officer shall be appointed in consultation with the 
Government. 
(iii) 
Section 43 empowers the Government to give general or special orders 
with respect to any function that the Corporation may perform in exercise 
of its duty. 
(iv)  
Under Section 52, the Government has the power to pass general or 
special orders as specified in Fifteenth Schedule of the Act, with respect 
to exercise of powers and functions of the Ward Committees. 
(v) 
Under Section 89, the appointment of the Municipal Chief Auditor shall 
be made with the previous approval of the Government. Similarly, all the 
officers mentioned in Section 89(1), except the Municipal Chief 
Accountant and Municipal Secretary, shall be subject to confirmation by 
the Government. 
(vi) 
Under Section 92A, direct recruitment to category B and C posts shall 
be made by the Government and it may prescribe the agencies for 
performing its function. 

24 
 
(vii) 
Under Section 116, the Government has the power to appoint and notify 
the Municipal Valuation Committee which comprises a Chairperson and 
such other members as the Government may determine. 
(viii) Under Section 150 the power of the Corporation to levy taxes is subject 
to the sanction of the Government. 
(ix) 
Under Section 169 the Government shall have the power to constitute 
the Municipal Taxation Tribunal and such other members as the 
Government may determine. 
(x) 
Under Section 207 the Government has the power to appoint an Auditor 
for the purpose of making a special audit of the Municipal Fund and 
reporting thereon to the Government. 
(xi) 
Under Section 347A the Government also has the power to constitute 
one or more Appellate Tribunal for deciding appeals under section 343 
and 347B.  
(xii) 
Under Section 347A(4) the Government has the power to appoint one or 
more persons having special knowledge or experience in the matters 
involved in such appeals to act as assessors to advice the Appellate 
Tribunal. In this very context it is important to note that in so far as 
appointment of person manning the Appellate Tribunal is concerned, the 
power is given to the Central Government. 
(xiii)  Under Section 469, the Government has the power to appoint Municipal 
Magistrates for conducting the trial of offences under the Act. Under sub-
Section (3) the Government has the power to prescribe the salary, 
pension, and leave etc. 
 
34. 
Apart from the powers and duties of Lt. Governor and the Government of NCTD 
as noted in Paras 32 and 33, the DMC Act also refers to powers, functions and duties 
of other authorities such as the Central Government, the Corporation,19 and the 
Commissioner.20 The specific powers that are entrusted to them are mentioned in the 
footnote for the purpose of brevity as we are concerned only with the competing power 
structure between the Lt. Governor and the Government of NCTD. 
 
19 See Sections 39, 89, 98, 209  
20 See Sections 89, 90, 92, 98  

25 
 
35. 
The provisions of the Act relating to the Lt. Governor are relating to matters 
such as nomination of experts, Election Commissioner, constituting Finance 
Commission, convening the first meeting of the Corporation, acting as an appellate 
authority, etc. These functions seem to suggest that they are intended to enable the 
authority (Lt. Governor) in which the power is vested to act as an independent body.  
36. 
On the other hand, powers and duties entrusted to the Government under the 
DMC Act are very distinct from that of the Lt. Governor. Para 30 evidences this fact. 
Powers and duties of Government of NCTD relate to matters such as making of 
subordinate legislation, having superintendence, making direct recruitment, imposing 
taxes, establishment of Tribunals, appointment of Authorities such as the Municipal 
Chief Auditor, Valuation Committee, etc.  
37. 
Having examined Section 3(3)(b)(i) of the DMC Act empowering the Lt. 
Governor to nominate persons having special knowledge to the DMC, we will 
underscore the point that it is law made by Parliament. As the law requires the Lt. 
Governor to exercise the power of nomination, it satisfies the exception contemplated 
under Article 239AA(4)  to act in his discretion as he is by or under any law so required 
to act. We also reject the submission that the word ‘Administrator’ is a relic of the past- 
a pre-1991 legislation when there was no Legislative Assembly for Delhi, for the 
reason that Section 3(3)(b)(i) was introduced only in 1993 to give effect to the two 
constitutional amendments. Apart from the ‘text’ of Section 3(3)(b)(i) specifically 
requiring the Lt. Governor to nominate, we have also examined the ‘context’ in which 
the said provision is located, and it evidences the existence of a statutory scheme in 

26 
 
which powers and duties are entrusted to different authorities under the Act to 
subserve the constitutional purposes. The statutory regime makes it clear that the 
entrustment of the powers is intended to be exercised by Lt. Governor as a statutory 
duty.  
38. 
We would therefore proceed to add the following two principles to the statement 
of the relations between Union and NCTD in para 22:  
(ix)  The statutory power under Section 3(3)(b)(i) to nominate persons of 
special knowledge was vested in the Lt. Governor for the first time by 
the 1993 amendment to the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 to 
incorporate the Constitutional changes through Articles 239AA, 239AB 
and introduction of Part IX-A relating to municipalities. The power to 
nominate is therefore not a vestige of the past or a power of the 
Administrator that is continued by default. It is made to incorporate 
change in the Constitutional structure of NCTD.   
(x) 
The ‘text’ of Section 3(3)(b)(i) of the DMC Act, 1957 as amended by Act 
67/1993 expressly enables the ‘Lt. Governor’ to nominate persons 
having special knowledge to the Corporation. The power expressed by 
the statute in the name of Lt. Governor, also seen in the ‘context’ of other 
provisions of the statute, demonstrates the statutory scheme in which 
powers and duties are distributed among authorities under the Act. The 
context in which the power is located confirms that the Lt. Governor is 

27 
 
intended to act as per the mandate of the statute and not to be guided 
by the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers.  
39. 
Having examined the provisions of the Act, we are of the opinion that Section 
3(3)(b)(i) of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act is a Parliamentary enactment vesting 
the power of nomination of persons with special knowledge in municipal administration 
with the Lt. Governor. The power is to be exercised as a statutory duty of the Lt. 
Governor and not as the executive power of the Government of NCTD.  
40. 
For the reasons stated above, the notifications dated 03.01.2023 and 
04.01.2023 issued by the Lt. Governor under Section 3(3)(b)(i) are not in violation of 
Article 239AA read with Section 41 of the GNCTD Act.  
41. 
Accordingly, this Writ Petition (C) No. 348 of 2023 under Article 32 of the 
Constitution of India is dismissed. 
42. 
No order as to costs. 
 
……..……………………………….CJI. 
                                         [Dr DHANANJAYA Y CHANDRACHUD] 
 
 
 
…………….………………………….J. 
                                         [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 
 
 
 
…………….………………………….J. 
[J.B. PARDIWALA] 
New Delhi; 
August 05, 2024