2024 INSC 577
NON-REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL Nos. 
 
 8435 - 8436 
 
  OF 2024 
(@ S. L. P. (CIVIL) Nos. 2733-2734 of 2024)
MOOL CHANDRA
      
…APPELLANT
VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                       …RESPONDENTS
   
J U D G M E N T
 Aravind Kumar, J. 
1.
Heard.
2.
Leave Granted.
3.
Appellant has laid challenge in these appeals to the Order dated
14.09.2023 passed by the High Court of Delhi in WP (C) No.5350 of 2022
and CM Appls. 16008 of 2022 and 46942 of 2023 whereby the Writ
Petition and connected applications came to be dismissed and Review
Petition No.305 of 2023 filed against said Order also came to be rejected
on 03.11.2023 and consequently the Order dated 10.12.2020 passed by the
Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi (hereinafter
1
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant
Date: 2024.08.05
16:38:15 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

referred to as the “Tribunal” for brevity) came to be affirmed whereunder
the  Tribunal  dismissed  the  application  for  condonation  of  delay  in
challenging the Order dated 22.11.2006 imposing the penalty of stoppage
of one increment with cumulative effect, on the ground of delay of 425
days in filing the OA and held penalty imposed on the appellant was
justified given the nature of charge. 
4.
It would be apt and appropriate to narrate the factual background
for appreciating the rival contentions raised in these appeals and the parties
are referred to hereinafter as per their rank in the High Court. 
BRIEF BACKGROUND
5.
The appellant was appointed to Indian Statistical Services in the
year 1982 and after being promoted as Deputy Director (STS) on regular
basis in 1987 came to be promoted as Joint Director (JAG) on ad hoc basis
in the year 1992 and regularised in 1993.  In the light of the Judgment of
this Court in Union of India and Others v. Tushar Ranjan Mohanty and
Others (1994) 5 SCC 450 the appellant along with others was reverted in
the year 1996 to the post of Deputy Director and again was promoted to
the post of Joint Director w.e.f. 08.06.2005.  
6.
Appellant  came  to  be  placed  under  suspension  on  13.10.1997
followed by issuance of charge memorandum under Rule 14 of CCS
2

(CCA) Rules, 1965. The only charge against the appellant was that he had
deserted his family consisting of his wife and two school going children in
December 1985 and was residing separately along with another woman
without judicial separation from his wife. The said charge sheet was issued
on the basis of the complaint lodged by his wife during August 1997 and
he was not paid salary from May 1996 to July 1997.
7.
The Disciplinary Authority appointed an Inquiry Officer to enquire
into the memorandum of charge and during the pendency of the inquiry,
the wife of the appellant filed an affidavit withdrawing her complaint on
the ground that there had been some misunderstanding. Despite the said
affidavit the enquiry officer proceeded with the inquiry and submitted
enquiry  report  on  16.12.1998  holding  appellant  guilty  of  charge  of
deserting his family and further held that the charge of appellant living
with another woman was not proved. This report resulted in order of
dismissal of appellant from service imposed by the disciplinary authority
by order dated 17.04.2000 and review petition filed against the same also
ended in its dismissal.
8.
Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order of dismissal from service,
appellant preferred an O.A. No.116 of 2002 before the Tribunal which
came to be allowed by Order dated 15.11.2002 and the order of dismissal
3

came to be quashed with the following observations and remitted the case
to the disciplinary authority:-
“2. In the enquiry that ensured, it was found that the assertions
that applicant was living with another woman are not established
but the other facts referred to above have been so established.
Keeping in view the findings referred to above that applicant
was not maintaining his wife and two children and they were
driven to the starvation level, the disciplinary authority on the
advice of the U.P.S.C. dismissed the applicant from service.
3.
Before us, at the time of arguments, it was pointed out that
no allegation against the applicant of extra marital relations has
been established and this fact is not in dispute. Taking clue from
aforesaid, it was argued that the punishment of dismissal so
awarded, is disproportionate to the dereliction of duty of the
applicant.
4.
We  are  conscious  of  the  decision  that  ordinarily  this
Tribunal is not to go in the said controversy. It is within the
domain of the disciplinary authority to consider the relevant
facts  and  pass  appropriate  orders  imposing  a  particular
punishment in a disciplinary authority.
5.
However, the well-known exception to the said rule is that
if the punishment awarded is totally disproportionate to the
alleged  dereliction  of  duty,  in  judicial  review  there  can  be
interference.
6.
In the present case, the assertions  against the applicant
established were that he had not been maintaining his wife and
children.  After  dismissal,  he  cannot  maintain  his  wife  and
children. When such is the situation, we have no hesitation in
concluding that the punishment awarded is disproportionate to
the allegations against the applicant that were established.
7.
Accordingly we quash the impugned order and remit the
case to the disciplinary authority to pass a fresh order in the light
of what has been said above.
8.
No opinion is expressed on the other contentions of the
applicant for the present. O.A. is disposed of.”
9.
On matter being sent back to the disciplinary authority, appellant
came to be reinstated into service on 09.04.2003 and an order dated
4

23.04.2004 came to be passed imposing minor penalty of stoppage of one
increment of pay for a period of one year, without cumulative effect.
Further  order  came  to  be  passed  on  02.08.2004  treating  period  of
suspension  as  on  duty  for  all  purposes.  However,  no  promotion  was
granted during the period of suspension. Seeking complete exoneration
appellant filed a revision petition and same was said to be pending. On
account of revision petition filed by the appellant having not been disposed
of representations dated 27.07.2015, 16.03.2016 and 17.03.2016 was said
to have been submitted by the appellant urging grant of promotion on par
with his juniors who had already been promoted and prayed for grant of
financial  benefits  in  that  regard  by  complete  exoneration  of  charge
levelled. In the meanwhile, appellant attained the age of superannuation
and retired from service with effect from 31.10.2016.
10.
O.A. No.1579 of 2017 came to be filed by the appellant seeking
direction to the respondent authorities to consider his representation and
same came to be disposed of by the Tribunal vide Order dated 08.05.2017
directing the respondents to dispose of the representation dated 27.07.2015
within a period of 90 days. This resulted in same being disposed of and
intimation/communication was forwarded to the appellant on 09.11.2017
informing the appellant thereunder that representation dated 27.07.2015
has been considered & rejected. Appellant was also intimated that his
5

representations had already been disposed of and same had been intimated
vide communication dated 20/22-11-2016 itself and also forwarded copy
thereof to the appellant along with communication dated 09.11.2017. The
communication dated 09.11.2017 came to be challenged by the appellant in
O.A. No.3034 of 2018 as well as the communication dated 20/22.11.2016.
The  said  O.A.  is  said  to  have  been  withdrawn  by  the  Ld.  Counsel
appearing for the appellant purportedly without his consent and knowledge
on 10.08.2018. The said order of the Tribunal dismissing the O.A. as
withdrawn reads:
“Learned Counsel for applicant seeks permission of the Tribunal
to withdraw the O.A.
2. Permission is accorded. The O.A. is dismissed as withdrawn
without prejudice to the right of the applicant to pursue his
remedy in accordance with law.”
11.
Appellant claims that he came to know about this fact namely
withdrawal of his application before the Tribunal only in the last week of
August 2019 and immediately thereafter he had applied for certified copy
of the order dated 10.08.2018 and filed another O.A. No.2066 of 2020
before the Tribunal along with Miscellaneous Application No. 3679 of
2019 for condoning the delay in filing the O.A. as he had been given
opportunity to pursue his remedy in accordance with law. The application
for condonation of delay came to be rejected by the Tribunal vide order
dated: 10.12.2020 by observing thus:
6

“3. The delay involved is more than one year. It is not as if the
applicant was not aware of the proceedings. As a matter of fact,
the OA is filed against the order of dismissal, passed against him
was allowed and relief was granted. It is in compliance with the
order by the Tribunal, that the revised order of punishment was
passed. The appellate authority rejected the appeal in the year
2016. It is not the case of the applicant that he did not receive the
same. Further, the applicant was very much free to pursue the
proceedings, ever since he retired. Except stating that his earlier
counsel  did  not  take  proper  steps,  the  applicant  did  not
substantiate the reasons for delay.
4.
We are not convinced with the reasons given in the MA. The
same  is  accordingly  dismissed.  The  OA  shall  also  stand
dismissed.”
12.
Being aggrieved by the same appellant filed Writ Petition (Civil)
No.5350 of 2022 before the Delhi High Court which dismissed the writ
petition by impugned order while affirming the order of the Tribunal and
observed that justifiable penalty had been imposed by the disciplinary
authority. Hence, this appeal. 
CONTENTIONS OF LEARNED ADVOCATES
13.
It is the contention of Shri Vardhman Kaushik, learned counsel
appearing for the appellant that High Court on the one hand having opined
not to entertain the writ petition on the ground of alleged unexplained
delay, yet proceeded to deal with the matter on merits of the case, that too
without affording an opportunity to the appellant and as such the appeal
deserves to be allowed by setting aside the impugned order. He would
7

further  elaborate  his  submissions  by  contending  that  Tribunal  had
committed an error in not condoning the delay of 425 days in filing O.A.
No.2066 of 2020 and the delay was due to the mistake of the counsel, who
without the knowledge and consent of the appellant had withdrawn the
earlier O.A. No.3034 of 2018 and also without prejudice to the right of the
appellant to pursue his remedy in accordance with law and it is on account
of lack of knowledge of the appellant’s application having been withdrawn
and on acquiring knowledge about such unilateral withdrawal appellant had
taken immediate steps to prosecute his legitimate claim before the Tribunal
by  filing  O.A.  No.2066  of  2020  afresh  along  with  an  miscellaneous
application No.3679 of 2019 for condonation of delay and as such Tribunal
ought to have condoned the delay which refused to do so and same has
been erroneously affirmed by the High Court. He would submit that a party
should not suffer for the mistake of his counsel or the conduct of the
counsel and he has placed reliance on  Rafiq and Another  Vs. Munshilal
and Another (1981) 2 SCC 788 and N. Balakrishnan Vs. M. Krishnamurthy
(1998) 7 SCC 123.
14.
He would further contend that term ‘sufficient cause’ ought to
receive  liberal  construction  by  the  constitutional  courts  to  advance
substantial justice and the facts obtained in the instant case were sufficient
to hold that the delay in filing fresh O.A. was not attributable to any laxity
8

exhibited by the appellant. On merits the learned counsel appearing for the
appellant would contend that it is an undisputed fact that complainant (wife
of appellant) had withdrawn her complaint and an affidavit to the said
effect had been filed before the Inquiry Officer itself and she had also not
deposed before inquiry though cited as a witness on behalf of employer and
as such the finding of the enquiry officer holding appellant guilty of alleged
misconduct was an erroneous finding and liable to be set aside. Hence, he
prays for appeals being allowed.
15.
 Per contra Shri N. Visakamurthy, learned counsel appearing for the
respondents would support the impugned orders and submits that purported
representations submitted by the appellant vide letters dated 19.10.2004,
16.03.2016 and 17.03.2016, had been examined by the Ministry and had
been rejected vide OM dated 20/22-11-2016 and this was challenged in
O.A. No.3034 of 2018 and same had been withdrawn by the appellant
unconditionally and as such no fault  can be laid at the doors of  the
respondents. Hence, he prays for dismissal of the appeals. 
16.
Having heard the learned advocates appearing for the parties and
after  bestowing  our  careful  and  anxious  consideration  to  the  rival
contentions raised at the bar, we are of the considered view that the
impugned orders are not sustainable and they are liable to be set aside for
the reasons assigned hereafter.
9

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS
17.
It is an undisputed fact that appellant was issued with the article of
charge alleging that he had deserted his wife and two school going children
and  was  residing  along  with  another  lady.  The  said  disciplinary
proceedings came to be initiated on account of a complaint lodged by the
wife of the appellant. When the Inquiry Officer commenced the inquiry,
she filed an affidavit stating thereunder that she had filed the complaint
under mistaken notion and she withdrew the complaint. In fact, in the
articles of charge issued to the appellant she was cited as a witness by the
respective authority and neither she appeared before the Inquiry Officer nor
she had deposed in the inquiry proceedings. Though, she had already filed
an  affidavit  withdrawing  her  complaint  against  the  appellant,  yet  the
Inquiry Officer proceeded with the inquiry and submitted the report as
already noticed herein above, holding appellant guilty of the charge of
deserting his wife and children and exonerating him of charge of residing
with another lady. This resulted in order of dismissal being passed against
the appellant and same was challenged before the Tribunal in O.A. No.116
of  2002 by the appellant  which came to be allowed and matter was
remitted to the disciplinary authority to pass fresh order, which resulted in
reinstatement of appellant into service and imposing of minor penalty
10

namely, stoppage of one increment of pay for a period of one year without
cumulative effect.
18.
On  account  of  the  said  penalty  having  been  imposed  on  the
appellant  representation was  submitted to the authorities for  complete
exoneration  and  grant  of  promotion  on  par  with  his  juniors.  In  the
meanwhile, appellant attained superannuation and thereafter O.A. No.1579
of  2017 was  filed  for  a  direction to  the respondents  to  consider  the
representation which was unattended and a direction came to be issued by
the Tribunal on 08.05.2017 directing the respondents to dispose of the
representation within a period of 90 days and accordingly it was disposed
of  as  already  noticed  herein  supra and  intimated to  the appellant  by
communication dated 09.11.2017.
19.
Being aggrieved, appellant challenged the same in O.A. No.3034 of
2018. However, the counsel appearing for the appellant is said to have
withdrawn the said O.A. On the one hand appellant claims that he had not
authorized his counsel to withdraw the O.A. No.3034 of 2018 and on the
other hand, learned counsel appearing for the respondents has submitted
that OA had been withdrawn by the appellant through his counsel without
prejudice to the right of the appellant to pursue his remedy in accordance
with law. This oath against oath cannot be tested in absence of any proof.
11

The fact remains that there was no memo duly signed by the appellant
came to be filed for withdrawal of the application before the Tribunal.
20.
Be that as it may. On account of liberty having been granted to the
appellant to pursue his remedy in accordance with law, yet another O.A.
No.2066 of 2020 along with an application for condonation of delay came
to be filed. The delay was not condoned by the Tribunal on the ground that
it was filed more than one year after the impugned order came to be
passed. No litigant stands to benefit in approaching the courts belatedly. It
is not the length of delay that would be required to be considered while
examining the plea for condonation of delay, it is the cause for delay which
has been propounded will have to be examined. If the cause for delay
would fall within the four corners of “sufficient cause”, irrespective of the
length of delay same deserves to be condoned. However, if the cause
shown is insufficient, irrespective of the period of delay, same would not
be condoned.
21.
In this background when we turn our attention to the facts on hand,
it would emerge from the records that appellant being aggrieved by the
dismissal  of  the O.A.  No.2066  of  2020 on  the ground of  delay  had
approached the Delhi High Court challenging the same. The High Court on
the ground of penalty imposed being a minor penalty, refused to entertain
12

the writ petition or in other words confirmed the order impugned before the
Tribunal  on  merits.  This  Court  in  Commissioner,  Nagar  Parishad,
Bhilwara Vs. Labour Court, Bhilwara and Another reported in 2009 (3)
SCC  525  has  taken  a  view  that  while  deciding  an  application  for
condonation of delay the High Court ought not to have gone into the merits
of the case. It has been further held:-
“5. While deciding an application for condonation of delay, it is
well settled that the High Court ought not to have gone into the
merits of the case and would have only seen whether sufficient
cause had been shown by the appellant for condoning the delay
in filing the appeal before it. We ourselves have also examined
the  application  filed  under  Section  5 of the  Limitation  Act
before the High Court and, in our opinion, the delay of 178 days
has been properly explained by the appellant. That being the
position, we set aside the impugned order of the High Court.
Consequently, the appeal filed before the High Court is restored
to its original file. The High Court is requested to decide the
appeal on merit in accordance with law after giving hearing to
the parties and after passing a reasoned order.”
22.
If negligence can be attributed to the appellant, then necessarily the
delay which has not been condoned by the Tribunal and affirmed by the
High Court deserves to be accepted. However, if no fault can be laid at the
doors of the appellant and cause shown is sufficient then we are of the
considered view that both the Tribunal and the High Court were in error in
not adopting a liberal approach or justice oriented approach to condone the
delay. This Court in Municipal Council, Ahmednagar and Anr. Vs. Shah
Hyder Beig and Ors.  2000 (2) SCC 48 has held:
“6. Incidentally this point of delay and laches was also raised
before the High Court and on this score the High Court relying
13

upon the decision in Abhyankar case (N.L. Abhyankar v. Union
of India [(1995) 1 Mah LJ 503] ) observed that it is not an
inflexible rule that whenever there is delay, the Court must and
necessarily refuse to entertain the petition filed after a period of
three years or more which is the normal period of limitation for
filing a suit. The Bombay High Court in Abhyankar case [(1995)
1 Mah LJ 503] stated that the question is one of discretion to be
followed in the facts and circumstances of each case and further
stated:
“The real test for sound exercise of discretion by the High
Court in this regard is not the physical running of time as
such but the test is whether by reason of delay, there is
such negligence on the part of the petitioner so as to infer
that he has given up his claim or where the petitioner has
moved the writ court, the rights of the third parties have
come  into  being  which  should  not  be  allowed  to  be
disturbed unless there is reasonable explanation for the
delay.”
23.
 Applying  the  aforesaid  principles  which  we  are  in  complete
agreement to the facts on hand and test the same it would not detain us for
too long to set aside the impugned orders, in as much as the delay of 425
days in filing fresh O.A. No.2066 of 2020 has been succinctly explained by
the appellant before the Tribunal, namely, it has been contended that there
was no intimation of withdrawal of the earlier OA by his counsel and the
order of withdrawal dated 10.08.2018 does not reflect that such withdrawal
was based on any memo duly signed by the appellant. Further, The High
Court has proceeded to confirm the order of the Tribunal on the footing
that  penalty  imposed  on  appellant  is  only  a  minor  penalty  namely
withholding of one increment without cumulative effect, by completely
ignoring the fact that in the earlier round of litigation it had been clearly
14

held that punishment of dismissal imposed on the appellant was totally
disproportionate to the alleged act. 
24.
In the normal circumstances we would have remitted the matter
back to the Tribunal or High Court or to the disciplinary authority for
reconsideration of the matter but we desist from doing so for reasons more
than one  firstly, the age of the appellant is 68 years (as on date); and,
secondly, there being no evidence whatsoever available on record to arrive
at  a  conclusion  that  appellant  is  guilty  of  the  charge;  Thirdly,  the
complainant herself had withdrawn the complaint made and she was not
even examined on behalf of the employer to prove the charge. Thus, the
findings of  the enquiry officer  cannot  be sustained by any stretch of
imagination as it is contrary to the facts and records on hand. There cannot
be judicial review of nature of penalty to be imposed by disciplinary
authority. Hence, we set aside the impugned orders and hold that appellant
is entitled for all consequential benefits flowing from the setting aside of
the orders of penalty and respondents are directed to take steps in this
regard expeditiously and at any rate within 3 months from the date of
receipt of copy of this order. Accordingly appeals stand allowed with no
order as to costs.
…….………………….J.
 (ARAVIND KUMAR)
15

…….………………….J.
 (SANDEEP MEHTA)
New Delhi,
August 05, 2024
16