2024 INSC 580
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 4468 OF 2013  
 
SHIFANA P.S.                  
 
 
    .…APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF KERALA 
AND OTHERS                                           ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
 
1. 
Heard. 
 
2. 
The instant appeal by special leave is directed against the 
judgment dated 16th October, 2012, rendered by the Division 
Bench of the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam whereby OP(KAT) 
No. 3407 of 2012 preferred by the appellant was dismissed and the 
order dated 19th June, 2012, passed by the Kerala Administrative 
Tribunal, Thiruvananthapuram(hereinafter being referred to as 
the ‘Tribunal’) dismissing O.A. No. 370 of 2012 preferred by the 
appellant, was affirmed. 
3. 
Facts in a nutshell relevant and essential for the disposal of 
the instant appeal are noted herein below.  
Digitally signed by
KAVITA PAHUJA
Date: 2024.08.06
15:47:42 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
4. 
The Kerala Public Service Commission(hereinafter being 
referred to as the ‘KPSC’) invited applications for the posts of High 
School Assistant(Physical Science) vide notification dated 30th 
April, 2008.  The qualifying criteria in the said advertisement was 
as below:- 
“A degree in the concerned subject and B.Ed./BT 
conferred or recognized by the Universities in Kerala. 
(Concerned subjects are specified in Note 3 below) 
  
(1) 
….. 
(2) 
….. 
(3) 
Applicant 
should 
have 
taken 
Physics/Chemistry/Home Science as main Subject for 
graduation. Degree in Geology (Main) with Physics and 
Chemistry as subsidiary subjects and B.Ed Degree 
(Physical/Science) can also be considered as an alternative 
qualification for the post (GO(MS) No. 195/96/G.Edn. 
Dated 22.7.1996).” 
 
5. 
The 
appellant, 
who 
holds 
a 
graduation 
degree 
in 
B.Sc(Polymer Chemistry) and a B.Ed(Physical Science), appeared 
in the written test on 10th October, 2009 and cleared the exam. 
The KPSC invited the appellant vide letter dated 03rd October, 2011 
for the interview requiring her to produce the equivalency 
certificate evidencing that B.Sc(Polymer Chemistry) is equivalent 
to B.Sc(Chemistry).    
6. 
The appellant claims that the University of Calicut had issued 
a certificate verifying that B.Sc(Polymer Chemistry) offered by the 

3 
 
said University is recognised as equivalent to its B.Sc(Chemistry) 
course for the purpose of employment and higher studies.   
7. 
The KPSC released the final merit list. However, the 
appellant's name did not figure therein. The reasoning assigned for 
excluding the appellant’s name was that the High Court of Kerala 
had held in the case of A. Suma v. The Kerala Public Service 
Commission & Ors.1 that under the scheme of Kerala State & 
Subordinate Service Rules, 1958, the KPSC is incompetent to deal 
with the question of ‘equivalence’ of educational or other 
qualifications prescribed by the special rules, unless the special 
rules provide for the recognition of qualifications other than those 
prescribed.    
8. 
Being aggrieved by her non-selection, the appellant preferred 
O.A. No. 370 of 2012 before the learned Tribunal seeking a 
direction that the respondents be commanded to include her name 
at the appropriate position in the final merit list according to the 
marks which she had obtained in the written test held by the 
KPSC.  The original application preferred by the appellant came to 
be rejected by the Tribunal vide judgment dated 19th June, 2012, 
holding that the appellant failed to meet the qualifying criteria and 
 
1 2010 SCC OnLine Ker 5028 

4 
 
thus she was ineligible for appointment to the post of High School 
Assistant(Physical Science).   
9. 
The appellant assailed the order passed by the Tribunal by 
preferring OP(KAT) No. 3407 of 2012 in the High Court of Kerala.  
The learned Division Bench rejected the petition filed by the 
appellant vide judgment dated 16th October, 2012 which is 
subjected to challenge in this appeal by special leave. 
Submissions on behalf of the appellant:- 
10. Learned counsel representing the appellant vehemently and 
fervently contended that the Tribunal did not non-suit the 
appellant on the ground that the degree of B.Sc(Polymer 
Chemistry) was not equivalent to the degree in B.Sc(Chemistry) 
required under the notification. The reasoning assigned by the 
Tribunal in the order dated 19th June, 2012 was that the appellant 
had not studied physics as one of the subsidiary subjects.  He 
urged that the said reasoning is without any basis whatsoever 
because the University of Calicut had verified that B.Sc(Polymer 
Chemistry) degree obtained by the appellant was equivalent to the 
degree of B.Sc(Chemistry) required under the advertisement. A 
fortiori, the appellant became eligible to appear in the interview on 
her standing in the final merit list.  He thus urged that the finding 

5 
 
recorded by the Tribunal and affirmed by the High Court in the 
impugned judgment holding that the appellant was not qualified 
for the post, is illegal and arbitrary and the appellant deserves the 
relief claimed for. 
Submissions on behalf of respondent-KPSC: -  
11. Per contra, learned counsel representing the respondent- 
KPSC drew the Court’s attention to the qualifying criteria 
incorporated in the notification dated 03rd October, 2011(supra) 
and urged that the same indicates in unambiguous terms that the 
aspirant for the post must be holding a graduation degree in 
B.Sc(Chemistry).  He contended that the issue of equivalence 
cannot be gone into either by the Commission or the Court while 
exercising the power of judicial review. The said domain is 
exclusive to the experts/educational institutions authorised in this 
regard.  He submitted that the Division Bench of High Court has 
assigned unassailable reasoning for denying relief to the appellant 
and thus, the present appeal merits dismissal. 
Discussion and Conclusion: -  
12. We have given thoughtful consideration to the submissions 
advanced at bar and have gone through the impugned judgment 
and the material placed on record. 

6 
 
13. Indisputably, the qualifying criteria prescribed for the post 
advertised vide notification dated 30th April, 2008 was a degree in 
B.Sc(Chemistry).  Admittedly, the appellant does not hold such a 
degree.  It is the case of the appellant that B.Sc(Polymer Chemistry) 
degree acquired by her is required to be treated as equivalent to a 
degree in B.Sc(Chemistry).  However, the said argument does not 
hold water and is misconceived.   
14. This Court in the case of Zahoor Ahmad Rather and Others 
v. Sheikh Imtiyaz Ahmad and Others2 held that judicial review 
can neither expand the ambit of the prescribed qualifications nor 
decide the equivalence of the prescribed qualifications with any 
other given qualification. Therefore, the equivalence of a 
qualification is not a matter that can be determined in the exercise 
of the power of judicial review.  Whether a particular qualification 
should or should not be regarded as equivalent is a matter for the 
State, as the recruiting authority, to determine.  
     (emphasis supplied)  
15. In Unnikrishnan CV and Others v. Union of India and 
Others3, a three Judge Bench of this Court, while relying upon the 
earlier judgment in the case of Guru Nanak Dev University v. 
 
2 (2019) 2 SCC 404 
3 2023 SCC OnLine SC 343 

7 
 
Sanjay Kumar Katwal and Another4 held that equivalence is a 
technical academic matter, it cannot be implied or assumed.  Any 
decision of the academic body of the University relating to 
equivalence should be by specific order or resolution, duly 
published. 
16. The fervent plea advanced on behalf of the appellant that the 
University of Calicut had issued a certificate dated 10th October, 
2011 verifying that B.Sc(Polymer Chemistry) course of the said 
University is recognised as equivalent to its B.Sc(Chemistry) 
course is also not tenable in light of the observations made by this 
Court in the case of Unnikrishnan CV(supra).  In view of the 
settled principles of law flowing from the above precedents, we are 
of the firm view that the appellant herein was not qualified for the 
post advertised vide notification dated 30th April, 2008.  
17. As a result, we find no justifiable reason so as to interfere 
with the judgment dated 16th October, 2012 rendered by the High 
Court. 
18. The appeal lacks merit and is dismissed as such.  No order 
as to costs. 
 
 
4 (2009) 1 SCC 610 

8 
 
19. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(HIMA KOHLI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
AUGUST 06, 2024