2024 INSC 589
 
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.          OF 2024 
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 11682 OF 2018) 
 
THE BLUE DREAMZ ADVERTISING  
PVT. LTD. & ANR.                                              APPELLANT(s) 
 
                                  
 
VERSUS 
 
KOLKATA MUNICIPAL CORPORATION 
& ORS.           
                                            RESPONDENT(s) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
K.V. Viswanathan, J. 
1.    Leave granted. 
2.    The present Appeal is filed against the judgment and 
order dated 21.06.2017 passed by the Division Bench of 
the High Court at Calcutta in M.A.T. No. 277 of 2017. By 
the said judgment, the High Court allowed the Appeal of 
the respondents and set aside the judgment of the learned 
Single Judge. Consequently, the Writ Petition filed by the 
appellant stood dismissed.  
Brief Facts: 
3. 
The respondent no. 1-Kolkata Municipal Corporation 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2024.08.07
17:34:50 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
2 
 
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Corporation’) invited bids for 
allotment of contract for display of advertisement on Street 
Hoardings (including V Shaped), Bus Passenger shelter 
and Kiosks within its jurisdiction. Under the tender 
conditions, the contract was to be awarded for a period of 
one year, subject to extension of two more years. By an 
award of 28.05.2014, the appellant who had participated 
in the tender and quoted the highest rate at Rs. 
3,70,00,000/- each for cluster no. I, II, III, VI and VIII was 
notified as a successful bidder and was requested to 
confirm the acceptance. On 29.05.2014, the appellant 
conveyed its acceptance.  
4.    Thereafter, a series of correspondence ensued with the 
appellant on matters like, alleged non-receipt of any formal 
work order (on 11.06.2014); non-receipt of any format of 
the Bank Guarantee (on 13.06.2014); request for a ‘No 
Objection Certificate’ for obtaining new connection from 
Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. (on 26.06.2014); 
problems with the execution like, non-matching of the unit 

 
3 
 
code numbers with the hoardings or the non-matching of 
locations; existence of same unit code for different 
locations, rendering the commencement of work incapable 
(letter of 26.06.2014) and existence of lesser hoardings out 
of the 250 street hoardings (letter of 07.07.2014).  
5.   The Corporation, by its letter dated 08.07.2014, 
demanded payment for the month of June. Thereafter, the 
appellant wrote a letter of 19.07.2014 stating that till date 
they have identified 200 numbers of street hoardings out 
of the 250 allotted and sought for a joint inspection to 
identify the rest of them. At this stage, the Corporation 
issued a letter of 10.09.2014 stating that there was no 
reason why the appellant was insisting for the Bank 
Guarantee Format since Bank Guarantee was not the 
mode of payment. According to the Corporation, the bills 
for 5 clusters of Rs. 4,62,67,500/- (for only July to 
September, 2014) had not been paid in spite of service of 
the bill on 08.07.2014. The Corporation also mentioned 
that in the joint inspection the appellant’s men failed to 

 
4 
 
cover all the areas and thereafter, the appellant was asked 
to submit a list of allotted locations which, according to 
the Corporation, the appellant had not furnished. The 
appellant was warned that in case the payment as 
demanded was not paid, steps as per the tender clauses 
would be taken.  
6.   When the matter stood thus, the appellant wrote a 
letter 
on 
14.11.2014 
setting 
out 
all 
the 
earlier 
correspondence and the grievances raised by them and 
ultimately praying that they be granted diminution, 
reduction and/or adjustment of the license fee. They 
prayed that their demand for 174 hoardings be confirmed 
so that they could make the payment. The Corporation 
served a memo dated 06.12.2014 setting out that already 
a notice of 20.11.2014 was served demanding payment of 
8,16,15,870/- up to December, 2014 but the same has not 
been cleared. The appellant was asked to appear on 
12.12.2014 to show cause why the allotment of hoarding 
shall not be cancelled. On 28.02.2015, a Show Cause 

 
5 
 
Notice was issued asking the appellant to show cause why 
the appellant’s allotment be not terminated as dues to the 
tune of Rs. 10,28,52,918/- plus interest had not been 
cleared.  
7. 
In this scenario, on 29.07.2015, a notice was 
published in English Daily “The Times of India” Kolkata 
stating that the appellant had been blacklisted from 
participating in any advertisement in the city of Kolkata. 
However, on a challenge made in Writ Petition No. 960 of 
2015, on 04.08.2015, a submission was made to the Court 
by the learned senior counsel for the Corporation that the 
decision of the blacklisting of appellant was to be 
withdrawn and that the Corporation would proceed with 
the matter in accordance with law after providing 
opportunity of hearing. The Writ Petition was disposed of.  
8.    The appellant had earlier filed Writ Petition No. 261 of 
2015 challenging the Show Cause Notice of 28.02.2015. 
The learned Single Judge dismissed the Writ Petition on 
04.03.2015. An appeal bearing APOT No. 89 of 2015 was 

 
6 
 
preferred along with GA No. 782 of 2015. The Appeal and 
G.A. were disposed of by an order of 24th August 2015 
recording the submissions of the Learned Additional 
Advocate General appearing for the Corporation and 
disposing of the matter in the following terms:-  
“Due to typographical errors in the show cause 
notice dated 28th February, 2015, the learned 
Additional Advocate General very fairly submitted 
he is not pressing this show cause notice but the 
appropriate proceedings shall be taken before the 
Arbitrator.”  
 
9.   Thereafter, the Corporation issued a Show Cause 
Notice dated 27.08.2015 to the appellant, stating that as 
on the said date Rs. 16,84,34,431/- along with interest is 
due and payable towards license fee/advertisement tax. 
The Show Cause Notice also alleged that the appellant had 
failed to execute the agreement for street hoardings, which 
was issued on 29.11.2014 and failed to submit the bank 
guarantee which was issued on 27.09.2014 and it also 
alleged that the appellant had illegally shifted several 
hoardings without the consent of the authority. The show 
cause notice asserted that in spite of repeated requests 

 
7 
 
and/or reminders, the appellant had failed to make 
payment and refused and/or neglected to perform the 
obligations as per the terms and conditions of the tender. 
The Show Cause Notice further clearly alleged as under: 
“In view of the aforesaid breach of the terms and 
conditions of the tender, you are requested to file a 
show cause as to why befitting action to blacklist 
you from participating in any tender process should 
not be taken all (sic.) you make the outstanding 
payment and comply with the terms and conditions 
of the tender. You are required to submit your reply 
within 15 days from the date of Receipt of this letter, 
failing which the authority will take appropriate 
decision in accordance with law.”   
 
10.   By its reply of 15.09.2015, the appellant responded 
to the Show Cause Notice. The appellant mentioned 
therein that the tender document did not empower the 
Corporation to determine the alleged breach on the part of 
the company arising out of the contract; that in view of the 
submission made by the Corporation before the Division 
Bench, it is only the arbitrator in terms of Clause 18 who 
can decide the dispute mentioned in the Show Cause 
Notice of 27.08.2015; that Corporation is a party to the 
proposed arbitration proceeding and it cannot usurp the 

 
8 
 
power of the arbitrator; that the decision to blacklist the 
appellant without recourse to arbitration proceeding is 
illegal and that any decision to blacklist before the decision 
of the arbitrator would be prejudging the alleged guilt 
without deciding the issue. The appellant prayed that the 
Show Cause Notice be not given effect to till the disposal 
of the arbitration proceeding.  
11.   It further appears that by notice dated 05.10.2015, 
the appellant invoked clause 18 of the tender document 
and sought reference to the Joint Municipal Commissioner 
as arbitrator.  
Debarment Order: 
12.    By an order of 02.03.2016, the Corporation debarred 
the appellant from participating in any tender for a period 
of five years or till the date of exoneration of the company 
from the allegation of negligent performance/action and 
also of nonpayment of huge amount or till the date of 
payment of entire dues with interest under the direction of 
any authority/forum/court, whichever is later. The order, 

 
9 
 
after recording the history of the dispute and after noticing 
the fact that at the hearing given, the company took the 
same plea as stated by them in their reply, observed as 
under:- 
“… …. The company had alleged that it could find only 
174 hoarding out of 250 hoardings but the company 
in their letter dated 14th November, 2014 stated, inter 
alia, that they were able to find 200 street hoarding 
including 26-V-shaped.  The company cannot take 
such 
plea 
particularly 
when 
the 
display 
sites/hoardings were specified in the lists under 
annexure-I, Il & III to the tender notice. The 
description of works under clause-2 of the tender 
notice clearly stated that the street hoarding in the 
annexure would be allotted in "As in where is basis". 
The company after having understood the scope and 
effect of the terms and condition of the notice the offers 
which were accepted by the authorities. The bills for 5 
clusters amounting to Rs.4,58,97,360/- had already 
been served. The company was informed of its failure 
to pay the sum of Rs.4,58,97,360/- for the period from 
July 2014 to September 2014. The company paid part 
amount for 55 nos. of hoarding as against the said 
demand for the said quarter.  
 
The company failed to mention the unit code on the 
allotted street hoarding and the company did not 
adhere to the instruction as made in this respect by 
writing letters on repeated occasions.  
 
Clause-2.1 as incorporated in the tender notice is 
redundant in respect of the hoardings already             
in-existence since such hoardings remain fitted with 
the provision for supply of electricity.   In fact, no 

 
10 
 
objection certificate is not required from the KMC in 
respect of the existing hoardings. All that is necessary 
is for confirmation of the change of the name of the 
user/agency. It is on record that the company 
continued to display the advertisement in the 
hoardings 
without 
requiring 
the 
no 
objection 
certificate from the KMC until 3rd March 2015 when a 
letter was issued in this respect. There is no document 
to show that the company applied to the CESC for 
electric connection and the CESC required no 
objection certificate from the KMC.  It is on record that 
the contract period commenced from 1st June 2014 
and hence there was no cogent reason to write the 
letter for No Objection Certificate after about 8 
months. No application to the CESC in the name of the 
petitioners for the purpose illuminated street hoarding 
was submitted to the concerned authorities. The 
company used the supply of Electricity without 
requiring to inform the KMC AND EACH AND EVERY 
HOARDING was found illuminated during inspection 
failed to obtain the interim order as prayed for 
preferred the appeal being APOT No. 290 of 2015 and 
an application being G.A. No. 2374 of 2015 was filed 
in connection with the said appeal.  The Hon'ble 
appeal court while dismissing the appeal and also the 
application by an order dated 3rd August 2015 was 
pleased to observe that there was no urgency in the 
matter in view of pendency of the writ petition. It was 
also observed that if the appellants were aggrieved in 
any manner with respect to the contract it was 
necessary for them to invoke arbitration clause.  
 
The company earlier filed the writ petition being W.P. 
No.261 of 2015 relating to the notice to show cause 
dated 28th February 2015. The company was asked to 
show cause why the allotment should not be 
terminated for not clearing the dues amounting to Rs. 
10,28,52,918/- as then calculated plus interest to 

 
11 
 
take defense upon certain facts in the written 
argument. I am not fully convinced and/or satisfied 
with the stand and/or explanation for several reasons 
and/or ground as stated hereinbefore. It appears to 
me that the company did not have the financial 
capacity to have the display of advertisement rights in 
5 clusters and as such the company started creating 
problems on one plea to another since after obtaining 
the allotment of Sites. The company in one hand 
stopped the KMC to allot the said site to others and on 
the other hand itself stopped the due payment for 5 
clusters.  The KMC has thus suffered in both counts. 
Moreover the company has made an attempt to set up 
a bad example to others having interest to enjoy the 
advertisement rights. 
 
That being the position the KMC has no alternative but 
to blacklist the company for gross negligent action. 
The company is therefore debarred from participating 
in any tender to have the award of contract for a period 
of 5 years or till the date of exoneration of the company 
from the allegation of negligent, performance/action 
and also of nonpayment of huge amount or till the date 
of payment of entire dues with interest under the 
direction of any authority/forum/court whichever is 
later.” 
 
13.   In the meantime, it appears that in August, 2016, the 
appellant also filed a claim before the arbitrator claiming 
an award for Rs. 19,81,60,400/-. At the hearing before us, 
it was submitted that the arbitrator Justice (Retd.) 
Narayan Chandra Sil, who ultimately heard the matter, 
passed an award on 26.04.2024 awarding the claimant a 

 
12 
 
sum of Rs. 2,23,14,565/- after excluding the set off 
amount of Rs. 78,03,435/- along with interest of 8% per 
annum from the date of the award till realization. This 
statement is reiterated in the written submissions. We 
were also given a copy of the award. The respondent has 
not disputed the said fact. 
Proceedings in the High Court:  
14. The appellant also filed a Writ Petition, namely, Writ 
Petition No. 6616(W) of 2016 challenging the order of 
02.03.2016. The learned Single Judge of the High Court 
while setting aside the order of 02.03.2016 held as under:  
“It is well settled by the above authorities that 
blacklisting is a civil consequence. The rules of natural 
justice have to be scrupulously followed. This denotes 
that proper reasons have to be given. The reasons, 
should have suggested that public interest would be 
affected if the writ petitioner was continued to be 
awarded contracts by the respondent Corporation.  Or it 
was to be established that the writ petitioner was a 
dishonest business organisation, or irresponsible or 
wholly lacking in business integrity. The government or 
a government agency like the respondent-Corporation 
could not blacklist the writ petitioner without assigning 
these reasons or reasons akin thereto. There is a civil 
dispute between the parties. The matter has gone to 
arbitration. At best, the writ petitioner can be accused of 
taking the contract, not fully paying for it and not 

 
13 
 
performing it. The respondent Corporation has a 
monetary claim against the writ petitioner. It does not 
appear that the writ petitioner has made payment of any 
significant part of the contract price. It is astonishing 
that the respondent Corporation did not terminate the 
contract within the contract period and award hoardings 
to another party when the writ petitioner made a breach 
of the payment condition to pay the quarterly licence fee 
in advance. It waited till after the expiry of the contract 
period on 30th June, 2015.  Thereafter, they proceeded 
to show cause the writ petitioner. This shows 
considerable fault on the part of the respondent 
Corporation. It also goes to indicate that expressly or 
impliedly the respondent Corporation had accepted the 
alleged breach of contract made by the petitioner. 
 
Moreover, the defence of the writ petitioner in their 
written notes of argument is that 174 hoardings which 
were awarded to them were "non-lucrative". As the 
respondent Corporation did not issue a no objection 
certificate, CESC Limited could not give permission to 
light the hoardings. The writ petitioner could not put 
them to any use. If this is the defence raised by the writ 
petitioner it could not be cast aside as one totally devoid 
of any merit. Therefore, following the ratio laid down by 
Mr. Justice Sinha in the case of B.S.N. Joshi & Sons Ltd. 
v. Nair Coal Services Ltd and another reported in (2006) 
11 SCC 548 blacklisting proceeding should not have 
proceeded with because the writ petitioner in my opinion 
raised a bona fide dispute. Furthermore, blacklisting 
ought not to have been made until and unless this 
dispute was resolved. 
 
For all the above reasons, the impugned order dated 2nd 
March, 2016 is set aside.  Only the issue of blacklisting 
is decided by this order. Any observation regarding any 
other dispute between the parties is to be taken as 
tentative.” 
 

 
14 
 
15.   The matter was carried in Appeal by the Corporation 
and by the impugned order, the High Court has allowed 
the same by holding that since the appellant was given a 
hearing and since the order of 02.03.2016 cannot be held 
to be unreasonable or unfair or disproportionate, there 
existed sufficient reasons for debarring the appellant. So 
holding, the Appeal was allowed. The appellant aggrieved 
is before us in Appeal. This Court while issuing notice in 
the matter by its order of 27.04.2018 stayed the operation 
of the impugned judgment.  
Contentions:  
16.   We have heard Mr. P.S. Datta, learned senior counsel 
for the appellant and Mr. Sujoy Mondal, learned counsel 
for the respondent. We have also perused the written 
submissions filed by the appellant. The respondent has 
not filed any written submissions.  
17.    The learned senior counsel for the appellant contends 
that the Corporation could at best have imposed only a 
‘penalty’ for making late payments or in the case of default 

 
15 
 
of payments under clause 9 and there could not have been 
blacklisting; that blacklisting can be only made when there 
was deviation of clauses 2.8, 11 & 14 and that the Show 
Cause Notice precisely setting out why the blacklisting was 
to be imposed need to have been given; that the grounds 
of blacklisting are not the one stated in clauses 2.8, 11 & 
14; that the order of blacklisting was passed during the 
pendency of the arbitration proceedings; that the issues 
relating to blacklisting were akin to the facts in issue 
before the arbitration; that the Corporation has failed to 
prove gross misconduct or irregularities or fraud involving 
of any element of public interest; that the learned Single 
Judge was right in setting aside the order of blacklisting; 
that the Corporation is guilty of having not acted fairly and 
reasonably by not facilitating the appellant to perform his 
contractual right; that the Corporation despite the 
repeated undertaking before the High Court for taking 
resort to arbitration has deliberately issued the order of 
blacklisting and that any and every act of alleged breach 

 
16 
 
of contract would not ensue blacklisting.  
18.   In support of their submission, the appellant relied 
on B.S.N. Joshi & Sons Ltd. vs Nair Coal Services Ltd. 
& Ors. (2006) 11 SCC 548. The appellant also assailed 
the judgment of the Division Bench by contending that the 
Division Bench failed to consider that there was no 
element of violation of public interest involved in the 
conduct of the appellant and in fact the Corporation was 
guilty of having not acted fairly and reasonably and that 
the Division Bench has completely overlooked this aspect. 
The appellant further contended that the order of 
blacklisting was disproportionate and contrary to the 
judgment in Kulja Industries Ltd. vs Chief General 
Manager Western Telecom Project BSNL & Ors. (2014) 
14 SCC 731. 
19.    The learned counsel for the Corporation defended the 
order of blacklisting as well as the judgment of the Division 
Bench and prayed that there was no case for interference 
by this Court. 

 
17 
 
20.  We have considered the submissions of the learned 
counsels and perused the record.  
Questions for consideration: 
21. The following questions arise for consideration: 
a.  Whether in the facts and circumstances of the 
case, the order of the Corporation dated 02.03.2016, 
debarring the appellant for a period of five years is 
valid and justified in the eye of the law?  
b.   If so, what reliefs is the appellant entitled to? 
Reasons and conclusions: 
22.   Blacklisting has always been viewed by this Court as 
a drastic remedy and the orders passed have been 
subjected to rigorous scrutiny. In Erusian Equipment & 
Chemicals Ltd. vs State of West Bengal & Anr. (1975) 
1 SCC 70, this Court observed that  
“20. Blacklisting has the effect of preventing a person 
from the privilege and advantage of entering into lawful 
relationship with the Government for purposes of gains. 
The fact that a disability is created by the order of 
blacklisting indicates that the relevant authority is to 
have an objective satisfaction….” 
 
23.   In Mr. B.S.N. Joshi (supra), this Court held that  

 
18 
 
“41.  … When a contractor is blacklisted by a department 
he is debarred from obtaining a contract, but in terms of 
the notice inviting tender when a tenderer is declared to 
be a defaulter, he may not get any contract at all. It may 
have to wind up its business. The same would, thus, 
have a disastrous effect on him. Whether a person 
defaults in making payment or not would depend upon 
the context in which the allegations are made as also the 
relevant statute operating in the field. When a demand 
is made, if the person concerned raises a bona fide 
dispute in regard to the claim, so long as the dispute is 
not resolved, he may not be declared to be defaulter.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied)  
 
24.   This Court in Kulja Industries Ltd. (supra) after 
setting 
out 
the 
legal 
position 
governing 
blacklisting/debarment in USA and UK held that:  
“25. Suffice it to say that “debarment” is recognised and 
often used as an effective method for disciplining deviant 
suppliers/contractors who may have committed acts of 
omission 
and 
commission 
or 
frauds 
including 
misrepresentations, falsification of records and other 
breaches of the regulations under which such contracts 
were allotted. What is notable is that the “debarment” is 
never permanent and the period of debarment would 
invariably depend upon the nature of the offence 
committed by the erring contractor. 
 
26. In the case at hand according to the respondent 
BSNL, the appellant had fraudulently withdrawn a huge 
amount of money which was not due to it in collusion 
and conspiracy with the officials of the respondent 
Corporation. Even so permanent debarment from future 
contracts for all times to come may sound too harsh and 
heavy a punishment to be considered reasonable 

 
19 
 
especially when (a) the appellant is supplying bulk of its 
manufactured products to the respondent BSNL, and (b) 
the excess amount received by it has already been paid 
back.” 
 
25.   What is significant is that while setting out the 
guidelines prescribed in USA, the Court noticed that 
comprehensive guidelines for debarment were issued there 
for protecting public interest from those contractors and 
recipients who are non-responsible, lack business 
integrity or engage in dishonest or illegal conduct or are 
otherwise unable to perform satisfactorily. The illustrative 
cases set out also demonstrate that debarment as a 
remedy is to be invoked in cases where there is harm or 
potential harm for public interest particularly in cases 
where the person’s conduct has demonstrated that 
debarment as a penalty alone will protect public interest 
and deter the person from repeating his actions which 
have a tendency to put public interest in jeopardy. In fact, 
it is common knowledge that in notice inviting tenders, any 
person 
blacklisted 
is 
rendered 
ineligible. 
Hence, 
blacklisting will not only debar the person concerned from 

 
20 
 
dealing with the concerned employer, but because of the 
disqualification, their dealings with other entities also is 
proscribed.  Even in the terms and conditions of tender in 
the present case, one of the conditions of eligibility is that 
the agency should not be blacklisted from anywhere. 
26. In other words, where the case is of an ordinary 
breach of contract and the explanation offered by the 
person 
concerned 
raises 
a 
bona 
fide 
dispute, 
blacklisting/debarment as a penalty ought not to be 
resorted to. Debarring a person albeit for a certain number 
of years tantamounts to civil death inasmuch as the said 
person is commercially ostracized resulting in serious 
consequences for the person and those who are employed 
by him.  
27.   Too readily invoking the debarment for ordinary cases 
of breach of contract where there is a bona fide dispute, is 
not permissible. Each case, no doubt, would turn on the 
facts and circumstances thereto.  
28.  Examining the facts of this case from that perspective, 

 
21 
 
we find that the appellant, after the award of the tender, 
has admittedly paid an amount of Rs. 3,71,96,265/-, 
though, according to the Corporation, the outstanding 
amount as on the date of the debarment was Rs. 
14,63,24,727/-. However, as would be clear from the facts 
discussed hereinabove, right from the inception there have 
been issues between the appellant and the Corporation 
with regard to the fulfilment of the reciprocal obligations 
in the bid document. There has been exchange of 
correspondence between the parties with each side 
blaming the other for not performing the reciprocal 
obligations. While the appellant had a case with regard to 
the non-issuance of work orders; non-receipt of formal 
format of bank guarantee; refusal of No Objection 
Certificate for obtaining connection from the Calcutta 
Electric Supply Corporation Ltd.; existence of only 200 out 
of 250 allotted street hoardings and so on demonstrating 
breach of obligations by the Corporation, the Corporation 
had a case that Bank Guarantee was not the mode of 

 
22 
 
payment and as such there was no reason to insist on 
Bank Guarantee; that in the joint inspection the 
appellant’s men failed to cover all the areas and thereafter 
when appellant was asked to submit a list of allotted 
location, the appellant failed to furnish the same and 
further there was huge default on the part of the appellant.  
29.  Even in the order dated 02.03.2016 by which the 
appellant was debarred for a period of five years, the 
reason given is that the tender notice had clearly stated 
that the street hoardings in the annexures would be 
allotted on ‘as is where is’ basis; that the company having 
understood the scope and effect of the terms and 
conditions of the notice accepted the award; that, ‘No 
Objection Certificate’, is not required in respect of the 
existing hoardings; that there was no document to show 
that the company had applied to the Calcutta Electric 
Supply Corporation Ltd. for connection and that it 
appeared to the Corporation that the company did not 
have the financial capacity to pay and as such the 

 
23 
 
company was creating problems on one pretext or the 
other since obtaining the allotment of sites. The order also 
stated that the appellant had set up a bad example to 
others having interest to enjoy the advertisement rights.  
30.  All these reasons fall far short of rendering the 
conduct of the appellant in the present case, so abhorrent 
as to justify the invocation of the drastic remedy of 
blacklisting/debarment. The appellant very clearly has 
been subjected to a disproportionate penalty.  The 
Corporation has lifted a sledgehammer to crack a nut. We 
disapprove of the said course of action on the facts of this 
case.  
31.  The exchange of correspondence resulted in 
invocation of the arbitration and today it is undisputed 
that by an award of 26.04.2024, the appellant has been 
awarded after due set off Rs. 2,23,14,565/- with 8% 
interest per annum under the very same dispute. We are 
not here concerned with the correctness of the award. 
What it does signify is that there was a bona fide 

 
24 
 
contractual dispute between the parties and we hold that 
the learned Single Judge was right in setting aside the 
order of debarment on the ground that there was a bona 
fide civil dispute between the parties.  
32.    What renders the matter a fortiori is that when APOT 
No. 89 of 2015 along with GA 782 of 2015 filed against the 
order of the learned Single Judge dismissing Writ Petition 
No. 261 of 2015, the counsel for the Corporation had 
submitted to the Court that the Show Cause Notice was 
being withdrawn at that stage and appropriate proceeding 
was to be taken before the arbitrator. In spite of the 
statement, the Corporation did not invoke arbitration.  
33.   The appellant invoked arbitration and no doubt a 
counter claim was filed by the Corporation before the 
arbitrator. Ultimately, the counter claim was decreed for 
Rs. 78,03,435/- and the claim was decreed for Rs. 
3,01,18,000/- and after ordering set off, an award has 
been passed for Rs. 2,23,14,565/-. 
34.   The issues framed by the arbitrator also indicate that 

 
25 
 
the assertions and counter assertions of the appellant and 
the Corporation were clearly in the nature of a bona fide 
civil dispute only to demonstrate that aspect, the issues 
are extracted herein below: 
“1. Is the arbitral proceeding barred by reasons of accord 
and satisfaction? 
2. Did the respondents fail to allot 250 street hoardings 
in terms of tender document? 
3. Did the respondents fail and neglect to provide clear 
sites to the claimants by intervening and removing illegal 
hoardings for obstructions at the allotted sites? 
4. Did the respondents issue ‘no objection certificate' to 
the claimants for getting new connections from the 
CESCP? 
5. Was there any mis-match of unit code and the 
location hoardings? 
6. Was it established and accepted in joint inspection by 
the KMC that only 200 street hoardings out of 250 could 
be located? 
7. Did the claimants fail to deposit the requisite amount 
in advance under the contract for which the KMC, the 
respondent, suffered substantial loss in revenue? 
8. Was there any obligation of the respondents to identify 
the location of the street hoardings as the agreement was 
on 'as is where is basis’? 
9. Did the parties discharge their respective liabilities 
under the contract and if so to what extent? 
10. Is the claimant entitled to the claim amount as 
claimed? 
11. Are the respondents entitled to the amount of 
counter-claim as claimed in their statement of counter-
claim? 
12. To what other relief or reliefs the parties are 
entitled?” 

 
26 
 
 
35.  The Division Bench has, in our opinion, not 
appreciated the case in its proper perspective. Merely 
saying that the blacklisting order carried reasons is not 
good enough. Do the reasons justify the invocation of the 
penalty of blacklisting and is the penalty proportionate, 
was the real question. 
36.  The Division Bench has observed that blacklisting is 
a business decision by which the party affected by the 
breach decides not to enter into any contractual 
relationship with the party committing the breach.  It also 
observed that between two private parties the right to take 
any such decision is absolute and untrammeled by any 
constraints whatsoever.  The observations are too 
sweeping in their ambit and wholly overlook the fact that 
the respondent-Corporation is a statutory body vested 
with the duty to discharge public functions.  It is not a 
private party.  Any decision to blacklist should be strictly 
within the parameters of law and has to comport with the 
principle of proportionality.   

 
27 
 
37.  The Division Bench having noticed the fact that any 
decision to blacklist will be open to scrutiny on the anvil 
of the doctrine of proportionality has failed to apply the 
principle to the facts of the case in the correct perspective.  
The Division Bench has also failed to correctly appreciate 
the ratio of the decision in B.S.N. Joshi (supra).  
38.   There has been no enquiry by the Division Bench as 
to whether the conduct of the appellant was part of the 
normal vicissitudes in business and common place 
hazards in commerce or whether the appellant had 
crossed the rubicon warranting a banishment order, albeit 
for a temporary period in larger public interest.  
39. One such case where this Court found the Lakshman 
Rekha to be breached by the party blacklisted was Patel 
Engineering Limited vs. Union of India and Another, 
(2012) 11 SCC 257.  In that case, while upholding the 
order of blacklisting, this Court recorded the following: 
“33. From the impugned order it appears that the second 
respondent came to the conclusion that: (1) the 
petitioner is not reliable and trustworthy in the context 
of a commercial transaction; (2) by virtue of the 

 
28 
 
dereliction of the petitioner, the second respondent 
suffered a huge financial loss; and (3) the dereliction on 
the part of the petitioner warrants exemplary action to 
“curb any practice of ‘pooling’ and ‘mala fide’ in future”. 
 
34. We do not find any illegality or irrationality in the 
conclusion reached by the second respondent that the 
petitioner is not (commercially) reliable and trustworthy 
in the light of its conduct in the context of the 
transaction in question. We cannot find fault with the 
second respondent's conclusion because the petitioner 
chose to go back on its offer of paying a premium of Rs 
190.53 crores per annum, after realising that the next 
bidder quoted a much lower amount. Whether the 
decision of the petitioner is bona fide or mala fide, 
requires a further probe into the matter, but, the 
explanation offered by the petitioner does not appear to 
be a rational explanation. 
 
36.  …. The dereliction, such as the one indulged in by 
the petitioner, if not handled firmly, is likely to result in 
recurrence of such activity not only on the part of the 
petitioner, but others also, who deal with public bodies, 
such as the second respondent giving scope for 
unwholesome practices…..” 
 
40. Equally so in Kulja Industries (supra), the party 
blacklisted was alleged to have fraudulently withdrawn a 
huge amount of money which was not due to it in collusion 
and 
conspiracy 
with 
officials 
of 
the 
respondent 
Corporation.  
41. Patel Engineering (supra) and Kulja Industries 
(supra) bring out the contrast between cases of that ilk 

 
29 
 
and others, like the case in question.  It is this distinction 
the Division Bench has grossly overlooked which, however, 
the learned Single Judge had rightly brought to the fore.  
42.  For all the reasons set out hereinabove, we set aside 
the impugned judgment of the Division Bench dated 
21.06.2017 passed in M.A.T. No. 277 of 2017 and restore 
the judgment of the learned Single Judge. The result will 
be that the Writ Petition No. 6616(W) of 2016 filed by the 
appellant before the High Court at Calcutta would stand 
allowed and the order of blacklisting dated 02.03.2016 
would stand set aside. The Appeal is, accordingly, allowed. 
No order as to costs.   
 
………........................J. 
    
 
 
 
           [B.R. GAVAI] 
 
 
    ………........................J. 
    
 
 
 
           [SANJAY KAROL] 
 
 
……….........................J. 
    
 
 
 
           [K. V. VISWANATHAN] 
New Delhi     
07 August, 2024.