2024 INSC 595
1 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.         OF 2024 
[Arising out of SLP(Criminal) No. 8781 of 2024] 
 
 
 
MANISH SISODIA 
 
 
                  …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT 
…RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.         OF 2024 
[Arising out of SLP(Criminal) No. 8772 of 2024] 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
 
1. 
Leave granted.  Appeals heard on merits. 
2. 
The present appeals challenge the judgment and order 
dated 21st May 2024 passed by the learned Single Judge of 
the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Bail Application Nos. 
1557 and 1559 of 2024, thereby rejecting the said 
applications filed by the present appellant for grant of bail.  
The aforesaid two applications were filed seeking bail in 
connection with ED Case No. HIU-II/14/2022 registered 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.08.09
11:47:07 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
against the appellant by the Directorate of Enforcement (for 
short, 
‘ED’) 
and 
First 
Information 
Report 
(FIR) 
No. 
RC0032022A0053 of 2022 registered against the appellant 
by the Central Bureau of Investigation (for short, ‘CBI’). 
3. 
FIR No. RC0032022A0053 of 2022 came to be 
registered by the CBI on 17th August 2022, and ED Case No. 
HIU-II/14/2022 came to be registered by the ED on 22nd 
August 2022.  
4. 
Since both the cases arise out of similar facts, the latter 
being the predicate offence and the former being a case 
registered on the basis of the predicate offence, both these 
appeals are heard and decided together. 
FACTS IN BRIEF: 
5. 
The present case travelled two rounds before the trial 
court, the High Court and this Court.  This is now the third 
round before this Court wherein the appellant is seeking bail 
in connection with the aforesaid two cases. 
6. 
On the basis of a letter dated 20th July 2022 addressed 
by Shri Vinai Kumar Saxena, the Lieutenant Governor of 
Delhi, 
alleging 
irregularities 
in 
the 
framing 
and 

3 
implementation of Delhi’s Excise Policy for the year 2021-22, 
the Director, Ministry of Home Affairs had directed an 
enquiry into the said matter vide Office Memorandum dated 
22nd July 2022.  On 26th February 2023, the appellant came 
to be arrested by the CBI.  Subsequently, the appellant was 
arrested by the ED on 9th March 2023. 
7. 
After investigation, CBI filed charge-sheet on 25th April 
2023 for the offences punishable under Sections 7, 7A, 8 and 
12 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (for short, ‘PC 
Act’) read with Sections 420, 201 and 120B of the Indian 
Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘IPC’).  Upon completion of 
investigation, the ED filed a complaint under Section 3 of the 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (for short, ‘PMLA’) 
on 4th May 2023. 
8. 
The first application for regular bail of the appellant in 
CBI matter came to be rejected by the High Court on 30th 
May 2023. Subsequently, the first application for regular bail 
of the appellant in ED matter came to be rejected by the High 
Court on 3rd July 2023.  This Court, vide common order 
dated 30th October 2023 (hereinafter referred to as “the first 
order of this Court”) rejected the regular bail applications of 

4 
the appellant in the CBI matter and the ED matter, with 
certain observations which we will refer to in the subsequent 
paragraphs. 
9. 
Subsequently, in view of the liberty granted by this 
Court, the appellant filed second bail application before the 
trial court on 27th January 2024.  In the said proceedings, 
the appellant was granted interim protection.  However, by 
an order dated 30th April 2024, the trial court rejected the 
said bail application on the ground that there was no change 
in the circumstances.  
10. The appellant thereafter filed second bail application 
before the High Court on 2nd May 2024. Vide impugned 
judgment and order dated 21st May 2024, the learned Single 
Judge of the High Court rejected the said bail application 
also.  
11. Being aggrieved thereby, the appellant had approached 
this Court by filing Special Leave Petition (Criminal) Nos. 
7795 and 7799 of 2024.   
12. The matter was heard on 4th June 2024.  This Court, in 
the said order (hereinafter referred to as “the second order of 
this Court”) recorded the submissions of the learned Solicitor 

5 
General that the investigation would be concluded and final 
complaint/charge-sheet would be filed expeditiously and at 
any rate on or before 3rd July 2024 and immediately 
thereafter, the trial court would be free to proceed with the 
trial.  This Court recorded the submissions made by the 
learned Solicitor General and observed that having regard to 
the fact that the period of “6-8 months” fixed by this Court by 
order dated 30th October 2023 had not yet come to an end, 
disposed of the said petition with liberty to revive his prayer 
afresh after filing of the final complaint/charge-sheet. 
13. Accordingly, after filing of the final complaint/charge-
sheet, the appellant has approached this Court by way of the 
present appeals. This Court, vide order dated 16th July 2024 
had issued notice. In response thereto, counter affidavit has 
been filed on behalf of the ED as well as the CBI opposing the 
present appeals.  
SUBMISSIONS: 
14. We have extensively heard Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, 
learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant 
and Shri Suryaprakash V. Raju, learned Additional Solicitor 
General (ASG) appearing on behalf of the respondents. 

6 
15. A preliminary objection has been raised on behalf of the 
learned ASG that the appellant cannot be permitted to file 
second set of SLPs to challenge the order of the High Court 
dated 21st May 2024 when the earlier SLPs arising out of the 
same order were disposed of.  He submitted that the liberty 
granted by this Court vide order dated 4th June 2024 has to 
be construed as a liberty to apply to the trial court afresh.  It 
is submitted that, only after the appellant approaches the 
trial court and in the event he does not succeed before the 
trial court, thereafter he approaches the High Court and in 
the event he also does not succeed before the High Court, 
then only he would be entitled to approach this Court.  He 
therefore submitted that the present appeals deserve to be 
rejected thereby relegating the appellant to approach the trial 
court afresh.  To buttress his submission, Shri Raju relied on 
the judgment of this Court in the case of Kunhayammed 
and Others v. State of Kerala and Others1. 
16. The said preliminary objection has been opposed by Dr. 
Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the 
appellant contending that this Court had specifically, vide its 
 
1 (2000) 6 SCC 359 : 2000 INSC 339 

7 
first order dated 30th October 2023, granted liberty to the 
appellant to move a fresh application for bail in case the trial 
does not conclude within next 6-8 months and also in case 
the trial is protracted and proceeds at a snail’s pace in next 
three months.  He submitted that, admittedly, the trial has 
not been concluded within a period of 6-8 months from the 
date of the first order of this Court.  He further submitted 
that the record would show that the trial was protracted and 
proceeded at a snail’s pace in the period of three months 
after the first order of this Court was passed.  He submitted 
that the second order of this Court clearly reserves the right 
of the appellant to revive the request afresh after filing of the 
final complaint/charge-sheet as assured by the learned 
Solicitor General. Dr. Singhvi therefore prays for rejection of 
the preliminary objection. 
17. On merits, Dr.  Singhvi submitted that this Court, vide 
its first order dated 30th October 2023, has given various 
findings in favour of the appellant.  It is submitted that, a 
perusal of the same would clearly reveal that at number of 
places, this Court has given findings which would show that 
the respondents have not been in a position to make out a 

8 
prima facie case.  Dr. Singhvi further submitted that a 
perusal of the record would reveal that even the investigation 
in the case is not complete. He therefore submitted that 
unless the investigation is complete, the trial cannot proceed.  
He submitted that three more supplementary complaints 
have been filed on 10th May 2024, 17th May 2024 and 20th 
June 2024 in the ED matter and as on 27th July 2024, there 
were 40 persons who have been arrayed as accused in the 
proceedings with more than 8 complaints. He further 
submitted that, in the ED matter, the ED has cited 224 
witnesses and produced 32,000 pages of documents. He 
further submitted that, in the CBI matter, the CBI has cited 
269 witnesses and produced around 37,000 pages of 
documents. It is therefore submitted that in all there are 493 
witnesses, excluding the ones in the 4th Supplementary 
Charge-sheet filed by the CBI, who will have to be examined 
and that in total the documents are running into around 
69,000 pages. 
18. Dr. Singhvi submitted that the ED has deliberately 
concealed the documents it acquired during investigation by 
putting documents exculpating the accused persons in the 

9 
category of “un-relied upon documents”.  It is submitted that, 
as such, it was necessary for the appellant to inspect such 
“un-relied upon documents”. He further submitted that there 
was an inordinate delay on the part of the ED and the CBI in 
producing the list of “un-relied upon documents”. 
19. Dr.  Singhvi submitted that, taking into consideration 
the voluminous number of witnesses and documents, there 
is no possibility of the trial seeing the light of the day and 
therefore the appeals filed by the appellant deserve to be 
allowed. 
20. Shri Raju vehemently opposed the present appeals.  He 
submitted that this Court, in its first order, after 
enumerating various factors on merits of the matter in 
paragraph 25 has held that the Court was not inclined to 
accept the prayer for grant of bail.  It is therefore submitted 
that the appeals of the present appellant on merits were 
specifically rejected.   
21. Shri Raju further submitted that, though the Court 
granted liberty to file a fresh application in the circumstances 
enumerated in paragraph 29, it was held that the same 
would be considered by the trial court on merits without 

10 
being influenced by the dismissal of the earlier bail 
applications including the said first order.  It is therefore 
submitted that the trial court as well as the High Court were 
required to take into consideration the merits of the matter.  
However, the present appellant opposed the consideration of 
the application on merits and insisted on consideration of the 
application only on the ground of delay in trial.  It is 
therefore submitted that both the courts have rightly 
considered the merits of the matter and after considering the 
merits, found that the appellant was not entitled to grant of 
bail.  He submitted that no interference would be warranted. 
22. Shri Raju submitted that the trial court and the High 
Court have specifically come to a finding that the appellant 
has delayed the pre-charge proceedings by taking recourse to 
the provisions of Section 207 of Criminal Procedure Code, 
1973 (for short, ‘Cr.P.C.’).  He submitted that more than 
hundred applications have been filed out of which many are 
under Section 207 Cr.P.C.  These applications have been 
filed only for the purpose of delaying the trial.  It is submitted 
that though in view of the law laid down by this Court in the 

11 
case of P. Ponnusamy v. State of Tamil Nadu2, such 
applications could have been filed only after framing of the 
charges, the same have been intentionally filed at a pre-
charge stage of the trial, so as to delay the framing of the 
charges.  He submitted that though the appellant is entitled 
to file an application for discharge, the same has not been 
filed only in order to protract the trial.  He submitted that the 
totality of the circumstances would reveal that it is the 
appellant who has been protracting the trial.  It is submitted 
that as the appellant himself is responsible for protracting 
the trial, he cannot be permitted to take the benefit of the 
same. 
23. The learned ASG submitted that unless the triple 
conditions as stipulated under Section 45 of the PMLA are 
satisfied, no person accused of an offence shall be released 
on bail.  It is submitted that, in the present case, this Court 
itself by the first order has found that the appellant was not 
entitled for bail on merits and as such, the second condition 
stipulated under Section 45 of the PMLA that there are 
 
2 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1543 : 2022 INSC 1175 

12 
reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such 
offence, would not be satisfied in the present case. 
24. The learned ASG further submitted that the appellant is 
a very influential person having occupied the office of Deputy 
Chief Minister of Delhi when the crime was committed.  He 
submitted that if the appellant is released on bail, there is 
every possibility of him influencing the witnesses or 
tampering with the evidence. 
25. Dr. Singhvi, in rejoinder, has submitted that the 
contention that the trial is being delayed due to the 
applications being filed by the appellant under Section 207 
Cr.P.C. is totally incorrect.  He submitted that the said 
applications were required to be filed since the prosecution 
had not placed on record the documents exculpating the 
accused persons by placing the same in the category of “un-
relied upon documents”. He submitted that in order to avail 
the right of a fair trial and in adherence to the principles of 
natural justice as encapsulated in Section 207 Cr.P.C., the 
appellant was forced to file such applications. However, each 
of these applications were vehemently opposed by the 
prosecution. It is submitted that the said material ought to 

13 
have been placed on record by the prosecution themselves, 
however, for the reasons best known to the prosecution, they 
have not done so.  He submitted that the appellant has filed 
only 14 applications in ED case and 13 applications in CBI 
case and that all these applications have been allowed by the 
learned trial judge. He lastly submitted that even as per the 
prosecution, if the entire “un-relied upon documents” are to 
be supplied in digital form, it will take a long time. To 
support his submission, Dr. Singhvi places reliance on the 
compliance report dated 7th May 2024 filed by the Assistant 
Director of ED which would fortify this position. 
CONSIDERATION OF PRELIMINARY OBJECTION: 
26. We will first deal with the preliminary objection of the 
learned ASG with regard to the filing of the second set of 
appeals before this Court challenging the order of the High 
Court 
dated 
21st 
May 
2024 
i.e., 
on 
the 
point 
of 
maintainability. 
27. Undisputedly, the appellant had earlier challenged the 
same order dated 21st May 2024 vide SLP (Criminal) Nos. 
7795 and 7799 of 2024. On doing so, a Division Bench of 
this Court passed the order dated 4th June 2024. It will be 

14 
apposite to refer to the observations made by this Court in 
the said order, which read thus: 
“Though, elaborate arguments have been made, we 
do not propose to go into the said arguments or 
dwell upon it and then record our reasons for the 
simple 
reason 
that 
Co-ordinate 
Bench 
while 
dismissing the appeals vide order dated 30.10.2023, 
as noticed hereinabove has granted liberty to the 
appellant, i.e., the petitioner herein to move a fresh 
application for bail by placing reliance on the 
assurance given on behalf of the prosecution that 
they would conclude the trial by taking appropriate 
steps within next 6-8 months and as such the 
liberty was extended to the petitioner herein to move 
a 
fresh 
application 
in 
case 
of 
change 
in 
circumstances, or in case the trial is protracted and 
proceeds at a snail’s pace in next three months. It 
was also observed that if such an application is filed 
in the aforesaid circumstances, the same would be 
considered by the trial court on merits without 
being influenced by the dismissal of the earlier bail 
application including the judgment of this Court.  
 
Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General on 
instructions would submit that the investigation 
would be concluded and final complaint/charge 
sheet would be filed expeditiously and at any rate 
on or before 03.07.2024 and immediately thereafter, 
the trial court will be free to proceed with trial. In 
the light of the said submissions made and having 
regard to the fact that the period of “6-8 months” 
fixed by this Court by Order dated 30.10.2023 
having not come to an end, it would suffice to 
dispose of these petitions with liberty to the 
petitioner to revive his prayer afresh after filing of 
the final complaint/Charge-sheet as assured by 
learned Solicitor General. Needless to state that in 
the event of such an application being filed, the 
same would be considered on its own merits as 

15 
already observed by this Court vide paragraph 29 
(supra). Contentions of both parties kept open.  
 
Accordingly, these petitions stand disposed of. All 
pending applications consigned to record.” 
 
28. Before considering the submissions of the learned ASG 
with regard to maintainability of the present appeals on 
account of the second order of this Court, it will be apposite 
to refer to certain observations made by this Court in its first 
order, which read thus:  
“26. However, we are also concerned about the 
prolonged period of incarceration suffered by the 
appellant – Manish Sisodia. In P. Chidambaram v. 
Directorate of Enforcement (2020) 13 SCC 791, 
the appellant therein was granted bail after being 
kept 
in 
custody 
for 
around 
49 
days 
[P. 
Chidambaram 
v. 
Central 
Bureau 
of 
Investigation (2020) 13 SCC 337], relying on the 
Constitution Bench in Shri Gurbaksh Singh 
Sibbia and Others v. State of Punjab (1980) 2 
SCC 565, and Sanjay Chandra v. Central Bureau 
of Investigation (2012) 1 SCC 40, that even if the 
allegation is one of grave economic offence, it is not 
a rule that bail should be denied in every case. 
Ultimately, the consideration has to be made on a 
case to case basis, on the facts. The primary object 
is to secure the presence of the accused to stand 
trial. The argument that the appellant therein was a 
flight risk or that there was a possibility of 
tampering with the evidence or influencing the 
witnesses, was rejected by the Court. Again, in 
Satender Kumar Antil v. Central Bureau of 
Investigation and Another (2022) 10 SCC 51, this 
Court referred to Surinder Singh Alias Shingara 
Singh v. State of Punjab (2005) 7 SCC 387 and 
Kashmira Singh v. State of Punjab (1977) 4 SCC 

16 
291, to emphasise that the right to speedy trial is a 
fundamental right within the broad scope of Article 
21 
of 
the 
Constitution. 
In 
Vijay 
Madanlal 
Choudhary (supra), this Court while highlighting 
the evil of economic offences like money laundering, 
and its adverse impact on the society and citizens, 
observed that arrest infringes the fundamental right 
to life. This Court referred to Section 19 of the PML 
Act, for the in-built safeguards to be adhered to by 
the authorised officers to ensure fairness, objectivity 
and accountability. [See also Pankaj Bansal v. 
Union of India and Ors. 2023 SCC OnLine SC 
1244] Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra), also 
held that Section 436A of the Code can apply to 
offences under the PML Act, as it effectuates the 
right to speedy trial, a facet of the right to life, 
except for a valid ground such as where the trial is 
delayed at the instance of the accused himself. In 
our opinion, Section 436A should not be construed 
as a mandate that an accused should not be 
granted bail under the PML Act till he has suffered 
incarceration for the specified period. This Court, in 
Arnab 
Manoranjan 
Goswami 
v. 
State 
of 
Maharashtra and Others (2021) 2 SCC 427, held 
that while ensuring proper enforcement of criminal 
law on one hand, the court must be conscious that 
liberty across human eras is as tenacious as 
tenacious can be. 
27. The appellant – Manish Sisodia has argued that 
given the number of witnesses, 294 in the 
prosecution filed by the CBI and 162 in the 
prosecution filed by the DoE, and the documents 
31,000 pages and 25,000 pages respectively, the 
fact that the CBI has filed multiple charge sheets, 
the arguments of charge have not commenced. The 
trial court has allowed application of the accused for 
furnishing of additional documents, which order 
has been challenged by the prosecution under 
Section 482 of the Code before the High Court. It 
was stated at the Bar, on behalf of the prosecution 
that the said petition under Section 482 will be 
withdrawn. It was also stated at the Bar, by the 

17 
prosecution that the trial would be concluded 
within next six to eight months.  
28. Detention or jail before being pronounced guilty 
of an offence should not become punishment 
without trial. If the trial gets protracted despite 
assurances of the prosecution, and it is clear that 
case will not be decided within a foreseeable time, 
the prayer for bail may be meritorious. While the 
prosecution may pertain to an economic offence, yet 
it may not be proper to equate these cases with 
those punishable with death, imprisonment for life, 
ten years or more like offences under the Narcotic 
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, 
murder, cases of rape, dacoity, kidnaping for 
ransom, mass violence, etc. Neither is this a case 
where 
100/1000s 
of 
depositors 
have 
been 
defrauded. The allegations have to be established 
and proven. The right to bail in cases of delay, 
coupled with incarceration for a long period, 
depending on the nature of the allegations, should 
be read into Section 439 of the Code and Section 45 
of the PML Act. The reason is that the constitutional 
mandate is the higher law, and it is the basic right 
of the person charged of an offence and not 
convicted, that he be ensured and given a speedy 
trial. When the trial is not proceeding for reasons 
not attributable to the accused, the court, unless 
there are good reasons, may well be guided to 
exercise the power to grant bail. This would be truer 
where the trial would take years.  
29. In view of the assurance given at the Bar on 
behalf of the prosecution that they shall conclude 
the trial by taking appropriate steps within next six 
to eight months, we give liberty to the appellant – 
Manish Sisodia to move a fresh application for bail 
in case of change in circumstances, or in case the 
trial is protracted and proceeds at a snail’s pace in 
next three months. If any application for bail is filed 
in the above circumstances, the same would be 
considered by the trial court on merits without 
being influenced by the dismissal of the earlier bail 

18 
application, 
including 
the 
present 
judgment. 
Observations made above, re.: right to speedy trial, 
will, however, be taken into consideration. The 
appellant – Manish Sisodia may also file an 
application for interim bail in case of ill health and 
medical emergency due to illness of his wife. Such 
application would be also examined on its own 
merits.” 
 
29. A perusal of the aforesaid would reveal that this Court 
was concerned about the prolonged period of incarceration 
suffered by the appellant.  After considering various earlier 
pronouncements, this Court emphasised that the right to 
speedy trial is a fundamental right within the broad scope of 
Article 21 of the Constitution.  Relying on Vijay Madanlal 
Choudhary and Others v. Union of India and Others3, 
this Court observed that Section 436A Cr.P.C. should not be 
construed as a mandate that an accused should not be 
granted 
bail 
under 
the 
PMLA 
till 
he 
has 
suffered 
incarceration for the specified period. This Court recorded 
the assurance given by the prosecution that they shall 
conclude the trial by taking appropriate steps within next 6-8 
months. This Court, after recording the said submissions, 
granted liberty to the appellant to move a fresh application 
for bail in case of change in circumstances or in case the trial 
 
3 (2022) SCC OnLine SC 929 : 2022 INSC 756 

19 
was protracted and proceeded at a snail’s pace in next three 
months. This Court observed that if any application was 
filed, the same would be considered by the trial court on 
merits without being influenced by the dismissal of the 
earlier bail applications including its own judgment.  It 
further observed that the observations made regarding the 
right to speedy trial will be taken into consideration. 
30. Since the trial proceeded at a snail’s pace in the period 
after three months of the first order of this Court, the 
appellant filed the second application for bail before the trial 
court.  The same came to be rejected by the trial court on 
30th April 2024.  It can thus be seen that it took a period of 
almost three months for the trial court to decide the said 
application.  By the time the appellant approached the High 
Court, a period of more than six months had elapsed from 
the date on which the first order of this Court was passed.  
The same also came to be rejected on 21st May 2024. 
31. When the appellant approached this Court in the 
second round and when the second order was passed by this 
Court on 4th June 2024, a period of 7 months and 4 days 
had elapsed from the date of the first order of this Court.  

20 
However, this Court took into consideration the statement of 
the learned Solicitor General that the investigation would be 
concluded and final complaint/charge-sheet would be filed 
expeditiously and at any rate on or before 3rd July 2024 and 
thereafter, the trial court would be free to proceed with the 
trial.  It, after observing that “having regard to the fact that 
the period of 6-8 months fixed by this Court in its first order 
having not come to an end”, disposed of the petitions with 
liberty to the appellant to revive his prayer afresh after filing 
of the final complaint/charge-sheet.   
32. It could thus be seen that this Court had granted liberty 
to the appellant to revive his prayer after filing of the charge-
sheet.  Now, relegating the appellant to again approach the 
trial court and thereafter the High Court and only thereafter 
this Court, in our view, would be making him play a game of 
“Snake and Ladder”.  The trial court and the High Court have 
already taken a view and in our view relegating the appellant 
again to the trial court and the High Court would be an 
empty formality. In a matter pertaining to the life and liberty 
of a citizen which is one of the most sacrosanct rights 

21 
guaranteed by the Constitution, a citizen cannot be made to 
run from pillar to post.  
33. A careful reading of the second order of this Court dated 
4th June 2024 would show that this Court recorded that they 
did not propose to go into the arguments or dwell upon it in 
view of the liberty granted in the first order of this Court.  
Thereafter, this Court noticed the assurance of the learned 
Solicitor General that the investigation would be concluded 
and final complaint/charge-sheet would be filed at any rate on 
or before 3rd July 2024.  This Court further observed in its 
second order that since the period of 6-8 months fixed by it in 
its first order had not come to an end, it was inclined to 
dispose of this petition with liberty to the appellant to revive 
his prayer.  It will be a travesty of justice to construe that the 
carefully couched order preserving the right of the appellant to 
revive his prayer for grant of special leave against the High 
Court order, to mean that he should be relegated all the way 
down to the trial court.  The memorable adage, that procedure 
is a hand maiden and not a mistress of justice rings loudly in 
our ears. 
 

22 
34. In this respect, we may also gainfully refer to one of the 
recent pronouncements by a bench of this Court to which 
one of us (B.R. Gavai, J.) was a member in the case of Prabir 
Purkayastha v. State (NCT of Delhi)4, which reads thus: 
“21. The Right to Life and Personal Liberty is the 
most sacrosanct fundamental right guaranteed 
under Articles 20, 21 and 22 of the Constitution of 
India. 
Any 
attempt 
to 
encroach 
upon 
this 
fundamental right has been frowned upon by this 
Court in a catena of decisions. In this regard, we 
may refer to following observations made by this 
Court in the case of Roy V.D. v. State of Kerala3:— 
“7. The life and liberty of an individual is 
so sacrosanct that it cannot be allowed to 
be interfered with except under the 
authority of law. It is a principle which 
has been recognised and applied in all 
civilised countries. In our Constitution 
Article 21 guarantees protection of life 
and personal liberty not only to citizens of 
India but also to aliens.”” 
 
35. In our view, the liberty reserved by this Court vide its 
second order, to revive the request of the appellant will have 
to be construed as a liberty given by this Court to revive his 
prayer afresh after filing of the final complaint/charge-sheet.  
Undisputedly, the present appeals have been filed after the 
final 
complaint/charge-sheet 
has 
been 
filed 
by 
the 
 
4 2024 SCC OnLine SC 934 : 2024 INSC 414 

23 
respondents.  In that view of the matter, we are not inclined 
to entertain the preliminary objection and the same is 
rejected. 
CONSIDERATION AS TO WHETHER THE APPELLANT IS 
ENTITLED FOR BAIL: 
36. Having rejected the preliminary objection, we will 
proceed to consider as to whether in the facts and 
circumstances of the present case, the appellant is entitled to 
grant of bail or not. 
37. Insofar as the contention of the learned ASG that since 
the conditions as provided under Section 45 of the PMLA are 
not satisfied, the appellant is not entitled to grant of bail is 
concerned, it will be apposite to refer to the first order of this 
Court. No doubt that this Court in its first order in paragraph 
25, after recapitulating in paragraph 24 as to what was 
stated in the charge-sheet filed by the CBI against the 
appellant, observed that, in view of the aforesaid discussion, 
the Court was not inclined to accept the prayer for grant of 
bail at that stage. However, certain paragraphs of the said 
order cannot be read in isolation from the other paragraphs.  
The order will have to be read in its entirety.  In paragraph 

24 
28 of the said order, this Court observed that the right to bail 
in cases of delay, coupled with incarceration for a long 
period, depending on the nature of the allegations, should be 
read into Section 439 Cr.P.C. and Section 45 of the PMLA.  
The Court held that the constitutional mandate is the higher 
law, and it is the basic right of the person charged of an 
offence and not convicted that he be ensured and given a 
speedy trial.  It further observed that when the trial is not 
proceeding for reasons not attributable to the accused, the 
court, unless there are good reasons, would be guided to 
exercise the power to grant bail.  The Court specifically 
observed that this would be true where the trial would take 
years. It could thus clearly be seen that this Court, in the 
first round of litigation between the parties, has specifically 
observed that in case of delay coupled with incarceration for 
a long period and depending on the nature of the allegations, 
the right to bail will have to be read into Section 45 of PMLA.   
38. A Division Bench of this Court in the case of 
Ramkripal Meena v. Directorate of Enforcement5 was 
considering an application of the petitioner therein who was 
 
5 SLP(Crl.) No. 3205 of 2024 dated 30.07.2024 

25 
to receive a bribe of rupees five crore and from whom, an 
amount of Rs.46,00,000/- was already recovered.  In the said 
case, the petitioner was arrested on 26th January 2022 in 
connection with FIR No. 402/2021 registered against him for 
the offences punishable under Sections 406, 420, 120B of 
IPC and Section 4/6 of the Rajasthan Public Examination 
(Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 1992.  He was released on 
bail by this Court vide order dated 18th January 2023.  
Thereafter, the petitioner was arrested by the ED on 21st 
June 2023.  The Court observed thus:  
“7.  Adverting to the prayer for grant of bail in the 
instant case, it is pointed out by learned counsel for 
ED that the complaint case is at the stage of 
framing of charges and 24 witnesses are proposed 
to be examined.  The conclusion of proceedings, 
thus, will take some reasonable time.  The petitioner 
has already been in custody for more than a year.  
Taking into consideration the period spent in 
custody and there being no likelihood of conclusion 
of trial within a short span, coupled with the fact 
that the petitioner is already on bail in the predicate 
offence, and keeping in view the peculiar facts and 
circumstances of this case, it seems to us that the 
rigours of Section 45 of the Act can be suitably 
relaxed to afford conditional liberty to the petitioner.  
Ordered accordingly.” 
 
 
39. In the light of the specific observations of this Court in 
paragraph 28 of the first order, we are not inclined to accept 

26 
the submission of the learned ASG that the provisions of 
Section 45 of the PMLA would come in the way of 
consideration of the application of the appellant for grant of 
bail.  
40. From the first order of this Court, it would be clear that 
an assurance was given at the Bar on behalf of the 
prosecution that they shall conclude the trial by taking 
appropriate steps within next 6-8 months.  In view of the 
said statement, this Court did not consider the application of 
the appellant for bail at that stage, however, granted liberty 
to the appellant to move a fresh application for bail in case of 
change in circumstances, or in case the trial is protracted 
and proceeded at a snail’s pace in next three months.  
Though, this Court observed that if any application for bail 
was filed on the grounds mentioned in paragraph 29, the 
same would be considered by the trial court without being 
influenced by the dismissal of the earlier bail applications 
including the present judgment, however, it clarified that the 
observations made by the Court with regard to right to 
speedy trial would be taken into consideration.  The liberty 
was also granted to the appellant to file an application for 

27 
interim bail in case of ill-health and medical emergency due 
to illness of his wife. 
41. A perusal of the impugned judgment and order would 
reveal that though the learned Single Judge of the High 
Court has dismissed the applications for bail on merits, on 
medical grounds, it has permitted the appellant to visit his 
residence to meet his wife in custody once every week. 
42. It could thus clearly be seen that this Court expected 
the trial to be concluded within a period of 6-8 months.  The 
liberty was reserved to approach afresh if the trial did not 
conclude within the period of 6-8 months.  The liberty was 
also granted in case the trial proceeded at a snail’s pace in 
next three months. 
43. A perusal of the material placed on record would clearly 
reveal that far from the trial being concluded within a period 
of 6-8 months, it is even yet to commence. Though in the 
first order of this Court, liberty was reserved to move afresh 
for bail if the trial proceeded at a snail’s pace within a period 
of three months from the date of the said order, the 
commencement of the trial is yet to see the light of the day.  
In these circumstances, in view of the first order of this 

28 
Court, the appellant was entitled to renew his request.  When 
the appellant renewed his request, the learned Special Judge 
(trial court) as well as the High Court was required to 
consider the said applications in the light of the observations 
made by this Court in paragraphs 28 and 29 of the first 
order. In paragraph 29 of the first order, this Court 
specifically observed that though the observations on the 
aspect of merit were not binding, the observations of right to 
speedy trial were required to be taken into consideration.   
44. The learned Special Judge and the learned Single Judge 
of the High Court have considered the applications on merits 
as well as on the grounds of delay and denial of right to 
speedy trial.  We see no error in the judgments and orders of 
the learned Special Judge as well as the High Court in 
considering the merits of the matter. In view of the 
observations made by this Court in the first order, they were 
entitled to consider the same. However, the question that 
arises is as to whether the trial court and the High Court 
have correctly considered the observations made by this 
Court with regard to right to speedy trial and prolonged 
period of incarceration.  The courts below have rejected the 

29 
claim 
of 
the 
appellant 
applying 
the 
triple 
test 
as 
contemplated under Section 45 of the PMLA. In our view, this 
is in ignorance of the observations made by this Court in 
paragraph 28 of the first order wherein this Court specifically 
observed that right to bail in cases of delay coupled with 
incarceration for a long period should be read into Section 
439 Cr.P.C. and Section 45 of the PMLA. 
45. The trial court, in its order, has held that the appellant 
individually and along with different accused persons have 
been filing one or the other applications/making oral 
submissions frequently. It further observed that some of 
them were frivolous. It was observed that this was apparently 
done as a concerted effort for accomplishing the shared 
purpose of causing delay in the matter.  The trial court 
therefore rejected the contention of the appellant that he had 
not contributed to delay in proceedings or that the case has 
been proceeding at a snail’s pace. However, in the very 
subsequent paragraph i.e., paragraph 80, the court observed 
that, in order to avoid any delay and considering the time 
being taken by the counsel for the accused in inspecting the 
“un-relied upon documents”, it had vide order dated 18th 

30 
April 2024 put a query to the prosecution if the entire “un-
relied upon documents” can be provided to the accused 
persons in a digitized form.  It further recorded that the ED 
accepted the suggestion that it would expedite the 
proceedings.  However, some time was sought to consider the 
same.  A perusal of the compliance report filed by the 
Assistant Director of ED dated 7th May 2024 which could be 
found at page 757 of the paperbook, would reveal that the 
Cyber Lab has informed that it would take 70-80 days to 
prepare one copy (cloning) of the data contained in the said 
unrelied digital devices.   
46. It could further be seen that, though it has been 
submitted on behalf of the ED that hundreds of applications 
have been filed for supply of “un-relied upon documents”, the 
record would not substantiate the said position.  Though 
various applications have been filed by different accused 
persons, insofar as the present appellant is concerned, he 
has filed only 13 applications in the CBI matter and 14 in the 
ED matter.  It would reveal that some of the applications are 
for seeking permission to meet his wife or permission to file 
vakalatnama, to put signature on the documents, seeking 

31 
permission to sign a cheque etc.  Most of the applications are 
for supply of missing documents and legible copies under 
Section 207/208 Cr.P.C. Some of the applications are for 
inspection of the “un-relied upon documents”.  It is pertinent 
to note that all these applications have been allowed by the 
learned trial court.  It is further pertinent to note that some 
of these orders were also challenged before the High Court 
wherein stay was granted.  However, a statement was made 
on behalf of the prosecution before this Court when the first 
order was passed that the said petitions filed under Section 
482 Cr.P.C would be withdrawn.  The said statement is 
recorded in paragraph 27 of the first order of this Court.  We 
may state that, when we specifically asked the learned ASG 
to point out any order wherein the learned trial judge found 
any of the applications of the appellant to be frivolous, not a 
single order could be pointed out. 
47. In that view of the matter, we find that the finding of the 
learned trial judge that it is the appellant who is responsible 
for delaying the trial is not supported by the record.  The 
learned Single Judge of the High Court endorses the finding 
of the trial court on the ground that the accused persons 

32 
have taken three months’ time from 19th October 2023 to 19th 
January 2024 for inspection of “un-relied upon documents” 
despite repeated directions from the learned trial court to 
conclude the same expeditiously. It is to be noted that there 
are around 69,000 pages of documents involved in both the 
CBI and the ED matters. Taking into consideration the huge 
magnitude of the documents involved, it cannot be stated 
that the accused is not entitled to take a reasonable time for 
inspection of the said documents.  In order to avail the right 
to fair trial, the accused cannot be denied the right to have 
inspection of the documents including the “un-relied upon 
documents”. 
48. It is further to be noted that a perusal of the second 
order of this Court would itself reveal that this Court 
recorded the submissions of the learned Solicitor General, 
which were made on instructions, that the investigation 
would be concluded and final complaint/charge-sheet would 
be filed expeditiously and at any rate on or before 3rd July 
2024.  Accordingly, 8th charge-sheet has been filed on 28th 
June 2024 by the ED. It could thus be seen that, even 
according to the respondents, the investigation was to be 

33 
concluded on or before 3rd July 2024.  In that view of the 
matter, we find that the contention raised by the learned 
ASG is self-contradictory. If the investigation itself was to 
conclude on or before 3rd July 2024, the question is how 
could the trial have commenced prior to that? If the 
investigation itself was to conclude after a period of 8 months 
from the date of the first order of this Court, there was no 
question of the trial being concluded within a period of 6-8 
months from the date of the first order of this Court.  We find 
that both the High Court and the trial court have failed to 
take this into consideration. 
49. We find that, on account of a long period of 
incarceration running for around 17 months and the trial 
even not having been commenced, the appellant has been 
deprived of his right to speedy trial.   
50. As observed by this Court, the right to speedy trial and 
the right to liberty are sacrosanct rights. On denial of these 
rights, the trial court as well as the High Court ought to have 
given due weightage to this factor.   
51. Recently, this Court had an occasion to consider an 
application for bail in the case of Javed Gulam Nabi Shaikh 

34 
v. State of Maharashtra and Another6 wherein the 
accused was prosecuted under the provisions of the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. This Court surveyed the 
entire law right from the judgment of this Court in the cases 
of 
Gudikanti 
Narasimhulu 
and 
Others 
v. 
Public 
Prosecutor, High Court of Andhra Pradesh7, Shri 
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and Others v. State of Punjab8, 
Hussainara Khatoon and Others (I) v. Home Secretary, 
State of Bihar9, Union of India v. K.A.  Najeeb10 and 
Satender 
Kumar 
Antil 
v. 
 
Central 
Bureau 
of 
Investigation and Another11.  The Court observed thus:  
“19. If the State or any prosecuting agency 
including the court concerned has no wherewithal 
to provide or protect the fundamental right of an 
accused to have a speedy trial as enshrined under 
Article 21 of the Constitution then the State or any 
other prosecuting agency should not oppose the 
plea for bail on the ground that the crime 
committed 
is 
serious. 
Article 21 of 
the Constitution applies irrespective of the nature of 
the crime.” 
 
 
52. The Court also reproduced the observations made in 
Gudikanti Narasimhulu (supra), which read thus: 
 
6 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1693 
7 (1978) 1 SCC 240 : 1977 INSC 232 
8 (1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 INSC 68 
9 (1980) 1 SCC 81 : 1979 INSC 34 
10 (2021) 3 SCC 713 : 2021 INSC 50 
11 (2022) 10 SCC 51 : 2022 INSC 690 

35 
“10. In the aforesaid context, we may remind the 
trial courts and the High Courts of what came to be 
observed 
by 
this 
Court 
in Gudikanti 
Narasimhulu v. Public 
Prosecutor, 
High 
Court 
reported in (1978) 1 SCC 240. We quote: 
“What is often forgotten, and therefore 
warrants reminder, is the object to keep a 
person in judicial custody pending trial or 
disposal of an appeal. Lord Russel, C.J., 
said [R v. Rose, (1898) 18 Cox]: 
“I observe that in this case bail 
was refused for the prisoner. It 
cannot be too strongly impressed 
on the, magistracy of the country 
that bail is not to be withheld as a 
punishment, 
but 
that 
the 
requirements as to bail are merely 
to secure the attendance of the 
prisoner at trial.”” 
 
53. The Court further observed that, over a period of time, 
the trial courts and the High Courts have forgotten a very 
well-settled principle of law that bail is not to be withheld as 
a punishment. From our experience, we can say that it 
appears that the trial courts and the High Courts attempt to 
play safe in matters of grant of bail.  The principle that bail is 
a rule and refusal is an exception is, at times, followed in 
breach.  On account of non-grant of bail even in straight 
forward open and shut cases, this Court is flooded with huge 
number of bail petitions thereby adding to the huge 

36 
pendency.  It is high time that the trial courts and the High 
Courts should recognize the principle that “bail is rule and 
jail is exception”. 
54. In the present case, in the ED matter as well as the CBI 
matter, 493 witnesses have been named. The case involves 
thousands of pages of documents and over a lakh pages of 
digitized documents.  It is thus clear that there is not even 
the remotest possibility of the trial being concluded in the 
near future.  In our view, keeping the appellant behind the 
bars for an unlimited period of time in the hope of speedy 
completion of trial would deprive his fundamental right to 
liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution. As observed time 
and 
again, 
the 
prolonged 
incarceration 
before 
being 
pronounced guilty of an offence should not be permitted to 
become punishment without trial. 
55. As observed by this Court in the case of Gudikanti 
Narasimhulu (supra), the objective to keep a person in 
judicial custody pending trial or disposal of an appeal is to 
secure the attendance of the prisoner at trial.   
56. In the present case, the appellant is having deep roots 
in the society. There is no possibility of him fleeing away from 

37 
the country and not being available for facing the trial. In any 
case, conditions can be imposed to address the concern of 
the State. 
57. Insofar as the apprehension given by the learned ASG 
regarding the possibility of tampering the evidence is 
concerned, it is to be noted that the case largely depends on 
documentary evidence which is already seized by the 
prosecution. As such, there is no possibility of tampering 
with the evidence. Insofar as the concern with regard to 
influencing the witnesses is concerned, the said concern can 
be addressed by imposing stringent conditions upon the 
appellant. 
CONCLUSION: 
58. In the result, we pass the following order: 
(i) 
The appeals are allowed; 
(ii) 
The impugned judgment and order dated 21st May 
2024 passed by the High Court of Delhi in Bail 
Application Nos. 1557 and 1559 of 2024 is quashed 
and set aside; 
(iii) The appellant is directed to be released on bail in 
connection with ED Case No. HIU-II/14/2022 

38 
registered against the appellant by the ED and FIR 
No. RC0032022A0053 of 2022 registered against the 
appellant by the CBI on furnishing bail bonds for a 
sum of Rs.10,00,000/- with two sureties of the like 
amount; 
(iv) 
The appellant shall surrender his passport with the 
Special Court; 
(v) 
The appellant shall report to the Investigating Officer 
on every Monday and Thursday between 10-11 AM; 
and 
(vi) 
The appellant shall not make any attempt either to 
influence the witnesses or to tamper with the 
evidence. 
59. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of in 
the above terms. 
 
..............................J.                
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
..............................J.   
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)   
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
AUGUST 09, 2024.