2024 INSC 605
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
INHERENT JURISDICTION
SUO MOTU CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4 OF 2024
IN
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 645 OF 2022
IN RE : PATANJALI AYURVED LIMITED THROUGH ITS MANAGING DIRECTOR,
  ACHARYA BALKRISHNA AND BABA RAMDEV
IN THE MATTER OF :
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION AND ANOTHER
        ……PETITIONERS
Versus
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS
      …..RESPONDENTS
JUDGEMENT
HIMA KOHLI, J.
1.
This order shall dispose of the suo motu contempt proceedings initiated by this
Court against the proposed contemnors, Patanjali Ayurved Limited1, Acharya Balkrishna,
Managing  Director  of  Patanjali  and  Baba  Ramdev.  The  circumstances  leading  to
initiation of contempt proceedings against the aforesaid parties needs some elucidation.
1 For short ‘Patanjali’
Page 1 of 41
Digitally signed by
KAVITA PAHUJA
Date: 2024.08.13
16:40:48 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

A.
  BACKDROP
2.
Indian Medication Association2, the petitioner in the writ petition3 has invoked
Article 32 of the Constitution of India for raising a grievance against Patanjali, its
Managing Director – Acharya Balkrishna and its primary proponent, Baba Ramdev
stating  that  they  have  been  indulging  in  a  campaign  of  misinformation  and
disparagement  against  the  modern  system  of  medicine  in  an  orchestrated  and
systematic manner resulting in misleading the common man.   IMA has claimed that
despite lodging multiple complaints and submitting several representations to the Union
of India and the State Authorities, they have declined to take any concrete action, thus
compelling them to approach this Court for relief. 
B.
   PROCEEDINGS DATED 21
 
 ST   NOVEMBER, 2023
3.
Notice was issued on the writ petition on 23rd August, 2022.   On 21st November,
2023, this Court passed the following order :
“2. After some arguments were canvassed by counsel afore-noted, on the
serious points emanating herein, at the request of the Court, Mr. K.M.
Nataraj, learned ASG has very fairly submitted that he may be permitted to
obtain instructions, after full and effective consultation with the authorities
concerned insofar as checking of incorrect assertions/misrepresentation for
various  products  with  regard  to  their  purported  medicinal  efficacy  is
concerned, as also the measures which may be put in place for statements
released through the media, both electronic and print, presently confined to
the Respondent No.5. 
3. Mr. Poovayya, learned senior counsel for the Respondent No.5, on
instructions, assures this Court that henceforth there shall not be any
violation of any law(s), especially relating to advertising or branding of
products manufactured and marketed by it and, further, that no casual
statements  claiming  medicinal  efficacy  or  against  any  system  of
medicine will be released to the media in any form. The Respondent
No.5 is bound down to such assurance. 
2 In short “IMA”
3 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 645 of 2022
Page 2 of 41

4. It is made clear that the suit(s) pending on issues pertaining inter-se, that
is, between the petitioners/other persons and the Respondent No.5 have not
been stayed, and shall not be hindered only by reason of the pendency of the
present writ petition.”
(emphasis added)
C.
   PROCEEDINGS DATED 27
 
 TH   FEBRUARY, 2024
4.
On 27th February, 2024, learned counsel appearing for IMA drew the attention of
this Court to some advertisements published by Patanjali in a newspaper and the
transcription  of  a  Press  Conference  conducted  by  Baba  Ramdev  and  Acharya
Balkrishna on 22nd November, 2023, i.e., on the very next day to passing of the order by
this Court on 21st November, 2023 and submitted that despite an assurance given on
behalf of Patanjali and recorded in the order passed on 21st November, 2023, the
aforesaid parties were continuing to make incorrect assertions and misrepresentations in
respect of various products marketed by them by describing the said products as a
permanent  solution to  particular ailments that  have  been  specifically listed  in the
Schedules appended to the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement)
Act, 19544 and the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Rules,
19555. 
5.
In view of the above, this Court expressed a prima facie view that Patanjali had
violated the undertaking given to the Court on 21st November, 2023 and issued a notice
to show cause to Patanjali and its Managing Director as to why contempt of court
4 For short ‘DMR Act, 1954’
5 For short ‘DMR Rules, 1955’
Page 3 of 41

proceedings be not issued against them. The relevant extract of the order passed on 27th
February, 2024, is as follows:
“3.
Today, Mr. P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
petitioners states that his briefing counsel proposes to file some newspaper
advertisements  in  the  daily  newspaper  “The  Hindu”  published  on  04th
December, 2023 (i.e. after the date of passing the order on 21st November,
2023) and a You Tube link and transcription of a Press Conference headed
by  Baba  Ramdev  and  Acharya  Balkrishna  (Managing  Director  of  the
respondent no.5) conducted on 22nd November, 2023 (i.e. on the very next
day of the passing of the order on 21st November, 2023). 
4.
It  is  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  petitioners  that  the  aforesaid
documents amply demonstrate that the respondent no.5 is continuing to
make incorrect assertions and misrepresentations in respect of its various
products in the market by describing the said products as a permanent
solution to such of the ailments that have been specifically listed in the
Schedule  appended  to  the  Drugs  and  Magic  Remedies  (Objectionable
Advertisements) Act, 1954 and the Schedule appended to the Drugs and
Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Rules, 1955. 
5.
We  may  note  that  Section  3(d)  of  the  1954  Act  prohibits
advertisement of certain products for treatment of certain diseases and
disorders, including  thereof diabetes (Sr. No.9), Heart Diseases (Sr. No.26),
High or Low Blood Pressure (Sr. No. 27) and Obesity (Sr. No. 38) and
Asthma (Appended to the 1955 Rules at Sr. No.1). 
6.
The aforesaid advertisement as referred to by learned Senior
Counsel for the petitioners and those that form part of the documents
enclosed  with  an  anonymous  letter  dated  15th  January,  2024,
addressed to Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India with copies marked to
two other Hon’ble Judges of this Court including one of us (Ahsanuddin
Amanullah, J.) show that the said advertisements were issued and
Press Conferences held after the order was passed on 21st November,
2023. The aforesaid documents handed over by learned Senior Counsel
for the petitioners and the anonymous letter dated 15th January, 2024,
are taken on record. Copies thereof have been furnished to learned
counsel for the respondents. 
7.
Prima facie, this Court is of the opinion that the respondent
no.5-Patanjali Ayurved Limited has violated the undertaking given by it
and recorded in the order dated 21st November, 2023. 
8.
Issue notice as to why Contempt of Court proceedings should
not be initiated against the respondent no.5 and its Managing Director-
Acharya Balkrishna. Memo of parties shall be drawn by the Registry. 
9.
Mr. Simranjeet Singh, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of Mr.
Gautam Talukdar, Advocate on Record, accepts notice on behalf of the
respondent no.5- Patanjali Ayurved Limited and its Managing Director and
seeks time to file a reply. 
10.
Reply be filed within two weeks with a copy to learned counsel for
the petitioners and other respondents.
Page 4 of 41

xxx 
xxx
xxx
14.
Till  further  orders,  the  respondent  no.5-Patanjali  Ayurved
Limited  is  restrained  from  advertising  or  branding  of  products
manufactured  and  marketed  by  it  which  are  meant  to  cure  the
diseases/disorders/conditions specified in the 1954 Act and 1955 Rules.
Respondent no.5 and its officers are also cautioned to refrain from
making any statements against any system of medicine in the media
(both  electronic  and  print)  in  any  form,  as  undertaken  on  21st
November, 2023.”
     (emphasis added)
D.
   PROVISIONS OF DMR ACT AND DMR RULES
6.
For purposes of ready reference, the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of the DMR
Act, 1954 are extracted below :
“3. Prohibition of advertisement of certain drugs for treatment of certain
diseases and disorders.—Subject to the provisions of this Act, no person
shall take any part in the publication of any advertisement referring to any
drug in terms which suggest or are calculated to lead to the use of that drug
for— 
(a) the procurement of miscarriage in women or prevention of conception in
women; or 
(b) the maintenance or improvement of the capacity of human beings for
sexual pleasure; or 
(c) the correction of menstrual disorder in women; or 
(d)  the  diagnosis,  cure,  mitigation,  treatment  or prevention  of any
disease, disorder or condition specified in the Schedule, or any other
disease, disorder or condition (by whatsoever name called) which may
be specified in the rules made under this Act: 
Provided that no such rule shall be made except— 
(i) in respect of any disease, disorder or condition which requires timely
treatment in consultation with a registered medical practitioner or for which
there are normally no accepted remedies; and 
(ii) after consultation with the Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted
under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), and if the Central
Government considers necessary, with such other persons having special
knowledge or practical experience in respect of Ayurvedic or Unani systems
of medicines as that Government deems fit.] 
4. Prohibition of misleading advertisements relating to drugs.—Subject
to the provisions of this Act, no person shall take any part in the publication of
any advertisement relating to a drug if the advertisement contains any
matters which— 
Page 5 of 41

(a) directly or indirectly gives a false impression regarding the true character
of the drug; or 
(b) makes a false claim for the drug; or (c) is otherwise false or misleading in
any material particular.
THE SCHEDULE
[See Sections 3(d) and 14]
S. No.
Name of the disease, disorder or condition
*****
9.
Diabetes.
******
26.
Heart diseases.
 
27.
High or low blood pressure.
*******
38.
Obesity.”
7.
Rule 6 of the DMR Rules, 1955 states as follows:
“[6] Prohibition of Advertisement of Drugs for Treatment of Disease,
etc.– No person shall also take part in the publication of any advertisement
referring to any drug in terms which suggest or are calculated to lead to the
use of that drug for the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of
any disease, disorder, or condition specified in the Schedule annexed to
these rules.
SCHEDULE
(See Rule 6)
1. Asthma
***]”
E.
ADVERTISEMENT PUBLISHED IN THE NEWSPAPER ON 4
 
 TH   DECEMBER,
2023
8.
It is noteworthy that Patanjali had published an advertisement in the daily
newspaper on  4th December,  2023  (copy  whereof  was  subsequently  filed  by  the
petitioner/IMA under index dated 6th February, 2024), that spoke of “completely curing”
lakhs of people of diseases like high blood pressure, sugar, thyroid, arthritis, asthma,
etc.  Similarly, the advertisement claimed to have “completely cure patient suffering from
failure of liver, kidney, heart and brain”. The advertisement as published by Patanjali on
Page 6 of 41

4th December, 2023 with a photograph of Baba Ramdev prominently displayed in it, is
extracted below : 
9.
In the advertisement, Patanjali also displayed packages of medicines sold by it
under the names of “BP GRIT”, “Madhu GRIT” and “Liva Amrit Advance” and declared
that they offer permanent solution for curing ailments such as sugar, BP and liver
problems. 
F.
TRANSCRIPTION  OF  THE  PRESS  CONFERENCE  CONDUCTED  ON  22
 
 nd
NOVEMBER, 2023
10.
We may also refer to the transcription of the statements made by Baba Ramdev
in a Press Conference conducted by Patanjali on 22nd November, 2023, i.e., on the very
next day to this Court passing the order on 21st November, 2023, recording the
Page 7 of 41

undertaking given by learned counsel for Patanjali that there shall be no violation of any
law relating to advertising or branding of products manufactured and marketed by
Patanjali and that no casual statements claiming medicinal efficacy or against any
system of medicine will be released to the media in any form.   In the said transcription,
Baba Ramdev alluded to the aforesaid order passed by this Court and asserted that a
group of doctors were making false propaganda claiming that “there is cure for diseases
like BP, sugar,  thyroid,  asthma,  arthritis,  liver and  kidney failure”, that  they have
“discontinued insulin for more than a crore people”; that “children with type-1 diabetes
have been cured” and that “we cure blood pressure, thyroid, type – 1 diabetes, asthma
and turn CRP positive to negative”.   Referring to the order passed by this Court on 21st
November, 2023,  Acharya  Balkrishna  made  a  statement  in  the  very same  Press
Conference, that “Corona could not be cured by allopathy…….” and that “Coronil has
not only protected the family but also followed all protocols and rules”.
G.
PROCEEDINGS DATED 19
 
 TH   MARCH, 2024
11.
In the light of the endorsement made by Baba Ramdev of the advertisement
issued by Patanjali that had given an Undertaking to this Court on 21 st November, 2023,
the scope of the contempt proceedings initiated by this Court on 27 th February, 2024,
was expanded.  On 19th March, 2024, notice to show cause was issued to Baba Ramdev
calling upon to him to state as to why contempt proceedings should not be initiated
against him as well for violation of the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of the DMR Act,
1954 and Rule 6 of the DMR Rules, 1955. Learned counsel appearing for Patanjali and
Page 8 of 41

Acharya Balkrishna accepted notice on behalf of the proposed contemnor, i.e., Baba
Ramdev and sought time to file replies. The relevant extract of the order passed on 19 th
March, 2024 is as follows :
“1. On the last date of hearing, notice to show cause was issued to the
respondent No.5 and its Managing Director-Acharya Balkrishna (respondent
No.6) as to why contempt of court proceedings be not initiated against them
for violating the order dated 21st November, 2023. At the request of learned
counsel appearing for the aforesaid respondent, a period of two weeks’ was
granted to file a reply. The reply is not on record. 
xxx 
xxx
xxx
4.  In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, it is deemed
appropriate  to  direct  the  presence  of  respondent  No.6-Acharya
Balkrishna on the next date of hearing. Further, having gone through
the advertisements issued by the respondent No.5 in the teeth of the
undertaking given to this Court on 21st November, 2023 and on noticing
that the said advertisements reflect an endorsement thereof by Baba
Ramdev, it is deemed appropriate to issue notice to show cause as to
why the contempt proceedings be not initiated against him as this
Court  is  prima  facie  of  the  opinion  that  he  too  has  violated  the
provisions  of  Section  3  and  4  of  the Drugs  and  Magic  Remedies
(Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954 read with Rule 6 of the Drugs
and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Rules, 1955. 
5. Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior counsel appearing with Mr. Gautam
Talukdar, learned Advocate on  Record accepts notice on  behalf of  the
proposed  Contemnor-Baba  Ramdev.  Complete  set  of  paper  book  be
furnished to the learned counsel within two days. 
6. 
Mr.  Mukul  Rohatgi,  learned  Senior  counsel  appearing  for  the
respondent  No.5  and  its  Managing  Director-respondent  No.6  states  on
instructions that reply to show cause is ready and the same shall be filed
during the course of the day. Copies thereof may be furnished to the learned
counsel for the petitioner as also to the Union of India and the same be filed
by tomorrow, i.e. 20th March, 2024.
xxx 
xxx
xxx
11. 
The respondent No.6-Acharya Balkrishna shall remain present
on the next date of hearing along with the proposed contemnor-Baba
Ramdev.”
(emphasis added)
Page 9 of 41

H.
AFFIDAVITS DATED 20
 
 TH   MARCH, 2024 AND 6
 
 TH   APRIL, 2024
12.
On  20th March,  2024,  Acharya  Balkrishna  filed  an  affidavit,  purportedly  in
compliance of the order passed by this Court on 27th February, 2024. In the said affidavit,
in one breath the deponent offered an unqualified apology on behalf of Patanjali for the
breach of the statement recorded in para 3 of the order dated 21st November, 2023 and
in the other breath, tried to explain that the advertisement in question was meant to
contain only general statements but inadvertently, included the offending statement and
that the intention was only to exhort the citizens of the country to lead the healthier life
by consuming the product of Patanjali. The contents of the aforesaid affidavit filed by
Acharya Balkrishna are extracted below :
“3.  The Deponent regrets that the advertisement in question which was
meant to contain only general statements inadvertently included the offending
sentences. The same was  bona fide  and added in routine course by the
media department of the Respondent No. 5 Company. The personnel of the
media department of the Respondent No. 5 Company were not cognizant of
the order dated 21.11.2023.”
13.
On perusing the aforesaid affidavit, this Court expressed its disinclination to
accept the conditional apology tendered.  At that stage, conscious of the fact that the
aforesaid affidavit could not be treated as an unqualified apology, time was sought to file
fresh affidavits. Thereafter, fresh affidavits were filed by Acharya Balkrishna and Baba
Ramdev on 6th April, 2024 wherein, identical averments were made by them.  The said
affidavits stated that :
“2. I am filing this Affidavit in supersession of my Affidavit dated 20.03.2024.
Page 10 of 41

3. Pursuant to the order dated 27.02.2024, I entered appearance through Ld.
Counsel on 19.03.2024 before this Hon’ble Court and tendered an unqualified
apology for the breach of the statement recorded in Para 3 of the order dated
21.11.2023. In the affidavit filed on 20.03.2024, I further undertake to ensure that
such offending advertisements shall not be issued in the future. I affirm that no
further offending advertisements were issued after 27.02.2024.
4. I hereby tender an unconditional and unqualified apology for the breach of the
statement recorded in para 3 of the order of this Hon’ble Court dated 21.11.2023.
I further undertake and ensure that the said statement shall be complied with in
letter and spirit and no such similar advertisements shall be issued.
5. I seek pardon for the aforesaid breach of the statement. I undertake to always
uphold the majesty of law and majesty of justice. 
6. That I sincerely regret the issue of advertisements from Respondent No. 5
which is an infraction of the order dated 21.11.2023. I tender my unconditional
and unqualified apology in this regard, on my own behalf and that of Respondent
No. 5 I never had any intention to violate orders of this Hon’ble Court. I state that
no such lapse will occur in future. I will always uphold the Majesty of law. 
7. I hereby tender an unconditional and unqualified apology for the press
conference dated 22.11.2023 and undertake not to make any public statements
which may amount to breach of the undertaking given as recorded in para 3 of
the order dated 21.11.2023, therefore, seek apology of this Hon’ble Court for the
aforesaid press Conference.” 
   
I.
PROCEEDINGS DATED 10
 
 TH   APRIL, 2024
14.
In an endeavour to avoid appearing before this Court in terms of the directions
issued on 19th March,  2024, both, Acharya  Balkrishna and Baba Ramdev moved
separate applications6 for permission to appear virtually on a plea that they had pre-
scheduled meetings at Dubai, UAE on 2nd April, 2024 and therefore, they needed
exemption from attending the Court hearing physically on 2nd April, 2024.  Enclosed with
the said applications sworn on 30th March, 2024, were the details of their travel summary
issued at 2.16 PM, on 31st March, 2024. 
15.
On  noticing  the  evident  discrepancies  in  the  aforesaid  affidavits  and  the
documents  enclosed  therewith,  it  was  pointed  out  that  while  the  travel  summary
6 IA No. 78328 of 2024 and IA No. 77726 of 2024
Page 11 of 41

enclosing the air tickets of the proposed contemnors was dated 31st March, 2024, the
affidavits filed by them were sworn one day before the said date, i.e., on 30th March,
2024. This  Court  adversely  commented  on  the  aforesaid  mismatch  of  dates  and
observed that it was an attempt on the part of the proposed contemnors to somehow
evade their physical appearance before the Court. The relevant paras of the order
passed on 10th April, 2024, are extracted below :
“1.  Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior counsel appearing for the respondents
No. 5, 6 and 7, proposed contemnors, submits that subsequent to filing affidavits
dated 02nd April, 2024, submitting qualified apologies to this Court for issuing
misleading advertisements and releasing press statements contrary to the orders
passed on 21st November, 2023 and the undertakings given to this Court, the
proposed contemnors have filed fresh affidavits on 06th April, 2024, tendering
their unconditional apologies for the lapses on their part and they have sought
pardon for the breach of statements made by them. 
2.  Having regard to the entire history of the matter and the past conduct of
the respondents No. 5 to 7 – proposed contemnors, we have expressed our
reservation about accepting the apologies offered in the latest affidavits
filed by them. We have also pointed out to learned counsel appearing for
the proposed contemnors that even after notices to show cause were
issued to the respondents-proposed contemnors and they were directed to
remain present before this Court, they attempted to wriggle out by moving
applications seeking exemption from appearing on the pretext that they
were travelling abroad. To demonstrate the said fact, in the affidavits filed
by them alongwith the exemption applications on 30th March, 2024, they
annexed tickets purportedly purchased by their travel agents for purposes
of travelling abroad. Strangely enough, the said documents were issued
the day after the aforesaid affidavits were sworn by them, i.e. on 31st
March, 2024. 
3. When confronted with the said position on the last date of hearing,
learned Senior counsel appearing for the respondents No. 5 and 7 –
proposed contemnors had sought time to obtain clarifications. It has now
been stated in the latest affidavits filed by the proposed-contemnors that
admittedly, photocopies of the tickets were issued on a date after the
affidavits were sworn and the said documents were annexed with the
affidavits that were sworn on 30th March, 2024 and filed on 31st March,
2024. Fact remains that on the date when the affidavits were sworn, there
were no such tickets issued. It is apparent that the respondents were trying
to escape appearing personally before this Court in these proceedings,
which is most unacceptable.”
 
(emphasis added)
Page 12 of 41

J.
 PROCEEDINGS DATED 16
 
 TH   APRIL, 2024
16.
 On 16th April, 2024, both the proposed contemnors were present in Court and
after interacting with them, the following order was passed:
“1. Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior counsel appearing for the proposed
Contemnors No.5 to 7 submits that to redeem themselves and demonstrate
their bona fides, they propose to take some steps unilaterally. He requests one
week’s time to revert back on the aforesaid aspect. 
2. This Court has interacted with the proposed Contemnors No.6 and 7
for some time and have heard their submissions. Both of them have
tendered their unqualified apology for having called a press conference
immediately after an order was passed by this Court on 21st November,
2023 and for continuing to issue misleading advertisements and making
derogatory statements in respect of other systems of treatment. They
seek to assure this Court that they will be careful in future and not violate
the orders of the Court or the undertaking given to the Court or violate
the provisions of law. 
3. This aspect shall be considered on the next date. 
4. At the request of the proposed Contemnors No.5 to 7, list on 23rd April, 2024
at the top of the Board. The proposed contemnors shall remain present on the
next date of hearing.”
(emphasis added)
17.
This was followed by an affidavit filed by Acharya Balkrishna on 24th April, 2024
stating inter alia as follows :
“2. That the Deponent herein in the affidavit filed on 06.04.2024, undertook to
ensure that no further offending advertisements shall be issued as directed by this
Hon’ble Court.
3. Further, I again tender my unconditional apology for the infraction of order dated
21.11.2023, and I regret that the advertisements were issued and I seek pardon of
this Hon’ble Court. I tender my unconditional and unqualified apology in this regard
once again. 
4. I state that no such lapse will occur in future. I will always uphold the Majesty of
the Court of law.
Page 13 of 41

5. Furthermore, pursuant to the order dated 16.04.2024, the Deponent took an
initiative to redeem himself voluntarily and in view of the same, the Deponent to
took an initiative to publish public apologies in various National and Regional
Newspapers with wide circulation across the country which were carried out on
22.04.2024. The said public apology which was published in several newspapers
circulated across the nation is reproduced as below for ready reference:
“Patanjali Ayurved Limited fully respects the dignity of the Hon’ble
Supreme  Court.  We  sincerely  apologize  for  the  mistake  of
publishing advertisements and holding a press conference even
after our advocates made a statement in the apex court. We are
committed to not let such a mistake be repeated ever in future. We
reassure  you  that  we  shall  remain  committed  to  uphold  the
constitution and dignity of the Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
Patanjali Ayurved Limited
Haridwar, Uttarakhand.”
K.
PROCEEDINGS DATED 23
 
 rd   APRIL, 2024
18.
On 23rd April, 2024, learned counsel appearing for the proposed contemnors
stated before this Court that some advertisements tendering unqualified apologies by the
proposed contemnors had been published in the press a day before.  When the
newspaper cuttings were handed over to the Court for perusal, it was noticed that the
apologies tendered were in a small box with such a fine print that it was impossible to
read the apologies without using a magnifying glass.  This attempt to downsize the
advertisements, making them virtually illegible, had drawn an adverse comment from the
Court.  As time was sought to collate and file the documents and issue additional
advertisements, the following orders were passed on 23rd April, 2024 :
“1.  Mr.  Mukul  Rohatgi,  learned  Senior  counsel  appearing  for  the  proposed
contemnors submits that some advertisements tendering unqualified apologies
have been published in the press by the proposed contemnors for the lapses on
their part, only yesterday. It is submitted that the same have been collated and
shall be filed during the course of the day with copies furnished to learned counsel
for the parties. 
2.  Needful shall be done within two days. 
Page 14 of 41

3. It is further stated that additional advertisements shall be published by the
proposed contemnors tendering an unqualified apology for the lapses on their part
within this week. As and when the said advertisements are issued and copies filed,
the same shall be considered and appropriate orders passed. 
4.  List on 30th April, 2024, at the top of the Board. The proposed contemnors shall
continue to remain present on the next date of hearing.” 
19.
On 24th April, 2024, an affidavit was filed by Acharya Balkrishna furnishing a list of
the daily newspapers published by the proposed contemnors on 22nd April, 2024, both in
English and in Hindi.  He further deposed that to redeem himself, he had voluntarily
taken the initiative to publish fresh advertisements seeking public apology in various
national and regional newspapers with wide circulation which were carried on 24th April,
2024. The apologies published by the proposed contemnors extracted in para 7 of the
affidavit, stated as follows: 
“In the wake of on going matter before the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India (Writ
Petition C. No. 645/2022), we in our individual capacity as well as on behalf of the
Company, unconditionally apologise for the non-compliance or disobedience of
directions/orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India.
We unconditionally extend the apology for holding meeting/press conference
dated 22.11.2023. We earnestly apologize for the mistake made in publishing our
advertisements and it is our whole-hearted commitment that such errors will not be
repeated. We undertake to abide by directions and instructions of the Hon’ble
Court with due care and utmost sincerity. We undertake to uphold the majesty of
the court and comply with applicable laws and directions of the Hon’ble Court of
law/relevant authorities.
Patanjali Ayurved Limited, Acharya Balkrishna, Swami Ramdev
Haridwar, Uttarakhand”
20.
On 30th April, 2024, learned counsel for the proposed contemnors alluded to the
aforesaid affidavit sworn  by his clients and to the publications carried in various
newspapers on 22nd April, 2024 containing their apologies for the breach of the order
passed by this Court on 21st November, 2023 and submitted that the apologies tendered
Page 15 of 41

by the proposed contemnors this time, were published in bold letters and the font size
was legible.
L.
   AFFIDAVIT DATED 16
 
 TH   MAY, 2024
21.
On 14th May, 2024, on a query posed by the Court, time was sought on behalf of
the proposed contemnors for permission to file affidavits setting out the steps that were
being taken by them to bring down the advertisements of those products of Patanjali,
licenses whereof had been suspended by the State of Uttarakhand and for recalling the
said medicines sent for sale to stockists and other agencies. The proposed contemnors
were  permitted  to  file  the  said  affidavits  and  orders  on  the  suo  motu contempt
proceedings were reserved. Following is the relevant extract of the affidavit filed by
Patanjali on 16th May, 2024 : 
“2.
That in pursuance of the order dated 10.04.2024 of this Hon’ble Court, the
State Government of Uttarakhand cancelled the manufacturing licenses of 14
ayurvedic medicines/formulations. The Respondent No. 5 is in the process of
taking the appropriate remedy against the aid suspension order, mentioned
hereinbelow, in terms of applicable law and further in light of the order dated
14.05.2024 passed by this Hon’ble Court. 
3.
That  in  light  of  the  suspension  order,  the  sale  of  these  ayurvedic
medicines/formulations has been stopped by Respondent No. 5 by issuing
various directions to entities associated with it, details of which are mentioned
hereinafter. It is relevant to state that the list of 14 medicines/formulations
which has been suspended by the State Government of Uttarakhand are as
follows :
S. No.
Medicines
1.
Swasari Gold 
2.
Swasari Vati
3.
Bronchom
4.
Swasari Pravahi
5.
Swasari Avaleh
6.
Mukta Vati Extra Power,
7.
Lipidom
8.
BP Grit
9.
Madhugrit
Page 16 of 41

10.
Madhunashini Vati Extra Power
11.
Livamrit Advance
12.
Livogrit
13.
Eyegrit Gold
14.
Patanjali Drishti Eye Drop
4.
That  the  sale  of  the  aforesaid  14  ayurvedic  medicines/formulations  by
Respondent No. 5 on its online e-commerce platform patanjaliayurved.net was
stopped on 09.05.2024.
5.
That deponent states that it has also taken steps to remove the advertisements
from  its  official  verified  social  media  accounts/handles  in  relation  to  the
aforesaid 14 ayurvedic medicines/formulations and is taking steps to ensure
that  no  advertisements  qua  the  suspended  medicines/formulations  are
available on the same. 
6.
Further, the Respondent No. 5 was selling the aforementioned ayurvedic
medicines/formulations through-out India in its 5606 exclusive/franchise stores
and has issued email of withdrawal dated 14.05.2024 to all the exclusive
stores/franchises of the Respondent No. 5 across India for removal/withdrawal
of the 14 ayurvedic medicines/formulations which were suspended vide order
dated 15.04.2024 passed by the State Drug Licensing Authority Ayurvedic and
Unani Services, Dehradun, Uttarakhand.
I.
The Respondent has instructed the media platforms, associated with it as
well as those specifically engaged by Respondent No. 5 for purchasing
advertisement slots in print and electronic media to immediately stop the
broadcasting  of  any  advertisements  in  any  form  in  relation  to
aforementioned medicines/formulations. It is relevant to state herein that
vide emails dated 14.05.2024, issued by Respondent No. 5 to advertising
agency namely Vermillion Communication Private Limited, Rights Ad
Communication  Private  Limited,   Rights  Ad  Communication  Private
Limited, Combine Communications Private Limited as well as entities
such as Sanskar Info TV Private Limited, Aastha Broad Casting Network
Limited and Vedic Broadcasting Limited, necessary instructions have
been issued to ensure that no advertisements qua the sale or promotion
of  the  aforesaid  14  suspended  ayurvedic  medicines/formulations  be
caried out in any publications either in print or electronic media.
A  true  copy  of  the  emails  dated  14.05.2024  sent  to  Vermillion
Communication  Private  Limited,  Rights  Ad  Communication  Private
Limited as well as entities such as Sanskar Info TV Private Limited,
Aastha Broad Casting Network Limited and Vedic Broadcasting Limited
are annexed herewith and marked as ANNEXURE R-1 at pages 10 to 21.
II.
Respondent No. 5 also issued emails of withdrawal dated 14.05.2024 to
all franchise stores, Super Distributors & e-commerce partner (Fit India
Organic  Private  Limited)  of  the  Respondent  No.  5  across  India  for
removal/withdrawal of the aforesaid 14 suspended medicines.
Page 17 of 41

A true copy of the emails dated 14.05.2024 sent to franchise stores,
Super  Distributors  &  e-commerce  partner  (Fit  India  Organic  Private
Limited) are annexed herewith and marked as ANNEXURE R-2 at page
22 to 27.
III.
Intimation  emails  dated  14.05.2024  were  issued  to  social  media
companies  to  remove/withdraw  all  advertisements  of  aforesaid  14
ayurvedic  medicine/formulations,  if any,  suspended  vide  order  dated
15.04.2024 passed by State Drug Licensing Authority Ayurvedic and
Unani Services, Dehradun, Uttarakhand, wherein such posts have been
issued by third party individuals/entities who are not associated with any
of the Respondent No. 5 verified social media handles. The said request
was made directly to the Social Media Intermediaries as Respondent No.
5 has not direct control on any such handle which belongs to third party
individuals/entities and any notice/take down action can only be initiated
by the Social media Intermediary themselves.
A true  copy  of  the  emails  dated  14.05.2024  sent  to  social  media
platforms/companies namely, X (Twitter), YouTube, Google and Meta
(Facebook  &  Instagram)  are  annexed  herewith  and  marked  as
ANNEXURE R-3 at pages 28-35.
Copies of the aforesaid emails dated 14.05.2024 written to various agencies,
media houses and social media platforms are tabulated hereinbelow for ready
reference of this Hon’ble Court:
7.
Respondent No. 5 has further intimated/conveyed all its franchise and
stores to withdraw/remove any offending advertisement material.
8.
The Respondent No. 5 further states that it has the highest regard for the
orders/directions passed by this Hon’ble Court and further it will comply with any
other directions/instructions as directed by this Hon’ble Court in order to meet the
compliance of orders passed by this Hon’ble Court.”
Page 18 of 41
S. No.
Medicines
1.
Patanjali (Exclusive/Franchise Stores
2.
Patanjali Super Distributors
3.
Sanskar Group
4.
Vermillion Team
5.
Fit India (E Commerce Partner)
6.
Meta (Facebook)
7.
Google LLC
8.
Meta (Instagram)
9.
Rights Ad communication Private Limited
10.
X Corp (Twitter)
11.
Vedic Broadcasting Limited
12.
YouTube (Google LLC)
13.
Combine Communications Private Limited 
14.
Aastha Broad Casting Network Pvt. Ltd.

M.
ARTICLE 129 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA AND CONTEMPT OF  
COURTS ACT, 1971
22.
Before examining the conduct of the proposed contemnors in the aforesaid
background, we may note the relevant provisions of law.  Article 129 of the Constitution
declares the Supreme Court to be “a court of record” and states that it shall have all the
powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.  The
provisions of Contempt of Courts Act, 19717 and the Rules framed thereunder form a
part of a special statutory jurisdiction that is vested in courts to punish an offending party
for its contemptuous conduct.  It needs no emphasis that the power of contempt ought to
be exercised with caution, care and sparingly. The contemptuous act complained of must
be such that would result in obstruction of justice, adversely affect the majesty of law and
impact the dignity of the courts of law. 
23.
It must also be understood that contempt proceedings are sui generis inasmuch
as  the  Law  of  Evidence  and  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1973  are  strictly
inapplicable.  At the same time, the procedure adopted during the contempt proceedings
must be fair and just that is to say that the principles governing the Rule of law must be
extended to the party against whom contempt proceedings have been initiated.  The
party must have every opportunity to place its position before the Court.  Such a party
must not be left unheard under any circumstances.
7 For short ‘the Act’
Page 19 of 41

24.
In the above context, we may profitably refer to the observations made in Murray
and Company v. Ashok Kr. Newatia and Another8 wherein, this Court stated as
follows:
 “9………The purpose of contempt jurisdiction is to uphold the majesty and
dignity of the courts of law since the image of such a majesty in the minds of
the people cannot be led to be distorted. The respect and authority commanded
by courts of law are the greatest guarantee to an ordinary citizen and the entire
democratic fabric of the society will crumble down if the respect for the judiciary is
undermined. It is true that the judiciary will be judged by the people for what
the judiciary does, but in the event of any indulgence which can even
remotely be termed to affect the majesty of law, the society is bound to lose
confidence and faith in the judiciary and the law courts thus, would forfeit
the trust and confidence of the people in general.”  
 (emphasis added)
25.
In Pushpaben and Another v. Narandas Badiani and Another9, this Court had
highlighted the significance of the special jurisdiction under the Act in the following
words:
“42. The contempt of court is a special jurisdiction to be exercised sparingly
and with caution whenever an act adversely affects the administration of
justice  or  which  tends  to  impede  its  course  or  tends  to  shake  public
confidence in the judicial institutions. This jurisdiction may also be exercised
when the act complained of adversely affects the majesty of law or dignity of the
courts. The purpose of contempt jurisdiction is to uphold the majesty and dignity of
the courts of law. It is an unusual type of jurisdiction combining “the jury, the
judge and the hangman” and it is so because the court is not adjudicating
upon any claim between litigating parties. This jurisdiction is not exercised to
protect the dignity of an individual judge but to protect the administration of
justice from being maligned. In the general interest of the community it is
imperative that the authority of courts should not be imperilled and there
should be no unjustifiable interference in the administration of justice. It is a
matter between the court and the contemner and third parties cannot intervene. It is
exercised in a summary manner in aid of the administration of justice, the
majesty of law and the dignity of the courts. No such act can be permitted
which may have the tendency to shake the public confidence in the fairness
and impartiality of the administration of justice.”
    (emphasis added)
8 (2000) 2 SCC 367
9 (1979) 2 SCC 394
Page 20 of 41

26.
In  Reliance  Petrochemicals  Limited  v.  Proprietors  of  Indian  Express
Newspapers, Bombay Pvt. Ltd. and Others10, this Court observed that :
35. The question of contempt must be judged in a particular situation. The
process of due course of administration of justice must remain
unimpaired.  Public  interest  demands  that  there  should  be  no
interference  with  judicial  process  and  the  effect  of  the  judicial
decision  should  not  be  pre-empted  or  circumvented  by  public
agitation or publications. It has to be remembered that even at turbulent
times through which the developing countries are passing, contempt of
court means interference with the due administration of justice.
(emphasis added)
27.
In Anil Ratan Sarkar and Others v. Hirak Ghosh and Others11 this Court added
a note of caution in exercise of contempt jurisdiction and made the following pertinent
observations :
“13. Before proceeding with the matter further, certain basic statutory
features ought to be noticed at this juncture. The Contempt of Courts
Act, 1971 has been introduced in the statute-book for the purposes
of securing a feeling of confidence of the people in general and for
due  and  proper  administration  of  justice  in  the  country  —
undoubtedly a powerful weapon in the hands of the law courts but
that  by  itself  operates  as  a  string  of  caution  and  unless  thus
otherwise  satisfied  beyond  doubt,  it  would  neither  be  fair  nor
reasonable for the law courts to exercise jurisdiction under the
statute. The observation as above finds support from a decision of this
Court in Chhotu Ram v. Urvashi Gulati [(2001) 7 SCC 530 : 2001 SCC
(L&S) 1196] wherein one of us (Banerjee, J.) stated as below: (SCC p.
532, para 2)
“2. As regards the burden and standard of proof, the
common legal phraseology ‘he who asserts must prove’
has its due application in the matter of proof of the
allegations said to be constituting the act of contempt.
As regards the ‘standard of proof’, be it noted that a
proceeding under the extraordinary jurisdiction of the
court in terms of the provisions of the Contempt of
Courts Act is quasi-criminal, and as such, the standard
of proof required is that of a criminal proceeding and the
10 (1988) 4 SCC 592
11 (2002) 4 SCC 21
Page 21 of 41

breach  shall  have  to  be  established  beyond  all
reasonable doubt.”
14. Similar  is  the  situation  in Mrityunjoy  Das v. Sayed  Hasibur
Rahaman12 and as such we need not dilate thereon further as to the
burden and standard of proof vis-à-vis the Contempt of Courts Act —
suffice it to record that powers under the Act should be exercised
with utmost care and caution and that too rather sparingly and in the
larger interest of the society and for proper administration of the
justice delivery system in the country. Exercise of power within the
meaning of the Act of 1971 shall thus be a rarity and that too in a matter
on which there exists no doubt as regards the initiation of the action being
bona fide.”
(emphasis added)
28.
In  Ram Kishan v. Tarun Bajaj and Others13, highlighting the significance of
contempt jurisdiction, it has been observed that :
“11. The contempt jurisdiction conferred on to the law courts power to punish an
offender for his wilful disobedience/contumacious conduct or obstruction to the
majesty of law, for the reason that respect and authority commanded by the courts
of law are the greatest guarantee to an ordinary citizen that his rights shall be
protected and the entire democratic fabric of the society will crumble down if the
respect of the judiciary is undermined.  Undoubtedly, the contempt jurisdiction is
a powerful weapon in the hands of the courts of law but that by itself operates
as  a  string  of  caution  and  unless,  thus,  otherwise  satisfied  beyond
reasonable doubt, it would neither be fair nor reasonable for the law courts to
exercise jurisdiction under the Act.  The proceedings are quasi-criminal in
nature, and therefore, standard of proof required in these proceedings is
beyond all reasonable doubt.  It would rather be hazardous to impose sentence
for contempt on the authorities in exercise of the contempt jurisdiction on mere
probabilities.”
     
    (emphasis added)
29.
A judicious use of the power of contempt has been underscored in Hon’ble Shri
Justice C.S. Karnan, in Re14, where a Constitution Bench of 7 Judges cited several
decisions of foreign jurisdictions and observed  thus :
“63. The authority to punish for contempt of court has always been exercised by
the judiciary from times immemorial [ In one of the earliest legal pronouncements
dealing with the subject, Justice Wilmot in  R. v. Almon, 1765 Wilmot’s Notes
243 : 97 ER 94 explained the philosophy behind the power to punish for contempt
of court.  The passage now a classis exposition runs as follows : (ER p. 100) “…
and whenever men’s allegiance to the laws is so fundamentally shaken, it is the
12 (2001) 3 SCC 739
13 (2014) 16 SCC 204
14 (2017) 7 SCC 1
Page 22 of 41

most fatal and most dangerous obstruction of justice, and, in my opinion, calls out
for a more rapid and immediate redress than any other obstruction whatsoever;
not for the sake of the Judges, as private individuals, but because they are the
channels by which the King’s justice is conveyed to the people.”}  the justification
for the existence of that is not to afford protection to individual Judges [ “14. …
the law of contempt is not made for the protection of Judges who may be
sensitive to the winds of public opinion.  Judges are supposed to be men of
fortitude, able to thrive in a hardy climate.”  [Douglas, J., Craig v. Harney, 1947
SCC Online US SC 79, para 14 : 91 L.Ed. 1546 : 331 US 367 (1947) at p. 376]]
but to inspire confidence in the sanctity and efficacy of the judiciary [ “… The
object of the discipline enforced by the Court in case of contempt of court
is not to vindicate the dignity of the court or the person of the Judge, but to
prevent undue interference with the administration of justice.”  [Bowen, L.J.
– Helmore v. Smith (2), [L.R.} 35 Ch. 449 at p. 455 (CA)]], though they do not
and should not flow from the power to punish for contempt.  They should rest on
more surer foundations.  The foundations are – the trust and confidence of the
people that the judiciary is fearless and impartial.”
(emphasis added
(Also refer:  Parashuram Detaram Shamdasani v. King-Emperor15 and Chairman,
West Bengal Administrative Tribunal and Another v. SK. Monobbor Hossain and
Another16)
N.
  MEANING OF THE EXPRESSION “WILFUL DISOBEDIENCE”
30.
What does the expression “wilful disobedience” used in defining “civil contempt”
in Section 2(b) of the Act, mean?   The expression “civil contempt” has been defined in
Section 2(b) as follows : 
“civil  contempt”  means wilful  disobedience  to  any  judgment,  decree,
direction, order, writ or other process of a court or wilful breach of an
undertaking given to a court”. 
31.
It can be discerned from the aforesaid definition that there are three sets of pre-
conditions for holding a person as guilty for committing civil contempt, i.e., (a) there must
a judgement, decree, direction, order, writ or other process of a Court; (b) there must be
disobedience of such a judgement, decree, direction, order, writ or other process of a
15 (1945) A.C. 264
16 (2012) 11 SCC 761
Page 23 of 41

Court; (c) such a disobedience to a judgement, decree, direction, order, writ or other
process of a Court must be wilful.  The fourth is the circumstance where an undertaking
is given to the Court and there is a breach of such an undertaking.  (Refer : Patel
Rajnikant Dhulabhai and Another v. Patel Chandrakant Dhulabhai and Others17).
32.
In Rama Narang v. Ramesh Narang and Another18, this Court expounded on
the interpretation of Section 2(b) of the Act and observed that the said provision can be
divided into two neat compartments. The first compartment is of cases where there is
willful disobedience of a Court process and the second one is where there is willful
breach of an undertaking given to a Court.  We may gainfully extract the following para
for ready reference :
“18. The Act has been duly widened.  It provides inter alia for definitions of the
terms and lays down firmer bases for exercise of the court’s jurisdiction in
contempt.  Section 2(b) of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 defines civil
contempt  as  meaning  “wilful  disobedience  to  any  judgment,  decree,
direction, order, writ or other process of a court or wilful breach of an
undertaking given to a court”. 
Analysed, the definition provides for two categories of cases, namely, (1)  wilful
disobedience to a process of court, and (2) wilful breach of an undertaking given
to a court.  As far as the first category is concerned, the word “any” further
indicates the wide nature of the power.  No distinction is statutorily drawn
between an order passed after an adjudication and an order passed by consent.
This first category is separate from the second and cannot be treated as
forming part of or taking colour from the second category.  The legislative
intention clearly was to distinguish between the two and create distinct
classes of contumacious behaviour.  Interestingly, the courts in England have
held that the breach of a consent decree of specific performance by refusal to
execute the agreement is punishable by way of proceedings in contempt.”
            (emphasis added)
17 (2008) 14 SCC 561
18 (2006) 11 SCC 114
Page 24 of 41

33.
Citing the decisions in Patel Rajnikant Dhulabhai (supra) and Rama Narang
(supra),  this  Court  observed  in  Balwantbhai  Somabhai  Bhandari  v.  Hiralal
Somabhai19 that : 
“62. Thus, it is evident that Section 2(b) of the Act, which defines civil contempt,
consists of two different parts and categories, namely, (i) wilful disobedience to
any judgment, decree, direction, order, writ or other process of a court or (ii)
wilful breach of an undertaking given to a court. The expression “any” used
with reference to the first category indicates the wide nature of power
given to the Court and that the statute does not draw a difference between
an order passed after adjudication or an order passed by consent. The first
part or category is distinct and cannot be treated as a part or taking colour
from the second category. This Court consciously observed that the Courts in
England have held that the breach of consent decree of performance by refusal
to execute an agreement was punishable by way of contempt proceedings. With
reference to the second part, in  Rama Narang (supra) it was observed that
giving of an undertaking is distinct from a consent order recording compromise.
In the latter case of violation of compromise, no question of contempt arises, but
the party can enforce the order of compromise either by execution or injunction
from a Court. However, in the former case, when there is wilful disobedience,
contempt application and proceedings would be maintainable.”
             (emphasis added)
34.
In  Balwantbhai Somabhai Bhandari (supra), the Court further observed as
under : 
“73. An undertaking or an assurance given by a lawyer based upon which the
court decides upon a particular course of action would definitely fall within the
confines of “undertaking” as stipulated under Section 2(b) of the Act, 1971 and
the breach of which would constitute “civil contempt”. As held in M. v. Home
(supra) relied upon by this Court in  Rama Narang  (supra) that if a party or
solicitor or counsel on his behalf, so as to convey to the court a firm conviction
that an undertaking is being given, that party will be bound and it will be no
answer that he did not think that he was giving it or that he was misunderstood.
The breach of an undertaking given to a court by a person in a pending
proceeding on the faith of which the court sanctions a particular course of action
is misconduct amounting to contempt.”
(emphasis added)
35.
The expression “willful disobedience” has been discussed by this Court at some
length in Niaz Mohammad and Others v. State of Haryana and Others20 as below : 
19 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1139
20 (1994) 6 SCC 332
Page 25 of 41

       “9. Section 2(b) of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the
Act’) defines “civil contempt” to mean “wilful disobedience to any judgment, decree,
direction, order, writ or other process of a court …”. Where the contempt consists in
failure to comply with or carry out an order of a court made in favour of a party, it is a
civil contempt. The person or persons in whose favour such order or direction has been
made can move the court for initiating proceeding for contempt against the alleged
contemner, with a view to enforce the right flowing from the order or direction in
question. But such a proceeding is not like an execution proceeding under Code of Civil
Procedure. The party in whose favour an order has been passed, is entitled to the
benefit of such order. The court while considering the issue as to whether the
alleged contemner should be punished for not having complied with and carried
out the direction of the court, has to take into consideration all facts and
circumstances of a particular case. That is why the framers of the Act while
defining civil contempt, have said that it must be wilful disobedience to any
judgment, decree, direction, order, writ or other process of a court. Before a
contemner is punished for non-compliance of the direction of a court, the court
must not only be satisfied about the disobedience of any judgment, decree,
direction or writ but should also be satisfied that such disobedience was wilful
and intentional. The civil court while executing a decree against the judgment-debtor is
not concerned and bothered whether the disobedience to any judgment, or decree, was
wilful. Once a decree has been passed it is the duty of the court to execute the decree
whatever may be consequence thereof. But while examining the grievance of the
person who has invoked the jurisdiction of the court to initiate the proceeding for
contempt for disobedience of its order, before any such contemner is held guilty
and punished, the court has to record a finding that such disobedience was wilful
and intentional. If from the circumstances of a particular case, brought to the
notice  of  the  court,  the  court  is  satisfied  that  although  there  has  been  a
disobedience  but  such  disobedience  is  the  result  of  some  compelling
circumstances under which it was not possible for the contemner to comply with
the order, the court may not punish the alleged contemner.”
        
 
           
 (emphasis added)
36.
In  Ashok Paper Kamgar Union v. Dharam Godha and Others21, this Court
observed that the expression “willful disobedience” deployed in Section 2(b) of the Act
means an act or omission done voluntarily and intentionally with a specific intent to do
something, which the law forbids or with a specific intention to fail to do something which
the law requires to be done.  The expression ‘willfulness’ signifies deliberate action done
with evil intent and bad motive or purpose.  It should not be an act which requires or is
dependent either wholly or in part, on any act or omission of a third party for compliance.
21 (2003) 11 SCC 1
Page 26 of 41

Holding that a willful act does not encompass any involuntary or negligent actions, this
Court held in Ram Kishan (supra) as under :
“12. Thus, in order to punish a contemnor, it has to be established that disobedience
of the order is  “wilful”.  The word “wilful” introduces a mental element and
hence, requires looking into the mind of a person/contemnor by gauging his
actions,  which  is  an  indication  of  one’s  state  of  mind.   “Wilful”  means
knowingly  intentional,  conscious,  calculated  and  deliberate  with  full
knowledge of consequences flowing therefrom.  It excludes casual, accidental,
bona fide or unintentional acts or genuine inability.  Wilful acts does not
encompass involuntarily or negligent actions.  The act has to be done with a “bad
purpose or without justifiable excuse or stubbornly, obstinately or perversely”.  Wilful
act is to be distinguished from an act done carelessly, thoughtlessly, heedlessly or
inadvertently.  It does not include any act done negligently or involuntarily.  The
deliberate conduct of a person means that he knows what he is doing and
intends to do the same.  Therefore, there has to be a calculated action with evil
motive on his part.  Even if there is a disobedience of an order, but such
disobedience is the result of some compelling circumstances under which it
was not possible for the contemnor to comply with the order, the contemnor
cannot be punished.   “Committal or sequestration will not be ordered unless
contempt involves a degree of default or misconduct.”
   (emphasis added)
37.
In a recent decision of this Court in Balwantbhai Somabhai Bhandari (supra)22,
in the above context, this Court has made the following relevant observations :
“45. The sanctity to judicial proceedings is paramount to a society governed
by law.  Otherwise, the very edifice of democracy breaks and anarchy reigns.  The
Act, 1971 is intended to correct a person deviating from the norm and trying to
breach the law/assuming law on to himself.  It intends to secure confidence of the
people  in  the  administration  of  justice  by  disciplining  those  erring  in
disobeying the orders of the Court/undertaking given to court.
xxx
xxx
xxx
56.  Hence, the expression or word “wilful” means act or omission which is
done voluntarily or intentionally and with the specific intent to do something
which the law forbids or with the specific intent to fail to do something the law
requires to be done, that is to say with bad purpose either to disobey or to
disregard the law.  It signifies a deliberate action done with evil intent or with a bad
motive or purpose.”
   (emphasis added)
22 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1139
Page 27 of 41

38.
To determine as to whether a person is guilty of civil contempt, it is necessary to
first hold that the person has willfully disobeyed any judgement, decree, order, writ or
any other process of the Court.  Of equal significance is a wilful breach of an undertaking
given to a Court.   Mere disobedience of an order may not suffice to qualify as a “civil
contempt” within the meaning of Section 2(b) of the Act.  The element of willingness is a
prerequisite to bring home the charge within the scope of the Act [Refer : Anil Ratan
Sarkar (supra)].   This must not be confused with a wilful breach of an undertaking given
to the opposite party in a litigation.  While an undertaking given to a party in a litigation
whether by way of a settlement / agreement (oral or in writing) or an assurance, does not
attract the provisions of the Act, an undertaking given to a Court of law is treated on an
entirely different footing and a breach of the said undertaking would no doubt, attract the
provisions of the Act.  It has to be seen in the facts and circumstances of a case as to
whether the undertaking is one offered to the Court or to the other side. 
39.
 In  Babu Ram Gupta v. Sudhir Bhasin and Another23 this Court drew a
distinction between a party failing to honour an undertaking resulting in a fraud on the
Court as against failure to adhere to a consent order by a party and observed that: 
“8.  …..while it is the duty of the court to punish a person who tries to obstruct the
course of justice or bring into disrepute the institution of judiciary, this power has to
be exercised not casually or lightly but with great care and circumspection and only
in such cases where it is necessary to punish the contemner in order to uphold the
majesty of law and dignity of the courts.
9    …..Contempt proceeding against a person who has failed to comply with the
Court a order serves a dual purpose: (1) vindication of the public interest by
punishment of contemptuous conduct and (2) coercion to compel the contemner to
do what the law requires of him…… 
23 (1980) 3 SCC 47
Page 28 of 41

10.  .…the reason why a breach of clear undertaking given to the court
amounts to contempt of court is that the contemner by making a false
representation to the court obtains a benefit for himself and if he fails to
honour the undertaking, he plays a serious fraud on the court itself and
thereby obstructs the course of justice and brings into disrepute the judicial
institution. The same cannot, however, be said of a consent order or a
compromise decree where the fraud, if any, is practised by the person
concerned not on the court but on one of the parties. Thus, the offence
committed by the person concerned is qua the party not qua the court, and,
therefore, the very foundation for proceeding for contempt of court is completely
absent in such cases…...
(emphasis added)
O.
  BREACH OF AN UNDERTAKING
40.
Coming next to the word “undertaking”, the same has not been defined in the Act
but it has different connotations.  In the backdrop of contempt proceedings, the word
“undertaking” has been defined in Black’s Law Dictionary, Fifth Edition as :
“A promise, engagement, or stipulation.  An engagement by one of the parties to a
contract to the other, as distinguished from the nutual engagement of the parties to
each other.  It does not necessarily imply a consideration.  In a somewhat special
sense, a promise given in the course of legal proceedings by a party or his counsel,
generally as a condition to obtaining some concession from the court or the opposite
party.  A promise or security in any form.”  
41.
The Osborn’s Concise Law Dictionary, 10th Edition defines “undertaking” in the
following words :
“A person, especially a promise in the course of legal proceedings by a party or
his counsel, which may be enforced by attachment or otherwise in the same
manner as an injunction.”
42.
In M v. Home Office24, the Court issued a caution on how an undertaking would
be treated and observed that :
“If a party, or solicitors or counsel on his behalf, so act as to convey to the court
the firm conviction that an undertaking is being given, that party will be bound
24 (1992) Q.B. 270
Page 29 of 41

and it will be no answer that he did not think that he was giving it or that he was
misunderstood.”
P.
QUALIFIED APOLOGY 
 
 VIS-À-VIS 
 
 UNCONDITIONAL APOLOGY  
 43.
We  may  next  touch  upon  the  aspect  of  a  qualified  apology  vis-à-vis  an
unconditional apology.  It must be understood that any apology tendered by a party in
contempt proceedings must be unconditional and unqualified.   Such an apology must
also demonstrate that it has been made with a bona fide intention and not just to wriggle
out of a tight situation. Tendering a qualified apology is akin to a game of dice.  It could
either have a  positive  outcome  or a  negative  result. If the contemnor tenders a
conditional apology and expects luck to play a role in the outcome of such an apology,
then he should be ready to face the consequence of an outright rejection.   
44.
In  M.Y. Shareef and Another v. Hon'ble Judges of the High Court of Nagpur
and Others25, a Constitution Bench of this Court had observed in para 12 that: 
“12. 
The proposition is well settled and self-evident that there cannot be
both justification and an apology. The two things are incompatible. Again,
an apology is not a weapon of defence to purge the guilty of their offence;
nor is it intended to operate as a universal panacea, but it is intended to be
evidence of real contriteness. The appellants having tendered an unqualified
apology, no exception can be taken to the decision of the High Court that the
application  for  transfer  did  constitute  contempt  because  the  Judges  were
scandalised with a view to diverting the due course of justice, and that in signing
this  application  the  two  advocates  were  guilty  of  contempt.  That  decision
therefore stands.”  
(emphasis added)
25 (1954) 2 SCC 444
Page 30 of 41

45.
In  Priya Gupta and Another v. Additional Secretary, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare and Others26, this Cout expounded on the expression “bona fide”  and held
as below:
“7. Tendering an apology is not a satisfactory way of resolving contempt
proceedings.  An  apology  tendered  at  the  very  initial  stage  of  the
proceedings being bona fide and preferably unconditional would normally
persuade the court to accept such apology, if this would not leave a
serious scar on the dignity/authority of the court and interfere with the
administration of justice under the orders of the Court.
8. “Bona fide” is an expression which has to be examined in the context of
a given case. It cannot be understood in the abstract. The attendant
circumstances, behaviour of the contemnor and the remorse or regret on
his part are some of the relevant considerations which would weigh with
the  Court in deciding  such  an  issue. Where,  persistently,  a person  has
attempted to overreach the process of Court and has persisted with the illegal
act done in wilful violation to the orders of the Court, it will be difficult for the
Court to accept unconditional apology even if it is made at the threshold of the
proceedings. It is not necessary for us to examine in any greater detail the
factual matrix of the case since the disobedience, manipulation of procedure and
violation of the schedule prescribed under the orders of the Court is an admitted
position. All that we have to examine is whether the apology tendered is bona
fide when examined in the light of the attendant circumstances and whether it will
be in the interest of justice to accept the same.
9.  The facts which will weigh with the Court while considering acceptance
of an apology are the contemptuous conduct, the extent to which the order
of the Court has been violated, irresponsible acts on the part of the
contemnor and the degree of interference in the administration of justice,
which thereby cause prejudice to other parties. An apology tendered, even at
the outset, has to be bona fide and should be demonstrative of repentance and
sincere regret on the part of the contemnor, lest the administration of justice be
crudely interfered with by a person with impunity. The basic ingredients of the
rule of law have to be enforced, whatever be the consequence and all persons
are under a fundamental duty to maintain the rule of law. An apology which is
not bona fide and has been tendered to truncate the process of law with
the ulterior motive of escaping the consequences of such flagrant violation
of orders of the court and causes discernible disrespect to the course of
administration of justice, cannot be permitted. The court has to draw a
balance between cases where tendering of an apology is sufficient, and
cases where it is necessary to inflict punishment on the contemnor. An
attempt to circumvent the orders of the court is derogatory to the very dignity of
the court and administration of justice. A person who attempts to salvage himself
by showing ignorance of the court's order, of which he quite clearly had the
knowledge, would again be an attempt on his part to circumvent the process of
law. Tendering a justification would be inconsistent with the concept of an
apology. An apology which is neither sincere nor satisfactory and is not
made at the appropriate stage may not provide sufficient grounds to the
court for the acceptance of the same. It is also an accepted principle that one
26 (2013) 11 SCC 404
Page 31 of 41

who commits intentional violations must also be aware of the consequences of
the same.  One who tenders an unqualified apology would normally not
render justification for the contemptuous conduct. In any case, tendering of
an  apology  is a weapon of defence to purge  the guilt  of offence by  the
contemnor. It is not intended to operate as a universal panacea to frustrate the
action in law, as the fundamental principle is that rule of law and dignity of the
court must prevail.
xxx xxx xxx
14. From the above principle, it is clear that consideration of an apology as
contemplated under Explanation to Section 12(1) of the Act is not a panacea to
avoid  action  in  law  universally. While  considering  the  apology  and  its
acceptance,  the  court  inter  alia  considers  :  (a)  the  conduct  of  the
contemnor  prior  and  subsequent  to  the  tendering  of  apology.  If  the
conduct is contemptuous, prejudicial and has harmed the system and
other innocent persons as a whole, it would be a factor which would weigh
against the contemnors; and (b) the stage and time when such apology is
tendered.”
               
             (emphasis added)
46.
In Bal Kishan Giri v. State of Uttar Pradesh27, where examining a case of rejection
of an apology offered to the High Court by the contemnors who had insinuated   bias and a
predetermined mind against three Judges of the High Court, this Court observed that :
“15. The appellant has tendered an absolute and unconditional apology which
has not been accepted by the High Court. The apology means a regretful
acknowledgment or an excuse for failure. An explanation offered to a person
affected  by  one's  action  that  no  offence  was  intended,  coupled  with  the
expression of regret for any that may have been given.  Apology should be
unquestionable in sincerity. It should be tempered with a sense of genuine
remorse  and  repentance,  and  not  a  calculated  strategy  to  avoid
punishment.
16.  Sub-section (1) of Section 12 of the Act and the Explanation attached
thereto enables the court to remit the punishment awarded for committing the
contempt of court on an apology being made to the satisfaction of the court.
However, an apology should not be rejected merely on the ground that it is
qualified or tendered at a belated stage if the accused makes it bona fide.  A
conduct which abuses and makes a mockery of the judicial process of the
court is to be dealt with iron hands and no person can tinker with it to
prevent, prejudice, obstruct or interfere with the administration of justice.
There can be cases where the wisdom of rendering an apology dawns upon only
at a later stage. Undoubtedly, an apology cannot be a defence, a justification, or
an appropriate punishment for an act which tantamounts to contempt of court. An
apology can be accepted in case where the conduct for which the apology is
given is such that it can be “ignored without compromising the dignity of the
court”, or it is intended to be the evidence of real contrition.  It should be
sincere. Apology cannot be accepted in case it is hollow; there is no
27 (2014) 7 SCC 280
Page 32 of 41

remorse; no regret; no repentance, or if it is only a device to escape the
rigour of the law. Such an apology can merely be termed as “paper
apology”.
17. In L.D. Jaikwal v. State of U.P.28, this Court noted that it cannot subscribe to
the “slap-say sorry-and forget” school of thought in administration of contempt
jurisprudence. Saying “sorry” does not make the slapper poorer. [See also T.N.
Godavarman Thirumulpad vs. Ashok Khot29 ] So an apology should not be
“paper apology” and expression of sorrow should come from the heart and
not from the pen; for it is one thing to “say” sorry, it is another to “feel”
sorry.
18. An apology for criminal contempt of court must be offered at the earliest
since a belated apology hardly shows the “contrition which is the essence of the
purging of contempt”. Of course, an apology must be offered and that too clearly
and at the earliest opportunity. However, even if the apology is not belated but
the court finds it to be without real contrition and remorse, and finds that it was
merely tendered as a weapon of defence, the court may refuse to accept it. If the
apology is offered at the time when the contemnor finds that the court is going to
impose punishment, it ceases to be an apology and becomes an act of a cringing
coward.
19. This Court has clearly laid down that an apology tendered is not to be
accepted as a matter of course and the court is not bound to accept the
same.  The court is competent  to reject  the  apology  and  impose  the
punishment recording reasons for the same. The use of insulting language
(sic and later on tendering an apology) does not absolve the contemnor on any
count whatsoever. If the words are calculated and clearly intended to cause any
insult, an apology, if tendered and lack penitence, regret or contrition, does not
deserve to be accepted.” 
(emphasis added)
47.
In  T.M.A. Pai Foundation and Others v. State of Karnataka and Others30, on
noticing that the orders passed by this Court were assigned a distorted interpretation by
judicial officers, who subsequently tendered an unqualified apology for their conduct, the
said apologies were firmly rejected with the following observations :
“10. All the five officers, viz., Shri Arvind Choudhari, Capt. Shaikh, Smt
Joyce  Sankaran,  Shri  P.S.  Mane  and  Shri  B.G.  More,  have  no  doubt
tendered  unqualified  apology  to  this  Court  but  in  the  facts  and
circumstances stated above, it would be a travesty of justice to accept the
same. They are senior and experienced officers and must be presumed to know
that under the constitutional scheme obtaining in this country, orders of this Court
have to be obeyed implicitly and that orders of the Apex Court — for that matter,
any Court — should not be trifled with. We have found hereinabove that they
have acted deliberately to subvert the orders of this Court, evidently at the
instance  of  the  Association  of Private  Medical  Colleges.  It is  equally
28 (1984) 3 SCC 405
29 (2006) 5 SCC 1
30 (1995) 4 SCC 1
Page 33 of 41

necessary to erase an impression which appears to be gaining ground that
the ‘mantra’ of unconditional apology is a complete answer to violations
and infractions of the orders of this Court.
11.  Accordingly, we reject the “unconditional apology” tendered by the five
officers, hold them guilty of contempt of court and do hereby censure their
conduct.  A copy  of  this  order  shall  form  part  of  the  Annual  Confidential
Reports/Record of Service of each of the said officers.” 
             (emphasis added)
48.
In  Balwantbhai Somabhai Bhandari  (supra), where the contemnors sold the
suit property in violation of an undertaking given to the court, this Court rejected the
apologies tendered holding that the same should not be accepted as a matter of course
and the Court is not bound to accept the same.   If the conduct of a contemnor is serious
and the said conduct has caused damage to the dignity of the institution, the same
should not be accepted.   The Court deprecated the tendency of courts to show
compassion in the face of disobedience of an undertaking or an order of the Court done
deliberately. 
49.
In Suman Chadha and Another v. Central Bank of India31, the Court noted that
an undertaking given by a party must be contextualized and observed as follows :
“25. It is true that an undertaking given by a party should be seen in the
context in which it was made and (i) the benefits that accrued to the
undertaking party; and (ii) the detriment/injury suffered by the counter
party. It is also true that normally the question whether a party is guilty of
contempt is to be seen in the specific context of the disobedience and the
wilful nature of the same and not on the basis of the conduct subsequent
thereto. While it is open to the court to see whether the subsequent conduct of
the alleged contemnor would tantamount to an aggravation of the contempt
already committed, the very determination of an act of contempt cannot simply
be based upon the subsequent conduct. 
26. But the subsequent conduct of the party may throw light upon one important
aspect namely whether it was just the inability of the party to honour the
commitment or it was part of a larger design to hoodwink the court.”
             (emphasis added)
31 2018 SCC OnLine Del 11536
Page 34 of 41

50.
A party appearing  before  the  Court  can  give  an  undertaking  by filing  an
application or an affidavit clearly setting out the undertaking given to the Court or by
giving a clear and express oral undertaking incorporated by Court in its order.  An
undertaking may also be given by an Advocate on behalf of a client and if duly and
properly given, it has the same effect as one given by the client. An undertaking given to
the Court has the same force as an order of the Court and breach thereof would
amount to contempt in the same manner as a breach of an injunction. Whether a
statement made by a party or its counsel could amount to an undertaking, would
depend on the words used in the statement made and the facts and circumstances of a
case.  When an undertaking is given before the Court for any purpose, be it for payment
of money or for vacating a property or for doing an act or for refraining from doing a
particular act and compliances are not made, contempt proceedings can be drawn up.
The bottom-line is that if a party or the advocate acts in such a manner so as to convey
to the Court a firm conviction that an undertaking is being given regardless of the fact
that the word “undertaking” has not been specifically mentioned, that party will be
bound down and it will be no answer that he did not think that he was giving it or that he
was misunderstood.
Q.
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
51.
Based on the aforesaid broad features of the law as laid down, we shall analyze
the action of the proposed contemnors for the purpose of deciding their action to be
wilful and contumacious.  On the factual score, to the credit of learned counsel for the
Page 35 of 41

proposed contemnors, they have not advanced an argument to the effect that the
assurance recorded by this Court on 21st November, 2023, on a statement made by the
learned counsel appearing on behalf of Patanjali, cannot be treated as an undertaking
given to the Court or that it does not bind them.  As a recall, on the aforesaid date,
learned Senior Advocate appearing for Patanjali had made a statement on instructions
and assured this Court that in future, there shall not be any violation of the law,
especially the laws relating to advertising or branding of products manufactured and
marketed by Patanjali.  Further, an assurance was given to the Court that no casual
statements claiming medicinal efficacy of the products of Patanjali or against any
system of medicine will be released to the media in any form.  Not only was the
aforesaid statement made a part of the order dated 21st November, 2023, this Court had
bound Patanjali down to the terms of the undertaking.
52.
In the teeth of the aforesaid clear, categorical and unambiguous assurance given
by Patanjali to the Court and knowing that the said assurance was given by its counsel
on instructions and further, that Patanjali had been bound down to such an assurance,
there was no justification for the proposed contemnors to have called for a Press
Conference on the very next day, i.e., on 22 November 2023.  The fact that the
proposed contemnors were aware of the undertaking given to this Court on their behalf
by their counsel is evident from their statements made in the Press Conference where
they acknowledged that an order had been passed by this Court on 21 st November,
2023.  Despite that, accusatory statements were made by them against practicing
Page 36 of 41

Doctors to the effect that they were spreading false propaganda that “there is no cure
for deceases like B.P., thyroid, sugar, asthma, arthritis, kidney and liver failure”.  
53.
Furthermore, the proposed contemnors being well aware  of the statement
recorded on their behalf on 21st November, 2023 to the effect that Patanjali shall not
violate  any  laws,  especially  laws  relating  to  advertising  or  branding  of  products
manufactured and marketed by it, a positive assertion was made by them in the Press
Conference that they have medicines that could cure blood pressure, thyroid, type-I
diabetes and asthma.  This statement was in violation of the provisions of the DMR Act
and Rules.  Describing the products manufactured by Patanjali as a “permanent
solution” in respect of ailments listed in the Schedule appended to the DMR Act and
Rules which prohibit advertisement of drugs for treatment of particular diseases and
disorders including those that were referred to by the proposed contemnors in the Press
Conference, again amounted to violating the undertaking given to the Court.
54.
Within a week of the order passed by this Court, the proposed contemnors
published advertisements in the daily newspapers on 4th December, 2023, yet again
claiming that they had manufactured medicines that could cure diseases like high blood
pressure, sugar, asthma, thyroid, arthritis which have been listed in the Schedules
appended  to  the  DMR  Act  and  DMR  Rules  and  are  specifically  prohibited  for
advertisement, so as to prevent the public from being misled.  The advertisement in
question that has been extracted in para 8 of this order, is clearly a violation of the
undertaking given by the proposed contemnors.  It was in the aforesaid background that
Page 37 of 41

this Court had issued a notice to Patanjali on 27th February, 2024 calling upon it to
explain as to why Contempt of Court proceedings should not be initiated against it and
its Managing Director – Acharya Balkrishna.  Subsequently, on 19th March, 2024, a
similar notice  was issued  to  Baba  Ramdev noting  that  he  too  had  violated  the
provisions of law.
55.
Coming to the first affidavit filed by Acharya Balkrishna, on 20th March 2024,
though he purportedly tendered an unqualified apology on behalf of Patanjali for the
breach of statement recorded in the order dated 21st November, 2023, we had rejected
the said affidavit for the reason that the deponent had tried to justify his conduct by
seeking to offer an explanation for the advertisements issued, which is impermissible.
As already observed by this Court, there cannot be a justification and an apology.  The
two things are incompatible and do not go hand-in-hand.  As a result, the conditional
apology tendered by the proposed contemnor was rejected.
56.
Thereafter, fresh affidavits were filed by Acharya Balkrishna and Baba Ramdev
on 6th April, 2024 wherein, an unconditional and unqualified apology was tendered by
them for the breach of the statement recorded in para 3 of the order dated 21 st
November 2023.   A further undertaking was given by them that they will ensure that the
statement recorded on their behalf is complied with and that no offending advertisement
will be issued in the future. Expressing regret for having issued advertisements in
violation of the undertaking given to this Court, they tendered an unconditional and
unqualified apology and again, gave an assurance that no such lapse shall occur in the
Page 38 of 41

future.  Similarly, an unconditional and unqualified apology was offered by the proposed
contemnors for holding a Press Conference on 22nd November, 2023 and making
casual public statements regarding the efficacy of particular medicines manufactured by
them and against any system of medicine.  They also undertook not to make any such
public statements in breach of the undertaking given to this Court. 
57.
 On 16th April 2024, Acharya Balkrishna and Baba Ramdev, who were directed to
remain present in Court in terms of earlier orders, stepped forward and orally tendered
their unqualified apology to this Court for having called a Press Conference on 22nd
November, 2023 and for having continued to issue misleading advertisements and
making derogatory statements in respect of other systems of treatment.  They assured
this Court that they would be more careful in future and not violate any orders of the
Court or the undertaking given to this Court or violate any provisions of law.  
58.
Learned Senior Advocate appearing for the proposed contemnors had also
stated that to redeem themselves and demonstrate their bona fides, they proposed to
take some steps on their own.  The said steps included tendering a public apology in
the press for which Acharya Balkrishna filed an affidavit on 24th April, 2024, stating inter
alia that an initiative had been taken to publish the public apology in various National
and Regional newspapers having wide circulation across the country.  
59.
However, when the said advertisements were handed over for the perusal of the
Court, the purported public apologies were rejected as meaningless and a mere lip
service.  This was for the reason that the public apologies were published in the
Page 39 of 41

newspapers in such a fine print that the same were virtually illegible.  This Court opined
that the said apology was more of an empty formality than an expression of genuine
contrition.   Readily  conceding  the  aforesaid  position,  learned  Senior  Advocate
appearing for  the  proposed  contemnors  had  sought  time  to  file  copies  of  fresh
advertisements incorporating the public apology.  This was done on an affidavit filed by
Acharya Balkrishna on 24th April, 2024.  This time, the public apology carried in various
National and Regional newspapers was not only in bold words, but also published at
prominent places.  Subsequently, Acharya Balkrishna filed an affidavit on 14th May,
2024, listing the steps that were being taken to bring down the advertisements of such
of the products manufactured by Patanjali whose licenses had been suspended by the
State of Uttarakhand and for recalling the said medicines from other agencies as also
from the online e-commerce platform of Patanjali.
R.
CONCLUSION
60.
On an overall conspectus of the facts of the present case and the sequence of
events that have transpired from November, 2023 till May, 2024, we are of the opinion
that though the initial conduct of the proposed contemnors prior to their tendering an
apology to the Court showed that the same was in violation of the undertakings given to
this Court, subsequent thereto, after they tendered an unqualified apology to this Court,
efforts have been made by them to take steps to make amends. This was not only by
expressing regret for their conduct on affidavit and in person, but also by taking steps to
publicize the apology tendered by them through advertisements published prominently
Page 40 of 41

in the National and Regional newspapers.  No doubt the wisdom of tendering an
unconditional apology dawned belatedly on the proposed contemnors, after this Court
rejected the first attempt made by them to offer a qualified apology, but their subsequent
conduct demonstrates that they have made sincere efforts to purge themselves. 
61.
Given the attendant facts and circumstances of the case and the effort made by
the proposed contemnors to absolve themselves of acts that amounted to breach of
undertakings given to this Court, we are inclined to accept the apology tendered by
them and close the matter.  At the same time, they are cautioned to strictly abide by the
terms of their undertakings.   Any future intransigence on their part, whether by act,
deed  or  speech  that  could  tantamount  to  violating  the  orders  of  the  Court  or
dishonouring the terms of the undertakings, shall be viewed strictly and the ensuing
consequences could indeed be grave.  In that eventuality, the sword of contempt that
has now been returned to rest in its sheath, shall be flourished as swiftly as these
proceedings were originally initiated.  
62.
With the aforesaid orders, the present proceedings are closed and the notice to
show cause issued to the proposed contemnors is discharged.  
       …………………………………… J
       [HIMA KOHLI]
      ..…………………………………… J
      [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI
AUGUST 13, 2024
Page 41 of 41