2024 INSC 601
 
 
1|Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl) 9783 of 2023 
 
REPORTABLE  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO………. OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.9783/2023) 
 
JAMES KUNJWAL 
 
 
  
 
… 
        APPELANT(S) 
 
Versus 
 
STATE OF UTTARAKHAND & ANR. 
 
 …         RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
SANJAY KAROL, J.  
 
Leave Granted. 
2. 
Impugned in the present appeal is the final order dated 1st October  2022, 
passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital in Bail Cancellation 
Application No.24/2022, whereby, although the said application was dismissed,  
it was observed that James Kunjwal, the present appellant had intentionally filed 
a false affidavit before the High Court and as such, a direction was issued to the 
Registrar (Judl.) of the High Court to file a complaint against him. This, in a 
nutshell, forms the basis for this appeal.   
Digitally signed by Dr.
Naveen Rawal
Date: 2024.08.13
12:56:01 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
2|Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl) 9783 of 2023 
 
3. 
It would be necessary to appreciate the background in which the impugned 
order came to be passed.  Briefly stated, the facts are :- 
3.1 
The appellant was made an accused in FIR No.109 of 2021 dated 2nd 
May, 2021 under Sections 376 & 504 of the Indian Penal Code, (45 
of 1860)1 by the second respondent ‘X’2 on the ground that the 
appellant had established relations with her on the false pretext of 
marriage, and the same continued after efforts towards marriage by 
the complainant repeatedly fell through.   
3.2      In reference to the said FIR, the appellant applied for bail, before the 
learned Additional District and Sessions Judge, Nainital which was 
rejected.3 Aggrieved thereby, the appellant pleaded his case for bail 
before the High Court.4 Vide order dated 8th June, 2021, such an 
application was allowed.  
3.3   
The complainant sought cancellation of such order of bail by way of 
Bail Cancellation Application No.24/2022. Various grounds were 
urged therein, including the appellant having made contradictory 
statements. 
3.4  
The High Court, while dismissing the application for cancellation of 
bail, vide impugned judgment made observations and issued 
 
1 ‘IPC’ hereinafter 
2 Complainant 
3 First Bail Petition No.180 of 2021, at Annexure P-3 
4 First Bail Application No.1190 of 2021, at Annexure P-4 

 
 
3|Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl) 9783 of 2023 
 
directions, now the subject matter of adjudication in appeal before 
this Court.   
4.   
The order dated 1st October, 2022 of the learned Single Judge, while 
dismissing the bail cancellation application, made reference to the conflict of 
facts in the affidavits filed by the complainant and the present appellant.  While 
the complainant submitted in her affidavit that certain events took place, the 
present appellant denied the same with certain explanations.  It was further noted 
that the State’s affidavit supported the position of the present respondent.  Despite 
the said contradiction having been brought to the notice of the present appellant, 
he “did not assist the Court in finding the truth about the incident of 24.07.2022”.  
It was, as such, concluded that the appellant had intentionally filed a false 
affidavit before the Court.  Accordingly, in the penultimate paragraph of the 
judgment, issued the following directions: 
“28.      The above narration establishes that the respondent no.2 
intentionally filed false affidavit before the Court,  Therefore, this 
Court requests Registrar, Judicial of this Court to file a complaint 
against the respondent no.2 in, the court of competent jurisdiction 
for filing a false affidavit.” 
 
5.    Pursuant to such an Order by the High Court, a complaint under Section 193 
of the IPC was filed before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Nainital bearing the 
following particulars - Criminal Complaint No.2991 of 2022, titled as State 
Through Registrar (Judicial), Hon’ble High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital v. 
James Kunjwal. 

 
 
4|Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl) 9783 of 2023 
 
6.  
By way of the special leave petition it is urged that mere denial of the 
averments in the pleadings would not constitute the offence of perjury. Further, 
it was urged that a Court is not “bound” to make a complaint under Section 
195(1)(b), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, unless it is of the opinion that it is 
expedient in the interest of justice to do so.  Reliance is placed on a Constitution 
Bench judgment of this Court in Iqbal Singh Marwah   v.  Meenakshi Marwah5. 
7. 
In the counter affidavit it has been claimed that the appellant has 
misrepresented and twisted certain facts, for instance, that he continued to have 
relations with the 2nd Respondent despite his marriage being fixed with someone 
else; that the appellant had forced the complainant to terminate her pregnancy etc.  
The respondent, in view of the above, has submitted that the High Court was 
justified in directing the filing of the complaint against the appellant.  At this 
juncture, for ready reference, we extract the relevant portion of what the 
complainant had said in her bail cancellation application.  It reads as under:- 
“9 That the applicant want to seek the kind attention of the Hon’ble 
court that on today’s date. It is evident and obvious that the personal 
status of the applicant and her family would be again in  knowledge 
of the accused  but still accused James Kunjwal is chasing applicant 
opting various ways, asking and pressurizing her to settle down the 
case by stating that he loves applicant, giving her love proposal, 
asking her to meet, to call etc and also sending obscene text, and 
status to applicant and on denial by the applicant and asking him to 
put his words before the respected hon’ble court and trial court 
started abusing her and her family badly also talking obscene to her. 
For the kind perusal of this Hon’ble court a true photo copy of the 
WhatsApp messages and status text and instagram messages are 
being filed herewith and marked as Annexure No.7 to this bail 
cancellation application.  
 
 
5 (2005) 4 SCC 370 

 
 
5|Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl) 9783 of 2023 
 
10. That being aggrieved by the aforesaid objectionable activities of 
the accused the applicant/complainant made a complaint before the 
police station - kathgodam on 24-7-2022. For the kind perusal of this 
Hon’ble court a true photo copy of the complaint letter along with 
its type copy is being filed herewith and marked as Annexure No.8 
to this bail cancellation application.  
 
11. That pursuant to this complaint the accused was called at police 
station and before police station he made a statement that he made a 
statement he will not repeat the any action in any manner but after 
returning from the police station when he reach his home the accused 
again started abusing her badly and also passing obscene comments 
to applicant through Whatsapp text status. For the kind perusal of 
this Hon’ble court a true photo copy of the whatsapp text status is 
being filed herewith and marked as Annexure No.9 to this bail 
cancellation application.  
 
12. That despite the promise made before the police station the 
accused did not stop the sending 10 abusing watsapp status messages 
therefore she again informed to the concerned police station 
kathgodam, on the perusal of which they called accused again where 
he accepted that he is doing this intentionally therefore police gave 
warning to him not to repeat the same again and again and police 
told the applicant that thought they can lodge the F.I.R. against the 
accused but the applicant cannot proof just on the basis of the various 
messages through social media platforms (WhatsApp and 
Instagram).” 
 
8. 
In response thereto, the appellant in his affidavit had averred as  under : 
“9. That the contents of the para no 9 are denied. 
   
10. That the contents of the Para no 10 are matter of record and hence 
need no comments.  
 
11. That the contents of the para no 10, 11 & 12 are denied. That the 
no such incident took place in the Police station and there is no 
material evidence to prove this. The respondent no 2 did not 
approach the applicant in fact it was the applicant who messaged and 
abused the respondent no.2 and communicated said indecent things 
about respondent no.2. The applicant alleged regarding depicting 
whatsapp status, but the respondent no2 denies communicating the 
status to the applicant. It is pertinent to mention here that Whatsapp 
status is not a message   and   is  not  sent  or  deliver  to  a  specific 
person. It requires positive act by viewer to look into somebody 
status which is his own privacy. If someone is seeing a whatsapp 
status than that person is invading/barging into the privacy of other 
person who has allegedly depicted his status. Thus it cannot be said 
that respondent no.2 somehow threatened or abused the applicant. It 
is a case where the applicant is hoodwinking the whole process, 

 
 
6|Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl) 9783 of 2023 
 
moreover the applicant has not mentioned on which dates these 
status were uploaded, the applicant is just using these random 
screenshot to file a frivolous case.” 
 
9. 
Hence, in the attending facts, the short question that falls for consideration 
of this Court is whether the contents of the affidavit filed before the High Court, 
as taken note of in the impugned order, constitutes an offence under Section 193 
IPC, as defined in Section 191 IPC?  
10. 
Section 191 IPC which defines the offence, reads as under :- 
“191. Giving false evidence.  Whoever, being legally bound by an 
oath or by an express provision of law to state the truth, or being 
bound by law to make a declaration upon any subject, makes any 
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to 
be false or does not believe to be true, is said to give false evidence. 
Explanation 1.— A statement is within the meaning of this section, 
whether it is made verbally or otherwise. 
 
Explanation 2.— A false statement as to the belief of the person 
attesting is within the meaning of this section, and a person may be 
guilty of giving false evidence by stating that he believes a thing 
which he does not believe, as well as by stating that he knows a thing 
which he does not know.” 
  
 
Section 193 IPC, under which the appellant is sought to be prosecuted is 
extracted below for reference.   
“193. Punishment For False Evidence. Whoever intentionally 
gives false evidence in any stage of a judicial proceeding, or 
fabricates false evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage 
of a judicial proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and 
shall also be liable to fine; and whoever intentionally gives or 
fabricates false evidence in any other case, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
Explanation 1. - A trial before a Court-martial is a judicial 
proceeding.  

 
 
7|Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl) 9783 of 2023 
 
Explanation 2. - An investigation directed by law preliminary to a 
proceeding before a Court of Justice, is a stage of a judicial 
proceeding, though that investigation may not take place before a 
Court of Justice.” 
  
11. 
Section 195(b)(1) of Cr.P.C. (relevant portion reproduced 
hereinbelow) provides that no Court shall take cognizance of an offence 
committed under Sections 193 to 196, 199, 200, 205-211; except on the 
complaint in writing of the Court or by an officer of the Court, duly 
authorized.  Section 340 mentions the procedure in respect of the 
prosecution as delineated under Section 195.  
“195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public 
servants, for offences against public justice and for offences 
relating to documents given in evidence.—(1) No Court shall take 
cognizance— 
(a)    …… 
(b) (i) of any offence punishable under any of the following 
sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), namely, sections 193 
to 196 (both inclusive), 199, 200, 205 to 211 (both inclusive) and 
228, when such offence is alleged to have been committed in, or in 
relation to, any proceeding in any Court, or 
(ii) ….. 
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit, or attempt to 
commit, or the abetment of, any offence specified in sub-clause (i) 
or sub-clause (ii)… 
(2) … 
(3) … 
(4) …”  
12. 
The proper approach in cases where Section 193 is in play, it has 
been  held by this Court in Dr. S.P. Kohli, Civil Surgeon, Ferozepur v. 
High Court of Haryana Through Registrar6 as under : 
 
6 (1979) 1 SCC 212 

 
 
8|Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl) 9783 of 2023 
 
“16. It is true that what the courts have to see before issuing the 
process against the accused is whether there is evidence in support 
of the allegations made by the complainant to justify the initiation of 
proceedings against the accused and not whether the evidence is 
sufficient to warrant his conviction, but this does not mean that the 
courts should not prima facie be of the opinion that there are 
sufficient and reasonable grounds for setting the machinery of 
criminal law in motion against the accused. The moment this guiding 
principle is overlooked, the prosecution degenerates itself into 
persecution which often is fraught with evil consequences.” 
                                                                     (Emphasis supplied) 
 
Referred to in Himanshu Kumar & Ors. v. State of Chhattisgarh & 
Ors.7 
 
13. 
When prosecution should be sanctioned under this Section by Courts has 
been expounded on by a Bench of three learned Judges in Chajoo Ram  v.  
Radhey Shyam & Anr.8  
“7. The prosecution for perjury should be sanctioned by courts only in 
those cases where the perjury appears to be deliberate and conscious 
and the conviction is reasonably probable or likely. No doubt giving of 
false evidence and filing false affidavits is an evil which must be 
effectively curbed with a strong hand but to start prosecution for perjury 
too readily and too frequently without due care and caution and on 
inconclusive and doubtful material defeats its very purpose. 
Prosecution should be ordered when it is considered expedient in the 
interests of justice to punish the delinquent and not merely because 
there is some inaccuracy in the statement which may be innocent or 
immaterial. There must be prima facie case of deliberate falsehood on 
a matter of substance and the court should be satisfied that there is 
reasonable foundation for the charge…” 
 
                                                                           (Emphasis supplied) 
 
 
Referred to in Himanshu Kumar (supra); Narendra Kumar Srivastava v. 
State of Bihar & Ors.9 
 
7 2022 SCC OnLine SC 884 
8 (1971) 1 SCC 774 
9 (2019) 3 SCC 318 

 
 
9|Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl) 9783 of 2023 
 
14. 
In this regard we may also notice the pronouncement in R.S. Sujatha v. 
State of Karnataka10, referred to in Aarish Asgar Qureshi v. Fareed Ahmad 
Qureshi11 wherein it was observed : 
“9. Both these judgments were referred to and relied upon with 
approval in R.S. Sujatha v. State of Karnataka [R.S. Sujatha v. State 
of Karnataka, (2011) 5 SCC 689 : (2011) 2 SCC (Cri) 757] (at paras 
15 and 16). This court, after setting down the law laid down in these 
two judgments concluded : (SCC pp. 694-95, para 18) 
 
“18. Thus, from the above, it is evident that the 
inquiry/contempt proceedings should be initiated by the court 
in exceptional circumstances where the court is of the opinion 
that perjury has been committed by a party deliberately to have 
some beneficial order from the court. There must be grounds 
of a nature higher than mere surmise or suspicion for initiating 
such proceedings. There must be distinct evidence of the 
commission of an offence by such a person as mere suspicion 
cannot bring home the charge of perjury. More so, the court 
has also to determine as on facts, whether it is expedient in the 
interest of justice to inquire into the offence which appears to 
have been committed.” 
                                                    (Emphasis supplied) 
15. 
 The three essential factors which can be said to be sine qua non for the 
application of Section 193 IPC as held in Bhima Razu Prasad v. State Rep. by 
Deputy Supdt. of Police, CBI/SPE/ACU-II12 are :- 
 
(1) false statement made on oath or in affidavits;  
 
(2) that such statements be made in a judicial proceeding; or  
 
(3)  such statement be made before an authority that has been expressly  
      deemed to be a ‘Court’. 
 
 
10 (2011) 5 SCC 689 
11 (2019) 18 SCC 172 
12(2021) 19 SCC 25 

 
 
10|Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl) 9783 of 2023 
 
16. 
What we may conclude from a perusal of the above-noticed judicial 
pronouncements is that:-  
(i)      The Court should be of the prima facie opinion that there exists 
sufficient and reasonable ground to initiate proceedings against the 
person who has allegedly made a false statement(s); 
(ii)    Such proceedings should be initiated when doing the same is 
“expedient in the interests of justice to punish the delinquent” and 
not merely because of inaccuracy in statements that may be 
innocent/immaterial; 
(iii) There should be “deliberate falsehood on a matter of 
substance”; 
(iv) The Court should be satisfied that there is a reasonable 
foundation for the charge, with distinct evidence and not mere 
suspicion; 
(v) Proceedings should be initiated in exceptional circumstances, 
for instance, when a party has perjured themselves to beneficial 
orders from the Court. 
17. 
The statement made by the appellant, that has been deemed to be befitting 
the offence of giving false evidence before the Court, which is known commonly 
as perjury, was more in the nature of denial of the statements made in the affidavits 
of the complainant herein.  

 
 
11|Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl) 9783 of 2023 
 
18. 
We are of the view that, in the present facts, a denial simpliciter cannot 
meet the threshold, as described in the judgments above, particularly when no 
malafide intention/deliberate attempt can be understood from the statement made 
by the appellant in the affidavit.  As has already been observed, mere suspicion or 
inaccurate statements do not attract the offence under the Section.  It cannot be 
disputed that the statements made in the affidavit were only to state his version of 
events and/or deny the version put forth by the complainant.   
19. 
We are also of the firm opinion that such statements do not make it 
expedient in the interest of justice, nor constitute exceptional circumstances in 
which such Sections may be invoked.  Given that these proceedings would 
constitute an offence, independent of the one for which the appellant is already 
facing trial, it cannot be unequivocally held that there was deliberate falsehood on 
a matter of substance.   
20. 
We find that at least three of the possible scenarios, as discussed supra, in 
which a court would be justified in invoking these powers on the face of it appear 
to be unmet, prosecution, therefore, would be unjust.  We say so for the reason 
that the respondent in her counter affidavit filed before this Court makes no 
particular allegation nor does she provide any of the material that was allegedly 
placed before the competent prosecuting authorities or the Court.  She only alleges 
untruth on the part of the appellant 8/12/2024stating that the Court was correct in 
initiating proceedings against him for making the false statement.  She further 
makes certain statements that fall outside the scope of the present adjudication 

 
 
12|Crl. Appeal a/o SLP (Crl) 9783 of 2023 
 
and pertain to the trial of the main offence pending before the court of competent 
jurisdiction.   
21. 
Consequent to the above discussion, we set aside the direction of the High 
Court of Uttarakhand in regard to registering a complaint against the present 
appellant.  Any proceedings arising therefrom shall stand quashed.  The appeal is, 
accordingly allowed.  Before parting with the matter, it stands clarified that the 
decision in this appeal shall have no bearing on the criminal case pending against 
the appellant which shall proceed on its own merits as per law.  
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
………….…………….J. 
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
…………………………J. 
(SANJAY KAROL) 
 
 
 
…………….……………J. 
(K.V. VISWANATHAN) 
Dated :  August 13, 2024; 
Place :   New Delhi.