2024 INSC 609
 
 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1691 OF 2023 
 
 
HUSSAINBHAI ASGARALI  
LOKHANDWALA 
 
   
 
 
 
   APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF GUJARAT     
          
 
 
RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
WITH 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1693-1695 OF 2023 
 
ASGARALI ONALI LOKHANDWALA  
 
   APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF GUJARAT  & ORS. 
 
 
 
RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
WITH 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1692 OF 2023 
 
HUSSAINI MITHIBOREWALA   
 
 
   APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
ASGARALI ONALI LOKHANDWALA & ORS. 
RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
Digitally signed by
satish kumar yadav
Date: 2024.08.14
17:58:54 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
J U D G M E N T 
UJJAL BHUYAN, J. 
1. 
 
This judgment will dispose of Criminal Appeal Nos. 1691 
of 2023, 1692 of 2023, 1693 of 2023, 1694 of 2023 and 1695 of 
2023. 
2. 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 1691 of 2023 arises out of 
SLP(Criminal) No. 7622 of 2016 filed by Hussainbhai Asgarali 
Lokhandwala (appellant herein). In this appeal, challenge has been 
made to the judgment and order dated 06.05.2016 passed by the 
High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad (‘High Court’ hereinafter) in 
Criminal Appeal No. 29 of 2007 whereby, though the High Court 
modified the judgment and order of the learned Additional 
Sessions Judge, Panchmahal at Godhra (‘trial court’ hereinafter) 
in Sessions Case No. 292 of 2001 by altering the conviction of the 
appellant from one under Section 304 Part I of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (IPC) to one under Section 304 Part II IPC but, 
sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment (RI) for five years 
while maintaining the sentence of fine. Be it stated that, by the 
same judgment and order, the High Court had similarly altered the 
conviction of the co-accused (co-appellant) – Asgarali Onali 
Lokhandwala but restricted the sentence of imprisonment to the 
period already undergone by him.  

3 
 
3. 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 1692 of 2023 has been filed by the 
informant-Husseni Mithiborewala against alteration of conviction 
of the two accused in Sessions Case No. 292 of 2001, i.e., the 
appellant-Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala and the co-accused 
Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala by the High Court from Section 304 
Part I IPC to Section 304 Part II IPC. 
4. 
 
Criminal Appeal Nos. 1693, 1694 and 1695 of 2023 
have been filed by Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala against the 
aforesaid judgment and order of the High Court in only partly 
allowing Criminal Appeal No. 29 of 2007 by altering the sentence 
but maintaining the conviction. Challenge has also been made to 
the aforesaid judgment and order of the High Court in dismissing 
Criminal Revision Application Nos. 294 of 2007 and 295 of 2007 
whereby the acquittal order of the trial court acquitting Hussaini 
Mithiborewala and others in Sessions Case No. 171 of 2004 has 
been upheld. 
5. 
 
All the related criminal appeals and criminal revision 
applications were disposed of by the High Court by the impugned 
judgment and order in the following terms:  
22. For the following reasons, the impugned 
judgment and order passed by the learned Addl. 
Sessions Judge, Panchmahal at Godhra in 

4 
 
Sessions Case No. 292 of 2001 dated 07.11.2006 
is modified to the extent hereunder: 
(A) The conviction imposed upon both original 
accused No. 1 & 2 u/s. 304 Part-I IPC is altered to 
one u/s. 304 Part-II IPC, without disturbing the 
order regarding fine and default sentence.  
(B) For conviction u/s. 304 Part-II IPC, original 
accused No. 1 is imposed the punishment of 
sentence for the period already undergone by him. 
However, the amount of fine deposited by him 
shall not be returned. The original accused No. 1 
is on bail and therefore, his bail bonds stand 
cancelled. 
(C) Insofar as original accused No. 2 is concerned, 
he is sentenced to undergo RI for five years, 
without disturbing the order regarding fine and 
default sentence imposed by the Court below for 
conviction u/s. 304 Part-I IPC. Original accused 
No. 2 is on bail. His bail bonds stand cancelled 
and he is directed to surrender to custody on or 
before 29th July, 2016 failing which appropriate 
action shall be taken to secure his arrest.  
(D) As regards the amount of fine, it is observed 
that original complainant shall be at liberty to 
withdraw the same but, if the same is not 
withdrawn, on or before 31st December, 2016, 
then the entire amount shall be utilized for legal 
aid purposes by the court below.  
22.1 Consequently, Criminal Appeal No. 29/2007 
stands partly allowed whereas, Criminal Appeal 
No. 45/2007 is dismissed. Criminal Revision 
Applications No. 35/2007, 182/2007, 294/2007 
and 295/2007 stand dismissed. 
 
6. 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 1691 of 2023, being the lead 
appeal, facts narrated therein (which is common to all the appeals) 
are referred to hereunder. 

5 
 
7. 
 
Onejaben 
is 
the 
daughter 
of 
Asgarali 
Onali 
Lokhandwala (accused No. 1) and was the wife of Abbasbhai, who 
is the son of Idrishbhai Fidaali Mithiborewala. On 07.11.2000, 
both husband and wife had come to Godhra alongwith their minor 
daughter to attend a marriage. Because of matrimonial dispute, 
the wife did not stay with her husband but came to the residence 
of her parents. At around 19:30 hours, husband Abbasbhai came 
to the residence of accused No. 1 Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala to 
take back his wife Onejaben. However, accused No. 1 refused to 
send his daughter alongwith Abbasbhai. This resulted in a heated 
exchange of words between accused No. 1 and Abbasbhai. On 
hearing the hue and cry, Arvaben, wife of the informant-Turabbhai 
Abdulhussain, came to the residence of accused No. 1. She asked 
accused No. 1 and Abbasbhai to stop quarreling. However, accused 
No. 1 pushed Arvaben, as a result of which she fell on the ground 
and sustained injuries on her hand. During this period, Idrishbhai 
Fidaali Mithiborewala and his other son i.e., brother of Abbasbhai, 
Husseni rushed to the residence of accused No. 1. At this stage, 
accused No. 1 caught hold of Idrishbhai Fidaali Mithiborewala and 
accused No. 2 Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala (son of accused 
No. 1) brought a knife and inflicted a knife blow on the stomach 
region of Idrishbhai Fidaali Mithiborewala who had to be 

6 
 
hospitalized because of the injuries sustained by him. In the 
course of his treatment, Idrishbhai Fidaali Mithiborewala 
succumbed to the injuries and died.  
7.1.  
In this connection, FIR was lodged before the Godhra 
police station, being I-C.R. No. 314/2000. In the course of 
investigation, both accused No. 1 and accused No. 2 were arrested. 
In connection with the same incident, a cross FIR was lodged by 
accused No. 1, being I-C.R. No. 315/2000, against the husband 
and in-laws of Onejaben.  
7.2.  
On completion of investigation, chargesheet was filed 
against the accused persons before the trial court. Being a sessions 
triable offence, the case was committed to the Court of Sessions 
where it was registered as Sessions Case No. 292 of 2001 
whereafter trial was initiated. In the trial, prosecution examined as 
many as 22 witnesses and also relied upon several documentary 
evidence. On conclusion of the evidence of the prosecution 
witnesses, statement of the accused were recorded under Section 
313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC). Thereafter, 
the trial court vide the judgment and order dated 07.11.2006 
convicted both the accused, i.e. Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala and 
Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala under Section 304 Part I IPC 

7 
 
 read with Sections 323 and 324 of the said Code. For the 
conviction under Section 304 Part I IPC, both the accused were 
sentenced to undergo RI for a period of five years and to pay a fine 
of Rs. 50,000.00 each with a default stipulation. It was clarified 
that out of total fine amount, an amount of Rs. 90,000.00 should 
be paid as compensation to the legal representatives of the 
deceased-Idrishbhai Fidaali Mithiborewala. For the conviction 
under Section 323 IPC, both the accused were sentenced to 
undergo RI for seven days and for the conviction under Section 
324 IPC, they were sentenced to undergo RI for two years. All the 
sentences were directed to run concurrently with the period of 
imprisonment already undergone by the accused, given a set off.  
7.3.  
In the related case arising out of I-C.R. No. 315/2000, 
Sessions Case No. 171 of 2004 came to be registered. Here, 
husband and in-laws of Onejaben were accused. On conclusion of 
the trial, all the accused in Sessions Case No. 171 of 2004 were 
acquitted by the trial court vide the judgment and order dated 
07.11.2006. 
8. 
 
We may mention that the judgment and order dated 
07.11.2006 passed by the trial court in Sessions Case No. 292 of 
2001 came to be challenged by the two accused Asgarali Onali 
Lokhandwala and Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala before the 

8 
 
High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 29/2007. In this appeal, the 
conviction of the accused by the trial court was challenged.  
8.1.  
Criminal Appeal No. 45 of 2007 was filed by the State 
seeking enhancement of sentence imposed on the two accused in 
Sessions Case No. 292 of 2001. 
8.2.  
Criminal Revision Application No. 35 of 2007 came to be 
filed before the High Court by the injured witness-Husseni 
Mithiborewala (as the original complainant had passed away in the 
interregnum) seeking conviction of the two accused Asgarali Onali 
Lokhandwala and Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala under 
Section 302 IPC instead of under Section 304 Part I IPC. 
8.3.  
Criminal Revision Application No. 182 of 2007 was 
registered suo-motu by the High Court on the issue of quantum of 
sentence in Sessions Case No. 292 of 2001. 
8.4.  
Criminal Revision Application No. 294 of 2007 was 
preferred by Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala against the judgment 
and order of the trial court dated 07.11.2006 passed in Sessions 
Case No. 171 of 2004 whereby accused No. 4 in Sessions Case               
No. 171/2004 Samimben Idrishbhai Mithiborewala was acquitted 
of all the charges framed against him under Sections 452, 427, 

9 
 
323, 324, 504 and 498A IPC read with Section 114 IPC and Section 
135 of the Bombay Police Act, 1951. 
8.5.  
Similarly, Criminal Revision Application No. 295/2007 
was filed by Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala against the judgment and 
order of the trial court dated 07.11.2006 passed in Sessions Case 
No. 171 of 2004 whereby accused Nos. 1 and 2 of that case 
Abbasbhai Idrishbhai Mithiborewala and Husseni @ Gopi 
Idrishbhai Mithiborewala were acquitted of all the charges framed 
against them under the aforesaid provisions of law. 
9. 
 
All the above criminal appeals and criminal revision 
applications were heard together by the High Court and by the 
judgment and order dated 06.05.2016, were disposed of in the 
manner as indicated in paragraph 5 above. In short, conviction of 
Asgarali 
Onali 
Lokhandwala 
and 
Hussainbhai 
Asgarali 
Lokhandwala was altered from one under Section 304 Part I IPC to 
one under Section 304 Part II IPC. While the sentence of Asgarali 
Onali Lokhandwala was modified to the period of incarceration 
already undergone by him, insofar Hussainbhai Asgarali 
Lokhandwala is concerned, his sentence was modified to five years. 
Consequently, all the other criminal appeals and criminal revision 
applications were dismissed. 

10 
 
10.   
Mr. Nikhil Goel, learned counsel for the appellant at the 
outset submits that the trial court was not justified in convicting 
the appellant under Section 304 Part-I IPC. Though the High Court 
had altered the conviction from one under Section 304 Part-I IPC 
to one under Section 304 Part-II IPC, it was not justified in 
sentencing the appellant to suffer RI for five years. According to 
the learned counsel, it is a clear case of acquittal.  
10.1.  
Learned counsel for the appellant has placed reliance 
on the evidence tendered by PW-1, PW-2, PW-3, PW-4 and PW-5, 
more particularly on the evidence tendered by PW-3. According to 
him, though they all claim to be eyewitness to the incident, they 
were interested witnesses. He submits that a dispassionate 
analysis of the evidence tendered by the aforesaid witnesses would 
clearly reveal that the appellant had acted in private defense.  It 
was the deceased and the others who were the aggressors. This 
aspect was overlooked by the High Court while altering the 
conviction.  In support of his submissions, as regards private 
defense, learned counsel has relied upon a decision of this Court 
reported in Sukumaran vs. State1.  He finally submits that Criminal 
 
1 (2019) 15 SCC 117 

11 
 
Appeal No. 1691 of 2023 may be allowed and conviction and 
sentence of the appellant may be set aside.  
10.2.  
Learned counsel for the appellant has also referred to 
the evidence of PW-16, PW-17 and PW-21 to contend that it was 
the informant and his family members who were the aggressors. 
Three members of the appellant’s family had suffered knife and 
lathi injuries at the hands of the informant and his family 
members. As a matter of fact, there was recovery of lathi and knife 
from PW-3 and PW-5. It has also come on record that the glass 
door of the appellant’s house was shattered due to stone pelting 
and that blood of both the appellant and the informant was found 
inside the residence of the appellant. Further, appellant had called 
the police twice citing apprehension of being assaulted by the 
family of his brother-in-law Abbasbhai as they were more in 
number. In order to defend himself and his father, appellant had 
acted in  self-defense by inflicting injuries on the person of the 
deceased and PW-5 (only one blow each). Relying on the decision 
of this Court in the case of Sukumaran (supra), learned counsel 
submits that appellant had invoked his right to self-defense which 
aspect had been overlooked by both the courts below. 
11.  
Ms. Archana Pathak Dave, learned counsel appearing 
for the State of Gujarat on the other hand supports the impugned 

12 
 
order and judgment. On a query by the Court, she submits that 
State has not filed any appeal against the altered conviction and 
modified sentence of accused No.1 Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala 
and of accused No.2 Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala (appellant 
herein). Contending that there is no merit in the appeal, she seeks 
dismissal of the same. 
12.  
On the other hand, Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned senior 
counsel appearing for the informant, has opposed the prayer made 
in Criminal Appeal No.1691 of 2023 and has further prayed that 
Criminal Appeal No. 1692 of 2023 filed by the informant may be 
allowed. According to her, it is a clear case of murder committed 
by both the accused resulting in the death of Idrishbhai Fidaali 
Mithiborewala. While the trial court was not justified in only 
convicting the two accused persons under Section 304 Part-I IPC, 
the High Court committed further error by altering the conviction 
from one under Section 304 Part-I IPC to one under Section 304 
Part-II IPC. Referring to the evidence tendered by PW-1 and the 
other prosecution witnesses as well as the cross-examination of 
PW-18, she submits that the clear picture which emerges 
therefrom is that it was a brutal assault on the deceased by the 
two accused resulting in his death and hence a case of murder 
under Section 302 IPC is made out. She further submits that this 

13 
 
Court should interfere with the altered conviction as well as the 
modified sentence imposed by the High Court and thereafter 
suitably convict the appellant and the other co-accused. 
13.  
Submissions made by the learned counsel for the 
parties have received the due consideration of the Court.  
14.  
To appreciate the rival submissions, let us analyse the 
evidence of the material witnesses.  
15.  
PW-1 is Turabbhai. In his examination-in-chief, he 
stated that his house and the house of Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala 
are situated just opposite to each other in the same colony. 
Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala is the father-in-law of the son of 
Idrishbhai Fidali Mithiborewala who is his brother-in-law. The 
house of Idrishbhai Fidali Mithiborewala is also situated opposite 
to the house of PW-1. He stated that Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala 
has one son Hussain and daughter Oneja. Oneja was married to 
the son of his brother-in-law Idrishbhai Fidali Mithiborewala by 
the name of Abbasbhai. 
15.1.  
Oneja and Abbasbhai i.e. son of Idrishbhai were 
residing at Ahmedabad. Marriage of the niece of Idrishbhai was 
fixed on 07.11.2000 in the residence of Sakirabai, the maternal 

14 
 
aunt of Abbasbhai. Abbasbhai and Oneja came to attend that 
marriage from Ahmedabad. 
15.2.  
On 07.11.2000, Abbasbhai came to the residence of his 
father-in-law Asgarali Lokhandwala to call his wife Oneja. Asgarali 
refused to send his daughter with Abbasbhai. Abbasbhai came out 
of the house and in a loud voice was heard saying that Oneja 
should be sent with him.  
15.3.  
PW-1 was relaxing on his swing in the verandah when 
he heard a commotion in the house of Asgarali Lokhandwala. His 
wife then went to the house of Asgarali to impress upon the two 
not to quarrel. However, Asgarali pushed his wife as a result of 
which she fell down. PW-1 and his son Akil went to the residence 
of Asgarali from where son Akil took his mother to the dispensary. 
15.4.  
PW-1 noticed that while Asgarali was holding the arms 
of his brother-in-law Idrishbhai, Hussain came and stabbed in the 
stomach portion of Idrishbhai by a knife. At that time, son of 
Idrishbhai, Gopi @ Husseni also arrived. Hussain, son of Asgarali 
stabbed Gopi @ Husseni too by that knife. On hearing the 
commotion, Kutubuddin Jinwala, a neighbour, came from the 
opposite house. Thereafter, Asgarali and Hussain went inside the 
house. Idrishbhai and his son Gopi also went to their house. Gopi 

15 
 
was taken to the civil hospital by a neighbour. Idrishbhai was also 
taken to the civil hospital by a neighbour in his sumo. 
15.5.  
Idrishbhai was declared dead in the hospital. As the 
injury of Gopi @ Husseni was serious, the doctor sent him to a 
private dispensary whereafter he was shifted to a hospital at 
Vadodara. 
15.6.  
PW-1 stated that after the incident, he lodged a 
complaint before the police. 
15.7.  
As to his wife, he stated that since she fell down, she 
had fractured her left hand and also got a head injury. He further 
stated that the incident happened between seven to half past seven 
in the evening. He identified the knife used by Hussain (Ex.10). 
15.8.  
In his cross-examination, he stated that the house of 
Asgarali was surrounded by a compound wall of six feet height. 
Therefore, he could not see what was happening inside the house. 
Referring to the knife, he stated that it was made from hex blade. 
Such type of knives are used to cut vegetables in the house. 
Though he had identified the knife, he had not placed an 
identification mark thereon. 
16.  
Arvaben is PW-2. She is the wife of PW-1. In her 
evidence, she stated that Idrishbhai was her brother and his son 

16 
 
Abbasbhai was her nephew. Their house is at Bungalow No. 3 of 
her society. Marriage of Abbasbhai was solemnized with Oneja, 
daughter of Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala whose house is Bungalow 
No. 6, opposite to the house of PW-2. Marriage of Abbasbhai and 
Oneja was solemnized about five years back. They have one 
daughter named Natasha. Because of his business, Abbasbhai was 
residing at Ahmedabad. Oneja was also residing with him at 
Ahmedabad. 
16.1.  
Sakirabai is the maternal aunt of Abbasbhai. Merriam 
is the daughter of Sakirabai. Her marriage was scheduled on 
07.11.2000. Abbasbhai and Oneja came to attend the marriage 
from Ahmedabad alongwith their daughter four days prior to the 
marriage. 
16.2.  
PW-2 stated that Abbasbhai went to the residence of 
Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala to take the keys in the evening of the 
marriage day i.e. 07.11.2000. An altercation took place between 
father-in-law 
Asgarali 
Onali 
Lokhandwala 
and 
son-in-law 
Abbasbhai. On hearing the hue and cry, she went to the house of 
Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala. At that stage, Idrishbhai and his 
other son Gopi @ Husseni also came there. Asgarali Onali 
Lokhandwala pushed PW-2 whereafter she fell down. Husband of  

17 
 
PW-2 i.e. PW-1 and her son came there and lifted her. As she stood 
up, she saw Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala holding her brother 
Idrishbhai by the arms. Since PW-2 was having much pain, she 
was taken away from the scene by her son to the dispensary where 
it was detected that she had fractured her left hand. 
16.3.  
In the morning, her husband told her that her brother 
Idrishbhai was murdered and that her nephew Gopi @ Husseni 
was injured for which he was taken to Vadodara for treatment. 
16.4.  
In her cross-examination, PW-2 stated that there was 
matrimonial dispute between Abbasbhai and Oneja prior to the 
incident but neither she nor any member of her family including 
her husband intervened. She further stated that when altercation 
took place between father-in-law and son-in-law, there was no 
loud outcry. 
17.  
Abbas, son of Idrishbhai Fidaali Mithiborewala, deposed 
as PW-3. In his examination-in-chief, he stated that he had one 
more brother by the name of Husseni @ Gopi and one sister by the 
name of Jenamben. He was doing business in wood for which he 
used to stay at Ahmedabad though his original home is at Godhra. 
He used to frequently visit Godhra during festivals where other 
family members were residing. His marriage with Oneja was 

18 
 
solemnized in the year 1997. Oneja was also residing with him at 
Ahmedabad. They had one minor daughter by the name of 
Natasha. 
17.1.  
PW-3 stated that his conjugal life was going on well. 
When he came to Godhra from Ahmedabad, his wife also 
accompanied him. Though she came to the residence of PW-3, she 
left after 10 minutes and went to the residence of her father 
Asgarali to stay. 
17.2.  
Wedding of the daughter of the maternal aunt of PW-3, 
Merriam was on 07.11.2000. To attend the marriage, PW-3 
alongwith his wife and daughter came to Godhra from Ahmedabad 
on 03.01.2000. Though they came to the house of PW-3 in Haidari 
society, wife of PW-3 Oneja stayed there for only about 10 minutes 
and went to her father’s house alongwith Natasha. While PW-3 was 
residing in his house, his wife was living in her parental home. 
17.3.  
On the wedding day, PW-3 called Oneja over phone at 
10’o clock in the morning whereafter she came to the residence of 
PW-3 at 3’o clock in the afternoon. From there, they went to the 
wedding keeping their daughter Natasha in the residence of the in-
laws of PW-3 i.e. with the parents of Oneja. In the wedding, before 
PW-3 could finish his meal, his wife Oneja left the wedding venue 

19 
 
for her home saying that her daughter Natasha was at home. After 
the wedding, PW-3 came to his house at 6’o clock in the evening 
whereater he called his wife over phone telling her to come to his 
home but she refused to come. At this stage, PW-3 sent his maid 
Mangliben to the residence of Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala (his 
father-in-law) to get the keys of the cupboard of their Ahmedabad 
house from his wife. Mangliben had gone around 7’o clock in the 
evening. She came back and told PW-3 that Oneja had refused to 
handover the keys to her. 
17.4.  
Thereafter, PW-3 went to the residence of Asgarali Onali 
Lokhandwala and from the verandah he told his wife Oneja that 
she should come home alongwith him but she refused. At this, PW-
3 told her that if she was not coming then atleast she should 
handover the keys of the cupboard to him. This also she refused. 
17.5.  
At that time, father-in-law of PW-3, Asgarali and his son 
Hussain came out and told PW-3 that he was very much harassing 
Oneja. According to PW-3, they were very angry and sensing that 
a quarrel would break out, he came out of their compound onto 
the road. His father-in-law and brother-in-law followed him to the 
road where an altercation took place. Hearing the hue and cry, his 
aunt Arvaben who was residing just in the opposite house came to 
the scene; so also his father and younger brother Husseni @ Gopi. 

20 
 
17.6.  
Arvaben told Asgarali that instead of quarreling, he 
should give them the keys of the cupboard. Asgarali then pushed 
Arvaben as a result of which she fell down. On hearing the 
commotion, her husband Turabbhai and son Akil came to the 
scene. Father of PW-3 i.e. Idrishbhai also came there. 
17.7.  
It was at that stage that Asgarali caught hold of the 
father of PW-3, Idrishbhai Fidaali Mithiborewala, by his arms from 
behind and told his son (brother-in-law of PW-3) that he was 
harassing them a lot and that he should be finished. Then, 
Hussain stabbed Idrishbhai in his stomach with a knife which he 
was carrying. As the brother of PW-3, Gopi tried to intervene, 
Hussain also stabbed him in his stomach with that knife. 
17.8.  
Hearing the hue and cry, Kutubuddin Jinwala, a 
neighbour, rushed out of the opposite compound and when he 
came, Asgarali and his son Hussain walked back towards their 
house. 
17.9.  
As his father and brother suffered knife injuries, PW-3, 
Kutubuddin and Turabbhai brought them to their house 
whereafter they were taken to the civil hospital where father of PW-
3 was declared dead. 

21 
 
17.10. 
PW-3 identified the knife (Ex. 10) in court which was 
used by the appellant in the incident.  
17.11. 
In his cross-examination, PW-3 stated that when he had 
called Oneja over phone, she refused to come and had put the 
phone down. However, he did not ask the reason as to why she 
was refusing to come. Though the house of Asgarali was just about 
200 footsteps away, PW-3 neither made a phone call nor went to 
her house prior to the incident when he had gone to collect the 
keys of the cupboard. 
17.12. 
PW-3 further stated that though he had carried his 
injured father back home, there were no blood stains on his cloth; 
neither were his hands blood stained though blood was all over his 
father. 
17.13. 
About the incident, PW-3 stated that after he had 
entered into the compound of Asgarali, he had climbed about five 
staircases onto the verandah. He did not ring the doorbell but 
shouted once. Oneja refused to go with him. Instead of going home, 
he came out of the compound and shouted loudly. He admitted 
that in the entire incident, he did not suffer any injury at all. 
18.  
Husseni @ Gopi is PW-5. In his deposition, he stated 
that Abbas was his brother. For the marriage of Merriam on 

22 
 
07.11.2000, Abbas alongwith his wife Oneja and their daughter 
had come to Ahmedabad but Oneja stayed in her father's house 
alongwith the daughter Natasha. Abbas had told his father-in-law 
on 07.11.2000 over phone to send Oneja to his house. However, 
Oneja refused. Thereafter, Abbas sent his maid Mangliben to the 
residence of Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala after 06:00 PM to bring 
back the keys of the cupboard of their Ahmedabad house. The 
maid came back and told that Oneja had refused to handover the 
keys. Thereafter, Abbas went to the residence of his father-in-law 
Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala to get the keys of the cupboard.           
PW-5 stated that after some time, he heard a loud outcry from the 
residence of Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala. On hearing the hue and 
cry, father of PW-5 Idrishbhai Fidaali Mithiborewala went to the 
residence of Asgarali Onali Lokhandwala. PW-5 followed behind 
his father. At around the same time, Arvaben also arrived at the 
scene and sought to pacify the parties. Asgarali Onali 
Lokhandwala pushed Arvaben as a result of which she fell down. 
No sooner did his father reached the place then Asgarali said that 
this Idrishbhai had come and that he should be beaten. Saying so, 
he held the arms of Idrishbhai from behind and instructed his son 
Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala to finish him off. It was then 
that Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala stabbed Idrishbhai in his 

23 
 
stomach by a knife which he was carrying. As PW-5 tried to 
intervene in order to save his father, he was also stabbed on the 
left part of his stomach by Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala by 
the same knife. 
18.1.  
In his cross-examination, PW-5 stated that he came to 
know from his relatives that his father Idrishbhai had died around 
8’o clock in the night of 07.11.2000. This he came to know on the 
fourth day of the incident. He denied the suggestion that he, his 
brother and father were taunting and harassing Oneja to bring 
dowry. 
19.  
Dr. Ramesh Chandra deposed as PW-12. He had 
conducted 
the 
postmortem 
examination 
of 
the 
deceased 
Idrishbhai. He deposed about the external injuries sustained by 
the deceased. There was one stab wound on the left side of the 
stomach at a distance of about 1 inch from the navel. The size of 
the wound was 2 inches long and 1.5 inches wide. It was deep till 
the abdominal cavity. It was a sharp wound with blood coming out 
therefrom. The injury was ante-mortem and was caused by a sharp 
weapon. 
20.  
PW-22 Rayjibhai Dahyabhai Solanki is the investigating 
officer who had investigated the case and had submitted the 

24 
 
chargesheet. In his examination-in-chief, he stated that on 
09.11.2000, 
accused 
Hussainbhai 
Asgarali 
Lokhandwala 
expressed willingness to take the police to the place of occurrence 
for recovery of the knife used by him. Accordingly, he alongwith 
the panchas were taken in a police van to the place of crime. 
Accused Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala led the police and the 
panchas to the kitchen of his house and from one of the drawers 
in the kitchen, he took out a knife saying that the same was used 
for stabbing the deceased and PW-5. That knife was seized and 
sealed in the presence of the panchas. 
20.1.  
PW-22 was subjected to a long cross-examination. 
However, what is of relevance is what he stated in his cross-
examination. He stated that the glass pane of the door of the house 
of the accused was found broken and pieces of glass were lying in 
the compound. That apart, he stated that there was blood 
splattered in the compound which was of both the parties. Though 
the blood belonged to different persons, only the sample of the 
accused persons was taken. That apart, he had seized one stick 
from Abbasbhai and one knife from Husseni @ Gopi. 
20.2.  
PW-22 further stated that though the age certificate of 
the accused Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala was not obtained 

25 
 
but it was a fact that he was a student then, studying in the            
12th standard. 
21.  
On a cumulative analysis of the evidence of the above 
prosecution witnesses, the picture which emerges is that there was 
a matrimonial dispute between Oneja and her husband Abbas. 
Despite that they had come home from Ahmedabad on 07.11.2000 
for attending the marriage of Merriam. However, because of the 
strained relationship, Oneja did not stay with Abbasbhai in his 
residence. Instead, she alongwith her daughter Natasha decided to 
stay in her father’s house which was in the close vicinity of the 
residence of her husband Abbas. On that fateful day, despite 
receiving calls from her husband, Oneja refused to come to his 
house. A maid was sent to bring back the keys of the cupboard of 
the Ahmedabad house but Oneja refused to handover the keys to 
the maid. It was then that Abbasbhai went to the residence of his 
father-in-law and demanded from his wife that the keys of the 
cupboard should be handed over to him. At this, pandemonium 
broke out resulting in a hue and cry as Oneja’s father Asgarali 
accused Abbasbhai of harassing his daughter. When aunt Arvaben 
went to the residence of Asgarali to diffuse the situation, she was 
pushed back by Asgarali as a result of which she fell down and 
suffered injuries. Idrishbhai went to the place of occurrence 

26 
 
followed by PW-5. It appears that the very sight of Idrishbhai flared 
up the situation and an enraged Asgarali caught hold of his 
(Idrishbhai’s) arms from behind, calling upon his son Hussain to 
finish him off. It has come on record that while asking his son to 
finish off Idrishbhai, Asgarali had said that these people (referring 
to Idrishbhai and his son Abbasbhai) had caused lot of distress to 
them. Therefore, he should be finished off. It was at that stage that 
Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala, son of Asgarali, brought a 
kitchen knife from inside the house and fatally stabbed Idrishbhai. 
When PW-5 sought to intervene, he was also stabbed in the 
stomach by Hussainbhai as he had stabbed Idrishbhai. That apart, 
there also appears to be pelting of stones aimed at the glass door 
of the house of Asgarali shattering the glass pane besides scuffle 
between the parties.  
22.  
The trial court had convicted Asgarali and Hussainbhai 
under Section 304 Part I IPC as well as under Sections 323 and 
324 thereof. On appeal, the High Court by the impugned judgment 
and order altered the conviction of both Asgarali and Hussainbhai 
from one under Section 304 Part I IPC to one under Section 304 
Part II IPC. While the sentence of Asgarali was modified to the 
period of incarceration already undergone by him, that of 
Hussainbhai was modified to five years. 

27 
 
23.  
In so far Hussainbhai is concerned, what is discernible 
from the record is that he was a young man of 18 years of age at 
the time of the incident studying in Class 12. There was a history 
of matrimonial dispute between his sister and brother-in-law 
Abbasbhai. It is natural for a young man to be emotionally upset 
to see his sister allegedly ill-treated by her in-laws and when the 
deceased and Abbasbhai came to their residence leading to the 
ruckus, it is not difficult to visualize the state of mind of 
Hussainbhai as well of his father Asgarali. The tension was 
building up since morning as Abbasbhai was first insisting that 
his wife Oneja should come to his house and then insisting on the 
cupboard key of the Ahmedabad house to be handed over to him. 
It is important to note that the incident had taken place inside the 
residence of Asgarali (and then spilling over onto the street infront) 
and not in the residence of Idrishbhai. It is quite possible that as 
a young man, Hussainbhai was overcome by emotion which led 
him to physically attack the deceased and his son (brother-in-law). 
The fact that the incident was not premeditated is buttressed by 
the happening thereof inside the residence of Asgarali. Besides 
there was only a stab wound each on the stomach of the deceased 
and PW-5. The knife was not directed by Hussainbhai at the upper 
portion of the bodies of the deceased and PW-5.  

28 
 
24.  
We are in agreement with the view taken by the High 
Court that the entire incident had occurred in the heat of the 
moment and that neither party could control their anger which 
ultimately resulted into the fateful incident. 
25.  
That being the position and since the High Court had 
brought down the charge from Section 304 Part I IPC to Section 
304 II IPC, we feel that it would be in the interest of justice if the 
sentence of the appellant Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala is 
further modified to the period of incarceration already undergone 
by him while maintaining the conviction. 
26.  
Much water has flown down the river by this time. The 
unfortunate incident leading to the loss of a precious life and 
sustaining of injuries by a couple of others had happened in a spur 
of the moment. Therefore, while concurring with the impugned 
judgment of the High Court dated 06.05.2016 insofar alteration of 
the conviction is concerned, we are of the view that the sentence 
imposed upon the appellant should be altered to the period of 
incarceration already undergone by him. That being the position, 
it is not necessary to delve into and elaborate upon the other 
contentions raised at the Bar.  

29 
 
27.  
Consequently, Criminal Appeal No. 1691 of 2023 is 
partly allowed. While maintaining the conviction of the appellant 
Hussainbhai Asgarali Lokhandwala under Section 304 Part II IPC, 
his sentence is modified to the period already undergone by him. 
All the other criminal appeals are, however, dismissed. 
28.  
In view of the above, appellant Hussainbhai Asgarali 
Lokhandwala is directed to be released forthwith, if his detention 
is not required in any other case. 
 
.………………………………J 
                                                            [ABHAY S. OKA] 
 
 
 
.………………………………J 
    [UJJAL BHUYAN] 
 
NEW DELHI;  
AUGUST 14, 2024.