2024 INSC 610
1 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.          OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP(Criminal) No. 5171 of 2024) 
 
 
 
GAUTAM KUMAR DAS 
 
                  …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
NCT OF DELHI AND OTHERS  
 
…RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeal challenges the final judgment and 
order dated 3rd April 2024 passed by a Division Bench of the 
High Court of Delhi in Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 416 of 2024, 
whereby the High Court disposed of the petition filed by the 
appellant, seeking to obtain the custody of his minor 
daughter from the alleged unlawful custody of respondent 
Nos. 5 and 6 (sisters-in-law of the appellant), by granting 
liberty to the parties to approach the family court of 
competent jurisdiction for seeking custody of the child in 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.08.20
13:01:08 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
question. 
3. 
The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeal are 
as given below:  
3.1 On 27th January 2012, the appellant married one Ms. 
Subrata Das and out of the wedlock two children were born – 
the first child, Master Divyanshu Das, on 11th September 
2013, and the second child, Ms./Baby Sugandha Das, on 
20th April 2021.  
3.2 When their daughter was only 10 days old, the 
appellant unfortunately lost his wife on 30th April 2021, due 
to Covid-19 infection. Shortly thereafter tragedy struck the 
appellant once again as he lost his father on 13th May 2021, 
due to Covid-19 infection.  
3.3 Grieving the loss of his loved ones, the appellant, took 
help from respondent No. 5, who is his sister-in-law, in 
taking care of his children. The appellant handed over the 
custody 
of 
his 
children 
to 
his 
sister-in-law 
as 
an 
interim/stop-gap solution, to see through the difficult period 
that he was undergoing on account of loss of his wife and 
father.  
3.4 After some time, the custody of the minor son was given 

3 
back to the appellant, but the custody of the minor daughter 
was sought to be kept by respondent No. 5 on the ground 
that the girl child was still quite young and would require the 
care and attention of a female for few more months. The 
custody of the minor daughter, as a result, continued to be 
with respondent No. 5.  
3.5 Respondent No. 5, thereafter, started refusing to let the 
appellant meet the minor daughter on one pretext or the 
other. She also took the minor daughter to her maternal 
home at Belda, West Bengal, where custody of the minor 
daughter was handed over to respondent No. 6. 
3.6 The appellant, in the meanwhile, married again in order 
to provide his children with the care and attention of a 
female. He again approached respondent No. 5 to get back 
the custody of his minor daughter, but the same was refused 
again. 
3.7 Aggrieved by the sequence of events, the appellant on 
7th July 2023, filed a case under Section 10 of the Guardians 
and Wards Act, 1890, being Case No. GP/71/2023 seeking 
custody of his minor daughter. The appellant also filed two 
complaints, one in Delhi and the other one in Belda, West 

4 
Bengal, but no action was taken on them.  
3.8 The appellant, thereafter, on 30th January 2024, filed a 
Writ Petition before the High Court of Delhi being W.P. (Crl.) 
No. 416 of 2024 seeking custody of his minor daughter from 
respondents Nos. 5 and 6. 
3.9 Pursuant to the order of the High Court dated 7th 
February 2024, the appellant withdrew his case under the 
Guardians and Wards Act. The Division Bench of the High 
Court, thereafter, interacted with the parties and referred the 
matter to mediation to find out a workable solution. Taking 
into consideration the report of the mediator, the Division 
Bench arrived at an interim arrangement for visitation rights. 
However, vide final judgment and order, the High Court 
disposed of the writ petition by granting liberty to the parties 
to approach the family court of competent jurisdiction.  
3.10 Aggrieved thereby, the appellant approached this Court. 
Vide order dated 16th April 2024, this Court issued notice 
and directed that the minor daughter shall remain in Delhi. 
Vide order dated17th May 2024, this Court, on a prima facie 
consideration of the facts, was of the view that the appellant 
has valid grounds to claim the custody of his minor 

5 
daughter. However, before arriving at a final conclusion, this 
Court thought it fit to give proper opportunity to the 
appellant to win over the love and affection of his minor 
daughter and accordingly gave visitation rights to the 
appellant, his second wife and his son. The interim 
arrangement arrived at by this Court has continued till 
today. 
4. 
We have heard Shri Saurav Agrawal, learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellant and Shri Hirein Sharma, 
learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent Nos. 5 
and 6. 
5. 
Shri Agrawal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
the appellant submitted that the High Court has grossly 
erred in dismissing the petition. He submitted that the 
appellant is the only surviving biological parent of the minor 
daughter Sugandha Das.  He submitted that the appellant is 
a natural guardian of the minor child Sugandha Das, 
whereas respondent Nos. 5 and 6 are neither the legal 
guardian nor have any legal right or authority over the minor 
girl Sugandha Das.  He further submitted that the appellant, 
who is a natural guardian, cannot be made to run from pillar 

6 
to post to seek custody of his own child.  He submitted that 
the view taken by the High Court is contrary to the law laid 
down by this Court in the case of Tejaswini Gaud and 
Others v. Shekhar Jagdish Prasad Tewari and Others1. 
6. 
Shri Agrawal further submitted that it is also in the 
interest of the minor child Sugandha Das to stay with her 
father who is stationed in Delhi whereas respondent Nos. 5 
and 6 are residing in a small village Belda in West Bengal.  
He submitted that the minor child Sugandha Das would also 
be deprived of the company of her biological brother. 
7. 
Shri 
Agrawal, 
relying 
on 
various 
photographs, 
submitted that the minor child Sugandha Das has gelled well 
with the appellant, his son and his wife.  The learned counsel 
therefore pressed for quashing and setting aside of the 
impugned order passed by the High Court with a direction to 
the respondents to immediately hand over the custody of the 
minor child Sugandha Das to the appellant. 
8. 
Shri Sharma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
respondent Nos. 5 and 6 submitted that the appellant, 
having withdrawn the petition filed under the Guardian and 
 
1 (2019) 7 SCC 42 : 2019 INSC 630 

7 
Wards Act, 1890, could not have filed a habeas corpus 
petition before the High Court.  It is submitted that the 
appellant and his family members were ill-treating Late Ms. 
Subrata Das, first wife of the appellant.  It is submitted that 
it is the appellant who had handed over the custody of the 
minor child Sugandha Das voluntarily to respondent Nos. 5 
and 6. In the written submissions, various other allegations 
have also been made by respondent Nos. 5 and 6 against the 
appellant.  The learned counsel has relied on the judgments 
of this Court in the cases of Dr. (Mrs.) Veena Kapoor v. Shri 
Varinder Kumar Kapoor2, Nirmala v. Kulwant Singh and 
Others3 and Athar Hussain v. Syed Siraj Ahmed and 
Others4. 
9. 
Before we come to the facts of the present case, it would 
be apposite to refer to the observations of this Court in the 
case of Tejaswini Gaud (supra), wherein this Court was 
considering almost similar facts as have arisen in the present 
case. In the said case also, after the marriage, the wife was 
detected with breast cancer and the husband had fallen ill 
with Tuberculosis Meningitis and Pulmonary Tuberculosis.  
 
2 (1981) 3 SCC 92 
3 2024 SCC OnLine 758 : 2024 INSC 370 
4 (2010) 2 SCC 654 : 2010 INSC 7 

8 
While the husband was undergoing treatment, one of the 
sisters of the wife and her husband took the minor child 
Shikha and her ailing mother to their residence at Mumbai.  
During the treatment, the wife succumbed to her illness.  The 
minor child continued to be in the custody of the sister of the 
wife and her husband. Since the father was denied the 
custody of the minor child, he approached the High Court by 
way of writ petition seeking writ of habeas corpus.  The High 
Court allowed the petition and directed the custody of the 
minor child to be handed over to the husband.  Being 
aggrieved thereby, the sister of the wife and her husband 
approached this Court.  Before this Court, an objection was 
taken to the very tenability of the petition of habeas corpus 
filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.  Rejecting 
the said argument, this Court observed thus: 
“21. In the present case, the appellants are the 
sisters and brother of the mother Zelam who do not 
have any authority of law to have the custody of the 
minor child. Whereas as per Section 6 of the Hindu 
Minority and Guardianship Act, the first respondent 
father is a natural guardian of the minor child and 
is having the legal right to claim the custody of the 
child. The entitlement of father to the custody of 
child is not disputed and the child being a minor 
aged 1½ years cannot express its intelligent 
preferences. Hence, in our considered view, in the 
facts and circumstances of this case, the father, 

9 
being the natural guardian, was justified in 
invoking the extraordinary remedy seeking custody 
of the child under Article 226 of the Constitution of 
India.” 
 
 
10. In 
the 
said 
case, 
after 
considering 
the 
earlier 
pronouncements, this Court further observed thus: 
“34. As observed in Rosy Jacob [Rosy Jacob v. Jacob 
A. Chakramakkal, (1973) 1 SCC 840] earlier, the 
father's fitness has to be considered, determined 
and weighed predominantly in terms of the welfare 
of his minor children in the context of all the 
relevant circumstances. The welfare of the child 
shall include various factors like ethical upbringing, 
economic well being of the guardian, child's 
ordinary comfort, contentment, health, education, 
etc. The child Shikha lost her mother when she was 
just fourteen months and is now being deprived 
from the love of her father for no valid reason. As 
pointed out by the High Court, the father is a highly 
educated person and is working in a reputed 
position. His economic condition is stable. 
35. The welfare of the child has to be determined 
owing to the facts and circumstances of each case 
and the Court cannot take a pedantic approach. In 
the present case, the first respondent has neither 
abandoned the child nor has deprived the child of a 
right to his love and affection. The circumstances 
were such that due to illness of the parents, the 
appellants had to take care of the child for some 
time. Merely because, the appellants being the 
relatives took care of the child for some time, they 
cannot retain the custody of the child. It is not the 
case of the appellants that the first respondent is 
unfit to take care of the child except contending that 
he has no female support to take care of the child. 
The first respondent is fully recovered from his 
illness and is now healthy and having the support of 
his mother and is able to take care of the child.” 

10 
11. Like the facts in the case of Tejaswini Gaud (supra), 
the facts in the present case are also peculiar. The 
appellant’s wife died due to COVID infection and as such, he 
was forced to give the custody of the minor child Sugandha 
Das to respondent Nos. 5 and 6, who are the sisters of the 
deceased wife.  Looking at the very tender age of the child 
Sugandha Das at that time, the appellant could not have 
looked after her. However, the appellant was looking after his 
son Divyanshu Das, who was relatively older. Subsequently, 
the appellant remarried. Now, he and his wife can very well 
look after the minor girl Sugandha Das.  A perusal of the 
photographs placed on record would also reveal that 
pursuant to the visitation rights granted by the High Court 
and this Court, the minor child has gelled well with the 
family and the family of four appears to be happy. 
12. Insofar as the fitness of the appellant is concerned, he 
is well educated and currently employed as Assistant General 
Manager 
(Class 
A 
Officer) 
in 
Central 
Warehousing 
Corporation, Delhi.  The appellant’s residence is also in Delhi 
whereas respondent No. 6 to whom the custody of the minor 
child was handed over to by respondent No. 5 is residing at a 

11 
remote village in West Bengal.  Apart from taking care of his 
children, the appellant can very well provide the best of the 
education facilities to his children. The child Sugandha Das, 
who lost her mother at tender age, cannot be deprived of the 
company of her father and natural brother.  At the relevant 
time, the appellant had no other option but to look upon the 
sisters of his deceased wife to nurture his infant child. 
13. In our opinion, merely because of the unfortunate 
circumstances faced by the appellant as a result of which, 
respondent Nos. 5 and 6 were given the temporary custody of 
the minor child Sugandha Das and only because they looked 
after her for few years, the same cannot be a ground to deny 
the custody of the minor child to the appellant, who is her 
only natural guardian. 
14. Insofar as the allegations made against the appellant by 
respondent Nos. 5 and 6 are concerned, it appears that they 
have been made only as an afterthought, and especially after 
the appellant started asserting his claim for the custody of 
his minor daughter Sugandha Das.  Insofar as the judgments 
of this Court on which respondent Nos. 5 and 6 have relied 
upon, we can only say that there cannot be any straight-

12 
jacket formula in the matters of custody. 
15. Recently, this Court, in the case of Nirmala (supra) in 
paragraph 16 has also observed that no hard and fast rule 
can be laid down insofar as the maintainability of the habeas 
corpus petition in the matters of custody of minor child is 
concerned.  It has been held that as to whether the writ court 
should exercise its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India or not will depend on the facts and 
circumstances of each case. 
16. However, it is to be noted that a common thread in all 
the judgments concerning the custody of minor children is 
the paramount welfare of the child. As discussed hereinabove, 
we find that, apart from the appellant being the natural 
guardian, even in order to ensure the welfare of the minor 
child, she should live with her natural family. The minor 
child is of tender age, and she will get adapted to her natural 
family very well in a short period. We are therefore inclined to 
allow the appeal. 
 
 
 

13 
17. In the result, we pass the following order: 
(i) 
The appeal is allowed; 
(ii) 
The impugned judgment and order of the High Court 
is quashed and set aside; 
(iii) Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 are directed to handover 
the custody of the minor child Sugandha Das 
forthwith; and 
(iv) 
We, however, permit respondent Nos. 5 and 6 to meet 
the minor child Sugandha Das at the residence of the 
appellant every Wednesday between 04:00 pm and 
06:00 pm. 
18. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
..............................J.              
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
..............................J.   
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)   
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
AUGUST 20, 2024