2024 INSC 648
W.P. (C) No.706/2020
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.706 OF 2020 
RAVI AGRAWAL  
                  … PETITIONER
VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA & ANOTHER  
               … RESPONDENTS
O R D E R 
  
This writ petition is filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of
India as a Public Interest Litigation seeking the following prayers to be
granted in exercise of powers of this Court under Article 142 of the
Constitution:
“a.   Issue  a  writ  of  Mandamus  under  Article  32  of  the
Constitution of India or any other appropriate writ, order
or directions under Article 142 of the Constitution of the
India  to  the  Respondents  to  execute/carry  out  the
decision/directions  of  the  Central  Information
Commission  given  on  27th  June,  2019  in  the  Second
Appeal  No.CIC/LICOI/A/  2018/611292-BJ  of  the
Petitioner.
b.   Issue  a  writ  of  Mandamus  under  Article  32  of  the
Constitution of India or any other appropriate writ, order
or directions under Article 142 of the Constitution of the
India  to  the  Respondents  to  take  cognizance  of  the
judgment passed by the Apex Court in Writ Petition (Civil)
1
Digitally signed by
Nisha Khulbey
Date: 2024.08.31
16:50:50 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

W.P. (C) No.706/2020
No.1107 of  2017  dated January  03, 2019 and  initiate
suitable necessary action accordingly.
c.  Issue order or directions to annul/strike down clause(a) of
sub-section (2) of Section 88DD of the Income Tax which
is against the objective of the legislation and violating the
fundamental rights of the handicapped person provided
under Article 14 of the Constitution of the India.
d.  Pass such other orders and further orders as may be
deemed necessary on the facts and in the circumstances
of the case.”
2. 
We have heard Mr. Partha Sil learned counsel who has  been
appointed to assist this Court and learned senior counsel Mr. Kailash
Vasdev for Respondent No.2 and learned senior counsel Ms. Nisha
Bagchi for Respondent-Union of India and perused the material on
record.
3.
Having heard learned counsel for the respective parties, we find
that the concerns expressed by the petitioner in this writ petition have
been assuaged to a certain extent inasmuch as the Parliament has
amended  Section  80DD  of  the  Income  Tax  Act,  1961  (hereinafter
referred to as the “Act” for the sake of brevity). The said provision deals
with payment of annuity of a lump sum amount for the benefit of a
dependant, being a person with disability, in the event of death of the
individual or the member of a Hindu Undivided Family (HUF) in whose
name the subscription to the scheme stipulated in the said provision
2

W.P. (C) No.706/2020
has been made.
4.
For easy reference, the said provision is extracted as under:
“80DD. Deduction in respect of maintenance including medical
treatment of a dependent who is a person with disability.– 
(1) Where an assessee, being an individual or a Hindu
undivided  family,  who  is  a  resident  in  India,  has,
during the previous year.-
(a)  incurred  any  expenditure  for  the  medical
treatment  (including  nursing),  training  and
rehabilitation of a dependant, being a person with
disability; or
(b) paid or deposited any amount under a scheme
framed  in  this  behalf  by  the  Life  Insurance
Corporation  or  any  other  insurer  or  the
Administrator or the specified company subject to
the  conditions  specified  in  sub-section  (2)  and
approved  by  the  Board  in  this  behalf  for  the
maintenance of a dependant, being a person with
disability, 
the  assessee  shall,  in  accordance  with  and  subject  to  the
provisions of this section, be allowed a deduction of a sum of
seventy-five  thousand  rupees  from  his  gross  total  income  in
respect of the previous year:
Provided that where such dependant is a person with severe
disability, the provisions of this sub-section shall have effect as
if for the words “seventy-five thousand rupees”, the words “one
hundred  and  twenty-five  thousand  rupees”  had  been
substituted. 
(2) The deduction under clause (b) of sub-section (1)
shall be allowed only if the following conditions are
fulfilled, namely:-
3

W.P. (C) No.706/2020
(a) the scheme referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section  (1)  provides  for  payment  of  annuity  or
lump sum amount for the benefit of a dependant,
being a person with disability, in the event of the
death  of  the  individual  or  the  member  of  the
Hindu  undivided  family  in  whose  name
subscription to the scheme has been made;
(b) the assessee nominates either the dependant,
being a person with disability or any other person
or a trust to receive the payment on his behalf, for
the benefit of the dependant, being a person with
disability.
(3) If the dependant, being a person with disability,
predeceases  the  individual  or  the  member  of  the
Hindu undivided family referred to in sub-section (2),
an amount equal to the amount paid or deposited
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be deemed to
be the income of the assessee of the previous year in
which such amount is received by the assessee and
shall accordingly be chargeable to tax as the income
of that previous year.
(4)  The  assessee,  claiming  a  deduction  under  this
section, shall furnish a copy of the certificate issued
by the medical authority in the prescribed form and
manner,  along  with  the  return  of  income  under
section  139,  in  respect  of  the  assessment  year  for
which the deduction is claimed: 
Provided  that  where  the  condition  of  disability
requires  reassessment  of  its  extent  after  a  period
stipulated  in the  aforesaid certificate,  no deduction
under  this  section  shall  be  allowed  for  any
assessment  year  relating  to  any  previous  year
beginning after the expiry of the previous year during
which  the  aforesaid  certificate  of  disability  had
expired, unless a new certificate is obtained from the
medical authority in the form and manner, as may be
prescribed, and a copy thereof is furnished along with
the return of income.”
4

W.P. (C) No.706/2020
By virtue of the Finance Act, 2022, Section 80DD was amended
with effect from 01.04.2023, in the following terms:
(I)
in  sub-section  (2),  for  clause  (a),  the  following
clause shall be substituted, namely:––
“(a) the scheme referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) provides for payment of annuity or lump
sum amount for the benefit of a dependant, being a
person with disability,–– 
(i) in the event of the death of the individual
or the member of the Hindu undivided family in
whose  name  subscription  to  the  scheme  has
been made; or
(ii) on attaining the age of sixty years or
more by such individual or the member of the
Hindu  undivided  family,  and  the  payment  or
deposit to such scheme has been discontinued;”;
(II)  
after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:–
“(3A) The provisions of sub-section (3) shall not
apply to the amount received by the dependant,
being a person with disability, before his death,
by way of annuity or lump sum by application of
the  condition  referred  to  in  sub-clause  (ii)  of
clause (a) of sub-section (2).”.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that having regard
to the order passed by this Court in the case of  Ravi Agrawal vs.
Union of India, being Writ Petition (C) No.1107/2017 disposed of on
03.01.2019 and the observations made therein, the Parliament has
5

W.P. (C) No.706/2020
amended  Section  80DD  of  the  Act  in  terms  of  Section  21  of  the
Finance Act, 2022. Consequently, on attaining the age of 60 years or
more by an individual subscriber or a member of an HUF, the payment
or  deposit  to  the  scheme  envisaged  under  Section  80DD  can  be
discontinued and the monetary benefit which would have accumulated
can be made use of. It is submitted that the said amendment ought to
be made retrospective as the same is with effect from 01.04.2023 to
the existing policies as it will benefit a large number of subscribers
who are interested in making use of the benefit of the such policies for
the benefit of the disabled persons on turning 60 years of age. That an
option could be reserved to the subscribers to have the benefit of the
amendment in respect of policies which were made much prior to 2014
as  in  the  said  year  such  policies  have  been  discontinued.  He
contended that if the amendment is given a retrospective effect, many
subscribers as well as disabled persons would benefit and hence the
concerns  of  the  petitioner  being  purely  in  public  interest  may  be
considered and relief may be granted.
6.
Per contra, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent
contended that Section 80DD refers to a situation where the benefit of
the policy would be provided to a disabled person only on the death or
demise of the  caregiver or the  subscriber. The event at which the
6

W.P. (C) No.706/2020
benefit of the policy would be given to the disabled person is on the
death of the subscriber. It is only then the policy would come to end
and the monetary benefit would be given to the disabled person. That
there is a salient object with which the terms and conditions of the
policy have been devised. That having regard to the order of this Court
on 03.01.2019, there has been an insertion of a clause under Section
80DD taking into consideration the concern expressed by the very
same petitioner herein in the earlier writ petition and to that extent,
amendment has been made. But it is too farfetched for the petitioner
to seek retrospective operation of the said amendment to the existing
policies. It was contended that the terms of the policies cannot be
changed subsequent to their crystallization and the premiums being
paid  on  the  said  terms.  Therefore,  there  can  be  no  retrospective
operation of the amendments.
7.
We have considered the submissions advanced at the Bar in light
of the object of Section 80DD and the fact that pursuant to the order
of this Court, the Parliament has taken note of the observations made
in the said order and has amended Section 80DD as extracted above.
We find it difficult to accept the plea made by the learned counsel for
the  petitioner  to  the  effect  that  the  said  amendment  be  applied
retrospectively to policies which were taken prior to 2014 so that the
7

W.P. (C) No.706/2020
benefit  of  the  amendment  is  given  to  those  subscribers  also.  The
reasons are not far to see. The whole object of Jeevan Adhar Policy is
to benefit disabled persons by making provision by the subscriber post
his demise. The concern and apprehension of a caregiver or subscriber
of a policy for a disabled family member or other person for whose
benefit the policy is taken after the demise of the caregiver is of utmost
significance.  It  is  only  with  that  object  that  the  caregiver  or  a
subscriber would take such a policy so that he would not leave a
disabled person in the lurch on his demise. If that is the object of the
policy then we do not think the subscriber or the caregiver of the
subscriber should be given the liberty to discontinue the policy during
his lifetime on attaining 60 years of age. That would only go against
the  object  with  which  the  policy  has  been  taken  and  against  the
interest of the beneficiary, namely, a disabled person. 
8.
In  the  circumstances,  we  do  not  think  that  the  plea  for
retrospective  operation of the  amendment is  in the  interest of the
disabled persons nor can this Court give a retrospective operation to
the amendment. This is particularly having regard to the fact that an
insurance  contract  is  in  a  sense,  a  commercial  contract,  having
certain terms and  conditions and the sub-stratum  of  the contract
cannot  be  removed  by  giving  a  retrospective  operation  to  the
8

W.P. (C) No.706/2020
amendment. The benefit under Section 80DD of the Act would have
been availed by the subscribers at the time when they have subscribed
to the policy. 
9. 
It is also relevant to note that the order passed by this Court on
10.02.2023 in Contempt Petition (C) No.408/2024 arising from W.P.(C)
No.1107/2017 (the earlier writ petition), this Court disposed of the
contempt petition for the reason that the Respondent-Union of India
had amended Section 80DD of the Act via Budget 2022-2023 Finance
Act and therefore, the grievance of the persons like the petitioner had
stood addressed though with prospective effect. 
10. We  have  also  considered  the  Proclamation  on  the  Full
Participation and Equality of the People with Disabilities in the Asian
and Pacific Region, 1992; and the subsequent enactments, namely, the
Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights
and Full Participation) Act, 1995 which has been substituted by the
Rights  of  Persons  with  Disabilities  Act,  2016,  as  well  as  the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and Optional
Protocol 2006; and, the provisions of the Life Insurance Corporation
Act, 1956. 
11.
In view of the said observations, we are not inclined to take a
different  view  of  the  matter  and  particularly  having  regard  to  the
9

W.P. (C) No.706/2020
reasons assigned by us as aforesaid.
In the circumstances, the writ petition stands disposed of.
We  place  on  record  our  sincere  appreciation  for  the  valuable
assistance rendered by Mr. Partha Sil, learned counsel appointed to
assist this Court.
                                        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . J. 
                 (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
 
                                        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . J. 
                                      (NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH)
New Delhi; 
August 20, 2024
10