2024 INSC 619
 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 878 of 2019 
 
Page 1 of 10 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 878 OF 2019 
 
AJAY KUMAR GUPTA     
 
 
          … APPELLANT 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
UNION OF INDIA  
 
                       … RESPONDENT 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The appellant is accused no.2. Along with other co-
accused, he was prosecuted for the offences punishable under 
the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (for 
short, ‘the NDPS Act’). The case of the prosecution is that the 
Narcotics Control Bureau (for short, ‘NCB’) received secret 
information on 21st December 2013 that a consignment of 
pentazocine, a psychotropic substance, was being transported 
illegally from Hajipur to Lucknow by train for being sold in the 
market as an intoxicating item. The NCB team mounted 
surveillance near the parcel house of Hajipur station. When 
accused no.1 - Jasvinder Singh reached there, he was 
intercepted. According to the prosecution case, accused no.1 
identified the consignment he had booked from the railway 
parcel house. During the search of the booked consignment, 
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.08.22
16:51:02 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 878 of 2019 
 
Page 2 of 10 
 
30 cartons of pentazocine (Fortwin injections) manufactured by 
Ranbaxy company were found. A statement of accused no.1 
was recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act. He admitted 
that he used to purchase medicines from Patna and sell them 
in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh. He claimed that he bought Fortwin 
injections from the appellant-accused no.2 and one Arun Singh 
on several occasions.  
2. 
Even the appellant's statement under Section 67 of the 
NDPS Act was recorded in which he stated that he runs a 
medical shop in Katra Market, Govind Mitra Road, Patna, 
under the name and style of M/s Mangalam Drug Agency. He 
disclosed that he had a valid licence issued by the Office of 
Controller of Drugs, Bihar. He stated that accused no.1 came 
to his shop and demanded 40 cartons of Fortwin injections. He 
could provide only 30 cartons against payment of cash. The 
consignment of 30 cartons was obtained by the appellant from 
accused no.3 – Sanjay Kumar, who was also running a medical 
store in the name of M/s Maheshwari Pharma. On the request 
made by the appellant, accused no.3 sent 30 cartons of Fortwin 
injections to accused no.1. The case of the prosecution is that 
the appellant produced his drug licence before the officers of 
NCB. On trial, the Special Court convicted the appellant and 
accused nos.1 and 3 for the offences punishable under Section 
22(c) and Section 29 of the NDPS Act. For the offence 
punishable under Section 22(c), the appellant was sentenced 
to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and to pay a 
fine of Rs. 1,00,000/-. Separate punishment was not imposed 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 878 of 2019 
 
Page 3 of 10 
 
for the offence punishable under Section 29 of the NDPS Act. 
The conviction of the appellant has been confirmed by the High 
Court by the impugned judgment.  
SUBMISSIONS 
3. 
The first submission of the learned senior counsel 
appearing for the appellant is that the charge framed against 
the appellant and accused no.1 was only for the offence 
punishable under Section 22(c) of the NDPS Act. The allegation, 
as stated in the charge, was that on 21st December 2013, the 
appellant and accused no.1 gave cartons of Fortwin injections 
for interstate transportation without any valid licence and in 
contravention of Section 8(c) of the NDPS Act. He submitted 
that no charge was framed against the appellant for the offence 
punishable under Section 29 of the NDPS Act. He submitted 
that the finding of the High Court is that the appellant has been 
prosecuted and convicted for having sold contraband to an 
unauthorised person, leading to the presumption that the 
contraband was sold to be used as an intoxicant. He submitted 
that there is no evidence to show that the contraband 
contained in the consignment booked by the accused no.1 was 
purchased from the appellant. He submitted that the Courts 
have placed reliance on the statement of the appellant recorded 
under Section 67 of the NDPS Act, which is not admissible in 
evidence as held by this Court in the case of Tofan Singh v. 
State of Tamil Nadu1. He submitted that apart from prejudice 
caused to the appellant on account of non-framing of proper 
 
1 (2021) 4 SCC 1 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 878 of 2019 
 
Page 4 of 10 
 
charge, the allegation of conspiracy under Section 29 of the 
NDPS Act was not put to the appellant in his statement 
recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (for short, ‘CrPC’). He submitted that unless a charge of 
conspiracy under Section 29 was proved, the appellant could 
not be punished under Section 22(c) of the NDPS Act.  
4. 
The learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent 
submitted that the accused no.3, who examined himself as a 
defence witness, placed on record invoices issued to the 
appellant for sending the Fortwin injections. She submitted 
that the fact that 30 cartons of Fortwin injections were supplied 
by accused no.3 at the instance of the appellant has been 
established through evidence. She submitted that there is 
enough evidence on record to show that the contraband was 
supplied to accused no.1 at the instance of the present 
appellant by the accused no.3.  
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
We have perused the notes of evidence and considered 
the submissions. Under Section 8(c), there is a complete 
prohibition on possessing and transporting any narcotic drug 
or psychotropic substance. Section 22 of the NDPS Act reads 
thus: 
“22. Punishment for contravention in relation 
to 
psychotropic 
substances.—Whoever, 
in 
contravention of any provision of this Act or any 
rule or order made or condition of licence 
granted thereunder, manufactures, possesses, 
sells, purchases, transports, imports inter-

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 878 of 2019 
 
Page 5 of 10 
 
State, 
exports 
inter-State 
or 
uses 
any 
psychotropic substance shall be punishable,— 
 
(a) where the contravention involves small 
quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to [one year], or with fine 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or 
with both; 
 
(b) where the contravention involves quantity 
lesser than commercial quantity but greater 
than 
small 
quantity, 
with 
rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
ten years, and with fine which may extend to 
one lakh rupees; 
 
(c) 
where 
the 
contravention 
involves 
commercial 
quantity, 
with 
rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than ten years but which may extend to twenty 
years, and shall also be liable to fine which shall 
not be less than one lakh rupees but which may 
extend to two lakh rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be 
recorded in the judgment, impose a fine 
exceeding two lakh rupees.” 
In this case, the contravention involves commercial quantity, 
for which there is no dispute. Section 22 is attracted when, in 
contravention of any provisions of the NDPS Act, anyone 
possesses or transports a psychotropic substance.  
6. 
Section 29 reads thus: 
“29. Punishment for abetment and criminal 
conspiracy.—(1) Whoever abets, or is a party to 
a criminal conspiracy to commit, an offence 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 878 of 2019 
 
Page 6 of 10 
 
punishable under this Chapter, shall, whether 
such offence be or be not committed in 
consequence of such abetment or in pursuance 
of 
such 
criminal 
conspiracy, 
and 
notwithstanding anything contained in Section 
116 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), be 
punishable with the punishment provided for 
the offence. 
(2) A person abets, or is a party to a criminal 
conspiracy to commit, an offence, within the 
meaning of this section, who, in India, abets or 
is a party to the criminal conspiracy to the 
commission of any act in a place without and 
beyond India which— 
 
(a) would constitute an offence if committed 
within India; or 
 
(b) under the laws of such place, is an offence 
relating to narcotic drugs or psychotropic 
substances having all the legal conditions 
required to constitute it such an offence the 
same as or analogous to the legal conditions 
required to constitute it an offence punishable 
under this Chapter, if committed within India.” 
7. 
In the facts of the case, the consignment was booked by 
accused no.1, and therefore, he was found to be transporting 
the psychotropic substance in contravention of Section 8(c) of 
the NDPS Act. There is no allegation against the appellant of 
transporting the contraband. The consignment was booked in 
the name of the accused no.1 as per the prosecution case. 
Therefore, unless it is proved that the appellant had supplied 
the consignment to accused no.1 or was a part of a criminal 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 878 of 2019 
 
Page 7 of 10 
 
conspiracy to commit an offence under Section 22(c), the 
appellant cannot be punished. 
8. 
Perusal of the evidence of accused no.3, who was 
examined as a defence witness, shows that he was carrying on 
the business of M/s Maheshwari Medical in his wife's name. 
He stated that he issued invoices for sending Fortwin injections 
to the appellant. However, there is no evidence on record to 
show that accused no.3 procured the contraband that is the 
subject matter of the prosecution and handed it over to the 
appellant or accused no.1.  
9. 
We may note that the Trial Court and High Court have 
relied upon the appellant's statement under Section 67 of the 
NDPS Act. In paragraph 158 of the decision of this Court in the 
case of Tofan Singh1, this Court held thus: 
“158. We answer the reference by stating: 
158.1. That the officers who are invested with 
powers under Section 53 of the NDPS Act are 
“police officers” within the meaning of Section 
25 of the Evidence Act, as a result of which any 
confessional statement made to them would be 
barred under the provisions of Section 25 of the 
Evidence Act, and cannot be taken into account 
in order to convict an accused under the NDPS 
Act. 
158.2. That a statement recorded under 
Section 67 of the NDPS Act cannot be used 
as a confessional statement in the trial of an 
offence under the NDPS Act.” 
(emphasis added) 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 878 of 2019 
 
Page 8 of 10 
 
Therefore, the appellant's statement recorded under Section 67 
of the NDPS Act is not admissible in evidence and cannot be 
read in evidence. 
10. 
The High Court, in paragraph 37 of the impugned 
judgment, has noted that a statement of the transporter ought 
to have been recorded to prove that the delivery of consignment 
containing contraband was made by accused no.3 to the 
appellant's shop. In fact, the person who allegedly transported 
the contraband from accused no.3 to the appellant was a 
crucial witness. However, the prosecution has withheld the 
evidence of this witness from the Court. Hence, an adverse 
inference must be drawn against the prosecution. In the 
statement of accused no.1, under Section 67 of the NDPS Act, 
he stated that he purchased Fortwin injections from the 
appellant and one Arun Singh several times. However, no 
investigation has been carried out against Arun Singh.  
11. 
There is no recovery from the appellant of any 
incriminating material. There is no evidence to show that the 
contraband tried to be transported by accused no.1 by railway 
parcel was delivered by or on behalf of the appellant to accused 
no.1. There is no evidence of any conspiracy against the 
appellant. Therefore, the respondent has not established the 
offences punishable under Sections 22(c) and 29 of the NDPS 
Act against the appellant beyond a reasonable doubt. 
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 878 of 2019 
 
Page 9 of 10 
 
12. 
It is necessary to refer to the charge framed, which reads 
thus: 
“  
 
Case No. C2A1 of 2013 
Name of Accused hereby charge you (1) 
Jasavinder Singh @ Kooki 
Person (2) Ajay Kumar Gupta 
That you on or about the 21st day of December, 
2013 at 7.50 to 10.30 P.M., at Parcel house Rly. 
Station, Platform No.1, Hajipur Junction on 
P.S. Hajipur District Vaishali Fortwin (12MIX 1 
ml) containing batch No. 9070238/Keptin 60, 
Gulabi and white packets in each carton for 
transportation the same interstate without any 
valid license and in contravention of S. 8(c) of 
the NDPS Act. You thereby committed an 
offence.  
 
And that hereby committed an offence under 
22(c) of the N.D.P.S. Act punishable of the 
Indian Penal code and within any cognizance.  
 
And hereby direct that you be tried by me on 
the said charge.”  
In the charge, there is no reference to the allegation of 
commission of an offence under Section 29 of the NDPS Act. 
13. 
However, it is not necessary for us to go into the question 
of whether non-framing of charge under Section 29 of the NDPS 
Act has resulted in the failure of justice. The reason is that 
there is absolutely no legal evidence on record to show that the 
contraband attempted to be transported by accused no.1 by a 
railway parcel was supplied to him by the appellant. There is 
no evidence of the appellant's participation in any conspiracy.  

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 878 of 2019 
 
Page 10 of 10 
 
14. 
Therefore, the conviction of the appellant cannot be 
sustained. Accordingly, we set aside the impugned judgments 
and acquit the appellant of all charges against him in Case No. 
C2 A 01/2013 before the Court of Special Judge, Vaishali at 
Hajipur.  
15. 
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.  As the appellant is on 
bail, his bail bonds stand cancelled. 
 
……….……………………..J. 
 
 
 
   (Abhay S. Oka) 
 
……………………………..J. 
(Augustine George Masih) 
New Delhi; 
August 22, 2024.