2024 INSC 622
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 97-98 OF 2012
INDIAN COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH THROUGH THE DIRECTOR
GENERAL AND ANR.
 
     
       …  Appellant(s)
VERSUS
RAJINDER SINGH AND ORS.
    … Respondent(s)
J U D G M E N T
Rajesh Bindal, J.
1.
The  appellants  are  aggrieved  by  an  order  dated
21.07.2010 passed by the High Court1 in Writ Petition2 filed
against the order dated 18.07.20033 passed by the Tribunal4.
The  Tribunal  had  allowed  the  application  filed  by  the
respondents, extending them the benefit of the scheme5 dated
27.02.1999 in terms of which a scientist was eligible for two
advance increments as and when he acquires a Ph.D. degree in
his service career.
1 High Court of Delhi
2 W.P.(C) Nos. 3364-65/2004
3 Passed in OA No. 2939/2002
4 Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi
5 Order No. 1 (15)98-Per IV of Indian Council of Agricultural Research, Krishi Bhavan, New
Delhi
Page 1 of 12

2.
Briefly the facts as are available on record are that
the  appellant  No.1-Indian  Council  of  Agricultural  Research
(ICAR)  before  this  Court  is  a  Society  registered  under  the
Societies Registration Act, 1860.  It is engaged in agricultural
research.  On 01.10.1975, the appellant No.1 constituted two
services namely Agricultural Research Service (in short “ARS”)
and Technical Service (in short “TS”). These are governed by
two sets of Service Rules. The nature of duties performed by
the incumbents employed under the two services are totally
different.
2.1
The  pay  scales  of  the  employees  of  the  Central
Government were revised on the recommendations of the Fifth
Central Pay Commission.  The appellant/ICAR issued a scheme
vide letter dated 27.02.1999 to all field offices informing them
about the revision of pay scales of the scientists working with
the appellants.  The communication provided for existing pay
scales and the corresponding new pay scales for the Scientists,
Scientists  (senior  scale),  Scientists  (selection  grade/Senior
Scientists), Principal Scientist and other Senior Officers.
2.2
Clause (ii) of the aforesaid communication provided
for incentives for Ph.D./M.Phil. Sub-clause (d) which is relevant
Page 2 of 12

for the case at hand provided that a ‘scientist will be eligible for
two  advance  increments  as  and  when  he  acquires  a  Ph.D.
degree in his service career’.  The aforesaid clause is the root
cause for the litigation in question.
2.3
The respondents who are working on technical side in
Indian Agricultural Research Institute (for short “IARI”), a unit
under the appellant No.1 approached the Tribunal by filing an
application6 for  a  direction  to  the  appellants  for  grant  of
advance  increments  to  them  in  terms  of  letter  dated
27.02.1999 on acquiring the Ph.D. degree as was applicable in
the  case  of  scientists.   The  Tribunal  vide order  dated
06.06.2002  directed  the  appellants  to  consider  the
representation made by the respondents claiming the aforesaid
relief.  
2.4
In terms of the directions issued by the Tribunal, the
appellant/ICAR considered the representation and rejected the
same vide memorandum dated 02.08.2002.  It was mentioned
therein that the appellant had categorized its staff as scientific,
technical, administrative, auxiliary and supporting staff.  Each
of the categories were governed by separate set of rules and
6 Original Application No. 1536/2002
Page 3 of 12

had independent cadres.  The recruitment of the scientists was
at the entry level of ₹8,000-13,500 and made on All India basis
through  a  written  competitive     examination  followed  by
interview whereas in technical service there were 3 categories
i.e. grades I, II and III.  The recruitment in these categories was
made at the institute level.  The appellants had adopted UGC
pay scales for scientists in ARS with effect from 01.01.1986 and
award of advance increments to the scientists in ARS for having
Ph.D. qualification during service was part and parcel of the pay
package applicable to the scientists.  As respondents are part
of the technical service, the pay scales as recommended by the
Government  of India for the Central Government  employees
were  adopted.  There  was  no  additional  incentive  to  the
respondents for Ph.D. qualification, if obtained during service
career.
2.5
Aggrieved  against  the  aforesaid  order,  the
respondents filed OA No. 2939/2002 before the Tribunal.  The
same was  allowed  vide order  dated  18.07.2003.  Aggrieved
against the same the appellants preferred Writ Petitions before
the High Court, which were dismissed.  The said order is under
challenge in the present appeals. 
Page 4 of 12

3.
Learned  Counsel  for  the appellants  submitted  that
the  Tribunal,  while  allowing  the  application  filed  by  the
respondents had travelled beyond the jurisdiction vested in it.
It  was  wrongly  opined  that  both  categories  of  employees,
namely the scientists and technical personnel, are working with
the appellant for the same object, hence, there should not be
any  distinction.   If  the  scientist  were  granted  two  advance
increments on acquiring Ph.D. qualification during service, the
respondents should not have been discriminated.  The Tribunal
could not have ventured into this aspect of the matter as the
competent authority, in its wisdom, had granted the benefit of
two advance increments to the category of employees, who
deserved  it.   Merely  because  other  sets  of  employees  also
obtained the same qualification, they will not be eligible to get
those benefits.  
3.1
He  further  submitted  that  extension  of  ARS  Study
Leave Regulations, 1991 to the technical personnel had nothing
to  do  with  grant  of  advance  increments.   It  was  merely  to
encourage them to improve their qualifications with no promise
of any financial benefit.  The writ petition was dismissed by a
cryptic order.  The High Court upheld the order of the Tribunal
Page 5 of 12

on wrong premise by invoking Article 14, trying to equate the
scientist and technical staff, merely because they are working
with the appellants.  They are governed by different sets of
rules and belong to different cadres.  
3.2
The prayer in the present appeal is to set aside the
order of the Tribunal as well as the High Court and rejection of
the application filed by the respondents before the Tribunal.
4.
On the other hand, learned Senior Counsel appearing
for the respondents relied upon Entry 66 in List I to the 7th
Schedule attached to the Constitution of India which deals with
determination of standards in institutions for higher education
or  research  and  scientific  and  technical  institutions.   The
submission was that the words ‘research’ and ‘technical’ have
been mentioned in the same Entry. Even if the scientists were
directly engaged in research, the respondents are working on
the technical side.  As the added qualification of Ph.D., made
their assistance in research better, the relief claimed by them
was rightly allowed by the impugned order.  
4.1
It  was  further  submitted  that  Study  Leave
Regulations, 1991 which were applicable to the scientists were
made applicable to the technical personnel, in terms of which
Page 6 of 12

they were entitled to get study leave for a period of 3 years for
undertaking Ph.D. program.  This establishes that they were
being equated with the scientists and the study leave granted
for  undertaking  program  was  to  enable  them  to  assist  the
scientists in a better way.  Hence, the benefit of two advance
increments, which are admissible to the scientists, was rightly
awarded to the respondents.  
4.2
He further referred to a Circular7 dated 01.05.1995 in
terms  of  which  the  names  of  the  technical  staff  who  have
obtained  Ph.D.  qualification  will  also  be  permitted  to  be
included in the research projects/papers/reports, in addition to
other scientists.  It was further argued that when the technical
personnel acquires a Ph.D. qualification, they become eligible
for lateral entry to the scientists cadre.  Hence, the qualification
has relation with the scientist cadre.
4.3
The submission is that there is no error in the orders
passed by the High Court as well as the Tribunal.  Grant of
advance increments merely encouraged the respondents and
the other  technical  personnel  to  improve  their  qualifications
and contribute more efficiently to the research.  
7 No. 25-4/95-Per V of the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi.
Page 7 of 12

5.
Heard Learned Counsel for the parties and perused
the relevant referred record.
6.
The root cause of the litigation is the circular dated
27.02.1999 vide which the pay scales of the scientists working
with  the  appellants  were  revised  after  acceptance  of  the
recommendations by the Fifth Central Pay Commission.  The
relevant clause is extracted below:
“(ii) Incentives for Ph.D./M.Phil
(a)
Four  and  two  advance  increments  will  be
admissible  to  those  who  hold  Ph.D.  and  M.Phil
degrees, respectively, at the time of recruitment as
Scientists.
(b)
One  increment  will  be  admissible  to  those
scientists with M.Phil degree who acquire Ph.D. within
two years of recruitment.
(c)
A  Scientist  with  Ph.D.  will  be  eligible  for  two
advance  increments  when  he  moves  into  the
Selection Grade as Sr. Scientists.
(d)
A  Scientist  will  be  eligible  for  two  advance
increments as and when he acquires a Ph.D. degree
in his service career.”
(emphasis supplied)
7.
The  argument  raised  by  the  appellants  is  that  it
constituted two services, namely Agricultural Research Service
(ARS)  and  Technical  Service  (TS)  on  01.10.1975.   Both  the
Page 8 of 12

services are governed by their independent sets of rules having
different cadres and different promotional avenues. 
8.
Reliance was  placed  on  Bye-laws  21  of  Rules  and
Bye-laws  of  ICAR,  which  classified  scientific  and  technical
categories.  The same is extracted below:
“(A)  SCIENTIFIC:
Scientific  personnel  shall  be
those who are engaged in agricultural research and
education (including extension educational whether
in  physical,  statistical,  biological,  engineering,
technological or social sciences. This category shall
also  include  persons  engaged  in  planning,
programming and management of scientific research.
(B)  TECHNICAL:
Technical  Personnel  shall  be
those, who perform technical service in support of
research and education whether in the Laboratory,
Workshop  or  Field,  or  in  areas  like  Library,
Documentation,
 
Publication
 
and
 
Agricultural
Communication.”
9.
At the time of argument, it was not denied by the
respondents that they are governed by different set of rules,
have  their  own  channel  of  promotion,  and  different
qualifications prescribed for recruitment.  The duties assigned
to them are also different as compared to the scientists, who
are engaged in core work of agricultural research and education
Page 9 of 12

whereas  the  respondents  being  technical  personnel  provide
support  in  different  areas.   It  is  further  the  stand  of  the
appellants that the scientists belonging to Agricultural Research
Service  are  getting  UGC  pay  scales  with  effect  from
01.01.1986.   The  benefit  of  two  advance  increments  for
acquiring  Ph.D.  qualification  was  part  of  their  pay  package.
Similar benefit was not extended to the technical personnel.
For technical personnel, the appellants had adopted the revised
scales as recommended by the Government of India for Central
Government employees.
10.
Merely because Study Leave Regulations, 1991 were
extended to technical personnel, this would not entitle them to
other benefits which are available to the scientists. The idea of
grant  of  study  leave  for  pursuing  Ph.D.  to  the  technical
personnel  was  only  to  enable  them  to  improve  their
qualifications.  
10.1
Merely after having Ph.D. qualification, the technical
personnel will not become eligible for grant of two advance
increments  when  the same  has  not  been  recommended  for
them.  In any institution incentives may be given to a particular
category  of  employees  to  get  higher  qualifications  during
Page 10 of 12

service, considering their job requirements.  Merely because
different set of employees,  who  may  be working in  aid  but
governed by different set of rules and having different duties to
discharge also obtain that qualification, will not entitle them to
the benefits which were extended to different set of employees
by the competent authority.  In the said sequel of facts, Article
14 of the Constitution of India will not have any application.  
10.2
The Tribunal and High Court have erred by equating
technical  personnel  and  scientists  and  granting  respondents
advance  increments  to  which  they  are  not  entitled  to.  The
argument raised by the respondents that after obtaining the
Ph.D.  qualification,  the  Technical  Staff  are  entitled  to  be
considered  for  lateral  entry  into  the  scientists  is  also  to  be
noticed  and  rejected  as  the  additional  qualification  merely
makes them eligible for the higher post in the different cadre
and  not  to  grant  them  benefits,  which  are  attached  to  the
higher  post  in  a  different  cadre.   Similar  is  the  position
regarding Entry 66 in List I to the 7th Schedule attached to the
Constitution  of  India.   The  contents  of  the  Entries  in  7th
Schedule only prescribe limits of the powers of the Parliament
or the State Legislature to enact laws.
Page 11 of 12

11.
For the reasons mentioned above, we find merit in
the present appeals.  The same are allowed.  The impugned
orders passed by the High Court and the Tribunal are set aside.
The Original Applications filed by the respondents before the
Tribunal are dismissed.  No order as to costs.
 
      ……………….……………..J.
 (J.K. MAHESHWARI)
……………….……………..J.
(RAJESH BINDAL)
New Delhi
August 22, 2024.
Page 12 of 12