2024 INSC 55
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(s)._______ OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP(C) No. 21139/2021) 
 
 
 
PRAKASHCHANDRA JOSHI   
 
 
  …. APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS  
 
KUNTAL PRAKASHCHANDRA JOSHI  
@ KUNTAL VISANJI SHAH  
 
       ... RESPONDENT 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J. 
 
 
 
Leave granted.  
 
 
2. 
The instant appeal is directed against the judgment and 
order impugned dated 24.06.2021 passed by the High Court of 
Judicature at Bombay in Family Court Appeal No. 162 of 2019 
whereby the High Court, while affirming the order of the Family 
Court, dismissed the appeal seeking dissolution of marriage by 
a decree of divorce.  
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2024.01.24
15:22:10 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
 
3. 
The facts in brief are that the marriage between the 
appellant and respondent was solemnized on 05.01.2004 as 
per the rituals of Hindu religion after having spent eight years 
in courtship. They are Indian citizens by birth. However, they 
acquired citizenship of Canada for financial gain and were living 
a normal and happy matrimonial life in Canada. A male child 
was born from the wedlock on 21.05.2010. In the year 2011, 
the appellant started experiencing medical problems namely, 
constant back and shoulder pain as well as skin related 
problems, especially during summer due to rag weed allergy 
resulting into sleepless nights and miserable days. During the 
period of recession in Canada, the appellant lost his job and the 
couple along with the minor child returned to India on 
29.01.2011. The respondent after wilfully staying at her 
matrimonial home, joined her parental house on 20.02.2011. 
After some time, when the appellant asked the respondent to 
resume cohabitation, the respondent did not pay any heed and 
refused to join the company of the appellant. The respondent 
was interested in returning to Canada for a better future. The 
appellant, however, expressed his unwillingness to shift to 

3 
 
Canada owing to his health issues. Various attempts were 
made by the family of the parties to resolve the matrimonial 
discord between them but to no avail. The respondent left for 
Canada with her son. Thereafter, the appellant tried to contact 
the respondent either through e-mail or by other modes 
requesting her to come and cohabit with him.  It was neither 
responded to nor complied with.  
 
4. 
The appellant was, therefore, constrained to prefer a 
petition under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act for 
restitution of conjugal rights which remained uncontested on 
behalf of the respondent though the respondent was duly 
served. Desperately, the appellant withdrew the petition for 
restitution of conjugal rights. Since the appellant realized that 
there would be no hope of any restitution, he filed a divorce 
petition on the ground of cruelty and desertion.  
 
5. 
The petition proceeded ex parte as, despite due service, 
the respondent remained unrepresented. After considering the 
pleadings and evidence, the learned Family Court dismissed the 
petition of the appellant, inter alia, observing that no case had 

4 
 
been made from the alleged cruelty caused to the appellant by 
the respondent.  
 
6. 
Being aggrieved with and dissatisfied by the dismissal of 
the petition by the learned Family Court, the appellant moved a 
Family Court Appeal before the High Court.  The High Court 
dismissed the appeal by holding that no case has been made 
out by the appellant for seeking a decree of divorce on the 
ground of either cruelty or desertion. Hence, this appeal.  
 
7. 
Considering the facts and circumstances, a short question 
arises for our consideration as to whether a decree for divorce 
can be granted for the reason that the marriage has 
irretrievably broken down.  
 
8. 
Notice was issued to the sole respondent/wife on 
21.01.2022, which was duly served upon the respondent. The 
respondent once again did not put in appearance either in-
person or through an advocate.  
9. 
We have heard Mr. Dhananjay Bhaskar Ray, learned 
counsel appearing for the appellant at length and have also 
perused the pleadings.  

5 
 
10. Mr. Dhananjay would submit that the respondent deserted 
the appellant about 13 years ago and she refused to cohabit 
with the appellant.  Learned counsel would further submit that 
the appellant and the respondent have been living apart due to 
matrimonial discord for the last 13 years and as there are no 
prospects for reconciliation, the marriage has been irretrievably 
broken down.  The learned counsel would argue that the 
uncontroverted evidence substantially establishes the fact that 
the appellant had been treated with mental cruelty by his wife 
who had left his company despite an objection from the 
appellant.  The learned counsel further submitted that the 
conduct of the respondent itself indicates that she is not willing 
to live with the appellant. Learned counsel for the appellant, in 
support of the contentions, placed reliance on the decisions of 
this Court in the case of “Sukhendu Das  Vs. Rita 
Mukherjee1” and “Samar Ghosh vs. Jaya Ghosh2”.  
  
11. The record reveals that after appellant’s car accident in 
November, 2009 the couple was blessed with a baby boy on 
 
1 (2017) 9 SCC 632 
2 (2007) 4 SCC 511 

6 
 
21.05.2010. The appellant lost his job owing to the deep 
recession in Canada and eventually the family came back to 
India in January, 2011. The couple last resided together in 
appellant’s mother’s house at Mumbai till 19.02.2011. After 
this date, they lost contact with each other, and the respondent 
refused to return to the matrimonial home. On being 
contacted, the respondent refused to resume matrimonial life 
unless the appellant separates from his family and resides in a 
separate household. On account of appellant's inability to 
accede to this demand of the respondent, she never returned 
to resume the matrimonial life.  
 
12. It is also to be seen that in the proceedings initiated by 
the appellant for restitution of conjugal rights under Section 9 
of the Hindu Marriage Act, the respondent did not appear 
despite receiving the summons. Similarly, in the present 
divorce proceedings also the respondent failed to enter 
appearance despite service of notice in the Trial Court, High 
Court and Supreme Court as well. Thus, it is apparent that the 
respondent does not wish to continue the marital chord and is 

7 
 
not responding to court summons much less the request made 
by the appellant.  
 
13. On the basis of the above factual matrix the present 
appears to be a case of irretrievable breakdown of marriage. In 
the matter of ”Shilpa Sailesh vs. Varubn Sreenivasan3”, 
this Court has held that exercise of jurisdiction under Article 
142 (1) of the Constitution of India is clearly permissible to do 
‘complete justice’ to a ‘cause or matter’ and this Court can pass 
an order or decree which a family court, trial court or High 
Court can pass and when such power is exercised, the question 
or issue of lack of subject-matter jurisdiction does not arise.  
 
14. On the issue as to grant of divorce on the ground of 
irretrievable breakdown of marriage in exercise of jurisdiction 
under Article 142 (1) of the Constitution of India, this Court in 
Shilpa Sailesh  (supra) held thus in paras 33 and 42 (iii):  
“33. Having said so, we wish to clearly state that 
grant of divorce on the ground of irretrievable 
breakdown of marriage by this Court is not a 
matter of right, but a discretion which is to be 
exercised with great care and caution, keeping in 
mind several factors ensuring that ‘complete 
 
3 (2023) SCC online SC 544 

8 
 
justice’ is done to both parties. It is obvious that 
this Court should be fully convinced and satisfied 
that 
the 
marriage 
is 
totally 
unworkable, 
emotionally dead and beyond salvation and, 
therefore, dissolution of marriage is the right 
solution and the only way forward. That the 
marriage has irretrievably broken down is to be 
factually determined and firmly established. For 
this, several factors are to be considered such as 
the period of time the parties had cohabited after 
marriage; when the parties had last cohabited; 
the nature of allegations made by the parties 
against each other and their family members; the 
orders passed in the legal proceedings from time 
to time, cumulative impact on the personal 
relationship; whether, and how many attempts 
were made to settle the disputes by intervention 
of the court or through mediation, and when the 
last attempt was made, etc. The period of 
separation should be sufficiently long, and 
anything above six years or more will be a 
relevant factor. But these facts have to be 
evaluated keeping in view the economic and 
social status of the parties, including their 
educational qualifications, whether the parties 
have 
any 
children, 
their 
age, 
educational 
qualification, and whether the other spouse and 
children are dependent, in which event how and 
in what manner the party seeking divorce intends 
to take care and provide for the spouse or the 
children. Question of custody and welfare of 
minor children, provision for fair and adequate 
alimony for the wife, and economic rights of the 
children and other pending matters, if any, are 
relevant considerations. We would not like to 
codify the factors so as to curtail exercise of 
jurisdiction 
under Article 
142(1) of 
the 
Constitution of India, which is situation specific. 
Some of the factors mentioned can be taken as 
illustrative, and worthy of consideration. 

9 
 
42 (iii) Whether this Court can grant divorce in 
exercise of power under Article 142(1) of the 
Constitution of India when there is complete and 
irretrievable breakdown of marriage in spite of 
the other spouses opposing the prayer? 
This question is also answered in the affirmative, 
inter alia, holding that this Court, in exercise of 
power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of 
India, has the discretion to dissolve the marriage 
on the ground of its irretrievable breakdown. This 
discretionary power is to be exercised to do 
‘complete justice’ to the parties, wherein this 
Court is satisfied that the facts established show 
that the marriage has completely failed and there 
is no possibility that the parties will cohabit 
together, and continuation of the formal legal 
relationship is unjustified. The Court, as a court 
of equity, is required to also balance the 
circumstances and the background in which the 
party opposing the dissolution is placed.” 
 
15. Reverting back to the case in hand, to accord satisfaction 
as to whether the present is a fit case for exercise of power 
under Article 142 (1) of the Constitution of India to dissolve the 
marriage on the ground of irretrievable breakdown, we see that 
the parties are residing separately since February, 2011 and 
there have been no contact whatsoever between them during 
this long period of almost 13 years. The respondent-wife is not 
even responding to the summons issued by the courts. It 
seems she is no longer interested in continuing the marital 

10 
 
relations with the appellant. Therefore, we have no hesitation 
in holding that the present is a case of irretrievable breakdown 
of marriage as there is no possibility of the couple staying 
together.  
 
16. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed and we 
dissolve the marriage between the parties on the ground of 
irretrievable breakdown in exercise of powers under Article 
142(1) of the Constitution of India. Accordingly, the marriage 
between the parties solemnized on 05.01.2004 is dissolved by 
a decree of divorce. A decree to this effect be drawn 
accordingly.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………………………J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (B.R. GAVAI) 
 
  
………………………………………J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
JANUARY 24, 2024  
NEW DELHI.