2024 INSC 620
1
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL 
 
 APPEAL NO.9758 
 
 OF 2024
[@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.11685 OF 2021]
SWATI PRIYADARSHINI 
               …     APPELLANT
VERSUS
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.  …     RESPONDENTS
J U D G M E N T
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
2.
We are inclined to grant leave; hence, granted.
3.
The  present  appeal  has  been  filed  against  the
Final Judgment and Order dated 03.02.2020 (hereinafter
referred to as the “Impugned Judgment”) passed by the
Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.08.22
16:51:03 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
Jabalpur  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  “High
Court”)  in  Writ  Appeal  No.956/2017,  whereby  it
overruled the Judgment dated 20.06.2017 passed by the
learned Single Judge in Writ Petition No.8404/2013.
FACTUAL MATRIX:
4.
On 15.10.2012, the sole appellant was appointed
by  the  Respondent  No.4  to  the  post  of  Assistant
Project  Coordinator  (hereinafter  referred  to  as
“APC”)  under  the  Sarv  Shiksha  Abhiyan  (hereinafter
referred  to  as  “SSA”)  on  contract  basis,  initially
for  one academic  session  (1  year),  renewable  in
subsequent  years  for  two  years  each  “subject  to
evaluation of work in the first year.”
5.
It  was  contended  by  the  appellant  that  she
received  some  information  about  alleged  misconduct
and  immoral  activity  going  on  in  the  CWSN
(abbreviation  for  “Children  with  Special  Needs”)
Girls’ Hostel, Sehore (hereinafter referred to as the
“hostel”) run by one Bright Star Social Society, a
non-governmental  organization  (hereinafter  referred
to  as  “Bright  Star”).  The  State  Level  Committee
raided  the  hostel  on  a  complaint  made  by  the
appellant.  The  State  Level  Committee  found  the

3
allegations,  made  by  the  appellant  to  be  true
eventually leading to termination of the Memorandum
of Understanding with Bright Star to run the hostel
with effect from 08.01.2013.
6.
On 09.01.2013, the appellant was made in-charge
of  the  hostel.  An  order  was  issued  by  the  Sub-
Divisional  Officer  and  Magistrate,  Sehore  on
10.01.2013  to  the  District  Coordinator,  State
Education Centre, Sehore to lodge a First Information
Report against the warden under whose supervision the
alleged  crime(s)  was/were  being  committed in  the
hostel.
7.
By order dated 14.01.2013, charge of the hostel
was withdrawn from the appellant after 5/6 days of
assigning the charge. The appellant received a Show-
Cause  Notice  (hereinafter  abbreviated  to  “SCN”)
issued by the Respondent No.5 which reads as under1:
“The attendance register was perused by
the
 
District
 
Project
 
Coordinator
District Education Centre, Sihore under
the above subject. Absent was marked on
4th and 5th January, 2013 by me in the
attendance rgister. (sic)
Signatures were made by you in the said
dates  in  the  attendance  register  and
your coming in the office at 12:00 hours
1
For convenience, English translation is used. The original SCN was issued in
Hindi.

4
on 14.02.13 is a negligence on your part
towards  duties  and  is  violation  of
orders of officer.”
To  the  above,  the  appellant  replied  on
16.02.2013,  stating  that  signatures  have  not  been
made by her on the attendance register. She stated
that due to the arrival of her daughter from Bhopal
on  14.02.2013,  she  was  late  on  the  said  date.  The
appellant contended that whenever she comes late to
work, she stays late in the office till evening 7-8
PM and completes all the work.
8.
On  15.03.2013,  another  SCN  was  issued  by  the
Respondent No.4 to the appellant with the following
charges:
“i.
Marking of disabled boys/girls
and verification of the specified list
prepared  by  Social  Justice  was  to  be
done by you for the execution of several
activities  through  Arushi  Institution
but  marking  and  verification  was  not
done by you.
ii.
The proceedings of appointing
volunteers and MRC are prevalent in the
Arushi  Institution.  You  are  also
nominated  therein  as  representative  of
District  Education  Centre  but  due  to
your  in-cooperative,  obstruction  and
negligent  attitude,  the  appointment  on
the said posts could not be made and due
to  this  reason,  the  other  activities
including  education  is  adversely  being
affected.

5
iii.
No report was submitted when
the monitoring of CWSN hostel was done
and what improvements were made.
iv.
Entry of unauthorized persons
in the hostel is strictly prohibited and
you being posted at a responsible post,
it is your duty to ensure prohibition on
the entrance of unwanted persons in the
hostel  but  telling  about  this  is  very
far and you yourself has tried to enter
the  hostel  along  with  the  crowd  of
outsiders. Further you put pressure on
the senior officers to give entrance to
the unauthorized persons in the hostel.
The  work  done  beyond  your  official
duties,  comes  under  the  category  of
indiscipline.
v. Your  head  office  is  situated  at
Sihore, but you are not residing at the
headquarter  and  come  from  Bhopal
everyday
vi.
You do not come in the office
at right time also and in spite of being
late,you  made  signature  on  the
attendance register. It is indiscipline
on your part.”
(sic)
9.
The  appellant
 vide 
representation  dated
20.03.2013 stated that all tricks were being adopted
for  removing  her  from  the  post  of  APC.  She  stated
that  SCNs  were  being  issued  to  her  even  for small
things.  She  alleged  non  co-operation  from  other
officers and that she was being harassed as she had
complained about the hostel.
10.
The  appellant  replied  to  the  SCN  dated
15.03.2013 on 22.03.2013, inter alia, countering that

6
she was being subjected to non-cooperation and mental
harassment by the officers. She further alleged that
her reputation was being spoiled by giving negative
feedback to senior officers.
11.
Order  dated  30.03.2013  was  passed  by  the
Respondent No.4 deciding not to extend the contract
of the appellant as APC from 31.03.2013 on the ground
of  dereliction  of  duty,  as  the  work/performance  of
the appellant was found to be unsatisfactory. English
translation of this order as annexed by the appellant
with the paper-book reads as under:
“Under  the  above  subject  matter  and
under  the  Sarv  Shiksha  Abhiyan  on
30.03.2013  in  the  meeting  of  the
District Appointment Committee after the
consideration and determination is done
and subsequent to the same this decision
has been taken that as you work is not
satisfactory and due to this reason from
the  end  dated  31.03.2013  of  the
Education Session your contract service
may not be increased.
In  the  context  of  the  above  decision
from  dated  31.03.2013  furthermore  your
contract service is not increased.”
(sic)
12.
Aggrieved,
 
the
 
appellant/original
 
writ-
petitioner invoked Article 226 of the Constitution of
India (hereinafter referred to as the “Constitution”)

7
to  file  Writ  Petition  No.8404/2013  before  the  High
Court  against  the  order  dated  30.03.2013  supra
refusing  to  renew/extend  her  services.  A  learned
Single Judge allowed this writ petition on 20.06.2017
and quashed the order dated 30.03.2013, holding that
the  termination  orders  being  stigmatic  in  nature,
relating  to  alleged  misconduct  involving  moral
turpitude,  the  same  could  not  have  been  passed
without holding a regular enquiry.
13.
Aggrieved by the learned Single Judge’s judgment
dated 20.06.2017, the official respondents filed Writ
Appeal  No.956/2017  under  Section  2  of  The  Madhya
Pradesh Uchcha Nyayalaya (Khand Nyaypeeth Ko Appeal)
Adhiniyam, 2005 before the Division Bench, which was
allowed on 03.02.2020, and now stands impugned by the
appellant.
APPELLANT’S SUBMISSIONS:
14.
Mr.  Prashant  Bhushan,  learned  counsel  for  the
appellant submitted that the order dated 30.03.2013
was clearly stigmatic in nature and thus could not
have been passed without giving her an opportunity of
being heard. It was submitted that the learned Single
Judge has rightly held so, and the Division Bench has

8
gone only by the text of the order dated 30.03.2013
to erroneously hold that the same was “simpliciter”.
15.
It was contended that the rules stipulate that
the  minimum  tenure  of  service  of  a  contractual
appointee  will  be  at  least  one  year  in  the  first
instance and two years each subsequently, subject to
evaluation of work in the first year whereas in the
present case, the appellant had put in only 5 months
and  15  days.  Further,  it  was  submitted  that  the
curtailment  of  the  tenure  of  the  appellant  was  in
violation of the provisions of the rules of the Rajiv
Gandhi Prathmik Shiksha Mission2 (hereinafter referred
to as “RGPSM”) which provide that for persons working
on contract, notice of one month is to be served, if
their  tenure  is  to  be  curtailed  on  the  ground  of
inefficiency.  Moreover,  learned  counsel  submitted
that  the  respondents  were  further  bound  by  orders
dated  09.03.2012  and  13.03.2012  issued  by  the
Respondent  No.2,  which  specifically  provide  that
contractual  workers  in  the  SSA  could  not  be
terminated  on  the  ground  of  inefficiency  without
2
 Erstwhile name of the SSA.

9
affording  them  an  opportunity  of  being  heard,  in
accordance with the principles of natural justice.
16.
It was pointed out by the learned counsel that
the  Division  Bench  also  failed  to  take  into
consideration  that  the  appellant  was  the  victim  of
malafide counter-action by the Respondents No.4 and 5
as it was she who had brought to the notice of the
authorities  the  misdeeds  being  committed  at  the
hostel  run  by  Bright  Star,  under  the  aegis  of  the
State,  which  was  sought  to  be  buried  by  the
respondents.
17.
Learned counsel contended that the glaring fact
was that the appellant was assigned the charge of the
hostel on 09.01.2013, which was revoked on 14.01.2013
without  giving  any  reason/ground  for  such  action.
Learned  counsel  submitted  that  this  discloses  that
the  respondents  made  an  ex-post-facto justification
for removing her and that during those 5/6 days, no
incident had occurred, which may have justified such
extreme action against the appellant. 
18.
Further,  the  stand  of  the  learned  counsel  was
that  under  the  RGPSM,  the  Appointing  Authority  for
the  post  of  APC  is  the  State  Level  Appointing

10
Authority,  whereas  she  had  been  removed  by  the
District Level Committee, in contravention of Article
311(2)3 of the Constitution.
19.
In  support  of  his  contentions,  Mr.  Bhushan
relied upon the following decisions of this Court:
1. Anoop Jaiswal v Government of India, (1984) 2
SCC 369
2.  Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. v Mazdoor Sabha,  
(1980) 2 SCC 593
3.  State Bank of India v Palak Modi, (2013) 3  
SCC 607
RESPONDENTS’ SUBMISSIONS:
20.
Per  contra,  Mr.  Nachiketa  Joshi,  learned
Additional  Advocate  General,  for  the  respondents  –
the State of Madhya Pradesh and its functionaries –
in support of the Impugned Judgment submitted that it
was rightly held by the Division Bench that it was
within the competence of the authority to determine
as  to  whether  the  service  of  a  person  claiming
3 “311. Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in
civil capacities under the Union or a State.
xxx
(2)  No  such  person  as  aforesaid  shall  be  dismissed  or  removed  or
reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the
charges  against  him  and given  a reasonable  opportunity  of  being heard in
respect of those charges. 
xxx”

11
continuation was satisfactory. For this proposition,
reliance was placed on  State of Uttar Pradesh v Ram
Bachan Tripathi, (2005) 6 SCC 496 and  Rajesh Kumar
Shrivastava v State of Jharkhand, (2011) 4 SCC 447.
21.
It was submitted that the order dated 30.03.2013
was an order simpliciter without involving any stigma
being  basically  an  order  of  non-extension  of  the
appellant’s  contractual  services.  He  submitted  that
it  does  not  involve  any  evil  consequences  nor  is
founded on any misconduct. The further submission was
that  the  appellant,  having  been  appointed  on
contractual basis, has no right of service as such. 
22.
Relying  upon  the  terms  of  service,  it  was
pointed out that the same clearly indicated that the
appointment would be purely temporary in nature and
subject to the contractual conditions stipulated in
the contract. It was submitted the even the letter of
appointment  dated  15.10.2012,  under  “Service
Conditions” stated that:
“1. This appointment will be absolutely
temporary and will be under the contract
conditions of Mission.
2. If the work is not found satisfactory
or if the post is not required, then the
service  can  be  terminated  without  any
prior information.

12
…” 
23.
In the aforesaid light, it was submitted that in
the  present  case  despite  the  appellant  having  been
issued  SCNs  seeking  explanation  for  her  non-
performance,  there  was  no  improvement  from  her  end
and since her work was found to be unsatisfactory,
the  contract  was  not  extended.  In  support  of  his
contentions,  learned  counsel  also  relied  upon  the
following:
1. State of Uttar Pradesh v Ram Chandra Trivedi,
(1976) 4 SCC 52
2.  Chandra  Prakash  Shahi  v  State  of  Uttar
Pradesh, (2000) 5 SCC 152
24.
It was submitted that the appellant was in the
habit  of  remaining  absent  from  work  and  neither
discharged  her  duty  of  marking  the  names  of
specially-abled  boys/girls  and  nor  did  verification
of the specified list prepared by the Department of
Social  Justice  for  execution  of  several  activities
through  the  Arushi Institutions.  Further,  it  was
contended  that  in  the  Committee  constituted  to
appoint  volunteers  and  MRC  in  the
 Arushi
Institutions,  the  appellant  was  appointed  as  the

13
representative of District Education Centre and due
to  her  non-cooperative,  obstructive  and  negligent
attitude, such appointment were not made, leading to
other  activities,  including  education,  being
adversely affected. 
25.
Moreover,  it  was  submitted  that  the  appellant
did not submit a report on the hostel when it was
under her monitoring and she did not inform whether
there  was  any  improvement  or  not  and  if  so,  the
details  thereof  and  steps  taken.  It  was  submitted
that only because the appellant had previously been
issued
 
some
 
appreciation
 
letters,
 
future
unsatisfactory conduct cannot be saved basis her past
conduct. 
26.
Learned  counsel  further  pointed  out  that
initially the appellant was placed at Serial No.5 in
the Provisional Merit List issued on 09.12.2011 which
was because of non-submission of proper Certificate
of Experience alongside her application for the post
of APC. Later, when the Certificate of Experience was
submitted, the Merit List was revised and rectified
on  12.09.2012,  whereupon  she  was  placed  at  Serial
No.1. 

14
27.
Apropos  the  appellant’s  allegations 
against
Respondents  No.4  &  5  to  the  effect  that  they  were
interested for the appointment of one Dheeraj Singh
Dhakad,  learned  counsel  submitted  that  in  the
Provisional Merit List, he was below the appellant,
which  would  not  have  been  the  case  had  he  been
favoured. It is also submitted that had there been
any
 malafide 
intent  towards  the  appellant,
Respondents  No.4  &  5  would  have  rejected  her
application on the basis of her submitting an expired
Certificate  of  Experience,  but  they  chose  to  give
time  to  her  to  submit  a  proper  Certificate,  which
would demonstrate that the said respondents did not
harbour any bias against her.
28.
Learned  counsel  summed  up  by  stating  that  the
judgment impugned was well-considered and needed no
interference under Article 136 of the Constitution.
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
29.
Having bestowed our anxious consideration to the
lis, we find that the interference of the Division
Bench  with  the  judgment  dated  20.06.2017  of  the

15
learned Single Judge, has to be interdicted at our
hands.
30.
A bird’s eye views reveals thus. The appellant
topped  the  revised  Merit  List,  leading  to  her
appointment  as  an  APC.  While  serving  as  such,
complaint(s) against her, in brief, were that she was
not performing her duties, primarily on two counts –
(i)  not  punctual  in  attending  to  her  duties,  and;
(ii) not correctly reported with regard to the events
in  the  hostel.  As  against  these,  the  appellant’s
response,  via her replies to the SCNs, is that she,
inter alia, frankly admits to being late on occasion,
but to compensate for her late-coming, she used to
sit till late evening in the office for completion of
work.  On  this  count,  the  Respondents  cannot  be
faulted. It is no justification for the appellant to
contend that she was late, but worked late/overtime
such that the work did not suffer. However, as borne
out  from  the  record,  with  regard  to  the  hostel,
charge was given to her for only 5/6 days. As such,
in our view, it cannot be said that within such a
short  period,  the  appellant,  without  fully
understanding  the  attendant  issues,  could  have

16
straightaway given any opinion/report on the hostel.
Be that as it may, this case turns on our findings
infra.
31.
Clause  4  of  the  RGPSM’s  General  Service
Conditions
 
under
 
the
 
heading
“Resignation/Termination” provides as below:
“Persons  working  on  contract  can  be
terminated  with  one  month  notice  if
found  inefﬁcient. In  case  of  persons
found indulged in undesirable activities
amounting to degradation of dignity of
Mission, Mission Director shall reserve
right  to  terminate  him/her  with
immediate effect.”
(emphasis supplied)
32.
Perusal  of  Clause  4  makes  it  clear  that
ordinarily, for inefficiency, one month’s notice is
sufficient. The Clause also makes it clear that if
someone  is  found  to  have  indulged  in  “undesirable
activities”,  the  Mission  Director  was  competent  to
terminate  such  person’s  services  “with  immediate
effect”.  We  are  afraid  that  the  Respondents  have
placed  themselves  in  a  Catch-224 situation.  If  the
order dated 30.03.2013 falls within the former part
of Clause 4, as contended by the respondent, on the
4 Colloquially,  when  one  is  placed  in  a  dilemma  due  to  two  contradictory
conditions. The phrase was popularized by Joseph Heller’s novel of the same
name, first published in 1961.

17
premise that it is a case of termination simpliciter
and  non-stigmatic,  then  one  month’s  notice  was
required  to  be  issued  to  the  appellant,  which
admittedly  was  not  done  in  the  instant  matter.
Arguendo, were the order dated 30.03.2013 to be seen
as  falling  under  the  latter  part  of  Clause  4,  it
would be stigmatic, as made clear by the use of the
words “indulged in undesirable activities amounting
to degradation of dignity of Mission”.
33.
In either of the above-noted eventualities, the
Impugned  Judgment  would  have  to  necessarily  be  set
aside. Nevertheless, let us examine the reasoning of
the Division Bench, which opined that the order is
non-stigmatic  and
 simpliciter 
non-renewal  of
contract.  The  order  dated  30.03.2013  was,  quite
obviously,  the  culmination  of  the  process  set  into
motion by the two SCNs, which has been overlooked by
the  Division  Bench.  The  mere  non-mention  of  the
background situation or the SCNs in the order dated
30.03.2013 cannot, by itself, be determinative of the
nature of the order. As held by this Court in Samsher
Singh v State of Punjab, (1974) 2 SCC 8315 and Anoop
5 “80. …The form of the order is not decisive as to whether the order is by way
of punishment. Even an innocuously worded order terminating the service may

18
Jaiswal v Government of India, (1984) 2 SCC6, the form
of  an  order  is  not  its  final  determinant  and  the
Court can find out the real reason and true character
behind  terminating/removing  an  employee.  Moreover,
the Impugned Judgment also does not deal with Clause
4.  Interestingly,  this  Clause  also  escaped  the
attention of or/and was not brought to the notice of
the learned Single Judge either.
34.
It is profitable to refer to what  five learned
Judges  of  this  Court  laid  down  in  Parshotam  Lal
Dhingra v Union of India, 1957 SCC OnLine SC 5: 
“28.  The  position  may,  therefore,  be
summed  up  as  follows:  Any  and  every
termination  of  service  is  not  a
dismissal, removal or reduction in rank.
A termination of service brought about
by the exercise of a contractual right
is not per se dismissal or removal, as
has been held by this Court in Satish
Chander Anand v. Union of India [(1953)
1 SCC 420: (1953) SCR 655]. Likewise the
termination  of  service  by  compulsory
retirement in terms of a specific rule
regulating the conditions of service is
not  tantamount  to  the  infliction  of  a
in  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case  establish  that  an  enquiry  into
allegations of serious and grave character of misconduct involving stigma has
been made in infraction of the provision of Article 311 …”
6 “12. It is, therefore, now well settled that where the form of the order is
merely a camouflage for an order of dismissal for misconduct it is always open
to the court before which the order is challenged to go behind the form and
ascertain the true character of the order. If the court holds that the order
though in the form is merely a determination of employment is in reality a cloak
for an order of punishment, the court would not be debarred, merely because of
the form of the order, in giving effect to the rights conferred by law upon the
employee.”

19
punishment and does not attract Article
311(2), as has also been held by this
Court  in  Shyam  Lal  v.  State  of  Uttar
Pradesh [(1955) 1 SCR 26]. In either of
the  two  abovementioned  cases  the
termination of the service did not carry
with it the penal consequences of loss
of pay, or allowances under Rule 52 of
the Fundamental Rules. It is true that
the misconduct, negligence, inefficiency
or  other  disqualification  may  be  the
motive  or  the  inducing  factor  which
influences the Government to take action
under  the  terms  of  the  contract  of
employment or the specific service rule,
nevertheless, if a right exists, under
the contract or the rules, to terminate
the service the motive operating on the
mind  of  the  Government  is,  as  Chagla,
C.J.,  has  said  in  Shrinivas  Ganesh  v.
Union  of  India  [LR  58  Bom  673  :  AIR
(1956)  Bom  455]  wholly  irrelevant.  In
short, if the termination of service is
founded  on  the  right  flowing  from
contract  or  the  service  rules  then,
prima  facie,  the  termination  is  not  a
punishment and carries with it no evil
consequences and so Article 311 is not
attracted. But  even if  the  Government
has, by contract or under the rules, the
right  to  terminate  the  employment
without  going  through  the  procedure
prescribed for inflicting the punishment
of dismissal or removal or reduction in
rank, the Government may, nevertheless,
choose to punish the servant and if the
termination of service is sought to be
founded  on  misconduct,  negligence,
inefficiency or other disqualification,
then  it  is  a  punishment  and  the
requirements  of  Article  311  must  be
complied with. As already stated if the
servant has got a right to continue in
the post, then,  unless the contract of
employment or the rules provide to the

20
contrary,  his  services  cannot  be
terminated
 
otherwise
 
than
 
for
misconduct, negligence, inefficiency or
other  good  and  sufficient  cause.  A
termination  of  the  service  of  such  a
servant  on  such  grounds  must  be  a
punishment  and,  therefore,  a  dismissal
or  removal  within  Article  311,  for  it
operates as a forefeiture of his right
and  he  is  visited  with  the  evil
consequences  of  loss  of  pay  and
allowances. It puts an indelible stigma
on  the  officer  affecting  his  future
career. A reduction in rank likewise may
be by way of punishment or it may be an
innocuous  thing.  If  the  government
servant  has  a  right  to  a  particular
rank, then the very reduction from that
rank will operate as a penalty, for he
will  then  lose  the  emoluments  and
privileges of that rank. If, however, he
has no right to the particular rank, his
reduction  from  an  officiating  higher
rank to his substantive lower rank will
not ordinarily be a punishment. But the
mere fact that the servant has no title
to  the  post  or  the  rank  and  the
Government has, by contract, express or
implied, or under the rules, the right
to reduce him to a lower post does not
mean  that  an  order  of  reduction  of  a
servant to a lower post or rank cannot
in  any  circumstances  be  a  punishment.
The  real  test  for  determining  whether
the reduction in such cases is or is not
by way of punishment is to find out if
the order for the reduction also visits
the servant with any penal consequences.
Thus  if  the  order  entails  or  provides
for  the  forfeiture  of  his  pay  or
allowances or the loss of his seniority
in his substantive rank or the stoppage
or postponement of his future chances of
promotion,  then  that  circumstance  may
indicate  that  although  in  form  the

21
Government had purported to exercise its
right to terminate the employment or to
reduce the servant to a lower rank under
the terms of the contract of employment
or under the rules, in truth and reality
the  Government  has  terminated  the
employment as and by way of penalty. The
use  of  the  expression  “terminate”  or
“discharge” is not conclusive. In spite
of  the  use  of  such  innocuous
expressions, the court has to apply the
two tests mentioned above, namely, (1)
whether the servant had a right to the
post or the rank, or (2) whether he has
been visited with evil consequences of
the  kind  hereinbefore  referred  to?  If
the  case  satisfies  either  of  the  two
tests  then  it  must  be  held  that  the
servant  has  been  punished  and  the
termination of his service must be taken
as a dismissal or removal from service
or the reversion to his substantive rank
must be regarded as a reduction in rank
and if the requirements of the rules and
Article  311,  which  give  protection  to
government  servant  have  not  been
complied  with,  the  termination  of  the
service or the reduction in rank must be
held to be wrongful and in violation of
the  constitutional  right  of  the
servant.”
(emphasis supplied)
35.
We  would  only  be  adding  to  verbosity  by
multiplying authorities. In view of the above dictum,
it is clear that the Respondents did not comply with
Clause 4 – either the first part or the second part
thereof.  The  order  dated  30.03.2013  does  visit  the

22
appellant  with  evil  consequences  and  would  create
hurdles for her re further employment. 
36. 
In view of the discussions made hereinabove, the
Impugned  Judgment  is  quashed  and  set  aside.  The
judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 20.06.2017
stands  revived,  however  with  a  modification  to  the
extent that the appellant shall be entitled to all
consequential
 
benefits
 
including
 
notional
continuation in service at par with other similarly-
situated  employees,  but  with  the  back  wages
restricted  to  50%.  Further,  in  view  of  the  long
passage of time, we deny liberty to the respondents
to  proceed  afresh  against  the  appellant  as  was
granted  by  the  learned  Single  Judge.  However,  this
will not preclude the respondents from taking action
against  the  appellant  in  accordance  with  law  in
futuro  apropos  her  official  duties  on  the  post  in
question, if the situation so arises. The exercise be
completed  within  three  months  from  the  date  of
receipt of this judgment.

23
37.
The  appeal  is  allowed  and  disposed  of  on  the
above terms while leaving the parties to bear their
own expenses.
                            ........................J.
[HIMA KOHLI]       
           
 
.........................J.
[AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI
AUGUST 22, 2024