2024 INSC 631
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7595 of 2021 
 
BANGALORE ELECTRICITY SUPPLY 
COMPANY LIMITED  
 
 
 
 
   ...APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
HIREHALLI SOLAR POWER PROJECT LLP 
& OTHERS 
 
 
 
 
 
      …RESPONDENT(S)  
WITH 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7608 OF 2021 
WITH 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6386 OF 2021 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Facts: .......................................................................................................................................... 2 
KERC’s order: . ........................................................................................................................ 5 
APTEL’s impugned order:. .................................................................................................... 6 
Submissions:. ......................................................................................................................... 10 
Scope of Supreme Court’s appellate jurisdiction under Section 125 of the Act:  13 
Analysis on merits:. .............................................................................................................. 16 
Clauses of the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA):. ..................................................... 17 
Re: Applicability of the force majeure clause: ............................................................... 21 
Conclusion: .............................................................................................................................. 26 
 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.08.27
19:00:40 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
J U D G M E N T 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
The short issue arising from these appeals is whether the 
extension of the Scheduled Commissioning Date1 was occasioned 
under the force majeure clause of the Power Purchase Agreement2, 
and consequently, whether the reduction in tariff payable to the 
respondents is justified. While upholding the decision of the 
Appellate Tribunal for Electricity3 we have examined the scope and 
ambit of our appellate jurisdiction under Section 125 of the 
Electricity Act, 20034. We have held that the restrictive scope of 
appellate jurisdiction is a product not only of the statutory 
preconditions, but also a necessary measure to enable freedom to 
statutory regulator and Tribunal to develop sectorial laws through 
a principled and consistent approach. 
2. 
Facts: Since the facts and the PPAs are similar in all three 
appeals, we will deal with the facts in the lead Civil Appeal No. 
7595/2021, where the most relevant facts are as follows: 
2.1  State of Karnataka introduced a policy dated 26.08.2014 to 
identify and promote solar energy projects by land-owning farmers. 
 
1 Hereinafter “SCD”.  
2 Hereinafter “PPA”.  
3 Hereinafter “APTEL”. 
4 Hereinafter “the Act”. 

3 
 
These solar power plants of 1-3 MW capacity would generate and 
sell power to the State Electricity (Distribution) Supply 
Companies5 at the tariff determined by the Karnataka Electricity 
Regulatory Commission6. 
2.2   Respondent no. 2 is one of the many farmers who applied 
under the policy and is recognised as a solar power developer7 
under the policy. Respondent No.1 is a special purpose vehicle to 
undertake the solar power project in Chitradurga district in 
Karnataka.  
2.3   Pursuant to a Letter of Award dated 28.08.2015, the 
appellant entered into a PPA with respondent no. 2 on 29.08.2015. 
This PPA was approved by the KERC on 07.09.2015. The relevant 
clauses of the PPA will be discussed later, but an important aspect 
to note at this juncture is that the SPV must achieve commercial 
operation within 18 months from the effective date as per Article 
1.1(xxviii) read with Article 4.1(c) of the PPA. Effective date is 
defined under Article 1.1(xii) as the date of signing the PPA. Hence, 
the SCD for the project was 28.02.2017 as per these clauses.  
 
5 Hereinafter “DISCOMs”. 
6 Hereinafter “KERC”. 
7 Hereinafter “SPD”.  

4 
 
2.4   The SPV (respondent no. 1) was incorporated on 
05.02.2016. The respondents then submitted an application for 
land conversion on 16.02.2016. On 10.03.2016, they paid the 
evacuation approval processing fee. On 27.12.2016, they paid the 
land conversion processing fee, and the approval for conversion 
was granted on 07.01.2017. The evacuation scheme was 
provisionally approved on 13.05.2016, and the final approval was 
on 22.08.2016.  
2.5   Several farmers, including the respondent, raised concerns 
regarding delay in the execution of the project on account of delay 
in getting land use conversion, delay in getting evacuation 
approvals, demonetisation, and other reasons. Hence, the 
Government of Karnataka by a letter dated 24.11.2016 directed all 
DISCOMs to set up 3-member committees to examine each request 
for extension.  
2.6   The present respondents requested a 6-month extension 
under Article 2.5 of the PPA on 03.12.2016. This was approved by 
the appellant through a letter dated 02.03.2017. 
2.7   However, by a letter dated 05.04.2017, KERC directed the 
DISCOMs that all requests for extensions must be filed before it. 
Pursuant to this letter, the respondents filed a petition before the 

5 
 
KERC seeking extension of time for the commercial operation of 
the project and invoked the force majeure clause in the PPA (Article 
8.3).  
2.8   During the pendency of the petition, the respondents’ solar 
power project was commissioned on 24.08.2017, within the 
extended period of 24 months. 
3. KERC’s order: In its order dated 18.09.2018, the KERC 
rejected the various causes of delay put forth by the respondents 
and held that the force majeure clause must be strictly interpreted. 
First, delay in approval of the PPA by KERC was held to have no 
bearing on the initial obligations of the SPD in applying for 
approvals, loans, etc as the respondents had not proved the same. 
Second, it found that the respondent had applied for conversion of 
land only on 18.02.2016, over five months after signing the PPA 
and paid the charges only on 27.12.2016, after which it was 
allowed on 07.01.2017. Hence, the delay in conversion of land use 
was attributed to the respondent. Third, the delay in disbursement 
of loan also did not delay the implementation as the respondent 
had commenced implementation from its own funds. Fourth, the 
respondent applied for the evacuation approval only on 
25.02.2016, and the regular approval was finally granted on 

6 
 
22.08.2016. Hence, the respondent delayed the application and 
cannot attribute the same to the authorities. Similarly, the KERC 
also rejected delay on other grounds such as time taken for 
delivery of the breaker, and inspection of the project and grant of 
safety approval.  
3.1   It also found that the respondents had not submitted a notice 
as contemplated under Article 8.3(b)(i) and hence, they are not 
entitled to invoke force majeure and claim an extension of time 
under Article 2.5. Since the KERC found that the delay in securing 
approvals and the consequent delay in commissioning was 
attributable to the respondents, it imposed liquidated damages 
under Articles 2.2 and 2.5.7 of the PPA.  
3.2   Lastly, the KERC reduced the tariff payable to the respondent 
to Rs. 4.36 per unit for the term of the PPA by relying on Article 
5.1 of the PPA.  
4. APTEL’s impugned order: The respondent’s appeal against the 
order of the KERC was allowed by the APTEL by the order 
impugned before us. The APTEL dealt with each ground of delay 
raised by the respondents. First, it took note that the respondent’s 
application for land conversion was on 16.02.2016, after which it 
had to procure several documents, including a PTCL certificate, as 

7 
 
provided under Rule 106A of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act. 
Further, these documents must be secured from various 
government departments, which is a laborious process. The PTCL 
certificate was issued by the government only on 04.10.2016, 
although the respondent had applied for it even before signing the 
PPA. Hence, it found that the respondent could not be blamed for 
the delay in getting approval for land use conversion.  
4.1   Further, the APTEL also took note of the State Government’s 
opinion to grant deemed conversion in such projects due to the 
number of SPDs facing similar issues. However, the APTEL 
observed, the guidelines to revenue authorities were unclear and 
hence the SPDs could not benefit from the same. The delay in the 
issuance of these guidelines and the confusion among authorities 
regarding deemed conversion had also resulted in a delay in 
obtaining land use conversion, which the respondents cannot be 
faulted for.   
4.2   Second, the APTEL found that although the application for 
grid connectivity and evacuation approval were submitted on 
25.02.2016, the final approval was only given on 22.08.2016, after 
a lapse of 5 months. Until this approval is given, the authorities 
will not prepare the bay SLD and layout drawings with estimation 

8 
 
of bay erection. The bay intimation notice was received by the 
respondents only a few days before the original SCD, and it was 
170 days after the grant of final evacuation approval. Hence, there 
was a delay in the construction of the bay that was not caused by 
the respondents.   
4.3   Relying on other decisions by the APTEL, it held that the date 
of signing the PPA will not be the effective date, as provided in 
Article 1.1(xxviii). Rather, the PPA becomes effective only when it 
is approved by the KERC, which in this case was on 07.09.2015. 
Hence, 18 months must be calculated from this date.  
4.4   The APTEL observed that the appellant had itself approved 
the extension of time by 6 months after a Technical Committee 
constituted by it had scrutinised all relevant documents. Hence, 
the appellant could not take the stance that the respondents were 
not diligent. Even before the KERC, the appellant had not objected 
to the grounds raised by the respondents, and hence they could 
not take a contrary stance at this stage.  
4.5   Considering the delay in obtaining the PTCL certificate and 
approval for land conversion, the approval for evacuation, and 
construction of the bay, the APTEL found that the respondents had 
taken all necessary care and caution and acted with due diligence. 

9 
 
Hence, it held that the respondents could not be blamed for the 
delay as the time taken by government authorities to provide 
approvals was not within their control and they had taken all the 
measures that they could. Consequently, the APTEL found that the 
respondents are entitled to the benefit of the force majeure clause 
and an extension of time, as was already approved by the 
appellant. The respondents were able to commission the project on 
24.08.2017, which falls within the extended period of 24 months 
from 07.09.2015.  
4.6   With regard to the reduction in tariff by the KERC, APTEL 
considered that the government scheme, under which these PPAs 
were signed, was intended to create opportunity and benefit for 
farmers by establishing solar power plants. The farmers had 
invested huge amounts, sometimes through loans, in these 
projects and a reduction in tariff from Rs. 8.40 to Rs. 4.36 per unit 
would adversely affect them. Hence, it directed the appellant to pay 
the difference in per unit tariff along with the late payment 
surcharge as provided under Article 6.4 of the PPA. 
4.7   Lastly, it also set aside the imposition of liquidated damages 
under the PPA as it found that there was no delay in securing 
approvals and commissioning the project.  

10 
 
5. Submissions: We have heard Mr. K.M. Nataraj, ASG and Mr. 
Yasobant Das, senior advocate appearing for the appellants, and 
Mr. Basava Prabhu Patil, senior advocate for the respondents. The 
learned counsels have, through the course of their submissions, 
emphasised on whether or not the delay in the present matter 
would be covered under the force majeure clause of the PPA.  
5.1   Learned ASG argued that a force majeure clause must be 
strictly interpreted. There must be a specific pleading by the party 
claiming force majeure and the burden is on him to prove the 
same. In this regard, he made two primary submissions: first, there 
was no force majeure event that warrants an extension of time 
under Article 2.5 of the PPA; and second, the respondents have not 
complied with the requirement of submitting a written notice 
invoking force majeure as required under Article 8.3(b)(i). Further, 
he has also argued that the APTEL was not justified in granting 
late payment surcharge to the respondent as the same was not 
pleaded before the KERC or in appeal.  
5.2   In regard the argument on force majeure, Mr. Nataraj has 
taken us through the various dates concerning approval for change 
in land use and the evacuation approval. He has submitted that 
the delay in securing these approvals is attributable to the 

11 
 
respondents, who were required to obtain these permissions 
within the contractually stipulated period of 365 days under 
Article 2.1 of the PPA, and to finally commission the project within 
a period of 18 months. Despite being aware of these timelines, he 
submits that the respondents delayed the applications and 
payment of requisite fees. The government departments provided 
the approvals within a few days from the time when the 
respondents fulfilled all requirements. He therefore submits that 
the delay is attributable to the respondents and hence, as per 
Article 8.3(b)(iv), they cannot claim benefit of force majeure. 
Consequently, the tariff must be reduced as per Article 5.1 as a 
higher tariff increases the burden on consumers and hence, affects 
public interest.   
5.3   Mr. Das supplemented these submissions by arguing that in 
Civil Appeal No. 6386 of 2021, the respondents therein had also 
raised the ground of demonetisation as a reason for delay in 
commissioning. He submits that Article 8.3 of the PPA does not 
cover such a ground as a force majeure event.  
6. 
Mr. Patil, appearing for the respondents, has submitted that 
there are three primary factors, among several others, that caused 
the delay – (i) time taken for converting the land; (ii) time taken for 

12 
 
the KERC to approve the PPA; and (iii) time taken for the 
evacuation approval. He submits that these concerns have been 
raised by not only the respondents in the present case but in 
several other cases. Due to the extent to which SPDs were facing 
these issues, the government directed DISCOMs to set up 
committees to look into the same and consider the facts of each 
case individually. It is pursuant to this direction that the 
respondents’ case was considered by the appellant, who granted a 
6-month extension on 02.03.2017 by exercising its power under 
Article 2.5 read with Article 8.3 of the PPA. He submits that it was 
incorrect for the KERC to then require the respondents to file a 
separate petition to seek extension as the same is not as per the 
terms of the PPA. He further submits that the KERC had perversely 
appreciated the evidence regarding delay and that it should not 
have rejected the petition when the appellant had already granted 
the extension. Further, he submitted that the respondents were 
able to complete the project within the extended time period.  
6.1    Mr. Patil also took us through several orders of this Court8 
that dismiss appeals arising out of similar orders by the APTEL. 
He has specifically referred to the APTEL’s decision in 
 
8 In Civil Appeal No. 3958/2020; Civil Appeal No. 897/2022; Civil Appeal No. 5134/2021; Civil Appeal Diary 
Nos. 32980/2022, 33053/2022 and 33572/2022. 

13 
 
Chennamangathihalli Solar Power Project LLP v. BESCOM9 and has 
submitted that this decision has been relied on by the APTEL in 
several subsequent decisions arising out of similar facts, including 
the present impugned order. This Court has dismissed the appeal 
arising out of Chennamangathihalli (supra)10 and appeals from 
other APTEL orders relying on it. Mr. Nataraj, in his written 
submissions, has sought to differentiate these cases from the 
present matter on facts. 
7. Scope of Supreme Court’s appellate jurisdiction under Section 
125 of the Act: Before we deal with the submissions of the learned 
counsels, we must take note of the scope of our appellate 
jurisdiction under Section 125, which reads: 
“Section 125. (Appeal to Supreme Court): 
Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate 
Tribunal, may, file an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days 
from the date of communication of the decision or order of the 
Appellate Tribunal, to him, on any one or more of the grounds 
specified in section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure,1908…” 
 
7.1   Section 100 of the CPC restricts the High Court’s 
jurisdiction in second appeals to cases that involve ‘substantial 
questions of law’. There are two components to this requirement – 
(i) there must be a ‘question of law’; and (ii) such question of law 
must be ‘substantial’.  
 
9 2020 SCC OnLine APTEL 75. 
10 In Civil Appeal No. 3958/2020.  

14 
 
7.2   In SEBI v. Mega Corporation Limited11, this Court analysed 
the meaning of ‘question of law’ to determine the scope of its 
appellate jurisdiction under Section 15Z of the SEBI Act, 199212. 
It held that this phrase is open textured and must be interpreted 
by looking at the words in their context13. The relevant portions 
are extracted: 
“17. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Section 15Z to 
consider any question of law arising from the orders of the 
Tribunal should therefore be seen in the ‘context’ of the powers and 
jurisdiction of the Tribunal under Sections 15K, 15L, 15M, 15T, 15U 
and 15Y of the Act. It is in the functioning of the Tribunal to re-examine 
all questions of fact at the appellate stage while exercising jurisdiction 
under Section 15T of the Act. In Clariant and National Securities 
Depository, this Court had an occasion to examine the jurisdiction of 
the Tribunal and explain that the Tribunal has wide powers. Being a 
permanent body, apart from acting as an appellate Tribunal on fact, 
the Tribunal routinely interprets the Act, Rules and Regulations made 
thereunder and evolves a legal regime, systematically developed over 
a period of time. The advantage and benefit of this process is 
consistency and structural evolution of the sectorial laws. 
18. It is in the above-referred context that the Supreme Court while 
exercising appellate jurisdiction under Section 15Z of the Act would 
be measured in its approach while entertaining any appeal from the 
decision of the Tribunal. This freedom to evolve and interpret laws 
must belong to the Tribunals to subserve the regulatory regime for 
clarity and consistency and it is with this perspective that the 
Supreme Court will consider appeals against judgment of the 
Tribunals on questions of law arising from its orders. 
19. It is in this very context that the UK Supreme Court in the case 
of Jones v. First Tier Tribunal, formulated certain principles for 
appellate courts to interfere against the orders of Tribunals on the 
ground of existence of questions of law. The Court held as under: 
“16 … It is primarily for the tribunals, not the appellate 
courts, to develop a consistent approach to these issues [of 
 
11 2022 SCC OnLine SC 361.  
12 Section 15Z of the SEBI Act, 1992 reads: 
“15Z. Appeal to Supreme Court.-- Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of 
communication of the decision or order of the Securities Appellate Tribunal to him on any question 
of law arising out of such order…” (emphasis supplied) 
13 ibid, para 16. 

15 
 
law and fact], bearing in mind that they are peculiarly well 
fitted to determine them. A pragmatic approach should be 
taken to the dividing line between law and fact, so that the 
expertise of tribunals at the first tier and that of the Upper 
Tribunal can be used to best effect. An appeal court should 
not venture too readily into this area by classifying issues 
as issues of law which are really best left for determination 
by the specialist appellate tribunals.” 
20. The scope of appeal under Section 15Z may be formulated as 
under: 
20.1 The Supreme Court will exercise jurisdiction only when there is 
a question of law arising for consideration from the decision of the 
Tribunal. A question of law may arise when there is an erroneous 
construction of the legal provisions of the statute or the general 
principles of law. In such cases, the Supreme Court in exercise of its 
jurisdiction of Section 15Z may substitute its decision on any question 
of law that it considers appropriate. 
20.2 However, not every interpretation of the law would amount to a 
question of law warranting exercise of jurisdiction under Section 15Z. 
The Tribunal while exercising jurisdiction under Section 15T, apart 
from acting as an appellate authority on fact, also interprets the Act, 
Rules and Regulations made thereunder and systematically evolves 
a legal regime. These very principles are applied consistently for 
structural evolution of the sectorial laws. This freedom to evolve and 
interpret laws must belong to the Tribunal to subserve the Regulatory 
regime for clarity and consistency. These are policy and functional 
considerations which the Supreme Court will keep in mind while 
exercising its jurisdiction under Section 15Z.” 
 
 
7.3   The above understanding of ‘question of law’ as a 
precondition to this Court’s exercise of appellate jurisdiction under 
regulatory statutes is extremely pertinent to the present matter. 
The Act envisages the establishment of State Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions and the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
as expert and specialised bodies that discharge advisory, 
regulatory, and adjudicatory functions.14 It has established the 
 
14 The functions of the Central Commission are enlisted in Section 79 of the Act. Similarly, Section 86 provides 
the functions of the State Commissions.  

16 
 
APTEL as an appellate body to hear appeals against orders of the 
adjudicating officers or the Appropriate Commission.15 Hence, 
while delineating the contours of this Court’s interference in 
appeal under Section 125, we must be mindful and measured so 
as to enable a systematic and coherent development of electricity 
law by the Commissions and the APTEL. 
7.4   Having examined the scope of this Court’s exercise of 
appellate jurisdiction when there is a ‘question of law’ under 
Section 15Z of the SEBI Act, the position that emerges in this case, 
it is a little more restrictive as the requirement under Section 125 
is not merely a ‘question of a law’ but a ‘substantial question of 
law’.16 
8. 
Analysis on merits: The above discussion provides the context 
in which we decide the present appeals. We take note of several 
orders of this Court that have dismissed appeals arising out of 
similar orders and similar facts17. We find it necessary to state our 
reasons for dismissing the present appeals, to finally settle this 
issue. We will therefore analyse the submissions of the learned 
 
15 Section 110 establishes the APTEL. Section 111 provides the scope of appellate jurisdiction of the APTEL and 
Section 120 sets out the procedure to be followed by the APTEL and the powers of the APTEL.  
16 The requirement of ‘substantial question of law’ for this Court to exercise appellate jurisdiction under Section 
125 has also been recognised in BSES Rajdhani Power Limited v. Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission, (2023) 
4 SCC 788.  
17 In Civil Appeal No. 3958/2020; Civil Appeal No. 897/2022; Civil Appeal No. 5134/2021; Civil Appeal Diary 
Nos. 32980/2022, 33053/2022 and 33572/2022. 

17 
 
counsels in light of the scope of our jurisdiction and the reasoning 
and findings of the impugned order. 
8.1   At the outset, it is necessary to state that the learned ASG 
and learned senior counsel for the appellant have not proposed a 
substantial question of law for this Court to consider. Rather, they 
have argued on facts as to whether or not the delay is attributable 
to the respondents, and consequently whether force majeure is 
applicable. We will analyse the impugned order, as well as the 
KERC’s order, to determine whether there is any substantial 
question of law that calls for our interference.  
9. 
Clauses of the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA): Before 
discussing the orders of the KERC and the APTEL, it is necessary 
to identify the relevant clauses of the PPA. Article 2.1 of the PPA 
imposes the obligation on the SPD to secure necessary approvals, 
clearances, and permits within 365 days. Liquidated damages can 
be imposed on the SPD under Article 2.2 in case of delay, provided 
that the delay is not attributable to the appellant or due to a force 
majeure event.  
9.1   Article 2.5.1 permits the extension of the SCD in case the 
SPD is unable to fulfil its contractual obligations due to the 
appellant’s default or there are force majeure events that affect 

18 
 
either the appellant or the SPD. The list of force majeure events is 
set out in Article 8.3(a), and sub-clause (vi) is the most relevant for 
us. A party can invoke the force majeure clause subject to the 
conditions set out in Article 8.3(b).  
9.2   Article 2.5.7 provides that subject to the other provisions of 
the PPA, the SPD is liable to pay liquidated damages if it is unable 
to supply power to the appellant by the SCD. Therefore, the 
payment of damages under this clause is subject to an extension 
of time under Article 2.5.1. Article 5.1 provides for the tariff rate 
payable to the SPD as Rs. 8.40 per unit. However, in cases of delay, 
subject to extension of time under Article 2.5, it provides that the 
lower of Rs. 8.40 per unit and the varied tariff applicable as on the 
date of commercial operation will apply. A plain reading of Article 
5.1 makes it clear that the lower tariff will not apply if there is an 
extension of time under Article 2.5.  
9.3   The relevant clauses of the PPA are reproduced for ready 
reference:  
“Article 2.1: Conditions Precedent 
The obligations of BESCOM and the SPD under this Agreement are 
conditional upon the occurrence of the following in full within 365 
days from the effective date. 
2.1.1 
 (i)The SPD shall obtain all permits, clearances and approvals 
(whether Statutory or otherwise) as required to execute and operate 
the Protect hereinafter referred to as "Approvals"): 

19 
 
(ii) The Conditions Precedent required to be satisfied by the SPD shall 
be deemed to have been fulfilled when the SPD shall submit: 
a. The DPR to BESCOM and achieve financial closure and 
provide a certificate to BESCOM from the lead banker to this 
effect;  
b. All Consents, Clearances and Permits required for supply of 
power to BESCOM as per the terms of this Agreement; and  
c. Power evacuation approval from Karnataka Power 
Transmission Company Limited or BESCOM, as the case 
maybe. 
2.1.2 SPD shall make all reasonable endeavors to satisfy the 
Conditions Precedent within the time stipulated and BESCOM shall 
provide to the SPD all the reasonable cooperation as may be required 
to the SPD for satisfying the Conditions Precedent. 
2.1.3 The SPD shall notify BESCOM in writing at least once a month 
on the progress made in satisfying the Conditions Precedent. The 
date, on which the SPD fulfills any of the Conditions Precedent 
pursuant to Clause 2.1.1, it shall promptly notify BESCOM of the 
same.” 
 
“Article 2.2: Damages for delay by the SPD: 
“2.2.1 In the event that the SPD does not fulfill any or all of the 
Conditions Precedent set forth in Clause 2.1 within the period of 365 
days and the delay has not occurred for any reasons attributable to 
BESCOM or due to Force Majeure, the SPD shall pay to BESCOM 
damages in an amount calculated at the rate of 0.2% (zero point two 
per cent) of the Performance Security for each day's delay until the 
fulfillment of such Conditions Precedent, subject to a maximum period 
of 60 (Sixty) days. On expiry of the said 60 (Sixty) days, BESCOM at 
its discretion may terminate this Agreement.” 
 
Article 2.5: Extension of Time  
“2.5.1 In the event that the SPD is prevented from performing its 
obligations under Clause 4.1 by the Scheduled Commissioning Date 
due to:  
a. Any BESCOM Event of Default; or  
b. Force Majeure Events affecting BESCOM; or  
c. Force Majeure Events affecting the SPD, 
2.5.2 The Scheduled Commissioning Date and the Expiry Date shall 
be deferred, subject to the reasons and limits prescribed in Clause 
2.5.1 and Clause 2.5.3 for a reasonable period but not less than 'day 
for day' basis, to permit the SPD or BESCOM through the use of due 
diligence, to overcome the effects of the Force Majeure Events 
affecting the SPD or BESCOM, or till such time such Event of Default 
is rectified by BESCOM. 
2.5.3. In case of extension occurring due to reasons specified in clause 
2.5.1 (a), any of the dates specified therein can be extended, subject 
to the condition that the Scheduled Commissioning Date would not be 
extended by more than 6 (six) months.  

20 
 
… 
2.5.6. As a result of such extension, the Scheduled Commissioning 
Date and the Expiry Date newly determined date shall be deemed to 
be the Scheduled Commissioning Date and the Expiry Date for the 
purposes of this Agreement. 
2.5.7. Liquidated damages for delay in commencement of supply of 
power to BESCOMs.  
Subject to the other provisions of this agreement, if the SPD is unable 
to commence supply of power to BESCOM by the scheduled 
commissioning date, the SPD shall pay to BESCOM, liquidated 
damages for the delay in such commencement of supply of power as 
follows: 
(a) For the delay up to one month-amount equivalent to 20% of the 
performance security. 
(b) For the delay of more than one month up to three months-amount 
equivalent to 40% of the performance security. 
(c) For the delay of more than three months up to six months-amount 
equivalent to 100% of the performance security. 
For avoidance of doubt, in the event of failure to pay the above 
mentioned damages by the SPD, the BESCOM entitled to encash the 
performance Security.” 
 
Article 5: Rates and Charges: 
“5.1 Tariff payable: The SPD shall be entitled to receive the Tariff of 
Rs. 8.40 per kwh based on the KERC tariff order S/03/1 dated 
10.10.2013 in respect of SPD's Solar PV projects in terms of this 
agreement for the period between COD and the Expiry Date. 
However, subject to Clause 2.5, if there is a delay in commissioning 
of the Project beyond the Scheduled Commissioning Date and during 
such period such period there is a variation in the KERC Tariff, then 
the applicable Tariff for the projects shall be the lower of the following:  
(i) Rs.8.40 per kwh  
(ii) varied tariff applicable as on the date of Commercial Operation…” 
 
Article 8: Force Majeure  
“8.3 Force Majeure Events:  
a) Neither Party shall be responsible or liable for or deemed in breach 
hereof because of any delay or failure in the performance of its 
obligations hereunder (except for obligations to pay money due prior 
to occurrence of Force Majeure events under this Agreement) or failure 
to meet milestone dates due to any event or circumstance (a "Force 
Majeure Event") beyond the reasonable control of the Party affected 
by such delay or failure, including the occurrence of any of the 
following: 
i. Acts of God;  
ii. Typhoons, floods, lightning, cyclone, hurricane, drought, famine, 
epidemic, plague or other natural calamities; 
iii. Strikes, work stoppages, work slowdowns or other labor dispute 
which affects a Party's ability to perform under this Agreement; 

21 
 
iv. Acts of war (whether declared or undeclared), invasion or civil 
unrest; 
v. Any requirement, action or omission to act pursuant to any 
judgment or order of any court or judicial authority in India (provided 
such requirement, action or omission to act is not due to the breach 
by the SPD or BESCOM, of any Law or any of their respective 
obligations under this Agreement); 
vi. Inability despite complying with all legal requirements to obtain, 
renew or maintain required licenses or Legal Approvals; 
vii. Fire, Earthquakes, explosions, accidents, landslides; 
viii. Expropriation and/or compulsory acquisition of the Project in 
whole or in part; 
ix. Chemical or radioactive contamination or ionizing radiation; or 
x. Damage to or breakdown of transmission facilities of either Party; 
b) The availability of the above item (a) to excuse a Party's obligations 
under this Agreement due to a Force Majeure Event shall be subject 
to the following limitations and restrictions: 
(i) The non-performing Party gives the other Party written notice 
describing the particulars of the Force Majeure Event as soon as 
practicable after its occurrence; 
(ii) The suspension of performance is of no greater scope and of no 
longer duration than is required by the Force Majeure Event.  
(iii) The non-performing Party is able to resume performance of its 
obligations under this Agreement, it shall give the other Party written 
notice to that effect; 
(iv) The Force Majeure Event was not caused by the non performing 
Party's negligent or intentional acts, errors or omissions, or by its 
negligence/failure to comply with any material Law, or by any 
material breach or default under this Agreement;  
(v) In no event shall a Force Majeure Event excuse the obligations of 
a Party that are required to be completely performed prior to the 
occurrence of a Force Majeure Event.” 
 
10. Re: Applicability of the force majeure clause: The primary 
issue for our consideration is whether the delay in this case is due 
to a force majeure event as defined under Article 8.3, and 
consequently whether the respondents were entitled to an 
extension of time under Article 2.5. If the answer to these 
questions is affirmative, the tariff cannot be lowered under  

22 
 
Article 5.1 and liquidated damages cannot be imposed under 
Articles 2.2 and 2.5.7.  
10.1   The law on force majeure, specifically in the context of PPAs, 
has been comprehensively dealt with by this Court in Energy 
Watchdog v. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission18. The Court 
delved into contractual jurisprudence on force majeure clauses 
and frustration of contracts. It held that Sections 32 and 56 of the 
Indian Contract Act, 187219 govern the law on force majeure. When 
the contract contains an express or implied force majeure clause, 
it is governed under Chapter III of the Contract Act, specifically 
Section 32. In such cases, the ‘doctrine of frustration’ in Section 
56 does not apply and the court must interpret the force majeure 
clause contained in the contract20. It held that a force majeure 
clause must be narrowly construed21.  
 
18 (2017) 14 SCC 80.  
19 Section 32 reads: 
“32. Enforcement of contracts contingent on an event happening.—Contingent contracts to do or 
not to do anything if an uncertain future event happens, cannot be enforced by law unless and until 
that event has happened. 
If the event becomes impossible, such contracts become void.” 
Section 56 reads: 
“56. Agreement to do impossible act.—An agreement to do an act impossible in itself is void. 
Contract to do act afterwards becoming impossible or unlawful.—A contract to do an act which, 
after the contract is made, becomes impossible, or, by reason of some event which the promisor 
could not prevent, unlawful, becomes void when the act becomes impossible or unlawful. 
Compensation for loss through non-performance of act known to be impossible or unlawful.—
Where one person has promised to do something which he knew, or, with reasonable diligence, 
might have known, and which the promisee did not know, to be impossible or unlawful, such 
promisor must make compensation to such promisee for any loss which such promisee sustains 
through the non-performance of the promise.” 
20 Energy Watchdog (supra), para 47.  
21 ibid, para 45.  

23 
 
10.2    The present case is clearly one where the PPA contains an 
explicit force majeure clause in Article 8.3, which has already been 
extracted above. The question is whether the delay in 
commissioning 
falls 
within 
the 
ambit 
of 
this 
clause.  
Article 8.3(a)(vi) is the most relevant force majeure event that 
would apply to the facts here. It reads:  
“vi. Inability despite complying with all legal requirements to 
obtain, renew or maintain required licenses or Legal Approvals” 
 
Article 8.3(b)(iv) disentitles a party from claiming force majeure 
when the event was caused by its own negligence, intentional act, 
or omission. It reads:  
“b) The availability of the above item (a) to excuse a Party's 
obligations under this Agreement due to a Force Majeure Event 
shall be subject to the following limitations and restrictions: 
… 
(iv) The Force Majeure Event was not caused by the non 
performing Party's negligent or intentional acts, errors or 
omissions, or by its negligence/failure to comply with any 
material Law, or by any material breach or default under this 
Agreement…” 
 
10.3    When these clauses are read together, it is clear that the 
SPD would be entitled to the benefit of Article 8.3(a)(vi) when it is 
unable to secure the necessary approvals and licenses required 
under the PPA, provided that there is no negligence or intentional 
act or omission on its part that caused this situation.   

24 
 
10.4    The entire dispute before the KERC and the APTEL revolves 
on a question of fact – whether the respondents were negligent or 
not diligent in securing approvals and hence, is the delay in 
commissioning attributable to them. The KERC’s appreciation of 
the evidence has led it to the conclusion that the delay in 
commissioning was due to the respondents’ delay in making the 
applications, despite the approval of the PPA. However, the APTEL 
has taken note of certain additional factors affecting the time taken 
to secure the approvals that were not considered by the KERC. 
These include the time taken by the government to provide the 
PTCL that is required for approval of land conversion, and the 
delay caused by the authority in evacuation approval. Considering 
these additional factors, the APTEL has reappreciated the evidence 
to find that the delay was not attributable to the respondents but 
to the government bodies and relevant authorities. We find that 
there is no error in the APTEL’s approach, and it is reasonable in 
its reappreciation of evidence.  
10.5    Further, the APTEL also correctly took note of the fact that 
a large number of SPDs have raised similar issues, and the 
government has responded to the same by requiring DISCOMs to 
set-up committees to look into these cases. The large number of 

25 
 
cases that raise similar grounds and the government’s response 
show that the delay was not faced by the respondents alone, and 
hence cannot be entirely blamed on them. The government has 
itself acknowledged that the land use conversion process is a long 
and arduous one, which led it to deem conversion for solar power 
projects under the present scheme. However, due to lapses in the 
implementation of the deemed conversion, the SPDs were unable 
to avail the same. The APTEL has rightly appreciated these facts 
to hold that the respondents acted diligently and with care and 
caution to secure approvals, and hence their claims cannot be 
rejected through recourse to Article 8.3(b)(iv).  
11. Finally, we have also considered the letter by the appellant 
dated 02.03.2017 that granted a 6-month extension to the 
respondents 
after 
considering 
its 
individual 
facts 
and 
circumstances. This grant of extension must be seen in light of the 
government’s direction to DISCOMs dated 24.11.2016 to set up 3-
member committees to consider each request for extension. This 
shows that the appellant, after considering the specific case of the 
respondents, has itself accepted that they are entitled to the 
benefit of Article 2.5 read with Article 8.3 of the PPA. Even before 
the KERC, the appellant did not challenge the respondents’ 

26 
 
contentions. Therefore, at the appellate stage before the APTEL 
and this Court, they cannot be permitted to take a contrary stance 
and raise the plea that the delay was attributable to the 
respondents and not covered by the force majeure clause or that 
there was non-compliance with the notice requirement under 
Article 8.3(b)(i). We therefore reject the contentions of the appellant 
that force majeure does not apply in this case.  
12. In light of the above findings of fact by the APTEL that the 
delay is not attributable to the respondents and that the force 
majeure clause is applicable, it rightly held that the extension of 
time under Article 2.5 is warranted and the commissioning of the 
project on 24.08.2017 is within the extended period of 24 months. 
Consequently, the APTEL also rightly held that there is no occasion 
for the imposition of liquidated damages under Articles 2.2 and 
2.5.7 or for the reduction of tariff under Article 5.1 of the PPA. 
13. Conclusion: 
After 
considering 
the 
learned 
counsels’ 
submissions in light of the above findings of the APTEL, we find 
that no substantial question of law arises in the present case. The 
APTEL has primarily decided a question of fact as to the 
attributability of the delay, and from the above, it is clear that the 

27 
 
APTEL’s findings are neither illegal nor unreasonable. Hence, we 
find no reason to interfere with the same.  
14. Lastly, we also reject the appellant’s contention that the 
APTEL’s direction to pay late payment surcharge to the 
respondents is unjustified since the same was not pleaded. As we 
have already held, the APTEL rightly restored the tariff of Rs. 8.4 
per unit and directed the appellant to pay the difference amount. 
The direction to pay the late payment surcharge on this amount is 
explicitly rooted in the PPA, and hence, is in furtherance of the 
intention of the parties. There is no reason to set aside the same. 
15. With the above reasons, we dismiss the present appeals. 
16. No order as to costs.    
 
………………………………....J. 
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 
………………………………....J. 
[PANKAJ MITHAL] 
NEW DELHI; 
August 27, 2024