2024 INSC 635
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 7440-7441 OF 2012  
 
 
NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL 
AND ANOTHER 
 
 
 
 
 
.…APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
MANJU TOMAR AND OTHERS 
 
      ..RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WITH 
 
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 7442-7444 OF 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
 
1. 
Heard. 
 
2. 
These appeals filed by New Delhi Municipal Council1 
(hereinafter being referred to as ‘NDMC’) and Delhi Sikh Gurdwara 
Management Committee2 (hereinafter being referred to as 
‘DSGMC’) arise out of a common judgment dated 9th December, 
2009 passed by the High Court of Delhi in Letters Patent Appeal 
 
1 Civil Appeal No(s). 7440-7441 of 2012 
2 Civil Appeal No(s). 7442-7444 of 2012 
Digitally signed by
KAVITA PAHUJA
Date: 2024.08.28
15:03:30 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Nos. 441 and 442 of 2009 and hence, they have been heard and 
are being decided together. 
Civil Appeal Nos. 7442-7444 of 2012 
3. 
Facts in a nutshell relevant and essential for disposal of the 
appeals are noted hereinbelow. 
4. 
The appellant-DSGMC was managing and operating a school, 
namely, Khalsa Boys Primary School (in short ‘school’), 
constructed by it in the premises of the Gurudwara Bangla Sahib, 
New Delhi.  The school was initially started with 130 students, five 
teachers including the Headmistress, 2 peons and one helper. The 
school was receiving 95% grant from the NDMC and remaining 5% 
contribution was made by the appellant-DSGMC towards the 
budget of the school.  Respondents No. 1, 5, 6, 7 and 8 were 
employed as the Headmistress, Assistant Teacher, Water Women, 
Sweeper-cum-Chowkidar, Chowkidar, respectively in the school. 
5. 
It is claimed that over a period of time, the building of the 
school became old and dilapidated and also, considering the 
growing number of devotees visiting the Gurudwara, the appellant-
DSGMC was finding it difficult to run the school on a day-to-day 
basis. The appellant-DSGMC, therefore, decided to shift the school 
from its existing location to a new premises i.e. at Mata Sundari 

3 
 
College, Old Building, New Delhi. Since the school was receiving 
95% grant from the NDMC, the appellant-DSGMC moved the 
NDMC seeking permission to shift the school.   
6. 
Upon receiving information about the proposed shifting of the 
school by the appellant-DSGMC, the Headmistress and other staff 
of the school challenged the said proposal by filing Writ Petitions3 
in the High Court of Delhi.  An ex-parte stay order dated 30th May, 
2005 was passed by the learned Single Judge of High Court of 
Delhi, staying the proposed shifting of the school. However, in spite 
of the stay order being granted and having been communicated, 
the appellant-DSGMC demolished a substantial part of the school 
building thereby, making it non-functional. Consequent to the 
demolition of the school building, the NDMC stopped the grant-in-
aid under Rule 69 of the Delhi Education Act and Rules, 1973 
(hereinafter after being referred to as ‘Delhi Education Rules’) on 
the reasoning that it was under an obligation to provide grant-in-
aid to schools which fell within its territorial jurisdiction and that 
the alternate location selected by the appellant-DSGMC, i.e., Mata 
Sundari College was outside the jurisdiction of the NDMC. 
 
3 WP(C) Nos. 9951-52/2005   
 

4 
 
7. 
The High Court of Delhi disposed of the above writ petitions 
vide order dated 6th October, 2005 with a direction to the NDMC 
to consider and decide within four weeks as to whether ex-post 
facto sanction could be granted to the appellant-DSGMC to close 
down the school since the same was being shifted to an area which 
was outside the jurisdiction of the NDMC, thus, the shifting could 
lead to the closure of the school.  Following the direction given by 
the High Court, the NDMC issued an order dated 14th February, 
2006 whereby, it invoked Rule 55(1) of the Delhi Education Rules 
and noted that ex-post facto sanction could not be granted for 
running the school at the Mata Sundari College because it fell 
beyond its jurisdiction and consequently, it was decided to 
withdraw the recognition and to stop the grant-in-aid to the school 
being run by the appellant-DSGMC. 
8. 
The teaching as well as non-teaching staff of the school filed 
fresh writ petitions4 in the High Court of Delhi, seeking a direction 
for absorption in a NDMC/Government aided school and also to 
command the appellant-DSGMC to pay them the salaries and 
other service benefits. 
 
4 WP(C) Nos. 13044-55/2006 

5 
 
9. 
The said writ petitions were later amended and the order of 
the NDMC dated 14th February, 2006 was also assailed by the 
teaching as well as non-teaching staff of the school. The writ 
petitions were disposed of by the learned Single Judge vide order 
dated 13th July, 2009 in the following manner:-  
i) 
NDMC was directed to pass a speaking order afresh within 
four weeks from the date of receipt of the decision 
reflecting as to whether ex-post facto sanction in terms of 
Rule 46 of Delhi Education Rules could be granted to the 
appellant-DSGMC to close down the school and if not why;  
ii) 
The appellant-DSGMC would continue to pay the salaries 
to the serving staff and pensionary benefits to petitioners 
No. 6 to 12(respondents No. 8 to 14 herein) w.e.f. March, 
2006, till the NDMC passed a fresh order in terms of the 
decision. 
10. The above order of the learned Single Judge was assailed by 
the then serving teachers/staff and the retired teachers of the 
school before the Division Bench of the High Court by filing two 
Letters Patent Appeals5, which were allowed vide order dated 9th 
December 2009, with the following directions: 
 
5 LPA No. 441 of 2009 in Ms. Manju Tomar & Ors. v. NCT & Ors. & LPA No. 442 of 2009 in Ms. Santosh Kaur 
& Ors. v. NCT & Ors. 

6 
 
(i) 
Pay the arrears of salary;  
(ii) 
Employ the petitioners No. 1-5(respondents No. 1-5 herein) 
in a Government or Government-aided school within 
twelve weeks of the order dated 9th December, 2009 i.e. by 
8th March, 2010;   
(iii) Otherwise, the DSGMC would be required to pay the 
petitioners No. 1-5(respondents No. 1-5 herein) the full pay 
and all perquisites from 4th March, 2010 onwards; 
(iv) 
NDMC was directed to pay to petitioners No. 6 to 
12(respondents No. 8 to 14 herein) the entire arrears of 
salary/retiral benefits with simple interest @ 9% per 
annum within twelve weeks. NDMC was further directed 
to regularly transfer pensionary amounts directly to the 
bank accounts of the petitioners No. 6 to 12(respondents 
No. 8 to 14 herein). However, NDMC was given liberty to 
seek reimbursement of the entire amount, as directed 
above, from the appellant-DSGMC which had closed the 
school without prior approval of the appropriate authority;  
(v) 
After re-employment, the tenure, seniority, pay scales and 
perquisites of the in-service staff i.e. the petitioners No. 1 

7 
 
to 5(respondents No. 1 to 5 herein) would not be adversely 
affected just because of closure of the school; 
(vi) 
Since the petitioners No. 1 to 5(respondents No. 1 to 5 
herein) had not worked during the period 2006-2009, they 
would be entitled to receive only 50% of their pay and 
perquisites but this period would be counted for the 
purposes of their seniority and for computing their 
pensionary and other statutory benefits.  
11. The said common order of the Division Bench of the High 
Court is assailed in these appeals preferred by the NDMC and the 
appellant-DSGMC, respectively. 
12. We have heard and considered the submissions advanced by 
learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the 
impugned judgments and the material placed on record. 
13. The following facts as emerging from the record are not in 
dispute:- 
(i) 
That appellant-DSGMC demolished a substantial part of 
the school building without seeking permission from the 
competent authority, i.e., NDMC, leading to the closure of 
the school. 

8 
 
(ii) 
That the demolition was undertaken in spite of an interim 
stay order passed by the High Court of Delhi on 30th May, 
2005 in Writ Petition(Civil) Nos. 9951-52 of 2005, staying 
the proposed shifting of the school. 
(iii) The recognition and grant extended to the school was 
withdrawn by the NDMC vide order dated 14th February, 
2006, and as a corollary thereto, the appellant-DSGMC 
was no longer entitled to receive 95% grant which was 
provided by the NDMC for running the school in the 
premises of the Gurudwara. Thus, the obligation to 
reimburse the pay and other service benefits accruing to 
the teaching and non-teaching staff of the school fell upon 
the appellant-DSGMC. 
(iv) 
That the appellant-DSGMC did not challenge the decision 
of the NDMC dated 14th February, 2006, withdrawing the 
recognition and the grant-in-aid, before any forum. 
(v) 
That the employees of the school have filed a Contempt 
Petition6 before the High Court of Delhi wherein, the 
learned Single Judge vide order dated 1st October, 2019 
observed as below: -  
 
6 Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 805 of 2016 in Manju Tomar & Ors. v. Manjit Singh GK & Ors. 

9 
 
“In effect, the respondent no. 4 in the LPA namely: 
Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Management Committee, Guru 
Gobind Singh Bhawan, Gurdwara Rakabganj, New 
Delhi-110001, was required to do the following:  
 
i) pay the arrears of salary;  
 
ii) employ the petitioners in a Government 
or Government-aided school within twelve 
weeks of the order dated 09.12.2009 i.e. by 
08.03.2010.  
 
iii) otherwise, the DSGMC would be 
required to pay the petitioners the full pay 
and 
all 
perquisites 
from 
04.03.2010 
onwards.  
 
Admittedly, the employment was not done till 
30.01.2018. There is a delay of roughly eight 
years, short of 36 days. Respondent no. 4-DSGMC 
had offered employment to the petitioners by its 
letter dated 17.08.2010 calling upon them to join 
Guru 
Tegh 
Bahadur 
International 
School, 
Fatehabad, Haryana. The petitioners declined to 
join the said school, because the said offer was not 
in accordance with the directions of this Court i.e. 
the school was neither Government owned nor 
Government-aided. Furthermore, it was situated 
in Haryana and not in Delhi.  
 
Keeping the said response in mind, the DSGMC 
offered yet another employment at their various 
schools in Delhi, however, yet again none of these 
schools 
were 
either 
Government 
owned 
or 
Government-aided. Hence, the petitioners expressed 
their reservations in joining the said schools. Their 
concern primarily was that their service conditions 
and employment benefits should not be affected, 
which indeed, had been secured by the order of the 
Division Bench dated 09.12.2009 and 08.02.2010. 
The petitioners replied to the DSGMC on the same 
date on which they received the offer i.e. 28.08.2010. 
Their reply reads as under:  
 
“The job offered to us is not as per the 
judgment of the Delhi High Court dt. 
9/12/09 & 8/2/10, in which Para 15, 17 & 
20 clearly says that job should be on same 
terms & conditions on which they were 

10 
 
employed when Primary school was owning 
in the NDMC area. So Please give us job in 
Govt/Govt-Aided School as per High Court 
judgement to avoid contempt of Supreme 
Court dt 9/8/10. We have also filed 
Affidavit 
in 
this 
connection. 
In 
The  
Supreme Court dt 27/8/10.”  
 
Subsequent 
to 
this 
reply, 
there 
was 
no 
communication to any of the petitioners by DSGMC. 
In the absence of such communication, the offer from 
the DSGMC did not exist. Hence, DSGMC is in breach 
of the orders of the Division Bench and the orders 
which had directed that all the five petitioners be re-
employed within twelve weeks of the order dated 
09.12.2009. The said time got over on 08.03.2010.  
 
Due to the non-compliance the second limb of the 
order becomes operative. Resultantly, the petitioners 
are entitled to full pay and all perquisites from 
04.03.2010 onwards till 30.01.2018. Respondent no. 
4-DSGMC shall, therefore, pay the petitioner nos. 1 
to 5 their full pay and all perquisites in terms of the 
order of the Division Bench dated 08.02.2010. The 
said monies shall be paid to them within four weeks 
from the date of receipt of this order. The interest on 
the delay will be considered thereafter.  
 
The due amounts shall be credited directly into the 
bank accounts of the petitioners, who shall supply 
their respective bank account details, to Respondent 
no.4-DSGMC directly as well as through counsel. 
Respondent no. 4 shall furnish the computation of the 
amounts due to each of the petitioners within the next 
two weeks and shall pay the due amounts by 
13.12.2019.” 
  
 
 
 
 
       (emphasis added) 
 
14. The appellant-DSGMC assailed the aforesaid order passed by 
the learned Single Judge by filing a Letters Patent Appeal7 which 
was dismissed vide order dated 15th March, 2023 for want of 
 
7 LPA No. 732 of 2019 in Majinder Singh Sora & Anr. v. Manju Tomar & Ors. 

11 
 
prosecution.  Hence, the order dated 1st October, 2019 has 
attained finality. 
15. A bare perusal of the above order would clearly indicate that 
the offer of re-employment made by the appellant-DSGMC to the 
teaching and non-teaching staff of the school was not found to be 
bona fide as the same was not in conformity with the directions 
given by the High Court.   
16. Thus, in the present appeals, the only issue which requires 
adjudication is as to whether the appellant-DSGMC has any valid 
ground so as to assail the impugned judgment of the High Court 
dated 9th December, 2009, whereby the NDMC was directed to 
reimburse the pay and perquisites including the pension and other 
benefits accruing to the staff of the school and “then to recover 
the same from the appellant-DSGMC”. 
17. Shri Ritesh Khatri, learned counsel representing the 
appellant-DSGMC, while referring to Rule 47 of the Delhi 
Education Rules, urged that where as a result of closure of a 
recognised school, or withdrawal of the recognition, the staff of the 
school becomes surplus, they may be absorbed as far as possible 
in a Government school or aided school.  As per learned counsel, 
the teachers and other staff of the school who became surplus on 

12 
 
account of closure of the school would be entitled to the benefit 
under Rule 47 of the Delhi Education Rules.  Thus, in sum and 
substance, the contention of learned counsel representing the 
appellant-DSGMC is that the NDMC and the Director (Education), 
NDMC are primarily responsible for absorption and payment of 
salary and other service benefits to the staff, which became 
surplus on account of closure of the school.  However, we find it 
difficult to sustain this argument which is fallacious on the face of 
record.  The closure which is contemplated in Rule 47 of the Delhi 
Education Rules has to be a valid closure, i.e., having been carried 
out with the prior approval of the Director as provided under Rule 
46 of the Delhi Education Rules which reads as under:- 
“Rule 46.  Closing down of a school or any class in a school- 
No managing committee shall close down a recognised school, 
not being an unaided minority school, or an existing class in 
such school without giving full justification and without the 
prior approval of the Director, who shall, before giving such an 
approval, consult the Advisory Board.” 
 
18. A bare perusal of the above Rule concludes beyond the pale 
of doubt that no recognised school or an existing class in the 
school, except an unaided minority school, shall be closed without 
offering full justification and without the prior approval of the 
Director. 

13 
 
19. Admittedly, the school in question being run by the 
appellant-DSGMC was receiving 95% grant from NDMC, and the 
same was closed down without due approval of the Director 
(Education), NDMC.  As a consequence, the appellant-DSGMC 
cannot be allowed to take the shield of Rule 47 of the Delhi 
Education Rules so as to claim that the burden of re-employment 
and payment of salaries of the surplus teachers and the non-
teaching staff upon closure of the school would be that of the 
NDMC. The question of absorption only arises when the closure of 
the school is done in accordance with law, which requires a full 
justification and prior approval of the Director as per Rule 46 
supra.  Since the closure of the school in question was undertaken 
de hors Rule 46, the argument advanced on behalf of the appellant-
DSGMC that the onus to absorb the surplus teaching and non-
teaching staff would be that of the NDMC, has no legal sanction 
and cannot be sustained. 
20. As a result, we do not find any merit in Civil Appeal Nos. 
7442-7444 of 2012 preferred by the appellant-DSGMC, which are 
hereby dismissed. No costs. 
 
 

14 
 
Civil Appeal Nos. 7440-7441 of 2012 
21. The NDMC, being the appellant in these appeals, is primarily 
aggrieved of the direction given by the Division Bench in the 
impugned judgment dated 9th December, 2009, that it should bear 
the burden of the pay and other service benefits accruing to the 
surplus school staff including the pension pursuant to the illegal 
closure of the school by the DSGMC. However, we may note that a 
clear direction was given by the High Court in the impugned 
judgment that the appellant-NDMC would be entitled to seek 
reimbursement of the entire amount from the DSGMC, because it 
illegally closed the school without prior approval of the appropriate 
authority. 
22. This Court, while entertaining the special leave petitions, vide 
order dated 7th July, 2010 had directed the appellant-NDMC to 
make payment of the entire arrears of the salary/pension and 
other retiral benefits to the respondents, i.e., staff of the school 
within three weeks.  During the course of submissions, learned 
counsel representing the appellant-NDMC apprised the Court that 
the NDMC has already paid the principal amount to the staff of the 
school and now the only issue which survives is regarding the 
interest component which was kept open for further consideration. 

15 
 
23. During the course of his submissions, learned counsel for the 
appellant-NDMC urged that since the reimbursement was made in 
the year 2010, DSGMC might take a defence of the recovery being 
barred by limitation.  However, we are of the firm view that since 
this Court, while passing the order dated 7th July, 2010 has left 
the question of reimbursement of the amount being paid by the 
appellant-NDMC open, the apprehension expressed by the learned 
counsel representing the appellant-NDMC that its endeavour to 
seek reimbursement of the amount may be opposed with a plea of 
being barred by limitation, is unfounded by this Court.  Since the 
issue of seeking reimbursement was left open with a specific 
observation being made in this regard in the order dated 7th July, 
2010, the bar of limitation would not come in the way of the 
appellant-NDMC in seeking reimbursement of the amounts paid to 
the staff of the school from the DSGMC. 
24. Since the principal amount has already been paid by the 
appellant-NDMC, there is no reason for this Court to interfere with 
the direction given by the Delhi High Court for payment of interest 
to the respondents, i.e., staff of the school, in terms of the 
impugned judgment. 

16 
 
25. Hence, we direct that appellant-NDMC shall pay all 
remaining dues including interest to the respondents-staff of the 
school, within a period of eight weeks from today. 
26. It is clarified and reiterated that the appellant-NDMC shall be 
entitled to take recourse of the appropriate remedy for 
reimbursement of the amounts paid to respondents-staff of the 
school from the DSGMC, in case the DSGMC voluntarily fails to 
reimburse the said amount. 
27. We also grant leave to the appellant-NDMC to seek 
impleadment in the pending Contempt Petition No. 805 of 2016 
before the High Court of Delhi so as to seek a direction for 
reimbursement of these amounts. 
28. The Civil Appeal Nos. 7440-7441 of 2012 are accordingly 
disposed of in the above terms.  No costs. 
29. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(HIMA KOHLI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
August 28, 2024