2024 INSC 642
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. ……..OF 2024 
(@SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (Crl.) No.2029 OF 2018 
 
K. RAVI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF TAMIL NADU & ANR.  
 
 
   …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
 
1. Leave granted. 
2. The instant appeal filed by the Appellant – Defacto Complainant arises 
out of an extremely unusual and untenable Judgment and Order dated 
27.07.2017 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras in 
Criminal Revision being Crl.R.C. No.1268 of 2016 filed by the 
Respondent No. 2 (originally Accused No. 2) under Section 397 and 
401 of Cr.P.C., whereby the High Court while allowing the said 
Revision Application set aside the order dated 18.10.2016 passed by 
the Principal Sessions Judge, Dharmapuri framing charge in SC No.90 
Digitally signed by
Nisha Khulbey
Date: 2024.08.29
18:55:30 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
of 2015, and directed the further investigation in Crime No.2074 of 
2009 under Section 173(8) of Cr.P.C. 
3. The brief facts leading to the present appeal are that an FIR being No. 
2074 of 2009 came to be registered on 24.11.2009 at Police Station, 
Dharmapuri against 9 accused including the Respondent No. 2 (A-2) 
for the offences under Section 147, 148, 323, 324, 307 and 302 of 
IPC. The said FIR was registered at the instance of the defacto 
complainant ADMK Ravi i.e., the present appellant. It was alleged inter 
alia in the said FIR that on 24.11.2009, the accused no. 1 S.R. Vetrivel, 
AIADMK Town Secretary along with his group prevented the 
complainant and his group from filing the nomination at AIADMK Party 
Office at Dharmapuri and also started threatening the complainant. 
The Accused Vetrivel thereafter shouted to bring weapons that were 
kept in a vehicle parked at the ground floor of the Dharmapuri District 
Party Office and the Accused Baskar son of Mathikonpalayam 
Pachiyappan (the Respondent No. 2 herein) brought the weapons kept 
in his Tata Safari White Car. Thereafter, the accused Vetrivel holding 
the knife ran towards the brother of the complainant i.e. Veeramani, 
who was running towards the complainant. Thereafter the accused 
Mathikonpalayam Annadurai caught hold of Veeramani and the 
accused Vetrivel stabbed Veeramani with knife on his chest and the 
accused Baskar (R-2) gave a blow on the head of Veeramani 

3 
 
repeatedly and also beat the complainant with the iron pipes. The 
other accused also assaulted the complainant and others as narrated 
in the said FIR. Thereafter the complainant and his brother Veeramani 
were taken to the Dharmapuri government hospital by some people for 
treatment, where his brother Veeramani expired during the course of 
treatment.  
4. The Investigating Officer after collecting sufficient evidence against all 
the accused submitted chargesheet implicating 31 accused before the 
Court of Judicial Magistrate, who committed the case to the Court of 
Sessions for trial.  
5. The Respondent No. 2 filed an application before the Sessions Court 
seeking his discharge from the case under Section 227 of Cr.P.C. in 
the said Sessions case, which came to be dismissed by the Sessions 
Court vide the order dated 01.07.2016. The said order came to be 
challenged by the Respondent No. 2 before the High Court by filing a 
Revision Application being No. Crl.R.C. No. 953 of 2016. The said 
Revision Application came to be dismissed by the High Court vide the 
order dated 05.08.2016 specifically holding that there were sufficient 
incriminating materials available against the Respondent No.2 to frame 
the charge and that the Sessions Court had rightly dismissed the 
application filed by the Respondent No. 2 under Section 227 of Cr.P.C. 

4 
 
6. It appears that thereafter the Sessions Court framed charge against all 
the accused. The Respondent No. 2 (A-2) was charged for the offence 
under Section 302 r/w 149, 147, 148 and 324 of IPC. The Respondent 
No.2 along with other accused again filed a vexatious application 
being CRMP No. 1679/2016 in SC No. 90/2015, under Section 216 of 
Cr.P.C seeking alteration of the charge on the ground that the accused 
no. 2 and others were not present at the scene of offence on 
24.11.2009. The said application came to be dismissed by the 
Sessions Court vide the order dated 18.10.2016 specifically observing 
that there were statements of eye witnesses available on record to 
show that the Respondent No.2 (A-2) was present at the scene of 
occurrence. From the statements of LW-1 Ravi, LW-2 Govindam, LW-3 
Tamilarasu, LW-4 Dhandapani and LW-5 Andiappan the role of the 
accused no. 1 and 2 was also revealed. It was also observed that the 
charge was framed against all the accused based on material on 
record available with the Court, and that as per the settled legal 
position the charge could be altered at any stage of the proceedings. 
Being aggrieved by the said order the Respondent No.2 preferred the 
Revisional Application being Crl.R.C. No.1268 of 2016, wherein the 
High Court passed the impugned order as stated hereinabove. 

5 
 
7. From the above conspectus of events, it clearly transpires that the 
Respondent No.2 after having failed to get himself discharged from the 
Sessions Court as well as from the High Court in the first round of 
litigation, filed another vexatious application before the Sessions Court 
under Section 216 of Cr.P.C., after the framing of charge by the 
Sessions Court, for modification of the charge. The Sessions Court 
having dismissed the said application, the Respondent No.2 preferred 
the Revisional Application before the High Court under Section 397 
and 401 of Cr.P.C. The High Court in its unusual impugned order, 
discharged the Respondent No. 2 (A-2) from the charges levelled 
against him, though his earlier application seeking discharge was 
already dismissed by the Sessions Court and confirmed by the High 
Court and that position had attained finality. The High Court utterly 
failed to realise that the order impugned against it was the order 
passed by the Sessions Court rejecting the application of the 
Respondent No. 2 seeking modification of the charge framed against 
him under Section 216 of Cr.P.C., and the said order was an order of 
interlocutory in nature. 
8. It is pertinent to note that the order dismissing application seeking 
modification of charge would be an interlocutory order and in view of 

6 
 
the express bar contained in sub-section (2) of Section 397 Cr.P.C., 
the Revision Application itself was not maintainable. 
9. At this juncture, it would be apt to refer to the observations made by 
this Court in Amit Kapoor vs. Ramesh Chander and Another1, 
explaining the scope of Section 397 Cr.P.C.  It was held that - 
“12. Section 397 of the Code vests the court with the power to 
call for and examine the records of an inferior court for the 
purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality and regularity of 
any proceedings or order made in a case. The object of this 
provision is to set right a patent defect or an error of jurisdiction 
or law. There has to be a well-founded error and it may not be 
appropriate for the court to scrutinise the orders, which upon the 
face of it bears a token of careful consideration and appear to 
be in accordance with law. If one looks into the various 
judgments of this Court, it emerges that the revisional 
jurisdiction can be invoked where the decisions under challenge 
are grossly erroneous, there is no compliance with the 
provisions of law, the finding recorded is based on no evidence, 
material evidence is ignored or judicial discretion is exercised 
arbitrarily or perversely. These are not exhaustive classes, but 
are merely indicative. Each case would have to be determined 
on its own merits. 
 
13. Another well-accepted norm is that the revisional jurisdiction 
of the higher court is a very limited one and cannot be exercised 
in a routine manner. One of the inbuilt restrictions is that it 
should not be against an interim or interlocutory order. The 
Court has to keep in mind that the exercise of revisional 
jurisdiction itself should not lead to injustice ex facie. Where the 
Court is dealing with the question as to whether the charge has 
been framed properly and in accordance with law in a given 
case, it may be reluctant to interfere in exercise of its revisional 
jurisdiction unless the case substantially falls within the 
 
1(2012) 9 SCC 460 

7 
 
categories aforestated. Even framing of charge is a much 
advanced stage in the proceedings under the CrPC.” 
 
 
 
10. Thus, the scope of interference and exercise of jurisdiction under 
Section 397 Cr.P.C. is extremely limited. Apart from the fact that sub-
section 2 of Section 397 prohibits the Court from exercising the powers 
of Revision, even the powers under sub-section 1 thereof should be 
exercised very sparingly and  only where the decision under challenge 
is grossly erroneous, or there is non-compliance of the provisions of 
law, or the finding recorded by the trial court is based on no evidence, 
or material evidence is ignored or judicial discretion is exercised 
arbitrarily or perversely by framing the charge. The Court exercising 
Revisional Jurisdiction under Section 397 should be extremely 
circumspect in interfering with the order framing the charge, and could 
not have interfered with the order passed by the Trial Court dismissing 
the application for modification of the charge under Section 216 
Cr.P.C., which order otherwise would fall in the category of an 
interlocutory order. 
11.  It is trite to say that Section 216 is an enabling provision which 
enables the court to alter or add to any charge at any time before 
judgment is pronounced, and if any alternation or addition to a charge 
is made, the court has to follow the procedure as contained therein. 

8 
 
Section 216 does not give any right to the accused to file a fresh 
application seeking his discharge after the charge is framed by the 
court, more particularly when his application seeking discharge under 
Section 227 has already been dismissed. Unfortunately, such 
applications are being filed in the trial courts sometimes in ignorance 
of law and sometimes deliberately to delay the proceedings. Once 
such applications though untenable are filed, the trial courts have no 
alternative but to decide them, and then again such orders would be 
challenged before the higher courts, and the whole criminal trial would 
get derailed. Suffice it to say that such practice is highly deplorable, 
and if followed, should be dealt with sternly by the courts. 
12. So far as the facts of the present case are concerned, as stated 
hereinabove the Respondent No.2 had miserably failed to get himself 
discharged from the case in the first round of litigation, when he had 
filed the application under Section 227 Cr.P.C, still however he filed 
another vexatious application seeking modification of charge under 
Section 216 of Cr.P.C. to derail the criminal proceedings. The said 
Application also having been dismissed by the Sessions Court, the 
order was challenged before the High Court by filing Revision 
Application under Section 397 Cr.P.C. The High Court, on an 
absolutely extraneous consideration and in utter disregard of the 
settled legal position, allowed the Revision Application filed by the 

9 
 
Respondent No. 2, though legally untenable, and set aside the charge 
framed by the Sessions Court against the Respondent No. 2. The said 
order being ex facie illegal, untenable and dehors the material on 
record, the same deserves to be set aside.  
13.  In that view of the matter, impugned order is set aside. The order 
passed by the Sessions Court is restored. The Respondent no. 2 (A-2) 
having sufficiently derailed the proceedings by filing frivolous and 
untenable applications one after the other misusing the process of law, 
the present Appeal is allowed with cost of Rs. 50,000/- to be paid by 
the Respondent No. 2 to the Appellant within two weeks. The 
Respondent No. 2 shall first deposit the cost in the office of this Court, 
which shall be permitted to be withdrawn by the Appellant. 
14. The Sessions Court is directed to proceed further with the trial against 
all the accused including the Respondent No. 2 (A-2) in accordance 
with law and as expeditiously as possible. All the parties are directed 
to cooperate the trial court to conclude the trial as expeditiously as 
possible. It is further directed that non-cooperation of any of the 
accused in proceeding with the trial shall entail cancellation of their 
bail.  

10 
 
15. The Appeal stands allowed, with cost as directed. The office shall 
ensure compliance of the order of payment of cost by the Respondent 
No. 2, and report to the Court in case of non-compliance. 
 
 
 
 
……………………………………J.
 
 
 
[BELA M. TRIVEDI] 
 
 
.……………..……………………. J. 
  [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
AUGUST 29, 2024.