2024 INSC 650
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 10039-40 OF 2024 
[@S.L.P. (CIVIL) NOS. 7249-7250 OF 2022] 
 
 
SEETHARAMA SHETTY 
    
                               … APPELLANT(S) 
 
Versus 
 
MONAPPA SHETTY  
 
 
                  … RESPONDENT(S) 
 
J U D G E M E N T  
 
S.V.N. BHATTI, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The Civil Appeals arise from an order dated 14.09.2021 in Review 
Petition No. 340 of 2019 and Writ Petition No. 30734 of 2019. 
3. 
In these Civil Appeals, the scope of Sections 33, 34, 37, and 39 of the 
Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (for short, ‘the Act’) arises for consideration. 
 
I. 
FACTUAL MATRIX 
4. 
The appellant filed O.S. No. 295 of 2013 for perpetual injunction 
restraining the respondent from interfering with the appellant’s peaceful 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Joshi
Date: 2024.09.02
17:34:50 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
possession and enjoyment of the plaint schedule property. The plaint 
schedule property consists of agricultural land in Kavoor village of 
Mangalore taluk. The prayer for injunction rests on the plea that the 
respondent entered into the agreement of sale dated 29.06.1999 with the 
appellant. The appellant claims to have been put in possession of the plaint 
schedule property as part performance under the agreement of sale dated 
29.06.1999 by the respondent. The other clauses covered by the 
agreement are not adverted to as part of the narrative, for they are of little 
relevance for disposing of the Civil Appeals. 
5. 
It is alleged that the respondent, contrary to the possession given as 
part performance under the suit agreement, tried to dispossess the 
appellant. This led to exchange of notices between the parties. The sheet 
anchor in the appellant’s narrative is that the agreement of sale dated 
29.06.1999 exists between the parties, and in part performance thereunder, 
the appellant was put in possession of the plaint schedule property by the 
respondent. Contrary to the ad idem of the parties in putting the appellant 
in possession, the respondent was trying to dispossess the appellant from 
the plaint schedule property. Therefore, the suit was filed for the relief of 
perpetual injunction. Briefly narrated, the possession claimed under the 

3 
 
agreement of sale is sought to be protected through the prayer for perpetual 
injunction.  
6. 
The respondent denies the execution of the agreement of sale dated 
29.06.1999. The appellant, since claims possession through the agreement 
of sale, the suit agreement shall be treated as a conveyance. The suit 
agreement is insufficiently stamped. Therefore, the document is 
inadmissible in evidence unless the document is made compliant with the 
requirements of the Act.  
6.1. The respondent filed an application before the trial court under 
Section 33 of the Act to impound the suit agreement to collect the deficit 
stamp duty and penalty in accordance with the Act. By order dated 
10.11.2016, the trial court sent the agreement of sale dated 29.06.1999 to 
the District Registrar for determination of requisite stamp duty and penalty 
payable on the agreement of sale. The record discloses that the District 
Registrar expressed inability to determine the deficit stamp duty and 
penalty payable on the suit agreement for want of the name of the village, 
hence, returned the instrument to the trial court. Thereafter, the appellant 
filed a memo dated 26.04.2017 purporting to clarify the name of the village 
in the schedule of the agreement of sale. The said effort was opposed by 
the respondent, namely ex-post-facto incorporation of material details into 

4 
 
the suit agreement; gaps in the agreement are not filled up by the appellant 
to the detriment of the respondent. The trial court, agreeing with the 
respondent’s objection, rejected the memo dated 26.04.2017. The 
appellant filed Writ Petition No. 8506 of 2018 challenging the trial court’s 
order dated 12.08.2017 before the High Court of Karnataka. On 
10.08.2018, the Writ Petition was disposed of, and the operative portion 
reads thus:  
 
“Accordingly, in modification of the impugned order dated 
12.08.2017, it is directed that a copy of the memo filed by the 
plaintiff may be sent by the Trial Court to the office of the District 
Registrar for appropriate proceedings in accordance with law. 
However, it is made clear that the order and proposition with 
reference to the name of the village mentioned by the 
plaintiff/petitioner shall have relevance only for the purpose of 
calculation of deficit stamp duty and other charges but shall have 
no bearing on the merit consideration of the submissions of the 
parties, including the submissions of the defendant/respondent 
about the genuineness and the validity of the document in 
question and the corresponding right of the plaintiff/petitioner to 
contest such objections.” 
 
 
7. 
The District Registrar, through report dated 10.11.2016, determined 
the deficit stamp duty payable on the instrument at Rs. 71,200/-. The trial 
court, by order dated 23.01.2019, directed the appellant to pay the deficit 
stamp duty of Rs.71,200/- and ten times penalty on the agreement of sale 
dated 29.06.1999. Thus, the total levy of stamp duty and penalty is Rs. 
7,83,200/-. The appellant assailed the order dated 23.01.2019 in O.S. NO. 

5 
 
295 of 2013 in Writ Petition No. 30734 of 2019 before the High Court. The 
Writ Petition was dismissed, and the appellant was granted four months’ 
time for payment of deficit stamp duty and the penalty. The appellant filed 
Review Petition No. 340 of 2019, and through the impugned order dated 
14.09.2021, the Review Petition was dismissed. Hence, the Civil Appeals 
have been filed questioning the orders dated 23.01.2019 and 14.09.2021.  
8. 
The learned Single Judge has, in great detail, referred to all the 
attending circumstances, appreciated their implication vis-à-vis the 
statutory obligation under the Act to pay ad valorem stamp duty on an 
agreement of sale satisfying the definition of a conveyance under the Act 
and dismissed the Review Petition. The findings, in brief, are as follows:   
8.1. Section 33 of the Act requires the adjudicating authorities to impound 
and determine the duty payable on the suit agreement. 
8.2. Section 34 of the Act provides for levy of deficit stamp duty and 
penalty. The Section employs the expression “ten times the amount of the 
proper duty or deficit portion thereof.” Therefore, there is no discretion 
granted to the adjudicating authorities to waive or reduce the penalty. 
8.3. Only on the payment of deficit stamp duty along with ten times 
penalty, the suit agreement is relied in evidence. 

6 
 
8.4. The text used in Sections 34 and 39 of the Act cannot be linguistically 
approximated, as the legislature has not vested the discretion given to the 
Deputy Commissioner under Section 39 of the Act in the same way to the 
adjudicating authorities under Section 34 of the Act. 
8.5. Relying on case law, the impugned order noted that the adjudicating 
authorities do not have the discretion to disobey the legislative command to 
waive or reduce the penalty in any circumstance. The discretion however 
extends to the grant of a reasonable time for the payment of duty and 
penalty. 
8.6. Thus, through the Impugned Order, the Learned Single judge 
concluded that the Review Petition fails, and the appellant was granted a 
period of six months’ time to pay the deficit stamp duty along with ten 
times penalty.   
9. 
Hence, the Civil Appeals. 
10. 
We have heard the learned counsel and also Ms. Liz Mathew, who 
was appointed as Amicus Curiae to assist the Court. 
 
II. 
SUBMISSIONS 
 
11. 
Learned counsel for the appellant firstly contends that the suit 
document conforms to the requirements of the Act and the suit was for 
injunction. Considering the total circumstances, it is argued that even if the 

7 
 
suit document is not stamped correctly but having regard to the orders 
dated 12.08.2017 and 10.08.2018, the trial court ought not to have decided 
the deficit stamp duty and penalty under Section 34 of the Act. Instead, the 
trial court ought to have sent the impounded instrument to the District 
Registrar for determining the stamp duty and the penalty. Thereupon, the 
District Registrar would have exercised his discretionary jurisdiction under 
Section 39 of the Act and determined the quantum of penalty payable by 
the appellant. In the case on hand, the dispute arose on the application filed 
by the respondent requesting to send the suit document to the District 
Registrar for determination of duty and penalty. The District Registrar has 
sent a report on the stamp duty payable but has not collected the deficit 
stamp duty or levied the penalty on the suit agreement. It is argued that the 
case falls under Section 37(2) of the Act, and the impugned orders have 
denied the appellant the option to have the penalty decided by the District 
Registrar. Therefore, the trial court and the High Court have committed an 
illegality by exercising the jurisdiction under Section 34 of the Act.  
12. 
The learned Amicus Curie places reliance on Gangappa and 
another v. Fakkirappa1, Trustees of H.C. Dhanda Trust v. State of 
 
1 (2019) 3 SCC 788. 

8 
 
Madhya Pradesh and others2, Digambar Warty and others v. District 
Registrar, Bangalore Urban District and another3, K. Amarnath v. Smt. 
Puttamma4, Suman v. Vinayaka and others5, Niyaz Ahmed Siddique v. 
Sanganeria Company Private Limited6, United Precision Engineers 
Private Limited v. KIOCL Limited7, Chilakuri Gangulappa v. Revenue 
Divisional Officer, Madanpalle8, and Sri. K. Govinde Gowda v. Smt. 
Akkayamma and others9, and contends that the scope of jurisdiction in 
receiving in evidence insufficiently stamped instruments by every person, 
having by law or consent of parties, authority to receive evidence and every 
person in charge of a public office on the one hand and the Deputy 
Commissioner/District Registrar on the other hand, is fairly well-settled by 
the binding precedents. The scope of discretion available in two distinct 
forums covered by Sections 34 and 39 of the Act is fairly well settled and 
defined. 
12.1. It is further argued that the ratio in Chilakuri Gangulappa (supra) is 
not applicable to the facts and circumstances of this case. The trial court 
 
2 (2020) 9 SCC 510. 
3 ILR 2013 KAR 2099. 
4 ILR 1999 KAR 4634. 
5 (2013) SCC OnLine Kar 10138. 
6 (2023) SCC OnLine Cal 1391. 
7 (2016) SCC OnLine Kar 1077. 
8 (2001) 4 SCC 197. 
9 ILR 2011 KAR 4719. 

9 
 
while considering the prayer for an injunction by relying on the suit 
document, exercised its jurisdiction under Section 34 of the Act. The 
procedure under Section 37(2) of the Act arises in the cases not attracting 
Section 37(1) of the Act. The discretionary jurisdiction under Section 39 of 
the Act is exclusive to the District Registrar/Deputy Commissioner while 
exercising the powers under the Act. Thus, expecting the court to exercise 
the discretion of Section 39 of the Act is untenable. 
III. 
ANALYSIS 
 
13. 
We have perused the record and noted the rival submissions. The 
following points arise in the Civil Appeals: 
I. 
Whether the agreement of sale dated 29.06.1999, with a recital on 
delivery of possession to the appellant, conforms to the definition of 
conveyance under Section 2(d) read with Article 20(1) of the Schedule of 
the Act or not? 
II. 
Whether, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the order dated 
23.01.2019 of trial court, as confirmed by the impugned orders dated 
23.08.2019 and 14.09.2021, are legal and valid or call for interference by 
this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution of India? 
 
 

10 
 
POINT I 
 
14. 
Agreement of sale dated 29.06.1999, among other clauses, refers to 
the alleged delivery of possession in favour of the appellant by the 
respondent. Article 5 of the Schedule of the Act deals with an agreement of 
sale coupled with possession and the requirement of paying the ad valorem 
stamp duty. If an instrument conforms to the requirements of conveyance 
under Section 2(d) read with Article 20(1) of the Schedule of the Act, the 
applicable stamp duty is ad valorem. In other words, ad valorem stamp duty 
is paid on such instruments. The learned counsel appearing for the 
appellant has not argued on the applicability of the clause dealing with 
possession in the agreement and requirement to ad valorem pay stamp 
duty. The relief of injunction is sought on the basis of delivery of possession 
by the respondent under the suit agreement. The following Judgments are 
relevant and are close in circumstance to the case on hand and are referred 
to. 
14.1. Gangappa’s case (supra), analysed a situation on an insufficiently 
stamped document produced before a court, and compared Sections 34 
and 39 of the Act and held that the discretion conferred by the provision is 
different by the text and the context of these provisions. This Court upheld 
the ratio laid in Digambar Warty (supra) and held that even though no 

11 
 
discretion was provided to the court to impose a reduced penalty, Section 
38 of the Act empowered the Deputy Collector to refund the duty so 
collected. In paragraph 18 of the Judgment, it is recorded that: 
 
“18. The above view of the Karnataka High Court that there is no 
discretion vested with the authority impounding the document in 
the matter of collecting duty under Section 33, is correct. The 
word used in the said proviso is “shall”. Sections 33 and 34 
clearly indicate that penalty imposed has to be 10 times. The 
Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in Digambar Warty 
[Digambar Warty v. Bangalore Urban District, 2012 SCC OnLine 
Kar 8776 : ILR 2013 KAR 2099] has rightly interpreted the 
provisions of Sections 33 and 34 of the Act. We, thus, are of the 
view that the High Court in the impugned judgment [Fakkirappa 
v. Gangappa, 2014 SCC OnLine Kar 12775] did not commit any 
error in relying on the judgment of the Division Bench in 
Digambar Warty [Digambar Warty v. Bangalore Urban District, 
2012 SCC OnLine Kar 8776 : ILR 2013 KAR 2099]. We thus have 
to uphold the above view expressed in the impugned judgment 
[Fakkirappa v. Gangappa, 2014 SCC OnLine Kar 12775]. 
 
However, as a one-time measure, this Court allowed closing the 
matter by confirming the payment of deficit duty with the double penalty as 
imposed by the trial court. The precedent interpreted the discretionary limits 
under Section 34 of the Act.  
14.2. In United Precision Engineers Private Limited (supra), the 
question arose as to the extent of power exercised by Deputy 
Commissioner under Section 37(2) of the Act. The Court observed that the 
phrase “in every other case” contained in Section 37(2) of the Act will have 
to be understood to include not only an instrument which is merely 

12 
 
impounded and referred but also an instrument impounded, relating to 
which duty and penalty determined but not paid by the party. The court 
observed that as per the combined reading of the sections, if the 
impounding authority determined the penalty under Section 37(1) of the 
Act, and thereafter, sends the document to Deputy Commissioner under 
Section 37(2) of the Act, then the Deputy Commissioner will have the power 
to reduce the penalty under Section 38 of the Act. The ratio deals with the 
interplay between Sections 37 and 38 of the Act.  
15. 
The impugned order, in fact, refers to these judgments. The High 
Court has correctly distinguished the jurisdiction vested in every person or 
a person in the public office on the one hand and on the other hand the 
District Registrar in determining the penalty payable on insufficiently 
stamped instrument. The ratio in all fours is applicable to the circumstances 
of the case. Therefore, by relying on the above judgments, it is held that the 
appellant, with a view to produce in evidence the agreement of sale in the 
suit, must pay the deficit stamp duty and penalty. We are confirming the 
findings of the High Court in this behalf. The next question for consideration 
is whether in the facts and the circumstances of the case, the penalty 
determined by the Court on the instrument instead of sending the 

13 
 
instrument to the District Registrar for determination and collection of 
penalty as may be applicable is legal. 
 
POINT II 
 
16. 
Chapter IV of the Act is both mandatory and regulatory. Section 33 
mandates every person having by law or consent of parties authority to 
receive evidence and every person in charge of public office (for short, 
‘Every Person/Court’) when an instrument insufficiently stamped is 
produced, the person is mandated to impound the insufficiently stamped 
instrument. In law, the word impound means to keep in custody of the law.10 
Having taken legal custody of the insufficiently stamped document, the 
inter-play available between Sections 33, 34, 37, 38 and 39 of the Act, as 
the case may be, would start operating. Sub-section (2) of Section 33 of the 
Act fastens an obligation to examine the instrument on the duty payable, 
value etc. of the instrument. Unless it is duly stamped, Section 34 of the 
Act, prohibits Every Person/Court from admitting in evidence or act upon 
an insufficiently/improperly stamped instrument. The proviso to Section 34 
of the Act, subject to deposit, of deficit stamp duty and penalty enables 
 
10 (2003) 3 SCC 674. 

14 
 
receipt of an instrument in evidence which is otherwise prohibited by 
Section 34 of the Act.  
17. 
The object of the Act is not to exclude evidence or to enable parties 
to avoid obligations on technical grounds. Rather, the object is to obtain 
revenue even from such instruments which are at the first instance 
unstamped or insufficiently stamped. The said objective has the twin 
elements of recovering the due stamp duty and penalty, and also the public 
policy of binding parties to the agreed obligations. It is apposite to refer to 
the declaration of law by a seven-judge bench’s judgement of this Court on 
the object of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899.  
17.1. In Re: Interplay Between Arbitration Agreements under 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 and Stamp Act, 189911, a Seven-
Judge Bench of this Court noted that Section 35 of the Indian Stamp Act, 
1899 (analogous to Section 34 of the Act) unambiguously requires an 
instrument chargeable with stamp duty to only be “admitted in evidence” if 
it is properly stamped. This Court further noted that improperly stamping 
the instrument does not render that instrument void or invalid. On the 
contrary, it is a defect which is curable upon payment of requisite stamp 
duty and penalty. The relevant paragraph reads thus:   
 
11 (2024) 6 SCC 1. 

15 
 
 
“54. Section 35 of the Stamp Act is unambiguous. It stipulates, 
“No instrument chargeable with duty shall be admitted in 
evidence…” The term “admitted in evidence” refers to the 
admissibility of the instrument. Sub-section (2) of Section 42, too, 
states that an instrument in respect of which stamp-duty is paid 
and which is endorsed as such will be “admissible in evidence.” 
The effect of not paying duty or paying an inadequate amount 
renders an instrument inadmissible and not void. Non-stamping 
or improper stamping does not result in the instrument becoming 
invalid. The Stamp Act does not render such an instrument void. 
The non-payment of stamp duty is accurately characterised as a 
curable defect. The Stamp Act itself provides for the manner in 
which the defect may be cured and sets out a detailed procedure 
for it. It bears mentioning that there is no procedure by which a 
void agreement can be “cured.” 
 
17.2. In Hindustan Steel Limited v. Dilip Construction Company12, this 
Court held that the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 is a fiscal measure intended to 
raise revenue, and the stringent provisions of the Stamp Act cannot be used 
as a weapon to defeat the cause of the opponent. The relevant paragraph 
reads thus: 
“7. The Stamp Act is a fiscal measure enacted to secure revenue 
for the State on certain classes of instruments: It is not enacted 
to arm a litigant with a weapon of technicality to meet the case of 
his opponent. The stringent provisions of the Act are conceived 
in the interest of the revenue once that object is secured 
according to law, the party staking his claim on the instrument will 
not be defeated on the ground of the initial defect in the 
instrument. Viewed in that light the scheme is clear.”  
 
 
12 (1969) 1 SCC 597. 

16 
 
17.3. The ratio in District Registrar and Collector v. Canara Bank13 and 
State of Maharashtra v. National Organic Chemical Industries 
Limited14 and Chiranji Lal v. Haridas15 reiterated that the Indian Stamp 
Act, 1899 is a piece of fiscal legislation, and not a remedial statute enacted 
on demand of the permanent public policy to receive a liberal interpretation. 
The principles for interpreting a fiscal provision/law are fairly settled. There 
is no scope for equity or judiciousness if the letter of law is clear and 
unambiguous in method, mode and manner of levy and collection. The 
decisions further held that the act authorises involuntary extraction of 
money, and therefore, is in the nature fiscal statute which has to be 
interpreted strictly.  
17.4.  Section 37 of the Act stipulates the procedure on how the instrument 
impounded is dealt with. The plain reading of Section 37(1) of the Act 
discloses that the person impounding the instrument under Section 33 of 
the Act and after receiving the penalty under Section 34 of the Act or duty 
under Section 36 of the Act, shall send to the Deputy Commissioner an 
authenticated copy of such instrument together with the amount of duty and 
penalty so levied and collected. Section 37(2) of the Act deals with an 
 
13 (2005) 1 SCC 496. 
14 (2024) SCC OnLine SC 497. 
15 (2005) 10 SCC 746. 

17 
 
instrument not subjected to the procedure of Sections 34 or 36 of the Act. 
According to Section 37(2) of the Act, the instrument is sent to the Deputy 
Commissioner for enquiry and decision at his end. The Deputy 
Commissioner gets jurisdiction under Section 39 of the Act and then 
decides the duty and also the penalty leviable on the insufficiently stamped 
instrument. In this background, we take note of the principle laid down on 
the distinction in the discretion available to Every Person/Court and the 
discretionary jurisdiction conferred on the District Registrar. See, United 
Precision Engineers (supra) and Gangappa (supra).  
The settled distinction and discretion available under Sections 34 and 
39 of the Act is no more res integra. 
18. 
The above consideration does not actually address the appellant's 
argument under Section 37(2) read with Section 39 of the Act. Appellant 
contends that the respondents by filing an application for impounding the 
instrument, preferred to have deficit stamp duty and the penalty collected 
exclusively by the District Registrar because the admissibility or otherwise 
of the suit document is not yet considered by the trial court for any purpose. 
From the record, it appears that the instrument is likely to be considered at 
the interlocutory stage for granting or refusing temporary injunction. 
Therefore, the option available under Section 33 read with Section 37 of 

18 
 
the Act is set in motion, resulting in the instrument being sent to the District 
Registrar, and calling for a report.  
19. 
A Three-Judge Bench of this Court in Trustees of HC Dhandha 
Trust v State of Madhya Pradesh16 held that in case of deficiency of 
Stamp Duty the Collector of Stamps cannot impose ten times penalty under 
Section 40(1)(b) of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (analogous to Section 
39(1)(b) of the Act) automatically or mechanically. The relevant paragraph 
reads thus:  
 
“22. The purpose of penalty generally is a deterrence and not 
retribution. When a discretion is given to a public authority, such 
public authority should exercise such discretion reasonably and 
not in oppressive manner. The responsibility to exercise the 
discretion in reasonable manner lies more in cases where 
discretion vested by the statute is unfettered. Imposition of the 
extreme penalty i.e. ten times of the duty or deficient portion 
thereof cannot be based on the mere factum of evasion of 
duty. The reason such as fraud or deceit in order to deprive the 
Revenue or undue enrichment are relevant factors to arrive at a 
decision as to what should be the extent of penalty under Section 
40(1)(b).  
(Emphasis supplied)”   
 
 
 
16 (2020) SCC OnLine SC 753 

19 
 
20. 
Further, in Petiti Subba Rao v. Anumala S. Narendra17, this Court 
notes on the discretionary limits while interpreting analogous provisions18 
in the Indian Stamp Act,1899 that: 
 
 
“6. The Collector has the power to require the person concerned 
to pay the proper duty together with a penalty amount which the 
Collector has to fix in consideration of all aspects involved. The 
restriction imposed on the Collector in imposing the penalty 
amount is that under no circumstances the penalty amount shall 
go beyond ten times the duty or the deficient portion thereof. That 
is the farthest limit which meant only in very extreme 
situations the penalty need be imposed up to that limit. It is 
unnecessary for us to say that the Collector is not required by law 
to impose the maximum rate of penalty as a matter of course 
whenever an impounded document is sent to him. He has to take 
into account various aspects including the financial position of 
the person concerned. 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied)”  
 
 
17 (2002) 10 SCC 427 
18  
Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 
§33 §34 
§35 
§36 
§37 
§38 
§39 
Indian Stamp Act, 1899 
§33 §35 
§36 
§37 
§38 
§39 
§40 
 

20 
 
21. 
As per the steps taken under Sections 3319, 3420, 3521, 3722, and 3923 
under Chapter IV of the Act, the position in law is well-established, and 
 
19 Section 33: Examination and impounding of instruments.- (1) Every person having by law or 
consent of parties authority to receive evidence, and every person in charge of a public office, 
except an officer of police, before whom any instrument, chargeable in his opinion, with duty, is 
produced or comes in the performance of his functions, shall, if it appears to him that such 
instrument is not duly stamped, impound the same. (2) For that purpose every such person shall 
examine every instrument so chargeable and so produced or coming before him, in order to 
ascertain whether it is stamped with a stamp of the value and description required by the law in 
force in the 1[State of Karnataka]1 when such instrument was executed or first executed: [1. 
Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order, 1973 w.e.f. 1.11.1973.] Provided that,— 
(a) nothing herein contained shall be deemed to require any Magistrate or Judge of a Criminal 
Court to examine or impound, if he does not think fit so to do, any instrument coming before him 
in the course of any proceeding other than a proceeding under Chapter XII or Chapter XXXVI 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898; (b) in the case of a Judge of the High Court, the duty 
of examining and impounding any instrument under this section may be delegated to such officer 
as the Court appoints in this behalf. (3) For the purposes of this section, in cases of doubt, the 
Government may determine,— (a)  what offices shall be deemed to be public offices; and 
(b)  who shall be deemed to be persons in charge of public offices.  
20 Section 34: Instruments not duly stamped inadmissible in evidence, etc.- No instrument 
chargeable with duty shall be admitted in evidence for any purpose by any person having by 
law or consent of parties authority to receive evidence, or shall be acted upon, registered or 
authenticated by any such person or by any public officer, unless such instrument is duly 
stamped: Provided that,— (a) any such instrument not being an instrument chargeable 1[with a 
duty not exceeding fifteen naye paise]1 only, or a mortgage of crop [Article 1[35]1 (a) of the 
Schedule] chargeable under clauses (a) and (b) of section 3 with a duty of twenty-five naye 
paise shall, subject to all just exceptions, be admitted in evidence on payment of the duty with 
which the same is chargeable, or, in the case of an instrument insufficiently stamped, or the 
amount required to make up such duty, together with a penalty of five rupees, or, when ten times 
the amount of the proper duty or deficient portion thereof exceeds five rupees, of a sum equal 
to ten times such duty or portion; [1. Substituted by Act 29 of 1962 w.e.f. 1.10.1962.] (b) where 
a contract or agreement of any kind is effected by correspondence consisting of two or more 
letters and any one of the letters bears the proper stamp, the contract or agreement shall be 
deemed to be duly stamped; (c) nothing herein contained shall prevent the admission of any 
instrument in evidence in any proceeding in a Criminal Court, other than a proceeding under 
Chapter XII or Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898; (d) nothing herein 
contained shall prevent the admission of any instrument in any Court when such instrument has 
been executed by or on behalf of the Government, or where it bears the certificate of the 
1[Deputy Commissioner]1 as provided by section 32 or any other provision of this Act 2[and 
such certificate has not been revised in exercise of the powers conferred by the provisions of 
Chapter VI]2. [1. Substituted by Act 29 of 1962 w.e.f. 1.10.1962.] [2. Inserted by Act 29 of 1962 
w.e.f. 1.10.1962.]  
21 Section 35: Admission of instrument where not to be questioned.- Where an instrument has 
been admitted in evidence such admission shall not, except as provided in section 58, be called 
in question at any stage of the same suit or proceeding on the ground that the instrument has 
not been duly stamped.  

21 
 
axiomatic by the letter of law and precedents of this Court. However, there 
are a few misgivings in the sequence of its application. For the benefit of 
practice and procedure, we sum up the steps as follows. 
21.1. Section 33 of the Act is titled examination and impounding of 
instruments. The object of the provision is to disable persons from 
withdrawing the instruments produced by them on being told that proper 
stamp duty and penalty should be paid. 
 
22 Section 37: Instruments impounded how dealt with.- (1) When the person impounding an 
instrument under section 33 has by law or consent of parties authority to receive evidence and 
admits such instrument in evidence upon payment of a penalty as provided by section 34 or of 
duty as provided by section 36, he shall send to the 1[Deputy Commissioner]1 an authenticated 
copy of such instrument, together with a certificate in writing, stating the amount of duty and 
penalty levied in respect thereof, and shall send such amount to the 1[Deputy Commissioner]1 
or to such person as he may appoint in this behalf. [1. Substituted by Act 29 of 1962 w.e.f. 
1.10.1962.] (2) In every other case, the person so impounding an instrument shall send it in 
original to the 1[Deputy Commissioner]1. [1. Substituted by Act 29 of 1962 w.e.f. 1.10.1962.]  
23 Section 39: 1[Deputy Commissioner]1's power to stamp instruments impounded.- (1) When 
the 1[Deputy Commissioner]1 impounds any instrument under section 33, or receives any 
instrument sent to him under sub-section (2) of section 37, not being an instrument chargeable 
1[with a duty not exceeding fifteen naye paise]1 only or a mortgage of crop [Article 1[35]1 (a) of 
the Schedule] chargeable under clause (a) or (b) of section 3 with a duty of twenty-five naye 
paise, he shall adopt the following procedure:— [1. Substituted by Act 29 of 1962 w.e.f. 
1.10.1962.] (a) if he is of opinion that such instrument is duly stamped, or is not chargeable with 
duty, he shall certify by endorsement thereon that it is duly stamped, or that it is not so 
chargeable, as the case may be; (b) if he is of opinion that such instrument is chargeable with 
duty and is not duly stamped he shall require the payment of the proper duty or the amount 
required to make up the same, together with a penalty of five rupees; or if he thinks fit; an amount 
not exceeding ten times the amount of the proper duty or of the deficient portion thereof, whether 
such amount exceeds or falls short of five rupees: Provided that, when such instrument has 
been impounded only because it has been written in contravention of section 13 or section 14, 
the 1[Deputy Commissioner]1 may, if he thinks fit, remit the whole penalty prescribed by this 
section. [1. Substituted by Act 29 of 1962 w.e.f. 1.10.1962.] (2) 1[Subject to any orders made 
under Chapter VI, every certificate]1 under clause (a) of sub- section (1) shall, for the purposes 
of this Act be conclusive evidence of the matters stated therein. [1. Substituted by Act 29 of 
1962 w.e.f. 1.10.1962.] (3) Where an instrument has been sent to the 1[Deputy Commissioner]1 
under sub-section (2) of section 37, the 1[Deputy Commissioner]1 shall, when he has dealt with 
it as provided by this section, return it to the impounding officer. [1. Substituted by Act 29 of 
1962 w.e.f. 1.10.1962.]  

22 
 
21.1.1. 
The person who intends to rely on an insufficiently/improperly 
stamped instrument has option to submit to the scope of Section 34 of the 
Act, pay duty and penalty. The party also has the option to directly move an 
application under Section 39 of the Act before the District Registrar and 
have the deficit stamp duty and the penalty as may be imposed collected. 
In either of the cases, after the deficit stamp duty and the penalty are paid, 
the impounding effected under Section 35 of the Act is released and the 
instrument available to the party for relying as evidence. In the event, a 
party prefers to have the document sent to the deputy commissioner for 
collecting the deficit stamp duty and penalty, the Court/Every Person has 
no option except to send the document to the District Registrar. The caveat 
to the above is that, before the Court/Every Person exercises the 
jurisdiction under Section 34 of the Act, the option must be exercised by a 
party.  
21.2. Section 34 of the Act is titled instruments not duly stamped 
inadmissible in evidence. This provision bars the admission of an 
instrument in evidence unless adequate stamp duty and the penalty are 
paid. Every person so authorised to collect deficit stamp duty and penalty 
has no discretion except to levy and collect ten times the penalty of deficit 
stamp duty.  

23 
 
21.3. Section 35 of the Act is titled admission of instrument where not to be 
questioned. Section 35 prohibits questioning the admission of an 
insufficiently stamped instrument in evidence.  
21.4. Section 37 of the Act is titled instruments impounded, how dealt with. 
This Section arises when the party pays the deficit duty and penalty, the 
Court is to impound the instrument under Section 33 of the Act and has to 
forward the instrument to the Deputy Commissioner/District Registrar. Sub-
section (2) of Section 37 of the Act deals with cases not falling under 
Section 34 and 36, and the person impounding an instrument shall send it 
in original to the Deputy Commissioner. This includes the exigencies set 
out in paragraph 21.1.1. 
21.5. Being a regulatory and remedial statute, a party who follows the 
regulation, and pays the stamp duty and penalty, as per Sections 34 or 39 
of the Act, the legal objection emanating from Section 33 of the Act alone 
is effaced and the document is admitted in evidence. In other words, the 
objection under the Stamp Act is no more available to a contesting party.  
21.6. Section 39 of the Act is titled deputy commissioner’s power to stamp 
instruments impounded. This Section provides the procedure to be followed 
by the Deputy Commissioner/District Registrar while stamping instruments 
that are impounded under Section 33 of the Act. As per Section 39(1)(b) of 

24 
 
the Act, the penalty may extend to ten times the stamp duty payable; 
however, ten times is the farthest limit which is meant only for very extreme 
situations. Therefore, the Deputy Commissioner/District Registrar has 
discretion to levy and collect commensurate penalty.  
21.7. The above steps followed and completed by paying/depositing the 
deficit duty and penalty would result in the instrument becoming compliant 
with the checklist of the Act. The finality is subject to the just exceptions 
envisaged by the Act addressing different contingencies.  
21.8. The scheme does not prohibit a party to a document to first invoke 
directly the jurisdiction of the District Registrar and present the instrument 
before Court/Every Person after complying with the requirement of duty and 
penalty. In such an event, the available objection under Sections 33 or 34 
of the Act is erased beforehand. The quantum of penalty is primarily 
between the authority/court and the opposing party has little role to 
discharge.   
22. 
Reverting to the circumstances of the case by keeping in perspective 
the steps summarised in the preceding paragraph, we notice that, before 
the stage of admission of the instrument in evidence, the respondent raised 
an objection on the deficit stamp duty. Therefore, it was the respondent who 
required the suit agreement to be impounded and then sent to the District 

25 
 
Registrar to be dealt with under Section 39 of the Act. In this case, the 
respondent desired the impounding of the suit agreement and collect the 
deficit stamp duty and penalty. The trial court is yet to exercise its 
jurisdiction under Section 34 of the Act. On the contrary, the trial court has 
called for a report from the District Registrar, so for all purposes, the suit 
instrument is still at one or the other steps summed up in paragraph 21. 
Therefore, going by the request of the respondent, the option is left for the 
decision of the District Registrar. Contrary to these admitted circumstances, 
though the suit instrument is insufficiently stamped, still the penalty of ten 
times under Section 34 of the Act is imposed through the impugned orders. 
The imposition of penalty of ten times at this juncture in the facts and 
circumstances of this case is illegal and contrary to the steps summed up 
in paragraph 21. The instrument is sent to the District Registrar, thereafter 
the District Registrar in exercise of his jurisdiction under Section 39 of the 
Act, decides the quantum of stamp duty and penalty payable on the 
instrument. The appellant is denied this option by the impugned orders. It 
is trite law that the appellant must pay what is due, but as is decided by the 
District Registrar and not the Court under Section 34 of the Act.  
23. 
Hence, for the above reasons, the direction to pay ten times the 
penalty of the deficit stamp duty merits interference and accordingly is set 

26 
 
aside. The trial court is directed to send the agreement of sale dated 
29.06.1999 to the District Registrar to determine the deficit stamp duty and 
penalty payable. Upon receipt of the compliance certificate from the District 
Registrar, without reference to an objection under the Act, the suit 
document be received in evidence. All objections available to the 
respondents except the above are left open for consideration. 
24. 
Appeals are allowed in part, as indicated above.  
 
 
..……………………J. 
(HRISHIKESH ROY) 
 
 
 
 
……………………J. 
                                                                                       (S.V.N BHATTI) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
SEPTEMBER 02, 2024.