2024 INSC 677
CIVIL APPEAL  NO. 3465/2023
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL  NO.  3465 OF 2023
STATE PROJECT DIRECTOR, UP EDUCATION  FOR ALL 
PROJECT BOARD & ORS.
APPELLANTS
VERSUS
SAROJ MAURYA & ORS. 
RESPONDENTS
O R D E R
1. The appellant-State of Uttar Pradesh has assailed the Judgment and Order
dated 18th April, 2022 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of
Judicature at Allahabad in an intra court appeal1 directed against the common
judgment and order dated 21st December, 2021 passed by the learned Single
Judge in a batch of writ petitions.  We have perused the impugned judgment
and find that except for placing on record the case of the writ petitioners  and
the respondents followed by the findings returned by the learned Single Judge
and the conclusions arrived at, on its own the Division Bench has not expressed
its view on the issues raised before it. The judgment simply concludes with an
observation that the Division Bench is in agreement with the approach and view
of the learned Single Judge without furnishing any reasons therefor.
2. Ms. Garima Prashad, learned Additional Advocate General appearing for
1
Special Appeal No.222 of 2022
1
REPORTABLE
Digitally signed by
geeta ahuja
Date: 2024.09.11
13:24:09 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

CIVIL APPEAL  NO. 3465/2023
the appellants submits that there were various Government Orders2 issued by
the State of Uttar Pradesh including G.O. dated 11th December, 2020 that was
brought to the notice of the Division Bench but has not been dealt with at all.
She states that much water has flown under the bridge by now and there are
further G.Os. and Circulars issued by the appellants which ought to have been
taken into consideration and without any application of mind, the impugned
judgment has been passed simply upholding the order passed by the learned
Single Judge without dealing with the submissions made by the either side.
She further states that in the meantime, in view of the order passed by this
Court on 02nd September, 2022 when notice was issued and it was directed that
there shall be a stay on the impugned order as well as any directions passed in
the contempt petition during the pendency of the matter, which order was
subsequently made absolute on 02nd May, 2023 with a clarification that the
appointments made by the appellants will be subject to final orders in the
appeal, the appellant-State has made subsequent appointments of teachers
and is continuing to do so.
3. We are of the opinion that in the absence of any reasoning in the impugned
judgment, the same cannot be sustained.  In this regard, we are benefitted by
the following observations made by this Court in CCT v. Shukla & Bros.3,. The
relevant paragraphs of the judgment are extracted hereinbelow: -
“23.  We  are  not  venturing  to  comment  upon  the  correctness  or  otherwise  of  the
2  For short ‘the G.Os.’
3  (2010) 4 SCC 785
2

CIVIL APPEAL  NO. 3465/2023
contentions of law raised before the High Court in the present petition, but it was certainly
expected of the High Court to record some kind of reasons for rejecting the revision
petition  filed  by  the  Department  at  the  very  threshold.  A litigant  has  a  legitimate
expectation of knowing reasons for rejection of his claim/prayer. It is then alone, that a
party would be in a position to challenge the order on appropriate grounds. Besides, this
would be for the benefit of the higher or the appellate court. As arguments bring things
hidden and obscure to the light of reasons, reasoned judgment where the law and factual
matrix of the case is discussed, provides lucidity and foundation for conclusions or
exercise of judicial discretion by the courts.
24.
Reason is the very life of law. When the reason of a law once ceases, the law itself
generally ceases (Wharton's Law Lexicon). Such is the significance of reasoning in any
rule of law. Giving reasons furthers the cause of justice as well as avoids uncertainty. As a
matter of fact it helps in the observance of law of precedent. Absence of reasons on the
contrary essentially introduces an element of uncertainty, dissatisfaction and give entirely
different dimensions to the questions of law raised before the higher/appellate courts. In
our view, the court should provide its own grounds and reasons for rejecting claim/prayer
of a party whether at the very threshold i.e. at admission stage or after regular hearing,
howsoever concise they may be.
25.
We would reiterate the principle that when reasons are announced and can be
weighed, the public can have assurance that process of correction is in place and
working. It is the requirement of law that correction process of judgments should not only
appear to be implemented but also seem to have been properly implemented. Reasons
for an order would ensure and enhance public confidence and would provide due
satisfaction to the consumer of justice under our justice dispensation system. It may not
be very correct in law to say, that there is a qualified duty imposed upon the courts to
record reasons.
26.
Our procedural law and the established practice, in fact, imposes unqualified
obligation upon the courts to record reasons. There is hardly any statutory provision under
the Income Tax Act or under the Constitution itself requiring recording of reasons in the
judgments but it is no more res integra and stands unequivocally settled by different
judgments of this Court holding that the courts and tribunals are required to pass
reasoned judgments/orders. In fact, Order 14 Rule 2 read with Order 20 Rule 1 of the
Code of Civil Procedure requires that, the court should record findings on each issue and
such findings which obviously should be reasoned would form part of the judgment, which
in turn would be the basis for writing a decree of the court.
27.
By practice adopted in all courts and by virtue of judge-made law, the concept of
reasoned judgment has become an indispensable part of basic rule of law and, in fact, is a
mandatory requirement of the procedural law. Clarity of thoughts leads to clarity of vision
and proper reasoning is the foundation of a just and fair decision. In Alexander Machinery
(Dudley) Ltd. [1974 ICR 120 (NIRC)] there are apt observations in this regard to say
“failure to give reasons amounts to denial of justice”. Reasons are the real live links to the
administration of justice. With respect we will contribute to this view. There is a rationale,
logic and purpose behind a reasoned judgment. A reasoned judgment is primarily written
to clarify own thoughts; communicate the reasons for the decision to the concerned and to
provide  and  ensure  that  such  reasons  can  be  appropriately  considered  by  the
appellate/higher court. Absence of reasons thus would lead to frustrate the very object
stated hereinabove.”
4. The matter is remanded back to the Division Bench for the parties to appear
3

CIVIL APPEAL  NO. 3465/2023
and address arguments afresh.   Liberty is granted to the parties to place on
record the subsequent developments in the matter so that the Division Bench is
apprised of the larger perspective in the case and take an objective view in the
matter.  Liberty is granted to both sides to address arguments on law as also on
facts afresh by additionally referring to the subsequent developments, if any
besides the issues raised before the Division Bench in the light of the common
judgment passed by the learned Single Judge.
5.  Accordingly, the impugned judgment is quashed and set aside and the
appeal filed by the appellant in the High Court is restored to its original position.
The parties are directed to appear before the Roster Bench on 20th September,
2024.  The interim orders passed by this Court shall continue to operate till the
appeal is disposed of by the Division Bench.
6. Needless to state that liberty is granted to the respondents and/or the
Intervenors to seek modification/vacation of the interim orders passed by this
Court.  If such an application is moved, the same shall be considered and
appropriate orders passed in accordance with law.
7. The High Court is requested to try and expedite the hearing in the appeal
that has been restored.  As regards the Impleadment/Intervention applications
filed by various private parties, learned AAG states that the State proposes to
move  before the Division Bench for impleading the Intervenors/applicants so
that a comprehensive view can be taken in the matter. Liberty is granted to the
impleaders/intervenors to participate in the proceedings before the Division
4

CIVIL APPEAL  NO. 3465/2023
Bench.
8. The appeal is disposed of along with pending application(s), if any.
           
       
       ……………………….......................J.
                  
                   ( HIMA KOHLI )          
 
……………………….......................J.
       ( SANDEEP MEHTA )
  NEW DELHI 
 21st AUGUST, 2024
  GA
5

CIVIL APPEAL  NO. 3465/2023
ITEM NO.105               COURT NO.9               SECTION III-A
               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
CIVIL APPEAL  NO(S).  3465/2023
STATE PROJECT DIRECTOR UP EDUCATION  FOR ALL 
PROJECT BOARD & ORS.
  APPELLANT(S)
                                VERSUS
SAROJ MAURYA & ORS.                                RESPONDENT(S)
(IA No. 70890/2024 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.
 IA No. 185599/2023 - INTERVENTION/IMPLEADMENT
 IA No. 128219/2024 - INTERVENTION/IMPLEADMENT
 IA No. 70891/2024 - PERMISSION TO FILE ADDITIONAL 
DOCUMENTS/FACTS/ANNEXURES)
 
Date : 21-08-2024 This appeal was called on for hearing today.
CORAM : 
         HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE HIMA KOHLI
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANDEEP MEHTA
For Appellant(s)
Ms. Garima Prashad, Sr. A.A.G.
                   Mr. Krishnanand Pandeya, AOR
                   Mr. Divyanshu Sahay, Adv.
                   Mr. Yash Kirti Kumar Bharti, Adv.
                   
                   
For Respondent(s)
 Mr. Sanjoy Ghose, Sr. Adv.
Ms. Mayuri Raghuvanshi, AOR
                   Mr. Vyom  Raghuvanshi, Adv.
                   Ms. Akanksha Rathore, Adv.
                                      
                   Mr. Mohnish Nirwan, Adv.
                   Mr. Ashok Kumar, Adv.
                   Mr. Abhishek Pratap Singh, Adv.
                   Mr. Sahil baraik, Adv.
                   Mr. Yash Tewari, Adv.
                   Mr. Shashank rai, Adv.
                   Mr. Jacob benny, Adv.
                   Mr. Piyush Singh, Adv.
                   Mr. Umesh Dubey, AOR
                   
                   Mr. Dushyant Parashar, AOR
                   
                   Mr. P.s. Patwalia, Sr. Adv.
                   Mr. R.k. Singh, Adv.
6

CIVIL APPEAL  NO. 3465/2023
                   Mrs. Neeraj Singh, Adv.
                   Mr. Tom Joseph, AOR
                   Mr. R. Krishnaraj, Adv.
                   Mr. Kumar Gaurav, Adv.
                   Mr. Arjun Singh, Adv.
                   Mr. Ramandeep Singh, Adv.
                   
                   
           UPON hearing the counsel the court made the following
                             O R D E R
The appeal is disposed of along with pending application(s), if
any, in terms of the signed Reportable Order.
   (Nand Kishor)
 (Geeta Ahuja)
Court Master (NSH)
Assistant Registrar-cum-PS  
 
(Signed Reportable order is placed on the file)
7