2024 INSC 740
1
           REPORTABLE
     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
 
      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
Criminal Appeal No(s).  960/2021
DINESH SAHU ALIAS DINNU                        Appellant(s)
                                VERSUS
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                   Respondent(s)
J U D G M E N T
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1.
The instant appeal arises out of the impugned judgment
and order dated 04.07.2019, passed by the High Court of
Madhya Pradesh, Principal Seat at Jabalpur in Criminal
Appeal  No.  1867  of  2007,  whereby  the  High  Court  has
confirmed  the  judgment  and  order  dated  16.08.2007,
passed  by  the  Court  of  3rd Additional  Sessions  Judge,
Bhopal  in  S.T.  No.43  of  2007,  convicting  the  present
appellant  Dinesh  Sahu  alias  Dinnu  and  the  co-accused
Raju Sharma alias Awadhesh Sharma alias Naresh Sharma,
for the offence punishable under Section 302 read with
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced them
to  suffer  Life  Imprisonment  along  with  a  fine  of
Rs.3,000/-,  in  default  thereof  to  undergo  further
rigorous imprisonment for six months.
Digitally signed by
Nisha Khulbey
Date: 2024.09.27
14:29:34 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
2.
The case of the prosecution in a nutshell was that, one
Vinod  Sai  (since  deceased) 
was  running  a  light
refreshment stall under the name and style of Ajay Tea
Stall Baba Board Chowraha. There was a previous enemity
between  the  said Vinod  Sai  (since  deceased) and  Raju
Sharma  alias  Awadhesh  Sharma  alias  Naresh  Sharma.  On
10.09.2004,  a  quarrel  took  place  between  the  above
parties  and  both  lodged  reports  against  each  other.
Driven by the same, on 11.11.2006 at 07:00 p.m., when
Kamal Sanwale (PW-6) and Vinod Sai (since deceased) were
at the shop, the said Raju Sharma alias Awadhesh Sharma
alias  Naresh  Sharma  armed  with  sword and  Dinesh  Sahu
alias Dinnu (the appellant herein) armed with a khukri,
came on the spot.  Both of them inflicted several blows
on  Vinod Sai. As a result, thereof, he fell down and
died on the spot.
3.
According  to  the  further  case  of  the  prosecution,  on
hearing  the  ruckus,  Kamal,  Kalim,  Anil,  Salman  and
Santosh rushed to the spot to save  Vinod Sai  but the
appellant-  Dinesh Sahu alias Dinnu  threatened them by
showing khukri, and thereafter both the accused, namely,
Raju Sharma and Dinesh Sahu, fled away from the spot. At
that time, Shashi Bai (PW-13), the mother of Vinod Sai
was coming to the shop of her son to take charge of the

3
shop and she witnessed the entire incident.
4.
At the instance of the informant Kamal Sanwale (PW-6),
Dehati  Nalisi  (Ex.P/1)  was  prepared  by  Arvind  Singh
Raghuvanshi, who was the Investigating Officer of the
case  and  a  temporary  Crime  bearing  No.  0/06  was
registered for the offence punishable under Section 302
read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.  Dehati
Nalisi was  sent  to  the  Police  Station,  Habibganj  for
registration,  where  it  was  registered  as  Crime
No.1100/2006. After the completion of the investigation,
charge-sheet was filed against both the accused.
5.
The  Trial  Court,  after  recording  the  evidence  of  the
witnesses  examined  by  the  prosecution  and  on
appreciating  the  evidence  on  record,  convicted  the
accused, namely, Raju Sharma alias Awadhesh Sharma alias
Naresh Sharma for the offence punishable under Section
302  of  the  IPC  and  Dinesh  Sahu  alias  Dinnu,  for  the
offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section
34 of the IPC.
6.
Being  aggrieved  by  the  said  judgment  and  order  of
conviction and sentence, both the accused preferred the
Criminal Appeal No.1867 of 2007 before the High Court,
which dismissed the appeal and confirmed the judgment
and order passed by the Trial Court.

4
7.
The present appellant (Dinesh Sahu alias Dinnu), being
aggrieved by the said judgment and order passed by the
High Court, has preferred the instant appeal.
8.
The learned counsel, Ms. Sangeeta Kumar, appearing for
the appellant, taking the Court to the record of the
case, more particularly, the evidence of the witnesses,
strenuously urged that all the material witnesses had
turned hostile including the informant Kamal Singh (PW-
6). She further submitted that neither the evidence of
Pratap  Singh  (PW-14),  in  whose  presence  the  alleged
recovery  of  khukri was  made  from  the  house  of  the
appellant, was reliable nor the evidence of the mother
of  the  deceased,  Shashi  Bai  (PW-13),  was  reliable.
According to her, even the very presence of Shashi Bai
(PW-13)  was  doubtful  inasmuch  as,  her  statement  was
recorded  three  days  after  the  alleged  incident  took
place.  She  further  submitted  that  the  appellant  has
already  undergone  incarceration  for  a  period  of  more
than 11 years (as on the date) and that there being no
evidence on record against the appellant to show that
the appellant had shared the same intention as his co-
accused-Raju  Sharma  to  kill  Vinod  Sai,  the  appellant
should be given benefit of doubt.

5
9.
However,  the  learned  counsel  Ms.  Mrinal  Gopal  Elker,
appearing  for  the  respondent-State  would  vehemently
submit  that  there  being  concurrent  finding  of  facts
recorded by the two Courts below, this Court in exercise
of the powers under Article-136 of the Constitution of
India,  should  not  interfere  with  the  same,  more
particularly,  when  the  prosecution  had  proved  the
charges  levelled  against  the  present  appellant  beyond
reasonable doubt. She has placed heavy reliance on the
evidence of Dr. C.S. Jain (PW-17), who had carried out
the post-mortem of the deceased, who had opined in his
post-mortem  report  that  the  cause  of  death  of  the
appellant was due to several injuries sustained by him
and  that  such  injuries  are  possible  with  the  weapon
recovered from the appellant-accused.
10.
Having  regard  to  the  submissions  made  by  the  learned
counsel for the parties, and to the evidence available
on record, it appears that the guilt of the appellant
was  sought  to  be  established  by  the  prosecution  by
examining as many as seventeen witnesses, including the
informant Kamal Singh and the other eye-witnesses, as
also the Shashi Bai (PW-13), who was the mother of the
deceased.  It  is  true  that  except  the  two  witnesses,

6
namely, Pratap Singh (PW-14) and Shashi Bai (PW-13), the
other  material  witnesses  had  turned  hostile.
Nonetheless, it is pertinent to note that the evidence
of witnesses cannot be totally discarded, merely because
they  have  turned  hostile  to  the  case  of  prosecution
during the course of trial. The informant, Kamal Singh
(PW-6), had admitted his signatures on the Dehati Nalisi
(Ex.P/1),  which  was  recorded  immediately  after  the
incident in question involving both the accused in the
alleged  incident.  It  is  further  required  to  be  noted
that one of the panch witnesses, namely, Pratap Singh
(PW-14) has duly supported the case of the prosecution
as regards the recovery of the alleged weapon,  Khukri,
from the house of the present appellant. Though the said
witness  was  thoroughly  cross-examined  by  the  defense
counsel,  nothing  significant  adverse  to  the  case  of
prosecution has come on record. Of course, the learned
counsel  for  the  appellant  had  tried  to  impeach  the
credibility of the said witness by submitting that he
was  an  interested  witness  as  he  was  known  to  the
deceased  Vinod Sai, and also since he had come to the
Court in a drunken condition, the said fact was taken
into consideration by the Trial Court at the time of
recording  his  deposition  by  noting  that  though,  the

7
witness was drunk, he was perfectly in sound state of
mind to understand the questions put to him and was able
to give his deposition. Merely because the said witness
knew  the  deceased,  it  cannot  be  said  that  he  was  an
interested witness or an unreliable witness.
11.
The mother of the deceased, Shashi Bai (PW-13), was also
thoroughly  cross-examined  by  the  defense  and  nothing
adverse to the case of prosecution had come on record,
which would help the case of the appellant.
12.
It is also pertinent to note that Dr. C.S. Jain (PW-17),
who  had  carried  the  post-mortem  of  the  deceased,  had
also  opined  that  the  injuries  on  the  body  of  the
deceased were possible with the alleged weapon/ article
khukri,  which  was  recovered  from  the  house  of  the
present  appellant.  The  said  weapon  khukri,  seized/
recovered from the house of the appellant was also sent
to  Forensic  Science  Laboratory  (FSL)  and  as  per  its
report, the human blood of ‘Group B’ was present on it,
which was the blood group of the deceased.
13.
In view of the above evidence, we are of the opinion
that the prosecution had succeeded in proving the guilt
of the appellant beyond reasonable doubt. Even the two
Courts below have also discussed the said evidence in
detail  and  found  him  guilty  of  the  charges  levelled

8
against him.
14.
We do not see any good ground to interfere with the said
concurrent  findings  of  facts  recorded  by  the  Courts
below.
15.
In  that  view  of  the  matter,  the  present  appeal  is
dismissed.
16.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand closed.
      ...................J. 
       (BELA M. TRIVEDI)
 ...................J.
         (SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA)
New Delhi
22nd August, 2024

9
(REPORTABLE)
ITEM NO.101                COURT NO.14               SECTION II-A
               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Criminal Appeal  No(s).  960/2021
DINESH SAHU ALIAS DINNU                            Appellant(s)
                                VERSUS
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                        Respondent(s)
([ PART HEARD BY : HON'BLE BELA M. TRIVEDI AND HON'BLE SATISH 
CHANDRA SHARMA, JJ. ] 
IA No. 106254/2021 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.
IA No. 100201/2021 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)
 
Date : 22-08-2024 These matters were called on for hearing today.
CORAM : 
         HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE BELA M. TRIVEDI
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA
For Appellant(s)
                    Ms. Sangeeta Kumar, AOR
                   
For Respondent(s)
                    Ms. Mrinal Gopal Elker, AOR
                   
          UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R
1.
The  appeal  is  dismissed  in  terms  of  the  signed
reportable judgment.
2.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand closed.
    (NISHA KHULBEY)                               (MAMTA RAWAT)
SENIOR PERSONAL ASSISTANT                     COURT MASTER (NSH)
(signed judgment is placed on the file)