2024 INSC 704
Page 1 of 30 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 10509-10510 OF 2013 
 
BIDYUT SARKAR & ANR. 
 
       …APPELLANTS 
VERSUS 
KANCHILAL PAL (DEAD)  
THROUGH LRs. & ANR. 
 
    …RESPONDENTS 
 
O R D E R  
 
1. These appeals, by defendant nos.2 and 3, have been 
filed assailing the correctness of the judgment and 
order dated 05.12.2008 whereby the Division Bench 
of Calcutta High Court allowed the First Appeal 
No.282 of 2006, titled Kanchilal Pal vs. Sashti 
Charan Banerjee & Others, and after setting aside 
the judgment of the Trial Court dismissing the suit of 
the respondent no.1, proceeded to decree the suit for 
specific performance of the contract in favour of 
plaintiff -respondent no.1. Hereinafter will deal with 
Digitally signed by
Neetu Khajuria
Date: 2024.09.19
17:10:42 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 30 
 
the parties as they have been referred in the Trial 
Court. 
2. Relevant facts giving rise to the present appeals are 
as follows: 
2.1. Sashti Charan Banerjee-respondent no.2, 
was admittedly the owner of the property in 
dispute. 
According 
to 
the 
appellants, 
respondent no.1 filed a suit for specific 
performance registered as Title Suit No.123 
of 1999, Kanchilal Pal vs. Sashti Charan 
Banerjee and two others in the Court of Civil 
Judge (Senior Division), Barasat, for a decree 
of specific performance of contract dated 
29.03.1999. The plaint allegations are as 
follows: 
a) Defendant no.1 is the owner of property in 
question 
being 
Premises 
No.126, 
Rajkumar Mukherjee Road, Calcutta, 
700035, within the JL No.5, Paragana 
Calcutta, Khatian No.2292 bearing Plot 
Nos. 2477 and 2478 measuring about 7 
cottahs, 71/2 Chittack of land, including 
the structures thereon. 

Page 3 of 30 
 
b) Defendant no.1 intended to sell the 
premises in question for which the plaintiff 
agreed to purchase the same for a 
consideration of Rs.3,00,000/- (Rupees 
three lakhs only). The plaintiff was 
required to develop the property/premises 
in question while dividing into plots and to 
sell the same to different persons within 
the period of one year and, after realizing 
sale consideration from the proposed 
purchasers, shall pay the balance amount 
of Rs.2,90,000/-(Rupees two lakhs ninety 
thousand only) whereupon defendant no.1 
would transfer the land in favour of the 
plaintiff or his nominees, as the case 
would be.  
c) An 
advance 
amount 
of 
Rs.10,000/- 
(Rupees ten thousand only) is said to have 
been paid in cash to defendant no.1. The 
plaintiff was also empowered to make a 
settlement for ejectment of the tenants 
residing in the premises in question and 
take possession from them. The plaintiff 
was 
also 
authorized 
to 
carry 
out 

Page 4 of 30 
 
development 
work 
and 
to 
make 
construction of common passage, drain, 
etc. in the meantime and to collect money 
from the proposed buyers of the plots to be 
developed.  
2.2. In due course, a sale deed would be executed 
by defendant no.1 in favour of the nominees 
or the plaintiff and in such sales, the plaintiff 
would be a confirming party. The said 
exercise was to be completed within one year. 
In case defendant no.1 fails to execute the 
sale deed, the plaintiff or his nominees would 
be at liberty to file a suit for specific 
performance.  
2.3. It was further provided in the agreement that, 
in case the plaintiff fails to pay the amount 
as agreed within the time stipulated i.e. one 
year, the agreement to sell would be treated 
as cancelled.  
2.4. Further, according to the plaint, the plaintiff 
has spent an amount of Rs.2,00,000/- 
(Rupees two lakhs only) for construction of 
common passage, drain, etc. and has also 
contacted with the tenants to purchase part 

Page 5 of 30 
 
of the property in question measuring  three 
cottahs and that they would pay an amount 
of Rs.1,20,000/- (Rupees one lakh twenty 
thousand only), out of which the plaintiff had 
received Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand 
only) from one of the tenants. The plaintiff 
also claimed to be in possession. He also 
requested defendant no.1 to deliver the 
original title deeds, which defendant no.1 did 
not oblige.  
2.5. The tenants, on 20.05.1999, came to the 
plaintiff and showed him letter of an advocate 
and, after going through the same, the 
plaintiff learnt that defendant no.1 had 
already transferred the property in question 
vide sale deed dated 03.05.1999 in favour of 
defendant nos.2 and 3 (appellants). The 
plaintiff thereafter made inquiries and again 
approached defendant nos.1 to 3 to execute 
the sale deed in his favour but as they 
declined, he was compelled to institute the 
suit on 21.05.1999.  

Page 6 of 30 
 
2.6. It is also averred in the plaint in paragraph 
10 that the plaintiff was always ready and 
willing to perform his part of the contract.  
 
3. Defendant no.1 filed his written statement denying 
the plaint allegations. A separate written statement 
was filed by defendant nos.2 and 3. Defendant no.1 
in his written statement stated that he had entered 
into an agreement to sell dated 10.03.1999 in favour 
of defendant nos.2 and 3 and had also executed a 
registered deed of conveyance on 03.05.1999 in 
favour of defendant nos.2 and 3 for valuable 
consideration received by him and, also handed over 
possession to them. Thereafter, a letter of atonement 
dated 18.05.1999 was served on the tenant of the 
premises in question on behalf of all the three 
defendants through their advocates which was duly 
received by them informing them about the transfer 
of title from defendant no.1 to defendant nos.2 and 3.  
 
4. It is further stated in the written statement of 
defendant no.1 that plaintiff approached him on 
24.03.1999 with a proposal to purchase the said 
property, however, defendant no.1 declined the said 

Page 7 of 30 
 
proposal informing him that he had already entered 
into an agreement to sell with defendant nos.2 and 3. 
The plaintiff, however, continued with his insistence 
to purchase the property and in that respect on 
29.03.1999 at about 04:30 PM, the plaintiff 
compelled defendant no.1 to accompany him to the 
machine shop of Ajit Bhattacharjee, where under 
threat and pressure and surrounded by about ten 
persons, he was compelled to sign some papers 
against his will. He was not even allowed to read the 
papers, and he was threatened not to disclose such 
incident to any person, including police. Despite the 
same, defendant no.1 reported the matter to the 
police on the basis of which G.D. Entry no.713 was 
made at the Talatola Police Station on 07.04.1999. 
The plaintiff, along with his men and agents, tried to 
cut the trees over the property in question on 
03.04.1999, which being illegal and unlawful, was 
again reported to the police station at Baranagar and 
registered vide G.D. Entry no.496 dated 04.09.1999.  
 
5. Defendant no.1 also moved an application under 
section 144(2) Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
before the Executive Magistrate at Barrackpore, 

Page 8 of 30 
 
which was registered as M.P. Case No.894 of 1999. 
The defendant also informed the Chairperson, 
Baranagar Municipality, through advocates’ letter 
dated 12.04.1999, against the illegal acts of the 
plaintiff over the suit property. 
 
6. Further, defendant no.1 also lodged a criminal case 
no. C/1335 of 1999 before the Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate under sections 384/341/34 Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 which was still pending at the time of 
filing of the written statement. It was further stated 
in the written statement of defendant no.1 that on 
23.04.1999, the plaintiff came to his house and threw 
some xerox copies of papers with a bundle of 
currency notes of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees ten thousand 
only) and threatened him with dire consequences if 
he discloses anything to the police. It was only then 
that defendant no.1 came to know of the alleged 
agreement to sell dated 29.03.1999, which he was 
compelled to sign under circumstances already 
stated above.  
 
7. It is also averred in the written statement that 
defendant no.1 tried to return the amount of 
Rs.10,000/- (Rupees ten thousand only) to the 

Page 9 of 30 
 
plaintiff by way of cheque which he received but later 
returned. Despite best efforts, defendant no.1 could 
not return the amount of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees ten 
thousand only) to the plaintiff. 
 
8. It was further averred that plaintiff was land 
speculator and promoter. He wanted to grab the suit 
property by hook or crook. The plaintiff joined hands 
with the tenants and tried to create obstructions from 
inspecting the premises in question by defendant 
nos. 2 and 3. Defendant nos.2 and 3 also lodged a 
complaint in that regard, being G.D. entry no.1434 
dated 03.04.1999 at the Baranagar Police Station. 
 
9. In para-wise reply, defendant no.1 denied the plaint 
allegations, however, accepted the execution of sale 
deed dated 03.05.1999 in favour of defendant nos.2 
and 3. On such averments defendant no.1 sought 
that suit deserves to be dismissed.  
 
10. Defendant nos. 2 and 3 in their written statement 
also denied the plaint allegations and more or less 
reiterated the same facts as pleaded in the written 
statement of defendant no.1. In addition, it was 
stated that defendant nos. 2 and 3 filed Title suit 

Page 10 of 30 
 
No.235 of 1999 in the Court of Civil Judge (Junior 
Division), Sealdah, against the plaintiff of which the 
plaintiff had full knowledge.  
 
11. Based upon the pleadings of the parties, the Trial 
Court framed the following issues: 
“ISSUES 
1) Is the suit maintainable in its 
present form and law? 
2) Has the plaintiff any cause of action 
to file this suit? 
3) Is the suit barred by limitation? 
4) Was there any concluded contract 
in between the plaintiff and the 
defendant no.1 on 29.03.1999 
regarding sale of the ‘A’ schedule 
property by defendant no.1 in 
favour of the plaintiff? 
5) Was the defendant no.1 compelled 
to put signature under threat and 
compulsion by the plaintiff and his 
associates at Dharamtala Street, 
Kolkata? 
6) Are the defendant nos. 2 & 3 
bonafide purchasers for value of 
the suit premises without notice? 
7) Is the agreement of sale dated 
29.03.1999 which has marked as 
Exbt.1 with objection be admitted 
in evidence? 
8) Is the plaintiff entitled to get the 
benefit of section 36 of the Indian 
Stamp Act? 

Page 11 of 30 
 
9) Is the plaintiff ready and willing to 
perform his part of the contract 
inviting Section 16(c) of the specific 
Relief Act? 
10) Was there any part performance of 
the said contract? 
11) Is the plaintiff entitled to get relief 
as prayed for? 
12) To what other relief/reliefs, if any, 
is the plaintiff entitled?” 
 
 
12. The parties led evidence, both documentary and oral. 
The plaintiff examined himself as PW-1 and proved 
the agreement to sell dated 29.03.1999 which was 
although marked as Exhibit-1 but with objections, as 
defendant no.1 had raised an objection regarding the 
said agreement to sell being not properly stamped. 
On behalf of the defendants, defendant no.1 
examined himself as DW-1, whereas on behalf of 
defendant nos.2 and 3, their father entered the 
witness box as DW-2. Various documents on behalf 
of the defendants were proved by the respective 
witnesses.  
 
13. The Trial Court decided all the issues relating to 
maintainability of the suit, cause of action, limitation, 
validity of agreement to sell dated 29.03.1999, 

Page 12 of 30 
 
defendant nos.2 and 3 being bona fide purchasers or 
not, readiness and willingness of the plaintiff to 
perform his part of the contract, in favour of the 
plaintiff and against the defendants. However, the 
Trial Court dealt in detail with regard to the 
admissibility of the agreement to sell dated 
29.03.1999 and whether the plaintiff was entitled to 
get the benefit of section 36 of Indian Stamp Act, 
18991. The Trial Court dismissed the suit of the 
plaintiff on the finding that the agreement to sell 
dated 29.03.1999 was not admissible in evidence as 
the defendants had raised objections regarding the 
same. Once the same was held not admissible, the 
suit for enforcement of the same was held liable to be 
dismissed. 
 
14. Aggrieved by the same, the plaintiff filed an appeal 
under section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
registered as Appeal from Original Decree No.282 of 
2006. Further, defendant nos.2 and 3 filed cross-
objections against the findings of the Trial Court 
recorded against them, which was registered as COT 
 
 
1 The Stamp Act 

Page 13 of 30 
 
No.2304 of 2005. The Division Bench of the Calcutta 
High Court allowed the First Appeal and dismissed 
the cross-objections. The Division Bench affirmed the 
findings recorded by the Trial Court on all issues 
already decided in favour of the plaintiff and 
accordingly dismissed the cross-objections. However, 
with regard to issue of admissibility of the agreement 
to sell dated 29.03.1999, the Division Bench was of 
the view that as the plaintiff had accepted that he 
would pay the deficient stamp duty and penalty as 
may 
be 
assessed 
by 
the 
competent 
authority/collector, the Trial Court had erred in 
dismissing the suit on the ground that Ex.-1-the 
agreement to sell, could not be enforced being 
executed on insufficiently stamped paper.  
 
15. Aggrieved, the present appeals have been preferred 
by defendant nos.2 and 3 against the judgment of the 
High Court in allowing the first appeal of the plaintiff 
and further on dismissing their cross-objections. 
 
16. Learned counsel for the appellants has not only 
challenged the findings of the High Court on the 
admissibility of the agreement to sell dated 
29.03.1999 but also the concurrent findings of both 

Page 14 of 30 
 
the courts on other issues regarding the validity of 
agreement to sell, circumstances under which it was 
executed and defendants 2 and 3 not being bona fide 
purchasers for value. 
 
17. Upon considering the submissions, we are of the view 
that the findings of the High Court regarding the 
admissibility of the agreement to sell dated 
29.03.1999 were neither based on a detailed 
consideration of the relevant statutory provisions nor 
supported by established legal principles. It appears 
that the High Court, without thoroughly examining 
the applicable legal provisions, cursorily concluded 
that the document would be admissible simply 
because the plaintiff had expressed willingness to pay 
the deficient stamp duty and any penalty imposed by 
the competent authority or the Collector. However, it 
is evident that the plaintiff made no concrete effort to 
initiate or pursue the necessary proceedings before 
the competent authority or the Collector to determine 
the deficient stamp duty and penalty. The High 
Court, therefore, failed to recognize that an 
insufficiently stamped document can only be 
admitted into evidence after the deficiency in stamp 

Page 15 of 30 
 
duty and any applicable penalty has been duly paid 
and cleared. This lapse of procedure was not properly 
addressed in the High Court's judgment. 
 
18. At the time of deposition of the plaintiff on 
07.03.2003, he stated in his examination-in-chief 
while referring to the agreement to sell dated 
29.03.1999, that this was the original agreement to 
sell executed by defendant no.1 Sashti Charan 
Banerjee in his favour in respect of the suit property 
and it had the signature of defendant no.1 on all 
pages which he had signed in his presence. The 
agreement to sell was drafted by Prasanta Pal and 
typed by Neel Kamal Mallick in his presence. He paid 
Rs.10,000/- (Rupees ten thousand only) to defendant 
no.1 as per the said agreement and it was marked as 
Ex.-1 with objection. He further stated that he was 
ready to deposit the deficient stamp duty as per order 
of the Collector. The Trial Court marked the 
document as Ex.-1 with objection which is also 
reflected in the Exhibit list similarly. Simultaneously, 
the Trial Court in the order sheet dated 07.03.2003 
noted the said document as Ex.-1 with objection and 
had further issued notice to the Collector to assess 

Page 16 of 30 
 
the deficient stamp duty and penalty as per the 
provisions of section 40 of the Stamp Act and to 
submit the report accordingly. Further, a copy of the 
order dated 07.03.2003, along with xerox copy of the 
disputed agreement to sell dated 29.03.1999, was 
sent to the Collector vide letter no.63 dated 
28.03.2003. However, no reply was received from the 
Collector till the date the judgment was delivered by 
the Trial Court. 
 
19. The Trial Court thereafter proceeded to consider the 
statutory provisions of the Stamp Act namely 
sections 35, 36, 40 and 42. After discussing the same 
in detail, it proceeded to hold that the document was 
inadmissible in evidence, as the plaintiff failed to 
further pursue the proceedings before the Collector 
resulting into non-determination of the deficiency 
and the penalty and consequently, the non-deposit of 
the deficiency and penalty, which could have been 
determined by the Collector. The High Court, 
unfortunately, has not considered the statutory 
provisions and only proceeded to rely upon the 
statement of the plaintiff that he had accepted to 
deposit the deficiency in stamp duty and penalty, if 

Page 17 of 30 
 
any, imposed by the Collector. It would be worthwhile 
to mention here that even till date, the plaintiff has 
not made any efforts before the Collector to get the 
deficiency and penalty determined on the impounded 
document and to clear the same. 
 
20. The relevant provisions of the Stamp Act, namely, 
sections 35, 36, 40 and 42 are reproduced 
hereunder: 
“35. Instruments not duly stamped 
inadmissible in evidence, etc. —  
No instrument chargeable with duty 
shall be admitted in evidence for any 
purpose by any person having by law or 
consent of parties authority to receive 
evidence, or shall be acted upon, registered 
or authenticated by any such person or by 
any public officer, unless such instrument 
is duly stamped:  
 
Provided that—  
 
(a) any such instrument [shall] be 
admitted in evidence on payment of 
the duty with which the same is 
chargeable, or, in the case of any 
instrument insufficiently stamped, of 
the amount required to make up such 
duty, together with a penalty of five 
rupees, or, when ten times the 
amount of the proper duty or deficient 
portion thereof exceeds five rupees, of 
a sum equal to ten times such duty or 
portion;  

Page 18 of 30 
 
(b) where any person from whom 
a stamped receipt could have been 
demanded, has given an unstamped 
receipt and such receipt, if stamped, 
would be admissible in evidence 
against him, then such receipt shall 
be admitted in evidence against him 
on payment of a penalty of one rupee 
by the person tendering it;  
(c) Where a contract or agreement 
of 
any 
kind 
is 
effected 
by 
correspondence consisting of two or 
more letters and any one of the letters 
bears the proper stamp, the contract 
or agreement shall be deemed to be 
duly stamped;  
(d) nothing herein contained 
shall prevent the admission of any 
instrument 
in 
evidence 
in 
any 
proceeding in a Criminal Court, other 
than a proceeding under Chapter XII 
or Chapter XXXVI of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure 1898 (5 of 1898);  
(e) nothing herein contained shall 
prevent 
the 
admission 
of 
any 
instrument in any Court when such 
instrument has been executed by or 
on behalf of [(the) (Government)], or 
where it bears the certificate of the 
Collector as provided by section 32 or 
any other provision of this Act. 
36. Admission of instrument where not 
to be questioned. — 
Where 
an 
instrument 
has 
been 
admitted in evidence, such admission 
shall not, except as provided in section 61, 
be called in question at any stage of the 

Page 19 of 30 
 
same suit or proceeding on the ground that 
the instrument has not duly stamped. 
xxx xxx xxx 
 
40. 
Collectors 
power 
to 
stamp 
instruments impounded. —  
(1) When the Collector impounds any 
instrument under section 33, or receives 
any instrument sent to him under section 
38, 
sub-section 
(2), 
not 
being 
an 
instrument chargeable [with a duty not 
exceeding ten naye paise] only or a bill of 
exchange or promissory note, he shall 
adopt the following procedure: — 
(a) if he is of opinion that such 
instrument is duly stamped or is not 
chargeable with duty, he shall certify 
by endorsement thereon that it is duly 
stamped, 
or 
that 
it 
is 
not 
so 
chargeable, as the case may be; 
(b) if he is of opinion that such 
instrument is chargeable with duty 
and is not duly stamped, he shall 
require the payment of the proper 
duty or the amount required to make 
up the same, together with a penalty 
of five rupees; or, if he thinks fit, [an 
amount not exceeding] ten times the 
amount of the proper duty or of the 
deficient portion thereof, whether 
such amount exceeds or falls short of 
five rupees: 
Provided that, when such instrument 
has been impounded only because it has 
been written in contravention of section 13 

Page 20 of 30 
 
or section 14, the Collector may, if he 
thinks 
fit, 
remit 
the 
whole 
penalty 
prescribed by this section. 
(2) Every certificate under clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) shall, for the purposes of 
this Act, be conclusive evidence of the 
matters stated therein. 
(3) Where an instrument has been 
sent to the Collector under section 38, 
sub-section (2), the Collector shall, when 
he has dealt with it as provided by this 
section, return it to the impounding officer. 
 
xxx xxx xxx 
42. Endorsement of instruments in 
which 
duty 
has 
been 
paid 
under 
sections 35, 40 or 41—  
(1) When the duty and penalty (if any) 
leviable in respect of any instrument have 
been paid under section 35, section 40 or 
section 41, the person admitting such 
instrument in evidence or the Collector, as 
the 
case 
may 
be, 
shall 
certify 
by 
endorsement thereon that the proper duty 
or, as the case may be, the proper duty and 
penalty (stating the amount of each) have 
been levied in respect thereof, and the 
name and residence of the person paying 
them. 
(2) Every instrument so endorsed 
shall thereupon be admissible in evidence, 
and may be registered and acted upon and 
authenticated as if it had been duly 
stamped, and shall be delivered on his 
application in this behalf to the person 

Page 21 of 30 
 
from whose possession it came into the 
hands of the officer impounding it, or as 
such person may direct: 
Provided that— 
(a) no instrument which has been 
admitted in evidence upon payment of 
duty and a penalty under section 35, 
shall be so delivered before the 
expiration of one month from the date 
of such impounding, or if the Collector 
has certified that its further detention 
is necessary and has not cancelled 
such certificate; 
(b) nothing in this section shall 
affect 
the 
Code 
of 
Civil 
Procedure,1882 (14 of 1882), section 
144 clause 3.” 
 
21. According to the language of the section 35 of the 
Stamp Act, instruments not duly stamped would be 
inadmissible in evidence, and any instrument 
chargeable with duty would be admissible in evidence 
only and only if such instrument is duly stamped. 
The proviso gives illustration as to how the 
instrument would become admissible upon payment 
of duty with which it was chargeable or in case of 
instruments insufficiently stamped, the payment is 
made to make up such duty along with penalty 
mentioned therein. It also refers to exceptions where 

Page 22 of 30 
 
a document could be admissible in evidence under a 
given situation. As elaborated in clauses (b), (c), (d) 
and (e) of the proviso, the instrument in question i.e. 
agreement to sell dated 23.03.1999 does not fall 
under any exception. 
 
22. Section 36 of the Stamp Act provides for admissibility 
of an instrument not being questioned if the same 
had been admitted in evidence on the ground that it 
is not duly stamped except as provided under section 
61 of the Stamp Act. In the present case, the 
instrument in question was admitted subject to 
objection as noted in the deposition of the plaintiff 
(PW-1) and recorded in the order sheet of the Trial 
Court dated 07.03.2003. As such section 36 of the 
Stamp Act will not come to the rescue of the plaintiff. 
 
23. Section 40 of the Stamp Act gives power to the 
Collector to stamp such instruments which have 
been impounded. The Collector will determine the 
proper duty payable on such instrument along with 
penalty as provided in clause (b) of section 41. 
 
24. Section 42 of the Stamp Act provides that when duty 
and penalty, if any, leviable in respect of any 

Page 23 of 30 
 
instrument has been paid under sections 35, 40 or 
41 upon endorsement by the Collector that such duty 
has been paid, instrument shall thereupon be 
admissible in evidence. 
 
25. In the present case, the agreement to sell dated 
29.03.1999 was found by the Trial Court to be 
insufficiently stamped. Consequently, the matter was 
referred to the Collector for determination of proper 
stamp duty and any applicable penalty. As per the 
provisions of Section 42 of the Stamp Act, such a 
document can only become admissible in evidence 
after deficiency in stamp duty and the penalty, if any, 
have been assessed by the Collector, and the 
requisite amounts have been paid. Once the 
deficiency and penalty are cleared, the Collector is 
required to certify the document by endorsement, 
indicating that the required duty and penalty have 
been paid. Only upon such certification can the 
document be admitted into evidence and acted upon 
legally.  
 
26. Despite the Trial Court's referral of the matter to the 
Collector, no determination regarding the deficiency 
in stamp duty or penalty was made by the Collector 

Page 24 of 30 
 
under Section 40 of the Samp Act. As a result, the 
document remains inadmissible in evidence under 
the express bar imposed by Section 35 of the Stamp 
Act. Failure to resolve the deficiency in stamp duty 
prevents the document from being considered as 
admissible and valid in evidence. Therefore, until the 
necessary stamp duty and penalty are duly paid and 
endorsed by the Collector, the instrument remains 
legally barred from being admitted in evidence. 
 
27. The argument advanced on behalf of the plaintiff-
respondent no.1 is that he would be entitled to get 
benefit of section 36 of the Stamp Act as the 
document had been exhibited and admitted in 
evidence, holds no ground in as much as the 
document was found to be insufficiently stamped and 
was marked as exhibit with objection and that 
objection having not been removed or cured, no 
benefit of section 36 of the Stamp Act could be 
extended to the plaintiff-respondent no.1.  
 
28. In this connection, following cases are cited: 

Page 25 of 30 
 
Ram Rattan (dead) by L.Rs. vs. Bajrang Lal and 
others2; 
Javer Chand and others vs. Pukhraj Surana3; 
 
29. The Trial Court had placed reliance upon the 
aforesaid two judgments and had also extracted the 
relevant part from the said judgments. The facts in 
the 1978 case of Ram Rattan (dead) by L.Rs.(supra) 
were quite similar wherein an instrument had been 
exhibited with objection but therein also the said 
objection had not been removed or cured. This Court 
held that such an instrument would not be 
admissible in evidence and section 36 of the Stamp 
Act would not be attracted. The relevant paras of this 
judgement are reproduced below: 
“6. When the document was tendered in evidence by 
the plaintiff while in witness box, objection having been 
raised by the defendants that the document was 
inadmissible in evidence as it was not duly stamped 
and for want of registration, it was obligatory upon the 
learned trial Judge to apply his mind to the objection 
raised and to decide the objects in accordance with 
 
 
2 AIR 1978 SC 1393 
3 AIR 1961 SC 1655 

Page 26 of 30 
 
law. Tendency sometimes is to postpone the decision 
to avoid interruption in the process of recording 
evidence and, therefore, a very convenient device is 
resorted to, of marking the document in evidence 
subject to objection. This, however would not mean 
that the objection as to admissibility on the ground 
that the instrument is not duly stamped is judicially 
decided; it is merely postponed. In such a situation at 
a later stage before the suit is finally disposed of it 
would none-the-less be obligatory upon the court to 
decide the objection. If after applying mind to the rival 
contentions the trial court admits a document in 
evidence, Section 36 of the Stamp Act would come into 
play and such admission cannot be called in question 
at any stage of the same suit or proceeding on the 
ground that the instrument has not been duly 
stamped. The court, and of necessity it would be trial 
court before which the objection is taken about 
admissibility of document on the ground that it is not 
duly stamped, has to judicially determine the matter 
as soon as the document is tendered in evidence and 
before it is marked as an exhibit in the case and where 
a document has been inadvertently admitted without 
the court applying its mind as to the question of 
admissibility, the instrument could not be said to have 
been admitted in evidence with a view to attracting 
Section 36 (see Javer Chand v. Pukhraj Surana) [AIR 
1961 SC 1655] . The endorsement made by the 
learned trial Judge that “Objected, allowed subject 
to objection”, clearly indicates that when the 
objection 
was 
raised 
it 
was 
not 
judicially 
determined 
and 
the 
document 
was 
merely 

Page 27 of 30 
 
tentatively marked and in such a situation Section 
36 would not be attracted. 
7. Mr Desai then contended that where an instrument 
not duly stamped or insufficiently stamped is tendered 
in evidence, the court has to impound it as obligated 
by Section 33 and then proceed as required by Section 
35 viz. to recover the deficit stamp duty along with 
penalty. Undoubtedly, if a person having by law 
authority to receive evidence and the civil court is 
one such person before whom any instrument 
chargeable with duty is produced and it is found 
that such instrument is not duly stamped, the 
same has to be impounded. The duty and penalty 
has to be recovered according to law. Section 35, 
however, prohibits its admission in evidence till 
such duty and penalty is paid. The plaintiff has 
neither paid the duty nor penalty till today. 
Therefore, stricto sensu the instrument is not 
admissible in evidence. Mr Desai, however, wanted 
us to refer the instrument to the authority competent 
to adjudicate the requisite stamp duty payable on the 
instrument and then recover the duty and penalty 
which the party who tendered the instrument in 
evidence is in any event bound to pay and, therefore, 
on this account it was said that the document should 
not be excluded from evidence. The duty and the 
penalty has to be paid when the document is tendered 
in evidence and an objection is raised. The difficulty in 
this case arises from the fact that the learned trial 
Judge declined to decide the objection on merits and 
then sought refuge under Section 36. The plaintiff was, 

Page 28 of 30 
 
therefore, unable to pay the deficit duty and penalty 
which when paid subject to all just exceptions, the 
document has to be admitted in evidence. In this 
background while holding that the document Ext. I 
would be inadmissible in evidence as it is not duly 
stamped, we would not decline to take it into 
consideration because the trial court is bound to 
impound the document and deal with it according to 
law.” 
[emphasis added] 
30. We find no reason to disagree with the findings of the 
Trial Court regarding the inadmissibility of the 
agreement to sell dated 29.03.1999. The document, 
being insufficiently stamped, was rightfully barred 
from being admitted as evidence in the absence of the 
requisite stamp duty and penalty being paid and 
certified by the Collector. The High Court, in treating 
this document as admissible without resolving the 
stamp duty deficiency, overlooked the statutory 
mandate under the Stamp Act. As the document is 
foundational to the suit, the failure to comply with 
the statutory requirements renders the entire claim 
unenforceable. Consequently, the suit must be 
dismissed, as it is based on an instrument that is 
legally inadmissible as evidence. The plaintiff cannot 
claim relief on the basis of a document that has not 
satisfied the legal requirements for admissibility. 

Page 29 of 30 
 
 
31. We need not deal with other arguments on merits 
regarding the validity of the instrument dated 
29.03.1999 and deal with the issue of coercion as 
alleged by defendant no.1. 
 
32. Accordingly, the appeals are liable to be allowed. The 
amount of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees ten thousand only) 
admittedly received by defendant no.1 although 
under abnormal conditions as alleged by defendant 
no.1 in the interest of the parties would be liable to 
be returned to the plaintiff. The said amount has 
remained with defendant no.1 for almost 25 years 
right from 1999 till the present. Now that the 
appellants have purchased the property from 
defendant no.1, we fasten the liability on the 
appellants to return the amount to the plaintiff. We 
quantify the said amount to be a rounded of figure at 
Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees five lakhs only) to be paid 
within a period of three months. 
 
33. In view of the above the appeals are allowed, the 
impugned order of the High Court is set aside and 
that of the Trial Court dismissing the suit is restored. 
Additionally, it is directed that the appellants shall 

Page 30 of 30 
 
pay Rs.5,00,000/-(Rupees five lakhs only) to the 
plaintiff-respondent no.1 within three months from 
today. 
 
..………….........................J. 
[VIKRAM NATH] 
 
 
……………..........................J. 
 
[PRASANNA B. VARALE] 
 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST 28, 2024.