2024 INSC 652
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
Civil Appeal No.
 
  10192  
 
    /2024   
 
 
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 28968/2018) 
VAIBHAV JAIN
 
        …Appellant (s)
VERSUS
HINDUSTAN MOTORS PVT. LTD.            …Respondent(s)
J U D G M E N T
MANOJ MISRA, J.
1.
Leave granted.
2.
This appeal impugns the judgment and order of the
High Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur1 dated 15.11.2017,
whereby Miscellaneous Appeal (Civil) No.1306 of 2007 filed
by the appellant was dismissed and Miscellaneous Appeal
(Civil) No.1147/2017 filed by the claimant(s) was allowed
thereby enhancing the compensation already awarded to
them. 
1 High Court
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 1 of 25
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant
Date: 2024.09.03
17:48:04 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

3. 
At the outset, we would like to put on record that the
Special Leave Petition (SLP) against the impugned order
was filed by impleading six respondents. Respondents 1 to
4 (R­1 to R­4) were heirs and legal representatives of the
deceased   Pranay   Kumar   Goswami   on   whose   accidental
death   the   claim   arose.   Respondent   no.5   (R­5),   namely,
Shubhashish Pal, was the person who drove the vehicle at
the time of accident; and Respondent no.6 (R­6), namely,
M/s   Hindustan   Motors,   was   the   manufacturer   of   the
vehicle.  However, on 23.10.2018, this Court issued notice
only   to   the   manufacturer   (R­6)   (i.e.,   M/s   Hindustan
Motors) and the SLP was dismissed  qua  R­1 to R­5 by
observing that the question raised in the matter is about
the liability of the dealer (i.e., the appellant).  Therefore, in
our view, the impugned award has attained finality insofar
as the rights of the claimant­respondents are concerned. In
consequence,   it   appears,   the   Registry   has   shown   M/s
Hindustan Motors as the sole respondent though, initially,
there were six respondents.   Be that as it may to have a
clear understanding of the matter, we shall describe the
parties as they were described in the SLP at the time of its
presentation.
FACTUAL MATRIX 
4. 
A   claim   petition   for   death   compensation   was   filed
before the Tribunal by claimant­respondents (R­1 to R­4)
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 2 of 25

(i.e., legal heirs of the deceased who died in the accident),
under   Section   166   of   the   Motor   Vehicles   Act,   19882,
against   driver   of   the   offending   vehicle   (R­5);   M/s.
Hindustan Motors Private Limited (R­6) (i.e., manufacturer
of the vehicle); and Vaibhav Jain (i.e., Proprietor of M/s
Vaibhav Motors ­ the dealer of R­6) (the appellant herein).
The   deceased   was   R­6’s   Territory   Manager   whereas   the
driver of the vehicle was R­6’s Service Engineer. Thus, the
driver and the deceased were employees of R­6 (i.e., M/s
Hindustan   Motors).   The   accident   took   place   when   the
vehicle was taken out for a test drive from the dealership of
the appellant.
5.
On   the   pleadings   of   the   parties,   five   issues   were
framed   by   the   Tribunal.     Out   of   those   five,   the   issue
relevant for the purposes of this appeal is:
Whether prior to the accident M/s. Hindustan
Motors  had  sold  the  offending  vehicle  to M/s.
Vaibhav Motors (i.e., the dealer)? If not, whether
the   dealer   can   be   held   liable   for   the
compensation,   jointly   and   severally,   with   M/s.
Hindustan Motors?
6.
As   regards   issue   of   ownership   of   the   vehicle,   the
Tribunal held that on the day of accident, M/s. Hindustan
Motors   was   the   owner   of   the   vehicle   though   Vaibhav
Motors   was   in   possession   of   the   vehicle   as   its   dealer.
2 M.V. Act
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 3 of 25

Based on that, the Tribunal held M/s. Hindustan Motors
as well as M/s. Vaibhav Motors (the appellant) jointly and
severally liable for the compensation awarded.
7.
Aggrieved by quantum of the compensation awarded,
the claimants (R­1 to R­4) preferred Miscellaneous Appeal
(Civil) No.1147/2017 before the High Court; whereas vide
Miscellaneous Appeal (Civil) No.1306/2007, the dealer (i.e.,
the appellant herein) questioned the award to the extent it
made him jointly and severally liable for payment of the
compensation. 
8.
Both the aforesaid appeals were heard simultaneously
and disposed of by the impugned order.   The claimants’
appeal was allowed, and the compensation was enhanced.
However, the appellant’s appeal was dismissed.
9.        We have heard Shri Arup Banerjee for the appellant
and Ms. Purti Gupta for M/s Hindustan Motors; and have
also perused the materials on record.
Submissions on behalf of the appellant
10.
      The learned counsel for the appellant submitted:
(i)
On the date of accident, the owner of the
offending vehicle was its manufacturer M/s.
Hindustan Motors (R­6) in whose name the
vehicle was temporarily registered and there
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 4 of 25

was   no   evidence   that   the   vehicle   was
transferred to the appellant.
(ii)
The driver of the vehicle and the deceased
were   both   employees   of   M/s   Hindustan
Motors and they took the vehicle from the
dealership   for   a   test   drive,   therefore,   the
vehicle, at the time of accident, was in the
control and possession of M/s Hindustan
Motors through its employees. 
(iii)
The   liability   for   compensation   is   of   the
owner  of  the  vehicle including  the  driver.
Section 2 (30) of the M.V. Act defines the
“owner” as a person in whose name a motor
vehicle stands registered, and where such
person   is   a   minor,   the   guardian   of   such
minor, and in relation to a motor vehicle
which   is   the   subject   of   a   hire­purchase
agreement, or an agreement of lease or an
agreement of hypothecation, the person in
possession   of   the   vehicle   under   that
agreement.
(iv)
The   Dealership   Agreement   between   the
appellant   and   M/s.   Hindustan   Motors   is
neither an agreement of hire­purchase nor
of lease or hypothecation, therefore, even if
the   dealer   is   taken   to   be   in   constructive
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 5 of 25

possession of the vehicle, the dealer would
not   be   its   owner   within   the   meaning   of
Section 2 (30) of the M.V. Act.
(v)
Clauses   3   (b)   and   4   of   the   Dealership
Agreement, relied to fasten liability on the
appellant, are in respect of defects in the
vehicle and not in respect of any claim for
compensation   arising   from   an   accident
involving   the   vehicle.   The   concept   of
possessory   owner   as
 obtaining 
under
section 2 (19)3  of the Motor Vehicles Act,
1939 is no longer available under the M.V.
Act, 1988 since the definition of owner has
undergone a sea change.  
(vi)
The judgment of this Court in “Rajasthan
State   Road   Transport   Corporation   vs.
Kailash Nath Kothari & Ors.4” was based
on   the   definition   of   owner   as   obtaining
under the old Act hence it would not be of
any help to decide ownership of a vehicle
under the new M.V. Act, 1988.
(vii)
Once   it   is   established   that   appellant   is
neither owner nor driver of the vehicle, it
3 “owner" means, where the person, in possession of a motor vehicle is a minor, the guardian of such minor, and in
relation to a motor vehicle which is the subject of a hire purchase agreement, the person in possession of the vehicle
under that agreement.
4 (1997) 7 SCC 481
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 6 of 25

cannot   be   made   liable   for   the
compensation.
Submissions on behalf of M/s Hindustan Motors (R­6) 
11.
Per contra, learned counsel for M/s Hindustan
Motors submitted:
(i)
M/s. Hindustan Motors had sold the vehicle
to the   appellant  vide  challan  cum  invoice
No.20302564
 
for
 
an
 
amount
 
of
Rs.7,73,475/­. Pursuant   thereto,   the   car
bearing
 
temporary
 
registration
 
No.
CG04RPRTC­0478   was   delivered   to   the
appellant on principal­to­principal basis. As
the sale stood complete in all respects, the
appellant was owner of the vehicle on the
date   of   accident.   (To   buttress   the   above
submission,   reliance   was   placed   on   a
decision of this Court in “M/s. Tata Motors
Limited vs. Antonio Paulo Vaz and Anr.5”)
(ii)
Assuming   that   the   deceased   as   well   the
driver was an employee of M/s Hindustan
Motors,   once   the   vehicle   was   sold   and
delivered to the dealer, the driver and the
dealer   alone   would   be   liable   for
5 (2021) 18 SCC 545
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 7 of 25

compensation. More so, because clause 3
(b)   of   the   Dealership   Agreement   absolved
M/s   Hindustan   Motors   of   its   liability   by
providing as follows:
“3(b)   After   the   motor   vehicles   are
dispatched   /delivered   the   Company’s
liability in respect of any defect in the
motor   vehicle   will   be   limited   to   the
Company’s   obligations   under   the
warranty clause and the Company will
have no other liability and all liability
other than the one under warranty as
aforesaid shall be to the account of the
Dealer.”
(Emphasis supplied)  
(iii)
The dealer being the possessory owner was
rightly held liable in the light of the decision
of   this   Court   in  Rajasthan   State   Road
Transport Corporation (supra).
(iv)
Even if M/s. Hindustan Motors did not file
an appeal against the impugned award, this
Court can absolve M/s. Hindustan Motors
of   its   liability   by   modifying   the   award   in
exercise of its power under Order 41 Rule
33 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (for
short CPC) as expounded by this Court in
“Bihar   Supply   Syndicate   vs.   Asiatic
Navigation   &   Ors.6”  and   “Sri   Chandre
6 (1993) 2 SCC 639
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 8 of 25

Prabhuji   Jain   Temple   &   Ors.   vs.
Harikrishna & Anr.7.
     ISSUES
12.
Having   noticed   the   rival   submissions,   in   our   view,
following issues fall for our consideration: ­
(i)
Whether,   as   a   mere   dealer   of   M/s   Hindustan
Motors, the appellant could be considered owner
of   the   vehicle   and   as   such   liable,   jointly   and
severally with M/s Hindustan Motors, to pay the
compensation as directed by the Tribunal/ High
Court?
(ii)
Whether clauses 3 (b) and 4 of the Dealership
Agreement absolved M/s Hindustan Motors of its
liability to pay compensation as an owner?
(iii)
Whether   M/s   Hindustan   Motors,   even   without
preferring   an   appeal   against   the   award   of   the
Tribunal, could question its liability under the
award by relying on the provisions of Order 41
Rule 33 of the CPC?
            Issue No.(i)
7 (1973) 2 SCC 665
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 9 of 25

13.
Before we delve into the afore­stated issues, we must
have a look at the concept of ‘ownership’ of a vehicle as
obtaining under the M.V. Act for fixing liability in respect
of compensation.  Section 1668 of the M.V. Act enumerates
the persons who may file an application for compensation
before the Claims Tribunal whereas Section 168(1)9 of the
M.V.   Act   speaks   about   the   award   of   the   Tribunal.
Interestingly,   Section   166,   though   specifies   the   persons
who may file an application for compensation, omits to
specify  person(s)  against  whom   the  application is   to be
88 Section 166. Application for compensation. – (1) An application for compensation arising out of an accident of the
nature specified in sub-section (1) of section 165 may be made –
(a)
by the person who has sustained the injury; or
(b)
by the owner of the property; or
(c)
where death has resulted from the accident, by all or any of the legal representatives of the deceased;
or
(d)
by any agent duly authorized by the person injured or all or any of the legal representatives of the
deceased, as the case may be,
Provided that where all the legal representatives of the deceased have not joined in any such
application for compensation, the application shall be made on behalf of or for the benefit of all the legal
representatives of the deceased and the legal representatives who have not so joined, shall be impleaded as
respondents to the application.
Provided further that where a person accepts compensation under section 164 in accordance with the
procedure provided under section 149, his claims petition before the claims tribunal shall lapse.
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made, at the option of the claimant, either to the
claims tribunal having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident occurred, or to the claims tribunal within
the local limits of whose jurisdiction the claimant resides or carries on business or within the local limits of
whose jurisdiction the defendant resides, and shall be in such form and contains such particulars as may be
prescribed.
(3) No application for compensation shall be entertained unless it is made within six months of the
occurrence of the accident.
(4) The claims tribunal shall treat any report of accident forwarded to it under section 159 as an
application for compensation under this Act.
(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, the right of a 
person to claim compensation for injury in an accident shall, upon the death of the person injured, survive to 
his legal representatives, irrespective of whether the cause of death is relatable to or had any nexus with the 
injury or not.
99 Section 168.- Award of the Claims Tribunal. – (1) On receipt of an application for compensation made under
section 166, the claims tribunal shall, after giving notice of the application to the insurer and after giving the parties
including the insurer an opportunity of being heard, hold and inquiry into the claim or, as the case may be, each of the
claims and, subject to the provisions of section 162 may make an award determining the amount of compensation which
appears to it be just and specifying the person or persons to whom compensation shall be paid and in making the award
the claims tribunal shall specify the amount which shall be paid by the insurer or owner or driver of the vehicle involved
in the accident or by all or any of them, as the case may be: ..
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 10 of 25

filed. However, sub­section (1) of Section 168 by providing
that the Claims Tribunal shall specify the amount which
shall   be   paid   by   the   insurer   or   owner   or   driver   of   the
vehicle involved in the accident, gives sufficient indication
on whom the liability for compensation would fall.  
14.
In
 Godavari   Finance   Company   v.   Degala
Satyanarayanamma & Ors.9   a question arose whether a
financier would be an owner of a motor vehicle within the
meaning of Section 2(30)10 of the M. V. Act, 1988. In that
case,   the   accident   took   place   on   29.5.1995   and,
admittedly, the vehicle was not in control of the financier
though its name was entered in the registration book of the
vehicle.   The   extract   of   the   registration   book,   however,
revealed that the vehicle was registered in the name of
fourth respondent therein (i.e., not the financier) and that
the hire­purchase agreement with the financier had also
been   cancelled   on   10.11.1995.     In   that   context,   while
holding   that   financier   was   not   liable,   interpreting   the
definition   of   ‘owner’,   as   provided   in   Section   2(30),   this
Court observed:
“12.
Section   2   of   the   Act   provides   for
interpretation   of   various   terms   enumerated   therein.   It
starts   with   the   phrase   unless   the   context   otherwise
requires. The definition of owner is a comprehensive one.
The   interpretation   clause   itself   states   that   the   vehicle
9 9 (2008) 5 SCC 107
1010 Section 2. – In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, --
(30)
“owner” means the person in whose name a motor vehicle stands registered, and while such person is
a minor, the guardian of such minor, and in relation to a motor vehicle which is the subject of a hire purchase
agreement, or an agreement of lease or an agreement of hypothecation, the person in possession of the vehicle under
that agreement.  
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 11 of 25

which is the subject matter of a hire purchase agreement,
the person in possession of vehicle under that agreement
shall be the owner. Thus, the name of financier in the
registration   certificate   would   not   be   decisive   for
determination as to who was the owner of the vehicle. We
are not unmindful of the fact that ordinarily the person in
whose name the registration certificate stands should be
presumed to be the owner, but such a presumption can
be   drawn   only   in   the   absence   of   any   other   material
brought   on   record   or   unless   the   context   otherwise
requires.
13. In case of a motor vehicle which is subjected to
a   hire   purchase   agreement,   the   financier   cannot
ordinarily be treated to be the owner. The person who is
in possession of the vehicle, and not the financier being
the owner would be liable to pay damages for the motor
accident. 
15. An application for payment of compensation is
filed before the Tribunal constituted under Section 165 of
the Act for adjudicating upon the claim for compensation
in respect of accident involving the death of, or bodily
injury to, persons arising out of the use of motor vehicles,
or damages to any property of a third party so arising, or
both.  Use  of   the  motor   vehicle  is  a   sine   qua   non  for
entertaining a claim for compensation. Ordinarily if driver
of   the   vehicle   would   use   the   same,   he   remains   in
possession   or   control   thereof.   Owner   of   the   vehicle,
although may not have anything to do with the use of
vehicle at the time of the accident, actually he may be
held to be constructively liable as the employer of the
driver. What is, therefore, essential for passing an award
is   to   find   out   the   liabilities   of   the   persons   who   are
involved in the use of the vehicle or the persons who are
vicariously   liable.  The   insurance   company   becomes   a
necessary party to such claims as in the event the owner
of   the   vehicle   is   found   to   be   liable,   it   would   have   to
reimburse   the   owner   in   as   much   as   a   vehicle   is
compulsorily   insurable   so   far   as   the   third   party   is
concerned, as contemplated under section 147 thereof.
Therefore, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the
possession or control of a vehicle plays a vital role.”
(Emphasis supplied)
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 12 of 25

15.
In Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation (in
short RSRTC) (supra), the vehicle along with services of
the driver were hired by RSRTC from its registered owner.
The issue which arose for consideration by this Court was
whether RSRTC, which had hired the vehicle along with
services   of   the   driver   from   the   registered   owner   of   the
vehicle, could be held vicariously liable for the accident
caused by use of that vehicle.  Answering the question in
the affirmative, this Court, on the principle of vicarious
liability of RSRTC for the tort committed by a person under
its control and command, held:
“17.   …..  The   general   proposition   of   law   and   the
presumption arising therefrom that an employer, that is
the   person   who   has   the   right   to   hire   and   fire   the
employee, is generally responsible vicariously for the tort
committed by the employee concerned during the course
of his employment and within the scope of his authority,
is a rebuttable presumption. If the original employer is
able to establish that when the servant was lent, the
effective   control   over   him   was   also   transferred   to   the
hirer, the original owner can avoid his liability and the
temporary employer or the hirer, as the case may be,
must be held vicariously liable for the tort committed by
the employee concerned in the course of his employment
while   under   the   command   and   control   of   the   hirer
notwithstanding the fact that the driver would continue
to be on the payroll of th
 
 e original owner………..”      
16.
In   that   backdrop,   this   Court   while   construing   the
definition of “owner”, as provided in Section 2(19) of the old
Motor Vehicles Act, 193911, held that (a) the definition of
“owner” under section 2 (19) of the Act is not exhaustive;
(b) it has to be construed in a wider sense based on the
1111 See Footnote 3
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 13 of 25

facts and circumstances of a given case; and (c) it must
include, in a given case, the person who has the actual
possession and  control  of  the  vehicle  and  under  whose
direction and command the driver is obliged to operate the
same.  It was also observed that to confine the meaning of
owner to the registered owner only would not be proper
where the vehicle is in the actual possession and control of
the hirer at the time of the accident.
17.
In  National   Insurance   Co.   Ltd.   v.   Deepa   Devi   &
Ors.12 the question was as to who would be liable to pay
compensation   if   the   offending   vehicle   at   the   time   of
accident   is   under   requisition   for   election.     From   the
claimant’s side, by relying on the decision of this Court in
Guru Govekar v. Filomena F. Lobo13, it was argued that
regardless of the vehicle being in possession of some other
person,   the   owner   would   be   liable.   Negativing   this
argument,   this   Court   held   that   when   a   vehicle   is
requisitioned for State duty, the owner of the vehicle has
no other alternative but to hand over the possession to the
statutory   authority   and,   therefore,   the   case   would   be
distinguishable from the one where the owner gives the
vehicle to someone else on his own free will. Holding so, it
was observed:
“10. …. While the vehicle remains under requisition, the
owner does not exercise any control there over. The driver
1212 (2008) 1 SCC 414
1313 ((1988) 3 SCC 1
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 14 of 25

may still be the employee of the owner of the vehicle but
he has to drive it as per the direction of the officer of the
State, who is put in charge thereof. Save and except for
legal ownership, for all intent and purport, the registered
owner of the vehicle loses entire control thereover. He has
no say as to whether the vehicle should be driven at a
given point of time or not. He cannot ask the driver not to
drive a vehicle on a bad road. He or the driver could not
possibly say that the vehicle would not be driven in the
night. The purpose of requisition is to use the vehicle. For
the period the vehicle remains under the control of the
State and /or its officers, the owner is only entitled to
payment of compensation therefor in terms of the Act,
but   he   cannot   exercise   any   control   thereupon.   In   a
situation of this nature, this court must proceed on the
presumption that Parliament while enacting the 1988 Act
did not envisage such a situation. If in a given situation,
the   statutory   definitions   contained   in   the   1988   Act
cannot be given effect to in letter and spirit, the same
should be understood from the common sense point of
view.”
(Emphasis supplied)  
18.
While observing as above, this Court noticed that the
clause   defining   “owner”  is   prefaced   with   the   expression
“unless the context otherwise requires” and, therefore, in
the light of an earlier decision of this Court in  Ramesh
Mehta v. Sanwal Chand Singhvi & Ors.14, it was held that
where   the   context   makes   the   definition   given   in   the
interpretation   clause   inapplicable,   the   same   meaning
cannot be assigned.          
19.
What is clear from the decisions noticed above, is that
‘owner’ of a vehicle is not limited to the categories specified
in Section 2(30) of the M.V. Act. If the context so requires,
even a person at whose command or control the vehicle is,
1414 (2004) 5 SCC 409, paragraph 27
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 15 of 25

could be treated as its owner for the purposes of fixing
tortious liability for payment of compensation. In this light,
we shall now examine whether at the time of accident the
vehicle in question was under the command and control of
the appellant (i.e., the dealer). 
20.
According   to   the   Tribunal,   M/s.   Hindustan   Motors
was admittedly the manufacturer of the vehicle and there
was no evidence that the vehicle was sold to the dealer.
The finding is that no sale letter was produced from its
side to show that the car was sold to M/s. Vaibhav Motors.
At the time of accident only two persons were present in
the vehicle, and they were none other than employees of
M/s. Hindustan Motors, namely, Pranav Kumar Goswami
(the deceased) and Shubhashish Pal (the driver).  Based on
that, the Tribunal observed:
“………therefore, it is inferred that Hindustan Motors
had given the Lancer car to Vaibhav Motors for the
purpose of selling it.   And the entire supervision was
that   of   Pranav   Kumar   and   Shubhashish   Pal   of
Hindustan   Motors.    It   is   not   proved   that   Hindustan
Motors had sold the said Lancer car to Vaibhav Motors.
Accordingly, the issue no.3 is held to be not proved.”
21.
However,   the   Tribunal   held   all   non­applicants,
namely, Shubhashish Pal (i.e., driver of the vehicle); M/s.
Hindustan Motors (owner of the vehicle); and M/s. Vaibhav
Motors   (the   dealer),   jointly   and   severally   liable   for   the
compensation.
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 16 of 25

22.
Against the award, the appellant (i.e., the dealer) filed
an appeal but no appeal was preferred by M/s. Hindustan
Motors even though a categorical finding was returned by
the Tribunal that no evidence of sale of the vehicle to the
dealer was produced by M/s Hindustan Motors.   In view
thereof, it does not lie in the mouth of M/s. Hindustan
Motors to canvass that it was not the owner of the vehicle.
We   have,   therefore,   to   consider   whether   M/s.   Vaibhav
Motors (the appellant), being in constructive possession of
the vehicle as a dealer, could be held liable, particularly
when M/s. Hindustan Motors was its owner and, at the
time   of   accident,   the   vehicle   was   being   driven   by   an
employee of M/s Hindustan Motors.
23.
As per the finding of the Tribunal, which remained
undisturbed,   the   aforesaid   two   employees   of   M/s.
Hindustan   Motors   took   the   vehicle   from   M/s   Vaibhav
Motors   (the   appellant)   for   a   test   drive.     None   of   the
employees of the dealer was present in the vehicle. Rather,
at the time of accident, the driver and the co­passenger of
that  vehicle  were  employees  of   M/s.  Hindustan  Motors.
There is nothing on record to suggest that the dealer had
the authority to deny those two persons permission to take
the   vehicle   for   a   test   drive.   More   so,   when   they   were
representatives   of   the   owner   of   the   vehicle.     In   these
circumstances, we can safely conclude that at the time of
accident the vehicle was not only under the ownership of
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 17 of 25

M/s.   Hindustan   Motors   but   also   under   its   control   and
command through its employees. Therefore, in our view,
the   appellant,   being   just   a   dealer   of   M/s   Hindustan
Motors, was not liable for compensation as an owner of the
vehicle.   
24.
The issue no.(i) is decided in the aforesaid terms.  
            Issue No.(ii)
25.
Now, we shall consider whether by virtue of clauses 3
(b) and  4 of  the  Dealership  Agreement,  M/s  Hindustan
Motors   was   absolved   of   its   tortious   liability,   that   is,
whether the tortious liability shifted to the dealer (i.e., the
appellant).
26.
Clauses 3 (b) and 4 of the Dealership Agreement have
been extracted in paragraph 14 of the  judgment of the
High Court. They read as under:
“3   (b)   After   the   motor   vehicles   are   dispatched/
delivered the Company’s liability in respect of any
defect in the motor vehicle will be limited to the
Company’s obligations under the warranty clause
and the Company will have no other liability and all
liabilities   other   than   the   one   under   warranty   as
aforesaid shall be to the account of the Dealer.
4.
After   the   motor   vehicles   are   delivered,   the
Company’s liability in respect of any defect in the
motor   vehicle   will   be   limited   to   the   Company’s
obligation   under   the   warranty   clause   and   the
Company will have no other liability.  All liabilities
other   than   the   one   under   warranty   as   aforesaid
shall be to the account of the Dealer.”
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 18 of 25

27.
A   careful   reading   of   the   aforesaid   clauses   would
indicate that they deal with company’s (M/s. Hindustan
Motors’)   liability   in   respect   of   any   defect   in   the   motor
vehicle.  They limit the company’s liability in respect of any
defect in the motor vehicle to the company’s obligations
under the warranty clause.  The use of the words “and the
company will have no other liability and all liabilities other
than   one   under   warranty   as   aforesaid   shall   be   to   the
account of the Dealer”, in absence of specific exclusion of
tortious liability arising from use of such vehicle, cannot
absolve the owner of the motor vehicle of its liability under
the Motor Vehicles Act and shift it on to the dealer when
the vehicle at the time of accident was under the control
and command of the owner (i.e., M/s Hindustan Motors)
through its own employees as found above.  We, therefore,
reject   the   submission   of   the   learned   counsel   for   M/s.
Hindustan Motors that it cannot be saddled with liability
for payment of compensation in view of clauses 3 (b) and 4
of the Dealership Agreement.
28.
Issue no.(ii) is decided in the aforesaid terms.
            Issue No.(iii)
29.
The   issue   as   to   whether   M/s   Hindustan   Motors,
without filing a separate appeal, or cross­objection, could
take recourse to the provisions of Order 41 Rule 33 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 190815 to challenge that portion of
1515 Order 41 Rule 33. CPC. – Power of Court of Appeal -- The appellate court shall have power to pass any decree
and make any order which ought to have been passed or made and to pass or make such further or other decree or order
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 19 of 25

the award which made it liable, jointly and severally, for
the compensation awarded is rendered academic in view of
our findings on issues (i) and (ii).  However, we propose to
address the said issue. 
30.
In  Banarasi & Ors. V. Ram Phal16  this Court dealt
with   the   scope   of   Order   41   Rule   2217  CPC   (post   1976
amendment) and the power of an appellate court under
Order 41 Rule 33 CPC. While dealing with the scope of
Rule 22 of Order 41, the Court observed:
“10. …. There may be three situations:
as the case may require, and this power may be exercised by the Court notwithstanding that the appeal is as to part only
of the decree and may be exercised in favor of all or any of the respondents or parties, although such respondents or
parties may not have filed any appeal or objection and may, where there have been decrees in cross-suits or where two
or more decrease are passed in one suit, be exercised in respect of all or any of the decrees, although any appeal may not
have been filed against such decrees:
Provided that the Appellate Court shall not make any order under section 35A, in pursuance of any objection
on which the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has omitted or refused to make such order.
Illustration
A claims a sum of money as due to him from X or Y, and in a suit against both obtains a decree against X. X,
appeals and A & Y are respondents. The appellate court decides in favor of X. It has power to pass a decree against Y.
1616 (2003) 9 SCC 606
1717 Order 41 Rule 22 CPC. – Upon hearing respondent may object to decree as if he had preferred a separate 
appeal..—
(1)
Any respondent, though he may not have appealed from any part of the decree, may not only support
the decree but may also state that the finding against him in the court below in respect of any issue ought
to have been in his favour; and may also take any cross-objection to the decree which he could have taken
by way of appeal provided he has filed such objection in the appellate court within one month from the
date of service on him or his pleader of notice of the day fix for hearing the appeal, or within such further
time as the appellate court may deem fit to allow.
Explanation.-- A respondent aggrieved by a finding of the court in the judgment on which the decree
appealed against is based may, under this rule, file cross objection in respect of the decree insofar as it is
based on that finding, notwithstanding that by reason of the decision of the court on any other finding
which is sufficient for the decision of the suit, the decree, is, wholly or in part, in favor of that respondent.
(2)
Form of objection and provisions applicable thereto. --- Such cross objection shall be in the form
of a memorandum, and the provisions of rule 1, so far as they relate to the form and contents of the
memorandum of appeal, shall apply thereto.
(3)
Omitted (by Act 46 of 1999, w.e.f. 1.7.2002)
(4)
Where, in any case in which any respondent has under this rule filed a memorandum of objection, the
original appeal is withdrawn or is dismissed for default, the objection so filed may nevertheless be heard
and determined after such notice to the other parties as the Court thinks fit.
(5)
The provisions relating to appeals by indigent persons shall, so far as they can be made applicable,
apply to an objection under this rule. 
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 20 of 25

(i)
The   impugned   decree   is   partly   in   favour   of   the
appellant and partly in favour of the respondent.
(ii)
The decree is entirely in favour of the respondent
though   an   issue   has   been   decided   against   the
respondent.
(iii)
The decree is entirely in favour of the respondent
and   all   the   issues   have   also   been   answered   in
favour of the respondent but there is a finding in
the judgment which goes against the respondent.
 11.
In the type of case (i) it was necessary for the respondent
to file an appeal or take cross­objection against that part of the
decree which is against him if he seeks to get rid of the same
though   that   part   of   the   decree   which   is   in   his   favor   he   is
entitled to support without taking any cross­objection. The law
remains so post amendment too. In the type of cases (ii) and
(iii)   pre­amendment   CPC   did   not   entitle   nor   permit   the
respondent   to   take   any   cross­objection   as   he   was   not   the
person aggrieved by the decree. Under the amended CPC, read
in the light of the explanation, though it is still not necessary
for the respondent to take any cross­ objection laying challenge
to any finding adverse to him as the decree is entirely in his
favor   and   he   may   support   the   decree   without   his   cross
objection; the amendment made in the text of sub­rule (1), read
with the explanation newly inserted, gives him a right to take
cross­objection to a finding recorded against him either while
answering   an   issue   or   while   dealing   with   an   issue.   The
advantage of preferring such cross­objection is spelled out by
sub­rule   (4).   In   spite   of   the   original   appeal   having   been
withdrawn or dismissed for default the cross objection taken to
any   finding  by   the respondent   shall still  be  available  to  be
adjudicated upon on merits which remedy was not available to
the   respondent   under   the   unamended   CPC.   In   the   pre­
amendment era, the withdrawal or dismissal for default of the
original   appeal   disabled   the   respondent   to   question   the
correctness or otherwise of any finding recorded against the
respondent.
12.
The fact remains that to the extent to which the decree is
against the respondent and he wishes to get rid of it he should
have either filed an appeal of his own or taken cross objection
failing which the decree to that extent cannot be insisted on by
the respondent for being interfered, set aside or modified to his
advantage……”
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 21 of 25

In respect of the power of an appellate court under
Order 41 Rule 33 CPC, the Court, after observing that the
true scope of the power could be best understood when
read along with Rule 418. of Order 41, held:
“15. Rule 4 seeks to achieve one of the several objects sought to
be   achieved   by   Rule   33,   that   is,   avoiding   a   situation   of
conflicting decrees coming into existence in the same suit. The
above said provisions confer power of the widest amplitude on
the appellate court so as to do complete justice between the
parties and such power is unfettered by consideration of facts
like what is the subject matter of the appeal, who has filed the
appeal and whether the appeal is being dismissed, allowed or
disposed of by modifying the judgment appealed against. While
dismissing   an   appeal   and   though   confirming   the   impugned
decree,   the   appellate  court  may   still  direct   passing   of  such
decree   or   making   of   such   order   which   ought   to   have   been
passed or made by the court below in accordance with the
findings of fact and law arrived at by the court below and which
it   would   have   done   had   it   been   conscious   of   the   error
committed   by   it   and   noticed   by   the   appellate   court.   While
allowing the appeal or otherwise interfering with the decree or
order appealed against, the appellate court may pass or make
such   further   or   other,   decree   or   order,   as   the   case   would
require being done, consistent with the findings arrived at by
the   appellate   court.  The   object   sought   to   be   achieved   by
conferment of such power on the appellate court is to avoid
inconsistency, inequity, inequality in reliefs granted to similarly
placed  parties   and   unworkable   decree   or   order   coming  into
existence. The overriding consideration is achieving the ends of
justice. Wider the power, higher the need for caution and care
while exercising the power. Usually, the power under Rule 33 is
exercised when the portion of the decree appealed against or
the portion of the decree held liable to be set aside or interfered
by the appellate court is so inseparably connected with the
portion  not  appealed  against   or  left   untouched  that  for  the
reason of the latter portion being left untouched either injustice
would result or inconsistent decrees would follow. The power is
subject to at least three limitations: first, the power cannot be
exercised to the prejudice or disadvantage of a person not a
18.18. Order 41 Rule 4 CPC. – One of several plaintiffs or defendants may obtain reversal of whole decree where
it proceeds on ground common to all. -- Where there are more plaintiffs or more defendants than one in a suit, and the
decree appealed from proceeds on any ground common to all the plaintiffs or to all the defendants, any one of the
plaintiffs or of the defendants may appeal from the whole degree, and thereupon the appellate court may reverse or vary
the decree in favor of all the plaintiffs or defendants, as the case may be. 
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 22 of 25

party before the court; secondly, a claim given up or lost cannot
be   revived;   and   thirdly,   such   part   of   the   decree   which
essentially ought to have been appealed against or objected to
by a party and which that party has permitted to achieve a
finality cannot be reversed to the advantage of such party.  A
case where there are two relief prayed for and one is refused
while the other one is granted and the former is not inseparably
connected with or necessarily depending on the other, in an
appeal against the latter, the former relief cannot be granted in
favor of the respondent by the appellate court exercising power
under Rule 33 of Order 41.”
(Emphasis supplied)
 
31.
From the decision above, which has been consistently
followed, it is clear that for exercise of the power under
Rule 33 of Order 41 CPC the overriding consideration is
achieving the ends of justice; and one of the limitations on
exercise of the power is that that part of the decree which
essentially   ought   to   have   been   appealed   against,   or
objected to, by a party and which that party has permitted
to achieve a finality cannot be reversed to the advantage of
such party.
32.
In   the   instant   case,   the   Tribunal   had   returned   a
finding   on  issue   no.3   that  M/s.   Hindustan  Motors   had
provided   no   evidence   to   show   that   the   vehicle
manufactured and owned by it was sold by it to the dealer.
Admittedly, its own employees /officers were in control of
the vehicle at the time of accident and, therefore, M/s.
Hindustan Motors was held jointly and severally liable for
the   compensation   awarded.     This   part   of   the   award
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 23 of 25

operated   against   it   and   was   backed   by   a   finding   of
ownership.   By   not   challenging   the   same,   through   an
appeal   or   cross­objection,   M/s   Hindustan   Motors   has
allowed it to attain finality. Therefore, in our view, M/s
Hindustan Motors cannot be allowed to question the same
now.  Issue no. (iii) is decided in the aforesaid terms.    
  
CONCLUSION
33.
In   view   of   our   conclusion   that   the   appellant   was
neither the owner nor in control/ command of the vehicle
at the time of accident, and the vehicle was being driven by
an employee of M/s. Hindustan Motors, we are of the view
that apart from the driver, M/s. Hindustan Motors alone
was   liable   for   the   compensation   awarded.   Thus,   the
appellant should not have been burdened with liability to
pay compensation.
RELIEF  
34.
However, as vide order dated 23.10.2018 the SLP was
dismissed qua the claimant­respondents, we are unable to
set aside the award to the extent it enables the claimant­
respondents to recover the awarded compensation, jointly
or   severally,   from   the   owner,   dealer   and   driver   of   the
vehicle.  But we make it clear that if the awarded amount,
or   any   part   thereof,   has   been   paid,   or   is   paid,   by   the
appellant, the  appellant shall  be  entitled to recover the
same from M/s. Hindustan Motors along with interest at
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 24 of 25

the rate of 6% p.a., with effect from the date of payment till
the date of recovery.
35.
The appeal is allowed to the extent above.
36.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 ..............................................J.
(J.B. Pardiwala)
..............................................J.
                                                                        (Manoj Misra)
New Delhi;
September 03, 2024
                
                    SLP (C) No.28968/2018                                                                             Page 25 of 25