2024 INSC 655
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1348  OF 2014 
 
NITYA NAND 
 
 
  
 
 
 
APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF U.P. & ANR. 
 
 
                 RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
UJJAL BHUYAN, J. 
 
 
This appeal is directed against the judgment and order 
dated 27.09.2012 passed by the Allahabad High Court upholding 
the conviction of the appellant alongwith others under Sections 
148 and 302/149 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC). 
2. 
 
It may be mentioned that learned Sessions Judge, Etah 
vide the judgment and order dated 20.01.1997 passed in Sessions 
Trial No. 17 of 1993 convicted the appellant alongwith three others 
under Sections 148 and 302/149 IPC and sentenced each of them 
to undergo rigorous imprisonment (RI) for two years and to pay 
fine of Rs. 2,000.00 for the conviction under Section 148 IPC with 
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2024.09.04
15:33:48 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
a default stipulation and further sentenced to undergo 
imprisonment for life under Section 302/149 IPC. Another 
accused Shree Dev was convicted for the offences punishable 
under Sections 147 and 302/149 IPC. He was sentenced to 
undergo RI for two years and to pay fine of Rs. 2,000.00 with a 
default stipulation for the offence committed under Section 147 
IPC and to suffer imprisonment for life under Section 302/149 IPC.  
3. 
 
Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and 
sentence, all the five accused persons including the appellant 
herein preferred criminal appeal under Section 374 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.P.C.) before the Allahabad High 
Court (High Court) which was registered as Criminal Appeal No. 
340 of 1997. By the judgment and order dated 27.09.2012, a 
division bench of the High Court affirmed the conviction and 
sentence of all the accused persons including that of the appellant 
and dismissed the criminal appeal. 
4. 
 
The appellant then preferred petition for special leave to 
appeal before this Court being SLP(Criminal) No. 750/2013. This 
Court vide the order dated 04.02.2013 had issued notice on the 
special leave petition as well as on the application for bail. On 
30.06.2014, this Court granted leave but rejected the prayer for 

3 
 
bail. It was thereafter that Criminal Appeal No. 1348 of 2014 came 
to be registered.  
5. 
 
We have heard learned counsel for the parties. 
6. 
 
Prosecution case in brief is that informant Sarwan 
Kumar, son of late Satya Narain, had lodged a written report (First 
Information Report) i.e. FIR before Police Station Soron, District 
Etah on 08.09.1992 at 05:10 PM. He stated that on 08.09.1992 at 
about 04:30 PM, he and his father Satya Narain as well as his 
uncle Laxmi Narain as per their daily routine, came to Ganga ghat 
near Ambhagarh Akhada, after easing themselves, for taking bath. 
At around the same time, from the side of Dhimaro Ka Mohalla, 
Bhola Shankar and Kuldeep Kumar Tiwari came. He and his uncle 
proceeded ahead while talking with Bhola Shankar and Kuldeep 
Kumar Tiwari. This way they had reached the temple of Govardhan 
Nath Ji. In the meantime, from the southern side of Tulsi Park, 
Shree Dev and his four sons, viz., Munna Lal, Raju, Nitya Nand 
and Uchchav @ Pappu, resident of Mohalla Tiraha, Chodah Pore, 
P.S. Soron, armed with kanta, knives and country-made pistol 
confronted his father Satya Narain. All the accused persons caught 
hold of his father and started assaulting him with kanta and 
knives. On hearing the cries of his father, informant Sarwan 

4 
 
Kumar and others dashed towards Satya Narain to save him. It 
was then that appellant Nitya Nand fired from his country-made 
pistol whereafter all the accused persons made good their escape 
from the south-western side. When the informant and others 
reached the spot, his father Satya Narain had already succumbed 
to the multiple injuries which he had suffered on his body. 
6.1.  
A written report of the incident scribed by Kuldeep 
Kumar Tiwari i.e., the FIR was submitted by Sarwan Kumar at 
05:10 PM on the same day at P.S. Soron. 
6.2.  
It was mentioned that Shree Dev, deceased Satya 
Narain, and Laxmi Narain were the three brothers. Laxmi Narain, 
who was the youngest of the three, had no issue; so he had 
executed a will in favour of Satya Narain’s sons. Shree Dev and his 
sons including the appellant Nitya Nand were enraged by this 
disposition of property by Laxmi Narain. This led to filing of several 
cases between them. Due to such litigation, there was an old 
enmity and for that reason, the accused persons had fatally 
assaulted Satya Narain on that fateful day. 
7. 
 
On the basis of the FIR, Crime No. 237/1992 was 
registered at P.S. Soron under Sections 147, 148, 149 and 302 
IPC. The investigating officer had carried out investigation of the 

5 
 
case. The post-mortem report indicated multiple ante-mortem 
injuries on the person of the deceased. On completion of the 
investigation, charges under Sections 148 and 302/149 IPC were 
framed against the accused Munna, Raju, Uchchav @ Pappu and 
Nitya Nand. Similarly, charges under Sections 147 and 302/149 
IPC were framed against the accused Shree Dev. 
8. 
 
The accused persons denied the charges and claimed to 
be tried. 
9. 
 
To prove its case, the prosecution examined a total of 
five witnesses. After closure of the prosecution evidence, 
statements of the accused persons were recorded under Section 
313 Cr.P.C. 
10.  
The trial court on an appreciation of the evidence 
adduced and considering the materials on record, convicted the 
accused Shree Dev under Sections 147 and 302/149 IPC and also 
convicted the appellant and the other sons of Shree Dev i.e. Munna 
Lal, Raju and Uchchav @ Pappu under Sections 148 and 302/149 
IPC. All the accused were thereafter sentenced as indicated above. 
11.  
In appeal, the High Court observed that the eyewitness 
account of the incident stood fully corroborated by the medical 
evidence. Prosecution had proved its case beyond all reasonable 

6 
 
doubt against each of the accused. Therefore, while upholding the 
conviction and sentence, the High Court dismissed the appeal.  
12.  
Learned counsel for the appellant submits that both the 
trial court and the High Court committed a manifest error in 
convicting the appellant under Sections 148 and 302/149 IPC. He 
submits that allegation against the appellant was that he was 
carrying a country-made pistol. As the informant and others tried 
to rush towards Satya Narain on hearing his cries as he was being 
assaulted by the other accused persons, appellant Nitya Nand fired 
from his country-made pistol thereby threatening the informant 
and the others who tried to rescue Satya Narain. As the appellant 
fired from his country-made pistol, all the accused persons made 
good their escape from the crime scene. However, neither were 
there any firearm injuries on the person of the deceased nor on 
anyone else. That apart, there was no recovery of any country-
made pistol or empty cartridge from the crime scene or from 
anywhere else. In the absence thereof, both the courts below were 
not justified in so convicting the appellant. 
12.1.  
Learned counsel for the appellant further submits that 
Laxmi Narain, who was with the deceased and who had walked 
ahead along with the informant while talking with Bhola Shankar 

7 
 
and Kuldeep Kumar Tiwari, was not examined by the prosecution 
as a witness. This is a crucial omission as because only due to 
gifting of the property by Laxmi Narain to the sons of the deceased 
Satya Narain which led to such bad blood between the brothers 
leading to the fatal incident. Learned counsel also emphasized that 
another crucial omission on the part of the prosecution is that 
Kuldeep Kumar Tiwari was not examined as a witness. Such 
glaring omission has cast uncertain shadows over the prosecution 
case. Omission to examine Kuldeep Kumar Tiwari as a prosecution 
witness has completely punctured the prosecution case because it 
was he who had written the FIR lodged by the informant besides 
being an eyewitness. 
12.2.  
Learned counsel for the appellant finally submits that 
appellant has been convicted solely on the basis of suspicion. In a 
criminal trial, the conviction must be based on hard evidence and 
not on mere suspicion. Even if there is an iota of doubt as to the 
culpability of an accused, as in the present case, he has to be given 
the benefit of the doubt. That being the position, the impugned 
conviction and sentence of the appellant should be interfered with 
by this Court. 

8 
 
13.  
Learned counsel for respondent No. 1, State of U.P., has 
vehemently argued that conviction and sentence of the appellant 
is fully justified. There is no reason to interfere with the same. 
13.1.  
He submits that there was a clear motive for the accused 
persons, including the appellant, to have caused the murder of 
Satya Narain. According to him, the accused Shree Dev, deceased 
Satya Narain, and Laxmi Narain were the three brothers, Laxmi 
Narain being the youngest of the three. Since Laxmi Narayan had 
no issue, he executed a will in favour of the sons of Satya Narain. 
Shree Dev and his sons, including the appellant, were unable to 
come to terms with this development. They were highly agitated 
which led to filing of several cases by and between them. This was 
the real intention behind the plot to kill Satya Narain.  
13.2.  
Learned counsel for respondent No. 1 submits that the 
appellant was very much a part of the unlawful assembly as one 
of the persons at the place of occurrence which was mentioned in 
the FIR itself. That apart, in their evidence, PW-1 and PW-2, 
categorically stated that appellant was carrying a country-made 
pistol from which he fired in the air with the intent to frighten the 
informant and others who tried to come to the rescue of the 

9 
 
deceased. Taking advantage of the situation, the accused persons 
escaped from the crime scene. 
13.3.  
The evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 in this regard is 
unflinching. Therefore, non-recovery of the country-made pistol or 
any cartridge fired therefrom cannot be fatal to the prosecution 
case. 
13.4.  
The very act of the appellant in firing from his country-
made pistol to enable the accused persons to escape is clearly an 
overt act whereby he became part of the unlawful assembly with a 
common object to cause the death of the deceased. The evidence 
on record clearly provides that appellant was part of the unlawful 
assembly having the common object to kill the deceased. 
13.5.  
Learned counsel for respondent No. 1 State submits 
that it is a case of direct evidence which clearly establish the 
involvement of the appellant in the killing of Satya Narain. The 
ocular evidence is fully supported by the medical evidence. That 
apart, the post incident conduct of the appellant is also a 
significant factor. Laxmi Narain, who could have been an 
important eyewitness, was killed on 25.10.1993. In that case, 
appellant herein along with others were named as accused. 

10 
 
Therefore, it was not possible for the prosecution to present Laxmi 
Narain as a prosecution witness.  
13.6.  
He, therefore, submits that there is no merit in the 
criminal appeal which should be dismissed.  
14.  
Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties 
have received the due consideration of the Court. 
15.  
Question for consideration is whether the prosecution 
could establish the culpability of the appellant in the murder of 
Satya Narain beyond any reasonable doubt? In other words, 
whether the prosecution could prove the charges against the 
appellant under Sections 148 and 302/149 IPC beyond any 
reasonable doubt? 
16.  
To answer the aforesaid question it is necessary to 
briefly analyse the evidence on record. PW-1 is Shri Sarwan Kumar 
S/o Late Satya Narain. He is the informant in the case. In his 
examination in chief, PW-1 stated that his father Late Satya Narain 
was one of the three brothers, Shree Dev being the eldest and 
Laxmi Narain alias Daroga being the younger. Shree Dev had four 
sons viz. Munna Lal, Raju, Nitya Nand (appellant) and Uchchav 
alias Pappu. His uncle Laxmi Narain was issueless and was 
residing with Satya Narain. Laxmi Narain gifted all his property to 

11 
 
the informant and his brothers i.e. to the sons of Satya Narain. 
This was not to the liking of the accused persons which resulted 
in litigation and enmity.  
16.1.  
He further stated that on the fateful day at about  04:30 
PM his father Satya Narain, uncle Laxmi Narain and himself after 
easing themselves at about 04:30 PM, had reached Ambhagarh 
Akhada, Har Ki Pauri. At the same time from the side of Dhimaro 
Ka Mohalla, Shri Kuldeep S/o Ram Prakash and Bhola Shankar 
S/o Siaram came. Informant and his uncle Laxmi Narain started 
a conversation with the above two persons and while talking with 
the two persons went ahead and reached the temple of Goverdhan 
Nath Ji. Father of PW-1 Satya Narain had got down from the stairs 
for bathing in the Ganga at Har Ki Pauri. In the meanwhile, from 
the southern side of Tulsi Park, the accused persons came. While 
Shree Dev was armed with a danda, Munna Lal was armed with  
kanta. Raju and Uchchav were armed with knives. Appellant Nitya 
Nand was carrying a country-made pistol in his hand. As they 
confronted Satya Narain, Shree Dev exhorted the other accused 
persons to kill him. Thereafter, the accused persons caught hold 
of his father and started assaulting him with knives and kanta. As 
Satya Narain cried for help, Bhola Shankar, Kuldeep, Laxmi 
Narain and PW-1 rushed to help him. They had reached the 

12 
 
Bharoji temple when appellant Nitya Nand fired a shot in the air 
from his country-made pistol to frighten PW-1 and the others. 
Taking advantage of the situation, the accused persons made good 
their escape from the crime scene through the south-western side.  
16.2.  
As PW-1 went near his father, he found that his father 
had received multiple injuries inflicted by knives and kanta on his 
head, cheek, neck, back and ribs. His father Satya Narain had died 
on the spot with half of his body inside the water. While blood was 
splattered on the spot, sandal of his father was lying on the stairs 
with stick in the water. PW-1 stated that he had dictated a report 
of the incident on the spot to Kuldeep Kumar Tiwari S/o Ram 
Prakash who had scribed the same. After he had completed writing 
down what was dictated, scribe Kuldeep Kumar Tiwari read over 
the same to PW-1 and thereafter took his signature. PW-1 stated 
that he along with his uncle Laxmi Narain went to the police 
station in a tricycle (rickshaw) and handed over the report to the 
incharge of the police station who registered a case and handed 
over a copy of the same to PW-1.  
17.  
In his cross-examination PW-1 stated that after hearing 
the cries of his father, he had rushed back to the spot. About five-
six nearby people had also gathered there but he could not 

13 
 
remember their names. Regarding Bhola Shankar, PW-1 stated 
that he came after the incident.  
17.1.  
When PW-1 tried to go near his father, appellant Nitya 
Nand had fired in the air to stop him and thereafter he ran away. 
No fire was shot for causing injury either to PW-1 or to the 
deceased. People did not find any cartridge or empty cartridge on 
the spot. 
17.2.  
He admitted that because of his uncle Laxmi Narain 
gifting all his property to the sons of Satya Narain including 
himself there was enmity between the two sides. 
17.3.  
Regarding the deceased, PW-1 stated that he had taken 
his last meal between 02.00 to 02.30 PM when he had taken dal 
and roti. His father’s daily routine was to go to Har ki Pauri for 
taking a bath in the Ganga. On the fateful day, his father went to 
ease himself first and then went for bathing.  
17.4.  
PW-1 stated that his uncle Shree Dev had exhorted the 
other accused persons to kill his father. This fact however is not 
mentioned in the FIR.  
17.5.  
PW-1 stated that he was at the crime scene for about 
half an hour. During this period, about 100-200 people had 
gathered. After intimation was sent to home about the incident, 

14 
 
people from home had also arrived. After getting the report written, 
PW-1 proceeded to the police station in a rickshaw and submitted 
the same. 
17.6.  
PW-1 denied the suggestion that the incident as 
reported in the FIR had not happened at the time mentioned 
therein and that the accused persons were falsely implicated due 
to previous enmity. He also denied the suggestion that the FIR 
(Ex.1) was not written in the handwriting of Kuldeep.  
18.  
Bhola Shankar, son of Satya Narain, deposed as PW-2. 
While reiterating  what was stated by PW-1 leading to the incident, 
he further stated that Satya Narain had cried out for help to save 
him when he was being assaulted by the accused persons. He 
stated that he alongwith other people rushed to the spot when                 
appellant Nitya Nand fired from his country-made pistol. He 
asserted that he alongwith the other people had seen the accused 
assaulting Satya Narain. After the accused persons escaped 
towards the south-western side, they came to the spot where Satya 
Narain was lying. By that time, he was already dead with half of 
his body inside the water.  
18.1.  
In his cross-examination, PW-2 stated that he had seen 
the incident with his own eyes. FIR was written by Kuldeep Kumar 

15 
 
and his statement was also recorded by the police. He further 
stated that he had seen Satya Narain falling down the stairs and 
crying for help. At that time, PW-1 was also near him and he had 
also witnessed the assault.  
18.2.  
He denied the suggestion that he was not present at the 
time of the incident and that he was not witness to the writing and 
lodging of the FIR. He further denied the suggestion that he was 
deposing falsely due to his friendship with the informant.   
19.  
Dr. Satya Mitra, who was serving in the District 
Hospital, Etah, deposed as PW-3. He had carried out the post-
mortem examination on the dead body of Satya Narain on 
09.09.1992, following which he found the following ante-mortem 
injuries on the body of the deceased: 
1.  Incised wound 10 cm x 1 cm x brain matter 
deep over right side and back of head at left of 
back of upper and of right external ear. Skin 
muscle (scalp) bone meninges and brain cut.  
 
2. Multiple incised wound in an area 10 cm x 7 cm 
on the right side cheek and upper part of neck 
measuring 1 cm x 0.3 cm muscle deep to 3 cm 
x 0.7 cm x bone deep. Mandible on right side 
fractured. 
 
3. Stab wound 3 cm x 1 cm x thoracic cavity deep 
over right side lateral side of chest 8 cm below 
axillary crease. On discussion subcostal muscle 
underlying rib, pleura right side, lung right side, 
cut direction right to left transverse.  

16 
 
 
4. Stab wound 3.5 cm x 1 cm x thoracic cavity 
deep on left side chest 6 cm below left nipple. 
Skin, muscle underlying the 8th rib, left pleura, 
left lung and pericardium part are cut. Direction 
left to right and slightly upwards.  
 
5. Multiple incised wound in an area 10 cm x 5 cm 
on the left side chest above nipple measuring              
2 cm x 0.3 cm x skin deep to 3 cm x 0.5 cm                  
x muscle and rib deep.  
 
6. Multiple incised wound over back of chest in an 
area 20 cm x 20 from base of neck above 
measuring 2 cm x 0.2 cm. Muscle deep to 3 cm 
x 0.5 cm x thoracic cavity deep. Right scapula 
cut. Right pleura and right lung cut at places.  
 
7. Multiple incise wound in an area 10 cm x 6 cm 
over front and external aspect of left upper arm 
3 cm below the left shoulder joint.  
 
 19.1. 
He opined that death was possibly caused due to shock 
and haemorrhage as a result of the injuries. The injuries were 
caused by sharp-edged weapons like kanta, knives etc.  
19.2.  
PW-3 proved the post-mortem report which was in his 
handwriting as well as his signature thereon.  
20.  
At the relevant point of time, Ramesh Chandra Sharma 
served as Inspector at Soron Police Station. He deposed as                
PW-4. He has stated that investigation of the case was started by 
Shri Devi Dayal Prajapati from whom he had taken over the 

17 
 
investigation on 23.09.1992. On completion of investigation, he 
had submitted the chargesheet on 13.10.1992.  
20.1.  
In his cross-examination, he has stated that he did not 
record the statement of any of the witnesses. On the basis of the 
statements recorded by his predecessor Shri Devi Dayal Prajapati, 
and after perusal of other documents, the chargesheet was 
submitted against the accused persons.  
21.  
Shri Devi Dayal Prajapati deposed as PW-5. He has 
stated that on the date of receipt of the first information, he had 
recorded the statements of Laxmi Narain, Bhola Shankar, Kuldeep 
Kumar and the witnesses of the panchnama. Despite search, the 
accused persons were not found and, therefore, they could not be 
arrested. Thereafter, investigation was taken over by PW-4.  
21.1.  
In his cross-examination, he admitted that though he 
had taken blood sample from the stairs where the dead body of 
Satya Narain was found, he did not send the sampled blood for 
chemical examination. Though he had recorded the statement of 
the informant, the latter did not mention in his statement that his 
uncle Shree Dev had exhorted the other accused persons to kill his 
father and that he should not be spared as he had grabbed the 
property of his younger brother. Again, he did not mention in the 

18 
 
case diary that Bhola Shankar was present on the spot. That apart, 
Bhola Shankar did not mention the names of any assailant.    
22.  
From the evidence tendered on behalf of the 
prosecution, it is clear that PW-1 and PW-2 are the eyewitnesses. 
When PW-1 Satya Narain and Laxmi Narain had reached Har Ki 
Pauri at Ambhagarh Akhada, they were joined by Kuldeep and 
Bhola Shankar (PW-2). PW-1 and Laxmi Narain went ahead talking 
with Kuldeep and PW-2. Satya Narain was walking down the steps 
for a dip in the river. At that time, the accused persons arrived at 
the scene from the southern side of Tulsi Park. Both PW-1 and PW-
2 were categorical in their evidence that Shree Dev was armed with 
a danda, Munna Lal was armed with kanta and Raju and Uchchav 
were armed with knives. Appellant Nitya Nand was carrying a 
country-made pistol in his hand. Though the appellant did not 
assault Satya Narain, the other accused persons actively 
participated in the assault. Hearing the cries of Satya Narain, PW-
1, PW-2, Kuldeep and Laxmi Narain rushed back. When they had 
reached near the crime scene, appellant Nitya Nand fired a shot in 
the air from his country-made pistol to frighten PW-1 and the 
others. As the appellant fired in the air, all the accused persons 
escaped from the crime scene.  

19 
 
23.  
At this stage, we may mention that PW-2 was categorical 
in his cross-examination that he had seen the incident with his 
own eyes and that PW-1 was also with him then. 
24.  
Neither PW-1 nor PW-2 has stated that appellant had 
fired at them nor he had fired at the deceased. The role attributed 
to the appellant was helping the other accused persons and 
himself flee from the scene of crime by frightening the people 
including PW-1 and PW-2 when they were about to reach the crime 
scene by firing from his country-made pistol into the air. The fact 
that the death of Satya Narain was homicidal has been fully 
established by the post-mortem report as well as by the evidence 
of PW-3 i.e. the doctor. The ocular evidence supported by the 
medical evidence clearly establish that it was a case of murder of 
the deceased by the other accused persons under Section 302 IPC. 
25.  
Appellant has been roped in by virtue of Sections 148 
and 149 IPC. Appellant was a part of the unlawful assembly which 
had the common object of eliminating Satya Narain by means of 
criminal force and, therefore, being a member of the unlawful 
assembly, he was also guilty of the offence committed in 
prosecution of the common object i.e. the offence under Section 
302 IPC. 

20 
 
26.  
At this juncture, we may briefly survey the relevant legal 
provisions.  
27.  
Section 141 IPC defines unlawful assembly. It says an 
assembly of five or more persons is designated as unlawful 
assembly if the common object of the persons composing that 
assembly is to commit an illegal act by means of criminal force. 
28.  
As per Section 148 IPC which deals with rioting armed 
with deadly weapon, whoever is guilty of rioting, being armed with 
a deadly weapon or with anything which, used as weapon of 
offence, is likely to cause death, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, or with fine, or with both. Rioting is defined in Section 
146 IPC. As per the said definition, whenever force or violence is 
used by an unlawful assembly, or by any member thereof, in 
prosecution of the common object of such assembly, every member 
of such assembly is guilty of the offence of rioting. 
29.  
This brings us to the pivotal section which is Section 
149 IPC. Section 149 IPC says that every member of an unlawful 
assembly shall be guilty of the offence committed in prosecution of 
the common object. Section 149 IPC is quite categorical. It says 
that if an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful 

21 
 
assembly in prosecution of the common object of that assembly, 
or such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely to be 
committed in prosecution of that object, every person who, at the 
time of committing of that offence, is a member of the said 
assembly; is guilty of that offence. Thus, if it is a case of murder 
under Section 302 IPC, each member of the unlawful assembly 
would be guilty of committing the offence under Section 302 IPC. 
30.  
In Krishnappa Vs. State of Karnataka1, this Court while 
examining Section 149 IPC held as follows:- 
20. It is now well-settled law that the provisions 
of Section 149 IPC will be attracted whenever 
any offence committed by any member of an 
unlawful assembly in prosecution of the 
common object of that assembly, or when the 
members of that assembly knew that offence is 
likely to be committed in prosecution of that 
object, so that every person, who, at the time of 
committing of that offence is a member, will be 
also vicariously held liable and guilty of that 
offence. Section 149 IPC creates a constructive 
or vicarious liability of the members of the 
unlawful assembly for the unlawful acts 
committed pursuant to the common object by 
any other member of that assembly. This 
 
1 (2012) 11 SCC 237 

22 
 
principle ropes in every member of the assembly 
to be guilty of an offence where that offence is 
committed by any member of that assembly in 
prosecution of common object of that assembly, 
or such members or assembly knew that offence 
is likely to be committed in prosecution of that 
object.  
21. The factum of causing injury or not causing 
injury would not be relevant, where the accused 
is sought to be roped in with the aid of Section 
149 IPC. The relevant question to be examined 
by the court is whether the accused was a 
member of an unlawful assembly and not 
whether he actually took active part in the crime 
or not.  
30.1.  
Thus, this Court held that Section 149 IPC creates a 
constructive or vicarious liability of the members of the unlawful 
assembly for the unlawful acts committed pursuant to the 
common object by any other member of that assembly. By 
application of this principle, every member of an unlawful 
assembly is roped in to be held guilty of the offence committed by 
any member of that assembly in prosecution of the common object 
of that assembly. The factum of causing injury or not causing 
injury would not be relevant when an accused is roped in with the 
aid of Section 149 IPC. The question which is relevant and which 

23 
 
is required to be answered by the court is whether the accused was 
a member of an unlawful assembly and not whether he actually 
took part in the crime or not. 
31.  
As a matter of fact, this Court in Vinubhai Ranchhodbhai 
Patel Vs. Rajivbhai Dudabhai Patel2 has reiterated the position that 
Section 149 IPC does not create a separate offence but only 
declares vicarious liability of all members of the unlawful assembly 
for acts done in common object. This Court has held: 
20. In cases where a large number of accused 
constituting an “unlawful assembly” are 
alleged to have attacked and killed one or more 
persons, it is not necessary that each of the 
accused should inflict fatal injuries or any 
injury at all. Invocation of Section 149 is 
essential in such cases for punishing the 
members of such unlawful assemblies on the 
ground of vicarious liability even though they 
are not accused of having inflicted fatal injuries 
in appropriate cases if the evidence on record 
justifies. The mere presence of an accused in 
such an “unlawful assembly” is sufficient to 
render him vicariously liable under Section 
149 IPC for causing the death of the victim of 
the attack provided that the accused are told 
 
2 (2018) 7 SCC 743  

24 
 
that they have to face a charge rendering them 
vicariously liable under Section 149 IPC for the 
offence punishable under Section 302 IPC. 
Failure to appropriately invoke and apply 
Section 149 enables large number of offenders 
to get away with the crime. 
 * 
 
    *  
    *  
    *  
    * 
22. When a large number of people gather 
together (assemble) and commit an offence, it 
is possible that only some of the members of 
the assembly commit the crucial act which 
renders the transaction an offence and the 
remaining members do not take part in that 
“crucial act” — for example in a case of murder, 
the infliction of the fatal injury. It is in those 
situations, the legislature thought it fit as a 
matter of legislative policy to press into service 
the concept of vicarious liability for the crime. 
Section 149 IPC is one such provision. It is a 
provision conceived in the larger public interest 
to maintain the tranquility of the society and 
prevent wrongdoers (who actively collaborate 
or assist the commission of offences) claiming 
impunity on the ground that their activity as 
members of the unlawful assembly is limited. 
* 
 
    *  
    *  
    *  
    * 
34. For mulcting liability on the members of an 
unlawful assembly under Section 149, it is not 
necessary that every member of the unlawful 

25 
 
assembly should commit the offence in 
prosecution of the common object of the 
assembly. Mere knowledge of the likelihood of 
commission of such an offence by the members 
of the assembly is sufficient. For example, if 
five or more members carrying AK 47 rifles 
collectively attack a victim and cause his death 
by gunshot injuries, the fact that one or two of 
the members of the assembly did not in fact fire 
their weapons does not mean that they did not 
have the knowledge of the fact that the offence 
of murder is likely to be committed. 
 
32.  
It is true that there are certain lacunae in the 
prosecution. The scribe Kuldeep was not examined. Similarly, the 
younger brother Laxmi Narain was not examined though it has 
come on record that Laxmi Narain was killed in the year 1993 and 
in that case one of the accused is the appellant himself. It is also 
true that neither any country-made pistol was recovered nor any 
cartridge, empty or otherwise, recovered. However, the appellant 
has been roped in with the aid of Section 149 IPC. Therefore, as 
held by this Court in Yunis alias Kariya Vs. State of M.P.3, no overt 
act is required to be imputed to a particular person when the 
charge is under Section 149 IPC; the presence of the accused as 
 
3 (2003) 1 SCC 425 

26 
 
part of the unlawful assembly is sufficient for conviction. It is clear 
from the evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 that the appellant was part 
of the unlawful assembly which committed the murder. Though 
they were extensively cross-examined, their testimony in this 
regard could not be shaken. 
33.  
In view of what we have discussed above, we have no 
doubt in our mind that the trial court had rightly convicted the 
appellant under Section 148 IPC read with Section 302/149 IPC 
and that the High Court was justified in confirming the same. The 
question framed in paragraph 15 above is therefore answered in 
the affirmative. 
34.  
Thus, we see no merit in the appeal which is accordingly 
dismissed. 
 
         ...………………………………J. 
     [ABHAY S. OKA] 
 
 
 
  …………………………………J. 
    [UJJAL BHUYAN] 
NEW DELHI;  
04.09.2024