2024 INSC 660
Page 1 of 22 
 
               REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 312 OF 2024 
 
   CHIRAG BHANU SINGH & ANR.         
  
      ...PETITIONER(S) 
VERSUS 
  HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH & ORS.  …RESPONDENT(S) 
JUDGMENT 
Hrishikesh Roy, J. 
1. 
Heard Mr. Arvind P. Datar, the learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the writ petitioners. The High Court of Himachal 
Pradesh is represented by Dr. S. Muralidhar, the learned Senior 
Counsel.  
2. 
This writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India 
has been filed by the two seniormost District and Sessions 
Judges serving in the State of Himachal Pradesh. The prayer in 
the writ petition reads thus: 
“(a) Issue writ/writs including a writ in the nature of 
certiorari calling for the minutes of meeting of the 
collegium of the Hon’ble High Court of Himachal 
Pradesh whereby names of officers junior to the 
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2024.09.06
13:48:37 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 22 
 
present petitioners have been recommended for 
elevation as Judges of the Hon’ble High Court ignoring 
the directions of reconsideration given by the Hon’ble 
Collegium of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India.  
 
(b) Issue writ/writs, order or direction, writ being in 
the nature of mandamus, directing the Respondent 
No. 1 to consider the names of the Petitioners as 
directed by the Hon’ble Collegium of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of India vide Resolution dated 
4.1.2024..” 
 
FACTS 
3. 
The petitioners i.e. Chirag Bhanu Singh and Arvind Malhotra 
were recommended by the then Collegium of the High Court on 
6th December 2022 for elevation as judges of the Himachal 
Pradesh High Court. On 12th July 2023, the Supreme Court 
Collegium, however, deferred their consideration. Thereafter, on 
4th January,2024, the Supreme Court Collegium in its wisdom 
resolved that the proposal for the elevation of both be remitted 
for reconsideration to the Chief Justice of the Himachal Pradesh 
High Court. In the letter dated 16th January,2024, addressed by 
the Minister for Law and Justice to the Chief Justice of the 
Himachal Pradesh, in reference to the Supreme Court 
Collegium Resolution dated 4th January,2024, a request was 
made that fresh recommendations be sent for the two officers 

Page 3 of 22 
 
against the available service quota vacancies in the Himachal 
Pradesh High Court.       
4. 
The grievance of the writ petitioners is that the High Court 
Collegium without first reconsidering the two petitioners in 
terms of the Supreme Court Collegium Resolution dated 4th 
January,2024 as communicated in the Law Minister’s letter 
dated 16th January,2024 had recommended two other judicial 
officers for elevation. The argument is that if the latter 
recommended persons are considered for appointment ahead of 
the two petitioners, it would amount to ignoring their seniority 
and long-standing unblemished service.  
5. 
On 13th May,2024, adverting to the contentions raised, this 
Court issued notice only to the Registrar General of the 
Himachal Pradesh High Court with the following order: 
“1. Heard Mr. Arvind Datar, learned senior counsel 
appearing for the petitioners.  
 2. The counsel would submit that the two petitioners 
are the senior most judicial officers serving in the 
State of Himachal Pradesh. Their names were 
recommended for elevation to High Court Judgeship 
in December, 2022. The Supreme Court Collegium on 
12.07.2023 however resolved to defer consideration 
for the two petitioners for the present with the 
observation that it will be taken up by the Collegium 
at an appropriate stage. The senior counsel then 
submits that the persons who were recommended in 

Page 4 of 22 
 
December, 2022 along with the petitioners have since 
been appointed as Judges of the High Court on 
28.07.2023.  
3. The Supreme Court thereafter on 04.01.2024 
resolved that the proposal for elevation of the two 
petitioners be remitted to the Chief Justice of the 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
High 
Court 
for 
fresh 
recommendation by the High Court. This decision is 
reflected in the communication dated 16.01.2024 
addressed by the Minister for Law and Justice to the 
Chief Justice of the Himachal Pradesh High Court 
where request is made that fresh recommendations be 
sent for the two officers i.e., Chirag Bhanu Singh and 
Arvind Malhotra against the unfilled vacancies from 
service quota in the Himachal Pradesh High Court.  
4. Projecting the grievances of the petitioners, Mr. 
Datar would submit that the Himachal Pradesh High 
Court Collegium on 23.04.2024 has recommended the 
names of two other Judicial Officers for elevation as 
High Court Judges without first acting on the 
recommendations of the Supreme Court Collegium 
and the 16.01.2024 letter of the Law Minister, for 
reconsideration of the two petitioners. Since both 
petitioners are the senior most judicial officers, Mr. 
Datar contends that if recently recommended judicial 
officers are considered for elevation, it will cause 
serious prejudice to the expectations of the petitioners 
who have unblemished service record as Judicial 
Officers.  
5. Issue notice only to the Registrar General of the 
Himachal Pradesh High Court so that appropriate 
information can be obtained on whether the High 
Court Collegium had reconsidered the cases of the two 
petitioners, 
pursuant 
to 
the 
Supreme 
Court 
Resolution dated 04.01.2024 and the Law Minister’s 
Communication dated 16.01.2024.” 
 
6. 
Following the above notice, a Report in sealed cover was filed by 
the Registrar General of the Himachal Pradesh High Court. The 

Page 5 of 22 
 
Report was perused and was also furnished to the learned 
Counsel for the writ Petitioners. 
7. 
The Report of the Registrar General, reflected that the 
Resolution of the Supreme Court Collegium (dated 4th January, 
2024) was never received by the Chief Justice of the High Court. 
It was further stated that the Chief Justice of the High Court 
had written to the Chief Justice of India on 11th December 2023 
seeking guidance on whether the Collegium of the Supreme 
Court needed further inputs about the suitability of the two 
officers for elevation as High Court judges. On 6th March 2024, 
the Chief Justice of the High Court individually addressed a 
letter to the Supreme Court Collegium on the suitability of the 
petitioners. This is projected to be in full compliance of the 
resolution dated 4th January, 2024 of the Supreme Court 
Collegium. The report also notes that a representation was 
made by one of the Petitioners to the Chief Justice of India 
against non-consideration for elevation. This letter, it is alleged 
was contemptuous.  
8. 
When the present matter was next heard on 23rd July, 2024, 
this Court called for the Supreme Court Resolution dated 4th 

Page 6 of 22 
 
January, 2024 as the parties wanted to be sure of the same, to 
make further submissions.  A copy of the Supreme Court 
resolution was then produced before this Court and was allowed 
to be perused by the respective counsel for the parties. 
SUBMISSIONS 
9.1. Mr. Datar, the learned Senior Counsel projected that the two 
petitioners were direct recruits and the seniormost district 
judges in the State of Himachal Pradesh. Over the last two 
decades, both have had a blemish-free record and all their 17 
ACRs have either been ‘Outstanding’ or ‘Excellent’. It was then 
submitted that as the two seniormost judges, they have a 
constitutional right for reconsideration of their names. 
Referring to paragraph-10 of the Registrar General’s Report, the 
senior counsel argues that the issue of elevation has to be 
collectively considered by the High Court Collegium and not by 
the Chief Justice acting alone. As regards the letter written by 
one of the judicial officers to the Chief Justice of India, it was 
submitted that it only highlights his judicial journey and the 
anguish for not being considered for elevation despite 17 years 
of exemplary service. According to Mr. Datar, the letter does not 

Page 7 of 22 
 
contain any insinuation against members of the Supreme Court 
Collegium and is not contemptuous or disrespectful or in bad 
taste as is alleged in the Report of the Registrar General.  
9.2. On maintainability, it was submitted that the present writ 
petition is limited to ‘lack of effective consultation’ and hence is 
maintainable. Reliance has been placed on the decisions of this 
Court in Mahesh Chandra Gupta v. Union of India1(for short 
“Mahesh Chandra Gupta”), where it was held that the issues of 
‘eligibility’ and ‘effective consultation’ would be within the realm 
of judicial review. This was followed in M. Manohar Reddy v. 
Union of India2 and reiterated recently in Anna Mathews v. 
Supreme Court of India3 where it was held that judicial review is 
restricted to ‘eligibility’ and not ‘suitability’ or ‘content of 
consultation’. It was also submitted that the consideration by 
the Collegium collectively is an in-built check against the 
likelihood of arbitrariness or bias.  
9.3. On the other hand, Dr. S. Muralidhar, Learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the High Court of Himachal Pradesh argued that 
 
1 (2009) 8 SCC 273 
2 (2013) 3 SCC 99 
3 (2023) 5 SCC 661 

Page 8 of 22 
 
the present writ petition is not maintainable. The prayer for 
reconsideration is, in effect, a request for judicial review over 
the ‘suitability’ of the candidates. To highlight the limited scope 
of judicial review, reliance has been placed on the decisions of 
this Court in Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Assn. v. Union 
of India4 (for short “Second Judges case”), Mahesh Chandra 
Gupta(supra)5, M. Manohar Reddy v. Union of India6, Registrar 
General, Madras High Court v. R. Gandhi7, Common Cause v. 
Union of India8 and Anna Mathews v. Supreme Court of India9 
9.4. As regards the Chief Justice of the High Court individually 
taking a decision and addressing the letter to the Chief Justice 
of India, it was argued by Dr. Muralidhar that the resolution of 
the Supreme Court Collegium(4.01.2024) did not specify that 
the reconsideration of the petitioners’ names was to be in 
consultation with the other members of the High Court 
Collegium.  Therefore, the High Court Chief Justice according 
 
4 (1993) 4 SCC 441(Para 482)  
5 Para 39-41, 43-44 and 71,74 
6 (2013) 3 SCC 99(Para 17-20) 
7 (2014) 11 SCC 547(Para 25-26) 
8 (2018) 12 SCC 377(Para 17) 
9 (2023) 5 SCC 661(Para 10) 

Page 9 of 22 
 
to the learned counsel, could have made the reconsideration all 
by himself. 
ISSUES 
10. Going by the above submissions, the following questions arise 
for our consideration:  
A) Whether the writ petition is maintainable?  
B) Whether elevation for judgeship in the High Court has to be 
considered collectively by the High Court Collegium or whether 
the Chief Justice acting individually can reconsider the same?  
Issue A 
11. At the outset, it is apposite to address the issue of 
maintainability of the writ petition and the limited scope of 
judicial review in such matters. This aspect was addressed by a 
nine-judge bench of this Court in Supreme Court Advocates-on-
Record Association. v. Union of India10 (for short “Second Judges 
case”). It was observed therein that the scope of judicial review 
in appointment of judges is limited as it introduces the ‘judicial 
 
10 (1993) 4 SCC 441  

Page 10 of 22 
 
element’ in the process and further judicial review is not 
warranted apart from some exceptions such as want of 
consultation amongst the named constitutional functionaries.  
In this regard, the following passage from the Second Judges 
case(supra) bears consideration: 
“482. This is also in accord with the public interest of 
excluding these appointments and transfers from 
litigative debate, to avoid any erosion in the credibility 
of the decisions, and to ensure a free and frank 
expression of honest opinion by all the constitutional 
functionaries, 
which 
is 
essential 
for 
effective 
consultation and for taking the right decision. The 
growing tendency of needless intrusion by strangers 
and busybodies in the functioning of the judiciary 
under the garb of public interest litigation, in spite of 
the caution in S.P. Gupta [1981 Supp SCC 87 : (1982) 
2 SCR 365] while expanding the concept of locus 
standi, was adverted to recently by a Constitution 
Bench in Krishna Swami v. Union of India [(1992) 4 
SCC 605] . It is, therefore, necessary to spell out 
clearly the limited scope of judicial review in such 
matters, to avoid similar situations in future. Except 
on the ground of want of consultation with the 
named constitutional functionaries or lack of any 
condition of eligibility in the case of an appointment, 
or 
of 
a 
transfer 
being 
made 
without 
the 
recommendation of the Chief Justice of India, these 
matters are not justiciable on any other ground, 
including that of bias, which in any case is excluded 
by the element of plurality in the process of decision-
making.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       [emphasis supplied] 
  

Page 11 of 22 
 
12. Thereafter in Special Reference No. 1 of 1998, Re11  (for short 
“Third Judges case”), it was noted as under:  
“32. Judicial review in the case of an appointment or a 
recommended appointment, to the Supreme Court or a 
High Court is, therefore, available if the recommendation 
concerned is not a decision of the Chief Justice of India 
and his seniormost colleagues, which is constitutionally 
requisite. They number four in the case of a 
recommendation for appointment to the Supreme Court 
and two in the case of a recommendation for 
appointment to a High Court. Judicial review is also 
available if, in making the decision, the views of the 
seniormost Supreme Court Judge who comes from the 
High Court of the proposed appointee to the Supreme 
Court have not been taken into account. Similarly, if in 
connection with an appointment or a recommended 
appointment to a High Court, the views of the Chief 
Justice and senior Judges of the High Court, as 
aforestated, 
and 
of 
Supreme 
Court 
Judges 
knowledgeable about that High Court have not been 
sought or considered by the Chief Justice of India and 
his two seniormost puisne Judges, judicial review is 
available. Judicial review is also available when the 
appointee is found to lack eligibility.” 
 
13.  Subsequently, a two-judge bench speaking through S.H. 
Kapadia J laid down important principles in Mahesh Chandra 
Gupta(supra). This Court distinguished between ‘eligibility’ and 
‘suitability’ and noted that Article 217(1) of the Constitution of 
India pertains to the ‘suitability’ of an individual, whereas 
Article 217(2) concerns the ‘eligibility’ of a person to become a 
 
11 (1998) 7 SCC 739 

Page 12 of 22 
 
Judge. While ‘eligibility’ is an objective criterion, ‘suitability’ is 
a subjective one. The bench further observed that decisions 
regarding who should be elevated, which primarily involve 
considerations of "suitability," are not subject to judicial review. 
It held as under: 
        “44. At this stage, we may highlight the fact that there 
is a vital difference between judicial review and merit 
review. Consultation, as stated above, forms part of 
the procedure to test the fitness of a person to be 
appointed a High Court Judge under Article 217(1). 
Once there is consultation, the content of that 
consultation is beyond the scope of judicial review, 
though lack of effective consultation could fall within 
the scope of judicial review. This is the basic ratio of 
the judgment of the Constitutional Bench of this 
Court 
in Supreme 
Court 
Advocates-on-Record 
Assn. [(1993) 4 SCC 441] and Special Reference No. 1 
of 1998, Re [(1998) 7 SCC 739].” 
        
14.  The above view where the Court distinguished between 
‘eligibility’ and ‘suitability’ has been consistently followed12 in 
subsequent decisions of this Court including in the recent 
 
12 Manohar Reddy and Anr. v. Union of India(2013) 3 SCC 99, Registrar 
General, Madras High Court v. R. Gandhi (2014) 11 SCC 547, Common Cause 
v. Union of India (2018) 12 SCC 377 
 

Page 13 of 22 
 
decision in Anna Mathews v Supreme Court of India13 where it 
was noted as under: 
“10. We are clearly of the opinion that this Court, 
while exercising power of judicial review cannot issue 
a writ of certiorari quashing the recommendation, or 
mandamus calling upon the Collegium of the 
Supreme Court to reconsider its decision, as this 
would be contrary to the ratio and dictum of the 
earlier decisions of this Court referred to above, which 
are binding on us. To do so would violate the law as 
declared, as it would amount to evaluating and 
substituting the decision of the Collegium, with 
individual or personal opinion on the suitability and 
merits of the person.” 
 
15. The following position emerges as a result of the above: 
i) 
‘Lack of effective consultation’ and ‘eligibility’ falls within the 
scope of judicial review.  
ii) 
‘Suitability’ is non-justiciable and resultingly, the ‘content of 
consultation’ falls beyond the scope of judicial review.  
16.  The above legal position clearly suggests that the absence of 
consultation amongst the members of the Collegium would be 
within the limited purview of judicial review.   Proceeding on 
this understanding, this Court had issued notice to the 
 
13 (2023) 5 SCC 661 
 

Page 14 of 22 
 
Registrar General to ascertain whether the High Court 
Collegium adhered to the procedural requirement of an ‘effective 
consultation’ for the reconsideration exercise. The Chief Justice 
of the High Court, it was submitted had never received the 
Resolution of the Supreme Court Collegium. It was therefore 
argued that perusing the Resolution of the Supreme Court was 
essential for the respective counsel to make their submissions. 
As earlier noted, a copy of the resolution(dated 4th January 
2024) was produced in Court and the same was allowed to be 
perused by the respective counsel for the parties.  
17.  The aforesaid re-consideration resolution was requisitioned 
only for factual determination as to whether ‘effective 
consultation’ was made, in terms of the resolution of the SC 
Collegium. This scrutiny has nothing to do with the ‘merits’ or 
the ‘suitability’ of the officers in question but to verify whether 
‘effective consultation’ was made. Such scrutiny is permissible 
within the limited scope of judicial review as discussed before. 
Therefore, the present writ petition for this limited scrutiny is 
found to be maintainable.  
 

Page 15 of 22 
 
Issue B 
18. The second issue that falls for our consideration is whether 
elevation for judgeship in the High Court has to be considered 
collectively by the Collegium of the High Court or whether the 
Chief Justice acting individually can reconsider the same. The 
process of judicial appointments to a superior court is not the 
prerogative of a single individual. Instead, it is a collaborative 
and participatory process involving all Collegium members. The 
underlying principle is that the process of appointment of 
judges must reflect the collective wisdom that draws from 
diverse perspectives. Such a process ensures that principles of 
transparency and accountability are maintained.  
19. Mr. Datar, the learned Senior Counsel earnestly submitted that 
the Chief Justice of a High Court individually cannot reconsider 
a recommendation.  To appreciate the legal basis for such a 
contention, we may refer to the following judgments discussed 
below.   
20. This Court in the Second Judges case(supra) noted as under: 
“468. The rule of law envisages the area of discretion 
to be the minimum, requiring only the application of 
known principles or guidelines to ensure non-

Page 16 of 22 
 
arbitrariness, but to that limited extent, discretion is 
a pragmatic need. Conferring discretion upon high 
functionaries and, whenever feasible, introducing 
the element of plurality by requiring a collective 
decision, are further checks against arbitrariness. 
This is how idealism and pragmatism are reconciled 
and integrated, to make the system workable in a 
satisfactory manner.” 
 
21. 
Again, in the Third Judges case(supra), it was observed that “the 
element of plurality of judges in formation of the opinion of the 
Chief Justice of India, effective consultation in writing and 
prevailing norms to regulate the area of discretion are sufficient 
checks against arbitrariness.” 
22. Mr. Datar placed reliance on the following passage from the 
decision in Mahesh Chandra(supra) to buttress his submission:  
      “73. The concept of plurality of Judges in the 
formation of the opinion of the Chief Justice of India 
is one of inbuilt checks against the likelihood of 
arbitrariness or bias. At this stage, we reiterate that 
“lack of eligibility” as also “lack of effective 
consultation” would certainly fall in the realm of 
judicial review. However, when we are earmarking a 
joint venture process as a participatory consultative 
process, the primary aim of which is to reach an 
agreed decision, one cannot term the Supreme Court 
Collegium as superior to High Court Collegium. The 
Supreme Court Collegium does not sit in appeal over 
the recommendation of the High Court Collegium. 
Each Collegium constitutes a participant in the 
participatory consultative process. The concept of 
primacy and plurality is in effect primacy of the 
opinion 
of 
the 
Chief 
Justice 
of 
India formed 
collectively. The discharge of the assigned role by each 

Page 17 of 22 
 
functionary helps to transcend the concept of primacy 
between them.” 
23. What was emphasized above is that collaborative deliberations 
bring in transparency in the process, as decisions are 
deliberated, debated, and recorded. This contributes to public 
trust in the judiciary, as it demonstrates that appointments are 
being made based on thorough consideration.  
24. Tracing the departure in the process of appointment of judges 
pre and post-1990 after the emergence of the Collegium system, 
a legal Scholar14 notes that the Second Judges case(supra) 
effectively ended the ‘primacy’ or the ‘preponderating voice’ of 
the Chief Justice over senior colleagues. Contrasting the 
observations of the Law Commission, in its 80th Report in 
197915 with the current system, the author observes that while 
the Commission recommended that a Chief Justice of a High 
Court should consult his two seniormost colleagues before 
recommending 
names 
to 
the 
government 
for 
judicial 
 
14 Abhinav Chandrachud,  'The Fictional Concurrence of the Chief Justice' in Supreme 
Whispers, Conversations with Judges of the Supreme Court 1980-1989 (OUP 2018) 
162-166 
15 Law Commission of India, ‘The Method of Appointment of Judges’ (80th Report, 
August 1979) Available at 
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3ca0daec69b5adc880fb464895726dbdf/uploads/20
22/08/20220805100-2.pdf, <Last accessed on 5.9.2024> 

Page 18 of 22 
 
appointments, it did not mandate that these recommendations 
be unanimous or binding. However, the collegium system 
introduced 
through 
the 
Second 
Judges 
case(supra), 
institutionalized the practice of consulting senior colleagues, 
making it binding on the chief justice.  
25. With the above judgments holding the field, it is difficult to 
accept the contention of the learned Senior Counsel, Dr. 
Muralidhar who argued that the Chief Justice of the High Court 
can individually reconsider a candidate based on how 
Resolutions are worded. To substantiate this argument, various 
Supreme Court Resolutions were placed before us to show that 
there is a difference in language and in the present case, it was 
specifically addressed to the Chief Justice of the High Court. It 
was contended that this wide power of the Collegium to direct 
reconsideration individually by the Chief Justice may not be 
curtailed. We are disinclined to accept this view as it is well-
settled that the Supreme Court Collegium does not sit in appeal 
over the High Court Collegium16. It is a participatory process 
 
16 Mahesh Chandra Gupta v. Union of India (2009) 8 SCC 273 

Page 19 of 22 
 
where each of the Constitutional functionaries have a role to 
play. In our opinion, the language therein by itself cannot be 
understood as permitting the Chief Justice of the High Court to 
act on his own, in matters of recommendation or even 
reconsideration, for elevation to the High Court bench. The 
recommendation by the Supreme Court Collegium for 
reconsideration, is not expected to be addressed individually to 
all the members of the High Court Collegium.  Such 
communications are naturally addressed to the Chief Justice of 
the concerned High Court but as noted earlier, the letter 
addressed to the Chief Justice will not enable the Chief Justice 
to act without participation by the other two Collegium 
members.   
26. In this case, the Court is not concerned with the aspects of 
‘suitability’ of the petitioners for elevation as judges of the High 
Court or even the ‘content of consultation’.  Our scrutiny is 
limited to whether the reconsideration of the proposal for the 
elevation of the two petitioners, was jointly made by the 
Collegium members of the High Court, following the Supreme 
Court Resolution dated 4th January 2024.   

Page 20 of 22 
 
27. This Court is mindful of the limited scope of interference in such 
matters.  But this appears to be a case where there was no 
collective consultation amongst the three Constitutional 
functionaries of the High Court i.e. the Chief Justice and the 
two senior-most companion judges.  The absence of the element 
of plurality, in the process of reconsideration as directed by the 
Supreme Court Collegium, is clearly discernible.   
28.  At this juncture, we must also address the submissions on the 
letter written by one of the petitioners, as referenced in the 
Report of the Registrar General and argued before this Court. It 
was contended that the letter contained contemptuous remarks 
directed at the Supreme Court Collegium.   We have perused 
the letter.   It is definitely an expression of hurt by the judicial 
officer, but will not bring the letter into the contemptuous 
category. 
29.  Before parting, it needs to be stated that there is also a need to 
protect certain sensitive information in matters involving 
appointment of judges. While transparency is necessary to 
ensure fairness and accountability, it must be carefully 
balanced with the need to maintain confidentiality. Disclosing 

Page 21 of 22 
 
sensitive information would compromise not only the privacy of 
the individual but also the integrity of the process.  
30. In the case before us, the procedure adopted in the matter of 
reconsideration of the two petitioners is found to be inconsistent 
with the law laid down in the Second Judges (supra) and the 
Third Judges case(supra).   There was no collective consultation 
and deliberations by the members of the High Court Collegium.   
The decision of the Chief Justice of the High Court, on the 
suitability of the two petitioners as conveyed in his letter dated 
6th March 2024, appears to be an individual decision.  The same 
therefore stand vitiated both procedurally and substantially.  
31. The final finding from the above is as follows:-  
(i) 
The writ petition is maintainable as it questions the lack of 
effective consultation;  
(ii) 
The Chief Justice of a High Court cannot individually 
reconsider a recommendation and it can only be done by 
the High Court Collegium acting collectively. 
32.  In light of the above, the High Court Collegium should now 
reconsider the names of Mr. Chirag Bhanu Singh and Mr. 
Arvind Malhotra for elevation as Judges of the High Court, 

Page 22 of 22 
 
following the Supreme Court Collegium decision dated 4th 
January,2024 and the Law Minister’s letter dated 16th 
January,2024. It is ordered accordingly. 
33.  The matter stands allowed in above terms. 
 
                                                                ….…….………………………...J. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [HRISHIKESH ROY] 
 
 
                                                                 ….………………………………..J 
                                                                [PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA] 
 
NEW DELHI  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
SEPTEMBER 6, 2024