2024 INSC 715
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9958 OF 2024
RICARDO CONSTRUCTIONS PVT. LTD.
… APPELLANT (s)
VERSUS
RAVI KUCKIAN & OTHERS   
        … RESPONDENT(s)
O R D E R 
Rajesh Bindal, J.
1.
The present appeal has been filed against the order1 dated
19.07.2024 passed by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission,2 New Delhi in a complaint filed by respondent Nos.1 to
31 whereby the right of the appellant to file written statement was
foreclosed.   The complainants  were given six  weeks  time to  file
affidavit of evidence and the matter was directed to be listed on
09.01.2025.  
2.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that time as
provided  in  law,  was  not  granted  to  file  the  written  statement.
Hence, the impugned order of the Commission may be set aside and
the appellant may be given an opportunity to file written statement.
3.
The  order  passed  by  the  Commission  on  06.02.2024
1 Consumer Complaint No.5 of 2024
2 For short, ‘The Commission’
1
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2024.09.21
16:35:10 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

suggests  that  the  counsel,  who  had  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
appellant was granted time to file vakalatnama.  Notice was directed
to be issued to the Opposite Party No.2 in the complaint and 30
days’ time was granted to the appellant to file its written statement,
whereafter the complainants could file rejoinder and the matter was
fixed on 19.07.2024 for the next hearing.  As the appellant could not
file  the  written  statement  within  the  time  granted  by  the
Commission, the right to file the same was foreclosed.  
4.
The  argument  raised  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the
appellant is that  copy  of the complaint  was not supplied  to the
counsel of the appellant, hence, written statement could not be filed
within the time granted.  He further submits that the counsel had
put in appearance merely, seeing the matter in the cause list on
06.02.2024, and had sought time to file the written statement.  The
copy of the complaint was not handed over to him.  The service of
notice on the appellant was not done by the process of the court.  In
the absence of a copy of the complaint, it was not possible for the
appellant to file its written statement.  Reliance has been placed on
the  Constitution  Bench  judgment  of  this  Court  in  New  India
Assurance  Company  Limited v.  Hilli  Multipurpose  Cold
Storage Private Limited
 
 3 to support the arguments raised by the
appellant.
3 (2020) 5 SCC 757 : 2020 INSC 274 : [2020] 5 S.C.R. 429
2

5.
It was further urged that there is no cause on the part of
the appellant to delay the proceedings.  Counsel for the appellant
accepted notice in the complaint on the very first date of hearing i.e.
06.02.2024, otherwise notice on that day was issued to the opposite
party No. 2 and matter was listed for further orders/directions on
19.07.2024.  Even after foreclosing the right of the appellant to file
the written statement on 19.07.2024 and granting six weeks’ time to
the  complainants  to  file  affidavit  of  evidence,  the  next  date  of
hearing  was  fixed  more  than  five  months  thereafter.   In  such
circumstances if opportunity is granted to the appellant to file its
written  statement,  he shall  file  the same  without  delay  and  the
complainants thereafter would have sufficient time to file rejoinder
and also affidavit of evidence, much before the next date of hearing
on 09.01.2025 as fixed by the Commission.
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent
Nos.1 to 31/complainants before the Commission, submitted that in
view of the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court in New
India Assurance Company Limited’s case (supra), a maximum
period  of  45 days’  can  be granted  to  opposite party  to  file  the
written statement and the Commission had rightly foreclosed the
3

right of the appellant to file the written statement as from the date
of  acceptance  of  notice,  more  than  45  days  had  expired.   The
written statement had not yet been filed.  It was the duty of the
appellant to have asked for a copy of the complaint from the counsel
for the complainant, in case it was not received or supplied.  The
appellant merely wants to delay the proceedings.  
7.
We  have  heard  learned  counsels  for  the  parties  and
perused the relevant referred record.
8.
It is evident from the impugned order that in the complaint
filed  by  the  respondent  Nos.1  to  31,  notice  was  issued  on
06.02.2024 to the Opposite Parties.  As the counsel representing the
appellant happened to be present before the Commission, and with
a view to resolve the dispute between the parties expeditiously, he
accepted the notice on the same day even though he did not have
the vakalatnama executed by the appellant in his favour.  Otherwise,
the notice was issued to Opposite Party No. 2 and matter was fixed
for 19.07.2024, the first date of hearing fixed by the Commission
after issuance of such notice.  As the copy of the complaint was not
served  upon  the  appellant  or  its  counsel,  the  written  statement
could not be filed in time and accordingly, prayer was made on
19.07.2024  seeking  further  time  for  the  purpose.   However,  the
same was declined by the Commission while observing that it was
4

an attempt on the part of the appellant to delay the proceedings.  
8.1
However,  considering  the  fact  that  the counsel  for  the
appellant who happened to be present before the Commission on
the very first date when the complaint was  listed,  accepted  the
notice, it does not show that there was any effort on the part of the
appellant to delay the process.  The next date of hearing fixed by
the  Commission  was  on  19.07.2024  after  issuance  of  notice  to
Opposite Party No.2.  On that day, while foreclosing the right of the
appellant to file the written statement, six weeks’ time was granted
to the complainants to file affidavit in evidence and matter was
posted  for  09.01.2025.   Under  these  circumstances,  if  some
reasonable  time  is  granted  to  the  appellant  to  file  the  written
statement and complainant to file replication thereof,  the pleadings
would be complete before the next date of hearing fixed and even
affidavit of evidence can be filed by the complainants before that
date.  
9.
The  Constitution  Bench  of  this  Court  in  New  India
Assurance Company Limited’s case (supra) considered one of the
questions as to what would be the commencing point of limitation of
30 days under Section 13 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and
opined that the commencing point of limitation of 30 days would be
from  the  date  of  receipt  of  the  notice  accompanied  with  the
5

complaint by the opposite party and not on mere receipt of the
notice  of  the  complaint.   For  ready  reference  questions  framed
thereunder and answer to those questions, are reproduced herein
below :
“Question  No.1  :  Whether  the  District  Forum  has
power to extend the time for filing of response to the
complaint beyond the period of 15 days, in addition
to 30 days, as envisaged under Section 13(2)(a) of
the Consumer Protection Act?
Question  No.2  :  What  would  be  the  commencing
point of limitation of 30 days under Section 13 of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986?
xxx
xxx
xxx
62.
To conclude, we hold that our answer to the
first question is that the District Forum has no power
to  extend  the  time  for  filing  the  response  to  the
complaint beyond the period of 15 days in addition
to 30 days as is envisaged under Section 13 of the
Consumer  Protection  Act;  and  the  answer  to  the
second  question  is  that  the  commencing  point  of
limitation  of  30  days  under  Section  13  of  the
Consumer Protection Act would be from the date of
receipt  of  the  notice  accompanied  with  the
complaint  by  the  opposite  party,  and  not  mere
receipt of the notice of the complaint.”
9.1
If we examine the provisions of the Consumer Protection
Act, 2019, the same are in the line with the Consumer Protection
6

Act, 1986.
10.
Argument raised by the learned counsel for the appellant
is that the copy of the complaint was not served upon him.  The
Commission had put onus on the appellant to have not made any
attempt to get the copy of the complaint.  However, the fact remains
that  the  Commission  has  merely  recorded  in  its  order  dated
06.02.2024 that the notice was accepted by the counsel for the
appellant in Court and he was granted time to file the vakalatnama
and written statement.   The order does not record that copy of the
complaint has been supplied by the counsel for the complainants to
the counsel for the opposite party No.1/the appellant herein.  Any
such  observation  by  the  Commission  in  its  order  would  have
clinched the issue.  It is not a case where along with the notice, copy
of the complaint was accompanied.  Therefore, it may be too harsh
to  foreclose  anyone’s  right  to  file  written  statement  merely  on
conjectures and surmises.
11.
For the reasons mentioned above, the present appeal is
allowed.  The impugned order passed by the Commission insofar it
foreclosed  the right  of the appellant  to  file written  statement is
hereby  set  aside.   The  appellant  is  permitted  to  file  written
statement  on  or  before  14.10.2024.   The  respondent  Nos.1  to
31/complainants  shall  be  at  liberty  to  file  replication,  if  any,  by
7

06.11.2024 and the affidavit of evidence on or before 09.12.2024.
The matter shall remain fixed on 09.01.2025 for the purpose already
mentioned.  The appellant is  permitted to file written statement
subject to payment of costs of ₹1,00,000/- each to respondent Nos.1
to  31/complainants.   The  payment  of  costs  shall  be  a  condition
precedent for acceptance of written statement on record.  The costs,
as above, shall be transferred in the respective bank accounts of the
respondents.  In case the details thereof are not available with the
appellant, the same can be taken in coordination with the counsels
representing them.  
 
   
   ……………….……………..J.
 
(J.K. MAHESHWARI)
……………….……………..J.
(RAJESH BINDAL)
New Delhi
September 06, 2024.
8

ITEM NO.28               COURT NO.8               SECTION XVII
               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Civil Appeal  No(s).  9958/2024
RICARDO CONSTRUCTIONS PVT. LTD.                    Appellant(s)
                                VERSUS
RAVI KUCKIAN & OTHERS                             Respondent(s)
(FOR ADMISSION and IA No.192778/2024-EX-PARTE STAY)
 
Date : 06-09-2024 This appeal was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :  HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.K. MAHESHWARI
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJESH BINDAL
For Appellant(s)   Mr. Dhruv Mehta, Sr. Adv.
                   Mr. Pranjit Bhattacharya, Adv.
                   Mr. Vaibhav Niti, AOR
                   Ms. Sonam Mhatre, Adv.
                   Ms. Raj Sarit Khare, Adv.
                                      
For Respondent(s)  Mr. Aditya Parolia, Adv.
                   Mr. Piyush Singh, Adv.
                   Mr. Akshay Srivastava, Adv.
                   Mr. Alankrit Bhatnagar, Adv.
                   Mr. Suryansh Vashisth, Adv.
                   Mr. Anshul Gupta, AOR
  
       UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                         O R D E R
1.
The civil appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.
2.
Pending interlocutory application(s), if any, is/are disposed of.  
(JAYANT KUMAR ARORA)                             (ANU BHALLA)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                           COURT MASTER
(Signed Reportable Order is placed on the file)
9