2024 INSC 664
  
Criminal Appeal No.3821 of 2023     
                   Page 1 of 12 
 
Reportable 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 3821 OF 2023 
 
Somprabha Rana & Ors. 
 
   
            … Appellants 
 
 
 
versus 
 
 
 
The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.  
 ... Respondents 
 
 
J  U  D  G  M  E  N  T 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
This appeal arises from a very unfortunate dispute about 
the custody of a female child (for short, ‘the child’) whose 
present age is two years and seven months. The mother of the 
child unfortunately died an unnatural death on 27th December 
2022.  It is alleged that the death of the mother was by hanging.  
The 4th respondent is the father of the child.  The 2nd and 3rd 
respondents are the paternal grandparents of the child.   The 
5th respondent is the sister-in-law of the 4th respondent (his 
brother’s wife).  The 1st to 3rd appellants are the real sisters of 
the deceased mother. The 4th and 5th appellants are the child's 
maternal grandparents, who were not the parties before the 
High Court. The 5th respondent is also a real sister of the child’s 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.09.06
16:48:31 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

  
Criminal Appeal No.3821 of 2023     
                   Page 2 of 12 
 
mother.  The 5th respondent is the wife of the 4th respondent’s 
brother.  
2. 
The 2nd to 4th respondents invoked the jurisdiction of the 
Madhya Pradesh High Court by filing a petition seeking a writ 
of Habeas Corpus under Article 226 of the Constitution of 
India.  A case made out in the petition was that the 4th 
respondent and the mother of the child were residing in Indore, 
where the unnatural death of the mother occurred.  A First 
Information Report was registered against the 2nd and 4th 
respondents for offences punishable under Sections 304-B and 
498-A of the Indian Penal Code and Sections 3 and 4 of the 
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.  According to the case of the 2nd 
to 5th respondents, the 2nd and 3rd appellants came to Indore 
on 28th December 2022.  When the 4th respondent was busy 
completing the formalities of the post-mortem, without the 
consent of the 4th respondent, the 2nd and 3rd appellants took 
away the minor child.  The 4th respondent - the father, was 
arrested in connection with the offence on 19th February 2023 
and was granted bail after filing the charge sheet on 19th April 
2023.  The petition under Article 226 filed by the 2nd to 5th 
respondents proceeded on the allegation that the 2nd and 3rd 
appellants illegally took over custody of the child.  It must be 
noted here that on the date of death of the mother, the age of 
the child was 11 months.  
3. 
By the impugned judgment dated 23rd June 2023, the 
Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Indore 
allowed the writ petition. It issued a writ of Habeas corpus 

  
Criminal Appeal No.3821 of 2023     
                   Page 3 of 12 
 
directing the appellants to hand over custody of the child to the 
2nd to 5th respondents.  On 7th July 2023, this Court issued 
notice and granted a stay of the operation of the impugned 
judgment.   On 5th December 2023, this Court granted leave 
and continued the stay.  However, this Court observed that it 
would be open for the husband to apply for custody before the 
appropriate Court.  As of this date, the husband has not 
applied for custody by filing proceedings under the Guardians 
and Wards Act, 1890 (for short, “the GW Act”).  The appellants 
made such an application under the GW Act, but it was 
withdrawn later. This is the statement made by the learned 
counsel for the appellants.  Now, the question is whether the 
High Court was justified in disturbing the custody of the child, 
whose age was one year and five months at the time of passing 
the impugned judgment.  
SUBMISSIONS 
4. 
The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants 
urged that by the impugned judgment, without making any 
inquiry, the High Court has ordered the child's custody to be 
disturbed based only on the legal rights of the child's father 
and grandparents.  He submitted that in the facts of the case, 
the High Court ought not to have entertained a petition for 
Habeas Corpus.  He submitted that even if the petition was to 
be entertained, it was the duty of the Court to see what was in 
the best interests of the minor and custody could not have been 
disturbed at such tender age without considering the question 
of the welfare of the minor child.   

  
Criminal Appeal No.3821 of 2023     
                   Page 4 of 12 
 
5. 
Learned senior counsel appearing for the respondents 
extensively relied upon decisions of this Court in the cases of 
Tejaswini Gaud & Ors. v. Shekhar Jagdish Prasad Tewari 
& Ors.1, Swaminathan Kunchu Acharya v. The State of 
Gujarat2 and Gautam Kumar Das v. NCT of Delhi & 
Others3.  Learned senior counsel would urge that the case of 
Gautam Kumar Das3 is identical on facts where the High 
Court had declined to entertain the petition for Habeas corpus 
by expressing a view that statutory remedy should be adopted 
for seeking custody.  However, this Court interfered and 
granted the father custody of the minor child.  He submitted 
that the father and his parents reside together and, therefore, 
are in a position to take the best possible care of the child.  He 
submitted that the appellants have not allowed the father to 
see even the face of the child.  The learned senior counsel 
appearing for the appellants relied upon a decision of this 
Court in the case of Nirmala v. Kulwant Singh and Others4. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
6. 
After having perused various decisions of this Court, the 
broad propositions of settled law on the point can be 
summarised as follows:  
a. Writ of Habeas corpus is a prerogative writ. It is an 
extraordinary remedy. It is a discretionary remedy; 
 
1 (2019) 7 SCC 45 
2 (2022) 8 SCC 804 
3 (2024) INSC 610 
4 (2024) SCC OnLine SC 758 

  
Criminal Appeal No.3821 of 2023     
                   Page 5 of 12 
 
b. The High Court always has the discretion not to exercise 
the writ jurisdiction depending upon the facts of the case. 
It all depends on the facts of individual cases; 
c. Even if the High Court, in a petition of Habeas Corpus, 
finds that custody of the child by the respondents was 
illegal, in a given case, the High Court can decline to 
exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution 
of India if the High Court is of the view that at the stage 
at which the Habeas Corpus was sought, it will not be in 
the welfare and interests of the minor to disturb his/her 
custody; and 
d. As far as the decision regarding custody of the minor 
children is concerned, the only paramount consideration 
is the welfare of the minor.  The parties' rights cannot be 
allowed to override the child's welfare. This principle also 
applies to a petition seeking Habeas Corpus concerning a 
minor. 
7. 
Now, we come to the impugned judgment.  The reasons 
given by the Division Bench are found only in two paragraphs, 
namely, paragraphs nos. 10 and 11, which read thus: 
“10. From perusal of the Tejaswini Gaud & 
Ors.(supra), the Habeas Corpus proceeding 
is not to justify or examine the legality of 
the custody. In the present case, the only 
thing which is required to be considered is 
whether the detention of the minor child by 
the parents or others was illegal and 
without any authority of law. It is the 

  
Criminal Appeal No.3821 of 2023     
                   Page 6 of 12 
 
settled proposition of law that the Writ of 
Habeas Corpus is maintainable only if the 
person is able to prove that the Corpus is 
in illegal custody or is kept in illegal 
confinement. 
In 
the 
present 
case, 
admittedly the petitioners would have 
precedence over the respondent Nos.3 
and 4 who are the relatives from the 
maternal side whereas the petitioner 
No.3 is the biological father of the 
Corpus, therefore, the writ of Habeas 
Corpus is maintainable as well as the 
petitioners would have precedence for 
custody of the minor child qua the 
respondent Nos.3 and 4.  
11. The writ of the Habeas Corpus for 
seeking 
custody 
of 
minor 
child 
is 
maintainable only if the Corpus is in illegal 
custody. 
In 
the 
present 
case, 
the 
custody/detention of a minor child by 
the respondent Nos.3 and 4 who are not 
the natural guardian of the Corpus, are 
not entitled to her legal custody. 
Accordingly, the respondent Nos.3 and 4 
are directed to hand over the custody of the 
minor child namely XXXX to the petitioners 
within 15 days from the date of receipt of 
certified copy of the order.” 
                       (emphasis added) 
8. 
It is apparent that the High Court has not dealt with and 
considered the issue of the welfare of the child.  The High 
Court has disturbed the child's custody based only on the 
father's right as a natural guardian. 
9. 
The High Court was dealing with the custody of the child, 
whose age at that time was one year and five months.  The 

  
Criminal Appeal No.3821 of 2023     
                   Page 7 of 12 
 
child had been in the custody of the appellants from the tender 
age of 11 months after her mother died. The child, at present, 
has been in the custody of the appellants for more than one 
and a half years. When the Court deals with the issue of 
Habeas Corpus regarding a minor, the Court cannot treat the 
child as a movable property and transfer custody without even 
considering the impact of the disturbance of the custody on 
the child.  Such issues cannot be decided mechanically. The 
Court has to act based on humanitarian considerations.  After 
all, the Court cannot ignore the doctrine of parens patriae.  
Learned senior counsel appearing for the 2nd to 5th 
respondents submitted that if the Court is of the view that 
there is no proper consideration by the High Court, the order 
of remand may be passed to the High Court. 
10. 
We believe that considering the peculiar facts of the case 
and the child's tender age, this is not a case where custody of 
the child can be disturbed in a petition under Article 226 of 
the Constitution of India.  Only in substantive proceedings 
under the GW Act can the appropriate Court decide the issue 
of the child custody and guardianship. Regular Civil/Family 
Court dealing with child custody cases is in an advantageous 
position. The Court can frequently interact with the child. 
Practically, all Family Courts have a child centre/play area. A 
child can be brought to the play centre, where the judicial 
officer can interact with the child. Access can be given to the 
parties to meet the child at the same place. Moreover, the 
Court dealing with custody matters can record evidence. The 

  
Criminal Appeal No.3821 of 2023     
                   Page 8 of 12 
 
Court can appoint experts to make the psychological 
assessment of the child. If an access is required to be given to 
one of the parties to meet the child, the Civil Court or Family 
Court is in a better position to monitor the same. 
11. 
Coming to the facts of the case, at this stage, it will be 
very difficult to decide whether the welfare of the minor child 
requires custody of the maternal aunts to be disturbed. The 
child has not seen the father and grandparents for over a year.  
At the tender age of two years and seven months, if custody of 
the child is immediately transferred to the father and 
grandparents, the child will become miserable as the child has 
not met them for a considerably long time. Moreover, even the 
contesting respondents have not alleged that the child is not 
being looked after properly by the appellants.  Whether the 
father is entitled to custody or not is a matter to be decided by 
a competent court, but surely, even assuming that the father 
is not entitled to custody, at this stage, he is entitled to have 
access to meet the child. It is in the child's best interest that 
she knows her father and grandparents and remains with them 
for some time to begin with. 
12. 
We repeatedly asked the learned senior counsel 
representing the husband whether the husband was willing to 
apply for custody. However, he has shown unwillingness to 
apply for custody. The husband is a member of the Bar 
practising at the Indore Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High 
Court. Even he was personally present during the hearing. 
However, the learned senior counsel appearing for the 

  
Criminal Appeal No.3821 of 2023     
                   Page 9 of 12 
 
appellants stated that the appellants or any of them would 
apply for claiming declaration as a guardian and retaining the 
custody. The earlier application filed by the appellants has 
been withdrawn. However, orders of the Court regarding 
custody are never final. Therefore, we propose to permit the 
appellants or any of them to apply for custody to the Regular 
Court under the GW Act. Even in the petition filed by the 
appellants, the competent Court can permit the father to take 
over the custody if it is satisfied that the welfare of the minor 
requires custody to be granted to the father.  
13. 
We propose to direct the appellants to give access to the 
father and paternal grandparents of the child to meet the child 
once a fortnight. To begin with, access can be provided in the 
office of the secretary of the District Legal Service Authority so 
that the secretary can supervise the access. We propose to 
direct the secretary of the District Legal Service Authority to 
take assistance from a child psychologist or a psychiatrist 
(preferably female) attached to a local public hospital. If no 
such expert is available with the local public hospital, such an 
expert can be appointed at the appellants' cost. The expert will 
ensure that the child responds to the father and grandparents 
and interacts with them. The order of access shall continue for 
four months. After that, it will be open for the concerned Trial 
Court to modify this order of access in all respects. When the 
child becomes comfortable with his father and grandparents, 
the Court can also consider granting overnight access to the 
father and the grandparents.    

  
Criminal Appeal No.3821 of 2023     
                   Page 10 of 12 
 
14. 
Hence, we pass the following order: 
a. 
Impugned judgment and order dated 23rd June, 
2023 is set aside, and Writ Petition No. 11004 of 2023 is 
hereby dismissed. We make it clear that the Writ Petition 
is dismissed not on merits but on the ground that on 
facts, the discretion could not have been exercised 
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to disturb 
the custody of the appellants at this stage;  
b. 
On every 1st, 3rd and 5th Saturdays starting from 
21st September 2024, the appellants shall take the child 
to the office of the secretary of the District Legal Service 
Authority at district Panna in the State of Madhya 
Pradesh at 03.00 p.m. Under the supervision of the 
secretary of the District Legal Service Authority, the 
father and grandparents of the child shall be permitted 
to meet the child till 05.00 p.m.; 
c. 
The secretary of the District Legal Service Authority 
shall take the assistance of a child psychologist or a 
psychiatrist (preferably female) working in any local 
public hospital. If such experts are unavailable, the 
secretary shall privately engage one such expert at the 
appellants' cost. The appellants will pay necessary 
charges as and when called upon by the secretary. The 
payment will be subject to the outcome of the 
proceedings for grant of custody; 

  
Criminal Appeal No.3821 of 2023     
                   Page 11 of 12 
 
d. 
The expert so appointed shall remain present at the 
time of access. The expert's duty will be to persuade the 
child to interact with her father and grandparents. As 
regards the mode and manner of allowing the father and 
grandparents to meet the child, the parties and the 
secretary of the District Legal Service Authority shall be 
guided by the opinion of the expert; 
e. 
As assured to the Court, the appellants or some of 
them shall file a petition seeking a declaration of 
guardianship and permanent custody of the child under 
the provisions of the GW Act before the competent Court 
within a maximum period of two months from today; 
f. 
The concerned Court in which the application will 
be filed shall pass further orders regarding the grant of 
access and/or overnight custody to the husband and the 
grandparents. Further interim directions regarding 
access, overnight access, etc., shall be issued by the 
competent Court in which the appellants apply for 
custody. To enable the said court to pass an appropriate 
interim order, we direct that the interim arrangement 
made as above for the grant of access to the father and 
the grandparents will continue to operate for four 
months from today.  Thereafter, the competent Court 
will deal with the prayer for interim relief on its own 
merits.  Needless to add, in the event the husband 
and/or grandparents apply for custody, the application 

  
Criminal Appeal No.3821 of 2023     
                   Page 12 of 12 
 
filed by them and the application filed by the appellants 
shall be heard together, and  
g. 
In the event of failure of both parties to apply to the 
competent Court, the parties will be free to apply to this 
Court for appropriate directions.  
15. 
The appeal is, accordingly, partly allowed on the above 
terms. 
16. 
We direct the registry to immediately forward a copy of 
this judgment to the secretary of the District Legal Service 
Authority at District Panna, State of Madhya Pradesh, who 
shall act upon the copy of the judgment provided by the registry 
of this Court. If the secretary of the District Legal Service 
Authority needs any further directions from this Court, it will 
be open for him to submit a report to the Registrar (Judicial) of 
this Court, who shall immediately place the same before this 
Bench and/or the appropriate Bench.  
17. 
There will be no orders as to costs. 
  
...…………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
  (Abhay S Oka) 
 
 
 
..…………………………….J. 
                                                      (Augustine George Masih) 
New Delhi; 
September 6, 2024.