2024 INSC 669
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2501 OF 2024 
(arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 6942 of 2024)  
 
DHANRAJ ASWANI 
 
 
 
 
       …APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
 
AMAR S. MULCHANDANI & ANR. 
             …RESPONDENTS  
 
 
 J U D G M E N T 
 
 
 
 
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2024.09.09
14:37:19 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 73 
 
J.B. PARDIWALA, J. :- 
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following 
parts:  
 
A. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT ........................... 4 
B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NO. 1 
(ORIGINAL ACCUSED) ............................................................................. 7 
C. VIEWS OF DIFFERENT HIGH COURTS ON THE ISSUE IN 
QUESTION ................................................................................................. 10 
D. ANALYSIS .................................................................................................. 25 
i. 
Evolution of the concept of anticipatory bail ....................................... 25 
ii. Whether a person, while in custody for a particular offence, can have 
a “reason to believe” that he may be arrested in relation to some 
other non-bailable offence? .................................................................... 44 
iii. Illustrative Examples .............................................................................. 63 
E. CONCLUSION ........................................................................................... 65 
 
       
 
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 73 
 
1. 
A short question of general public importance on which there is great 
divergence of judicial opinion that falls for the consideration of this 
Court is as under: 
 
“Whether an application for anticipatory bail under Section 438 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, “CrPC”) is 
maintainable at the instance of an accused while he is already in 
judicial custody in connection with his involvement in a different 
case?” 
 
2. 
This appeal arises from the judgment and order dated 31.10.2023 
passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Anticipatory Bail 
Application No. 2801 of 2023 by which the High Court overruled the 
objection raised by the appellant herein (original complainant) as 
regards the maintainability of the anticipatory bail application filed by 
respondent no. 1 (original accused) in connection with CR No. 806 of 
2019 registered with Pimpri Police Station for the offences punishable 
under Sections 406, 409, 420, 465, 467, 468, 471 respectively read with 
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code (for short, “IPC”) and thereby took 
the view that although respondent no.1 herein may already be in 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 73 
 
custody in connection with ECIR No. 10 of 2021, yet he would be 
entitled to pray for anticipatory bail in connection with a different case. 
 
3. 
It appears from the materials on record that respondent no. 1 herein 
came to be arrested in connection with ECIR No. 10 of 2021.While in 
custody, he apprehended arrest in connection with CR No. 806 of 2019 
registered against him at the instance of the appellant herein. In such 
circumstances, he prayed for anticipatory bail before the High Court. 
The appellant herein intervened in the proceedings of said anticipatory 
bail application and raised an objection that as respondent no. 1 herein 
is already in custody in connection with ECIR No. 10 of 2021, he 
cannot pray for anticipatory bail in connection with CR No. 806 of 
2019. The objection raised by the appellant herein in his capacity as the 
complainant came to be overruled and the High Court proceeded to hold 
that although respondent no. 1 herein may be in custody in one case, 
yet the same would not preclude him from seeking pre-arrest bail in 
connection with a different case. Since the objection was overruled, the 
appellant is now before this Court. 
 
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 73 
 
A. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT 
 
4. 
Mr. Sidharth Luthra, the learned Senior counsel appearing for the 
appellant canvassed the following submissions: 
i. 
The High Court committed a serious error in taking the view that 
although a person might be in custody after his arrest in one case, 
yet such a person can apply for the grant of pre-arrest bail under 
Section 438 of the CrPC in connection with a different case. 
ii. 
The essential part of arrest is placing the corpus (body of the person) 
in custody of the police authorities. The natural corollary, therefore, 
is that a person who is already in custody cannot have reasons to 
believe that he would be arrested as he already stands arrested. The 
pre-condition to invoke Section 438 CrPC is that the accused should 
have a reason to believe that he “may be arrested”. If the accused is 
already in custody, then he can have no reason to believe that he 
“may be arrested”. 
iii. 
The salutary provision of Section 438 of the CrPC was enshrined 
with a view to see that the liberty of any individual concerned is not 
put in jeopardy on frivolous grounds at the instance of unscrupulous 
or irresponsible person or officers who may be in charge of the 
prosecution. If such is the objective behind the enactment of Section 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 73 
 
438 of the CrPC, then for a person who is already arrested there is 
no question of any humiliation being caused.  
iv. 
If an accused while being in custody in connection with one case, is 
granted anticipatory bail under Section 438 of the CrPC in 
connection with a different case, then it would not be possible for 
him to fulfill the requirement of the condition that may be imposed 
under Section 438(2)(i) of the CrPC i.e. to make himself/herself 
available for interrogation as and when required. In other words, a 
person in custody would not be able to meet or comply with the 
condition that may be imposed under Section 438(2)(i) of the CrPC.  
This being a material consideration for grant of anticipatory bail, it 
would be illogical to permit a person to seek anticipatory bail if he 
is unable to satisfy conditions that may be imposed under Section 
438(2)(i) of the CrPC. 
v. 
If a person who is already in custody in connection with one case 
apprehends arrest in connection with a different case, then he is not 
remediless. In such circumstances, he can seek to surrender and pray 
for regular bail on the principle of “deemed custody” both in 
Magistrate as well as Sessions triable cases.  
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 73 
 
5. 
Mr. Luthra, with a view to fortify his aforesaid submissions, placed 
strong reliance on the following decisions: 
i. Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab, [1994] 2 SCR 375, (1994) 3 SCC 
569 
ii. Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab, [1980] 3 SCR 383, (1980) 
2 SCC 565 
iii. Sushila Aggarwal v. State (NCT of Delhi), [2020] 2 SCR 1, (2020) 5 
SCC 1 
iv. Sunil Kallani v. State of Rajasthan, 2021 SCC OnLine Raj 1654 
v. Rajesh Kumar Sharma v. CBI, 2022 SCC OnLine All 832 
vi. Tejesh Suman v. State of Rajasthan, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 76  
vii. Bashir Hasan Siddiqui v. State (GNCTD), (2023) SCC OnLine Del 
7544 
viii. Narinderjit Singh Sahni v. Union of India, [2001] Supp. 4 SCR 114, 
(2002) 2 SCC 210. 
 
6. 
In such circumstances referred to above, the learned Senior counsel 
prayed that there being merit in his appeal, the same may be allowed 
and the impugned order passed by the High Court be set aside.  
 
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 73 
 
B. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NO. 1 
(ORIGINAL ACCUSED) 
 
7. 
Mr. Siddharth Dave, the learned Senior counsel appearing for the 
original accused, vehemently opposed the present appeal and canvassed 
the following submissions: 
i. 
The legal maxim ubi jus ibi remedium i.e. where there is a right, 
there is a remedy, is recognised as a basic principle of jurisprudence.  
A Constitution Bench of this Court in Anita Kushwaha v. Pushap 
Sudan reported in (2016) 8 SCC 509 held that the right to access 
justice is so inalienable, that no system of governance can possibly 
ignore its significance, leave alone afford to deny the same to its 
citizens. It was also held that the ancient Roman jurisprudential 
maxim ubi jus ibi remedium has contributed to the acceptance of 
access to justice as a basic and inalienable human right, which all 
civilized societies recognise and enforce. 
ii. 
The right of an accused to apply for pre-arrest bail under Section 438 
of the CrPC is intrinsically linked to his right to access the competent 
courts to avail his remedies under the law. A person would thus be 
entitled to apply for pre-arrest bail under Section 438 of the CrPC in 
one case, even though he may be in custody in connection with some 
other case. 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 73 
 
iii. 
The right of an accused to protect his personal liberty within the 
contours of Article 21 of the Constitution of India, by applying for 
pre-arrest bail under Section 438 CrPC cannot be eliminated without 
a procedure established by law. Further, such procedure should also 
pass the test of fairness, reasonableness and manifest non-
arbitrariness on the touchstone of Article 14 of the Constitution of 
India. 
iv. 
Under Section 438 of the CrPC, the pre-condition for a person to 
apply for pre-arrest bail is a “reason to believe that he may be 
arrested on accusation of having committed a non-bailable 
offence”. Therefore, the only pre-condition for exercising the said 
right is the apprehension of the accused that he may be arrested.  
v. 
The arrest of an accused in one case cannot foreclose his right to 
apply for pre-arrest bail in a different case, since there is no such 
stipulation in the language of Section 438 of the CrPC. The 
restrictions on the exercise of power to grant pre-arrest bail under 
Section 438 of the CrPC are prescribed under Section 438(4) of the 
CrPC which provides that the provisions of Section 438 shall not 
apply to cases involving arrest under Sections 376(3), 376AB, 
376DA or 376DB respectively of the IPC. 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 73 
 
vi. 
A Constitution Bench of this Court, in Sushila Aggarwal (supra) 
while considering the statutory restrictions on Section 438 of the 
CrPC held that where the Parliament intended to exclude or restrict 
the powers of the Court under Section 438 of the CrPC, it did so in 
categorical terms (such as Section 438(4)).  The omission on the part 
of the legislature to restrict the right of any person accused of having 
committed a non-bailable offence to seek anticipatory bail can lead 
one to assume that neither a blanket restriction can be read into the 
text of Section 438 CrPC by this Court, nor can inflexible guidelines 
in the exercise of discretion be insisted as that would amount to 
judicial legislation. 
vii. 
A statutory restriction on the right to apply for pre-arrest bail is also 
found under Sections 18 and 18A(2) respectively of the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 
(for short, “the Act, 1989”). The said provisions provide that Section 
438 of the CrPC shall not apply to cases under the Act, 1989. That 
despite the statutory bar under Sections 18 and 18A(2) respectively 
of the Act, 1989 a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Prathvi Raj 
Chauhan v. Union of India reported in (2020) 4 SCC 727 held that 
if a complaint does not make out a prima facie case for applicability 
of the Act, 1989 the bar under Sections 18 and 18A(2) respectively 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 73 
 
of the said Act shall  not apply.  The aforesaid judgment indicates 
the judicial approach of adopting an interpretation in favour of 
personal liberty. 
 
8. 
In such circumstances referred to above, Mr. Dave prayed that there 
being no merit in the appeal, the same may be dismissed. 
C. 
VIEWS OF DIFFERENT HIGH COURTS ON THE ISSUE IN 
QUESTION 
 
9. 
In Sunil Kallani (supra), a learned Single Judge of the High Court of 
Rajasthan took the view that an application for anticipatory bail would 
not be maintainable at the instance of a person who is already arrested 
and is in police custody or judicial custody in relation to a different 
case.  The line of reasoning adopted by the High Court in taking such a 
view was that a person who is already in custody cannot have a reason 
to believe that he would be arrested as he already stood arrested, albeit 
in a different case.  The High Court observed that arrest means to 
actually touch or confine the body of the person to the custody of a 
police officer and an essential part of arrest is placing the corpus, that 
is the body of the person, in custody of the police authorities. In light 
of this essential requirement to constitute an arrest, a person who is 
already in custody cannot have a reason to believe that he may be 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 73 
 
arrested as he stood already arrested. The High Court tried to fortify its 
view by relying on some of the observations made by this Court in 
Narinderjit Singh Sahni (supra). A few relevant observations made by 
the High Court are extracted hereinbelow: 
“17. The Scheme of Code of Criminal Procedure does 
not define the word arrest. In Chapter V of Code of 
Criminal Procedure, Section 41 lays down when police 
may arrest without warrant. Section 41B lays down 
procedure of arrest and duties of officer. Section 46 
mentions how arrest is to be made. 
 
18. Upon reading Section 46 Cr.P.C. (supra), it is 
apparent that arrest would mean to actually touch or 
confine the body of the person to custody of the police 
officer. Section 167 Cr.P.C. lays down that the custody 
may be given to the police for the purpose of 
investigation (called as remand) or be sent to jail (called 
as judicial custody). Thus the essential part of arrest is 
placing the corpus, body of the person in custody of the 
police authorities whether of a police station or before 
him or in a concerned jail. 
 
19. The natural corollary is therefore that a person who 
is already in custody cannot have reasons to believe that 
he shall be arrested as he stands already arrested. In 
view thereof, the precondition of bail application to be 
moved under Section 438 Cr.P.C. i.e. reasons to believe 
that he may be arrested” do not survive since a person 
is already arrested in another case and is in custody 
whether before the police or in jail. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxx 
 
 xxx  
 xxx 
 
23. As pointed out by learned counsel for the petitioner 
that there may be cases where a person who has already 
been arrested in a particular case may be faced with 
registering of several FIRs by the persons who do not 
want him to be released from jail and in the said 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 73 
 
circumstances only option available is to take 
anticipatory bail in other FIRs as the police would seek 
his arrest in all the cases. It may be subsequently 
registered against him for non-bailable Offences and in 
such an event, there would be infraction of his personal 
liberty. However this Court does not agree to the 
submissions noticed as above. Once the FIR has been 
registered in relation to an offence committed against 
any person by an accused he cannot claim to be 
protected from offences which he may have committed 
with other persons who have their individual right of 
registering an FIR against such an accused. The 
accused will have to face investigation and subsequent 
trial in relation to each and every case individually. The 
question whether he may be punished separately or 
jointly for other cases is a completely different question 
altogether and need not be gone into the present case. 
 
24. However, 
keeping 
in 
view 
observations 
in Narinderjit Singh Sahni, (supra) and considering that 
the purpose of preventive arrest by a direction of the 
court on an application under Section 438 Cr.P.C. 
would be an order in vacuum. As a person is already in 
custody with the police this Court is of the view that such 
an anticipatory bail application under Section 438 
Cr.P.C. would not lie and would be nothing but travesty 
of justice in allowing anticipatory bail to such an 
accused who is already in custody. 
 
25. Examining the issue from another angle if such an 
application is held to be maintainable the result would 
be that if an accused is arrested say for an offence 
committed of abduction and another case is registered 
against him for having committed murder and third case 
is- registered against him for having stolen the car 
which was used for abduction in a different police 
station and the said accused is granted anticipatory bail 
in respect to the offence of stealing of the car or in 
respect to the offence of having committed murder the 
concerned Police Investigating Agency where FIRs 
have been registered would be prevented from 
conducting individual investigation and making 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 73 
 
recoveries as anticipatory bail once granted would 
continue to operate without limitation as laid down by 
the Apex Court in Sushila Aggarwal, (supra). The 
concept of. anticipatory bail, as envisaged under-
Section 438 Cr.P.C. would stand frustrated. The 
provisions of grant of anticipatory bail are essentially 
to prevent the concerned person from litigation initiated 
with the object of injuring and humiliating the applicant 
by haying him so arrested and for a person who stands 
already arrested, such a factor does not remain 
available. 
 
26. In view of above discussion, this Court holds that the 
anticipatory bail would not lie and would not be 
maintainable if a person is already arrested and is in 
custody of police or judicial custody in relation to 
another criminal case which may be for similar offence 
or for different offences.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
                      
10. 
In the case of Rajesh Kumar Sharma (supra), a learned Single Judge 
of the High Court of Allahabad followed the view taken by the High 
Court of Rajasthan referred to above.   
 
11. 
In Bashir Hasan Siddiqui (supra), a learned Single Judge of the High 
Court of Delhi, relying on Sunil Kallani (supra) and Rajesh Kumar 
Sharma (supra), took a similar view that an application seeking 
anticipatory bail would not be maintainable at the instance of a person 
who apprehends arrest if such a person is already arrested and is in 
custody in connection with a different offence. The relevant 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 73 
 
observations made by the High Court in paragraph 6 of the said decision 
are extracted as under: 
“6.  Therefore, keeping in view the entire facts and 
circumstances and also taking into account the 
judgment passed by the Rajasthan High Court in Sunil 
Kallani (supra) and subsequently judgment passed by 
Allahabad 
High 
Court 
in Rajesh 
Kumar 
Sharma (supra), this Court is in consonance with the 
opinions of both the High Court that since the accused 
is in custody in another FIR, the anticipatory bail in 
other FIR is not maintainable. As a result, the present 
petition stands dismissed.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
12. 
 In Alnesh Akil Somji v. State of Maharashtra reported in 2021 SCC 
OnLine Bom 5276, a learned Single Judge of the High Court of 
Judicature at Bombay formulated the following question of law for its 
consideration: 
“Whether an anticipatory bail application would be 
maintainable by an accused who is already arrested and 
is in magisterial custody in relation to another crime?” 
 
13. 
The Bombay High Court also took notice of the decision of the High 
Court of Rajasthan in Sunil Kallani (supra). The decision of this Court 
in the case of Narinderjit Singh Sahni (supra) was also looked into 
and ultimately it was held that an accused has every right, even if he is 
arrested in a number of cases, to move the courts for anticipatory bail 
in each of the offence registered against him, irrespective of the fact 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 73 
 
that he is already in custody in relation to a different offence.  The High 
Court was of the view that the application(s) under Section 438 of the 
CrPC would have to be heard and decided on merits independent of the 
other cases in which he is already in custody.  We may refer to some of 
the observations made by the High Court as under: 
“8. A plain reading of the provision would show that the 
only restriction provided is under Section 438 (4) of the 
Cr. PC, which says that the provision will not apply to 
accusations of offences which are stated in Section 438 
(4) of the Cr.P.C. Similarly, certain special statutes have 
excluded the operation of Section 438 of the Cr.P.C. for 
accusation of offences punishable under those special 
statutes, for example Section 18A of the Schedule Caste 
and Schedule Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 
1989 bars exercise of powers under Section 438 of the 
Cr.P.C.  
 
9. The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Sushila A 
Aggarwal and others (supra), while dealing with the 
scope of Section 438 of the Cr.P.C has followed the 
decision in the case of Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and 
others Versus State of Punjab and regarding the bar or 
restriction on the exercise of power to grant anticipatory 
bail, the Hon’ble Apex Court has held as follows:  
 
“62. […] In this background, it is important to 
notice that the only bar, or restriction, imposed by 
Parliament upon the exercise of the power (to 
grant anticipatory bail) is by way of a positive 
restriction i.e. in the case where accused are 
alleged to have committed offences punishable 
under Section 376 (3) or Section 376-AB or 
Section 376-DA or Section 376-DB of the Penal 
Code. In other words, Parliament has now denied 
jurisdiction of the court (i.e. Court of Session and 
High Courts) from granting anticipatory bail to 
those accused of such offences. The amendment 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 73 
 
[Code of Criminal Procedure Amendment Act, 
2018 introduced Section 438 (4)] reads as follows:  
 
“438. (4) Nothing in this section shall apply 
to any case involving the arrest of any 
person on accusation of having committed 
an offence under sub-section (3) of Section 
376 or Section 376-AB or Section 376-DA 
or Section 376-DB of the Indian Penal 
Code”.  
 
63. Clearly, therefore, where Parliament wished to 
exclude or restrict the power of courts, under 
Section 438 of the Code, it did so in categorical 
terms. Parliament’s omission to restrict the right 
of citizens, accused of other offences from the right 
to seek anticipatory bail, necessarily leads one to 
assume that neither a blanket restriction can be 
read into by this Court, nor can inflexible 
guidelines in the exercise of discretion, be insisted 
upon- that would amount to judicial legislation”. 
 
 
10. Similarly, the Hon’ble Apex Court has made 
following observations in the case of Shri Gurbaksh 
Singh Sibbia and others (supra):  
 
“39. Fifthly, the provisions of Section 438 cannot 
be invoked after the arrest of the accused. The 
grant of “anticipatory bail” to an accused who is 
under arrest involves a contradiction in terms, 
insofar as the offence or offences for which he is 
arrested, are concerned. After arrest, the accused 
must seek his remedy under Section 437 or Section 
439 of the Code, if he wants to be released on bail 
in respect of the offence or offences for which he is 
arrested”.  
 
 
11. It is thus very clear, according to Hon’ble Apex 
Court, that anticipatory bail will not be maintainable in 
case a person is in custody in the same offence for which 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 73 
 
pre-arrest bail is sought, the restriction, if any, upon 
maintainability of prearrest bail will be there only if a 
person is in custody in that particular offence itself. 
 
12. From the above pronouncements, two things are 
clear. First, there is no such bar in Cr.P.C or any statute 
which prohibits Session or the High Court from 
entertaining and deciding an anticipatory bail, when 
such person is already in judicial or police custody in 
some other offence. Second, the restriction cannot be 
stretched to include arrest made in any other offence as 
that would be against the purport of the provision.   
 
xxx xxx xxx  
14. I may point out here that the case of Narinderjit 
Singh Sahni and Another (supra) was in respect of 
maintainability of Article 32 wherein relief in the nature 
of Section 438 was sought. Even, the said judgment does 
not hold in very clear terms that a person arrested in 
one offence cannot seek the relief provided under 
Section 438 of Cr.PC in another offence merely on the 
ground that he stands arrested in another district 
offence.   
 
15. In my considered opinion, there was no proper 
interpretation of Section 438 of the Cr.PC at the hands 
of learned Additional Sessions Judge. Accused has 
every right, even if he is arrested in number of cases, to 
move in each of offence registered against him 
irrespective of the fact that he is already in custody but 
for different offence, for the reason that the application 
(s) will have to be heard and decided on merits 
independent of another crime in which he is already in 
custody.  
 
16. One cannot and must not venture, under the garb of 
interpretation, to substantiate its own meaning than the 
plain and simple particular though provided by statute. 
What has not been said cannot be inferred unless the 
provision itself gives room for speculation. If the 
purpose behind the intendment is discernible sans 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 73 
 
obscurity and ambiguity, there is no place for 
supposition.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
14. 
In Sanjay Kumar Sarangi v. State of Odisha reported in 2024 SCC 
OnLine Ori 1334, a learned Single Judge of the High Court of Orissa  
took the view that there is no statutory bar for an accused in custody in 
connection with a case to pray for grant of anticipatory bail in a 
different case registered against him. The court, upon perusal of the 
relevant provisions, took the view that arrest means physical 
confinement of a person with or without the order of the Court. The 
Court noted that Section 167(2) of the CrPC, which governs ‘remand’, 
is applicable to a case where the accused is already arrested, and charge-
sheet has not been filed. The Court observed that there is no specific 
provision in the CrPC which governs a situation where a person is 
required to be arrested/remanded in connection with a new case when 
he is already in custody in connection with some other case and in such 
a situation, the accused can only be remanded in connection with the 
new case on the order of the competent court. Answering the question 
whether such order of remand by the court can be equated with an act 
of arrest, the Court held that the purpose of remand as in the case of 
arrest is to collect evidence during investigation, and thus both amount 
to one and the same thing.  

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 73 
 
15. 
The High Court proceeded to explain that if a new case is registered 
against a person already in custody in connection with one case, the 
police in such circumstances can either seek an order of remand from 
the court or arrest the accused, as and when he is released from custody 
in connection with the other case. The Court explained that it is only in 
the latter scenario that an order of anticipatory bail under Section 438 
of the CrPC would become effective because it is only after the accused 
is released from custody that he can be arrested in relation to the 
subsequent case. The Court said that the anticipatory bail operates at a 
future time. After being released from custody in the former case, if he 
is sought to be arrested in relation to the subsequent case, there is no 
reason why he should be precluded from approaching the court 
beforehand with the necessary protection in the form of anticipatory 
bail.  
 
16. 
The court clarified that a person cannot be arrested if he is already in 
custody in connection with some case, however, his right to obtain an 
anticipatory bail in connection with a different case cannot be curtailed 
having regard to the scheme of the CrPC. The anticipatory bail, if 
granted, shall however be effective only if he is arrested in connection 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 73 
 
with the subsequent case consequent upon his release from custody in 
the previous case. 
 
17. 
Lastly, the Court observed that there is nothing in the CrPC which takes 
away the right of the accused to seek his liberty or of the investigating 
agency to investigate the case only because the accused is in custody in 
a different case. The Court observed that an accused can exercise his 
right of moving the court for anticipatory bail just as the investigating 
agency can exercise its right to investigate the subsequent case by 
seeking remand of the accused from the court having jurisdiction over 
the case. Both the rights can co-exist and operate at their respective and 
appropriate times. The court held that if the application of the 
investigating agency, seeking remand of the accused whilst he is in 
custody in connection with the former case, is allowed, the accused can 
no longer pray for anticipatory bail in the subsequent case, as then he 
could be said to be technically in custody in connection with the 
subsequent case also. In such a scenario, the accused can only seek 
regular bail. The Court further elaborated that the grant of anticipatory 
bail does not clothe the accused with a licence to avoid investigation or 
claim any immunity therefrom. 
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 73 
 
18. 
We may refer to some of the relevant observations made by the learned 
Single Judge as under: 
 
 
“13. To illustrate, a person is in custody in connection 
with a case and a new case is registered against him for 
commission of some other offence. Two recourses are 
available to the police in such a situation - firstly to seek 
an order of remand from the Court if the presence of the 
accused is required for investigation or secondly, to 
arrest him, as and when he is released from custody in 
connection with the previous case. It is only in the 
second scenario that an order of anticipatory bail can 
become effective because only then can he be ‘arrested’. 
It is trite law that the distinction between an order in 
case of custody bail and anticipatory bail is that the 
former is passed when the accused is already arrested 
and in custody and operates as soon as it is passed 
(subject to submission of bail bonds etc), while the latter 
operates at a future time-when the person not being in 
custody, is arrested. This, according to the considered 
view of this Court, is the crux of the issue. To amplify, 
since an order granting anticipatory bail becomes 
effective only when the person is arrested and as it is not 
possible to arrest a person already in custody, it follows 
that when, on being released from custody in the former 
case, he is sought to be arrested in the new case, there 
is no reason why he shall be restrained from moving the 
Court beforehand to arm himself with necessary 
protection in the form of anticipatory bail to protect 
himself from such a situation. If such an order is passed 
by the Court in his favour, it shall become effective if 
and when he is arrested as normally happens. The only 
catch is, he cannot be arrested as long as he is in custody 
in the first-mentioned case. So, his right to obtain an 
order in the new case beforehand that can be effective 
only upon his release from the first-mentioned case 
cannot be denied under the scheme of the Code. 
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 73 
 
14. Another 
aspect 
must 
also 
be 
taken 
into 
consideration - when a person is in custody in 
connection with a case and a new case gets registered 
against him, it is, for all practical purposes a separate 
case altogether. This implies all rights conferred by the 
statute on the accused consequent upon registration of 
a case against him as well as the investigating agency 
are independently protected. There is no provision in the 
Code that takes away the right of the accused to seek his 
liberty or of the investigating agency to investigate into 
the case only because he is in custody in another case. 
As already stated, the accused can exercise his right of 
moving the court for anticipatory bail which would of 
course be effective only upon his release from the earlier 
case and in the event of his arrest in the subsequent case. 
Similarly, the right of the investigating agency to 
investigate/interrogate in the subsequent case can be 
exercised by seeking remand of the accused from the 
court in the subsequent case. Both these scenarios are 
not mutually exclusive and can operate at their 
respective and appropriate times. The investigating 
agency, if it feels necessary for the purpose of 
interrogation/investigation can seek remand of the 
accused whilst he is in custody in connection with the 
previous case and if such prayer is allowed, the accused 
can no longer pray for grant of anticipatory bail as then 
he would be technically in custody in connection with 
the subsequent case also. Then, he can only seek regular 
or custody bail. It is also to be considered that if the 
prosecution has the power to register a case against a 
person who is in custody in connection with another 
case how can the accused be deprived of his right to seek 
protection of his liberty in such case? This would 
militate 
against 
the 
very 
principle 
underlying 
Article 21 of the Constitution as also Section 438 of the 
Code. 
 
15. This takes the court to the reasoning adopted by the 
learned single judge of Rajasthan High Court in the 
case of Sunil Kallani (supra) that “…..the concerned 
Police Investigating Agency where FIRs have been 
registered would be prevented from conducting 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 73 
 
individual investigation and making recoveries as 
anticipatory bail once granted would continue to 
operate without limitation as laid down by the Apex 
Court in Sushila Aggarwal, (supra)….” 
 
With great respect, this Court is unable to persuade 
itself to agree with the above-quoted reasoning in view 
of the fact that grant of anticipatory bail does not and 
cannot grant the accused a licence to avoid 
investigation or clothe him with any immunity there-
from. In fact, sub-section (2) of Section 438 holds the 
answer to this question as follows: 
 
 
(2) When the High Court or the Court of Session 
makes a direction under sub-section (1), it may 
include such conditions in such directions in the 
light of the facts of the particular case, as it may 
think fit, including- 
 
 
(i) a condition that the person shall make 
himself available for interrogation by a 
police officer as and when required; 
 
 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
It is needless to mention that an order under subsection 
(1) can be passed only upon hearing the Public 
Prosecutor. Hence, the prosecution can always insist 
upon inclusion of such a condition by the court in the 
order grating anticipatory bail. And in so far as 
‘recoveries’ are concerned, as already stated, it is 
always open to the investigating agency to pray for 
remand of the accused, as long as he is in custody, for 
such purpose and an order granting anticipatory bail 
has not been passed. […] 
 
xxx   
xxx 
 
 xxx  
 
17. From a conspectus of the analysis made 
hereinbefore thus, this Court holds as follows: 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 73 
 
 
(i) There is no statutory bar for an accused in custody in 
connection with a case to pray for grant of anticipatory 
bail in another case registered against him;  
 
(ii) Anticipatory bail, if granted, shall however be 
effective only if he is arrested in connection with the 
subsequent case consequent upon his release from 
custody in the previous case;  
 
(iii) The investigating agency, if it feels necessary for the 
purpose of interrogation/investigation can seek remand 
of the accused whilst he is in custody in connection with 
the previous case and in which no order granting 
anticipatory bail has yet been passed. If such order 
granting remand is passed, it would no longer be open 
to the accused to seek anticipatory bail but he can seek 
regular bail. 
 
18. In the cases at hand, the prosecution has not sought 
for nor obtained any order from the Court for remand 
of the petitioners in the subsequent cases registered 
against them. Thus, this Court holds that the 
Anticipatory Bail applications are maintainable...” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
 
19. 
Thus, it appears from the aforesaid discussion that there are divergent 
opinions expressed by different High Courts of the country.  The 
Rajasthan, Delhi and Allahabad High Courts have taken the view that 
an anticipatory bail application would not be maintainable if the 
accused is already arrested and is in custody in connection with some 
offence. On the other hand, the Bombay and Orissa High Courts have 
taken the view that even if the accused is in custody in connection with 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 73 
 
one case, anticipatory bail application at his instance in connection with 
a different case is maintainable.  
D. 
ANALYSIS  
 
i. Evolution of the concept of anticipatory bail  
 
20. 
The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (for short, “the 1898 Code”) 
did not contain any specific provision analogous to Section 438 of the 
CrPC. In Amir Chand v. The Crown reported in 1949 SCC OnLine 
Punj 20, the question before the Full Bench was whether Section 498 
of the 1898 Code empowered the High Court or the Court of Session to 
grant bail to a person who had not been placed under restraint by arrest 
or otherwise. The Full Bench answered the reference as under: 
“…The very notion of bail presupposes some form of 
previous restraint. Therefore, bail cannot be granted to 
a person who has not been arrested and for whose arrest 
no warrants have been issued. Section 498, Criminal 
Procedure Code, does not permit the High Court or the 
Court of Session to grant bail to anyone whose case is 
not covered by sections 496 and 497, Criminal 
Procedure Code. It follows, therefore, that bail can only 
be allowed to a person who has been arrested or 
detained without warrant or appears or is brought 
before a Court. Such person must be liable to arrest and 
must surrender himself before the question of bail can 
be considered. In the case of a person who is not under 
arrest, but for whose arrest warrants have been issued, 
bail can be allowed if he appears in Court and 
surrenders himself. No bail can be allowed to a person 
at liberty for whose arrest no warrants have been issued. 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 73 
 
The petitioners in the present case are, therefore, not 
entitled to bail. The question referred to the Full Bench 
is, therefore, answered in the negative.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
21. 
Under the 1898 Code, the concept of anticipatory or pre-arrest bail was 
absent and the need for introduction of a new provision in the CrPC 
empowering the High Court and Court of Session to grant anticipatory 
bail was pointed out by the 41st Law Commission of India in its report 
dated September 24, 1969. It observed thus in para 39.9 of the said report 
(Volume I): 
“Anticipatory bail 
39.9 The suggestion for directing the release of a person 
on bail prior to his arrest (commonly known as 
“anticipatory bail”) was carefully considered by us. 
Though there is a conflict of judicial opinion about the 
power of a Court to grant anticipatory bail, the majority 
view is that there is no such power under the existing 
provisions of the Code. The necessity for granting 
anticipatory bail arises mainly because sometimes 
influential persons try to implicate their rivals in false 
causes for the purpose of disgracing them or for other 
purposes by getting detained in jail for some days. In 
recent times, the accentuation of political rivalry, this 
tendency is showing signs of steady increase. Apart from 
false cases, where there are reasonable grounds for 
holding that a person accused of an offence is not likely 
to abscond, or otherwise misuse his liberty while on 
bail, there seems no justification to require him first to 
submit to custody, remain in prison for some days and 
then apply for bail”  
We recommend the acceptance of this suggestion. We 
are further of the view that this special power should be 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 73 
 
conferred only on the High Court and the Court of 
Session, and that the order should take effect at the time 
of arrest or thereafter. 
In order to settle the details of this suggestion, the 
following draft of a new section is placed for 
consideration: 
‘497-A. (1) When any person has a reasonable 
apprehension that he would be arrested on an 
accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, 
he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session 
for a direction under this section. That court may, in its 
discretion, direct that in the event of his arrest, he shall 
be released on bail. 
(2) A Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence against 
that person shall, while taking steps under Section 
204(1), either issue summons or a bailable warrant as 
indicated in the direction of the court under sub-section 
(1). 
(3) If any person in respect of whom such a direction is 
made is arrested without warrant by an officer in charge 
of a police station on an accusation of having committed 
that offence, and is prepared either at the time of arrest 
or at any time while in the custody of such officer to give 
bail, such person shall be released on bail.’ 
We considered carefully the question of laying down in 
the statute certain conditions under which alone 
anticipatory bail could be granted. But we found that it 
may not be practicable to exhaustively enumerate those 
conditions; and moreover, the laying down of such 
conditions may be construed as prejudging (partially at 
any rate) the whole case. Hence we would leave it to the 
discretion of the court and prefer not to fetter such 
discretion in the statutory provision itself. Superior 
courts will, undoubtedly, exercise their discretion 
properly, and not make any observations in the order 
granting anticipatory bail which will have a tendency to 
prejudice the fair trial of the accused.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 73 
 
22. 
The suggestion made by the Law Commission was, in principle, 
accepted by the Central Government which introduced clause 447 in the 
Draft Bill of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1970 with a view to confer 
express power on the High Court and the Court of Session to grant 
anticipatory bail. The said clause of the draft bill was enacted with 
certain modifications and became Section 438 of the CrPC.  
23. 
The Law Commission, in paragraph 31 of its 48th Report (1972), made 
the following comments on the aforesaid clause: 
“The Bill introduces a provision for the grant of 
anticipatory bail. This is substantially in accordance 
with the recommendation made by the previous 
Commission. We agree that this would be a useful 
addition, though we must add that it is in very 
exceptional cases that such a power should be 
exercised. 
We are further of the view that in order to ensure that 
the provision is not put to abuse at the instance of 
unscrupulous petitioners, the final order should be 
made only after notice to the Public Prosecutor. The 
initial order should only be an interim one. Further, the 
relevant section should make it clear that the direction 
can be issued only for reasons to be recorded, and if the 
court is satisfied that such a direction is necessary in the 
interests of justice. 
It will also be convenient to provide that notice of the 
interim order as well as of the final orders will be given 
to the Superintendent of Police forthwith.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 73 
 
24. 
Section 438 of the CrPC reads thus: 
“Discretion for grant of bail to person apprehending 
arrest.─(1) Where any person has reason to believe that 
he may be arrested on accusation of having committed 
a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court 
or the Court of Session for a direction under this section 
that in the event of such arrest he shall be released on 
bail; and that Court may, after taking into 
consideration, inter alia, the following factors, namely:-
-- 
(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation; 
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as 
to whether he has previously undergone imprisonment 
on conviction by a Court in respect of any cognizable 
offence; 
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; 
and. 
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object 
of injuring or humiliating the applicant by having him 
so arrested, 
either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim 
order for the grant of anticipatory bail: 
Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may 
be, the Court of Session, has not passed any interim order 
under this sub-section or has rejected the application for 
grant of anticipatory bail, it shall be open to an officer 
in-charge of a police station to arrest, without warrant 
the applicant on the basis of the accusation apprehended 
in such application. 
(1A) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub-
section (1), it shall forthwith cause a notice being not less 
than seven days notice, together with a copy of such 
order to be served on the Public Prosecutor and the 
Superintendent of Police, with a view to give the Public 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 73 
 
Prosecutor a reasonable opportunity of being heard 
when the application shall be finally heard by the Court, 
(1B) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory 
bail shall be obligatory at the time of final hearing of the 
application and passing of final order by the Court, if on 
an application made to it by the Public Prosecutor, the 
Court considers such presence necessary in the interest 
of justice. 
(2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes 
a direction under sub-section (1), it may include such 
conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of 
the particular case, as it may think fit, including-- 
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself 
available for interrogation by a police officer as and 
when required; 
(ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or 
indirectly, make any inducement, threat or promise to 
any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to 
dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or 
to any police officer; 
(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India 
without the previous permission of the Court; 
(iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub-
section (3) of section 437, as if the bail were granted 
under that section. 
(3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant 
by an officer in charge of a police station on such 
accusation, and is prepared either at the time of arrest or 
at any time while in the custody of such officer to give 
bail, he shall be released on bail; and if a Magistrate 
taking cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant 
should be issued in the first instance against that person, 
he shall issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the 
direction of the Court under sub-section (1). 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 73 
 
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any case 
involving the arrest of any person on accusation of 
having committed an offence under sub-section (3) of 
section 376 or section 376AB or section 376DA or 
section 376DB of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).” 
 
25. 
The Statement of Objects and Reasons accompanying the bill for 
introducing Section 438 in the CrPC indicates that the legislature felt that 
it was imperative to evolve a device by which an alleged accused is not 
compelled to face ignominy and disgrace at the instance of influential 
people who try to implicate their rivals in false cases. The purpose behind 
incorporating Section 438 in the CrPC was to recognise the importance 
of personal liberty and freedom in a free and democratic country. A 
careful reading of this section reveals that the legislature was keen to 
ensure respect for the personal liberty of individuals by pressing in 
service the age-old principle that an individual is presumed to be 
innocent till he is found guilty by the court. [See: Siddharam 
Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra and Others reported in 
(2011) 1 SCC 694]. 
26. 
In the context of anticipatory bail, this Court, in Siddharam Satlingappa 
Mhetre (supra), discussed the relevance and importance of personal 
liberty as under: 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 73 
 
“36. All human beings are born with some unalienable 
rights like life, liberty and pursuit of happiness. The 
importance of these natural rights can be found in the 
fact that these are fundamental for their proper 
existence and no other right can be enjoyed without the 
presence of right to life and liberty. Life bereft of liberty 
would be without honour and dignity and it would lose 
all significance and meaning and the life itself would not 
be worth living. That is why “liberty” is called the very 
quintessence of a civilised existence. 
37. Origin of “liberty” can be traced in the ancient 
Greek civilisation. The Greeks distinguished between 
the liberty of the group and the liberty of the individual. 
In 431 BC, an Athenian statesman described that the 
concept of liberty was the outcome of two notions, 
firstly, protection of group from attack and secondly, the 
ambition of the group to realise itself as fully as possible 
through the self-realisation of the individual by way of 
human reason. Greeks assigned the duty of protecting 
their liberties to the State. According to Aristotle, as the 
State was a means to fulfil certain fundamental needs of 
human nature and was a means for development of 
individuals' personality in association of fellow citizens 
so it was natural and necessary to man. Plato found his 
“republic” as the best source for the achievement of the 
self-realisation of the people. 
xxx 
 
 xxx  
 
xxx 
43. A distinguished former Attorney General for India, 
M.C. 
Setalvad 
in 
his 
treatise War 
and 
Civil 
Liberties observed 
that 
the 
French 
Convention 
stipulates common happiness as the end of the society, 
whereas Bentham postulates the greatest happiness of 
the greatest number as the end of law. Article 19 of the 
Indian Constitution averts to freedom and it enumerates 
certain rights regarding individual freedom. These 
rights are vital and most important freedoms which lie 
at the very root of liberty. He further observed that the 
concept of civil liberty is essentially rooted in the 
philosophy of individualism. According to this doctrine, 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 73 
 
the highest development of the individual and the 
enrichment of his personality are the true function and 
end of the State. It is only when the individual has 
reached the highest state of perfection and evolved what 
is best in him that society and the State can reach their 
goal of perfection. In brief, according to this doctrine, 
the State exists mainly, if not solely, for the purpose of 
affording the individual freedom and assistance for the 
attainment of his growth and perfection. The State exists 
for the benefit of the individual. 
xxx 
 
 
 xxx  
 
 xxx 
49. An eminent English Judge, Lord Alfred Denning 
observed: 
“By personal freedom I mean freedom of every 
law-abiding citizen to think what he will, to say 
what he will, and to go where he will on his 
lawful occasion without hindrance from any 
person…. It must be matched, of course, with 
social security by which I mean the peace and 
good order of the community in which we live.” 
50. An eminent former Judge of this Court, Justice H.R. 
Khanna in a speech as published in 2 IJIL, Vol. 18 
(1978), p. 133 observed that 
“… Liberty postulates the creation of a climate 
wherein there is no suppression of the human 
spirits, wherein, there is no denial of the 
opportunity for the full growth of human 
personality, wherein head is held high and there 
is no servility of the human mind or enslavement 
of the human body.”” 
 
27. 
In Kartar Singh (supra), a Constitution Bench of this Court held that 
there is no constitutional or fundamental right to seek anticipatory bail. 
In the said case, this Court was called upon to consider the 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 73 
 
constitutional validity of sub-section (7) of Section 20 of the Terrorists 
and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987. The Constitution 
Bench also looked into the validity of Section 9 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure (U.P. Amendment) Act, 1976 which deleted the operation of 
Section 438 of the CrPC in the State of Uttar Pradesh with effect from 
28.11.1975. In the aforesaid context, Justice Ratnavel Pandian speaking 
for himself and on behalf of four other Judges observed as under: 
“326. The High Court of Punjab and Haryana in Bimal 
Kaur [AIR 1988 P&H 95 : (1988) 93 Punj LR 189 : 
1988 Cri LJ 169] has examined a similar challenge as 
to the vires of Section 20(7) of TADA Act, and held thus: 
 
“In my opinion Section 20(7) is intra vires the 
provision of Article 14 of the Constitution in that 
the persons charged with the commission of 
terrorist act fall in a category which is distinct 
from the class of persons charged with commission 
of offences under the Penal Code and the offences 
created by other statutes. The persons indulging in 
terrorist act form a member of well organised 
secret movement. The enforcing agencies find it 
difficult to lay their hands on them. Unless the 
Police is able to secure clue as to who are the 
persons behind this movement, how it is organised, 
who are its active members and how they operate, 
it cannot hope to put an end to this movement and 
restore public order. The Police can secure this 
knowledge only from the arrested terrorists after 
effective interrogation. If the real offenders 
apprehending 
arrest 
are 
able 
to 
secure 
anticipatory bail then the police shall virtually be 
denied the said opportunity.” 
 
327. It is needless to emphasise that both the Parliament 
as well as the State Legislatures have got legislative 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 73 
 
competence to enact any law relating to the Code of 
Criminal Procedure. 
No 
provision 
relating to 
anticipatory bail was in the old Code and it was 
introduced for the first time in the present Code of 1973 
on the suggestion made of the Forty-first Report of the 
Law Commission and the Joint Committee Report. It 
may be noted that this section is completely omitted in 
the State of Uttar Pradesh by Section 9 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 
1976 (U.P. Act No. 16 of 1976) w.e.f. 28-11-1975. In the 
State of West Bengal, proviso is inserted to Section 
438(1) of the Code w.e.f. 24-12-1988 to the effect that 
no final order shall be made on an application filed by 
the accused praying for anticipatory bail in relation to 
an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life 
or imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years, 
without giving the State not less than seven days' notice 
to present its case. In the State of Orissa, by Section 2 of 
Orissa Act 11 of 1988 w.e.f. 28-6-1988, a proviso is 
added to Section 438 stating that no final order shall be 
made on an application for anticipatory bail without 
giving the State notice to present its case for offence 
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or 
imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years. 
 
xxx 
 
 xxx  
 xxx  
 
329. Further, at the risk of repetition, we may add that 
Section 438 is a new provision incorporated in the 
present Code creating a new right. If that new right is 
taken away, can it be said that the removal of Section 
438 
is 
violative 
of 
Article 
21. 
In Gurbaksh 
Singh [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465 : (1980) 
3 SCR 383] , there is no specific statement that the 
removal of Section 438 at any time will amount to 
violation of Article 21 of the Constitution.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
28. 
The aforesaid decision was discussed in the course of the hearing of this 
case for the limited proposition that there is no constitutional or 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 of 73 
 
fundamental right to seek anticipatory bail. Section 438 of the CrPC is 
just a statutory right. 
 
29. 
In Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia (supra), a Constitution Bench of this Court 
(speaking through Justice Y.V. Chandrachud, Chief Justice, as his 
Lordship then was) undertook an extensive analysis of the provision of 
anticipatory bail. This Constitution Bench decision can be termed as a 
profound and passionate essay on how personal liberty under the 
Constitution can be consistent with needs of investigations and why this 
Court should avoid any generalisation that would take away the 
discretion of the courts dealing with a new set of facts in each case.  
Chief Justice Y.V. Chandrachud observed thus: 
“8. […] Attendant upon such investigations, when the 
police are not free agents within their sphere of duty, is 
a great amount of inconvenience, harassment and 
humiliation. That can even take the form of the parading 
of a respectable person in handcuffs, apparently on way 
to a Court of justice. The foul deed is done when an 
adversary is exposed to social ridicule and obloquy, no 
matter when and whether a conviction is secured or is 
at all possible. It is in order to meet such situations, 
though not limited to these contingencies, that the power 
to grant anticipatory bail was introduced into the Code 
of 1973.   
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
12. […] The legislature conferred a wide discretion on 
the High Court and the Court of Session to grant 
anticipatory bail because it evidently felt, firstly, that it 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 of 73 
 
would be difficult to enumerate the conditions under 
which anticipatory bail should or should not be granted 
and secondly, because the intention was to allow the 
higher courts in the echelon a somewhat free hand in the 
grant of relief in the nature of anticipatory, bail. That is 
why, departing from the terms of Sections 437 and 439, 
Section 438(1) uses the language that the High Court or 
the Court of Session “may, if it thinks fit” direct that the 
applicant be released on bail. Sub-section (2) of Section 
438 is a further and clearer manifestation of the same 
legislative intent to confer a wide discretionary power 
to grant anticipatory bail. It provides that the High 
Court or the Court of Session, while issuing a direction 
for the grant of anticipatory bail, “may include such 
conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of 
the particular case, as it may think fit”, including the 
conditions which are set out in Clauses (i) to (iv) of Sub-
section(2). 
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx  
 
14. Generalisations on matters which rest on discretion 
and the attempt to discover formulae of universal 
application when facts are bound to differ from case to 
case frustrate the very purpose of conferring discretion. 
No two cases are alike on facts and therefore, courts 
have to be allowed a little free play in the joints if the 
conferment of discretionary power is to be meaningful. 
There is no risk involved in entrusting a wide discretion 
to the Court of Session and the High Court in granting 
anticipatory bail because, firstly, these are higher 
courts manned by experienced persons, secondly, their 
orders are not final but are open to appellate or 
revisional scrutiny and above all because, discretion 
has always to be exercised by courts judicially and not 
according to whim, caprice or fancy. On the other hand, 
there is a risk in foreclosing categories of cases in which 
anticipatory bail may be allowed because life throws up 
unforeseen possibilities and offers new challenges. 
Judicial discretion has to be free enough to be able to 
take these possibilities in its stride and to meet these 
challenges.   

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 of 73 
 
 
15. […] While laying down cast-iron rules in a matter 
like granting anticipatory bail, as the High Court has 
done, it is apt to be overlooked that even judges can have 
but an imperfect awareness of the needs of new 
situations. Life is never static and every situation has to 
be assessed in the context of emerging concerns as and 
when it arises.” 
 
30. 
As regards making out a ‘special case’ to seek anticipatory bail, this 
Court in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia (supra) said: 
“21. […] A wise exercise of judicial power inevitably 
takes care of the evil consequences which are likely to 
flow out of its intemperate use. Every kind of judicial 
discretion, whatever may be the nature of the matter in 
regard to which it is required to be exercised, has to be 
used with due care and caution. In fact, an awareness of 
the context in which the discretion is required to be 
exercised 
and 
of 
the 
reasonably 
foreseeable 
consequences of its use, is the hallmark of a prudent 
exercise of judicial discretion. One ought not to make a 
bugbear of the power to grant anticipatory bail. 
xxx 
                xxx                
xxx  
27. […] An accused person who enjoys freedom is in a 
much better position to look after his case and to 
properly defend himself than if he were in custody. As a 
presumably innocent person he is therefore entitled to 
freedom and every opportunity look after his own case. 
A presumably innocent person must have his freedom to 
enable him to establish his innocence.”  
 
31. 
In Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia (supra), this Court emphasized that the 
applicant must have a tangible reason to believe. Vague apprehension 
will not do. Secondly, it held that the High Court or the Court of Session 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 of 73 
 
should not ask an applicant to go before the Magistrate to try his luck 
under Section 437 of the CrPC. It was also observed that once the 
accused is arrested, Section 438 of the CrPC ceases to play any role 
with reference to the offence or offences for which he is arrested. This 
Court also cautioned against passing a blanket order for anticipatory 
bail.  
 
32. 
The following principles of law as regards the grant of anticipatory bail 
can be discerned from Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia (supra): 
i. 
The applicant must genuinely show the “reason to believe” 
that he may be arrested for a non-bailable offence. Mere 
fear is not belief and the grounds on which the belief of the 
applicant is based must be capable of being examined by 
the Court objectively.  Specific events and facts must be 
disclosed to enable the Court to judge the reasonableness of 
belief or likelihood of arrest, the existence of which is the 
sine qua non in the exercise of the power to grant 
anticipatory bail. 
ii. 
The High Court or the Court of Session must apply its mind 
to the question of anticipatory bail and should not leave it 
to the discretion of the Magistrate under Section 437 CrPC. 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 40 of 73 
 
iii. 
Filing of the FIR is not a condition precedent. However, 
imminence of a likely arrest founded on the reasonable 
belief must be shown. 
iv. 
Anticipatory bail can be granted so long as the applicant is 
not arrested in connection with that case/offence.  
v. 
Section 438 of the CrPC cannot be invoked by the accused 
in respect of the offence(s)/case in which he has been 
arrested. The remedy lies under Section 437 or 439 of the 
CrPC, as the case may be, for the offence for which he is 
arrested.  
vi. 
The normal rule is to not limit the operation of the order in 
relation to a period of time. 
 
33. 
On account of various decisions of benches of lesser strength than in 
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia (supra) taking a view curtailing the scope of 
the findings in the said case, the scope of Section 438 of the CrPC came 
to be considered yet again in Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre (supra). 
A two-Judge Bench in Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre (supra) held 
that the intervening decisions between 1980 and 2011 curtailing the 
scope of Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia (supra) were per incuriam.  
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 41 of 73 
 
34. 
However, since Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre (supra) was delivered 
by a coram of two Judges, the matter again reached the Constitution 
Bench in the judgment rendered in the case of Sushila Aggarwal 
(supra) laying down the following principles: 
i. 
An application for anticipatory bail should be based on 
concrete facts (and not vague or general allegations). It is 
not essential that an application should be moved only after 
an FIR is filed. 
ii. 
It is advisable to issue a notice on the anticipatory bail 
application to the Public Prosecutor. 
iii. 
Nothing in Section 438 of the CrPC compels or obliges 
courts to impose conditions limiting relief in terms of time.  
The courts would be justified – and ought to impose 
conditions spelt out in Section 437(3) of the CrPC [by 
virtue of Section 438(2)]. The need to impose other 
restrictive conditions would have to be judged on a case-to-
case basis. 
iv. 
Courts ought to be generally guided by considerations such 
as the nature and gravity of the offences, the role attributed 
to the applicant, and the facts of the case, while considering 
whether to grant anticipatory bail or not.   

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 42 of 73 
 
v. 
Once granted, Anticipatory bail can, depending on the 
conduct and behaviour of the accused, continue after filing 
of the chargesheet till the end of trial.  
vi. 
An order of anticipatory bail should not be a “blanket” 
order and should be confined to a specific incident.  
vii. 
An order of anticipatory bail does not limit the rights of the 
police to conduct investigation. 
viii. 
The observations in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia (supra) 
regarding “limited custody” or “deemed custody” would be 
sufficient for the purpose of fulfilling the provisions of 
Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
ix. 
The police can seek cancellation of anticipatory bail under 
Section 439(2) of the CrPC.  
x. 
The correctness of an order granting bail can be considered 
by the appellate or superior court.   
 
35. 
The aforesaid principles as regards the grant of anticipatory bail 
discernible from the decision of this Court in Sushila Aggarwal (supra) 
are general and may not have a direct bearing on the question we are 
called upon to consider and answer. What is important to be taken note 
of in the decision in Sushila Aggarwal (supra) is the following:  

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 43 of 73 
 
“62. … In this background, it is important to notice that 
the only bar, or restriction, imposed by Parliament upon 
the exercise of the power (to grant anticipatory bail) is 
by way of a positive restriction i.e. in the case where 
accused are alleged to have committed offences 
punishable under Section 376 (3) or Section 376-AB or 
Section 376-DA or Section 376-DB of the Penal Code. 
In other words, Parliament has now denied jurisdiction 
of the courts (i.e. Court of Session and High Courts) 
from granting anticipatory bail to those accused of such 
offences. […] 
 
63. Clearly, therefore, where Parliament wished to 
exclude or restrict the power of courts, under Section 
438 of the Code, it did so in categorical terms. 
Parliament's omission to restrict the right of citizens, 
accused of other offences from the right to seek 
anticipatory bail, necessarily leads one to assume that 
neither a blanket restriction can be read into by this 
Court, nor can inflexible guidelines in the exercise of 
discretion, be insisted upon-that would amount to 
judicial legislation”. 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
 
36. 
What has been conveyed in the aforesaid decision is that the court, on 
its own, should not try to read any other restriction as regards the 
exercise of its power to consider the plea for grant of anticipatory bail. 
Wherever parliament intends or desires to exclude or restrict the power 
of courts, it does so in categorical terms. This is very much evident from 
the plain reading of sub-section (4) of Section 438 of the CrPC itself. 
The dictum as laid is that the court should not read any blanket 
restriction nor should it insist for some inflexible guidelines as that 
would amount to judicial legislation.    

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 44 of 73 
 
ii. Whether a person, while in custody for a particular offence, can have 
a “reason to believe” that he may be arrested in relation to some other 
non-bailable offence?   
 
37. 
The line of reasoning adopted by the High Court of Rajasthan in Sunil 
Kallani (supra) was that once a person is taken in custody in relation to 
an offence, it is not possible thereafter to arrest him in relation to a 
different offence as one of the essential conditions for arrest is placing 
the body of the accused in custody of the police authorities by means 
of actual touch or confinement. As there cannot be any actual touch or 
confinement while a person is in custody, he cannot have a “reason to 
believe” that he may be arrested in relation to a different offence.  
 
38. 
However, there are two fundamental fallacies in the reasoning adopted 
by the Rajasthan High Court. First, the High Court failed to consider 
the possibility of arrest of the person in custody in relation to a different 
offence immediately after he is set free from the custody in the first 
offence. In such a scenario, if it is held that the application seeking 
anticipatory bail in relation to an offence, filed during the period when 
the applicant is in custody in relation to a different offence, would not 
be maintainable, then it would amount to precluding the applicant from 
availing a statutory remedy which he is otherwise entitled to and which 
he can avail as soon as he is released from custody in the first offence. 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 45 of 73 
 
Thus, in cases where the accused has a “reason to believe” that he may 
be arrested in relation to an offence different from the one in which he 
is in custody immediately upon his release, the view taken by the 
Rajasthan High Court, if allowed to stand, would deprive him of his 
statutory right of seeking anticipatory bail because it is quite possible 
that before such a person is able to exercise the aforesaid right, he may 
be arrested.  
 
39. 
In our opinion, no useful purpose would be served by depriving the 
accused of exercising his statutory right to seek anticipatory bail till his 
release from custody in the first offence. We find force in the 
submission of the respondent that if the accused is not allowed to obtain 
a pre-arrest bail in relation to a different offence, while being in custody 
in one offence, then he may get arrested by the police immediately upon 
his release in the first case, even before he gets the opportunity to 
approach the competent court and file an application for the grant of 
anticipatory bail in relation to the said particular offence. This practical 
shortcoming in the approach taken by the Rajasthan High Court is prone 
to exploitation by investigating agencies for the purpose of putting the 
personal liberty of the accused in peril. 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 46 of 73 
 
40. 
The second fallacy in the reasoning of the High Court is that there can 
be no arrest of an accused in relation to a different offence while he is 
already in custody in relation to some offence. Although there is no 
specific provision in the CrPC which provides for the arrest of an 
accused in relation to an offence while he is already in judicial custody 
in a different offence, yet this Court explained in Central Bureau of 
Investigation, Special Investigation Cell-I, New Delhi v. Anupam J. 
Kulkarni reported in (1992) 3 SCC 141 that even if an accused is in 
judicial custody in connection with the investigation of an earlier case, 
the investigating agency can formally arrest him in connection with his 
involvement in a different case and associate him with the investigation 
of that other case. In other words, this Court clarified that even when a 
person is in judicial custody, he can be shown as arrested in respect of 
any number of other crimes registered elsewhere in the country. 
Reliance was placed by this Court on the decision of Punjab & Haryana 
High Court in S. Harsimran Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 1984 
Cri LJ 253 wherein it was held that there is no inflexible bar under the 
law against the re-arrest of a person who is already in judicial custody 
in relation to a different offence. The High Court held that judicial 
custody could be converted into police custody by an order of the 
Magistrate under Section 167(2) of the CrPC for the purpose of 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 47 of 73 
 
investigating the other offence. The relevant paragraphs of Anupam J. 
Kulkarni (supra) are extracted hereinbelow:   
“11. A question may then arise whether a person 
arrested in respect of an offence alleged to have been 
committed by him during an occurrence can be detained 
again in police custody in respect of another offence 
committed by him in the same case and which fact comes 
to light after the expiry of the period of first fifteen days 
of his arrest. The learned Additional Solicitor-General 
submitted that as a result of the investigation carried on 
and the evidence collected by the police the arrested 
accused may be found to be involved in more serious 
offences than the one for which he was originally 
arrested and that in such a case there is no reason as to 
why the accused who is in magisterial custody should 
not be turned over to police custody at a subsequent 
stage of investigation when the information discloses his 
complicity in more serious offences. We are unable to 
agree. In one occurrence it may so happen that the 
accused might have committed several offences and the 
police may arrest him in connection with one or two 
offences on the basis of the available information and 
obtain police custody. If during the investigation his 
complicity in more serious offences during the same 
occurrence is disclosed that does not authorise the 
police to ask for police custody for a further period after 
the expiry of the first fifteen days. If that is permitted 
then the police can go on adding some offence or the 
other of a serious nature at various stages and seek 
further detention in police custody repeatedly, this 
would defeat the very object underlying Section 167. 
However, we must clarify that this limitation shall not 
apply to a different occurrence in which complicity of 
the arrested accused is disclosed. That would be a 
different transaction and if an accused is in judicial 
custody in connection with one case and to enable the 
police to complete their investigation of the other case 
they can require his detention in police custody for the 
purpose of associating him with the investigation of the 
other case. In such a situation he must be formally 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 48 of 73 
 
arrested in connection with other case and then obtain 
the order of the Magistrate for detention in police 
custody. The learned Additional Solicitor-General 
however strongly relied on some of the observations 
made by Hardy, J. in Mehar Chand case [(1969) 5 DLT 
179] extracted above in support of his contention 
namely that an arrested accused who is in judicial 
custody can be turned over to police custody even after 
the expiry of first fifteen days at a subsequent stage of 
the investigation in the same case if the information 
discloses his complicity in more serious offences. We 
are unable to agree that the mere fact that some more 
offences alleged to have been committed by the arrested 
accused in the same case are discovered in the same 
case would by itself render it to be a different case. All 
these offences including the so-called serious offences 
discovered at a later stage arise out of the same 
transaction in connection with which the accused was 
arrested. Therefore there is a marked difference 
between 
the 
two 
situations. 
The 
occurrences 
constituting two different transactions give rise to two 
different cases and the exercise of power under Sections 
167(1) and (2) should be in consonance with the object 
underlying the said provision in respect of each of those 
occurrences which constitute two different cases. 
Investigation in one specific case cannot be the same as 
in the other. Arrest and detention in custody in the 
context of Sections 167(1) and (2) of the Code has to be 
truly viewed with regard to the investigation of that 
specific case in which the accused person has been 
taken into custody. In S. Harsimran Singh v. State of 
Punjab [1984 Cri LJ 253 : ILR (1984) 2 P&H 139] a 
Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court 
considered the question whether the limit of police 
custody exceeding fifteen days as prescribed by Section 
167(2) is applicable only to a single case or is attracted 
to a series of different cases requiring investigation 
against the same accused and held thus: (p. 257, para 
10-A) 
“We see no inflexible bar against a person in 
custody with regard to the investigation of a 
particular offence being either re-arrested for the 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 49 of 73 
 
purpose of the investigation of an altogether 
different offence. To put it in other words, there is 
no insurmountable hurdle in the conversion of 
judicial custody into police custody by an order of 
the Magistrate under Section 167(2) of the Code 
for investigating another offence. Therefore, a re-
arrest or second arrest in a different case is not 
necessarily beyond the ken of law.” 
 
This view of the Division Bench of the Punjab and 
Haryana High Court appears to be practicable and also 
conforms to Section 167. We may, however, like to make 
it explicit that such re-arrest or second arrest and 
seeking police custody after the expiry of the period of 
first fifteen days should be with regard to the 
investigation of a different case other than the specific 
one in respect of which the accused is already in 
custody. A literal construction of Section 167(2) to the 
effect that a fresh remand for police custody of a person 
already in judicial custody during investigation of a 
specific case cannot under any circumstances be issued, 
would seriously hamper the very investigation of the 
other case the importance of which needs no special 
emphasis. The procedural law is meant to further the 
ends of justice and not to frustrate the same. It is an 
accepted rule that an interpretation which furthers the 
ends of justice should be preferred. It is true that the 
police custody is not the be-all and end-all of the whole 
investigation but yet it is one of its primary requisites 
particularly in the investigation of serious and heinous 
crimes. The legislature also noticed this and permitted 
limited police custody. The period of first fifteen days 
should naturally apply in respect of the investigation of 
that specific case for which the accused is held in 
custody. But such custody cannot further held to be a 
bar for invoking a fresh remand to such custody like 
police custody in respect of an altogether different case 
involving the same accused. 
 
xxx xxx xxx 
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 50 of 73 
 
13. … There cannot be any detention in the police 
custody after the expiry of first fifteen days even in a 
case where some more offences either serious or 
otherwise committed by him in the same transaction 
come to light at a later stage. But this bar does not apply 
if the same arrested accused is involved in a different 
case arising out of a different transaction. Even if he is 
in judicial custody in connection with the investigation 
of the earlier case he can formally be arrested regarding 
his involvement in the different case and associate him 
with the investigation of that other case and the 
Magistrate can act as provided under Section 167(2) 
and the proviso and can remand him to such custody as 
mentioned therein during the first period of fifteen days 
and thereafter in accordance with the proviso as 
discussed above. …” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
41. 
It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that a person already in 
judicial custody in relation to an offence, cannot have a “reason to 
believe” that he may be arrested on the accusation of having committed 
a different offence. However, we do not find any merit in the aforesaid 
submission. There are two ways by which a person, who is already in 
custody, may be arrested –  
 
a. First, no sooner than he is released from custody in connection 
with the first case, the police officer can arrest and take him into 
custody in relation to a different case; and  
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 51 of 73 
 
b. Secondly, even before he is set free from the custody in the first 
case, the police officer investigating the other offence can 
formally arrest him and thereafter obtain a Prisoner Transit 
Warrant (“P.T. Warrant”) under Section 267 of the CrPC from 
the jurisdictional magistrate for the other offence, and 
thereafter, on production before the magistrate, pray for 
remand;  
OR 
Instead of effecting formal arrest, the investigating officer can 
make an application before the jurisdictional magistrate seeking 
a P.T. Warrant for the production of the accused from prison. If 
the conditions required under 267 of the CrPC are satisfied, the 
jurisdictional magistrate shall issue a P.T. Warrant for the 
production of the accused in court. When the accused is so 
produced before the court in pursuance of the P.T. Warrant, the 
investigating officer will be at liberty to make a request for 
remanding the accused, either to police custody or judicial 
custody, as provided in Section 167(1) of the CrPC. At that 
time, the jurisdictional magistrate shall consider the request of 
the investigating officer, peruse the case diary and the 
representation of the accused and then, pass an appropriate 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 52 of 73 
 
order, either remanding the accused or declining to remand the 
accused. [See: State v. K.N. Nehru reported in 2011 SCC 
OnLine Mad 1984] 
 
42. 
As arrest in both the aforesaid circumstances is permissible in law, it 
would be incorrect to hold that a person, while in custody, cannot have 
a “reason to believe” that he may be arrested in relation to a different 
offence. As a logical extension of this, it can also be said that when 
procedural law doesn’t preclude the investigating agency from arresting 
a person in relation to a different offence while he is already under 
custody in some previous offence, the accused too cannot be precluded 
of his statutory right to apply for anticipatory bail only on the ground 
that he is in custody in relation to a different offence.  
   
43. 
The procedure for arrest of the accused in relation to an offence after 
he is released from custody in the first offence would be similar to the 
procedure of arrest which is required to be followed in any other 
cognizable offence. However, we think it is necessary to shed some 
light on the procedure to effect arrest in the second category of cases, 
that is, where the investigating agency arrests the accused in relation to 
an offence while he is in custody in relation to a different offence.   

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 53 of 73 
 
44. 
As discussed in the preceding paragraphs, an accused could be arrested 
either when he is free or when he is in custody in some offence. 
Similarly, an arrest can be made by a police officer either without a 
warrant or with a warrant issued by a court. Thus, the following 
possibilities emerge:  
a. If an accused is arrested without a warrant while he is free and 
not in custody, then he has to be produced before the nearest 
Magistrate, who may remand him to police or judicial custody or 
may grant bail if applied for by the accused.  
b. If an accused is arrested with a warrant while he is free and not 
in custody, then Section 81 of the CrPC permits the production 
of such a person before the court issuing the warrant.  
c. If an accused is arrested with or without a warrant while he is 
already in custody in one offence, then it is only under Section 
267 of the CrPC that he can be removed from such custody and 
produced before the Magistrate under whose territorial 
jurisdiction the other offence is registered.  
 
45. 
Section 46(1) of the CrPC reads as under:  
“46. Arrest how made.—(1) In making an arrest the 
police officer or other person making the same shall 
actually touch or confine the body of the person to be 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 54 of 73 
 
arrested, unless there be a submission to the custody by 
word or action. 
 
Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, unless 
the circumstances indicate to the contrary, her 
submission to custody on an oral intimation of arrest 
shall be presumed and, unless the circumstances 
otherwise require or unless the police officer is a female, 
the police officer shall not touch the person of the 
woman for making her arrest.” 
 
46. 
Thus, the plain reading of the aforesaid makes it clear that arrest 
involves actual touch or confinement of the body of the person sought 
to be arrested. However, arrest can also be effected without actual touch 
if the person sought to be arrested submits to the custody by words or 
action.  
 
47. 
The term ‘arrest’ is not defined either in the procedural Acts or in the 
various substantive Acts, though Section 46, CrPC, lays down the mode 
of arrest to be effected. Black’s Law Dictionary (5th Edition, 1979) 
defines arrest as follows:  
“To deprive a person of his liberty by legal authority. 
Taking, under real or assumed authority, custody of 
another for the purpose of holding or detaining him to 
answer a criminal charge or civil demand. Arrest 
involves the authority to arrest, the assertion of that 
authority with the intent to effect an arrest, and the 
restraint of the person to be arrested. All that is required 
for an 'arrest' is some act by officer indicating his 
intention to detain or take person into custody and 
thereby subject that person to the actual control and will 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 55 of 73 
 
of the officer, as formal declaration of arrest is 
required.” 
 
48. 
Similarly, the term ‘custody’ too is not defined either in the CrPC or 
the IPC. The Corpus Juris Secondum (Vol. 25 at Page 69) defines 
‘custody’ as follows:  
“When it is applied to persons, it implies restraint and 
may or may not imply physical force sufficient to 
restrain depending on the circumstances and with 
reference to persons charged with crime, it has been 
defined as meaning on actual confinement or the present 
means of enforcing it, the detention of the person 
contrary to his will. Applied to things, it means to have 
a charge or safe-keeping, and connotes control and 
includes as well, although it does not require, the 
element of physical or manual possession, implying a 
temporary physical control merely and responsibility 
for the protection and preservation of the thing in 
custody. So used, the word does not connote dominion 
or supremacy of authority. The said term has been 
defined as meaning the keeping, guarding, care, watch, 
inspection, preservation or security of a thing, and 
carries with it the idea of the thing being within the 
immediate personal care and control of the prisoner to 
whose custody it is subjected; charge; charge to keep, 
subject to order or direction; immediate charge and 
control and not the final absolute control of ownership.” 
[See: Roshan Beevi and others v. Joint Secretary to 
Government of Tamil Nadu and others, 1983 SCC OnLine 
Mad 163]   
 
49. 
The Rajasthan High Court proceeded on the assumption that there can 
be no arrest while a person is in judicial custody because it is not 
possible for the police officer to arrest him without actual touch or 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 56 of 73 
 
confinement while such person is under custody. However, we are 
unable to agree with the view taken by the High Court for the reason 
that a lawful arrest can be made even without actually seizing or 
touching the body. Actions or words which successfully bring to the 
notice of the accused that he is under a compulsion and thereafter cause 
him to submit to such compulsion will also be sufficient to constitute 
arrest. This Court in State of U.P. v. Deoman Upadhyaya reported in 
AIR 1960 SC 1125 held that submission to the custody by word or 
action by a person is sufficient so as to constitute arrest under Section 
46 of the CrPC.  
 
50. 
In the aforesaid context, we may also refer to and rely upon the decision 
of the Queen’s Bench in Alderson v. Booth reported in [1969] 2 All ER 
271. The relevant observations are as under:  
 
 
“There are a number of cases, both ancient and modern, 
as to what constitutes an arrest, and whereas there was 
a time when it was held that there could be no lawful 
arrest unless there was an actual seizing or touching, it 
is quite clear that is no longer the law. There may be an 
arrest by mere words, by saying “I arrest you” without 
any touching, provided of course that the accused 
submits and goes with the police officer. Equally it is 
clear, as it seems to me, that an arrest is constituted 
when any form of words in used which, in the 
circumstances, of the case, were calculated to bring to 
the accused's notice, and did bring to the accused's 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 57 of 73 
 
notice, that he was under compulsion and thereafter he 
submitted to that compulsion.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
51. 
The aforesaid decision fortifies the view that the actual seizing or 
touching of the body of the person to be arrested is not necessary in a 
case where the arrester by word brings to the notice of the accused that 
he is under compulsion and thereafter the accused submits to that 
compulsion. This is in conformity with the modality of the arrest 
contemplated under Section 46 of the CrPC wherein also it is provided 
that the submission of a person to be arrested to the custody of the 
arrester by word or action can amount to an arrest. The essence of the 
decision in Alderson (supra) is that there must be an actual seizing or 
touching, and in the absence of that, it must be brought to the notice of 
the person to be arrested that he is under compulsion, and as a result of 
such notice, the said person should submit to that compulsion, and then 
only the arrest is consummated.  
 
52. 
As pointed out in the preceding paragraphs, a police officer can 
formally arrest a person in relation to an offence while he is already in 
custody in a different offence. However, such formal arrest doesn’t 
bring the accused in the custody of the police officer as the accused 
continues to remain in the custody of the Magistrate who remanded him 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 58 of 73 
 
to judicial custody in the first offence. Once such formal arrest has been 
made, the police officer has to make an application under Section 267 
of the CrPC before the Jurisdictional Magistrate for the issuance of a 
P.T. Warrant without delay. If, based on the requirements prescribed 
under Section 267 of the CrPC, a P.T. Warrant is issued by the 
jurisdictional Magistrate, then the accused has to be produced before 
such Magistrate on the date and time mentioned in the warrant, subject 
to Sections 268 and 269 respectively of the CrPC. Upon production 
before the jurisdictional Magistrate, the accused can be remanded to 
police or judicial custody or be enlarged on bail, if applied for and 
allowed. The only reason why we have delineated the procedure 
followed in cases where a person already in custody is required to be 
arrested in relation to a different offence is to negate the reasoning of 
the Rajasthan, Delhi and Allahabad High Courts that once in custody, 
it is not possible to re-arrest a person in relation to a different offence. 
When a person in custody is confronted with a P.T. Warrant obtained 
in relation to a different offence, such a person has no choice but to 
submit to the custody of the police officer who has obtained the P.T. 
Warrant. Thus, in such a scenario, although there is no confinement to 
custody by touch, yet there is submission to the custody by the accused 
based on the action of the police officer in showing the P.T. Warrant to 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 59 of 73 
 
the accused. Thereafter, on production of the accused before the 
jurisdictional Magistrate, like in the case of arrest of a free person who 
is not in custody, the accused can either be remanded to police or 
judicial custody, or he may be enlarged on bail and sent back to the 
custody in the first offence. A number of decisions have held that 
although Section 267 of the CrPC cannot be invoked to enable 
production of the accused before the investigating agency, yet it can 
undoubtedly be invoked to require production of the accused before the 
jurisdictional Magistrate, who can thereafter remand him to the custody 
of the investigating agency. Such an interpretation of the provision 
would give true effect to the words “other proceedings” as they appear 
in the text of Section 267 of the CrPC, which cannot be construed to 
exclude proceedings at the stage of investigation. [See: C. Natesan v. 
State of Tamil Nadu and Others, 1998 SCC OnLine Mad 931; Ranjeet 
Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 1995 Cri LJ 3505; State of 
Maharashtra v. Yadav Kohachade, 2000 Cri LJ 959] 
 
53. 
Thus, contrary to the view taken by the Rajasthan, Allahabad and Delhi 
High Courts, a person, while in custody in relation to an offence, can 
be arrested in relation to a different offence, either after getting released 
from custody in the first offence, or even while remaining in custody in 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 60 of 73 
 
the first offence. In such circumstances, it follows that a person, while 
in custody in relation to an offence, can have “reason to believe” that 
he may be arrested in relation to a different cognizable offence. We find 
no restriction in the text of Section 438 or the scheme of the CrPC 
precluding a person from seeking anticipatory bail in relation to an 
offence while being in custody in relation to another offence. In the 
absence of any such restriction, we find no valid reason to read any 
prohibition in the text of Section 438 of the CrPC, to preclude a person 
in custody from seeking anticipatory bail in relation to different 
offences.   
 
54. 
The option of applying for anticipatory bail in relation to an offence, 
while being in custody in relation to a different offence, will only be 
available to the accused till he is arrested by the police officer on the 
strength of the P.T. Warrant obtained by him from the court concerned. 
We must clarify that mere formal arrest (on-paper arrest) would not 
extinguish the right of the accused to apply for anticipatory bail. We 
say so because a formal arrest would not result in the submission of the 
accused, who is already in custody, to the custody of the police officer 
effecting a formal arrest in the subsequent case. However, if after 
effecting a formal arrest, the police officer on the strength of the same 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 61 of 73 
 
procures a P.T. Warrant from the jurisdictional Magistrate, the accused 
would have no other choice but to submit to that compulsion and the 
right of the accused to apply for anticipatory bail would thereafter get 
extinguished.  
 
55. 
If an accused is granted anticipatory bail in relation to an offence, while 
being in custody in a different offence, then it shall no longer be open 
to the police officer in the first case to apply under Section 267 of the 
CrPC for the production of the accused before the jurisdictional 
Magistrate for the purpose of remanding him to police or judicial 
custody. However, it shall be open to the jurisdictional Magistrate to 
require the production of accused under Section 267(1) for any other 
purpose mentioned under the said section except for the purpose of 
remanding him to police or judicial custody. [See: Tusharbhai 
Rajnikantbhai Shah v. State of Gujarat, reported in 2024 SCC 
OnLine SC 1897] 
 
56. 
We would also like to observe that contrary to the submission of the 
appellant that grant of anticipatory bail to the accused would prevent 
the investigating authorities from conducting investigation and 
discoveries, etc., it is always open to the concerned investigating officer 
to apply before the Magistrate in whose custody the accused is in 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 62 of 73 
 
relation to a different offence, seeking permission of such Magistrate to 
interrogate the accused in relation to the particular offence which he is 
investigating.  
 
57. 
It was also submitted by the appellant that as the object of Section 438 
of the CrPC was to prevent an accused from the humiliation of arrest, 
the protective cover of the provision would not include within its ambit 
a person who is already in custody. In other words, a person once 
arrested in relation to an offence, cannot be said to suffer further 
humiliation for any subsequent arrest which may take place, and thus, 
the relief of anticipatory bail should not be made available to a person 
who is already in custody.  
 
58. 
We are unable to accept the aforesaid contention of the appellant. Each 
arrest a person faces compounds their humiliation and ignominy. We 
say so because each subsequent arrest underscores a continued or 
escalating involvement in legal troubles that can erode the dignity of 
the person and their public standing. The initial arrest itself often brings 
a wave of social stigma and personal distress, as the individual struggles 
with the implications of their legal predicament. When a subsequent 
arrest occurs, it intensifies this emotional and social burden, amplifying 
the perception of their criminality and reinforcing negative judgments 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 63 of 73 
 
from society. Subsequent arrest in relation to different offences, while 
the individual is in custody in a particular offence, further alienates the 
individual from their community and adversely affects their personal 
integrity. For this reason, it is incorrect to assume that subsequent 
arrests diminish the level of humiliation. On the contrary, each 
additional arrest exacerbates the person’s shame making the cumulative 
impact of such legal entanglements increasingly devastating. 
 
iii. Illustrative Examples  
 
59. 
The discrimination that would be caused if the submissions 
canvassed on behalf of the appellant were to be accepted can be 
understood with the aid of the following illustrations:  
Illustration A 
(1) ‘A’ is in custody for a case under Section 420 of the IPC, and is 
enlarged on bail on a particular date. On the same day, ‘A’s’ wife 
registers a case under Section 498A IPC against him. Here, if the 
appellant’s argument is accepted, ‘A’ would be able to apply for 
anticipatory bail.  
 
(2) ‘B’ is in custody under Section 420 of the IPC, and he has applied 
for bail. However, the order releasing him on bail is yet to be passed. 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 64 of 73 
 
While so, ‘B’s’ wife files a case under Section 498A of the IPC 
against him. Here, if the appellant’s argument is accepted. ‘B’ would 
not be able to apply for anticipatory bail while in custody for a case 
under Section 420. He can apply for anticipatory bail in relation to 
the case under Section 498A only if he is not arrested immediately 
after his release in the case under Section 420. If he is arrested 
immediately in the case under Section 498A after being released in 
the case under Section 420, then the only remedy left for him would 
be to seek regular bail. 
 
If the interpretation sought to be put forward by the appellant is 
accepted, two persons who are accused of similar offences are 
entitled to different sets of rights. While one is permitted to avail the 
right under Section 438 of the CrPC, the other is deprived of it, 
merely on the basis of the point in time when the FIR gets lodged.   
 
Illustration B 
(1) ‘X’ is in custody for an offence under Section 302 of the IPC 
punishable by life imprisonment or death, and subsequently an FIR 
is registered against him for an offence under Section 376 of the IPC 
which is punishable with imprisonment which may extend for life. 
Here, if the appellant’s argument is accepted, then ‘X’ would not be 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 65 of 73 
 
able to apply for anticipatory bail in the subsequent case, since he is 
in custody for the earlier case under Section 302 of the IPC.  
 
(2) ‘Y’ is in custody for an offence under Section 384 of the IPC 
[extortion – punishable with imprisonment for 3 years], and while in 
custody for this offence, an FIR is registered against him for an 
offence under Section 406 of the IPC [criminal breach of trust – 
punishable with imprisonment for 3 years]. In this example as well, 
if the argument of the appellant is accepted, ‘Y’ would not be able to 
apply for anticipatory bail, even though the offence is punishable 
with imprisonment for 3 years. 
 
‘Y’, therefore, would be placed at par with a person who has 
committed a serious crime and would ordinarily not be granted 
anticipatory bail. However, by prohibiting ‘Y’ from even applying 
for anticipatory bail for an offence punishable by imprisonment for 
a maximum of 3 years [i.e. Section 406 of the IPC], ‘Y’ is placed in 
the same class as ‘X’. 
 
E. 
CONCLUSION  
 
60. 
Our examination of the matter has led us to the following conclusions: 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 66 of 73 
 
 
i. 
An accused is entitled to seek anticipatory bail in connection with 
an offence so long as he is not arrested in relation to that offence. 
Once he is arrested, the only remedy available to him is to apply 
for regular bail either under Section 437 or Section 439 of the 
CrPC, as the case may be. This is evident from para 39 of 
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia (supra). 
 
ii. 
There is no express or implied restriction in the CrPC or in any 
other statute that prohibits the Court of Session or the High Court 
from entertaining and deciding an anticipatory bail application in 
relation to an offence, while the applicant is in custody in relation 
to a different offence. No restriction can be read into Section 438 
of the CrPC to preclude an accused from applying for anticipatory 
bail in relation to an offence while he is in custody in a different 
offence, as that would be against the purport of the provision and 
the intent of the legislature.  The only restriction on the power of 
the court to grant anticipatory bail under Section 438 of the CrPC 
is the one prescribed under sub-section (4) of Section 438 of the 
CrPC, and in other statutes like the Act, 1989, etc.  
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 67 of 73 
 
iii. 
While a person already in custody in connection with a particular 
offence apprehends arrest in a different offence, then, the 
subsequent offence is a separate offence for all practical purposes. 
This would necessarily imply that all rights conferred by the 
statute on the accused as well as the investigating agency in 
relation to the subsequent offence are independently protected.  
 
iv. 
The investigating agency, if it deems necessary for the purpose of 
interrogation/investigation in an offence, can seek remand of the 
accused whilst he is in custody in connection with a previous 
offence so long as no order granting anticipatory bail has been 
passed in relation to the subsequent offence. However, if an order 
granting anticipatory bail in relation to the subsequent offence is 
obtained by the accused, it shall no longer be open to the 
investigating agency to seek remand of the accused in relation to 
the subsequent offence. Similarly, if an order of police remand is 
passed before the accused is able to obtain anticipatory bail, it 
would thereafter not be open to the accused to seek anticipatory 
bail and the only option available to him would be to seek regular 
bail.  
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 68 of 73 
 
v. 
We are at one with Mr. Dave that the right of an accused to protect 
his personal liberty within the contours of Article 21 of the 
Constitution of India with the aid of the provision of anticipatory 
bail as enshrined under Section 438 of the CrPC cannot be 
defeated or thwarted without a valid procedure established by law. 
He is right in his submission that such procedure should also pass 
the test of fairness, reasonableness and manifest non-arbitrariness 
on the anvil of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.  
 
vi. 
Under Section 438 of the CrPC, the pre-condition for a person to 
apply for pre-arrest bail is a “reason to believe that he may be 
arrested on an accusation of having committed a non-bailable 
offence”. Therefore, the only pre-condition for exercising the said 
right is the apprehension of the accused that he is likely to be 
arrested. In view of the discussion in the preceding paragraphs, 
custody in one case does not have the effect of taking away the 
apprehension of arrest in a different case.  
 
vii. 
If the interpretation, as sought to be put forward by Mr. Luthra is 
to be accepted, the same would not only defeat the right of a person 
to apply for pre-arrest bail under Section 438 of the CrPC but may 
also lead to absurd situations in its practical application.  
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 69 of 73 
 
61. 
Before we part with the matter, we would like to underscore the 
importance of the rights conferred under the procedural laws as noted 
by a Constitution Bench of this Court in A.R. Antulay v. R. S. Nayak 
reported in (1988) 2 SCC 602. It was observed therein that no man 
can be denied of his rights under the Constitution and the laws. He 
has a right to be dealt with in accordance with the law, and not in 
derogation of it. This Court held that a denial of equal protection of 
laws, by being singled out for a special procedure not provided under 
the law, caused denial of rights under Article 14 of the Constitution 
of India. A few relevant observations are extracted hereinbelow:  
“41. In the aforesaid view of the matter and the 
principle reiterated, it is manifest that the appellant has 
not been ordered to be tried by a procedure mandated 
by law, but by a procedure which was violative of Article 
21 of the Constitution. That is violative of Articles 14 
and 19 of the Constitution also, as is evident from the 
observations of the Seven Judges Bench judgment 
in Anwar Ali Sarkar case [(1952) 1 SCC 1 : AIR 1952 
SC 75 : 1952 SCR 284 : 1952 Cri LJ 510] where this 
Court found that even for a criminal who was alleged to 
have committed an offence, a special trial would be per 
se illegal because it will deprive the accused of his 
substantial and valuable privileges of defence which, 
others similarly charged, were able to claim. 
 
xxx               xxx                   xxx 
  
81. […] We proclaim and pronounce that no man is 
above the law, but at the same time reiterate and declare 
that no man can be denied his rights under the 
Constitution and the laws. He has a right to be dealt with 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 70 of 73 
 
in accordance with the law and not in derogation of it. 
This Court, in its anxiety to facilitate the parties to have 
a speedy trial gave directions on 16-2-1984 as 
mentioned hereinbefore without conscious awareness of 
the exclusive jurisdiction of the Special Courts under the 
1952 Act and that being the only procedure established 
by law, there can be no deviation from the terms of 
Article 21 of the Constitution of India. That is the only 
procedure under which it should have been guided. By 
reason of giving the directions on 16-2-1984 this Court 
had also unintentionally caused the appellant the denial 
of rights under Article 14 of the Constitution by denying 
him the equal protection of law by being singled out for 
a special procedure not provided for by law. […]” 
  
 
 
 
 
      
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
62. 
Similarly, a Constitution Bench of this Court in State of West Bengal 
v. Anwar Ali Sarkar reported in (1952) 1 SCC 1, held that 
procedural law confers very valuable rights on a person, and their 
protection must be as much the object of a Court’s solicitude as those 
conferred under the substantive law. Few pertinent observations are 
extracted hereinbelow:  
 
“27. The argument that changes in procedural law are 
not material and cannot be said to deny equality before 
the law or the equal protection of the laws so long as the 
substantive law remains unchanged or that only the 
fundamental rights referred to in Articles 20 to 22 
should be safeguarded is, on the face of it, unsound. The 
right to equality postulated by Article 14 is as much a 
fundamental right as any other fundamental right dealt 
with in Part III of the Constitution. Procedural law may 
and does confer very valuable rights on a person, and 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 71 of 73 
 
their protection must be as much the object of a court's 
solicitude as those conferred under substantive law.” 
  
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
63. 
It was also sought to be argued by Mr. Luthra that the issue at hand 
has already been dealt with and decided by a three-Judge Bench of 
this Court in Narinderjit Singh Sahni (supra). It was contended that 
the dictum laid therein is that an anticipatory bail application filed by 
an accused in a different case, while he is in custody in one case, 
would not be maintainable.  However, we are unable to agree with 
such submission of the appellant. In the said case, the Petitioners 
therein, who were arrayed as accused in multiple FIRs registered at 
various police stations across the country, had invoked the 
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 32 praying for an order for 
bail in the nature as prescribed under Section 438 of the CrPC. The 
crux of the grievance of the Petitioners was that although they had 
secured an order of bail in one case yet they were being detained in 
prison on the strength of a production warrant in another matter. 
This, according to the petitioners, was violative of Article 21 as they 
were deprived of their liberty despite having been granted bail in one 
of the cases.  
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 72 of 73 
 
64. 
The aforesaid contention of the Petitioners in the said case was 
ultimately rejected by this Court on the ground that even if the 
Petitioners could be said to have been deprived of their liberty, such 
deprivation was in accordance with the due process of law.  Having 
observed thus, this Court dismissed the Writ Petition filed by the 
Petitioners as no infraction of Article 21 was established.  
 
65. 
Evidently, this Court in the aforesaid case had no occasion to go into 
the question of maintainability of an application for grant of 
anticipatory bail by an accused who is already in judicial custody in 
relation to some offence. On the contrary, this Court in Narinderjit 
Singh Sahni (supra) examined the issue whether a blanket order in 
the nature of anticipatory bail could be passed by this Court in 
exercise of its Writ Jurisdiction, wherein the Petitioner was arrayed 
as an accused in multiple criminal proceedings.  
 
66. 
On the other hand, in the present case, we have decided the issue of 
maintainability of an anticipatory bail application filed at the 
instance of an accused who is already in judicial custody in a 
different offence and have reached the conclusion that such an 
application is maintainable under the scheme of the CrPC. However, 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2501/2024   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 73 of 73 
 
it is clarified that each of such applications will have to be decided 
by the competent courts on their own merits.  
 
67. 
In view of the aforesaid discussion, the present appeal must fail and 
the same is thereby dismissed.  
 
68. 
The High Court of Judicature at Bombay shall now proceed to decide 
the anticipatory bail application filed by the respondent accused on 
its own merits.  
 
69. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.  
 
70. 
The Registry shall forward one copy each of this judgment to all the 
High Courts across the country.    
 
 
…………………………………….CJI 
 (Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud) 
 
 
 
………………………………………J. 
(J.B. Pardiwala) 
 
 
 
………………………………………J. 
(Manoj Misra) 
New Delhi; 
 
9th September, 2024.