2024 INSC 764
1
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.26454 OF 2019
KHURSHEED & ANR.                             …PETITIONER(S)
Versus
SHAQOOR                                               …RESPONDENT
O R D E R 
1.
The question which arises in this petition for our determination
relates to the bar on jurisdiction of the Civil Court under Section 5
(2) (a) read with Section 49 of the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings
Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as ‘Consolidation Act’). 
2.
Whether, by virtue of Section 5 (2) (a), upon publication of the
Notification under Section 4 of the Consolidation Act, any pending
civil suit for cancellation of a sale deed executed by fraud and
impersonation,  stands  abated  and  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Civil
Digitally signed by
Chetan Kumar
Date: 2024.10.04
19:45:35 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
Court to try such a suit is ousted in terms of Section 49 of the
Consolidation Act? 
3.
The Petitioners-Defendants, assail the correctness of the Order
dated  02.08.2019,  passed  by  the  High  Court  of  Uttarakhand,
whereby Writ Petition (M/S) No. 93/2019, filed by the Respondent-
Plaintiff  was  allowed  holding  that  a  suit  for  cancellation  of  a
“voidable” sale deed relating to agricultural land pending in a Civil
Court would not stand abated in terms of Section 5 (2) (a) of the
Consolidation Act and the bar on jurisdiction of the Civil Court’s
under Section 49 of the Consolidation Act would not be applicable
when  the  suit  is  for  cancellation  of  a  “voidable  document”;  as
opposed to a “void document”. 
4.
The  dispute  in  this  petition  relates  to  certain  parcels  of
agricultural land bearing Khata Nos. 154 and 154A, situated at
village-Basedi Khaadar, Pargana-Manlore, Tehsil-Laskar, District-
Haridwar. The facts which have given rise to this dispute are as
follows:
i.
One Illahibaksh the owner of the aforementioned parcels of
land  had  three  sons-  Shafi,  Gafoor  and  Shaqoor
(Respondent herein). Upon the death  Ilahibaksh, the land
devolved  upon  the  three  sons  equally  and  they  each

3
acquired  1/3rd share  in  the  land.  His  son Shafi  had  3
daughters & one of them (Haneefa) is the mother of the
Petitioner No.1 herein. 
ii.
The  other  son,  Gafoor  did  not  have  any  children  and
therefore, his share devolved upon his wife, namely Vakila.
Her name was accordingly mutated in the revenue records.
Later, Vakila married the Respondent herein, i.e. Shaqoor.
iii.
In the year 2003, the  property in dispute was brought
under consolidation proceedings and a notification to that
effect was published in the Gazette.
iv.
It is averred by the Respondent herein that after the death
of his wife-Vaqila in 2009, the mother of Petitioner No.1
(Haneefa)  fraudulently  claimed  to  be  the  daughter  of
Gafoor and by impersonation, inherited the property which
had devolved upon Vakila and got herself recorded as the
co-tenure holder of the property on 03.08.2016
v.
Thereafter,  it is  alleged  that  mother  of  Petitioner  No. 1
(Haneefa) executed a Sale Deed dt. 09.08.2016 in favour of
Petitioner No. 2 and in this way, alienated and sold the
property, to which she had no title or any transferable
right in respect thereof. 
5.
A Civil Suit praying for the relief of cancellation of the Sale Deed
dated 09.08.2016 was then filed by the Respondent herein before
the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Laksar (hereinafter referred to as
‘the Civil Court’).  The mother of petitioner No. 1-Haneefa and
petitioner No. 2-Jodh Singh, who had purchased the property were
impleaded as Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 respectively in the suit. 
6.
On 09.09.2016, an application came to be filed by Petitioner No. 2
herein before the Civil Court praying for an order that suit stands

4
abated as per Section 5 (2) (a) of the Consolidation Act, which
reads as under:
(2) Upon the said publication of the notification under
sub-section  (2)  of  Section  4,  the  following  further
consequences shall ensue in the area to which the
notification relates, namely-
(a) every proceeding for the correction of records and
every suit and proceeding in respect of declaration of
rights or interest in any land lying in the area, or for
declaration or adjudication of any other right in regard
to which proceeding can or ought to be taken under
this  Act,  pending  before  any  court  or  authority
whether of the first instance or of appeal, reference or
revision,  shall,  on  an  order  being  passed  in  that
behalf by the court or authority before whom such suit
or proceedings is pending, stand abated: 
Provided that no such order shall be passed without
giving to the parties notice by post or in any other
manner and after giving them an opportunity of being
heard:
Provided further that on the  issue  of  a notification
under sub-section (1) of Section 6 in respect of the said
area or part thereof, every such order in relation to the
land lying in such area or part as the case may be,
shall stand vacated;
(b) Such abatement shall be without prejudice to the
rights of the persons affected to agitate the right or
interest in dispute in the said suits or proceedings
before the appropriate consolidation authorities under
and in accordance with the provisions of this Act and
the rules made there under.

5
7.
The application filed by petitioner No. 2 was allowed vide Order
dated 26.09.2016, passed by the Civil Court. What weighed in with
the Civil Court, while allowing the application was that the dispute
which it had to adjudicate  in the Civil Suit filed by the Respondent
is pending consideration before the Consolidation authorities. In
view of the fact that the village where the property is situated has
been notified under Section 4 (1) (a) of the Consolidation Act, thus,
civil suit filed by the Respondent-Plaintiff would stand abated, in
terms of Section 5 (2) (a) of the Act. 
8.
Aggrieved by the order of the Civil Court, by which his suit stood
abated, the Respondent-Plaintiff filed a Miscellaneous Civil Appeal
under Section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 before the
Additional  District  Judge,  Laksar,  District-Haridwar.  The
Respondent’s appeal was dismissed vide Order dated 22.11.2018. 
9.
Invoking the extra-ordinary writ jurisdiction of the High Court
under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the respondent
challenged the order dated 22.11.2018 of the Additional District
Judge, Laksar by filing a Writ Petition before the High Court of
Uttarakhand.  The  learned  Single  Judge  of  the  High  Court,  by
passing the impugned order dated 02.08.2019 allowed the Writ

6
Petition  filed  by  the  Respondent  &  set  aside  the  order  dated
22.11.2018  of  the  Additional  District  Jugde,  Laksar  and
consequently ordered that the Civil Suit filed by the Respodent be
restored to the file of the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Laksar,
District-Haridwar.  The  learned  Single  Judge,  after  placing  his
reliance upon a judgment of this Court in Gorakh Nath Dube v.
Hari Narain Singh (1973) 2 SCC 535, came to the conclusion
that as the allegation is that the sale deed was executed by playing
fraud and by impersonation, it would be a “voidable” document
and thus, any suit, for cancellation of a voidable sale deed will not
abate by virtue of Section 5 (2) (a) of the Consolidation Act. The
distinction between ‘void’ and ‘voidable’ documents was made by
this Court in the case of  Ningawwa v. Byrappa (1968) 2 SCR
797 and this is what was held:
4……………………….  It  is  well  established  that  a
contract or other transaction induced or tainted by
fraud is not void, but only voidable at the option of
the  party  defrauded.  Until  it  is  avoided,  the
transaction  is  valid,  so that third  parties  without
notice  of  the  fraud  may  in  the  meantime  acquire
rights and interests in the matter which they may
enforce against the party defrauded. “The fact that
the  contract has  been induced  by fraud  does  not
make the contract void or prevent the property from
passing, but merely gives the party defrauded a right

7
on discovering the fraud to elect whether he shall
continue to treat the contract as binding or disaffirm
the contract and resume the property. If it can be
shown that ‘the party defrauded’ has at any time
after knowledge of the fraud either by express words
or by unequivocal acts affirmed the contract, ‘his’
election is determined for ever. The party defrauded
may  keep  the  question  open  so  long  as  he  does
nothing to affirm the contact.” (Clough v. L. & N.W.
Ry.) [(1871) LRs 7 Ex 26, 34] .
5. The legal position will be different if there is a
fraudulent  misrepresentation  not  merely  as  to
the  contents  of  the  document  but  as  to  its
character.
 The  authorities  make  a  clear
distinction between fraudulent misrepresentation
as  to  the  character  of  the  document  and
fraudulent misrepresentation as to the contents
thereof. With reference to the former, it has been
held that the transaction is void, while in the
case of the latter, it is merely voidable. 
(emphasis supplied)
10.
This Court, in Dularia Devi v. Janardan Singh & Ors. AIR 1990
SC 1173 relying upon the law laid down in Ningawwa (supra) and
Gorakh Nath Dube (supra) had held that a “voidable” document
continues to be in force until it is set aside and such a document
can only be set aside by a competent civil court. Further, such
documents  were  held  to  be  binding  upon  the  Consolidation

8
Authorities so long as they are not cancelled or set aside by a
Court vested with the jurisdiction to do so.  Moreover, in  Ram
Sakal Singh v. Mosamat Monako Devi (1997) 5 SCC 192 this
Court has held that the consolidation authorities do not have the
jurisdiction and power to cancel a document, which is required to
be set aside or cancelled and the document will continue to be
valid till it is cancelled by a Competent Court i.e. a Civil Court.
This court also held that if the document is void, it would be open
for the Consolidation Authorities to disregard such a document &
in such a case, they would get the exclusive jurisdiction to proceed
with the matter. But if the document is voidable, the Civil Court is
vested with the jurisdiction to declare the same to be voidable. In
the case of voidable documents, not only would the Consolidation
Authorities have no power to cancel such documents, but even the
proceedings pending before any competent Civil Court would not
abate. 
11.
The allegation here is that the fraudulent misrepresentation was
by petitioner No. 1’s mother, who executed the sale deed dated
09.08.2016  by  impersonation,  it  would  make  the  sale  deed
voidable, but not void. As such, in view of the law laid down by this
Court  in  Gorakh  Nath  Dube  (supra),  the  Sale  Deed  dated

9
09.08.2016 will be binding on the Consolidation Authorities unless
it is set aside by a competent Civil Court and there would be no bar
on jurisdiction of the Civil Court to try a suit for cancellation of
such a sale deed. 
12.
In view of the aforesaid, we see no reason to interfere with the
impugned order dated 02.08.2019 passed by the High Court of
Uttarakhand.  The  Special  Leave  Petition,  accordingly,  stands
dismissed.
13.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
…………..……….………………….J.
                                                            [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]
       
  
 ..………....………………………….J.   
                                                        [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
New Delhi.
September 10, 2024.