2024 INSC 681
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE/INHERENT JURISDICTION  
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 2764 OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 3419 OF 2024) 
 
 
RAGHUVEER SHARAN 
 
 
 
... APPELLANT 
 
 
VERSUS  
 
 
DISTRICT SAHAKARI KRISHI GRAMIN  
VIKAS BANK & ANR.  
 
      
       ...RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 
 
CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO. 508 OF 2024 IN CRIMINAL APPEAL 
NO(s). 2764 OF 2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 
3419 OF 2024. 
 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
 
 
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J. 
 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 2764 OF 2024 
 
 
 
1. 
 The appellant seeks to challenge the judgment and order dated 
09.11.2023 passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in Criminal 
Revision No. 1925 of 2023 whereby the High Court has dismissed the 
appellant’s revision application affirming the order passed by the Special 
Court MP/MLA) Gwalior on 17.04.2023 in exercise of power under 
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant
Date: 2024.09.11
17:35:22 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19731 to summon the 
appellant as an accused. 
 
2. 
The facts of the case, briefly stated, are that in the year 1998, one 
Rajendra Bharti was the President of the complainant/respondent no. 12 
which is now under liquidation. At the relevant time, accused Savitri 
Shyam (since deceased), (mother of the accused Rajendra Bharti), 
moved an application on 24.08.1998 for creating a Fixed Deposit of Rs. 
10,00,000/- for a period of 3 years with the respondent bank, in her 
capacity as the President of Shyam Sunder Shyam Sansthan, Datia, 
Madhya Pradesh.  The amount was deposited with the respondent bank 
vide 2 separate deposits of Rs. 8.5 Lakhs and Rs. 1.5 Lakhs respectively. 
However, subsequently, these challans were interpolated under the initial 
of the appellant who was working as the Cashier of the respondent bank 
at the relevant time.  Due to the interpolation, the Fixed Deposit for 3 
years was converted to Fixed Deposit for 10 years by committing forgery.  
In the bank ledger also interpolation and forgery were made by striking 
off the period of “3 years” to make “15 years” under the initial of the 
appellant.  
 
3. 
When the criminal complaint was filed, the appellant was also 
examined as one of the witnesses of the respondent bank, wherein he 
admitted having changed the tenure of the Fixed Deposit from 3 years to 
10 years and later on to 15 years.  This statement of the appellant was 
 
1 ‘Cr.P.C.’ 
2 ‘respondent bank’ 

3 
 
recorded at the pre-summoning stage on 19.03.2016.  However, 
subsequently, during trial, PW-1/Narendra Singh Parmar was examined-
in-chief on 31.03.2022 wherein he made the statement that it was the 
appellant who made the interpolation in the Fixed Deposit document.   
 
4. 
After the statement of PW-1/ Narendra Singh Parmar was 
recorded, the respondent bank submitted application under Section 319 
Cr.P.C. for arraying the appellant and one Rakesh Bharti (brother of 
Rajendra Bharti) as additional accused.  
 
5. 
The trial court vide its order dated 17.04.2023 allowed the 
application partly by summoning the appellant, while rejecting the same 
qua Rakesh Bharti. Pursuant to the summoning, charges have already 
been framed against the appellant on 15.06.2023. 
 
6. 
The trial court’s order dated 17.04.2023 was challenged before the 
High Court.  However, under the impugned judgment and order, the High 
Court dismissed the criminal revision petition preferred by the appellant. 
 
SUBMISSIONS 
 
 
7. 
Mr. Vivek K. Tankha, learned senior counsel appearing for the 
appellant has argued that the appellant was entitled to the benefit under 
Section 132 of the Indian Evidence Act, 18723 and he could not be held 
accountable for the statement made by him.  It is also argued that the 
evidence available on record do not make out any prima facie case 
 
3 ‘of the Act’ 

4 
 
against the appellant for summoning him as an accused under Section 
319 Cr.P.C.  It is further submitted that the power under Section 319 
Cr.P.C. can be exercised only in a case when there is prima facie material 
giving rise to grave suspicion against the person with respect to 
commission of offence.  Reference is made to R. Dinesh Kumar alias 
Deena v. State represented by Inspector of Police and another4. 
 
8. 
Per contra, Mr. Saurabh Mishra, learned senior counsel appearing 
for the respondent bank would argue that since the appellant is made 
accused on the basis of statement made by PW-1/Narendra Singh 
Parmar recorded in course of trial on 31.03.2022 and not on the basis of 
appellant’s 
pre-summoning 
statement 
recorded 
on 
19.03.2016, 
therefore, Section 132 of the Act, has no application in the facts and 
circumstances of the case.  It is also argued that the statement recorded 
at the pre-summoning stage is not admissible in evidence as held by this 
Court in Sashi Jena and Others v. Khadal Swain and another.5 
 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
9. 
The issue to be decided herein is whether in the facts and 
circumstances of the case, the appellant is entitled for protection under 
Section 132 of the Act, as his statement was recorded earlier at the pre-
summoning stage as a witness for the complainant/respondent bank. 
 
 
4 (2015) 7 SCC 497 
5 (2004) 4 SCC 236 
 

5 
 
10. 
Before proceeding further, it would be appropriate to refer and 
reproduce the provisions contained in Section 132 of the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872 as under: - 
“132. Witness not excused from answering on 
ground that answer will criminate. - 
 
A witness shall not be excused from answering any 
question, as to any matter relevant to the matter in 
issue in any suit or in any civil or criminal proceeding, 
upon the ground that the answer to such question will 
criminate, or may tend directly or indirectly to 
criminate, such witness, or that it will expose, or tend 
directly or indirectly to expose, such witness to a 
penalty or forfeiture of any kind: 
 
Proviso:- Provided that no such answer, which a witness 
shall be compelled to give, shall subject him to any 
arrest or prosecution, or be proved against him, in any 
criminal proceeding, except a prosecution for giving 
false evidence by such answer.” 
 
11. 
In order to have clear understanding of the sweep and import of 
the provisions contained in Section 132 of the Act and the proviso, in 
particular, it is necessary to dwell on the principle on which the provision 
is introduced in the statute. 
 
12. 
The proviso to Section 132 of the Act is based on the maxim nemo 
Tenetur prodere seipsum i.e. no one is bound to criminate himself and to 
place himself in peril. In this regard the law in England, (with certain 
exceptions) is that a witness need not answer any question, the tendency 
of which is to expose the witness, or to feed hand of the witness, to any 

6 
 
criminal charge, penalty or forfeiture6. The privilege is based on the 
principle of encouraging all persons to come forward with evidence, by 
protecting them, as far as possible, from injury or needless annoyance in 
consequence of so doing7. This absolute privilege, in some cases tended 
to bring about a failure of justice, for the allowance of the excuse, 
particularly when the matter to which the question related was in the 
knowledge solely of the witness, deprived the court of the information 
which was essential to its arriving at a right decision.  
13. 
In order to avoid this inconvenience, Section 132 of the Act, 
withdrew this absolute privilege and affords only a qualified privilege. 
The witness is deprived of the privilege of claiming excuse from testifying 
altogether; but, while subjecting him to compulsion, the legislature, in 
order to remove any inducement to falsehood, declared that evidence so 
obtained should not be used against him, except for the purpose in the 
Act declared.  
14. 
It must also be borne in mind that the proviso to Section 132 of 
the Act is also an extension of the protection enshrined under Article 
20(3) of the Constitution of India which confers a fundamental right that 
“no person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness 
against himself”. Under the constitutional scheme, the right is available 
only to a person who is accused of an offence, the proviso to Section 132 
 
6 See Woodroffe & Amir Ali, Law of Evidence, Twenty-first edition, 2020 pp.4377 (Syn 132.1) R v. Gopal 
Dass, (1881) 3 Mad 271  
 
7 WM Best, A Treatise on the Principles of Evidence, 4th Edn, H Sweet, London, 1866, p 126 
 

7 
 
of the Act, in extension, creates a statutory immunity in favour of a 
witness who in the process of giving evidence in any suit or in any civil or 
criminal proceeding makes a statement which criminates himself. It is 
settled that the proviso to Section 132 of the Act is a necessary corollary 
to the principle enshrined under Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India 
which confers a fundamental right that “no person accused of any 
offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself”8. 
15. 
A perusal of the legislative history would reveal that the object of 
the law is to secure evidence which could not have been obtained. The 
purpose for granting such a statutory immunity was to enable the court 
to reach a just conclusion (and thus assisting the process of law). 
 
16. 
In R. Dinesh Kumar alias Deena (supra), the two judges Bench 
of this Court observed, after referring to Justice Muttusami Ayyar’s 
opinion in the matter of “The Queen vs. Gopal Doss & Anr.9”  that the 
policy under Section 132 of the Act appears to be to secure the evidence 
from whatever sources it is available for doing justice in a case brought 
before the court.  In the course of securing such evidence, if a witness 
who is under obligation to state the truth because of the Oath taken by 
him makes any statement which will criminate or tend to expose such a 
witness to a “penalty or forfeiture of any kind etc.”, the proviso grants 
immunity to such a witness by declaring that “no such answer given by 
 
8 Laxmipat Choraria v. State of Maharashtra AIR 1968 SC 938 
9 ILR 3 Mad 271 
 

8 
 
the witness shall subject him to any arrest or prosecution or be proved 
against him in any criminal proceeding”.  This Court in R. Dinesh Kumar 
alias Deena (supra) further observed in para 47 that no prosecution can 
be launched against the maker of a statement falling within the sweep of 
Section 132 of the Act on the basis of the “answer” given by a person 
while deposing as a “witness” before a Court. We are in agreement with 
the view taken by this Court in R. Dinesh Kumar alias Deena (supra). 
However, the facts of the present case compel us to consider the matter 
in a different perspective as to when apart from his own statement made 
by a witness, he is still protected under the proviso of Section 132 of the 
Act when there is other material against him for summoning as an 
accused. In R. Dinesh Kumar alias Deena (supra) a witness examined 
as PW-64 during trial was sought to be summoned by moving an 
application under Section 319 Cr.P.C. The Trial Court dismissed the 
application, and the High Court affirmed the dismissal order. The High 
Court, in the said case, observed in para 64 that PW-64 cannot be 
prosecuted by summoning him as an additional accused under Section 
319 Cr.P.C. on the basis of his evidence in the Sessions Case. However, 
the High Court held that PW-64 could be separately prosecuted for an 
offence under Section 120B of the Indian Penal Code, 186010 read with 
Section 302 of IPC if independent evidence other than the statement 
under Section 164 Cr.P.C.  of PW-64 and his evidence in Sessions Case 
are available to prosecute him along with other accused.  
 
10 ‘IPC’ 

9 
 
 
17. 
This Court in R. Dinesh Kumar alias Deena (supra) refused to 
consider the issue as to whether a witness protected under the proviso of 
Section 132 of the Act could be separately prosecuted if independent 
evidence is also available by observing thus in paras 7 & 52:  
 
“7. 
In our opinion, the second conclusion recorded by 
the High Court contained in para 64 extracted above, is 
really uncalled for in the context of the issue before the High 
Court. The question before the High Court was whether the 
Sessions Court was justified in declining to summon PW 64 
in exercise of its authority under Section 319 of the Cr.P.C. 
as an additional accused in Sessions Case No. 73 of 2009. 
We, therefore, will examine only the question whether on 
the facts mentioned earlier the Sessions Court is obliged to 
summon PW 64 as an additional accused exercising the 
power under Section 319 of the Cr.P.C. 
 
52. 
In the light of the above two decisions, the 
proposition whether the prosecution has a liberty to 
examine any person as a witness in a criminal prosecution 
notwithstanding that there is some material available to the 
prosecuting agency to indicate that such a person is also 
involved in the commission of the crime for which the other 
accused are being tried, requires a deeper examination.” 
 
18. 
In other words, if the privilege made available to a witness under 
the proviso to Section 132 of the Act is interpreted as a complete 
immunity, notwithstanding availability of other evidence, it is capable of 
abuse. In a particular case, a dishonest Investigating officer could cite a 
person as a witness in the report under Section 173 of the Cr.P.C, being 
fully aware that there is incriminating material against such person. 
Similarly, a man complicit of an offence, could very well institute a 
complaint under Section 200 Cr.P.C., examine himself as a witness, make 

10 
 
statements incriminating himself and claim immunity from prosecution. It 
could also be so that an investigating officer, under an honest mistake 
examines a man complicit of an offence as a witness in the case, the 
Court upon examining the other evidence, could conclude that the 
witness was complicit in the offence, the question then would be whether 
there would be complete bar on the Court to prosecute such witness for 
the offence on the basis of such other material.  
19. 
The question that would then arise is whether the qualified 
privilege under the proviso to Section 132 of the Act, grants complete 
immunity to a person who has deposed as a witness (and made 
statements incriminating himself), notwithstanding the availability of 
other material with the prosecution? 
a. Whether a Court while trying an offence, is barred from 
initiating process under Section 319 of the Cr.P.C, against a 
witness in the said proceeding on the basis of other 
material on record? 
 
20. 
As noted above, the qualified privilege under the proviso to Section 
132 of the Act, is intended to ensure that all the evidence is placed 
before the Court to reach a just conclusion. In our view, it is not 
fathomable that a provision in the Evidence Act, the primary purpose of 
which was to ensure that all the material is before the Court and ensure 
that the ends of justice are met, could itself grant a blanket immunity to 
a witness (albeit complicit). Such an interpretation in our opinion would 

11 
 
be unsustainable. Needless to say, that his statement cannot be used for 
any purpose whatsoever for the purposes of bringing such witness to 
trial. As such we hold that the qualified privilege under the proviso to 
Section 132 of the Act does not grant complete immunity from 
prosecution to a person who has deposed as a witness (and made 
statements incriminating himself).  
 
21. 
However, the next question that would arise is what is the course 
available to a Court, which in the course of trial is confronted with 
evidence, other than the statement of the witness (against whom 
incriminating material is available)? Whether the Court can rely upon the 
statement of the witness for invoking the provisions of Section 319 
Cr.P.C? Whether reference to any statement tendered by the witness 
would vitiate the order under Section 319 Cr.P.C?   
 
22. 
There cannot be an absolute embargo on the Trial Court to initiate 
process under Section 319 Cr.P.C., merely because a person, who though 
appears to be complicit has deposed as a witness. The finding to invoke 
Section 319 Cr.P.C., must be based on the evidence that has come up 
during the course of Trial. There must be additional, cogent material 
before the Trial Court apart from the statement of the witness.  
23. 
An order for initiation of process under Section 319 Cr.P.C against a 
witness, who has deposed in the trial and has tendered evidence 

12 
 
incriminating himself, would be tested on the anvil that whether only 
such incriminating statement has formed the basis of the order under 
Section 319 Cr.P.C. At the same time, mere reference to such statement 
would not vitiate the order. The test would be as to whether, even if the 
statement of witness is removed from consideration, whether on the 
basis of other incriminating material, the Court could have proceeded 
under Section 319 Cr.P.C.  
 
24. 
In the case at hand, the appellant has been summoned as an 
additional accused under Section 319 of the Cr.P.C. not only on the basis 
of his pre-summoning statement but on the basis of the statement of 
PW-1/Narendra Singh Parmar who was examined as a witness on 
31.03.2022. Had the appellant been proposed as an additional accused 
on the basis of his statement, he would have been summoned 
immediately after his pre-summoning statement was recorded on 
19.03.2016. Thus, the present is a case where the appellant has been 
summoned as an additional accused on the basis of the statement of PW-
1/Narendra Singh Parmar.  
 
 
25. 
The proviso to Section 132 offers statutory immunity against self-
incrimination providing that no such answer, which a witness shall be 
compelled to give, shall subject him to any arrest or prosecution or be 
proved against him in any criminal proceedings except a prosecution for 
giving false evidence by such answer. Thus, the only protection available 

13 
 
is, a witness cannot be subjected to prosecution on the basis of his own 
statement. It nowhere provides that there is complete and unfettered 
immunity to a person even if there is other substantial evidence or 
material against him proving his prima facie involvement. If this 
complete immunity is read under the proviso to Section 132 of the Act, 
an influential person with the help of a dishonest Investigating Officer 
will provide a legal shield to him by examining him as a witness even 
though his complicity in the offence is writ large on the basis of the 
material available in the case.    
 
26. 
As earlier stated, R. Dinesh Kumar aias Deena has not 
examined the issue discussed in the preceding paragraph, therefore, 
R.Dinesh Kumar aias Deena (supra) is of no assistance to the 
appellant.  
 
27. 
Reverting to the issue as to whether there is prima facie material 
against the appellant for summoning him as an accused in exercise of 
power under Section 319 Cr.P.C.  It is to be seen that in his statement 
during trial recorded on 31.03.2022, PW-1/Narendra Singh Parmar has 
categorically stated in para 5 of the examination-in-chief that the 
interpolations by applying fluid have been made under the initials and 
signatures of the appellant.  Thus, there is prima facie material for 
exercise of power under Section 319 Cr.P.C. 
 

14 
 
28. 
For the foregoing, the criminal appeal deserves to be and is hereby 
dismissed.   
 
CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO. 508 OF 2024 IN CRIMINAL APPEAL 
NO(s). 2764 OF 2024 @ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 
3419 OF 2024. 
 
 
 
29. 
In view of the above judgment passed in Criminal Appeal, the 
proceedings in this Contempt Petition stand closed and the interim order 
passed therein is vacated. The Contempt Petition is disposed of.  
 
………………………………………J. 
 
 
 
 
 
    (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
 
 
.......……………………………….J. 
 
 
 
(PRASANNA BHALACHANDRA VARALE) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
SEPTEMBER 10, 2024.