2024 INSC 732
1 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.         OF 2024 
(ARISING OUT OF SLP(CRL.) NO. 5342 OF 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S VIJIKUMARI     
 
 
                     APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
MOWNESHWARACHARI C                        RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
NAGARATHNA, J. 
 
 
Leave granted. 
2.  
Being aggrieved by the order dated 06.04.2023 passed 
in Criminal Revision Petition No.674/2022 by the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bengaluru, the appellant who is the wife of 
the respondent has preferred this appeal.  
3.  
Briefly stated, the facts are that the appellant-wife had 
filed a petition under Section 12 of the Protection of Women 
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as 
“the Act”).  The said petition, i.e., Criminal Miscellaneous 
Digitally signed by
RADHA SHARMA
Date: 2024.09.25
12:47:23 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
No.6/2014 was allowed by the learned Magistrate by order 
dated 23.02.2015, granting Rs.12,000/- (Rupees Twelve 
Thousand 
only) 
per 
month 
as 
maintenance 
and 
Rs.1,00,000/- 
(Rupees 
One 
Lakh 
only) 
towards 
compensation. At this stage itself, it may be mentioned that 
the respondent-husband did not let in any evidence in the 
said proceeding.  Being aggrieved by the order of the learned 
Magistrate, the respondent filed an appeal under Section 29 
of the Act which was dismissed by the Appellate Court on the 
ground of delay. The aforesaid orders attained finality as they 
were not assailed by the respondent herein.  
4.  
Thereafter, the respondent filed an application under 
Section 25 of the Act before the learned Magistrate. The said 
application was dismissed. Being aggrieved, the respondent 
filed Criminal Appeal No.757/2020 under Section 29 of the 
Act before the Appellate Court.  The said appeal was allowed 
and the matter was remanded to the learned Magistrate with 
a direction to consider the application filed by the respondent 
under Section 25 of the Act, by giving an opportunity to both 
the parties to adduce their evidence and to dispose of the 
same in accordance with law. 

3 
5.  
Being aggrieved by the said order, the appellant herein 
filed Criminal Revision Petition No.674/2022 before the High 
Court, which, by the impugned order dated 06.04.2023 
dismissed the same with a direction to the learned Magistrate 
to consider the application filed by the respondent under 
Section 25 of the Act, without being influenced by any 
observation made by the Appellate Court while disposing of 
Criminal Appeal No.757/2020.  
Being aggrieved by the aforesaid orders, the appellant-
wife has filed this appeal.  
6. 
We have heard learned counsel for the respective parties 
at length. 
7.  
Learned counsel for the appellant, during the course of 
her submissions, drew our attention to the prayers sought for 
by the respondent in the application filed under Section 25 of 
the Act, in light of sub-section (2) of the said Section. She 
submitted that the application filed under the said provision 
could be by an aggrieved person seeking alteration, 
modification or revocation of any order made under the Act 
and for reasons to be recorded in writing, the learned 
Magistrate can pass such an order appropriate to the facts of 

4 
the case. But in the instant case, the respondent is seeking 
setting aside of the order dated 23.02.2015 passed in 
Criminal Miscellaneous No.6/2014 and with an additional 
prayer 
for 
seeking 
return 
of 
the 
entire 
amount 
of 
maintenance paid by the respondent to the appellant on the 
ground of fraud. Learned counsel for the appellant submitted 
that such prayers are not maintainable. She contended that 
the aforesaid application is not for alteration, modification or 
revocation of an order made under the Act; it is in substance 
for setting aside of the order dated 23.02.2015 passed in 
Criminal Miscellaneous No.6/2014; that such an application 
is not maintainable at all.   
8.  
Learned counsel further submitted that the High Court 
as well as the Appellate Court were not right in remanding 
the matter to the learned Magistrate to consider the 
application filed by the respondent herein under sub-section 
(2) of Section 25 of the Act.  She therefore submitted that the 
impugned orders may be set aside and the application filed 
by the respondent may be dismissed and consequently, the 
earlier order passed on 23.02.2015 in Criminal Miscellaneous 
No.6/2014 may be given effect to while sustaining the order 

5 
dated 04.03.2020, by which the application under Section 25 
of the Act was dismissed.   
9.  
Per 
contra, 
learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
respondent 
submitted that the reason as to why the application under 
Section 25 of the Act was filed was owing to the fact that the 
appellant herein had misrepresented the fact that she was in 
need of maintenance whereas she is an employed person and 
not at all in need of maintenance.  The fact that she had said 
that she was unemployed goes to the root of the matter and 
hence, despite the order of the learned Magistrate awarding 
Rs.12,000/- (Rupees Twelve Thousand Only) per month as 
maintenance having attained finality, an application under 
Section 25 of the Act was filed seeking revocation of the said 
order and the Appellate Court as well as the High Court were 
justified in directing the learned Magistrate to consider the 
said application.   
10.  We have considered the arguments advanced at the Bar 
in light of the facts of this case and Section 25 of the Act. For 
immediate reference, Section 25 of the Act is extracted as 
under: 
 

6 
“25. Duration and alteration of orders 
(1)  A protection order made under section 18 
shall be in force till the aggrieved person 
applies for discharge. 
(2)  If 
the 
Magistrate, 
on 
receipt 
of 
an 
application from the aggrieved person or the 
respondent, is satisfied that there is a 
change in the circumstances requiring 
alteration, modification or revocation of any 
order made under this Act, he may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing pass such 
order, as he may deem appropriate.” 
 
On a reading of the same, it is evident that an aggrieved 
person or a respondent as defined under the Act can seek for  
alteration, modification or revocation of an order made under 
the provisions of the Act if there is a change in the 
circumstances as per sub-section (2) of Section 25 of the Act.  
This would indicate that after an order has been made, inter 
alia, under Section 12 of the Act, such as in the instant case 
granting Rs.12,000/- as maintenance per month, if there is 
any change in the circumstance, the same could be a ground 
for seeking alteration, modification or revocation of such an 
order. Such circumstances could be illustratively stated in 
the context of the present case as the wife on divorce having 
been given an alimony or the wife earning an amount higher 

7 
than the respondent-husband and, therefore, not in need of 
maintenance or such other circumstances. The said change 
in the circumstance must occur only after an initial order is 
made under Section 12 of the Act and cannot relate to a 
period prior to the passing of an order under Section 12 of 
the Act.   
11.  The Act is a piece of Civil Code which is applicable to 
every woman in India irrespective of her religious affiliation 
and/or social background for a more effective protection of 
her rights guaranteed under the Constitution and in order to 
protect women victims of domestic violence occurring in a 
domestic relationship.   
12.  Section 25(2) of the Act contemplates an eventuality 
where an order passed under the Act can be altered, modified 
or revoked. Section 25(2) of the Act provides that the 
aggrieved person or the respondent, as defined under the Act, 
may approach the Magistrate by filing an application for 
alteration, modification or revocation of “any order” made 
under the Act. Thus, the scope of Section 25(2) of the Act is 
broad enough to deal with all nature of orders passed under 
the Act, which may include orders of maintenance, residence, 

8 
protection, etc. If any such application is filed before the 
Magistrate by any of the two parties, i.e., the aggrieved 
person or the respondent, then the Magistrate may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, pass an order as he may 
deem appropriate. Thus, an order passed under the Act 
remains in force till the time that order is either set aside in 
an 
appeal 
under 
Section 
29 
of 
the 
Act, 
or 
altered/modified/revoked in terms of Section 25(2) of the Act 
by the Magistrate.   
13.  However, the Magistrate while exercising his discretion 
under Section 25(2) of the Act has to be satisfied that a 
change in the circumstances has occurred, requiring to pass 
an order of alteration, modification or revocation.  The phrase 
“a change in the circumstances” has not been defined under 
the Act. The said phrase was present under Section 489 of 
the now repealed Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, as well 
as under Section 127(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (CrPC, 1973), now repealed, as is also found under 
Section 146(1) of the present Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 (BNNS, 2023), but the legislature (Parliament) 
has intentionally not provided a definition for the same in the 

9 
repealed Codes or the present Sanhita. Thus, the Magistrate 
has to adjudge the change in the circumstances based on the 
material put forth by the parties in a case and having regard 
to the circumstances of the said case. A change in the 
circumstances under the Act may be of either a pecuniary 
nature, such as a change in the income of the respondent or 
an aggrieved person or it could be a change in other 
circumstances of the party paying or receiving the allowance, 
which would justify an increase or decrease of the 
maintenance amount ordered by the Magistrate to pay or any 
other necessary change in the relief granted by the Magistrate 
including a revocation of the earlier order. The phrasing of 
the provision is wide enough to cover factors like the cost of 
living, income of the parties, etc. Further, a change in the 
circumstances need not just be of the respondent but also of 
the aggrieved person. For example, a change in the financial 
circumstances of the husband may be a vital criterion for 
alteration of maintenance but may also include other 
circumstantial changes in the husband or wife's life which 
may have taken place since the time maintenance was first 
ordered.   

10 
14.  However, for the invocation of Section 25(2) of the Act, 
there must be a change in the circumstances after the order 
being passed under the Act. Alexander Sambath Abner vs. 
Miron Lede, 2009 SCC OnLine Mad 2851 is also to the 
same effect. Thus, an order for alteration, modification or 
revocation operates prospectively and not retrospectively. 
Though the order for grant of a maintenance is effective 
retrospectively from the date of the application or as ordered 
by the Magistrate, the position is different with regard to an 
application for alteration in an allowance, which may 
incidentally be either an increase or a reduction – to take 
effect from a date on which the order of alteration is made or 
any other date such as from the date on which an application 
for alteration, modification or revocation was made depending 
on the facts of each case.   
15.  The position is analogous to Sections 125 and 127 of the 
CrPC, 1973, wherein the legislature under Section 125(2) of 
the CrPC, 1973 had given power to the Magistrate to grant 
maintenance from the date of the application, but did not give 
any such power under Section 127 of the CrPC, 1973. 
Therefore, under the Act, the order of alteration or 

11 
modification or revocation could operate from the date of the 
said application being filed or as ordered by the Magistrate 
under Section 25(2) of the Act. Thus, the applicant cannot 
seek its retrospective applicability, so as to seek a refund of 
the amount already paid as per the original order.   
16.  The respondent herein has however sought the following 
prayers in the application filed under Section 25 of the Act, 
which read as under: 
“WHEREFORE, the petitioner respectfully prays 
that this Hon’ble Court may be pleased to pass the 
following orders: 
 
a)  
Set aside the order dated 23-02-2015 
passed in Crl. Mis. 6/2014, 
 
b)  
In 
pursuant 
of 
that 
direct 
the 
respondent to pay back the entire 
amount received by her by playing 
fraud on the court and on petitioner. 
c)  
Direct the respondent to pay the cost 
of this litigation, 
 
d)  
Grant such other relief or reliefs on 
this Hon’ble Court deem fit and 
proper in the circumstances of the 
case to meet the ends of justice.” 
 
What the respondent is seeking is in fact a setting aside 
of 
the 
order 
dated 
23.02.2015 
passed 
in 
Criminal 
Miscellaneous No.6/2014 and return of the amount paid by 

12 
him to the appellant herein in terms of the said order by way 
of a restitution of the status quo ante.  
17.  Learned counsel for the appellant rightly contended that 
the said order has in fact merged with the Appellate Court’s 
order in the appeal filed by the respondent which was 
dismissed on the ground of delay and there being no further 
challenge to the said order. In fact, the order dated 
23.02.2015 has attained finality.  Therefore, there cannot be 
a setting aside of the order dated 23.02.2015 for the period 
prior to such an application for revocation being made. 
Unless there is a change in the circumstance requiring 
alteration, modification or revocation of the earlier order 
owing to a change occurring subsequent to the order being 
passed, the application is not maintainable. Thus, the 
exercise of jurisdiction under sub-section (2) of Section 25 of 
the Act cannot be for setting aside of an earlier order merely 
because the respondent seeks setting aside of that order, 
particularly when the said order has attained finality by its 
merger with an appellate order as in the instant case unless a 
case for its revocation is made out. Secondly, the prayers 
sought for by the respondent herein are for refund of the 

13 
entire amount of maintenance that was paid prior to the 
application under sub-section (2) of Section 25 of the Act 
being filed and the order dated 23.02.2015 passed in 
Criminal Miscellaneous No.6/2014 being in fact revoked. The 
revocation of an order, inter alia, under Section 12 of the Act 
sought by a party cannot relate to a period prior to such an 
order being passed. We find that in the instant case the 
second prayer was not at all maintainable inasmuch as we 
have already observed that any alteration, modification or 
revocation of an order passed under Section 12 of the Act 
owing to a change in circumstances could only be for a period  
ex post facto, i.e., post the period of an order being made in a 
petition under Section 12 of the Act and not to a period prior 
thereto. Thus, such an application for alteration, modification 
or revocation filed under sub-section (2) of Section 25 of the 
Act cannot relate to any period prior to the order being 
passed, inter alia, under Section 12 of the Act. 
18.  In the circumstances, we find that the prayers sought 
for by the respondent herein were not at all maintainable 
under sub-section (2) of Section 25 of the Act as they related 
to the period prior to 23.02.2015 when the original order was 

14 
passed. In fact, the prayers sought for by the respondent are 
totally contrary to the spirit of sub-section (2) of Section 25 of 
the Act. While making such a prayer, the respondent could 
not have sought in substance for setting aside of the original 
order dated 23.02.2015 passed in Criminal Miscellaneous 
No.6/2014 and seeking refund of the maintenance amount 
which was paid to the appellant pursuant to the said order.  
The respondent could not have also sought the aforesaid 
prayers:  firstly, because he did not participate in the 
proceedings 
before 
the 
learned 
Magistrate; 
secondly, 
respondent belatedly filed an appeal before the Appellate 
Court which was dismissed and thirdly, when that appeal 
was dismissed on the ground of delay, he did not choose to 
assail the said order before a higher forum. 
19.  In the circumstances, the orders of the High Court as 
well as the first Appellate Court are set aside and the 
application filed by the respondent is dismissed. However, 
liberty is reserved to the respondent herein to file a fresh 
application under Section 25 of the Act, if so advised. If such 
an application is filed by the respondent, the same shall be 
considered by the learned Magistrate having regard to the 

15 
observations made above and on its own merits, which can be 
relatable to the period subsequent to the date of making the 
earlier order dated 23.02.2015 in the instant case. Any 
revocation of the order dated 23.02.2015 could be with effect 
from the date of the application, if any, to be made by the 
respondent herein or as ordered by the learned Magistrate.  
20.  This appeal is allowed and disposed of in the aforesaid 
terms. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
   …………………………………………………….,J. 
      (B.V. NAGARATHNA) 
 
 
 
 
 
       …………………………………………………..,J. 
(NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH) 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
SEPTEMBER 10, 2024.