2024 INSC 686
 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 1 of 16 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  
OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 23320 of 2023) 
 
ROHAN BUILDERS (INDIA) PRIVATE LIMITED 
.....  
APPELLANT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
  
 
BERGER PAINTS INDIA LIMITED 
.....  
RESPONDENT 
 
W I T H 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  
OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 24489 of 2023) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  
OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 26938 of 2023) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 
 
OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos. 26990-26991 of 2023) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  
OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27353 of 2023) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  
OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 1344 of 2024) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  
OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 2115 of 2024) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  
OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 8131 of 2024) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  
OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 12170 of 2024) 
 
A N D 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 
 
OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos. 13975-13976 of 2024) 
 
 
 
 
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
Date: 2024.09.12
17:23:33 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 2 of 16 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
SANJIV KHANNA, J. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
2. 
This common judgment decides whether an application for extension of time 
under Section 29A of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 19961 can be filed 
after the expiry of the period for making of the arbitral award. The High Court 
at Calcutta in Rohan Builders (India) Pvt. Ltd. v. Berger Paints India Limited2 
has held that the application for extension of time under Sections 29A(4) and 
29A(5) of the A & C Act can only be entertained if filed before the expiry of the 
mandate of the arbitral tribunal. The High Court at Calcutta held that once the 
mandate of the arbitral tribunal is terminated by afflux of time of twelve months, 
or when so consented to by the parties after a further six-month extension, the 
power of the court to extend time under Section 29A(4) cannot be invoked. A 
similar view has been taken by a Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature 
at Patna in South Bihar Power Distribution Company Limited v. Bhagalpur 
Electricity Distribution Company Private Limited.3 However, a catena of 
judgments from other High Courts have taken an opposite view. The High 
Court of Delhi in ATC Telecom Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. v. Bharat Sanchar Nigam 
Ltd.4, Wadia Techno-Engineering Services Limited v. Director General of 
Married Accommodation Project and Another5, and some other cases6; the 
High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Nikhil H. Malkan and Others v. Standard 
 
1 For short, “A & C Act”.  
2 AP/328/2023 and other connected matters decided on 06.09.2023. 
3 Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No. 20350 of 2021 and other connected matters decided on 26.04.2023. 
4 2023:DHC:8078. 
5 2023 SCC OnLine Del 2990. 
6 ATS Infrastructure Ltd. and Another v. Rasbehari Traders, 2023 SCC OnLine Del 8645, M/s Power 
Mech Projects Ltd. v. M/s Doosan Power Systems India Pvt. Ltd., 2024:DHC:3769, KMP Expressways 
Ltd. v. IDBI Bank Ltd., 2024 SCC OnLine Del 2617, Reliance Infrastructure Limited v. Madhyanchal 
Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited, 2023:DHC:5745 et al. 

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 3 of 16 
 
Chartered Investment and Loans (India) Limited7; the High Court of Kerala in 
Hiran Valiiyakkil Lal and Others v. Vineeth M.V. and Others8; the High Court of 
Madras in G.N.Pandian v. S. Vasudevan and Others9; and the High Court of 
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh in H.P.Singh v. G.M. Northern Railways and 
Others10, have held that an application for extension of time limit for arbitral 
award can be filed by a party even after the expiry of the term of twelve months 
or the extended period of six months. Recently, the High Court at Calcutta in a 
subsequent decision of the single Judge in Ashok Kumar Gupta v. M.D. 
Creations and Others11, on elaborated examination, has concurred with this 
view.12 
 
3. 
For the reasons recorded below, we accept the view taken by the High Courts 
of Delhi, Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh, Bombay, Kerala, Madras, and the 
subsequent view expressed by the High Court at Calcutta in Ashok Kumar 
Gupta (supra). However, before we elucidate our reasons, it would be 
appropriate to first quote Section 29A of the A & C Act as it stands today: 
“29-A. Time limit for arbitral award.—(1) The award in matters 
other than international commercial arbitration shall be made by 
the arbitral tribunal within a period of twelve months from the date 
of completion of pleadings under sub-section (4) of Section 23: 
 
Provided that the award in the matter of international commercial 
arbitration may be made as expeditiously as possible and 
endeavour may be made to dispose of the matter within a period 
of twelve months from the date of completion of pleadings under 
sub-section (4) of Section 23. 
 
(2) If the award is made within a period of six months from the 
date the arbitral tribunal enters upon the reference, the arbitral 
 
7 2023:BHC-OS:14063. 
8 2023 SCC OnLine Ker 5151. 
9 2020 SCC OnLine Mad 737. 
10 2023 SCC OnLine J&K 1255. 
11 2024 SCC OnLine Cal 6909. 
12 This Court while issuing notice in the Civil Appeal a/o SLP (C) No. 2115 of 2024 had granted a stay 
on the operation of the common judgment in Rohan Builders (India) Pvt. Ltd. (supra). 

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 4 of 16 
 
tribunal shall be entitled to receive such amount of additional fees 
as the parties may agree. 
 
(3) The parties may, by consent, extend the period specified in 
sub-section (1) for making award for a further period not 
exceeding six months. 
 
(4) If the award is not made within the period specified in sub-
section (1) or the extended period specified under sub-section 
(3), the mandate of the arbitrator(s) shall terminate unless the 
court has, either prior to or after the expiry of the period so 
specified, extended the period: 
 
Provided that while extending the period under this sub-section, 
if the court finds that the proceedings have been delayed for the 
reasons attributable to the arbitral tribunal, then, it may order 
reduction of fees of arbitrator(s) by not exceeding five per cent 
for each month of such delay: 
 
Provided further that where an application under sub-section (5) 
is pending, the mandate of the arbitrator shall continue till the 
disposal of the said application: 
 
Provided also that the arbitrator shall be given an opportunity of 
being heard before the fees is reduced. 
 
(5) The extension of period referred to in sub-section (4) may be 
on the application of any of the parties and may be granted only 
for sufficient cause and on such terms and conditions as may be 
imposed by the court. 
 
(6) While extending the period referred to in sub-section (4), it 
shall be open to the court to substitute one or all of the arbitrators 
and if one or all of the arbitrators are substituted, the arbitral 
proceedings shall continue from the stage already reached and 
on the basis of the evidence and material already on record, and 
the arbitrator(s) appointed under this section shall be deemed to 
have received the said evidence and material. 
 
(7) In the event of arbitrator(s) being appointed under this 
section, the arbitral tribunal thus reconstituted shall be deemed 
to be in continuation of the previously appointed arbitral tribunal. 
 
(8) It shall be open to the court to impose actual or exemplary 
costs upon any of the parties under this section. 
 
(9) An application filed under sub-section (5) shall be disposed of 
by the court as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be 
made to dispose of the matter within a period of sixty days from 
the date of service of notice on the opposite party.” 
 

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 5 of 16 
 
4. 
Earlier, the Arbitration Act, 1940, stipulated in its First Schedule that the arbitral 
award must be made within four months from the date of reference, or from 
the date the arbitrator was called upon to act by notice, or within any extended 
time granted thereafter.13 Section 28(1) of the Arbitration Act, 1940,  
empowered the court to extend the time for making an award, irrespective of 
whether the original time had expired or whether the award had already been 
made. As per Section 28(2) of the Arbitration Act, 1940, parties could extend 
the time for making an award by mutual consent.14 Prior to the enactment of 
Section 29A, the A & C Act did not specify a time limit for making an arbitral 
award. This was deliberate, given the fact that the First Schedule and Section 
28 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 led to litigation and delay. Section 29A, as 
quoted above, was inserted by Act No. 3 of 201615 with retrospective effect 
 
13 Paragraph 3 to the First Schedule of the Arbitration Act, 1940 reads:  
 
“3. The arbitrators shall make their award within four months after entering on the reference 
or after having been called upon to act by notice in writing from any party to the arbitration 
agreement or within such extended time as the Court may allow.” 
 
14 “28. Power to Court only to enlarge time for making award.— 
(1) The Court may, if thinks fit, whether the time for making the award has expired or not and whether 
the award has been made or not, enlarge from time to time the time for making the award. 
(2) Any provision in an arbitration agreement whereby the arbitrators or umpire may except with the 
consent of all the parties to the agreement, enlarge the time for making the award, shall be void and 
of no effect.” 
15 Section 29A was inserted in the A & C Act vide the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 
2015 (Act No. 3 of 2016) which read: 
“15. Insertion of new Sections 29-A and 29-B.— After Section 29 of the principal Act, 
the following new sections shall be inserted, namely—  
‘29-A. Time limit for arbitral award.—  
(1) The award shall be made within a period of twelve months from the 
date the arbitral tribunal enters upon the reference. 
Explanation.— For the purpose of this sub-section, an arbitral tribunal shall 
be deemed to have entered upon the reference on the date on which the 
arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the case may be, have received notice, 
in writing, of their appointment. 
(2) If the award is made within a period of six months from the date the 
arbitral tribunal enters upon the reference, the arbitral tribunal shall be 
entitled to receive such amount of additional fees as the parties may agree. 
(3) The parties may, by consent, extend the period specified in sub-section 
(1) for making award for a further period not exceeding six months. 
(4) If the award is not made within the period specified in sub-section (1) 
or the extended period specified under sub-section (3), the mandate of the 
arbitrator(s) shall terminate unless the Court has, either prior to or after the 
expiry of the period so specified, extended the period: 

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 6 of 16 
 
from 23.10.2015. The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 
aimed to ensure that arbitration proceedings are completed without 
unnecessary adjournments and delay.  
 
5. 
Section 29A envisages two time limits for making of an arbitral award. First, 
Section 29A(1) states that an award shall be made by the arbitral tribunal within 
a period of twelve months. Secondly, Section 29A(3) stipulates that the parties 
by consent can extend the time for making the award beyond twelve months, 
up to an additional period of six months. Extension beyond six months, even 
by consent of the parties, is not permitted. In terms of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019 (Act No. 33 of 2019)16, the time-limit for 
 
Provided that while extending the period under this sub-section, if the court 
finds that the proceedings have been delayed for the reasons attributable 
to the arbitral tribunal, then, it may order reduction of fees of arbitrator(s) 
by not exceeding five per cent for each month of such delay. 
(5) The extension of period referred to in sub-section (4) may be on the 
application of any of the parties and may be granted only for sufficient 
cause and on such terms and conditions as may be imposed by the court. 
(6) While extending the period referred to in sub-section (4), it shall be 
open to the court to substitute one or all of the arbitrators and if one or all 
of the arbitrators are substituted, the arbitral proceedings shall continue 
from the stage already reached and on the basis of the evidence and 
material already on record, and the arbitrator(s) appointed under this 
section shall be deemed to have received the said evidence and material. 
(7) In the event of arbitrator(s) being appointed under this section, the 
arbitral tribunal thus reconstituted shall be deemed to be in continuation of 
the previously appointed arbitral tribunal. 
(8) It shall be open to the Court to impose actual or exemplary costs upon 
any of the parties under this section. 
(9) An application filed under sub-section (5) shall be disposed of by the 
court as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose 
of the matter within a period of sixty days from the date of service of notice 
on the opposite party.’ ” 
16 Section 29A was further amended vide the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019 (Act 
No. 33 of 2019) which read: 
“6. Amendment of Section 29-A.— In Section 29-A of the principal Act,— 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 
‘(1) The award in matters other than international commercial 
arbitration shall be made by the arbitral tribunal within a period of 
twelve months from the date of completion of pleadings under sub-
section (4) of Section 23: 
Provided that the award in the matter of international commercial 
arbitration may be made as expeditiously as possible and 
endeavour may be made to dispose of the matter within a period of 
twelve months from the date of completion of pleadings under sub-
section (4) of Section 23.’; 

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 7 of 16 
 
making an arbitral award under Section 29A(1) is not applicable to international 
commercial arbitration. As per the amendment made by Act No. 33 of 2019, 
the twelve-month period commences from the date of completion of pleadings 
under Section 23(4) of the A & C Act. Earlier, Section 29A(1) had stipulated 
that the twelve-month period would begin from the date the arbitral tribunal 
enters upon reference. Section 29A(2) states that if the award is made within 
six months, the arbitral tribunal will be entitled to receive such amount as 
additional fees as the parties may agree.  
 
6. 
Section 29A(4) is the provision which requires interpretation. It states that 
where the award is not made within the specified period of twelve or eighteen17 
months, the mandate of the arbitral tribunal will terminate. However, this 
provision does not apply if the court has extended the period, either before or 
after the expiry of the initial or the extended term. In other words, Section 
29A(4) empowers the court to extend the period for making of the arbitral 
award beyond a period of twelve months or eighteen months, as the case may 
be. The expression “either prior to or after the expiry of the period so specified” 
is unambiguous. It can be deduced by the language that the court can extend 
the time where an application is filed after the expiry of the period under sub-
section (1) or the extended period in terms of sub-section (3). The court has 
the power to extend the period for making an award at any time before or after 
the mandated period.  
 
 
(b) in sub-section (4), after the proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:— 
‘Provided further that where an application under sub-section (5) is 
pending, the mandate of the arbitrator shall continue till the disposal of 
the said application: 
Provided also that the arbitrator shall be given an opportunity of being 
heard before the fees is reduced.’” 
17 This includes the period of twelve months under Section 29A(1) and the extended period of six 
months under Section 29A(3). 

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 8 of 16 
 
7. 
Section 29A(5) states that a party to the arbitration proceedings can file an 
application in court for an extension of time for making the award. As per the 
second proviso to Section 29A(4), where an application for an extension of 
time under Section 29A(5) has been filed and is pending, the mandate of the 
arbitral tribunal shall continue till the disposal of the application. Thus, the 
second proviso to Section 29A(4), by specific mandate, allows the arbitration 
proceedings to continue during the pendency of the extension application 
under Section 29A(5) before the court. Lastly, the extension of time is to be 
granted by the court only for ‘sufficient cause’ and on such terms and 
conditions as may be imposed by the court. We will elaborate on the last 
aspect, and why this interpretation is preferable. First, we will refer to the ratio 
and reasoning in Rohan Builders (India) Pvt. Ltd. (supra). 
 
8. 
The core of the ratio and reasoning of Rohan Builders (India) Pvt. Ltd. (supra) 
is based on the use of the expression “terminate” in Section 29A(4). The 
judgment relies on the recommendations made by the 176th Report of the Law 
Commission of India, which had suggested using the term “suspend”. 
Juxtaposing the words “terminate” and “suspend”, it is noted that the use of the 
expression “terminate” reflects the legislative intent of terminating the mandate 
of the arbitral tribunal upon the expiry of the specified period. Therefore, the 
reasoning observes that on the termination of the mandate, the arbitral tribunal 
becomes de jure incapable of performing its function. Along the same lines, it 
is argued before us that, as a sequitur, and in view of Sections 14, 15, 29A and 
32 of the A & C Act, a party must file an application for an extension of time to 
make an arbitral award before the culmination of the initial twelve-month period 
or the extended six-month period. 

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 9 of 16 
 
 
9. 
In our opinion, the aforesaid reasoning is fallacious and unacceptable. 
Language serves as a means to express thoughts and intentions.18 Words can 
have various meanings and connotations; thus, an interpretive exercise must 
be conducted with careful consideration of both the text and the context of the 
provision. Therefore, sometimes the court eschews a literal construction if it 
produces manifest absurdity or unjust results.19  
 
10. 
The word “terminate” in Section 29A(4) has to be read in the context of the said 
provision.20 It should not be read as an isolated word with a strict dictionary 
meaning, but rather in conjunction with the surrounding words and expressions 
which warrant recognition and consideration. This evinces the legislative 
intent. Secondly, the legislative preference for the term “terminate” over 
“suspend” is apparent, since the word “suspend” could cause incongruity and 
a legal conundrum if no party files an application for an extension of time. In 
such a scenario, the arbitral proceedings would stand suspended ad infinitum. 
Therefore, the legislature by using the word “terminate” intends to affirm the 
principle of party autonomy. Resultantly, if neither party moves an application 
for an extension of time for making the award, the arbitration proceedings are 
terminated. Consequences follow. Clearly, the use of the word “suspension” 
would have led to infeasible ramifications. 
 
 
18 Oswal Agro Mills Ltd. and Others v. Collector of Central Excise and Others, 1993 Supp (3) SCC 716. 
19 Babu Manmohan Das Shah and Others v. Bishun Das, (1967) 1 SCR 836. 
20 This Court in Renaissance Hotel Holdings Inc. v. B. Vijaya Sai and Others, (2022) 5 SCC 1 at ¶66 
held that 
“It is thus trite law that while interpreting the provisions of a statute, it is necessary that the 
textual interpretation should be matched with the contextual one. The Act must be looked 
at as a whole and it must be discovered what each section, each clause, each phrase and 
each word is meant and designed to say as to fit into the scheme of the entire Act. No part 
of a statute and no word of a statute can be construed in isolation.(…)” 

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 10 of 16 
 
11. 
The word “terminate” in Section 29A(4) makes the arbitral tribunal functus 
officio, but not in absolute terms. The true purport of the word “terminate” must 
be understood in light of the syntax of the provision. The absence of a full stop 
after the word “terminate” is noteworthy. The word “terminate” is followed by 
the connecting word “unless”, which qualifies the first part with the subsequent 
limb of the section, i.e. “unless the court has, either prior to or after the expiry 
of the period so specified, extended the period.” The expression “prior to or 
after the expiry of the period so specified” has to be understood with reference 
to the power of the court to grant an extension of time.  
 
12. 
Accordingly, the termination of the arbitral mandate is conditional upon the 
non-filing of an extension application and cannot be treated as termination 
stricto sensu. The word “terminate” in the contextual form does not reflect 
termination as if the proceedings have come to a legal and final end, and 
cannot continue even on filing of an application for extension of time. 
Therefore, termination under Section 29A(4) is not set in stone or absolutistic 
in character.21 
 
13. 
An interpretive process must recognize the goal or purpose of the legal text.22 
Section 29A intends to ensure the timely completion of arbitral proceedings 
while allowing courts the flexibility to grant extensions when warranted. 
Prescribing a limitation period, unless clearly stated in words or necessary, 
should not be accepted. Bar by limitation has penal and fatal consequences. 
This Court in North Eastern Chemicals Industries (P) Ltd. and Another v. 
Ashok Paper Mill (Assam) Ltd. and Another23 observed: 
 
21 Supra note 11.  
22 Shailesh Dhairyawan v. Mohan Balkrishna Lulla, (2016) 3 SCC 619. 
23 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1649. 

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 11 of 16 
 
“When no limitation stands prescribed it would be 
inappropriate for a Court to supplant the legislature’s wisdom 
by its own and provide a limitation, more so in accordance with 
what it believes to be the appropriate period.”  
 
 
Courts should be wary of prescribing a specific period of limitation in cases 
where the legislature has refrained from doing so.24 If we give a narrow and 
restrictive meaning to Section 29A(4), we would be indulging in judicial 
legislation by incorporating a negative stipulation of a bar of limitation, which 
has a severe annulling effect. Such an interpretation will add words to widen 
the scope of legislation and amount to modification or rewriting of the statute. 
If the legislature intended such an outcome, it could have stated in the statute 
that – “the Court may extend the period only if the application is filed before 
the expiry of the mandate of the arbitrator, not after”. Indeed, there would have 
been no need to use the phrase “after the expiry of the period” in the statute.   
In other words, a rigid interpretation would amount to legislating and 
prescribing a limitation period for filing an application under Section 29A, when 
the section does not conspicuously so state. Rather, the expression and intent 
of the provision are to the contrary.  
 
 
14. 
In our opinion, a restrictive interpretation would lead to rigour, impediments 
and complexities. A party would have to rush to the court even when the period 
of arbitral mandate of twelve months has not expired, notwithstanding the 
possibility of a consent-based extension of six months under Section 29A(3). 
Narrow interpretation presents an additional challenge by relegating a faultless 
 
24 Ajaib Singh v. Sirhind Cooperative Marketing-cum-Processing Service Society Ltd. and Another, 
(1999) 6 SCC 82. 

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 12 of 16 
 
party to a fresh reference or appointment of an arbitrator under the A & C Act25, 
thereby impeding arbitration rather than facilitating it.26 The legislature vide the 
2015 Amendment envisions arbitration as a litigant-centric process by 
expediting disposal of cases and reducing the cost of litigation.27 A narrow 
interpretation will be counterproductive. The intention is appropriately captured 
in the following observations made in the 176th Report of the Law Commission 
of India : 
“2.21.1 (…)But the omission of the provision for extension of 
time and therefore the absence of any time limit has given rise 
to another problem, namely, that awards are getting delayed 
before the arbitral tribunal even under the 1996 Act.  One view 
is that this is on account of the absence of a provision as to 
time limit for passing an award. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
2.21.3 (…)The time limit can be more realistic subject to 
extension only by the court.  Delays ranging from five years to 
even fourteen years in a single arbitration have come to the 
Commission’s notice. The Supreme Court of India has also 
referred to these delays of the arbitral tribunal. The point here 
is that these delays are occurring even in cases where there 
is no court intervention during the arbitral process. The 
removal of the time limit is having its own adverse 
consequences. There can be a provision for early disposal of 
the applications for extension, if that is one of the reasons for 
omitting a provision prescribing a time limit, say one month.  
Parties can be permitted to extend time by one year. Pending 
the application for extension, we propose to allow the 
arbitration proceedings to continue.(…) 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
25 We have not examined and pronounced on the legal consequence when the proceedings “terminate” 
in terms of Section 29A of the A & C Act and the legal remedy available to the parties. 
26 This Court in Interplay Between Arbitration Agreements under Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
& Stamp Act, 1899, In re, (2024) 6 SCC 1 at para ¶94 held:  
“The Arbitration Act represents the principles of modern arbitration, which seeks to give 
effect to the mutual intention of the parties to resolve their disputes by a neutral third-party 
Arbitral Tribunal, whose decision is final and binding on all the parties. Arbitration law 
allows the parties to design arbitral procedures, which ensures efficiency and expediency 
of the arbitration process. One of the reasons that business and commercial entities prefer 
arbitration is because it obviates cumbersome judicial processes, which can often prove 
expensive, complex and interminable. (…) It is the duty of this Court to interpret the 
Arbitration Act in a manner which gives life to the principles of modern arbitration in India.” 
27 See Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2015 
inserting Section 29A. 

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 13 of 16 
 
 
2.21.4 
It 
is, 
therefore, 
proposed 
to 
implement 
the 
recommendation made in the 76th Report of the Law 
Commission with the modification that an award must be 
passed at least within one year of the arbitrators entering on 
the reference.  The initial period will be one year.  Thereafter, 
parties can, by consent, extend the period upto a maximum of 
another one year.  Beyond the one year plus the period agreed 
to by mutual consent, the court will have to grant extension.  
Applications for extension are to be disposed of within one 
month.  While granting extension, the court may impose costs 
and also indicate the future procedure to be followed by the 
tribunal .  There will, therefore,  be  a further proviso, that 
further extension beyond the period stated above should be 
granted by the Court.  We are not inclined to suggest a cap on 
the power of extension as recommended by the Law 
Commission earlier.  There may be cases where the court 
feels that more than 24 months  is necessary.  It can be left to 
the court to fix an upper limit.  It must be provided that beyond 
24 months, neither the parties by consent, nor the arbitral 
tribunal could extend the period.  The court’s order will be 
necessary in this regard.  But in order to see that delay in 
disposal of extension applications does not hamper 
arbitration, we propose to allow arbitration to continue pending 
disposal of the application. 
 
2.21.5 One other important aspect here is that if there is a 
delay beyond the initial one year and the period agreed to by 
the parties (with an upper of another one year) and also any 
period of extension granted by the Court, there is no point in 
terminating the arbitration proceedings.  We propose it as they 
should be continued till award is passed.  Such a termination 
may indeed result in waste of time and money for the parties 
after lot of evidence is led.  In fact, if the proceedings were to 
terminate and the claimant is to file a separate suit, it will even 
become necessary to exclude the period spent in arbitration 
proceedings, if he was not at fault, by amending sec. 43(5) to 
cover such a situation.  But the Commission is of the view that 
there is a better solution to the problem.    
 
The Commission, therefore, proposes to see that an arbitral 
award is ultimately passed even if the above said delays have 
taken place. In order that there is no further delay, the 
Commission proposes that after the period of initial one year 
and the further period agreed to by the parties (subject to a 
maximum of one year) is over, the arbitration proceedings will 
nearly stand suspended and will get revived as soon as any 
party to the proceedings files an application in the Court for 
extension of time.  In case none of the parties files an 
application, even then the arbitral tribunal may seek an 
extension from the Court.  From the moment the application is 

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 14 of 16 
 
filed, the arbitration proceedings can be continued. When the 
Court takes up the application for extension, it shall grant 
extension subject to any order as to costs and it shall fix up 
the time schedule for the future procedure before the arbitral 
tribunal.  It will initially pass an order granting extension of time 
and fixing the time frame before the arbitral tribunal and will 
continue to pass further orders till time the award is passed.  
This procedure will ensure that ultimately an award is passed.” 
 
15. 
Rohan Builders (India) Pvt. Ltd. (supra) highlights that an interpretation 
allowing an extension application post the expiry period would encourage 
rogue litigants and render the timeline for making the award inconsequential. 
However, it is apposite to note that under Section 29A(5), the power of the 
court to extend the time is to be exercised only in cases where there is sufficient 
cause for such extension. Such extension is not granted mechanically on filing 
of the application. The judicial discretion of the court in terms of the enactment 
acts as a deterrent against any party abusing the process of law or espousing 
a frivolous or vexatious application. Further, the court can impose terms and 
conditions while granting an extension. Delay, even on the part of the arbitral 
tribunal, is not countenanced.28 The first proviso to Section 29A(4) permits a 
fee reduction of up to five percent for each month of delay attributable to the 
arbitral tribunal. 
 
16. 
Lastly, Section 29A(6) does not support the narrow interpretation of the 
expression “terminate”. It states that the court – while deciding an extension 
application under Section 29A(4) – may substitute one or all the arbitrators. 
Section 29A(7) states that if a new arbitrator(s) is appointed, the reconstituted 
arbitral tribunal shall be deemed to be in continuation of the previously 
appointed arbitral tribunal. This obliterates the need to file a fresh application 
 
28Supra note 10.  

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 15 of 16 
 
under Section 11 of the A & C Act for the appointment of an arbitrator. In the 
event of substitution of arbitrator(s), the arbitral proceedings will commence 
from the stage already reached. Evidence or material already on record is 
deemed to be received by the newly constituted tribunal. The aforesaid 
deeming provisions underscore the legislative intent to effectuate efficiency 
and expediency in the arbitral process. This intent is also demonstrated in 
Sections 29A(8) and 29A(9). The court in terms of Section 29A(8) has the 
power to impose actual or exemplary costs upon the parties. Lastly, Section 
29A(9) stipulates that an application for extension under sub-section (5) must 
be disposed of expeditiously, with the endeavour of doing so within sixty days 
from the date of filing. 
 
17. 
As per the second proviso to Section 29A(4), the mandate of the arbitral 
tribunal continues where an application under sub-section (5) is pending. 
However, an application for extension of period of the arbitral tribunal is to be 
decided by the court in terms of sub-section (5), and sub-sections (6) to (8) 
may be invoked. The power to extend time period for making of the award 
vests with the court, and not with the arbitral tribunal. Therefore, the arbitral 
tribunal may not pronounce the award till an application under Section 29A(5) 
of the A & C Act is sub-judice before the court. In a given case, where an award 
is pronounced during the pendency of an application for extension of period of 
the arbitral tribunal, the court must still decide the application under sub-section 
(5), and may even, where an award has been pronounced, invoke, when 
required and justified, sub-sections (6) to (8), or the first and third proviso to 
Section 29A(4) of the A & C Act. 
 

 
 
Civil Appeal a/o. SLP (C) No. 23320 of 2023 & Ors. 
Page 16 of 16 
 
18. 
While interpreting a statute, we must strive to give meaningful life to an 
enactment or rule and avoid cadaveric consequences that result in unworkable 
or impracticable scenarios.29 An interpretation which produces an 
unreasonable result is not to be imputed to a statute if there is some other 
equally possible construction which is acceptable, practical and pragmatic.  
 
19. 
In view of the above discussion, we hold that an application for extension of 
the time period for passing an arbitral award under Section 29A(4) read with 
Section 29A(5) is maintainable even after the expiry of the twelve-month or the 
extended six-month period, as the case may be. The court while adjudicating 
such extension applications will be guided by the principle of sufficient cause 
and our observations in paragraph 15 of the judgment. 
 
20. 
We, accordingly, answer the question in the aforesaid terms. The appeals are 
directed to be listed in the week commencing 30.09.2024 for final hearing and 
disposal. 
 
......................................J. 
(SANJIV KHANNA) 
 
 
 
......................................J. 
(R. MAHADEVAN) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
SEPTEMBER 12, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 Franklin Templeton Trustee Services (P) Ltd. and Another v. Amruta Garg and Others, (2021) 6 SCC 
736.