2024 INSC 703
1 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 1689 OF 2016 
   
THE SECRETARY, PUBLIC WORKS 
DEPARTMENT & ORS. 
 
 
 
 
    ….APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
  
 
TUKARAM PANDURANG SARAF 
& ORS.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
Mehta, J. 
1.   Heard. 
2.     The present appeal by special leave is preferred on behalf of the 
appellants-employer, challenging the impugned judgment dated 15th 
November, 2014 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, 
Nagpur Bench at Nagpur in Writ Petition No. 3425 of 2010 (Civil), 
whereby the High Court dismissed the said writ petition filed by 
appellants-employer and upheld the judgment and order dated 31st  
October, 
2009 
passed by 
the 
Industrial Court, 
Yavatmal, 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.09.19
17:30:37 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Maharashtra (hereinafter being referred to as ‘Industrial Court’) in 
Complaint (A.K.P.) No.38/2006.  The Industrial Court had allowed 
the complaint filed by the respondent-employees upholding their 
claim for entitlement of holidays on 2nd and 4th Saturdays and for 
payment of salary equal to one and a half times salary for the work 
done by them on 2nd and 4th Saturdays as per the Kalelkar Award. 
3. 
The facts of the case, in a nutshell, are that the respondent-
employees were appointed on the positions of Mailmujar and Mali 
between 1982 and 1997 under the Executive Engineer, Public Works 
Department, Pusad, Tq. Pusad, District Yavatmal and the Sub-
Divisional Officer, Public Works Department, Pusad, Tq. Pusad, 
District Yavatmal. For the sake of brevity, the details of the 
respondent-employees with reference to their date of initial 
employment, post held, and date of appointment are illustrated in a 
tabular form below: - 
Name of the 
Respondent/ 
Employee 
Date of the 
Initial 
Employment 
Post Held 
Work on the 
temporary 
establishment 
Date of 
Appoin-
tment 
Shri Tukaram 
P. Saraf 
1st November 
1984 
Mailmujar 
Phone 
Attendant 
1st 
November 
1989 
Shri Subhash 
13rd April 1988 
Mailmujar 
Room 
1st April 

3 
 
T. Waghmare 
Attendant 
1993 
Shri Mahadeo 
R. Jadhao 
1st October 1986 
Mailmujar 
Phone 
Attendant 
1st 
January 
1991 
Shri Kabirdas 
S. Kamble 
1st June 1976 
Mailmujar 
Khan Sama 
1st June 
1981 
Shri Anil S. 
Chavhan 
1st January 1986 
Mailmujar 
Room 
Attendant 
1st 
January 
1997 
Mehboob Khan 
Baba Khan 
1st April 1981 
Mailmujar 
Room 
Attendant 
1st April 
1986 
Shri Ashok V. 
Alane 
15th April 1988 
Mailmujar 
Room 
Attendant 
1st April 
1993 
Shaikh Nisar 
Sk. Mahboob 
1st January 1986 
Mailmujar 
Room 
Attendant 
15th 
January 
1991 
Shri Laxman J. 
Gabhane 
1st August 1974 
Mali 
Mali 
18th May 
1982 
Shri Chhagan 
B. Somwal 
1st January 1986 
Mali 
Sweeper 
21st 
January 
1991 
Shri Sanjay S. 
Reddi 
1st January 1985 
Mali 
Room 
Attendant 
1st 
January 
1990 
Shri Ananda 
Champat Lodhe 
1st September 
1977 
Mali 
Room 
Attendant 
2nd April 
1982 
Shri Himmat 
Ramkrishna 
1st February 
1985 
Mali 
Room 
Attendant 
1st 
February 
1990 
Saiyyad Pashu 
Sy. Isak 
20th January 
1984 
Mali 
Chowkidar 
20nd 
January 
1989 
 

4 
 
4. 
On 27th February, 2004, the respondent-employees were placed 
on the Converted Temporary Establishment in accordance with the 
Kalelkar Award, which came into effect in the year 1967, determining 
the service conditions of the workers working in the Public Works 
Department at various places or districts under different projects. 
Under the Kalelkar award, the Public Works Department workers or 
the staff are entitled to get the benefits of public holidays as well as 
holidays on the 2nd and 4th Saturdays of each month. 
5. 
On 10th January 1974, the Government of Maharashtra, 
Irrigation and Power Department, Sachivalaya, Bombay, issued a 
Government Resolution No. PAS-1070/741883-E(2)(2), wherein the 
benefits of public holidays as well as holidays on the 2nd and 4th 
Saturdays of each month, were purported to be withdrawn as far as 
the field staff is concerned. According to the said Resolution, which 
was purported to be a clarification of the Kalelkar award, the ‘field 
staff’ was not held entitled to public holidays as well as holidays on 
the 2nd and 4th Saturdays of each month. The relevant portion of the 
Resolution is reproduced as under:- 
“Resolution 
Orders have been issued from time to time in the Government 
Resolution mentioned below in regard to grant of Gazetted 

5 
 
Holidays and holidays on second and fourth Saturdays to 
various categories of staff working under the Irrigation and 
Power Department:-  
 
i) 
Government 
Resolution, 
Irrigation 
and 
Power 
Department No. LAB-1967-L, Dt. the 20th December, 
1967. 
 
ii) 
Government 
Resolution, 
Irrigation 
and 
Power 
Department 
No.LAB-1568/769-L, 
Dtd. 
the 
21st 
September,1970.  
 
iii) 
Government 
Resolution, 
Irrigation 
and 
Power 
Department No.LAB-1071/7539 5-L, dated the 19th 
May, 1972.  
 
It is, however, observed that the position in this respect 
is not quite clear. In amplification modification of the 
orders referred to above Government is therefore, pleased 
to issue to following comprehensive orders in the matter:  
 
(1) The Office staff in the office of Circle Office, Divisional 
Office, Sub-Divisional Office etc. should be allowed all the 
Public Holidays Notified by Government and the holidays 
Holidays notified by Government and the holidays on 
Second and Fourth Saturdays of every month. 
 
(2)  The staff working in the field which comprises staff 
borne on regular establishment, the staff converted to 
regular establishment from work-charged and daily, 
rated establishments and the staff on work charged and 
daily rated establishments should not be held eligible for 
the Public Holidays and Holidays on Second and Fourth 
Saturdays of each month. In other words, the days of 
such holidays should be working days for them. They 
should, however, be granted 15th August and fourth 
optional holidays on festival days of their choice, in each 
year, besides of course one weekly holidays either on 
Sunday or any other convenient day on which the 
fieldwork is closed. 

6 
 
 
(3) The orders regarding grant of holidays on Second and 
Fourth Saturdays issued in –  
 
(a) Government Resolution, Irrigation and Power 
Department No. LAB-107 2/1027709-L, dated 
the 7th September, 1972.  
(b) Government Memorandum, Irrigation and 
power Department No. LAB-1072/102795-L, 
dated the 11th October, 1972;  
And 
(c) Government Memorandum, Irrigation and 
Power Department No. LAB-1072/60093-L, 
dated the 8th of December, 1972.  
 
Applicable to the workers respectively in (a) the Dapodi 
Workshop at Poona, (b) the Workshops, Research 
Divisions 
and 
the 
Civil 
Sub-Division 
under 
the 
Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute, Nasik and 
(c) the Regional Workshops at Akola and Nanded and 
other workshops excluding the project workshops under 
the 
Control 
of 
the 
superintending 
Engineers 
of 
Mechanical Circles will stand.  
 
(4) Compensatory holidays should be granted to those 
who will work on holidays that are admissible, to them. 
This should be done only if they are asked in writing to 
work on holidays. As rainy season is usually a slack 
season, it could be possible to give them as many 
compensatory holidays during that season-as would be 
necessary.  
 
(5) Compensatory holidays should be allowed to be 
accumulated but must be availed of in the particular year 
and cannot be carried forward in the succeeding year. For 
this purpose, the year shall be reckoned from October to 
September. Such, compensatory holidays may be allowed 
to be joined with leave of any kind.  
 

7 
 
No payment in lieu of the compensatory holidays should 
be made.  
 
2. These orders apply to the staff in the Irrigation and 
Power Department and Buildings and Communications, 
Department. 
 
By order and in the name of the Governor of 
Maharashtra.” 
 
6. 
On 12th September 1980, the Government of Maharashtra 
Irrigation 
Department 
in 
consultation 
with 
the 
General 
Administration Department and the Finance Department, issued a 
Government Resolution No. LAB-1080/1047(119)-A(14), wherein the 
Government revoked all previous orders related to holidays for 
workmen in the Irrigation Department and replaced them with a set 
of consolidated and revised guidelines which provided that employees 
working in zonal, divisional, sub-divisional, and other related offices 
were eligible for public holidays as well as holidays on the 2nd and 4th  
Saturdays of each month, as sanctioned by the Government. 
Additionally, the workmen employed in the specific regional 
workshops, such as those in Dapodi (Pune), Satara, Wardha, 
Ahmadnagar (Kedgaon), Ashti, Khadakwasala, Nashik, and Nanded, 
along with the Government Central Workshop and Store at Nagpur, 

8 
 
were also made eligible for these holidays. However, due to the 
unique nature of their work, ‘regional workmen’ were only granted 
public holidays on the 26th of January and the 15th of August. They 
were also given the option to take four additional holidays per year 
on festival days of their choosing, subject to prior approval from the 
concerned official. The Resolution further provided that employees or 
workmen who were required to work on designated holidays, as 
instructed through written orders, were entitled to compensatory 
leave. The Government Resolution is reproduced herein below: - 
Holidays- Irrigation Department  
 
Government of Maharashtra  
Irrigation Department 
 
Government Resolution No. LAB-1080/1047(119)-A(14) 
Mantralaya, Mumbai- 400 032 Date- 12th September, 1980  
 
Read: -  
1) 
Government 
Resolution 
Irrigation 
and 
—No. 
PAS- 
1070/741883-Aa (9) (2), dated January, 1974 
 
2) 
Government Resolution, Irrigation Department No. l-AB/Aa 
(14), dated 20th September 1979. 
 
The workmen working in the Irrigation Department and Public 
Works Department and Housing Department are getting 
holidays as per demand Number 5 in the Kalelkar Award. But 
in the said demand, there was no provision regarding working 
applicable to the workmen of Technical Union working in the 
workshops the holiday on Second and Fourth Saturday which 
are admissible to the other employees working on these 
establishments. Hence, after considering the issue regarding 
making applicable the said holidays to the workmen working in 
the workshops at Dapodi, Satara, Wardha and some other 

9 
 
regional workshops, the orders were issued declaring the 
concerned workmen entitled to the said holidays. Similarly, the 
Government issued the orders to grant, compensatory holidays 
to these workmen for the work done on holidays. However, 
these orders were not implemented for the regional workmen 
due to the peculiarity of their work. Now, it has come to the 
notice of the Government that as these orders have been issued 
by different Government Resolutions and there is uniformity in 
them, number of times it creates confusion in the minds of local 
authorities while granting leave to the workmen. Similarly, it 
has also come to the notice of the Government that the holidays 
on Second and Fourth Saturday are not admissible to the 
workmen working in the Regional Workshops at Ahmadnagar 
(Kedgaon), Ashti, Khadakwasala and Nashik like workmen 
working in other regional workshops. Hence, the question of 
giving the benefit of these holidays to the concerned workmen 
was under the consideration of the Government. 
 
Resolution:  
 
Now, the Government is pleased to direct that the orders issued 
time to time till date for making applicable holidays to the 
workmen in Irrigation Department should be considered as 
cancelled and instead, the following consolidated and revised 
orders should be implemented.  
 
a) The employees working in the Zoned, Divisional, Sub 
Divisional, etc. offices should be considered eligible for getting 
Public Holidays and holidays on Second and Fourth Saturday 
of each month, sanctioned by the Government from time to 
time.  
 
b) The holidays on Second and Fourth Saturday of each month 
should be made applicable to the workmen working in the 
workshops at Dapodi (Pune), Satara and Wardha, Regional 
Workshops 
at 
Akola, 
Ahmadnagar 
(Kedgaon), 
Ashtl, 
Khadakwasala, Nashik and Nanded, Government Central 
Workshop and Store at Nagpur.  
 
c) Due to the peculiar nature of work and duties of the regional 
workmen. Public Holidays on 26th January and 15th August 
only should be granted. Similarly, they should be given liberty 
to avail as per their choice additional 4 holidays on any festival 
day in a year approved by the Government. The workmen 
should avail such option leave with the prior sanction of the 
concerned official.  

10 
 
 
d) (i) The employees/ workmen, who will work on the days of 
leave applicable to them, shall be entitled for getting 
compensatory 
holiday. 
But 
in 
this 
regard, 
such 
employees/workmen should have been directed by issuing 
writing orders to work on the day of holiday. As rainy season 
hampers the pace of regional and other work, as far as possible 
maximum compensatory leave, should be granted in rainy 
season (period from -16th June to 15th October) to the 
workmen who have become entitled for compensatory leave.  
 
(ii) The liberty to accumulate compensatory leave should be 
given on the condition of availing leave in the same year itself. 
For any reason, permission should not be granted to avail such 
leave in the next year. For the purpose of counting of leave, 
period of a year should be considered from the month of 
October to September.  
 
(iii) 
Compensatory 
leave 
should 
not 
be 
compensated 
monetarily.  
 
3) 
The Resolution issues with the informal reference of the 
General Administration Department dated 14th July, 1980 and 
with the concurrence of Finance Department vide its informal 
reference No. 1213/80/EXP- 6, dated 17th July, 1980.  
 
By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra.  
 
Sd/- 
(S.G.Khale)  
Assistant Secretary to the 
Government. 
 
7. 
Despite the new Government Resolution revoking all the 
previous orders and revising the guidelines, the respondent-
employees were not granted access to all Government holidays and 
holidays on 2nd and 4th Saturday under the Kalelkar Award. Instead, 
the respondent-employees were compelled to work on these holidays 

11 
 
without any additional compensation. Despite submitting multiple 
letters and representations to the appellants-employer requesting 
enforcement of their rights under the Kalelkar award, no positive 
action was taken and instead, their complaint was dismissed vide 
communication dated 27th May 1996. Consequently, the respondent-
employees filed a complaint under Section 28 of the Maharashtra 
Recognition of Trade Union and Prevention of Unfair Labour Practice 
Act, 1971 (hereinafter ‘Maharashtra Act’) before the Industrial Court, 
seeking enforcement of their rights under the Kalelkar Award. They 
sought direction to the appellants-employer to cease the unfair 
labour practices and grant them the holidays as per their entitlement 
under the award, along with back wages for the work performed on 
these holidays. 
8. 
The Industrial Court, vide Order dated 31st October 2009, 
allowed the complaint and held that the complainants (respondent-
employees), who were employed in a Converted Temporary 
Establishment are entitled to Government holidays, including those 
on the 2nd and 4th Saturdays, and to overtime compensation for work 
performed on such holidays as per the Kalelkar Award. The Industrial 
Court confirmed that these entitlements are in line with the Kalelkar 

12 
 
Award's provisions, which mandate Government holidays and 
overtime allowances.  Overruling the objections raised by the 
appellants-employer, the Industrial Court found that the Circular 
issued by the Government on 27th May 1996 did not exclude the 
complainants (respondent-employees) from these benefits as the said 
Circular only concerns the issue involved in the disposed of cases 
and in the cases pending before the Industrial Court at Bombay.   The 
Industrial Court directed the appellants-employer herein to grant all 
entitled holidays and to provide appropriate overtime payments to 
respondent-employees, within a month. 
9. 
Aggrieved by the Industrial Court’s award, the appellants-
employer herein filed Writ Petition No. 3425 of 2010 before the High 
Court of Bombay, Nagpur Bench. After hearing both the parties and 
taking into consideration the material available on record, the High 
Court dismissed the writ petition upholding the Industrial Court's 
decision that employees covered under the Kalelkar Award are 
entitled to Government holidays and overtime pay for working on the 
2nd and 4th Saturdays.   The High Court affirmed that the State 
Government's Circular issued on 27th May 1996, excluding certain 
employees from these benefits was invalid, as it contradicted the 

13 
 
Kalelkar Award’s provisions and the High Court's earlier precedents.  
The order dated 15th November, 2014 passed by the High Court 
dismissing the writ petition of the appellants-employer is subjected 
to challenge in this appeal by special leave. 
Submissions on behalf of the Appellants: - 
10. Learned 
counsel 
representing 
the 
appellants-employer, 
vehemently and fervently contended that although the respondent-
employees were appointed to the establishment and were given 
monthly salaries regularly as per the Kalelkar Award, however, this 
by itself would not entitle them to the same facilities and leave 
benefits as permanent employees. These privileges including 
additional holidays and overtime wages, which apply to permanent 
employees cannot pari passu be extended to respondent-employees, 
given their status as temporary workers. Thus, this logical distinction 
invalidates any claims for benefits exclusive to permanent staff, as 
the respondent-employees’ conditions of employment are totally 
different.  
11. Learned counsel further urged that the respondent-employees’ 
demand for holidays and reimbursement of back wages for duties 
performed on holidays, as well as other benefits typically reserved for 

14 
 
permanent staff, is unjustified and untenable in the eyes of law.  To 
buttress this submission, 
learned counsel referred to the 
Government Circular issued on 27th May, 1996 and urged that the 
respondent-employees are not entitled to the benefits under the 
Kalelkar award. 
12. Learned counsel further contended that the demand of the 
respondent-employees for holidays on the 2nd and 4th Saturdays and 
additional compensation is based on a misinterpretation of the 
Kalelkar Award and relevant regulations. He laid emphasis on the 
fact that some of the respondent-employees being temporary 
employees were deputed to work as Khansama and for incidental 
work at Guest House at Pusad, where their presence is imperative as 
important dignitaries such as Chief Minister, other Ministers, Judges 
of the High Court, Judges of other courts and other Senior Officers 
visit thereat. These employees are getting one week off regularly. 
13. On these grounds, learned counsel for the appellants-employer 
implored the Court to accept the appeal, quash the proceedings, and 
set aside the impugned judgment and order. 
 
 

15 
 
Submissions on behalf of the Respondents: - 
14. Learned counsel representing the respondent-employees, 
vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions advanced by the 
learned counsel for the appellants-employer.   Learned counsel 
asserted that the respondent-employees were rightfully entitled to 
claim the benefits under the Kalelkar Award, including Government 
holidays, holidays on the 2nd and 4th Saturdays, and overtime pay at 
a rate of one and a half times salary for the work done by them on 
2nd and 4th Saturdays as per the Kalelkar Award. 
15. Learned counsel further urged that the appellants-employer 
had engaged in unfair labour practices by denying these rightful 
benefits and by compelling the respondent-employees to work on 
these designated holidays without paying appropriate overtime 
compensation.  
16. It was further urged that the appellants-employer also failed to 
issue the notice as mandated under Section 9A of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947, when altering the service conditions of the 
respondent-employees. 
Thus, 
the 
appellants-employer 
clearly 
violated the provisions of the Kalelkar Award, and the Industrial 
Court was justified in granting relief sought for by the respondent-

16 
 
employees.  He urged that the order of the Industrial Court has also 
been affirmed by the High Court after detailed deliberation on facts 
as well as in law. 
17. On these grounds, the learned counsel for the respondent-
employees implored the Court to dismiss the appeal and affirm the 
impugned judgment and order. 
Discussions and Conclusion: - 
18. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions 
advanced at a bar and have perused the impugned judgments. With 
the assistance of learned counsel for the parties, we have thoroughly 
examined the material available on record. 
19. The fundamental issue before us is whether the respondent-
employees who are working in Public Works Department as a 
Converted Temporary Establishment and fall within the domain of 
Kalelkar Award, are entitled to get the benefits of public holidays as 
well as holidays on the 2nd and 4th Saturdays of each month. 
20.   It is not in dispute that the respondent-employees have been 
taken on Converted Temporary Establishment from 27th February, 
2004 as per the Kalelkar Award. Under the Kalelkar Award, there is 
a specific agreement between the parties i.e., the employer and 

17 
 
employee in respect of “holidays” under caption demand No. 5 which 
reads as under: - 
“Demand Number 5:- The employee in the work charged, 
regular temporary and permanent category shall be entitled 
for the Government Holidays approved by the Government. 
The employee on daily wages shall be; entitled for the three paid 
leave in a year that is on 1) 26th January, 2) 15th August and 
3) 2nd October as per the existing practice". Similarly additional 
four optional paid; leave shall be granted to these employees by 
taking into: consideration the exigency of work. The employee 
shall avail these leave on any day of festival as per their: choice. 
But they are required to make an application in. advance for 
availing these optional leave. 
Demand number 6 :- All the employees shall be paid overtime 
allowance as per the provisions of section 14 (Annexure-:8) of 
the Minimum Wages Act, 1948. The employees, who are being 
paid overtime allowance at present, shall be paid overtime 
allowance at the double rate of minimum wages or at one and 
a half time rate of the actual salary of the employee whichever 
rate is higher, as prescribed in the Government notification 
issued as per the provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
21. It is thus clear that except the daily-wage employees, all other 
categories of employees are entitled to get such public holidays as are 
sanctioned by the Government for these categories of employees. The 
respondent-employees in the present factual matrix fall under the 
category of temporary employees and not as daily-wage employees. 
As of 27th February 2004, they have been placed on the Converted 
Temporary Establishment in accordance with the Kalelkar Award. 

18 
 
Therefore, the respondent-employees are entitled to all the holiday 
benefits and other emoluments stipulated under the Kalelkar Award. 
22. The contention advanced by the learned counsel for the 
appellants-employer that the respondent-employees are not eligible 
for Government holidays, including the 2nd and 4th Saturdays, based 
on the Circular issued by the Government on 27th May 1996, is 
fundamentally flawed. The Circular, as referred to by the learned 
counsel for the appellants-employer, pertains specifically to the 
issues involved in disposed of cases and those pending before the 
Industrial Court in Bombay. The instructions in this Circular were 
related to the cancellation of facilities and concessions granted 
through interim orders in those particular cases. However, the above 
stated Circular does not govern the employees who were shifted to 
the Converted Temporary Establishment under the Kalelkar Award, 
neither it stated that the said employees would be ineligible for the 
benefits outlined in the Award, such as Government holidays and 
overtime allowances.  
23. In fact, the provisions of the Kalelkar Award explicitly state that 
all employees, except those on daily wages, are entitled to these 

19 
 
benefits. The appellants-employer’s reliance on the 27th May, 1996 
Circular to deny the complainants their rightful entitlements is 
misguided and does not withstand scrutiny when compared to more 
specific and comprehensive provisions of the Kalelkar Award. 
Consequently, the Circular does not negate the eligibility of the 
respondent-employees for Government holidays and overtime 
allowances, and they were rightly granted the relief sought for by the 
Industrial Court and affirmed by the High Court. 
24. The Industrial Court assigned strong unassailable reasons 
while granting relief sought for by the respondent-employees in terms 
of the Kalelkar award. The findings arrived at by the Industrial Court 
have been reaffirmed by the High Court with the dismissal of the writ 
petition filed by the appellants-employer against the Industrial 
Court’s award. Thus, the impugned judgment dated 15th November, 
2014 does not suffer from any infirmity warranting interference.  
25. The appeal is dismissed accordingly. No costs. 
26. The appellants-employer are directed to comply with the order 
passed by the Industrial Court, and later affirmed by the High Court, 
within a period of eight weeks. 

20 
 
 
27. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
..………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ..………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (R. MAHADEVAN) 
New Delhi; 
September 19, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21