2024 INSC 706
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 10648 OF 2024  
                   (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 21172 of 2021) 
 
SUSHMA                                                       .…APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
NITIN GANAPATI 
RANGOLE & ORS.  
                           ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 10649 OF 2024  
(Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 1023 of 2022) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 10650 OF 2024  
(Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 21248 of 2021) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 10651 OF 2024  
(Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 337 of 2022) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 10652-10653 OF 2024  
(Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 17692-17693 of 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
Civil Appeals @ SLP(Civil) Nos. 21172 of 2021 
Civil Appeals @ SLP(Civil) Nos. 1023 of 2022 
Civil Appeals @ SLP(Civil) Nos.  21248 of 2021 
Civil Appeals @ SLP(Civil) Nos.  337 of 2022 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.09.19
17:30:37 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
2. 
The appellant-claimants have preferred these appeals being 
aggrieved by the common judgment dated 7th April, 2021 passed 
by the Division Bench of High Court of Karnataka in MAC appeals1 
filed by the appellant-claimants and respondent No.2-Reliance 
General Insurance Limited (for short the ‘Insurer’) under Section 
173(1) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for short the ‘Act’). The 
Division Bench of the High Court disposed of the appeals in the 
following manner: -  
“ORDER 
 
1. 
Miscellaneous First Appeals filed by both the Insurance 
Company and the Claimants are disposed of; 
 
2. 
The modified compensation in all the appeals is as follows: 
 
MFA No. 
Amount (Rs.) 
102773 of 2016 (MVC 2277 of 2013) 
21,81,718.00 
102774 of 2016 (MVC 2278 of 2013) 
74,720.00 
102775 of 2016 (MVC 2279 of 2013) 
59,54,392.00 
102776 of 2016 (MVC 2280 of 2013) 
7,01,400.00 
102777 of 2016 (MVC 2281 of 2013) 
15,000.00 
 
3. 
Insurance company shall satisfy the award within four 
weeks from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order; 
 
4. 
Apportionment and disbursement of the compensation 
amount shall be as per the award of the Tribunal; 
 
5. 
The amount in deposit, if any, be transmitted to the 
Tribunal forthwith, for disbursement to the claimants.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 In Miscellaneous First Appeal Nos. 102776, 102549, 102775, 102546, 102773, 102547, 
102777 & 102550 of 2016 and 100204 of 2017.    

3 
 
3. 
Brief facts relevant and essential for the disposal of the 
present appeals are that on 18th August, 2013, a car bearing 
registration No. MH-09/BX-4073 (for short ‘the car’) collided with 
a 14-wheeler trailer truck bearing registration No. MH-09/CA-
0389 (for short ‘the offending truck’) which was left abandoned in 
the middle of the highway without any warning signs in the form 
of indicators or parking lights.  The collision resulted into the death 
of the passengers of the car, namely, Sunita, Ashtavinayak Patil, 
Deepali and the driver Saiprasad Karande at the spot. One of the 
passengers, namely, Smt. Sushma (wife of deceased- Ashtavinayak 
Patil) survived the accident, however, sustaining grievous injuries. 
The car was insured by respondent No. 4-IFFCO-TOKIO General 
Insurance Co. Ltd. (for short the ‘Insurance Company’), whereas, 
the offending truck was insured by respondent No.2-Insurer. 
4. 
The injured Smt. Sushma and the legal heirs of the deceased 
occupants of the car filed separate claim petitions under Section 
166 of the Act before the VI Additional District and Sessions Judge 
and Member, Additional Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Belagavi 
(hereinafter being referred to as ‘Tribunal’) claiming compensation 
from the owner of offending truck i.e. respondent No. 1 and the 
insurer of the offending truck i.e. respondent No.2-Insurer. No 

4 
 
relief was sought by the claimants against the owner and the 
insurer of the car. The claimants alleged that since the offending 
truck was left abandoned in the middle of the highway without 
switching on the parking lights or indicators or without taking any 
other precautionary measures to warn the incoming traffic, the 
person in control of the said vehicle was fully responsible for the 
accident. 
5. 
The Tribunal, while deciding the claims held that it was a 
case of contributory negligence by the drivers of both the vehicles. 
The Tribunal observed that the driver of the car had contributed 
to the accident because he failed to take appropriate preventive 
measures so as to avoid collision with the offending truck which 
was parked in the middle of the road.   
6. 
As the appellant-claimants had not claimed compensation 
from owner of the car, i.e., respondent No.3-Shri Vasant Ravan 
Jadhawar and respondent No.4-Insurance Company of the car, 
these respondents were exonerated and the claims against them 
were dismissed. 
7. 
The Tribunal computed the compensation as below: - 
 
MVC No. 
Amount(Rs.) 
2277 of 2013 
22,25,000.00 
2278 of 2013 
30,000.00 
2279 of 2013 
66,02,500.00 

5 
 
2280 of 2013 
87,500.00 
2281 of 2013 
12,500.00 
 
8. 
The Tribunal held the owner of the offending truck, 
respondent No.1 and the respondent No. 2-Insurer jointly and 
severally responsible to indemnify the claims of the appellant-
claimants and at the same time directed reduction of the 
compensation awarded by 50% on account of contributory 
negligence. 
9. 
Aggrieved by the quantum of compensation awarded and the 
reduction on account of contributory negligence, the appellant-
claimants filed appeals under Section 173(1) of the Act before the 
High Court of Karnataka.  
10. Upon hearing arguments advanced on behalf of the parties 
and appreciating the material available on record, the Division 
Bench of the High Court of Karnataka applied the rule of last 
opportunity and held that had the driver of the car been cautious, 
he could have avoided the accident. The High Court gave 
imprimatur to the Tribunal’s observation with respect to 
contributory negligence, however, it modified and enhanced 
compensation awarded by the Tribunal while disposing of the 
appeals vide judgment dated 7th April, 2021 (supra). The High 

6 
 
Court affirmed the direction of the Tribunal holding the respondent 
No.2-Insurer responsible to indemnify the claims to the extent of 
50%.  
11. The appellant-claimants have preferred these appeals by 
special leave primarily aggrieved by the deduction of the 
compensation awarded to them on account of contributory 
negligence. 
  
12. Thus, the core issue involved in these appeals centres around 
the deduction of 50% compensation awardable to the appellant-
claimants, who have assailed the concurrent findings of the Courts 
below on the aspect of contributory negligence whereby, the driver 
of the car, i.e. Saiprasad Karande (deceased), was held jointly 
responsible for causing the collision.  
13. The challenge in these appeals is against the concurrent 
findings of the Courts below. The scope of interference by this 
Court in such concurrent finding while exercising jurisdiction 
under Article 136 of the Constitution of India is well-established. 
In the case of Sukhbiri Devi v. Union of India2, this Court noted: 
“3. At the outset, it is to be noted that the challenge in this 
appeal is against concurrent findings by three Courts, as 
mentioned hereinbefore. The scope of an appeal by special 
leave under Article 136 of the Constitution of India against the 
concurrent 
findings 
is 
well 
settled. 
In State 
of 
 
2 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1322 

7 
 
Rajasthan v. Shiv Dayal3 reiterating the settled position, this 
Court held that a concurrent finding of fact is binding, unless 
it is infected with perversity. It was held therein: — 
“When any concurrent finding of fact is assailed in 
second appeal, the appellant is entitled to point 
out that it is bad in law because it was recorded 
de hors the pleadings or it was based on no 
evidence or it was based on misreading of material 
documentary evidence or it was recorded against 
any provision of law and lastly, the decision is one 
which no Judge acting judicially could reasonably 
have reached. (see observation made by learned 
Judge Vivian Bose, J. as His Lordship then was a 
Judge of the Nagpur High Court in Rajeshwar 
Vishwanath 
Mamidwar v. Dashrath 
Narayan 
Chilwelkar, AIR 1943 Nag 117 Para 43).” 
4. Thus, evidently, the settled position is that interference 
with the concurrent findings in an appeal under Article 
136 of the Constitution is to be made sparingly, that too 
when the judgment impugned is absolutely perverse. On 
appreciation of evidence another view is possible also cannot 
be a reason for substitution of a plausible view taken and 
confirmed. We will now, bearing in mind the settled position, 
proceed to consider as to whether the said appellate power 
invites invocation in the case on hand.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
14. This Court while dealing with the exercise of power under 
Article 136 to interfere with concurrent findings in Mekala 
Sivaiah v. State of A.P.,4 expounded: - 
“15. It is well settled by judicial pronouncement that Article 
136 is worded in wide terms and powers conferred under the 
said Article are not hedged by any technical hurdles. This 
overriding and exceptional power is, however, to be exercised 
sparingly and only in furtherance of cause of justice. Thus, 
when the judgment under appeal has resulted in grave 
miscarriage of justice by some misapprehension or misreading 
of evidence or by ignoring material evidence then this Court is 
not only empowered but is well expected to interfere to promote 
the cause of justice. 
 
3 (2019) 8 SCC 637 
4 (2022) 8 SCC 253 

8 
 
16. It is not the practice of this Court to re-appreciate the 
evidence for the purpose of examining whether the findings of 
fact concurrently arrived at by the trial court and the High 
Court are correct or not. It is only in rare and exceptional 
cases where there is some manifest illegality or grave and 
serious miscarriage of justice on account of misreading or 
ignoring material evidence, that this Court would interfere 
with such finding of fact. 
… 
 
18. In Bharwada 
Bhoginbhai 
Hirjibhai v. State 
of 
Gujarat [Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat, 
(1983) 3 SCC 217 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 728] , a two-Judge Bench of 
this Court held that this Court does not interfere with the 
concurrent findings of fact unless it is established: 
 
18.1. That the finding is based on no evidence. 
 
18.2. That the finding is perverse, it being such as no 
reasonable person could arrive at even if the evidence was 
taken at its face value. 
 
18.3. The finding is based and built on inadmissible 
evidence which evidence, excluded from vision, would 
negate the prosecution case or substantially discredit or 
impair it. 
 
18.4. Some vital piece of evidence which would tilt the 
balance in favour of the convict has been overlooked, 
disregarded or wrongly discarded.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          (emphasis supplied) 
15. In view of the above precedents, it is clear that this Court in 
exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution of 
India has the power to interfere, even if the Courts below have 
concurrently reached to a common conclusion with respect to a 
certain factual aspect, subject to the condition that such a 
conclusion is so perverse that no reasonable person could arrive 

9 
 
at such a conclusion even if the evidence was taken at its face 
value. 
16. Having considered the submissions advanced by learned 
counsel for the parties and after going through the impugned 
judgements passed by the High Court and the Tribunal as well as 
upon appreciating the material placed on record, we feel that the 
contentious finding whereby, the driver of the car, namely, 
Saiprasad Karande (deceased) was held jointly responsible for 
causing the accident along with the driver/owner of the offending 
truck leading to the claims of the passenger-Sushma & 
dependants of the deceased-passengers being deducted by 50% on 
the principle of contributory negligence is perverse on the face of 
the record.   
17. In addition, we hold that the finding of the Courts below, 
which reduced the claims of the legal heirs of the deceased and the 
injured, other than the legal heirs of the driver-Saiprasad Karande 
(deceased) is also invalid in the eyes of law. The Courts below 
uniformly applied the principle of contributory negligence while 
directing deduction from the compensation awarded to the 
respective appellant-claimants, i.e. the dependents of passengers 
and the injured as well as the dependents of the driver-Saiprasad 

10 
 
Karande @ 50%. Thus, the contributory negligence of the driver of 
the car was vicariously applied to the passengers which is prima 
facie illegal and impermissible. 
18. In the case of Union of India v. United India Insurance Co. 
Ltd.,5 this Court dealt with the question whether the driver’s 
negligence in any manner vicariously attaches to the passengers 
of the motor vehicle of which he was the driver, and it was held as 
below: - 
“10. There is a well-known principle in the law of torts called 
the “doctrine of identification” or “imputation”. It is to the 
effect that the defendant can plead the contributory negligence 
of the plaintiff or of an employee of the plaintiff where the 
employee is acting in the course of employment. But, it has 
been also held in Mills v. Armstrong [(1888) 13 AC 1, HL] (also 
called The Bernina case) that that principle is not applicable 
to a passenger in a vehicle in the sense that the negligence of 
the driver of the vehicle in which the passenger is travelling, 
cannot be imputed to the passenger. (Halsbury's Laws of 
England, 4th Ed., 1984 Vol. 34, p. 74; Ratanlal and 
Dhirajlal, Law of Torts, 23rd Ed., 1997, p. 511; Ramaswamy 
Iyer, Law of Torts, 7th Ed., p. 447.) The Bernina case [(1888) 
13 AC 1, HL] in which this principle was laid in 1888 related 
to passengers in a steamship. In that case a member of the 
crew and a passenger in the ship Bushire were drowned on 
account of its collision with another ship Bernina. It was held 
that even if the navigators of the ship Bushire were negligent, 
the navigators' negligence could not be imputed to the 
deceased who were travelling in that ship. This principle has 
been applied, in latter cases, to passengers travelling in a 
motor vehicle whose driver is found guilty of contributory 
negligence. In other words, the principle of contributory 
negligence is confined to the actual negligence of the 
plaintiff or of his agents. There is no rule that the driver 
of an omnibus or a coach or a cab or the engine driver of 
a train, or the captain of a ship on the one hand and the 
 
5 (1997) 8 SCC 683 

11 
 
passengers on the other hand are to be “identified” so as 
to fasten the latter with any liability for the former's 
contributory negligence. There cannot be a fiction of the 
passenger sharing a “right of control” of the operation of 
the vehicle nor is there a fiction that the driver is an agent 
of the passenger. A passenger is not treated as a backseat 
driver. (Prosser and Keeton on Torts, 5th Ed., 1984, pp. 521-
22.) It is therefore clear that even if the driver of the passenger 
vehicle was negligent, the Railways, if its negligence was 
otherwise proved — could not plead contributory negligence 
on the part of the passengers of the vehicle. What is clear is 
that qua the passengers of the bus who were innocent, — the 
driver and owner of the bus and, if proved, the Railways — can 
all be joint tortfeasors.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               (emphasis supplied) 
19. It is clear from the ratio of the above judgment that the 
contributory negligence on the part of a driver of the vehicle 
involved in the accident cannot be vicariously attached to the 
passengers so as to reduce the compensation awarded to the 
passengers or their legal heirs as the case may be. 
20. Thus, we have no hesitation in holding that the Courts below 
committed gross error in law while reducing the compensation 
awarded to the appellant-claimants, being the dependents of the 
deceased-passengers and Smt. Sushma as the claims of these 
claimants cannot be truncated by attaching the vicarious liability 
with the driver. However, the claim of the dependents of the 
deceased driver Saiprasad Karande would stand on a different 
footing.  

12 
 
21. We shall now proceed to discuss whether the Courts below 
were justified in fastening partial liability on the driver of the car 
on the basis of contributory negligence in causing the accident. 
22. The High Court, after adverting to the evidence available on 
record, made the following observations on the aspect of 
contributory negligence: - 
“12. The Investigation Officer has filed charge sheet against 
the driver of the car as also the driver of truck. Exhibit P4-spot 
mahazar establishes the fact that the offending truck was 
parked on the middle of the road. Undisputedly, accident took 
place at 9.10 pm and the truck is a Heavy Goods Vehicle. 
Exhibit P6-Photograph of the place of accident substantiate 
that the offending truck was fourteen wheeled heavy truck 
which was parked on the middle of the road. Though Shri G.N. 
Raichur, learned counsel submitted that the truck was parked 
on the extreme left of the road, however, perusal of the 
photographs would clearly substantiate the fact that the 
truck was parked on the middle of the road and on the 
other hand, the learned counsel for the claimants 
submitted that there was fog at the time of the accident. 
There are no eye-witnesses to the incident. Taking into 
consideration the facts in totality, it may be stated that if the 
driver of the car was cautious, he would have avoided the 
accident and accordingly, the rule of last opportunity would 
be squarely applicable to the facts of the case and therefore, 
the finding recorded by the Tribunal fastening 50% 
contributory negligence on the drivers of both the vehicles in 
question, is just and proper. In view of the same, the finding 
recorded by the Tribunal on issue No.1 is, hereby, affirmed 
and the appeals filed by the Insurance Company challenging 
the liability are required to be rejected, accordingly rejected.” 
      (emphasis supplied) 
23. On going through the above extract from the impugned 
judgment, it is evident that the High Court recorded an affirmative 
finding that the offending truck was parked in the middle of the 
road. This finding as borne out from the evidence is not under 

13 
 
challenge and has attained finality. The accident took place on 18th 
August, 2013 which as per the Hindu calendar fell on Shukla 
Paksha Dwadashi, and thus, there was not even a remote 
possibility that the road would be illuminated by moonlight at the 
time of the accident.  The discussion of evidence by the Tribunal 
and the High Court makes no reference to availability of 
streetlights at the collision site and hence, there is no doubt that 
at the time of the accident, the conditions on the road would have 
been pitch dark making it virtually impossible for the incoming 
vehicles to sight the stationary offending truck within a reasonable 
distance. 
24. Learned counsel for the appellant-claimants, urged that there 
is neither any evidence nor any finding by the Courts below that 
the offending truck was parked on the road after taking due care 
and caution i.e. either by switching on the parking lights or by 
putting any prominent markers around the vehicle so as to warn 
the passing vehicles.  Apparently thus, the offending truck was left 
abandoned in the middle of the highway (as concurrently held by 
both the Courts below) without taking due care and caution to 
switch on the parking lights or to put in place any other 

14 
 
precautionary measures to warn the vehicles traversing the 
highway in the dead of the night. 
25. Common sense requires that no vehicle can be left parked 
and unattended in the middle of the road as it would definitely be 
a traffic hazard posing risk to the other road users. 
26. We shall briefly refer to the statutory provisions applicable to 
the situation at hand. 
27. A highway or a road is a public place as defined in Section 
2(34) of the Act: - 
“2(34) “public place” means a road, street, way or other place, 
whether a thoroughfare or not, to which the public have a right 
of access, and includes any place or stand at which passengers 
are picked up or set down by a stage carriage;” 
 
 
28. Section 121 of the Act provides that the driver of a motor 
vehicle shall make such signals and, on such occasions, as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government.  
29. Section 122 of the Act provides that no person in charge of a 
motor vehicle shall cause or allow the vehicle or any trailer to be 
abandoned or to remain at rest on any “public place” in such a 
position or in such a condition or in such circumstances so as to 
cause or likely to cause danger, obstruction or undue 
inconvenience to other users of the public place or to the 
passengers. 

15 
 
30. Section 126 of the Act provides that no person driving or in 
charge of a motor vehicle shall cause or allow the vehicle to remain 
stationary in any public place. 
31. Section 127(2) of the Act provides that where any abandoned, 
unattended, wrecked, burnt or partially dismantled vehicle is 
creating a traffic hazard, because of its position in relation to the 
public place, or its physical appearance is causing the impediment 
to the traffic, its immediate removal from the public place by a 
towing service may be authorised by a police officer having 
jurisdiction. 
32. Regulation 15 of the Rules of Road Regulation, 1989 which 
were prevailing on the date of the incident provides that every 
driver of a motor vehicle shall park the vehicle in such a way that 
it does not cause or is not likely to cause danger, obstruction or 
undue inconvenience to other road users. It casts a duty on the 
drivers of a motor vehicle stating that the vehicle shall not be 
parked at or near a road crossing or in a main road. 
33. These legal provisions leave no room for doubt that the 
person in control of the offending truck acted in sheer violation of 
law while abandoning the vehicle in the middle of the road and 
that too without taking precautionary measures like switching on 

16 
 
the parking lights, reflectors or any other appropriate steps to warn 
the other vehicles travelling on the highway. Had the accident 
taken place during the daytime or if the place of accident was well 
illuminated, then perhaps, the car driver could have been held 
equally responsible for the accident by applying the rule of last 
opportunity. But the fact remains that there was no illumination 
at the accident site either natural or artificial. Since the offending 
truck was left abandoned in the middle of the road in clear 
violation of the applicable rules and regulations, the burden to 
prove that the placement of the said vehicle as such was beyond 
human control and that appropriate precautionary measures 
taken while leaving the vehicle in that position were essentially on 
the person in control of the offending truck. However, no evidence 
was led by the person having control over the said truck in this 
regard. Thus, the entire responsibility for the negligence leading to 
the accident was of the truck owner/driver. 
34. In view of the above discussion, the view expressed by the 
High Court that if the driver of the car had been vigilant and would 
have driven the vehicle carefully by following the traffic rules, the 
accident may have been avoided is presumptuous on the face of 
the record as the same is based purely on conjectures and 

17 
 
surmises. Nothing on record indicates that the car was being 
driven at an excessively high speed or that the driver failed to 
follow the traffic rules. The High Court recorded an incongruous 
finding that if the offending truck had not been parked on the 
highway, the accident would not have happened even if the car was 
being driven at a very high speed. Therefore, the reasoning of the 
High Court on the issue of contributory negligence is riddled with 
inherent contradictions and is paradoxical. 
35. The Courts below erred in concluding that it is a case of 
contributory negligence, because in order to establish contributory 
negligence, some act or omission which materially contributed to 
the accident or damage should be attributed to the person against 
whom it is alleged. 
36. In the case of Pramodkumar Rasikbhai Jhaveri v. 
Karmasey Kunvargi Tak6, this Court while referring to a decision 
of the High Court of Australia in Astley v. Austrust Ltd.7, went on 
to hold that: - 
 
“… where, by his negligence, if one party places another in 
a situation of danger which compels that other to act quickly in 
order to extricate himself, it does not amount to contributory 
negligence, if that other acts in a way which, with the benefit of 
hindsight is shown not to have been the best way out of the 
difficulty.” 
 
6 (2002) 6 SCC 455 
7 (1999) 73 ALJR 403 

18 
 
 
37. In the very same judgment, this Court also referred to and 
approved the view taken in Swadling v. Cooper8, as below: - 
“Mere failure to avoid the collision by taking some extra 
ordinary 
precaution, 
does 
not 
in 
itself 
constitute 
negligence.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (emphasis supplied) 
38. A three Judge Bench of this Court in the case of Archit Saini 
and Another v. Oriental Insurance Company Limited and 
Others9, had the occasion to consider an identical fact scenario, 
and after analysing the evidence available on record, it was held:- 
“8. After having perused the evidence of PW7, Site Map (Ext. 
P-45) and the detailed analysis undertaken by the Tribunal, we 
have no hesitation in taking the view that the approach of the 
High Court in reversing the conclusion arrived at by the 
Tribunal on issue No.1 has been very casual, if not cryptic and 
perverse.  Indeed, the appeal before the High Court is required 
to be decided on fact and law. That, however, would not permit 
the   High   Court   to   casually   overturn   the   finding   of   
fact recorded by the Tribunal.  As is evident from the analysis 
done by the Tribunal, it is a well-considered opinion and a 
plausible view. The High Court has not adverted to any specific 
reason as to why the view taken by the Tribunal was incorrect 
or not supported by the evidence on record.  It is well settled 
that the nature of proof required in cases concerning accident 
claims is qualitatively different from the one in criminal cases, 
which must be beyond any reasonable doubts. The Tribunal 
applied the   correct   test   in   the   analysis   of   the   evidence   
before   it. Notably, the High Court has not doubted the evidence 
of PW7 as being unreliable nor has it discarded his version that 
the driver of the Maruti Car could not spot the parked Gas 
Tanker due to the flashlights of the oncoming traffic from the 
front side.   Further, the   Tribunal   also   adverted   to   the   
legal presumption against the driver of the Gas Tanker of 
having parked his vehicle in a negligent manner in the middle 
of the road. The Site Plan (Ext. P-45) reinforces the version of 
 
8 1931 AC 1 
9 (2018) 3 SCC 365 

19 
 
PW7 that the Truck (Gas Tanker) was parked in the middle of 
the road   but   the   High   Court   opined   to   the   contrary   
without assigning any reason whatsoever. In our view, the Site 
Plan (Ext. P-45) filed along with the chargesheet does not 
support the finding recorded by the High Court that the Gas 
Tanker was not parked in the middle of the road.  Notably, the 
High Court has also not doubted the claimant’s plea that the 
Gas Tanker/offending vehicle was parked without any indicator 
or parking lights. The fact that PW7 who was standing on the 
opposite side of the road at a distance of about 70 feet, could 
see the Gas Tanker parked on the other side of the road does 
not discredit his version that the Maruti Car coming from the 
opposite side could not spot the Gas Tanker due to flashlights 
of the oncoming traffic from the front side. It is not in dispute 
that the road is a busy road. In the cross-examination, neither 
has any attempt been made to discredit the version of PW7 nor 
has any suggestion been made that no vehicle with flashlights 
on was coming from the opposite direction of the parked Gas 
Tanker at the relevant time. 
 
9. Suffice it to observe that the approach of the High Court in   
reversing   the   well-considered finding recorded by the 
Tribunal on the material fact, which was supported by the 
evidence on record, cannot be countenanced. 
 
10. Accordingly, we have no hesitation in setting aside the said 
finding of the High Court. As a result, the appellants would be 
entitled   to   the   enhanced   compensation   as determined   
by   the   High   Court   in   its   entirety   without   any deduction 
towards contributory negligence.   In other words, we restore 
the finding of the Tribunal rendered on issue No.1 against   the   
respondents   and   hold   that   respondent   no.1 negligently 
parked the Gas Tanker/offending vehicle in the middle of the 
road without any indicator or parking lights.” 
 
39. We are of the view that the aforesaid decision applies to the 
case at hand on all fours and thus, the appellant-claimants cannot 
be denied their rightful compensation on the ground that the driver 
of the car, namely Saiprasad Karande (deceased), was jointly 
responsible for the accident with the person in control of the 

20 
 
offending truck and hence, their claims should be reduced on the 
principle of contributory negligence.  
40. On a holistic analysis of the material available on record, it is 
established beyond the pale of doubt that the offending truck was 
parked in the middle of the road without any parking lights being 
switched on and without any markers or indicators being placed 
around the stationary vehicle so as to warn the incoming vehicular 
traffic.  This omission by the person in control of the said truck 
was in clear violation of law. The accident took place on a highway 
where the permissible speed limits are fairly high. In such a 
situation, it would be imprudent to hold that the driver of a vehicle, 
travelling through the highway in the dead of the night in pitch 
dark conditions, would be able to make out a stationary vehicle 
lying in the middle of the road within a reasonable distance so as 
to apply the brakes and avoid the collision. The situation would be 
compounded by the headlights of the vehicles coming from the 
opposite direction and make the viewing of the stationary vehicle 
even more difficult. Thus, the conclusion drawn by the Courts 
below that the driver of the car could have averted the accident by 
applying the brakes and hence, he was equally negligent and 
contributed to the accident on the application of principle of last 

21 
 
opportunity is ex-facie perverse and cannot be sustained. Hence, 
it is a fit case warranting exercise of this Court’s powers under 
Article 136 of the Constitution of India to interfere with the 
concurrent finding of facts. 
41. We, therefore, hold that the person in control of the offending 
truck insured by respondent No. 2-Insurer, was fully responsible 
for the negligence leading to the accident.  
42. As a consequence, the deduction of 50% of compensation 
awarded to the appellant-claimants on account of contributory 
negligence, as directed by the Tribunal and affirmed by the High 
Court, cannot be sustained.  The finding recorded by the Courts 
below on this issue is reversed as being perverse and 
unsustainable in the facts as well as in law. Resultantly, it is 
directed that there shall be no deduction from the compensation 
payable to the appellant-claimants who shall be entitled to the full 
compensation as assessed by the Tribunal and modified by the 
High Court by the impugned judgment. 
43. It is further directed that respondent No. 2-Insurer shall be 
jointly and severally liable along with the owner of the offending 
truck to indemnify the awards.   
44. The appeals are accordingly allowed.  No costs. 

22 
 
 
Civil Appeals @ SLP(Civil) Nos. 17692-17693 of 2023 
45. Leave granted. 
46. In these appeals, the appellant-Malutai10 has challenged the 
apportionment of the compensation awarded by the Tribunal 
between the appellant and the co-claimant11.  Modification in the 
apportionment is sought on the ground that the co-claimant Smt. 
Sushma has remarried after the claim was decided and thus, she 
cannot claim equal share in the compensation.  
47. Having considered the submissions advanced on behalf of the 
parties, we are not inclined to interfere in the apportionment of the 
compensation between the appellant-Malutai and co-claimant 
(respondent No.5), as directed by the Tribunal and affirmed by the 
High Court. Thus, the said prayer of the appellant-Malutai is 
declined. 
48. However, we reiterate the findings recorded in Civil Appeal @ 
SLP (Civil) No. 21172 of 2021 and connected matters and direct 
that the claimants, being the mother and wife of the deceased-
 
10 Mother of the deceased-Ashtavinayak Patil 
11 Smt. Sushma, wife of the deceased-Ashtavinayak Patil (respondent No. 5 in the present 
appeals) 

23 
 
Ashtavinayak Patil, shall be entitled to full compensation without 
any deduction on account of contributory negligence. 
49. The respondent No.2-Insurer shall be liable to indemnify the 
award, however, the apportionment of the compensation inter se 
between the claimants as directed by the Tribunal shall not be 
disturbed. 
50. The appeals are accordingly disposed of.  No costs. 
51. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ………………….………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
        (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA) 
 
 
 …………………..………………………….J. 
 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
 
New Delhi; 
September 19, 2024.