2024 INSC 710
Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 1 of 67 
 
      REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 19 OF 2024 
 
   
AJAY MADHUSUDAN PATEL & ORS.                       …PETITIONERS 
 
 
    VERSUS    
 
 
JYOTRINDRA S. PATEL & ORS.        
 
 
  …RESPONDENTS 
 
          
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
 
 
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2024.09.20
14:51:12 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 2 of 67 
 
J. B. PARDIWALA, J.: 
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided in the following parts:  
INDEX 
A. FACTUAL MATRIX .................................................................................. 3 
B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER (AMP 
GROUP) ............................................................................................................ 25 
C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT (JRS 
GROUP) ............................................................................................................ 31 
D. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT (SRG 
GROUP) ............................................................................................................ 32 
E. ANALYSIS ................................................................................................. 38 
i. 
Scope of jurisdiction of the referral court under Section 11(6) of the 
Act, 1996......................................................................................................... 38 
ii. Whether on a prima facie view, the SRG Group being a non-
signatory to the FAA, can be referred to arbitration? .............................. 55 
F. CONCLUSION .......................................................................................... 66 
 
 
1. The present petition has been filed under Section 11(6) read with Section 
11(9) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter, “the Act, 
1996”) seeking appointment of a Sole Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes 
between the Petitioners and the Respondents in terms of Clauses 7.2 and 
7.3 respectively of the Family Arrangement Agreement dated 28.02.2020 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 3 of 67 
 
(hereinafter, “the FAA”) read with the Amendment Agreement dated 
15.05.2020 (hereinafter, “Amendment to the FAA”) entered into between 
the petitioner AMP Group and respondent JRS Group. 
 
2. Since the Petitioner No. 13 i.e., Silvercity Management Ltd. is a company 
incorporated outside India having its office at 17, Bond Street, St. Helier, 
Jersey, JE2, 3NP, an island in the English Channel, northwest of France and 
the Petitioner No. 14 i.e., Hiral Ashit Patel is an individual, who is a citizen 
and resident of Canada, the dispute between the Parties falls within the 
definition of an international commercial arbitration under Section 2(1)(f) 
of the Act, 1996. 
 
A. FACTUAL MATRIX 
 
3. For convenience, the Parties involved in the present petition and the 
respective groups of which they form a part of are tabulated below:  
 
S.NO 
NAME 
PETITIONER/ 
RESPONDENT 
GROUP 
1.  Ajay Madhusudan Patel 
Petitioner No. 1 
AMP  
2.  Apoorva Madhusudan Patel 
Petitioner No. 2 
AMP 
3.  Meeta Ajay Patel 
Petitioner No. 3 
AMP 
4.  Sonal Apoorva Patel 
Petitioner No. 4 
AMP 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 4 of 67 
 
5.  Bhavik Ajay Patel 
Petitioner No. 5 
AMP 
6.  Jinal Ajay Patel  
Petitioner No. 6 
AMP 
7.  Kaushal Apoorva Patel  
Petitioner No. 7 
AMP 
8.  Nishkal Apoorva Patel 
Petitioner No. 8 
AMP 
9.  Apoorva M. Patel (HUF) 
Petitioner No. 9 
AMP 
10.  Spectrum Ingredients Pvt. Ltd. Rep. by 
its Director 
Petitioner No. 10 
AMP 
11.  Sai Fragrances & Flavours Pvt. Ltd. Rep. 
by its Director  
Petitioner No. 11 
AMP 
12.  Zest Aromas Pvt. Ltd. Rep. by its 
Director  
Petitioner No. 12 
AMP 
13.  Silvercity Management Ltd. Rep. by its 
Chairman  
Petitioner No. 13 
AMP 
14.  Hiral Ashit Patel  
Petitioner No. 14 
AMP 
15.  Jyotrindra S. Patel  
Respondent No. 1 JRS 
16.  Rajesh C. Patel HUF  
Respondent No. 2 JRS 
17.  Sanjay S. Patel  
Respondent No. 3 JRS 
18.  Finhelp Investments and Consultants 
(Mumbai) Pvt. Ltd. Rep. by its Director  
Respondent No. 4 JRS 
19.  Greenbiz Holdings and Consultants Pvt. 
Ltd. Rep. by its Director  
Respondent No. 5 JRS 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 5 of 67 
 
20.  Jyotrindra S. Patel and Sanjay S. Patel 
(Holding for and on behalf of J&S 
Associate – AOP) Rep. by its Member  
Respondent No. 6 JRS 
21.  Millenium Estates Pvt. Ltd. Rep. by its 
Director  
Respondent No. 7 SRG 
22.  Deegee Software Pvt. Ltd. Rep. by its 
Director  
Respondent No. 8 SRG 
23.  Samarjitsinh R. Gaekwad (Shareholder 
& Director of Millenium Estates Pvt. Ltd. 
and Deegee Software Pvt. Ltd.) 
Respondent No. 9 SRG 
24.  Radhikaraje S. Gaekwad (Shareholder of 
Deegee Software Pvt. Ltd.) 
Respondent 
No. 
10 
SRG 
25.  Subhanginiraje 
R. 
Gaekwad 
(Shareholder of Deegee Software Pvt. 
Ltd.) 
Respondent 
No. 
11 
SRG 
26.  Gaekwad Services Ltd. now known as 
Gaekwad Enterprise Pvt. Ltd. Rep. by its 
Managing Director (Shareholder of 
Deegee Software Pvt. Ltd.) 
Respondent 
No. 
12 
SRG 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 6 of 67 
 
27.  Samarjitsinh 
Gaekwad 
HUF 
(Shareholder of Deegee Software Pvt. 
Ltd.) 
Respondent 
No. 
13 
SRG 
28.  Rajesh C. Patel (Shareholder of Deegee 
Software Pvt. Ltd.) 
Respondent 
No. 
14 
JRS 
29.  Shilpa R. Patel (Shareholder of Deegee 
Software Pvt. Ltd.) 
Respondent 
No. 
15 
JRS 
30.  Aditya 
Patel (Director 
of 
Deegee 
Software Pvt. Ltd.) 
Respondent 
No. 
16 
SRG 
31.  Nitin Shripadbhai Pujari (Director of 
Deegee Software Pvt. Ltd.) 
Respondent 
No. 
17 
SRG 
 
4. The Petitioners herein are collectively referred to as the “AMP Group”. The 
Petitioner Nos. 1 to 9 & 14 respectively are individuals and family members 
of Mr. Ashit Patel, who are a part of the AMP Group in the FAA. The 
Petitioner Nos. 10 to 13 respectively are companies described as a part of 
the AMP Group in the FAA. The Petitioner No. 13 is a company 
incorporated outside India and the Petitioner No. 14 is a resident of a foreign 
country.  
 
5. The Respondents are divided into two groups i.e., “JRS Group” consisting 
of Respondents 1 to 6, 14 & 15 and “SRG Group” consisting of 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 7 of 67 
 
Respondents 7 to 13, 16 & 17. The Millenium Estates Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter, 
“Millenium”) and Deegee Software Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter, “Deegee”) are 
Respondent 7 and 8 companies respectively. The Respondents 9 to 17 are 
all either Directors or Shareholders of Respondent 7 and 8 companies. 
Therefore, the Respondents comprise of individuals, Companies and 
Shareholders and Directors of the respective companies dealt with under 
the FAA.  
 
 
6. Apart from the Petitioners and Respondents aforementioned, a few other 
individuals find a repeated mention in the facts of the present petition. First, 
Mr. Ashit M. Patel who is the Power of Attorney Holder of Petitioner Nos. 
1 to 9 and 14 of the AMP Group. He is the co-brother of Respondent No.1. 
Secondly, Mr. Kalpesh Parmar, a Chartered Accountant who represented 
the interests of the JRS Group during the negotiations leading up to the 
FAA, the implementation of the FAA and the first round of mediation. He 
is alleged to have also represented the interests of the SRG Group during 
the same. In the last, Mr. Pankaj Agarwal, an employee of Deegee.  
 
7. Mr. Ashit Patel representing the AMP Group and Mr. Jyotrindra S. Patel 
(Respondent No.1) of the JRS Group are co-brothers and married in the 
same family. The two groups were jointly engaged in various businesses 
and co-owned several entities. Subsequently, the SRG Group had joined 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 8 of 67 
 
hands with the AMP Group and JRS Group in two entities i.e. Millenium 
and Deegee. SRG Group presently holds 40% equity shares in Millenium.  
 
8. It is the case of the Petitioners that between 2013 & 2019, various disputes 
arose between the AMP Group on one side and the JRS and SRG Groups 
on the other which led to the filing of several proceedings before various 
forums including the National Company Law Tribunal (hereinafter, 
“NCLT”) at New Delhi, Mumbai and Ahmedabad  by the AMP Group. The 
same are still pending before the respective forums. It is pertinent to note 
that, of the aforesaid disputes, the respondent No.9 of the SRG Group is one 
of the respondents in CP/383/2017 pertaining to Deegee, filed by the AMP 
Group before the NCLT at Mumbai.  
 
 
9. The Best Value Chem. Ltd. (hereinafter, “BVC”) is an entity involved in 
the business of manufacturing aroma chemicals co-owned by the AMP and 
JRS Groups. The Premji Group had initiated a proposal to buyout BVC and 
indicated that the deal could only go through if the litigations filed against 
BVC were withdrawn. Therefore, the parties thought it fit to resolve all the 
issues between them once and for all with the understanding that the AMP 
Group would completely takeover various entities and that the JRS and 
SRG Groups would co-own other entities.  
 
 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 9 of 67 
 
10. During negotiations that preceded the execution of the FAA, the following 
events/communications took place;  
 
• Vide emails dated 12.12.2019 and 02.01.2020, several internal documents 
required for the valuation of Millenium and Deegee were shared by Mr. 
Pankaj Agarwal with the AMP Group wherein a copy was marked to Mr. 
Kalpesh Parmar.  
• Vide email dated 14.01.2020 sent to the AMP Group, Mr. Kalpesh Parmar 
confirmed that the matters pertaining to Millenium and Deegee even after 
its valuation may have to be discussed with Mr. Samarjitsinh (hereinafter, 
“Respondent No. 9”) of the SRG Group before finalisation. The said 
excerpt from the contents of the email are reproduced hereinbelow:  
 
“…The pending details from Pankaj, if I correctly 
understand then it is related to documents of Millenium and 
Deegee, Even if we consider both of it to be treated 
separately, it can be done because even after valuation, the 
matter needs to be discussed out with Samarjitsinh before 
finalising. Therefore, in the binding agreement you can put 
necessary points covering both the properties and till it is not 
resolved we can work out some alternate solution so that 
both the groups are covered properly….” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
• A joint meeting was arranged by Mr. Kalpesh Parmar and attended by Mr. 
Ashit Patel of the AMP Group and Respondent No.9 of the SRG Group. 
• Vide email dated 25.01.2020 sent to the AMP Group, Mr. Kalpesh Parmar 
suggested that the valuation of Millenium be finalized in consultation with 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 10 of 67 
 
the Respondent No.9 of the SRG Group. The said excerpt from the contents 
of the email are reproduced hereinbelow:  
 
“…In view of releasing above deadlock situation, I am 
suggesting that we include in FAA binding methodology to 
resolve it. For Chandan Sanjaybhai, Jagdishbhai & AMP 
can sit and decide the value within __ days from execution of 
FAA, Similarly for Millenium Sanjaybhai, Samarjitsinh & 
AMP can sit and close it along with issue of residential flats. 
This can also be done within __ days from execution of FAA. 
In the meantime, whatever valuation/s so far JRS has given 
on Chandan & Millenium will stand withdrawn, so nothing 
is there on table from JRS side on the value of Chandan & 
Millenium. Therefore, we can proceed to close on FAA & 
Escrow agreement on Monday. If you can flip this suggestion 
with AMP, I can try to convince Sanjaybhai too…” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
11.  Subsequently, the FAA dated 28.02.2020 was entered into between the 
AMP Group and JRS Group. The terms of the FAA impose several 
obligations on the AMP and JRS Groups in pursuance of the settlement 
contemplated therein.  
 
12.  It is pertinent to observe that the present petition relates primarily to the 
dispute arising from specific clauses wherein the SRG Group is also 
required to undertake certain steps and actions specified viz, (a) Clause 2.1.4 
read with Schedule 7 on Millenium Exit (presently AMP Group holds 36% 
while SRG Group holds 40%) where AMP Group is required to exit and 
SRG Group is required to purchase additional shares; (b) Clause 2.1.5 
requiring Amendment of Lease Deed executed between Millenium, the 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 11 of 67 
 
Lessor and Aurosagar Estates Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter, “Aurosagar”), the 
Lessee and; (c) Clause 2.1.6 read with Schedule 8 on Deegee Exit where 
JRS and SRG Groups are required to completely exit and AMP Group 
would purchase the shares. The relevant clauses of the FAA are reproduced 
hereinbelow:  
 
 
“2.1.4 Exit of AMP Group from Millenium 
 
(a) Within 30 (thirty) days from the Trigger Date(“Millenium 
Transfer Date”), Parties shall execute duly stamped 
agreement(s) with SRG to record and finalize their 
understanding with respect to exit of AMP Group from 
Millenium by way of transfer/ buy back of all Class A equity 
shares in Millenium (“Millenium Exit”) in the manner set 
out in Schedule 7. The Parties agree that the valuation of 
Millenium for the purposes of the Millenium Exit shall be 
INR 130,00,00,000 (Rupees One Hundred Thirty Crores). It 
is hereby clarified that AMP Group will continue to hold 
Class B equity shares in Millenium in accordance with the 
provisions set out in the articles of association of Millenium. 
 
(b) Notwithstanding anything contained herein, Parties shall 
endeavour to simultaneously undertake the Millenium Exit 
and Deegee Exit on the same day in accordance with Clause 
2.1.4 and Clause 2.1.6, respectively. 
 
(c) Parties shall co-operate with each other for any actions 
required to be undertaken or documents required to be 
executed in order to give effect to the actions contemplated 
under this Clause, including but not limited to passing 
exercising their voting rights to provide necessary board or 
shareholders' approval, execution and stamping of share 
transfer forms, endorsement of share certificates, filing 
forms with the registrar of companies, making entries in 
statutory registers, providing all necessary information and 
documents necessary for preparing necessary documents, 
etc required to be complied by Millenium under Applicable 
Law. 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 12 of 67 
 
2.1.5 Amendment of Aurosagar Lease Deed  
 
(a) On the Millenium Transfer Date, Aurosagar and 
Millenium shall execute a duly stamped amendment deed to 
the Aurosagar Lease Deed in the format set out in Annexure 
1. 
 
(b) Parties shall co-operate with each other for any and all 
such actions required to be undertaken and execute all such 
documents as may be necessary in order to give effect to this 
Clause (Including registration of the amendment deed), 
including but not limited to exercising their voting rights to 
provide necessary board or shareholders' approval, 
attending office of registrar of assurance for admitting the 
amendment deed, providing all necessary information and 
documents necessary for preparing necessary documents, 
etc. 
 
(c) All costs and expenses for amendment of the Aurosagar 
Lease Deed in accordance herewith, including without 
limitation, 
fee 
charged 
by 
attorneys 
and 
other 
advisors/consultants, stamp duty and registration charges 
shall be borne by AMP Group. 
 
2.1.6 Exit of JRS Group and SRG from Deegee Software  
 
(a)Within 30 (thirty) days from the Trigger Date ("Deegee 
Transfer Date"), Parties shall and shall ensure that SRG 
executes duly stamped agreement(s) to record their 
understanding with regards to exit of JRS Group and SRG 
from Deegee Software, including (i) transfer of all shares 
held by JRS Group and SRG in Deegee Software ("AMP 
Deegee Transfer"); (ii) resignation of directors appointed by 
JRS Group/SRG from the board of directors of Deegee 
Software; and (iii) repayment of loan by Deegee Software to 
its lenders including the interest accrued thereon in the 
manner set out in Schedule 8 ((i), (ii) and (iii) are collectively 
referred as "Deegee Exit") 
 
(b) AMP Group shall complete due diligence of Deegee 
Software within 20 (twenty) Business Days from the 
Execution Date, in the event, there are any findings requiring 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 13 of 67 
 
indemnity by AMP Group from JRS Group and/or SRG the 
same will be mutually agreed between the parties. 
 
(c) Parties shall co-operate with each other for any actions 
required to be undertaken or documents required to be 
executed for giving effect to the actions contemplated under 
this Clause, including but not limited to exercising their 
voting rights to provide necessary board or shareholders' 
approval, execution and stamping of share transfer forms, 
endorsement of share certificates, filing forms with the 
registrar of companies and the Reserve Bank of India, 
making entries in statutory registers, providing all necessary 
information and documents necessary for preparing 
necessary documents, etc required to be complied by Deegee 
Software under Applicable law. AMP Group shall be 
responsible for all compliances/filings under foreign 
exchange laws of India in relation to the AMP Deegee 
Transfer.  
 
xxx  
 
xxx 
 
 xxx  
 
SCHEDULE 7 
MILLENIUM EXIT 
 
In connection with Millenium Exit, the Parties have agreed 
the following:  
 
1. AMP Group will exit from Millenium. The total value of 
Millenium has been fixed at INR 130,00,00,000 and AMP 
Group's share of 36% out of total value of Millenium will be 
INR 46,80,00,000. 
 
2. Phase–1 - SRG will purchase approx. 11% shares of AMP 
Group post receipt of Balance JRS Purchase Price in the JRS 
Designated Bank Account. JRS Group proposes to provide 
necessary funding to SRG for purchasing shares held by 
AMP Group in Millenium. 
 
3. Phase 2 - Millenium will buy back the balance shares of 
AMP Group i.e., approx. 25% from the funds to be received 
from Deegee Software. Any tax in relation to such buyback 
to be borne by AMP Group. 
 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 14 of 67 
 
4. Phase 3 - within 12 months from execution of relevant 
documents in respect of Millenium Exit, Millenium will 
separate out the Class "B" shares being residential flat 
owners in a separate co-operative society. 
 
5. Until co-operative society is not formed, Millenium will 
provide no objection letter to AMP Group for transfer of 
their flats. 
 
SCHEDULE 8 
DEEGEE EXIT 
 
In connection with Deegee Exit, the Parties have agreed the 
following: 
 
1. JRS Group and SRG will exit from Deegee Software. AMP 
Group will discuss with Jabalpur Group and finalise on their 
exit. The total value of the property owned by Deegee 
Software is fixed at INR 141,00,00,000, which shall be used 
to pay off loans with proportionate interest to all lenders of 
Deegee Software. 
 
2. The sale proceeds received by AMP Group from sale of 
shares as per Phase 1 of Millenium Exit, will be brought in 
Deegee Software by AMP Group. 
 
3. AMP Group will bring further funds in Deegee Software 
to pay off entire loan provided by Millenium to Deegee 
Software along with interest at the rate of 14.50% p.a. 
compounded annually. 
 
4. Simultaneously, with repayment of loans to Millenium as 
per paragraph 3 above, (i) Deegee Software to pay off entire 
loan provided by JRS Group and SRG along with interest at 
the rate of 14.50% p.a. compounded annually; and (ii) 
shares of Deegee Software held by JRS Group and SRG shall 
also be transferred to AMP Group. 
 
5. The above exercise to be completed within 12 months from 
the execution of relevant documents in this regard.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 15 of 67 
 
13. Post the execution of the FAA and in pursuance of the implementation 
thereof, the following communications were exchanged:  
• Vide emails dated 12.03.2020 and 13.03.2020 sent to the AMP Group, Mr. 
Pankaj Agarwal shared documents required for the due diligence of Deegee 
which were marked to Mr. Kalpesh Parmar and the latter email was 
additionally marked to the respondent No.9 of SRG Group.  
• Vide emails dated 24.04.2020 and 04.05.2020 sent to the AMP Group, the 
JRS Group lawyers shared the FAA Closing Tracker reflecting the status of 
implementation of the FAA which included the pending transfer of Deegee 
and Millenium. The same were marked to Mr. Kalpesh Parmar.  
• Vide email dated 08.05.2020 sent to a shareholder of BVC, Mr. Kalpesh 
Parmar acted as the representative of the SRG Group on discussions 
pertaining to the amendment of the Aurosagar lease deed. The said excerpt 
from the contents of the email are reproduced hereinbelow: 
“….On Aurosagar point, this email I am sending to put 
forward views of Samarjitsinh (SRG) and not JRS. SRG is 
clear that Millenium can give POA to AMP and his 
immediate family and as agreed in FAA draft, PL can work 
on language without disturbing the construct / concept. SRG 
is not going to honour any POA which is beyond what is 
stated in the draft of POA shared with him even though you 
find any logical point in AMP’s arguments. As per him AMP 
is neither trustworthy nor a reliable person, so he is not 
interested in dealing any further with him. He already had a 
very bad experience of similar nature when he had sealed a 
deal with TATAs, that time also after signing the minutes, 
AMP took extreme U-turn just for SRG to become a laughing 
stock not only in front of all partners and HDFC Realty but 
also in front of TATAs. That’s enough for him. 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 16 of 67 
 
 
Please appreciate, though SRG is not a signatory to FAA, he 
is ready to honour what was agreed with him over phone call 
but on other side there is a person though has signed a 
document is now not ready to stick to it. Real mockery. 
 
I would suggest that seriously you should take this with 
Sanjaybhai & Shaju before approaching PI. My hands are 
tied on this since I have to safeguard interest of SRG….” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
• Vide email dated 11.05.2020 sent to the AMP Group on discussions 
pertaining to the Aurosagar Lease deed, Mr. Kalpesh Parmar indicated 
that Respondent No.9 is the only decision maker in Millenium and JRS 
is at best the facilitator if needed. The said excerpt from the contents of 
the email are reproduced hereinbelow: 
“…..The newly inserted points mentioned in the lease deed 
vide clause nos. 2.8, 2.9 (including 2.9.1 to 2.9.4), 2.10 and 
2.11 cannot be considered as part of the draft of lease deed 
for following reasons:…..  
 
…4. While your newly inserted points suggest that they are 
having a futuristic impact so this can very well be taken up 
in due course with Millenium when Samarjitsinh is the only 
decision maker and JRS is at best the facilitator if needed…” 
(Emphasis supplied)  
 
14.  An Amendment to the FAA was executed between the AMP Group and 
JRS Group on 15.05.2020. The clauses relevant to the present dispute are 
reproduced hereinbelow:  
“5. Clause 2.1.5(a) stands deleted in its entirety and is 
substituted with the following: 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 17 of 67 
 
On the Millenium Transfer Date, Aurosagar and Millenium 
shall simultaneously execute the following: (i) duly stamped 
amendment deed to the Aurosagar Lease Deed in the format 
set out in Annexure 1; (ii) duly stamped irrevocable special 
power of attorney in favour of Aurosagar in the format set 
out in Annexure 1A; and (iii) duly stamped deed of indemnity 
in the format set out in Annexure 1B. 
 
6. Clause 2.1.6(b) stands deleted in its entirety and is 
substituted with the following: 
 
AMP Group shall complete due diligence of Deegee 
Software on or before June 30, 2020. In the event, there are 
any findings requiring indemnity by AMP Group from JRS 
Group and/or SRG the same will be mutually agreed between 
the parties in writing. 
 
xxx xxx xxx  
 
12. Paragraph 27 in Schedule 4 stands deleted in its entirety 
and is substituted with the following: 
 
"Transaction Documents" means this Agreement, the 
Settlement Escrow Agreement and any and every document 
executed in connection with the transaction contemplated 
under or in connection with this Agreement.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
 
15.  In continuation of the implementation of the FAA, the following 
communications were exchanged;  
• Emails dated 01.07.2020, 10.04.2021 and 15.04.2021 were exchanged 
between the AMP Group and Mr. Kalpesh Parmar pertaining to the due 
diligence of Deegee.  
• Vide email dated 09.10.2020 sent to the AMP Group, the JRS lawyers 
shared drafts of the Share Purchase Agreements (hereinafter, “SPAs”) 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 18 of 67 
 
pertaining to Millenium and Deegee and a copy was marked to Mr. 
Kalpesh Parmar. 
• Vide email dated 27.11.2020 and a reminder email dated 03.04.2021, Mr. 
Kalpesh Parmar sent the drafts of these SPAs (with AMP Group 
comments) to the SRG lawyers with a copy marked to Respondent No.9 
in order to seek their comments.  
• Vide email dated 26.03.2021 sent to the AMP Group with a copy marked 
to the Respondent No.9, Mr. Kalpesh Parmar clarified that though the 
SPAs related to Deegee was stuck up with a non-JRS Group, yet the JRS 
Group was ready to hand over the affairs of Deegee w.e.f. 01.04.2021 
and requested the AMP Group to withdraw all litigations before the 
concerned forums.  
• Vide email dated 03.04.2021 sent to the JRS Group with a copy marked 
to the Respondent No.9, the AMP Group requested the JRS Group to 
undertake steps for restoring the original shareholding of the AMP Group 
in Deegee.  
 
16.  Several items under the FAA were pending implementation including the 
finalisation and execution of SPAs for Millenium and Deegee at the end of 
the SRG Group. Therefore, vide email dated 20.12.2021 sent to the JRS 
Group, the AMP Group nominated Mr. Upen Shah as the AMP Group’s 
representative in compliance with clause 7.1.2 of the FAA for amicable 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 19 of 67 
 
resolution of the issues arising out of the FAA between the AMP and JRS 
Groups. Vide reply email dated 26.12.2021, the JRS Group named Mr. 
Sanket Jain and/or Mr. Kalpesh Parmar as their representative. Clause 7.1.2 
is reproduced hereinbelow:  
 
“7.1.1 The Parties agree to use all reasonable efforts to 
resolve any dispute, controversy, claim or disagreement of 
any kind whatsoever between or amongst any of the Parties 
in connection with or arising out of this Agreement or the 
Transaction Document/s executed in connection with the 
transaction contemplated under or in connection with this 
Agreement, including any question regarding its existence, 
validity or termination ("Dispute"), expediently and 
amicably to achieve timely and full performance of the terms 
of this Agreement or the Transaction Document/s. 
 
7.1.2 Any Party which claims that a Dispute has arisen must 
give notice thereof to the other Parties as soon as practicable 
after the occurrence of the event, matter or thing which is the 
subject of such Dispute and in such notice, such Party shall 
provide particulars of the circumstances and nature of such 
Dispute and of its claim(s) in relation thereto and shall 
designate a Person as its representative for negotiations 
relating to the Dispute, which Person shall have authority to 
settle the Dispute. The other Parties shall, within 7 (seven) 
days of such notice, each specify in writing its position in 
relation to the Dispute and designate as their representative 
in negotiations relating to the Dispute, a Person with similar 
authority.” 
 
 
17.  The first round of mediation was held between the representatives of the 
AMP and JRS Groups on 19.01.2022. However, the discussions on the 
issues did not lead to any conclusion. While the minutes of the same were 
shared with Mr. Kalpesh Parmar, he denied its contents and stated that the 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 20 of 67 
 
draft minutes do not correctly record the events which occurred at the 
meeting.  
 
18. For the purpose of initiating the second round of mediation, an email dated 
06.05.2022 was sent by the JRS Group to the AMP Group invoking Clause 
7.1.2 and they nominated Mr. Anuj Trivedi or Mr. Kalpesh Parmar to act as 
their representatives.  In response to the same, on 23.05.2022, the AMP 
Group nominated Mr. Keyur Gandhi and/or Mr. Upen Shah and/or Mr. 
Nihar Mehta as their representatives. The first mediation meeting was 
convened on 13.06.2022. The second mediation meeting was convened on 
23.07.2022 wherein it was stated by the petitioners that the AMP and JRS 
Groups were agreeable to hold a joint meeting with SRG for the purpose of 
resolving the major issues pertaining to Millenium and Deegee. 
 
19. In the midst of mediation, on 17.10.2022, the JRS Group sent a WhatsApp 
message to the AMP Group stating that (a) the JRS Group had a meeting 
with the SRG Group, (b) SRG and Millenium were ready to purchase the 
stake of AMP Group in Millenium at the price agreed in the FAA, (c) SRG 
would exit from Deegee subject to a payment of Rs. 25 crore as 
compensation considering its contribution to the growth of Deegee. The 
contents of the message are reproduced hereinbelow: 
 
“ Dear Keyurbhai. 
 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 21 of 67 
 
My clients had a meeting with SRG and the following points 
have been suggested by SRG: 
(1) Millennium: 
(a) SRG and Millennium would be ready to purchase the 
stake of AMP in Millennium at the price already agreed AMP 
and JRS 
(b) The said purchase would be made from the compensation 
that SRG receives from AMP for handling, taking care of and 
making Deegee prosperous over the last 20 years. The said 
compensation would be used for purchasing 11% of the 36% 
stake of AMP in Millennium. 
(c) The balance 25% would be "buy back" by Millennium of 
AMP shares. This would be subject to the receipt of loan and 
interest by Millennium & SRG from Degee 
 
(2) Amendment to AoA: Millennium and SRG are of the 
opinion that AoA does not need to be amended 
 
(3) Aurosagar Lease Deed: the lease of Millennium and 
Aurosagar is as per the plans sanctioned by the Municipal 
Corporation. The draft lease deed provided is in 
contradiction to the said sanctioned plans. 
 
(4) Aurosagar Special Power of Attorney: Millennium and 
SRG are of the opinion that there is no required of a Special 
Power of Attorney. 
 
(5) Deegee 
(a) SRG will exit from Deegee, however, the same has been 
formed and promoted by SRG, SRG has also given its name 
in order to avoid the conflict of interest of AMP with 
Firmenich. SRG has taken care of the company for the last 
20 years and has provided services without any 
renumeration. In view thereof, for exiting Deegee, SRG is 
expecting compensation of Rs.25 crores 
(b) Millennium and SRG are also expecting interest 14.50% 
till repayment of the amount lent to AMP 
 
JRS Group has suggested that we may have another meeting 
and try to take it forward”.  
(Emphasis supplied) 
 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 22 of 67 
 
20.  Further on 21.11.2022, the JRS Group sent another WhatsApp message to 
the AMP Group stating that it had spoken to the SRG Group and that if the 
AMP Group was not ready to recognise SRG’s contribution in the growth 
of Deegee, it would be difficult for them to agree with the AMP Group on 
any point. The contents of the message are reproduced hereinbelow: 
 
“Talked with SRG and here is the response- 
As he understands from me that AMP group is looking 
forward for meeting with SRG to discuss the points 
forwarded by SRG, however AMP Grp would not like to give 
any compensation for Deegee to SRG. As per SRG, if AMP 
Grp is not even ready to recognize his contribution in growth 
of Deegee, then it would be difficult for him to meet AMP 
Grp for any point and thereby the points sent by SRG shall 
be considered as non existent and should not be referred any 
time in future.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
21.  Vide email dated 16.05.2023 sent to the AMP Group, Mr. Kalpesh Parmar 
conveyed that he would discuss with SRG and try to resolve all matters 
pertaining to Deegee and would also intimate the outcome of his discussion. 
It was also conveyed that Millenium can be simultaneously worked out 
once Deegee is settled. The contents of the email are reproduced 
hereinbelow: 
“Dear Nihar, 
 
Based on my discussions with JRSG, following are the 
comments: 
[…]  
4. All Deegee points we will discuss and try to resolve with 
SRG and Jabalpur Group. The outcome, we will update you. 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 23 of 67 
 
However, we expect to complete other companies/entities as 
per excel chart, which is concerning only JRSG & AMPG, 
subject to the comments herein without putting any deadlines 
for Deegee. 
 
5. About Millenium, once Deegee is settled. Millenium can 
be simultaneously worked out. 
 
6. Escrow should be released along with the signing of 
consent terms of Aurosagar. 
 
7. As informed earlier Aurosagar's SPOA & Lease Deed 
points can be directly dealt with SRG. 
 
You may consider above comments and discuss. You may 
thereafter make necessary changes in your comments in the 
excel file and resend it”.  
(Emphasis supplied) 
  
22. Since mediation between the parties yielded no result, the JRS Group sent 
an Arbitration Notice dated 11.12.2023 to the AMP Group invoking 
Clauses 7.2 and 7.3 respectively contained in the FAA dated 28.02.2020 
read with the Amendment to the FAA dated 15.05.2020. The JRS Group, 
in the said notice, alleged, inter alia, that while the JRS Group had fulfilled 
its obligations under the FAA, the AMP Group had failed to discharge and 
take appropriate steps in compliance of its obligations. On account of such 
failure, the JRS Group was unable to fulfil its corresponding obligations 
and hence, disputes had arisen between the parties. They nominated Justice 
Kalpesh S. Jhaveri (Former Chief Justice, High Court of Orissa) to act as 
the sole arbitrator to resolve and adjudicate the disputes only between the 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 24 of 67 
 
AMP Group and JRS Group, in accordance with the FAA. The arbitration 
clause contained in the FAA is reproduced hereinbelow:  
 
“7.2 Any Dispute, if not resolved in accordance with Clause 
7.1, shall be referred to and finally resolved by arbitration 
in accordance with the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 read with the rules framed thereunder ("Arbitration 
Act"). Subject to any interim reliefs/orders granted, this 
Agreement and the rights and obligations of the Parties 
contained in this Agreement shall remain in full force and 
effect pending issuance of the award in such arbitration 
proceedings, which award, if appropriate, shall determine 
whether and when any termination shall become effective. 
 
7.3 The arbitral tribunal shall consist of a sole arbitrator 
mutually agreed upon and appointed by the Parties. Failing 
such agreement, either Party shall be at liberty to seek 
appointment of a sole arbitrator by preferring an 
appropriate application in accordance with the Arbitration 
Act before the jurisdictional Court or arbitral institution, as 
the case may be, at Ahmedabad.” 
 
23. On 12.01.2024, the AMP Group gave its reply to the aforesaid notice and 
sent it to both the JRS and SRG Groups. The AMP Group, while denying 
the contents of the Arbitration Notice, alleged, inter alia, that, it is the JRS 
Group that had failed to perform their part of the obligations under various 
pretext despite the AMP Group pursuing the same. It stated that the 
assertion on the part of the JRS Group that SRG Group was not bound by 
the terms of the FAA since it is not a signatory to the said document was 
completely contrary to what had been represented to AMP during the 
negotiations and at the time of execution of the FAA and further the same 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 25 of 67 
 
was made only for the purpose of raising an extra monetary demand of Rs. 
25 crore which was never contemplated under the FAA. It was further stated 
that Mr. Kalpesh Parmar and the JRS Group had represented the SRG 
Group at all stages including the mediation process.  The appointment of 
Justice Akil Kureshi (Former Chief Justice, High Court of Rajasthan) was 
suggested as an arbitrator for adjudication of all disputes arising under the 
FAA between the AMP, JRS and SRG Groups.  
 
24. On 09.02.2024 and 10.02.2024 respectively, the JRS Group and SRG 
Group responded to the reply to the Arbitration Notice sent by the AMP 
Group.  
 
25. Upon failure to reach an agreement on the appointment of the Sole 
Arbitrator within 30 days, the Petitioner AMP Group has filed the present 
Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 before this Court. 
 
 
B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER (AMP 
GROUP) 
 
26.  Mr. Darius Khambata, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of 
the petitioners submitted that although the SRG Group is not a signatory to 
the FAA dated 28.02.2020 which contains the arbitration clause, yet it is a 
veritable party to the arbitration agreement since they participated in the 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 26 of 67 
 
negotiations leading up to the FAA and continued to talk with the parties 
on the issues pertaining to the implementation of the FAA.  
 
27. It was submitted that the successful implementation of the FAA was 
contingent on the involvement and action of the SRG Group and it was the 
intention and understanding of all the parties, including the SRG Group, 
that they would adhere to, and act on the terms of the FAA. The same was 
submitted to be evident through the following: 
• The email dated 14.01.2020 by which Mr. Kalpesh Parmar stated that 
the valuation of Respondent Nos. 7 and 8 respectively can be finalized 
only in consultation with the SRG Group;  
• A joint meeting that took place between Mr. Kalpesh Parmar, Mr. Ashit 
Patel and Respondent No.9 during which Respondent No.9 represented 
that Mr. Kalpesh Parmar was also representing the interest of the SRG 
Group in the negotiations and that SRG would be bound by the final 
terms agreed with Mr. Kalpesh Parmar and JRS Group;  
• The email dated 08.05.2020 by which Mr. Kalpesh Parmar asserts that 
SRG is ready to honour what was agreed in the FAA and that he has to 
safeguard the interest of SRG in the implementation of the FAA.  
• Even after the execution of the FAA, important emails dated 
13.03.2020, 27.11.2020, 26.03.2021 and 03.04.2021 respectively were 
sent by the JRS Group/Kalpesh Parmar wherein SRG (Respondent 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 27 of 67 
 
No.9) was marked and has not objected to the contents thereof or raised 
any grievance. 
• During the mediation process, the SRG Group had communicated 
through a JRS Group representative that it is ready and willing to 
perform its obligations under the FAA if its demand for an additional 
consideration of Rs. 25 Crore for exit from Respondent No. 8 company 
is accepted by the AMP Group.  
 
28. The Counsel submitted that the execution of the terms of the FAA required 
the involvement and action of the SRG Group while also benefitting them. 
It was submitted that a perusal of the following clauses and schedules of the 
FAA would indicate that the transaction was one of separation of 
shareholding and businesses of the three groups viz AMP, JRS and SRG: 
• Clause 2.1.4 read with Schedule 7 provides that AMP Group would exit 
from Respondent No. 7 Company i.e. Millenium (where the SRG Group 
already holds 40%) and that out of the 36% shares held by the AMP 
Group, 11% will be purchased by the SRG Group and the remaining 
25% will be bought back by Respondent No. 7 Company. The valuation 
of Respondent No. 7 Company is provided as Rs. 130 crore.  
• Clause 2.1.6 read with Schedule 8 provides that the JRS and SRG 
Groups shall exit the Respondent No. 8 Company i.e. Deegee by selling 
their shares to the AMP Group. Sale proceeds received by the AMP 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 28 of 67 
 
Group on its exit from the Respondent No. 7 company will be brought 
into the Respondent No. 8 Company. The valuation of Respondent No. 
8 Company is provided as Rs. 141 Crore.  
• Clause 2.1.7 read with Item 10 of Schedule 3 provides that the AMP 
Group shall withdraw CP 383/2017 filed against the Respondent No. 8 
Company where Respondent No.9 is also a party.  
 
29. The counsel submitted that the Share Purchase Agreements (SPAs) were to 
be executed to facilitate the implementation of Clauses 2.1.4 and 2.1.6 
respectively of the FAA and the SRG Group would have been a party to the 
SPAs. This is evident from the draft SPAs and the same were forwarded 
specifically to the respondent No.9 vide email dated 27.11.2020. That 
according to the dispute resolution clause contained in Clauses 7.1 and 7.2 
respectively, disputes between or amongst any of the parties in connection 
with or arising out of the Transaction Documents can be amicably resolved 
and upon its failure, be resolved by arbitration. The term “Transaction 
Documents” is defined as “means this Agreement, the Escrow Agreement 
and any and every document executed in connection with the transaction 
contemplated under or in connection with this Agreement” and also 
includes the SPAs to be executed inter alia the SRG Group, the drafts of 
which were forwarded to the SRG Group on 27.11.2020.  
 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 29 of 67 
 
30. It was submitted that the AMP Group has conducted the due diligence of 
the Respondent No.8 Company i.e., Deegee as contemplated in Clause 
2.1.6(b) of the FAA with the full knowledge and consent of the SRG Group. 
The same is evident vide emails dated 01.07.2020, 23.10.2020, 10.04.2021 
and 15.04.2021 respectively. This demonstrated that the FAA had also been 
partly implemented qua the SRG Group which is in management of the said 
company.  
 
31.  One another submission made by the counsel was that the nomenclature of 
the agreement i.e., “Family Arrangement Agreement” is irrelevant. In 
addition to that, the description and obligation of the parties under the FAA 
is also irrelevant since most cases of non-signatory parties will involve 
agreements, the terms of which do not expressly include the non-signatory. 
In support of the aforesaid, the counsel placed reliance on the decision of 
this Court in Sasan Power Ltd. v. North American Coal Corporation 
(India) Private Ltd. reported in (2016) 10 SCC 813 where it was settled 
that the nomenclature of an agreement is not determinative of its character.  
 
32. The counsel submitted that while on many occasions the representatives of 
JRS Group were there to take care of the interests, suggestions and 
comments of the SRG Group, it was understood by all the parties that the 
SRG Group although not a signatory to the FAA yet would be a part of the 
execution of and compliance of the terms and conditions thereof. Therefore, 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 30 of 67 
 
there was commonality of subject matter and composite transactions, in 
view of which SRG is a veritable party liable to be referred to arbitration. 
 
33. By placing a strong reliance on the decision of this Court in Cox and Kings 
Ltd. v. SAP India Pvt. Ltd. reported in (2024) 4 SCC 1, the counsel 
submitted that the settled position is that the referral court should leave it 
for the Arbitral Tribunal to decide whether the non-signatory party is indeed 
a party to the arbitration agreement on the basis of factual evidence and 
application of legal doctrine. He submitted that the Delhi and Bombay High 
Courts have consistently taken a view to refer the parties, including the non-
signatories to arbitration in DLF Ltd. v. PNB Housing Finance Ltd. 
reported in (2024) SCC OnLine Del 2165, Moneywise Financial Services 
(P) Ltd. v. Dilip Jain reported in (2024) SCC OnLine Del 1896 and 
Cardinal Energy and Infra Structure Pvt. Ltd. v. Subramanya 
Construction & Development Co. Ltd. reported in (2024) SCC OnLine 
Bom 964 by relying on this Court’s decision in Cox and Kings (supra).  
 
34. The counsel finally submitted that it is critical to refer even the non-
signatory to arbitration since otherwise there is a risk that the non-signatory 
may not appear before the Arbitral Tribunal and disregard its award as 
beyond jurisdiction. In any event, the arbitrability of disputes qua the SRG 
Group can always be considered by the Arbitral Tribunal   
 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 31 of 67 
 
C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT (JRS 
GROUP) 
 
 
35. Ms. Anushree Prashit Kapadia the learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
the Respondent JRS Group submitted that while the JRS Group has no 
objection to the adjudication of disputes with the AMP Group by arbitral 
proceedings presided by the Sole arbitrator nominated by the AMP Group, 
the SRG Group cannot be a part of the arbitration proceedings as they are 
not party to the FAA. It was also submitted that the FAA contained the 
definition of “Parties” and the SRG Group is not defined in the FAA. The 
AMP Group and JRS Group are family members, whereas, the SRG Group 
is not part of the family.  
 
36. The counsel submitted that the various clauses of the FAA indicate that the 
FAA binds only the AMP and JRS Groups. Clauses 2.1.4 and 2.1.6 
respectively wherein the SRG Group is mentioned do not cast any 
obligations on the SRG Group since it merely states that “Parties shall 
execute…” & “Parties shall ensure...”. There is also no exchange of 
consideration with the SRG Group in the FAA.  
 
37. The counsel submitted that neither the JRS Group nor the chartered 
accountant, Mr. Kalpesh Parmar have ever represented the SRG Group, 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 32 of 67 
 
acted on their behalf or received any authority or power from the SRG 
Group. There is no evidence on record or otherwise to the contrary.  
 
38.  The counsel submitted that Clause 8.1 of the FAA on “Entire Agreement” 
categorically states that the FAA superseded any and all prior oral and 
written agreements. Therefore, the case of the AMP Group that SRG Group 
was effectively a part of the negotiations and is privy to the transactions is 
inconsequential.  
 
39. The counsel finally submitted that the AMP Group and JRS Group have 
fulfilled part of their respective obligations under the FAA and are in a 
position to fully execute the FAA without the presence or role of the SRG 
Group. Clause 8.7 dealing with Partial Validity empowers the severance of 
invalid or unenforceable provisions of the FAA.  
 
D. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT (SRG 
GROUP) 
 
40. Mr. Huzefa Ahmadi, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the 
Respondent SRG Group submitted that the present petition is merely a 
device to embroil strangers into an agreement entered into between two 
groups of the same family since the SRG Group is admittedly neither a party 
nor signatory or confirming party to the FAA or the alleged arbitration 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 33 of 67 
 
agreement contained therein. The AMP and JRS Groups who are 
signatories thereto are ad idem about the terms of the FAA, including their 
mutual intention to refer the disputes arising from it to arbitration. Had the 
SRG Group been involved in the negotiations leading to the signing of the 
FAA, or participated therein, or expressed its inclination to be bound by the 
arbitration agreement, the same would have been recorded in the FAA.  
 
41. The counsel submitted that the fact that the FAA had always been intended 
to operate inter se the AMP and JRS Groups is borne from a bare perusal 
of the clauses of the FAA itself which only confers rights or fastens 
obligations upon the said Groups.  
• Recital F specifically records that the AMP and JRS Groups “after mutual 
discussions and negotiations have agreed to settle all disputes/issues that 
have arisen amongst the parties over last several years …. on the terms 
and conditions as mutually agreed to”.  
• Clauses 2.1.4 and 2.1.6 read with Schedules 7 and 8 which relate to the exit 
of AMP Group from Millenium and the exit of JRS and SRG Groups from 
Deegee contain a mere reference to the SRG Group wherein the foremost 
words used read as “In connection with the … Exit, the Parties agree…” – 
thereby placing the obligation to exit and/or ensure such exit solely upon 
the AMP or JRS Groups, as the case may be. None of these clauses indicate 
either the consent or agreement of the SRG Group in this regard.  

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 34 of 67 
 
• Further, in Clause 2.1.7, the FAA places an obligation to unconditionally 
withdraw all litigations solely on the AMP and JRS Groups.  
 
42. The counsel submitted that the arbitration clause contained in the FAA by 
itself makes a reference only to the parties to the FAA inasmuch as it sets 
out the negotiation or dispute resolution mechanism or appointment 
procedure to be followed by the parties alone, and importantly, the factum 
that the AMP and JRS Groups shall continue to perform their respective 
obligations under the FAA, subject to the termination of the FAA. At no 
point does the arbitration agreement make any reference to the SRG Group 
nor does it fasten any obligations to be performed by it.  
 
43. It was further submitted that there is no defined legal relationship between 
the SRG Group and the petitioners to justify the application of Section 7(1) 
of the Act, 1996. In other words, there is no ‘arbitration agreement’ between 
them either in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract or in the form 
of a separate agreement in terms of sub-sections (2) to (5) of section 7 of 
the Act, 1996. In fact, there is no contract at all between them and 
consequently, there is no privity of contract between the Petitioners and 
SRG Group in any manner whatsoever.  
 
44. It was also submitted that bringing non-signatories within the scope of the 
arbitration agreement is an exception and not the rule. In support of this, the 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 35 of 67 
 
counsel relied on the decision of this Court in Cox & Kings (supra). 
Further, it was submitted that a dual test has to be satisfied to compel the 
SRG Group to be a party to the present arbitration proceedings i.e., (a) SRG 
Group should be shown to have agreed to the underlying contract and (b) 
SRG Group should also be shown to have agreed to be bound by the 
arbitration agreement. Both the conditions are not satisfied. A vague 
awareness of the JRS and AMP Groups being in negotiations or the mere 
marking of emails relating thereto to a member of the SRG Group cannot 
imply consent. It was submitted that the SRG Group is neither a consensual 
or non-consensual participant in the arbitration proceedings arising out of 
the FAA nor have any of the aforementioned consensual or non-consensual 
theories been invoked by the petitioners. To compel a party to arbitration in 
respect of a family arrangement despite the fact that they are not a member 
of the family would sound the death knell to the concept of party autonomy 
and freedom of contract.   
 
45. The counsel submitted that apart from co-ownership or common 
shareholding in Millenium and Deegee, the SRG Group has no business 
relationship or dealings or common interest with either of the other groups. 
Since the subject-matter in question is with respect to the implementation 
of the FAA, there is no doubt that the same can be effectively implemented 
without the participation of the SRG Group in the arbitration proceedings. 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 36 of 67 
 
Without prejudice to the above, the counsel submitted that severing the only 
two sub-clauses that merely make a reference to the SRG Group, without 
placing any obligation thereupon i.e., Clauses 2.1.4 and 2.1.6 would in no 
way impact the implementation of the FAA.   
 
46. It was submitted that the negotiations leading to the signing of the FAA 
were initiated at the behest of one Premji Group in the BVC deal that took 
place between the Premji Group, the JRS Group and other shareholders. 
Surprisingly, despite disputes having arisen regarding a similar exit of the 
JRS Group from BVC, neither BVC nor the Premji Group have been roped 
in as participants in the FAA. However, the AMP Group, for reasons best 
known to itself, has sought participation of the SRG Group on the feeble 
pretext of ensuring exits from Millenium and Deegee.  
 
47. The counsel also submitted that the SRG Group was not a party to the 
mediation proceedings since vide email dated 20.12.2021, the AMP Group 
invoked mediation as per clause 7.1.2 of the FAA only against the JRS 
Group for resolving disputes between themselves. It has been admitted in 
the same email that the AMP Group had no contact with the SRG Group 
regarding any SPAs for Millenium and Deegee or otherwise and the AMP 
Group even castigated the JRS Group for pushing pending obligations inter 
se the parties on the SRG Group when “the SRG group is not even a party 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 37 of 67 
 
to the FAA”. The minutes of the 1st mediation meeting dated 19.01.2022 
also reflect that the same was not attended by the members or 
representatives of the SRG Group. The counsel further submitted that when 
the negotiations were resumed for the second time vide email dated 
23.05.2022, the SRG Group neither attended nor was represented in the 
same.   
 
48. The counsel submitted that the SRG Group at no point of time, appointed, 
engaged or authorised, either the JRS Group or Mr. Kalpesh Parmar to 
undertake any actions or make any representations on its behalf or bind it 
to any agreement that has been entered into by and between the AMP and 
JRS Groups either expressly or impliedly. It was submitted that even as per 
the petitioners’ own case, the so called joint meeting dated 14.01.2020 that 
was arranged by Mr. Kalpesh Parmar was done so by him representing the 
JRS Group and “was attended by Mr. Ashit Patel for AMP Group and 
Respondent No.9 of the SRG Group”. Therefore, the petitioners cannot blow 
hot and cold and allege that Mr. Parmar also attended in the capacity of a 
representative of the SRG Group. Further, the JRS Group itself nominated 
Mr. Kalpesh Parmar as its representative for mediation vide email dated 
26.12.2021 and therefore, it is not proper for the petitioners to contend that 
the SRG Group was represented by Mr. Kalpesh Parmar or the JRS Group.  
 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 38 of 67 
 
49. The counsel submitted that the Notice invoking arbitration sent by the JRS 
Group on 11.12.2023 was not addressed to the SRG Group. Only in the 
Reply to the Arbitration Notice issued by the AMP Group on 12.01.2024, 
the SRG Group was marked and this is the first instance that the AMP 
Group alluded to the SRG Group as a participant in the FAA and that to 
after a span of almost 4 years. This, according to him, was clearly an 
afterthought.  
 
50. The counsel in the last submitted that, in the facts of the present case, even 
the prima facie threshold required to be met to warrant joinder of non-
parties to arbitral proceedings, either by the referral court or by an arbitral 
tribunal, has not been met.  
 
E. ANALYSIS  
 
 
51. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone 
through the materials on record, the only question that falls for our 
consideration is whether the SRG Group, being a non-signatory to the FAA, 
should also be referred to arbitration along with the AMP and JRS Groups?  
 
i. Scope of jurisdiction of the referral court under Section 11(6) of the 
Act, 1996 
 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 39 of 67 
 
52. A plethora of decisions have deliberated upon the scope of the Court’s 
jurisdiction and the role to be played by the referral court in the appointment 
of an arbitrator. The position on this question was starkly different prior to 
and post the 2015 Amendment to the 1996, Act.  
 
53. A seven-Judge Bench of this Court in SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd. 
reported in (2005) 8 SCC 618, held that the power under Section 11 of the 
Act, 1996 was not an administrative but a judicial power. Therefore, it was 
opined that the Chief Justice or his designate under Section 11(6) had the 
right to decide preliminary issues including his own jurisdiction, to 
entertain the request, the existence of a valid arbitration agreement, the 
existence or otherwise of a live claim, the existence of the condition for the 
exercise of his power and on the qualifications of the arbitrator or 
arbitrators. The relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow: 
 
“47. We, therefore, sum up our conclusions as follows:  
 
(i) The power exercised by the Chief Justice of the High 
Court or the Chief Justice of India under Section 11(6) of the 
Act is not an administrative power. It is a judicial power. 
  
      
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
(iv) The Chief Justice or the designated Judge will have the 
right to decide the preliminary aspects as indicated in the 
earlier part of this judgment. These will be his own 
jurisdiction to entertain the request, the existence of a valid 
arbitration agreement, the existence or otherwise of a live 
claim, the existence of the condition for the exercise of his 
power and on the qualifications of the arbitrator or 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 40 of 67 
 
arbitrators. The Chief Justice or the designated Judge would 
be entitled to seek the opinion of an institution in the matter 
of nominating an arbitrator qualified in terms of Section 
11(8) of the Act if the need arises but the order appointing 
the arbitrator could only be that of the Chief Justice or the 
designated Judge.  
     
 xxx  
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
(ix) In a case where an Arbitral Tribunal has been 
constituted by the parties without having recourse to Section 
11(6) of the Act, the Arbitral Tribunal will have the 
jurisdiction to decide all matters as contemplated by Section 
16 of the Act. 
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
 
xxx 
 
(xii) … The decision in Konkan Rly. Corpn. Ltd. v. Rani 
Construction (P) Ltd. [(2002) 2 SCC 388] is overruled. 
         (Emphasis supplied) 
 
 
54. While further reinforcing the view taken in SBP & Co. (supra), this Court 
in National Insurance Company Limited v. Boghara Polyfab Private Ltd 
reported in (2009) 1 SCC 267 identified and segregated the three categories 
of preliminary issues that may arise for consideration in an application 
under Section 11 as follows: 
“22. Where the intervention of the court is sought for 
appointment of an Arbitral Tribunal under Section 11, the 
duty of the Chief Justice or his designate is defined in SBP & 
Co. [(2005) 8 SCC 618] This Court identified and 
segregated the preliminary issues that may arise for 
consideration in an application under Section 11 of the Act 
into three categories, that is, (i) issues which the Chief 
Justice or his designate is bound to decide; (ii) issues which 
he can also decide, that is, issues which he may choose to 
decide; and (iii) issues which should be left to the Arbitral 
Tribunal to decide. 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 41 of 67 
 
 
22.1. The issues (first category) which the Chief Justice/his 
designate will have to decide are: 
 
(a) Whether the party making the application has 
approached the appropriate High Court. 
(b) Whether there is an arbitration agreement and whether 
the party who has applied under Section 11 of the Act, is a 
party to such an agreement. 
 
22.2. The issues (second category) which the Chief 
Justice/his designate may choose to decide (or leave them to 
the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal) are: 
 
(a) Whether the claim is a dead (long-barred) claim or a live 
claim. 
(b) 
Whether 
the 
parties 
have 
concluded 
the 
contract/transaction by recording satisfaction of their 
mutual rights and obligation or by receiving the final 
payment without objection. 
 
22.3. The issues (third category) which the Chief Justice/his 
designate should leave exclusively to the Arbitral Tribunal 
are: 
 
(i) Whether a claim made falls within the arbitration clause 
(as for example, a matter which is reserved for final decision 
of a departmental authority and excepted or excluded from 
arbitration). 
(ii) Merits or any claim involved in the arbitration. 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
55. On a closer look at the categories delineated in the aforesaid decision, it can 
be seen that the issues in the first category have to be mandatorily decided 
by the Chief Justice or his designate under Section 11 of the Act, 1996. This 
included the question whether there is an arbitration agreement and whether 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 42 of 67 
 
the party that has applied under Section 11 is also a party to such an 
agreement.  
 
56. Later, on the suggestion of the 246th Report of the Law Commission of 
India, Section 11(6A) was inserted through the 2015 Amendment to the 
Act, 1996. The wide jurisdiction afforded to the referral courts by the 
decisions in SBP & Co (supra) and Boghara Polyfab (supra) was 
legislatively overruled by virtue of the non-obstante clause incorporated in 
Section 11(6A). Although the 2019 Amendment to the Act, 1996 omitted 
Section 11(6A), such an omission was not notified and therefore Section 
11(6A) still remains in force and reads thus:  
“(6A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the 
High Court, while considering any application Under 
Sub-section (4) or Sub-section (5) or Sub-section (6), 
shall, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of 
any Court, confine to the examination of the existence of 
an arbitration agreement.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
57. The crucial question that arose for consideration by this Court in Duro 
Felguera S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Limited reported in (2017) 9 SCC 729 
was the effect of the change introduced by the 2015 Amendment to the Act, 
1996 which inserted Section 11(6A). The Court held that all that needs to 
be looked into is whether the agreement contained a Clause which provides 
for arbitration pertaining to the disputes which have arisen between the 
parties to the agreement i.e., the existence of the arbitration agreement, 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 43 of 67 
 
nothing more, nothing less. The relevant observations are extracted 
hereinbelow: 
 
“48[…] From a reading of Section 11(6-A), the intention of 
the legislature is crystal clear i.e. the court should and need 
only look into one aspect—the existence of an arbitration 
agreement. What are the factors for deciding as to whether 
there is an arbitration agreement is the next question. The 
resolution to that is simple—it needs to be seen if the 
agreement contains a clause which provides for arbitration 
pertaining to the disputes which have arisen between the 
parties to the agreement. 
 
xxx   
 
xxx   
 
xxx  
 
59. The scope of the power under Section 11(6) of the 1996 
Act was considerably wide in view of the decisions in SBP 
and Co. [SBP and Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 
618] 
and Boghara 
Polyfab [National 
Insurance 
Co. 
Ltd. v. Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd., (2009) 1 SCC 267 : (2009) 
1 SCC (Civ) 117] . This position continued till the 
amendment brought about in 2015. After the amendment, all 
that the courts need to see is whether an arbitration 
agreement exists—nothing more, nothing less. The 
legislative policy and purpose is essentially to minimise the 
Court's intervention at the stage of appointing the arbitrator 
and this intention as incorporated in Section 11(6-A) ought 
to be respected. 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
 
58. A two Judge-Bench of this Court in Garware Wall Ropes Ltd. v. Coastal 
Marine Constructions & Engineering Ltd. reported in (2019) 9 SCC 209 
considered the effect of Section 11(6A) which confined the jurisdiction of 
the Court to examine the “existence of an arbitration agreement” on an 
arbitration agreement contained in an unstamped document or contract. The 
Court was of the opinion that its enquiry as to whether a compulsorily 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 44 of 67 
 
stampable document, which contains the arbitration clause, is duly stamped 
or not, is only an enquiry into whether such an arbitration agreement exists 
in law and this does not in any manner amount to deciding “preliminary 
question(s)” that arise between the parties. However, in deciding so, the 
Court maintained that a referral court must confine itself to the question of 
existence of the arbitration agreement and observed as thus:  
 
“14. A reading of the Law Commission Report, together with 
the Statement of Objects and Reasons, shows that the Law 
Commission felt that the judgments in SBP & Co. [SBP & 
Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] and Boghara 
Polyfab [National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Boghara Polyfab 
(P) Ltd., (2009) 1 SCC 267 : (2009) 1 SCC (Civ) 117] 
required a relook, as a result of which, so far as Section 11 
is concerned, the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the 
High Court, while considering any application under 
Sections 11(4) to 11(6) is to confine itself to the examination 
of the existence of an arbitration agreement and leave all 
other 
preliminary 
issues 
to 
be 
decided 
by 
the 
arbitrator.  […]” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
 
59. Once again, a three-judge bench of this Court in Vidya Drolia and Ors. v. 
Durga Trading Corporation reported in (2021) 2 SCC 1 held that Sections 
8 and 11 respectively must be read as laying down a similar standard on the 
scope of the referral court’s powers. It was stated that the questions as 
regards the existence and validity being intertwined, an arbitration 
agreement does not exist if it is illegal or does not satisfy mandatory legal 
requirements. The decision endorsed the application of a prima facie test in 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 45 of 67 
 
examining the existence and validity of an arbitration agreement both under 
Sections 8 and 11. This prima facie examination was not a full review but 
a primary first review to weed out manifest and ex-facie non-existent and 
invalid arbitration agreements and non-arbitrable disputes. However, it was 
clarified that the Court should not get lost in thickets and decide debatable 
questions of fact. The relevant extract is reproduced hereinbelow:  
“153. Accordingly, we hold that the expression “existence of 
an arbitration agreement” in Section 11 of the Arbitration 
Act, would include aspect of validity of an arbitration 
agreement, albeit the court at the referral stage would apply 
the prima facie test on the basis of principles set out in this 
judgment. In cases of debatable and disputable facts, and 
good reasonable arguable case, etc., the court would force 
the parties to abide by the arbitration agreement as the 
Arbitral Tribunal has primary jurisdiction and authority to 
decide the disputes including the question of jurisdiction and 
non-arbitrability.” 
(Emphasis Supplied) 
 
60. Vidya Drolia (supra) while speaking in the context of Section 8 also pointed 
out that jurisdictional issues like whether certain parties are bound by the 
arbitration agreement must be left to the arbitral tribunal since they involve 
complicated factual questions and observed as thus:  
“239. […] Jurisdictional issues concerning whether certain 
parties are bound by a particular arbitration, under group-
company doctrine or good faith, etc., in a multi-party 
arbitration raises complicated factual questions, which are 
best left for the tribunal to handle.[…]” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 46 of 67 
 
61. A Constitution Bench of this Court in In Re: Interplay Between Arbitration 
Agreements under Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 and Stamp Act, 
1899 reported in (2024) 6 SCC 1, stated that an arbitration agreement 
contained in an unstamped or insufficiently stamped contract would not be 
non-existent in law as stated in Garware Wall Ropes (supra). It also 
clarified the position taken in Vidya Drolia (supra) and stated that the 
parameters for judicial review under Sections 8 and 11 respectively were 
different. The scope of examination under Section 11(6) should be confined 
to the “existence of the arbitration agreement” under Section 7 of the Act, 
1996. Similarly, the “validity of an arbitration agreement” must be 
restricted to the requirement of formal validity such as the requirement that 
the agreement be in writing. Substantive objections pertaining to existence 
and validity on the basis of evidence must therefore be left to the arbitral 
tribunal. Moreover, it was stated that the expression “examination” under 
Section 11 does not connote or imply a laborious or contested inquiry. On 
the other hand, Section 16 provides that the arbitral tribunal can “rule” on 
its jurisdiction, including the existence and validity of an arbitration 
agreement. It was also stated that any prima facie opinion rendered by the 
Court under Section 11 need not bind the arbitral tribunal. The relevant 
observations are extracted hereinbelow:  
“164. The 2015 Amendment Act has laid down different 
parameters for judicial review under Section 8 and Section 
11. Where Section 8 requires the Referral Court to look into 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 47 of 67 
 
the prima facie existence of a valid arbitration agreement, 
Section 11 confines the Court's jurisdiction to the 
examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement. 
Although the object and purpose behind both Sections 8 and 
11 is to compel parties to abide by their contractual 
understanding, the scope of power of the Referral Courts 
under the said provisions is intended to be different. The 
same is also evident from the fact that Section 37 of the 
Arbitration Act allows an appeal from the order of an 
Arbitral Tribunal refusing to refer the parties to arbitration 
under Section 8, but not from Section 11. Thus, the 2015 
Amendment Act has legislatively overruled the dictum 
of Patel Engg. [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 
618] where it was held that Section 8 and Section 11 are 
complementary in nature. Accordingly, the two provisions 
cannot be read as laying down a similar standard. 
 
165. The legislature confined the scope of reference under 
Section 11(6-A) to the examination of the existence of an 
arbitration agreement. The use of the term “examination” in 
itself connotes that the scope of the power is limited to a 
prima facie determination. Since the Arbitration Act is a self-
contained code, the requirement of “existence” of an 
arbitration agreement draws effect from Section 7 of the 
Arbitration 
Act. 
In Duro 
Felguera [Duro 
Felguera, 
S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd., (2017) 9 SCC 729 : (2017) 4 
SCC (Civ) 764] , this Court held that the Referral Courts 
only need to consider one aspect to determine the existence 
of an arbitration agreement — whether the underlying 
contract contains an arbitration agreement which provides 
for arbitration pertaining to the disputes which have arisen 
between the parties to the agreement. Therefore, the scope of 
examination under Section 11(6-A) should be confined to the 
existence of an arbitration agreement on the basis of Section 
7. Similarly, the validity of an arbitration agreement, in view 
of Section 7, should be restricted to the requirement of 
formal validity such as the requirement that the agreement 
be in writing. This interpretation also gives true effect to the 
doctrine of competence-competence by leaving the issue of 
substantive existence and validity of an arbitration 
agreement to be decided by Arbitral Tribunal under Section 
16. We accordingly clarify the position of law laid down 
in Vidya Drolia [Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn., 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 48 of 67 
 
(2021) 2 SCC 1 : (2021) 1 SCC (Civ) 549] in the context of 
Section 8 and Section 11 of the Arbitration Act. 
 
166. The burden of proving the existence of arbitration 
agreement generally lies on the party seeking to rely on such 
agreement. In jurisdictions such as India, which accept the 
doctrine of competence-competence, only prima facie proof 
of the existence of an arbitration agreement must be adduced 
before the Referral Court. The Referral Court is not the 
appropriate forum to conduct a mini-trial by allowing the 
parties to adduce the evidence in regard to the existence or 
validity of an arbitration agreement. The determination of 
the existence and validity of an arbitration agreement on the 
basis of evidence ought to be left to the Arbitral Tribunal. 
This position of law can also be gauged from the plain 
language of the statute. 
 
167. Section 11(6-A) uses the expression “examination of the 
existence of an arbitration agreement”. The purport of using 
the word “examination” connotes that the legislature 
intends that the Referral Court has to inspect or scrutinise 
the dealings between the parties for the existence of an 
arbitration 
agreement. 
Moreover, 
the 
expression 
“examination” does not connote or imply a laborious or 
contested inquiry. [ P. Ramanatha Aiyar, The Law 
Lexicon (2nd Edn., 1997) 666.] On the other hand, Section 
16 provides that the Arbitral Tribunal can “rule” on its 
jurisdiction, including the existence and validity of an 
arbitration agreement. A “ruling” connotes adjudication of 
disputes after admitting evidence from the parties. 
Therefore, it is evident that the Referral Court is only 
required to examine the existence of arbitration agreements, 
whereas the Arbitral Tribunal ought to rule on its 
jurisdiction, including the issues pertaining to the existence 
and validity of an arbitration agreement.[…] 
 
xxx 
 
 xxx  
 
xxx 
 
169. When the Referral Court renders a prima facie opinion, 
neither the Arbitral Tribunal, nor the Court enforcing the 
arbitral award will be bound by such a prima facie view. If 
a prima facie view as to the existence of an arbitration 
agreement is taken by the Referral Court, it still allows the 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 49 of 67 
 
Arbitral Tribunal to examine the issue in depth. Such a legal 
approach will help the Referral Court in weeding out prima 
facie non-existent arbitration agreements. It will also protect 
the jurisdictional competence of the Arbitral Tribunals to 
decide on issues pertaining to the existence and validity of 
an arbitration agreement.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
62. This very Bench in SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Krish Spinning 
reported in (2024) SCC OnLine SC 1754 dealt with the scope and standard 
of judicial scrutiny in an application made under Section 11(6) of the Act, 
1996 specifically when a plea of “accord and satisfaction” is taken by the 
defendant. It was observed that in a scenario where the Courts delve into 
the domain of the arbitral tribunal at the Section 11 stage and reject the 
application, there is a risk of leaving the claimant forum-less for the 
adjudication of its claims. It was stated that a detailed examination at this 
stage would also be counterproductive to the objective of expediency in 
deciding a Section 11 application and simplification of pleadings. It was 
also stated that even if ex-facie frivolity is made out by the referral court, 
the arbitral tribunal has the benefit of extensive pleadings and evidentiary 
material and therefore, it would be incorrect to doubt that the arbitral 
tribunal would not be able to arrive at a similar conclusion. The relevant 
observations are reproduced hereinbelow:  
“123. The power available to the referral courts has to be 
construed in the light of the fact that no right to appeal is 
available against any order passed by the referral court 
under Section 11 for either appointing or refusing to appoint 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 50 of 67 
 
an arbitrator. Thus, by delving into the domain of the arbitral 
tribunal at the nascent stage of Section 11, the referral courts 
also run the risk of leaving the claimant in a situation 
wherein it does not have any forum to approach for the 
adjudication of its claims, if it Section 11 application is 
rejected. 
 
124. Section 11 also envisages a time-bound and expeditious 
disposal of the application for appointment of arbitrator. 
One of the reasons for this is also the fact that unlike Section 
8, once an application under Section 11 is filed, arbitration 
cannot commence until the arbitral tribunal is constituted by 
the referral court. This Court, on various occasions, has 
given directions to the High Courts for expeditious disposal 
of pending Section 11 applications. It has also directed the 
litigating parties to refrain from filing bulky pleadings in 
matters pertaining to Section 11. Seen thus, if the referral 
courts go into the details of issues pertaining to “accord and 
satisfaction” and the like, then it would become rather 
difficult to achieve the objective of expediency and 
simplification of pleadings. 
 
125. We are also of the view that ex-facie frivolity and 
dishonesty in litigation is an aspect which the arbitral 
tribunal is equally, if not more, capable to decide upon the 
appreciation of the evidence adduced by the parties. We say 
so because the arbitral tribunal has the benefit of going 
through all the relevant evidence and pleadings in much 
more detail than the referral court. If the referral court is 
able to see the frivolity in the litigation on the basis of bare 
minimum pleadings, then it would be incorrect to doubt that 
the arbitral tribunal would not be able to arrive at the same 
inference, most likely in the first few hearings itself, with the 
benefit of extensive pleadings and evidentiary material.” 
                                                               (Emphasis supplied) 
 
63. The recent Constitution Bench decision of this Court in Cox and Kings 
Limited v. SAP India Private Limited and Another reported in (2024) 4 
SCC 1, specifically dealt with the question of impleading a non-signatory 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 51 of 67 
 
as a party in the arbitration proceedings and the corresponding scope of 
enquiry at the referral stage. It was held therein that Section 16 is an 
inclusive provision which comprehends all preliminary issues touching 
upon the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal and the issue of determining 
parties to an arbitration agreement goes to the very root of the jurisdictional 
competence of the arbitral tribunal. The relevant observations are 
reproduced hereinbelow:  
 
163. Section 16 of the Arbitration Act enshrines the principle 
of competence-competence in Indian arbitration law. The 
provision empowers the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on its own 
jurisdiction, including any ruling on any objections with 
respect to the existence or validity of arbitration agreement. 
Section 16 is an inclusive provision which comprehends all 
preliminary issues touching upon the jurisdiction of the 
Arbitral Tribunal. [Uttarakhand Purv Sainik Kalyan Nigam 
Ltd. v. Northern Coal Field Ltd., (2020) 2 SCC 455 : (2020) 
1 SCC (Civ) 570] The doctrine of competence-competence is 
intended to minimise judicial intervention at the threshold 
stage. The issue of determining parties to an arbitration 
agreement goes to the very root of the jurisdictional 
competence of the Arbitral Tribunal. 
xxx 
  
xxx 
 
 xxx  
 
169. In case of joinder of non-signatory parties to an 
arbitration agreement, the following two scenarios will 
prominently emerge : first, where a signatory party to an 
arbitration agreement seeks joinder of a non-signatory party 
to the arbitration agreement; and second, where a non-
signatory party itself seeks invocation of an arbitration 
agreement. In both the scenarios, the referral court will be 
required to prima facie rule on the existence of the 
arbitration agreement and whether the non-signatory is a 
veritable party to the arbitration agreement. In view of the 
complexity of such a determination, the referral court should 
leave it for the Arbitral Tribunal to decide whether the non-
signatory party is indeed a party to the arbitration agreement 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 52 of 67 
 
on the basis of the factual evidence and application of legal 
doctrine. The Tribunal can delve into the factual, 
circumstantial, and legal aspects of the matter to decide 
whether its jurisdiction extends to the non-signatory party. In 
the process, the Tribunal should comply with the 
requirements of principles of natural justice such as giving 
opportunity to the non-signatory to raise objections with 
regard to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal. This 
interpretation also gives true effect to the doctrine of 
competence-competence 
by 
leaving 
the 
issue 
of 
determination of true parties to an arbitration agreement to 
be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal under Section 16. 
 
170. In view of the discussion above, we arrive at the 
following conclusions: 
 
      
 
xxx 
 
 xxx  
 xxx 
 
(170.12) At the referral stage, the referral court should leave 
it for the Arbitral Tribunal to decide whether the non-
signatory is bound by the arbitration agreement […]” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
64. Therefore, on the pivotal issue whether the non-signatories can be referred 
to arbitration, this Court took the view that the referral court is required to 
prima facie rule on the existence of the arbitration agreement and whether 
the non-signatory party is a veritable party to the arbitration agreement. 
However, recognising the complexity of such a determination, the arbitral 
tribunal was considered the proper forum since it can decide whether the 
non-signatory is a party to the arbitration agreement on the basis of factual 
evidence and application of legal doctrine. In this process, the non-
signatory must also be given an opportunity to raise objections regarding 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 53 of 67 
 
the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal in accordance with the principles of 
natural justice.  
 
65. The position of law that emerges from the aforesaid discussion can be 
summarized as follows;  
• SBP & Co. (supra) expanded the scope of the Court’s power under 
Section 11 while empowering the referral courts to decide several 
preliminary issues. Boghara Polyfab (supra) went to the extent of 
identifying three categories of preliminary issues that may arise for 
consideration in an application under Section 11. Of these, in the first 
category which had to be mandatorily decided by the referral Court, the 
question whether there was an arbitration agreement and whether the 
party who has applied under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is a party to such 
an agreement, was also included.  
• The insertion of Section 11(6A) through the 2015 Amendment to the Act, 
1996 stipulated that the Courts under Section 11 shall confine their 
examination to the ‘existence’ of an arbitration agreement. It legislatively 
overruled the decisions in SBP & Co. (supra) and Boghara Polyfab 
(supra) by virtue of its non-obstante clause.  
• Duro Felguera (supra), in clear terms, clarified the effect of the change 
brought in by Section 11(6A) and stated that all that the Courts need to 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 54 of 67 
 
see is whether an arbitration agreement exists - nothing more, nothing 
less.  
• Vidya Drolia (supra) endorsed the prima facie test in examining the 
existence and validity of an arbitration agreement both under Sections 8 
and 11 respectively. However, it was clarified that in cases of debatable 
and disputable facts and reasonably good arguable case, etc. the Court 
may refer the parties to arbitration since the arbitral tribunal has the 
authority to decide disputes including the question of jurisdiction. It was 
further stated that jurisdictional issues concerning whether certain parties 
are bound by a particular arbitration under the group-company doctrine 
etc. in a multi-party arbitration raise complicated questions of fact which 
are best left to the tribunal to decide.  
• In In Re: Interplay (supra) the position taken in Vidya Drolia (supra) 
was clarified to state that the scope of examination under Section 11(6) 
should be confined to the “existence of the arbitration agreement” under 
Section 7 of the Act, 1996 and the “validity of an arbitration agreement” 
must be restricted to the requirement of formal validity such as the 
requirement that the agreement be in writing. Therefore, substantive 
objections pertaining to existence and validity on the basis of evidence 
must be left to the arbitral tribunal since it can “rule” on its own 
jurisdiction. 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 55 of 67 
 
• Krish Spinning (supra) cautioned that the Courts delving into the 
domain of the arbitral tribunal at the Section 11 stage run the risk of 
leaving the claimant remediless if the Section 11 application is rejected. 
Further, it was stated that a detailed examination by the courts at the 
Section 11 stage would be counterproductive to the objective of 
expeditious disposal of Section 11 application and simplification of 
pleadings at that stage.  
• Cox and Kings (supra) specifically dealt with the scope of inquiry under 
Section 11 when it comes to impleading the non-signatories in the 
arbitration proceedings. While saying that the referral court would be 
required to prima facie rule on the existence of the arbitration agreement 
and whether the non-signatory party is a veritable party to the arbitration 
agreement, it also said that in view of the complexity in such a 
determination, the arbitral tribunal would be the proper forum. It was 
further stated that the issue of determining parties to an arbitration 
agreement goes to the very root of the jurisdictional competence of the 
arbitral tribunal and can be decided under its jurisdiction under Section 
16.  
 
ii. Whether on a prima facie view, the SRG Group being a non-
signatory to the FAA, can be referred to arbitration?  
 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 56 of 67 
 
66. It is well settled that an arbitration agreement, in order to qualify as a valid 
agreement, has to satisfy the requirements stipulated under Section 7 of the 
Act, 1996 along with the principles of law under the Indian Contract Act, 
1872. Having regard to the submissions of both the Respondent Groups i.e., 
JRS and SRG, it can be said that they have raised manifold objections to 
the present petition, however, none of those objections question or deny the 
existence of the arbitration agreement under which the arbitration has been 
invoked by the Petitioner AMP Group. In fact, the JRS Group has no 
objection to resolve the disputes with the AMP Group by way of arbitration. 
Their primary objection is only that the SRG Group cannot be a part of the 
arbitration proceedings. Therefore, the requirement of prima facie existence 
of an arbitration agreement, as stated under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is 
satisfied.  
 
67.  However, the core issue that falls for our consideration is whether the SRG 
Group, being a non-signatory to the FAA can also be referred to arbitration 
and whether they are “veritable” parties to the arbitration agreement.  
 
68. This Court in Cox and Kings (supra) held that the definition of “parties” 
under Section 2(1)(h) read with Section 7 of the Act, 1996 includes both 
the signatory as well as non-signatory parties. Persons or entities who have 
not formally signed the arbitration agreement or the underlying contract 
containing the arbitration agreement may also intend to be bound by the 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 57 of 67 
 
terms of the agreement. Further, the requirement of a written agreement 
under Section 7 of the Act, 1996 does not exclude the possibility of binding 
non-signatory parties if there is a defined legal relationship between the 
signatory and non-signatory parties. Therefore, the issue as to who is a 
“party” to an arbitration agreement is primarily an issue of consent. Actions 
or conduct could be an indicator of the consent of a party to be bound by 
the arbitration agreement. This aspect is also evident from a reading of 
Section 7(4)(b) which emphasises on the manifestation of the consent of 
persons or entities through actions of exchanging documents. The relevant 
observations made in Cox and Kings (supra) are extracted hereinbelow:  
 
“83. Reading Section 7 of the Arbitration Act in view of the 
above discussion gives rise to the following conclusions 
: first, arbitration agreements arise out of a legal 
relationship between or among persons or entities which 
may be contractual or otherwise; second, in situations where 
the legal relationship is contractual in nature, the nature of 
relationship can be determined on the basis of general 
contract law principles; third, it is not necessary for the 
persons or entities to be signatories to the arbitration 
agreement to be bound by it; fourth, in case of non-signatory 
parties, the important determination for the Courts is 
whether the persons or entities intended or consented to be 
bound by the arbitration agreement or the underlying 
contract containing the arbitration agreement through their 
acts or conduct; fifth, the requirement of a written 
arbitration agreement has to be adhered to strictly, but the 
form 
in 
which 
such 
agreement 
is 
recorded 
is 
irrelevant; sixth, the requirement of a written arbitration 
agreement does not exclude the possibility of binding non-
signatory parties if there is a defined legal relationship 
between 
the 
signatory 
and 
non-signatory 
parties; 
and seventh, once the validity of an arbitration agreement is 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 58 of 67 
 
established, the Court or tribunal can determine the issue of 
which parties are bound by such agreement.” 
 
84. It is presumed that the formal signatories to an 
arbitration agreement are parties who will be bound by it. 
However, in exceptional cases persons or entities who have 
not signed or formally assented to a written arbitration 
agreement or the underlying contract containing the 
arbitration agreement may be held to be bound by such 
agreement. As mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, the 
doctrine of privity limits the imposition of rights and 
liabilities on third parties to a contract. Generally, only the 
parties to an arbitration agreement can be subject to the full 
effects of the agreement in terms of the reliefs and remedies 
because they consented to be bound by the arbitration 
agreement. Therefore, the decisive question before the 
Courts or tribunals is whether a non-signatory consented to 
be bound by the arbitration agreement. To determine 
whether a non-signatory is bound by an arbitration 
agreement, the Courts and tribunals apply typical principles 
of contract law and corporate law. The legal doctrines 
provide a framework for evaluating the specific contractual 
language and the factual settings to determine the intentions 
of the parties to be bound by the arbitration agreement. [ 
Gary Born, International Arbitration Law and Practice, (3rd 
Edn., 2021) at p. 1531.] 
xxx  
 
xxx   
xxx 
 
170. In view of the discussion above, we arrive at the 
following conclusions:  
170.1. The definition of “parties” under Section 2(1)(h) read 
with Section 7 of the Arbitration Act includes both the 
signatory as well as non-signatory parties;  
 
170.2. Conduct of the non-signatory parties could be an 
indicator of their consent to be bound by the arbitration 
agreement;  
 
170.3. The requirement of a written arbitration agreement 
under Section 7 does not exclude the possibility of binding 
non-signatory parties;[…]”  
(Emphasis supplied) 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 59 of 67 
 
 
69. The fact that a non-signatory did not put pen to paper may be an indicator 
of its intention to not assume any rights, responsibilities or obligations 
under the arbitration agreement. However, the courts and tribunals should 
not adopt a conservative approach to exclude all persons or entities who 
intended to be bound by the underlying contract containing the arbitration 
agreement through their conduct and their relationship with the signatory 
parties. The mutual intent of the parties, relationship of a non-signatory with 
a signatory, commonality of the subject matter, composite nature of the 
transactions and performance of the contract are all factors that signify the 
intention of the non-signatory to be bound by the arbitration agreement.  
 
70. An important factor to be considered by the Courts and Tribunals is the 
participation of the non-signatory in the performance of the underlying 
contract. In this regard, it was observed in Cox and Kings (supra) as 
follows: 
“123. […] The intention of the parties to be bound by an 
arbitration agreement can be gauged from the circumstances 
that surround the participation of the non-signatory party in 
the negotiation, performance, and termination of the 
underlying 
contract 
containing 
such 
agreement. 
The UNIDROIT Principle of International Commercial 
Contract, 2016 [UNIDROIT Principles of International 
Commercial Contracts, 2016, Article 4.3.] provides that the 
subjective intention of the parties could be ascertained by 
having regard to the following circumstances: 
 
(a) preliminary negotiations between the parties; 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 60 of 67 
 
(b) practices which the parties have established between 
themselves; 
(c) the conduct of the parties subsequent to the conclusion of 
the contract; 
(d) the nature and purpose of the contract; 
(e) the meaning commonly given to terms and expressions in 
the trade concerned; and 
(f) usages. 
 
xxx  
 
xxx   
xxx 
 
126. Evaluating the involvement of the non-signatory party 
in the negotiation, performance, or termination of a contract 
is an important factor for a number of reasons. First, by 
being actively involved in the performance of a contract, a 
non-signatory may create an appearance that it is a veritable 
party to the contract containing the arbitration agreement; 
second, the conduct of the non-signatory may be in harmony 
with the conduct of the other members of the group, leading 
the other party to legitimately believe that the non-signatory 
was a veritable party to the contract; and third, the other 
party has legitimate reasons to rely on the appearance 
created by the non-signatory party so as to bind it to the 
arbitration agreement. 
 
xxx 
 
 xxx  
 xxx 
 
127. […] The nature or standard of involvement of the non-
signatory in the performance of the contract should be such 
that the non-signatory has actively assumed obligations or 
performance upon itself under the contract. In other words, 
the test is to determine whether the non-signatory has a 
positive, direct, and substantial involvement in the 
negotiation, performance, or termination of the contract. 
Mere incidental involvement in the negotiation or 
performance of the contract is not sufficient to infer the 
consent of the non-signatory to be bound by the underlying 
contract or its arbitration agreement. The burden is on the 
party seeking joinder of the non-signatory to the arbitration 
agreement to prove a conscious and deliberate conduct of 
involvement of the non-signatory based on objective 
evidence.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 61 of 67 
 
71. It is evident that the intention of the parties to be bound by an arbitration 
agreement can be gauged from the circumstances that surround the 
participation of the non-signatory party in the negotiation, performance, and 
termination of the underlying contract containing such an agreement. 
Further, when the conduct of the non-signatory is in harmony with the 
conduct of the others, it might lead the other party or parties to legitimately 
believe that the non-signatory was a veritable party to the contract 
containing the arbitration agreement. However, in order to infer consent of 
the non-signatory party, their involvement in the negotiation or 
performance of the contract must be positive, direct and substantial and not 
be merely incidental. Thus, the conduct of the non-signatory party along 
with the other attending circumstances may lead the referral court to draw 
a legitimate inference that it is a veritable party to the arbitration agreement.  
 
72. Of the several entities pertaining to which settlement is contemplated under 
the FAA dated 28.02.2020 executed between the AMP Group and JRS 
Group, clauses 2.1.4 and 2.1.6 relate to Millenium and Deegee which are 
Respondent Nos. 7 and 8 companies respectively. It is an undisputed fact 
that Respondent Nos. 7 and 8 companies are themselves a part of the SRG 
Group. Therefore, prima facie without the joinder of the SRG Group, which 
includes Millenium and Deegee, there may not be a complete and effective 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 62 of 67 
 
resolution of the disputes arising out of the FAA between the AMP and JRS 
Groups.  
 
73. Clause 2.1.4 read with Schedule 7 of the FAA prima facie indicates that the 
petitioners i.e., the AMP Group has to exit from the Respondent No.7 
company i.e. Millenium where they hold Class A equity shares amounting 
to 36%. According to the procedure contemplated therein, during Phase 1 
of the Millenium exit, the SRG Group (which already holds 40% shares in 
Millenium) is supposed to additionally purchase approx. 11% of the shares 
in Millenium held by the AMP Group. It is stated therein that the JRS Group 
would provide the necessary funding to SRG Group to purchase the 
aforementioned shares. In Phase 2, Millenium would buy back the balance 
shares of the AMP Group i.e., approx. 25% from the funds to be received 
from Respondent No. 8 company i.e. Deegee.  
 
74. Clause 2.1.6 read with Schedule 8 prima facie indicates that the JRS Group 
and SRG Group would completely exit from the Respondent No. 8 
Company i.e., Deegee. The proceeds received by the AMP Group from the 
sale of its shares in Millenium as per Phase 1 of the Millenium exit would 
be brought into Deegee by the AMP Group. AMP Group is also required to 
bring further funds into Deegee to pay off the entire loan provided by 
Millenium to Deegee along with interest at the rate of 14.5% compounded 
annually. Simultaneously with the repayment of loans to Millenium as 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 63 of 67 
 
aforesaid, Deegee is also required to pay off the entire loan provided by the 
JRS Group and SRG Group with interest at the rate of 14.5% compounded 
annually. Subsequently, the shares of Deegee held by the JRS Group and 
SRG Group would be transferred completely to the AMP Group.  
 
75. In short, while the AMP Group is supposed to exit from Millenium and 
acquire shares in Deegee, the JRS and SRG Groups are supposed to exit 
from Deegee and, the SRG Group would acquire shares in Millenium. It is 
also provided that agreements are to be executed with or by the SRG Group 
to record and finalize the understanding with respect to the exit of AMP 
Group from Millenium and the exit of JRS and SRG Groups from Deegee. 
Recognising the interdependent nature of the transactions contemplated 
with respect to Millenium and Deegee, clause 2.1.4(a) also states that the 
exit of Millenium and Deegee should be endeavoured to be undertaken 
simultaneously on the same day.  
 
76. Further Clause 2.1.7 requires the AMP Group to irrevocably and 
unconditionally withdraw all litigations including CP/383/2017 filed in 
connection with Deegee by the AMP Group before the NCLT at Mumbai 
wherein Respondent No.9 of the SRG Group is one of the respondents.   
 
77. All that has been stated aforesaid gives an impression, though prima facie, 
that the SRG Group may be connected to the FAA and forms part of the 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 64 of 67 
 
settlement contemplated therein. However, this aspect should be looked 
into more closely by the Arbitral Tribunal.  
 
78. Moreover, on the question whether the non-signatory party i.e., the SRG 
Group intended or consented to be bound by the arbitration agreement or 
the underlying contract containing the arbitration agreement through their 
acts or conduct, elaborate submissions have been made on behalf of all three 
groups, by placing reliance on the terms of the agreement, several email 
exchanges etc. On bare perusal of the email exchanges produced by the 
petitioner, it appears prima facie that several contested questions of fact, 
including but not limited to those hereinbelow, need to be first resolved:  
• Whether Mr. Kalpesh Parmar or the JRS Group can be said to have 
represented the interests of the SRG Group during the negotiations 
leading up to the FAA, its implementation and during the mediation 
process; 
• Whether the marking of several emails to the Respondent No.9 of the 
SRG Group and the absence of any protest on his part can imply consent 
of the SRG Group to be bound by the underlying contract and/or the 
arbitration agreement;  
• Whether the documents required for the valuation and due diligence of 
Millenium and Deegee could have been shared by an employee of 
Deegee without the knowledge or consent of the SRG Group; and  

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 65 of 67 
 
• Whether the demand of an additional Rs. 25 crore made by the SRG 
Group through the JRS Group as a condition for exit from Deegee 
indicates their intention to be bound by the underlying contract and/or 
the arbitration agreement?  
 
79. A detailed examination of numerous disputed questions of fact are 
imperative in deciding whether the SRG Group participated in the 
negotiation and performance of the underlying contract and can be bound 
by the arbitration agreement. At the cost of repetition, we may state that 
under our limited jurisdiction afforded under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 
we should not conduct a mini trial and delve into contested or disputed 
questions of fact. This has been categorically laid down in several decisions 
of this Court including Vidya Drolia (supra) and Krish Spinning (supra). 
Further, it is also the case of the SRG Group that a dual test needs to be 
satisfied before it is compelled to be a party to the present arbitration 
proceedings i.e., (a) SRG Group should be shown to have agreed to the 
underlying contract and (b) SRG Group should also be shown to have 
agreed to be bound by the arbitration agreement. We are of the considered 
view that the same requires a much more detailed examination of the 
evidence that may be adduced by the parties which can only be gone into 
by the Arbitral Tribunal. 
 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 66 of 67 
 
80. Therefore, considering the complexity involved in the determination of the 
question whether the SRG Group is a veritable party to the arbitration 
agreement or not, we are of the view that it would be appropriate for the 
arbitral tribunal to take a call on the question after taking into consideration 
the evidence that may be adduced by the parties before it and the application 
of the legal doctrine as elaborated in the decision in Cox and Kings (supra).  
 
81. We also prima facie find force in the contention of the petitioner AMP 
Group that the nomenclature of the agreement is not determinative of its 
character as held by this Court in Sasan Power Ltd. (supra). Therefore, the 
fact that the underlying contract is called the “Family Arrangement 
Agreement” by itself may not preclude the impleadment of the SRG Group 
in arbitration.  
 
82.  Once the arbitral tribunal is constituted, it shall be open for the respondents 
to raise all the available objections in law, and it is only after (and if) the 
preliminary objections are rejected that the tribunal shall proceed to 
adjudicate the claims of the Petitioners.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. CONCLUSION  
 
83.  In view of the aforesaid, the present petition is allowed. We appoint Mr. 
Akil Kureshi (Former Chief Justice, High Court of Rajasthan) to act as the 

Arbitration Petition No. 19 of 2024 
 
Page 67 of 67 
 
sole arbitrator. The fees of the arbitrator including other modalities shall be 
fixed in consultation with the parties. 
 
84.  It is made clear that all the rights and contentions of the parties are left open 
for adjudication by the learned arbitrator.  
 
 
85.  Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.  
 
 
 
 
…………………………………….CJI. 
 (Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………………………………J. 
(J.B. Pardiwala) 
 
 
 
 
………………………………………J. 
(Manoj Misra) 
New Delhi; 
September 20, 2024.