2024 INSC 713
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL No.249/2013
SHOOR SINGH & ANR.
                      …  Appellant(s)
 
VERSUS
STATE OF UTTARAKHAND
            …Respondent(s)
J U D G M E N T
MANOJ MISRA, J.
1.
This appeal is against the judgment and order of the High
Court1 dated  26.04.2012,  whereby,  while  affirming  the
conviction of the appellants under Sections 304-B and 498-
A IPC2, the appeal3 of the appellants was partly allowed
thereby reducing the sentence awarded by the Trial Court4
from 10 years to 7 years  R.I. under Section 304-B IPC and
1  The High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital
22 Indian Penal Code, 1860
33 Criminal Appeal No.87 of 2010
44 Sessions Judge, Pauri Gharwal
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 1 of 20
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2024.09.27
17:11:24 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

maintaining the sentence of 1 year R.I. under Section 498-
A IPC.
FACTUAL MATRIX 
2.
The  appellants  are  father-in-law  and  mother-in-law,
respectively, of the deceased (Neelam), who was daughter of
Shanker  Singh  (PW-1)  and  Sarojini  Devi  (PW-2).  The
deceased  was  married  to appellants’  son Jitendra Singh
(co-accused) on 1.03.2006. On 30.12.2006, deceased gave
birth to a male child. Naming ceremony of the child was
performed on 11.01.2007. On 17.01.2007, deceased died at
her matrimonial home due to extensive burn injuries. Upon
being  informed  of  her  death,   PW-1  lodged  a  first
information report5 (Ex. Ka-1) on the same day,  inter alia,
alleging  that,-when  he  along  with  PW-2  had  visited
deceased’s  matrimonial  home  on  4.1.2007,  deceased’s
father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law (i.e., husband’s
elder brother – not tried) and sister-in-law (husband’s elder
brother’s wife – not tried) had told PW-1 and PW-2 that on
the day of naming ceremony of the child they would have to
55 FIR
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 2 of 20

give a motor-cycle and cash of Rs.50,000/-.  Besides that, it
was alleged that when PW-1 and PW-2 visited deceased’s
matrimonial home on 11.01.2007, the deceased inquired
from PW-1 and PW-2 whether they had brought motorcycle
and cash. However, when PW-1 expressed his inability to
meet  the  demand,  the  deceased  told  PW-1  that  lot  of
pressure was being put on her and if the demand is not
met, she would be killed. With these allegations, and by
stating that accused had killed his daughter on account of
the demand being not met, PW-1 lodged the FIR, which was
registered as case crime No.1 of 2007 at P.S. Langur Walla-
2, district Pauri Garhwal, under Sections 304-B, 498-A IPC
and Sections 3/ 4 Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, against
three  accused,  namely,  Jitendra  Singh  (husband  of  the
deceased) and the appellants, who were all tried together by
the Court of Session, Pauri Garhwal in Sessions Trial No.25
of 2007. 
3.
During trial, prosecution examined 7 witnesses. PW-1 (the
first informant – father of the deceased); PW-2 (mother of
the deceased); and PW-3 (uncle of the deceased) were family
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20

members of the deceased who proved the date of marriage
and alleged that the deceased was depressed on account of
the demand.  PW-4 was the doctor who conducted autopsy
of the cadaver. He proved that the deceased had suffered
extensive ante-mortem burn injuries which resulted in her
death.  PW-5 is cousin of the deceased who had arrived at
the  spot  along  with  PW-1  on  receipt  of  information
regarding her death. He is also the inquest witness.  PW-6
is the Patwari who made GD entry of the FIR and took
initial steps of investigation such as preparation of inquest
report  and  dispatch  of  the  cadaver  for  autopsy.   PW-7
completed  the  investigation  and  submitted  charge-sheet.
PW-7, inter alia, stated that at the time of inquest the body
of the deceased was lying in the courtyard.
4.
In their statement recorded under Section 313 CrPC6 the
accused admitted: 
(a) the factum of marriage; 
(b) the date of marriage; 
(c) the date of childbirth; 
66 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20

(d)  that  parents  of  the  deceased  visited  her
matrimonial  home  on  04.01.2007  to  see  their
daughter and the child; and 
(e) that on 11.01.2007 child  naming  ceremony was
done. 
The  accused,  however,  denied  demand  of  dowry/
motorcycle/ cash of Rs.50,000/- as well as harassment of
the  deceased.  Jitendra  Singh  (i.e.,  husband  of  the
deceased) stated that the deceased committed suicide due
to depression on account of staying separate from him as
no  quarter  was  allotted  to  him,  and  also  because  a
photograph of her with a male stranger was found. He had
also stated that at the time of the incident he had gone to
collect wood. 
Accused Shoor Singh (appellant no.1 herein) added that he
had gone to Lansdowne at the time of incident. Similarly,
accused Gangotri Devi (appellant no.2 herein) stated that
she had gone out to wash clothes.   
5.
The defense had examined 4 witnesses (DW-1 to DW-4) and
produced color photographs (Ex Kha-1 to Kha-6).  DW-1
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 5 of 20

stated  that  the  deceased  used  to  accompany  her  for
collecting  grass  and  wood,  but  she  never  made  any
complaint  about  her  harassment  on  account  of  dowry
demand.  Rather, the deceased used to say that if she is not
taken by her husband to his workplace she would die.  DW-
2 stated that in the morning of 17.01.2007 (i.e., date of the
incident) she had seen Shoor Singh (appellant no.1 herein)
going towards Lansdowne. DW-3 stated that between 12.30
and 1.00 p.m. he saw smoke bellowing from the house of
Shoor Singh. When he reached there, he noticed that none
of the accused were there, and the body of the deceased
was  lying  outside  the  shutter  in  a  burnt  condition.
Whereafter,  he  went  to  inform  Gangotri  Devi  who  was
washing clothes near a water well. DW-4 stated that he was
present at the time of inquest when he saw an empty can of
kerosene  and  matchsticks  lying  near  the  body  of  the
deceased; and smell of kerosene was all over. 
6.
The trial court primarily relied on the testimonies of PW-1,
PW-2 and PW-3 to hold that the deceased was harassed
soon before her death in connection with demand  for a
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 6 of 20

motorcycle  and  cash  and,  therefore,  in  view  of  the
presumption  under  Section  113-B  of  the  Evidence  Act,
1872, the accused were liable to be convicted for dowry
death,  punishable  under  Section  304-B  IPC,  and  for
cruelty, punishable under Section 498-A IPC.   
7.
Aggrieved therewith,  two  separate  criminal appeals  were
filed  before  the  High  Court.  One  appeal  was  by  the
husband  of  the  deceased  and  the  other  was  by  the
appellants  herein.  Both  appeals  were  decided  by  the
impugned order.  In so far as the accused Jitendra Singh is
concerned, he has served out the sentence and has not
filed any appeal. This appeal is, therefore, by father-in-law
and mother-in-law of the deceased. 
8.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have
perused the record.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT(S)
9.
Learned counsel for the appellants submitted:
(i)
The autopsy report indicated no mark of injury,
other  than  burn  injuries,  on  the  body  of  the
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 7 of 20

deceased. Body of the deceased was found in the
courtyard  of  the  house.  Further,  the  evidence
indicated  death  during  daytime.  The  defense
evidence indicated that when smoke was noticed,
the witness reached the spot to find a burnt body
of the deceased lying in the courtyard and, at
that  time,  none  of  the  accused  persons  were
present. Even prosecution witnesses do not state
that  at  the  time  of  incident  the  accused  were
present in the house. All of this would suggest
that it is a case of suicide, which could be for
multiple reasons.     
(ii)
There is no direct evidence regarding demand of
dowry by the appellants. The testimonies of PW-1
and PW-2 do not support the FIR allegation that
on  4.1.2007  appellants  had  demanded  a
motorcycle and cash from PW-1 and PW-2.
(iii)
There is no evidence that motorcycle or cash was
demanded in connection with marriage. Hence, a
case of dowry death is not made out.
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20

(iv)
The courts below failed to test the merit of the
allegations  against  the  weight  of  surrounding
circumstances and the deposition of prosecution
witnesses
 
during
 
cross-examination.
Interestingly,  PW-1  and  PW-2,  who  had  been
visiting the matrimonial home of the deceased,
admitted during cross-examination that they did
not confront the accused in respect of the alleged
demand as reported to them by their daughter
(i.e., the deceased) because they thought it to be
a joke. If it was so, the question of subjecting the
deceased to cruelty does not arise.
(v)
Admittedly,  husband  of  the  deceased  in
connection with service was residing elsewhere.
Accused  in their  statement  under  Section 313
CrPC stated that the deceased was unhappy and
depressed because she was not able to live with
her  husband  as  no  residential  quarter  was
allotted to him. A suggestion to that effect was
also given to the prosecution witnesses. Hence,
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 9 of 20

this was a material circumstance explaining the
drastic step to commit suicide. 
(vi)
PW-1 tried to implicate even the elder brother of
the  husband  of  the  deceased  even  though  he
resided  in  another  town  in  connection  with
service.  This  would  suggest  that  there  was  a
malicious attempt to implicate the entire family
without any basis. In such circumstances, the
Court ought to have been circumspect. More so,
when no witness of the locality was produced in
support of the prosecution case.
(vii) Presumption  under  Section  113-B  of  the
Evidence  Act  arises  only  when  the  necessary
ingredients of a dowry death are proved beyond
reasonable doubt.  Here there was no direct and
reliable evidence that the deceased was subjected
to cruelty in connection with demand of dowry
soon  before  her  death.  Hence,  there  was  no
occasion to raise a presumption in respect of a
dowry death.
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 10 of 20

(viii) There were sufficient reasons for the deceased to
commit suicide, such as: 
(a)She was depressed for not being able to
reside with her husband who had to be
away from home in connection with his
service.
(b) She  was  shamed  by  discovery  of  a
photograph (Ex. Kha-1) wherein she was
noticed  alone  with  a  male  stranger  in
front of a waterbody.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF STATE
10.
On  behalf  of  the  prosecution  (i.e.,  the  State  of
Uttarakhand), it was submitted:
(i)
PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3 have all been consistent
about  the  deceased  reporting  to  them  that
accused persons were demanding a motorcycle
and  cash  of  Rs.50,000/-  and  threatening  her
that if their demand is not met by the date of
child  naming  ceremony,  she  would  be  killed.
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 11 of 20

Naming ceremony was held on 11.01.2007 and
soon thereafter the deceased died on 17.01.2007.
Thus,  deceased’s  statement  was  in  respect  of
circumstances of the transaction which resulted
in  her  death  and,  therefore,  admissible  in
evidence under Section 32 (1) of the Evidence
Act.
(ii)
The courts below justifiably raised a presumption
of  the  offence  of  dowry  death;  and  that
presumption was not dispelled by the accused-
appellants. Moreover, the appellants being father-
in-law  and  mother-in-law  of  the  deceased,
residing in the same house where the deceased
died  an  unnatural  death,  were  liable  to  be
convicted. 
(iii)
The photograph (Ex. Kha-1) was not admissible
in evidence as neither the person who took the
photograph  nor  its  negative  was  produced  in
evidence. Otherwise also, it did not reveal any
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 12 of 20

such  compromising  position  of  which  the
deceased will be ashamed of.  
(iv)
 The appeal is concluded by concurrent findings
of fact, therefore no case for interference is made
out.
ANALYSIS/ DISCUSSION
11.
Before we proceed to test the merit of the rival submissions,
it would be useful to cull out certain facts as regards which
there is no serious dispute.  These are:  
(a)the  deceased  was  married  to  the  son  of  the
appellants within seven years of her death;
(b)the deceased died an unnatural death on account of
ante-mortem burn injuries;
(c) place of death of the deceased was her matrimonial
home;
(d)just 18 days before her death, the deceased had
given birth to a male child;
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20

(e) prior to her death there was no police complaint or
FIR in respect of harassment of the deceased for
any reason whatsoever;
(f) there  is  no  evidence  that  any  of  the  accused
demanded dowry, or a motorcycle, or cash from the
family members of the deceased either before the
marriage or at the time of marriage; and
(g)there  is  no  evidence  that  the  deceased  was
physically  assaulted  by  any  of  the  accused  in
connection with demand for dowry or motorcycle or
cash.
12.
To constitute  a ‘dowry death’, punishable under Section
304-B7 IPC, following ingredients must be satisfied:
i. death of a woman must have been caused by any
burns  or bodily injury  or it must have occurred
otherwise than under normal circumstances;
77 Section 304-B. Dowry Death. – (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs 
otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her 
death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection 
with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called ‘dowry death’, and such husband or relative shall be deemed to 
have caused her death.
Explanation. -- For the purpose of this sub-section, ‘dowry’ shall have the same meaning as in section 2 of the 
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 [28 of 1961].
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20

ii. such death must have occurred within seven years
of her marriage;
iii. soon  before  such  death,  she  must  have  been
subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband
or any relative of her husband; and 
iv. such cruelty or harassment must be in connection
with any demand for dowry.
The phrase ‘otherwise than under normal circumstances’ is
wide enough to encompass a suicidal death. 
13.
When all the above ingredients of ‘dowry death’ are proved,
the presumption under Section 113-B8 of the Evidence Act
is to be raised against the accused that he has committed
the offence of ‘dowry death’. What is important is that the
presumption  under  Section  113-B  is  not  in  respect  of
commission  of  an  act  of  cruelty,  or  harassment,  in
connection with any demand for dowry, which is one of the
essential ingredients of the offence of ‘dowry death’. The
presumption, however, is in respect of commission of the
88 Section 113-B. Presumption as to dowry death.  When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry 
death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty 
or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the court shall presume that such person had caused 
the dowry death.
Explanation.-  For the purposes of this section, dowry death shall have the same meaning as in section 304 
capital B of the Indian Penal Code [45 of 1860]
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 15 of 20

offence  of  ‘dowry  death’  by  the  accused  when  all  the
essential ingredients of ‘dowry death’  are proved beyond
reasonable  doubt  by  ordinary  rule  of  evidence,  which
means that to prove the essential ingredients of an offence
of ‘dowry death’ the burden is on the prosecution. 
14.
In the instant case, it is not in dispute that the deceased
died otherwise than under normal circumstances within
seven years of her marriage. However, the issue between
the  parties  is  about  her  being  subjected  to  cruelty  or
harassment by her husband or his relative, soon before her
death, in connection with any demand for dowry. 
15.
The testimonies of PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3 do not indicate
that  any  demand  for  dowry  was  made  by  the  accused-
appellants either before or at the time of marriage of the
deceased with their son. Further, there is no evidence that
the accused appellants directly demanded a motorcycle or
cash from any of the above witnesses.  In fact, evidence is
to the effect that the deceased had informed PW-1 and PW-
2  on  4.1.2007  and  11.1.2007  about  the  demand  for  a
motorcycle and cash.  Further, from the deposition of PW-1
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 16 of 20

and PW-2, it appears that the aforesaid demand was not in
connection with marriage but as a mark of celebration on
birth of a male child. 
16.
No doubt testimonies of PW-1 and PW-2 would not be hit by
the rule against hearsay evidence because it related to one
of the circumstances of the transaction resulting in their
daughter’s unnatural death. However, a distinction must be
drawn between admissibility and acceptability/reliability of
a piece of evidence. Merely because a piece of evidence is
admissible does not mean that it must be accepted. Before
accepting the evidence to hold that the fact in issue stands
proved beyond reasonable doubt, the Court must evaluate
the same against the weight of surrounding circumstances
and other facts proven on record. 
17.
In the instant case, the witnesses PW-1 and PW-2 were
asked whether they took up the issue of motorcycle /cash
demand with the accused.  Their reply was that they did
not, because they took it as a joke. We fail to understand
how parents could treat their daughter’s multiple reporting
of threat to her life, on account of demand being not met, as
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20

a joke.  This creates a serious doubt about the truthfulness
of the allegation more so when there is no allegation that
any such demand was ever raised either before or at the
time of marriage.  This doubt gets fortified by change in
stance of PW-1 from what was taken in the FIR. Notably, in
the FIR it was alleged that the accused-appellants including
their elder son, and his wife, had directly raised demand for
a motorcycle and cash. This allegation was not supported
by the deposition of both PW-1 and PW-2 while admitting
that appellant’s elder son was a doctor serving in another
district.  Thus, there appears to be a knee-jerk reaction to
the unnatural death of their daughter to make out a case of
dowry death. Besides that, no independent witness of the
vicinity was examined. In our considered view, therefore,
one of the essential ingredients of dowry death, namely, any
demand  for  dowry,  was  not  proved  beyond  reasonable
doubt.  
18.
Indisputably,  the  accused  have  not  been  convicted  for
murder, and rightly so, because there was no worthwhile
evidence to show that except for the burn injuries, which
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20

could be self- inflicted, the accused suffered any other ante-
mortem injury. Moreover, the presence of the accused in the
house at the time of occurrence is not proved.  In such
circumstances,  the  death  was  most  probably  suicidal
though this would not make a difference for commission of
an offence punishable under Section 304-B IPC if all the
other  ingredients  of  dowry  death  stand  proved.  But,  as
noted above, here harassment/ cruelty at the instance of
the appellants in connection with any demand for dowry
has not been proved beyond reasonable doubt.  As regards
the reason to commit suicide, though it is not necessary for
us to dwell upon, suffice it to say  that husband of the
deceased  was  in  service  and  stayed  away  from  the
deceased.  Suggestion  was  given  to  the  prosecution
witnesses, and statement was also made under Section 313
CrPC, that the deceased used to remain depressed for being
unable to join her husband at the place of his posting due
to lack of residential quarter. That apart, a photograph of
the deceased (Ex. Kha 1), regarding which no dispute was
raised  by  the  prosecution  witnesses,  showing  her  alone
with a male stranger had surfaced. In the statement under
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20

Section 313 CrPC a stand was taken that this photograph
had shamed her. Be that as it may, once all the necessary
ingredients of dowry death have not been proved beyond
reasonable doubt, the presumption under Section 113-B of
the Evidence Act would not be available to the prosecution.
Hence, in our considered view, the appellants are entitled to
be acquitted of the charge of offences punishable under
Section 304-B and 498-A IPC.
19.
 The appeal is accordingly allowed. The order convicting
and sentencing the appellants under Section 304-B and
498-A IPC is set aside. The appellants are on bail. They
need not surrender. Their bail bond(s) stand discharged.
20.
Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of. 
..............................................J.
(J.B. Pardiwala)
..............................................J.
                                                                        (Manoj Misra)
New Delhi;
September 20, 2024
               Criminal Appeal No. 249/2013                                                                                                    Page 20 of 20