2024 INSC 821
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO.           OF 2024
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 7080 of 2021)
TARUN CHUGH, CEO AND 
MANAGING DIRECTOR,
BAJAJ ALLIANZ LIFE INSURANCE 
COMPANY LTD. 
         
…APPELLANT(s)
VERSUS
SAROJ KUMAR PANDA          
      …RESPONDENT(s)
O R D E R
Rajesh Bindal, J.
1.
Leave granted.
2.
The  impugned  order1 was  passed  by  the  High
Court2 in  Writ  Petition3 filed  by  Tarun  Chugh4,  Ruben
Selvadoray5 and Prabir Ranjan Prusty6 whereby the ex parte
Award7 of the Tribunal8 was upheld.
1 Dated 01.03.2021
2 High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
3 W.P.(C) No.8877 of 2020 
4 CEO and Managing Director, Bajaj Allianz Life Insurance Co. Ltd.
5 Chief Human Resource Officer, Bajaj Allianz Life Insurance Co.Ltd.
6 Regional Head, Bajaj Allianz Life Insurance Co.Ltd.
7 Dated 05.02.2019
8 Central Government Industrial Tribunal, Bhubaneswar in I.D. Case No.86 of 2017
1
Digitally signed by
KAVITA PAHUJA
Date: 2024.10.25
19:12:50 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

3.
Initially the Special Leave Petition was filed by one
of the writ petitioners, Tarun Chugh, however, while deleting
the proforma Respondent Nos.2 and 3 from the array of the
parties, as allowed vide order dated 30.06.2021, the name of
the Petitioner in the Amended Cause Title annexed to the
S.L.P. paper book is shown as ‘Bajaj Allianz Life Insurance
Company  Ltd.’  herein  after  referred  to  as  ‘the  Company’,
which is different from the original Petitioner. This change was
made  without  any  order  of  the  Court,  hence,  cannot  be
admitted. 
4.
Briefly, the facts as available on record are that a
statement of claim was filed by the Respondent No.1 before
the  Tribunal  impugning  his  termination  vide order  dated
25.07.2017.  Vide ex-parte Award dated 05.02.2019 passed
by the Tribunal, the termination of the Respondent No.1 was
held to be bad.  He was directed to be reinstated with back-
wages and other service benefits.  The aforesaid  ex-parte
Award was challenged by all the parties impleaded by the
Respondent No.1 before the Tribunal, namely, the officers in
person, without joining the company - employer as a party.
The writ petition filed by the writ petitioners/appellants herein
2

before the High Court, impugning the ex-parte Award of the
Tribunal, was dismissed vide order impugned.
5.
Learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that it
is a case in which the matter was entrusted to the counsel for
appearance before the Tribunal, but later he failed to take
care of the proceedings of the case.  The Officer in the Legal
Department  had  left  the  management  company  on
26.09.2018  and  the  Officer  in  the  Human  Resource
Department  had  left  the  management  company  on
24.05.2019  respectively,  i.e.,  during  the  pendency  of  the
dispute before the Tribunal.  It was under these circumstances
that proper representation could not be made. 
5.1 
The Respondent No.1 had failed to implead the
employer with whom there may be privity of contract. Only
the officers of the company were impleaded.  Such officers of
the  company  had  not  engaged  Respondent  No.1  in  their
personal capacity.  It was argued that the Respondent No.1
was initially appointed as Branch Accountant on 09.05.2006
by  the Company.  Thereafter, he was promoted as Senior
Divisional Accountant in Grade L(IA) on 01.04.2009. He was
3

redesignated  as  Business  Supporting  Officer  (Managerial
Post)  w.e.f.  01.08.2014.   He  was  transferred  from  Finance
Department  to  Sales  Administration  w.e.f.  01.01.2015  and
again from Agency Sales Administration to Agency Sales w.e.f.
15.05.2017.   On  account  of  Departmental  restructuring
resulting in changes in roles and responsibilities of different
officers, the Respondent No.1 became surplus and redundant
in the company and there being no alternative work available
for  his  adjustment,  however,  his  services  were  dispensed
with, as per the terms of appointment and a communication
was  sent  to  the  Respondent  No.1  on  25.07.2017  by  the
company. A sum of ₹ 1,07,787/- was transferred in his bank
account in lieu of notice for termination. The Respondent No.
1 was earning a salary of  ₹ 35,929/- per month, as was his
last drawn salary for the month of June 2017. Further, it was
argued  that  the  Respondent  No.  1  was  working  on  a
managerial post, by no stretch of imagination he could be
treated as workman, entitling him to invoke the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal by raising an industrial dispute. The order passed
by  the  Tribunal  was  totally  without  jurisdiction.  This  basic
issue should have been examined by the Tribunal even on the
4

facts, which were brought on record.
5.2
The order of the Tribunal was challenged before
the High Court placing the aforesaid facts and also explaining
the lapse on the part of the counsel, who was later removed
from the panel of the advocates engaged to conduct cases on
behalf  of  the  company.   However,  the  writ  petition  was
dismissed. The submission is that an opportunity be granted,
and the matter may be remitted back to the Tribunal for re-
examination on merits after impleadment of proper parties.
6.
On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the
Respondent No.1 submitted that after due service of notice,
no one had appeared before the Tribunal, hence, they were
proceeded  against  ex-parte.   The  management  was  well
within knowledge of the pendency of the matter before the
Tribunal, hence, it cannot be allowed to take the plea that
employer was not impleaded as such, as senior officers were
already  before  the  Tribunal,  as  such  a  hyper-technical
submission  deserves  to  be rejected.   Once  service to  the
Respondent No.1 before the Tribunal was complete, which is
not disputed by the Appellant before this Court, there is no
5

good reason for setting aside the Award of the Tribunal only
because of the Appellant’s lapse in appearance.  The appeal
deserves to be dismissed.
7.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused
the paper book.
8.
The facts as evident from the record are that the
Respondent  No.1  was  appointed  as  Branch  Accountant  on
09.05.2006.   Thereafter,  he  was  promoted  as  Senior
Divisional Accountant in Grade L(IA) on 01.04.2009. He was
redesignated as Business Support Officer (Managerial Post)
w.e.f. 01.08.2014.  Further, he was transferred from Finance
Department  to  Sales  Administration  w.e.f.  01.01.2015  and
again from Agency Sales Administration to Agency Sales w.e.f.
15.05.2017.  It is claimed that on account of Departmental
restructuring  resulting  in  changes  in  duties  and
responsibilities  of  different  officers,  the  Respondent  No.1
became surplus and there being no alternative job available
for his adjustment, his services were dispensed with, as per
the terms of appointment.
9.
The Respondent No. 1 challenged his termination
6

before the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), which led
to conciliation proceedings. However, no settlement could be
arrived at. The Respondent No. 1 was issued a Certificate
dated 25.10.2017 to approach the Tribunal directly. 
10.
The Respondent No.1 filed claim petition9 before
the Tribunal.  Three officers of the company were impleaded
and  not  the  company,  which  was  the  employer  of  the
Respondent  No.1.   Para  3  of  the  Award  of  the  Tribunal
mentions  that  in  spite  of notice,  neither  the  management
company  nor  the  officers  who  were  impleaded  as  party
appeared.  Hence, they were proceeded against  ex parte.
However, the fact remains that the management was not a
party before the Tribunal.  Finally, while granting the relief
also it was directed that the first party management-Bajaj
Allianz  Life  Insurance  Co.  Ltd.  is  directed  to  reinstate  the
applicant workman whereas the first party impleaded before
the Tribunal was not Bajaj Allianz Life Insurance Co. Ltd. but
Tarun Chugh, CEO and Managing Director of the company.
10.1
It is to observe that proper impleadment of parties
in any proceedings is  sine qua non in any matter coming
9 I.D. Case No.86 of 2017
7

before the court.  However, what is noticed is that it has
become a casualty in the process.  Due care is not taken at
the time of initiation of any proceedings before any forum to
ensure that proper parties are impleaded.
10.2
The case in hand is not in isolation.  It needs to
be appreciated that a corporate has a separate legal entity
as compared to an individual or an officer of the company.
There can be privity of contract between the corporate and
any  other  individual  and  that  contract  or  communication
may have been signed by any officer on its behalf as an
authorized  signatory.   It  does  not  mean  that  the  officer
signing  the  communication  or  the  agreement  or  the
executive head of the company becomes individually liable
for any claim against the company except the cases where
any  specific  claim is  made in  that  regard.   Any  order  or
decree or award passed by the Court, in case proper parties
are not impleaded, becomes inexecutable.
11.
The  plea  taken  before  the  High  Court  while
challenging the aforesaid Award of the Tribunal was that the
then Human Resource Manager and the Legal Manager were
8

dealing  with  the  matter  and  had  engaged  a  counsel  to
represent  the  company  before  the  Tribunal.  However,  the
Legal  Manager  had  left  the  management  company  on
26.09.2018 while the Human Resource Manager had left the
management  company  on  24.05.2019,  i.e.,  during  the
pendency of the matter before the Tribunal. The counsel10
engaged by the management company did not take proper
care of matter, hence, was removed from the panel of the
advocates  conducting  cases  on  behalf  of  the  company.
However, the High Court did not accept this plea and rejected
the writ petition.
12.
On the facts at hand and the material available on
record, we find that there was a technical defect in the claim
petition filed by the Respondent No.1 as the management
who  was  his  employer  was  not  even  impleaded  as  party
before  the  Tribunal,  still  a  direction  was  issued  to  the
management  to  reinstate  him.   The  designation  and  job
profile of the Respondent No.1 and even the material placed
on  record  by  the  Respondent  No.  1  were  required  to  be
considered by the Tribunal to come to the conclusion whether
10 Name is being withheld
9

he was a workman or not. It is only then jurisdiction is vested
in the Tribunal to deal with the subject.  The reason assigned
by  the  Appellant  explaining  the  non-appearance  of  the
counsel before the Tribunal seems plausible and acceptable.
As the two officers, who were dealing with the matter and
engaged the then counsel, had also left the organization.  
13.
Considering the totality of the facts, as discussed
above, in our opinion, the appeal deserves to be allowed.  
14.
For the reasons mentioned above, we allow the
present  appeal.   The impugned order passed by the High
Court and the Award of the Tribunal are set aside.  The matter
is remitted back to the Tribunal for fresh consideration on
merits  after  proper  parties  are  impleaded,  giving  due
opportunity to both the parties.  There shall be no order as to
costs.  
……………………………………., J.
[ J.K. MAHESHWARI ]
….…………………………………., J.
[ RAJESH BINDAL ]
New Delhi
September 23, 2024.
10