2024 INSC 716
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 2161-2162 OF 2024 
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL) NOS. 3665-3666 OF 2024) 
 
 
JUST RIGHTS FOR CHILDREN ALLIANCE & ANR.                       ...APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
S. HARISH & ORS.                                      
 
 
         ...RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2024.09.23
16:48:37 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 1 of 199 
 
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.: 
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following 
parts: - 
INDEX 
A. FACTUAL MATRIX ................................................................................ 4 
B. IMPUGNED ORDER .............................................................................. 10 
C. SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES ...................................................... 16 
i. 
Submissions on behalf of the Appellants. .................................................... 16 
ii. Submissions on behalf of the National Commission for Protection of Child 
 
Rights (NCPCR). .......................................................................................... 18 
iii. Submissions on behalf of the respondent no. 1 / the Sole Accused. ............ 20 
iv. Submissions on behalf of the respondent nos. 2 & 3 / the State. ................. 22 
D. ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION ......................................................... 24 
E. ANALYSIS ............................................................................................... 25 
i. 
Relevant Statutory Scheme and Provisions. ................................................ 25 
a. Legislative History and Scheme of the POCSO. ................................................ 25 
b. Relevant Provisions of the IT Act. ..................................................................... 38 
ii. Scope of Section 15 of the POCSO and Section 67B of the IT Act. ............ 40 
a. Contradictory Views of different High Courts on the subject. ............................ 40 
b. Three distinct offences punishable under Section 15 of the POCSO. .................. 55 
I. 
Concept of an Inchoate Crime – The ‘Actus Reus’ and ‘Mens Rea’ required 
 
under Section 15. ........................................................................................ 60 
II. Concept of ‘Possession’, ‘Constructive Possession’ and ‘Immediate Control’ 
 
under Section 15 of the POCSO.................................................................. 78 
c. Pornographic Material must prima facie appear to involve a Child. ................... 86 
d. Scope of Section 67B of the IT Act.................................................................... 95 
iii. Presumption of Culpable Mental State under Section 30 of the POCSO. 108 
a. Concept of Statutory Presumption and Principle of Foundational  Facts. .......... 110 
b. Foundational Facts required under Section 15 of the POCSO........................... 126 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 2 of 199 
 
c. Whether the Presumption under Section 30 of the POCSO can be  resorted to in a 
 
Quashing Proceeding? ..................................................................................... 130 
iv. Whether the case at hand was one fit for the High Court to quash?........ 141 
a. Plea of Ignorance of Law: Ignorance of Law viz-a-viz Incognizance of  Law. . 147 
v. Summary of our conclusion ........................................................................ 161 
F. FEW MEANINGFUL SUGGESTIONS. .............................................. 167 
i. 
The Lingering Impact of Child Pornography on the Victimization & Abuse 
 
of Children. ................................................................................................. 167 
a. Obligation to report under Section(s) 19 & 20 respectively of the POCSO and Role 
 
of the Society and all Stakeholders. ................................................................. 180 
ii. Suggestions to the Union of India and to the courts. ................................. 195 
G. FINAL ORDER ..................................................................................... 198 
 
 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 3 of 199 
 
1. 
Since the issues raised in both the captioned appeals are same and the 
challenge is also to a self-same judgment and order passed by the High Court 
those were taken up for hearing analogously and are being disposed of by 
this common judgment and order.  
 
2. 
The present appeals arise out of the final judgment and order passed by the 
High Court of Judicature at Madras dated 11.01.2024 in Criminal Original 
Petition (Crl. O.P.) No. 37 of 2024 (“Impugned Order”) filed by the 
respondent no. 1 (accused) herein under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (for short, the “Cr.P.C.”) by which the High Court allowed 
the petition and thereby quashed the chargesheet dated 19.09.2023 filed for 
the offences punishable under Section  67B of the Information Technology 
Act, 2000 (for short, the “IT Act”) and Section 15(1) of the Protection of 
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (for short, the “POCSO”) arising 
out of the FIR No. 03 of 2020, P.S. Ambattur, Chennai. As a consequence, 
the criminal proceedings in Special Sessions Case No. 170 of 2023 stood 
terminated.  
 
3. 
It may be necessary to clarify that the appellant no. 1 herein, ‘Just Rights for 
Children Alliance’ is a collation comprising of five different NGOs that 
work in unison against child trafficking, sexual exploitation and other allied 
causes. Whereas the appellant no. 2 is a child rights organization working 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 4 of 199 
 
towards protecting children from exploitation and one of the partner NGOs 
to the aforesaid collation. The appellants herein were not a party to the 
proceedings before the High Court. However, having regard to the serious 
issue of public importance involved in the matter they sought leave of this 
Court to challenge the impugned judgment of the High Court. The 
respondent nos. 2 & 3 are the State of Tamil Nadu and the Inspector of 
Police, All-Women’s Police Station Ambattur, Chennai, respectively. 
 
A.  
FACTUAL MATRIX 
4. 
On 29.01.2020, the All-Women’s Police Station Ambattur, Chennai, Tamil 
Nadu i.e., the respondent no. 3 herein, received a letter from the Additional 
Deputy Commissioner of Police (Crime against women and children 
Branch) wherein it was mentioned that as per the Cyber Tipline Report of 
the National Crimes Record Bureau (NCRB), the respondent no. 1 herein is 
an active consumer of pornography and has allegedly downloaded 
pornographic material involving children in his mobile phone.  
 
5. 
Accordingly, in view of the aforesaid letter an FIR was registered against the 
respondent no. 1 herein on the very same day i.e., 29.01.2020 at the All-
Women’s Police Station Ambattur, Chennai, Tamil Nadu as Crime No. 03 
of 2020 for the offence punishable under Section(s) 67B of the IT Act and 
14(1) of the POCSO.  The relevant portion of the FIR reads as under: - 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 5 of 199 
 
 
“Today on 29.01.2020 at 12.00 noon, I, the Inspector of W28, All 
Women Police Station was on duty, received letter RC. No. 
03/ADC 
CWC/West/Camp/2020 
dated 
28.01.2020 
from 
Thirumathi S. Megalina, Additional Deputy Commissioner of 
Police, Prevention of Crimes against Women and Children 
Division, Chennai, West Zone. On perusal of the same, 4 
References were mentioned therein viz. 
 
  Ref: 1. DO.Lr.No.05/ADGP-CWC/NCMEC/2020 
2. C. No.30/COP/CO/2020 
3.R.C. No. 228 VIII/DC CWC/Genl/2020 (CTR No.   
49303278) 
4. RC No. 68 /Japu – ii/NCMEC/2020 
 
As per the notice issued in CTR No. 49303278 by National Crime 
Record Bureau, it is seen that Harris, resident of Door No.2, 1st 
Main Road, VPC Nagar, Kallikuppam, Ambattur, Mobile No. 
99406 87836, has for the past more than two years, been watching 
child pornographic films. Details have also been obtained with 
regard to child pornographic films which were made by using 
children who have been exploited, children who have gone 
missing, and by collecting information from centres which deal 
with missing children, and details have been provided with regard 
to the persons who have downloaded such child pornographic 
films. When those notices were perused, it was seen that the above 
said person had downloaded those films through Old Site ID-
KALLI/OLD/ Chm ID-CHM2307, with a view to indulge in sexual 
activities, and these films were made at the address ‘Gopalsamy, 
No.2, Gangai Amman Kovil 3rd Main Road, Kallikuppam, 
Ambattur’ by exploiting children in this area. Since this bad 
activity is a crime against good social order, it was directed to 
take appropriate action against the said person, and therefore, 
Crime No. 03/2020 U/S 67B IT ACT r/w 14(1) POCSO Act 2012 
was registered, and the original FIR has been sent to the 
concerned Court of learned Judicial Magistrate, and copies have 
been sent to the concerned superior officers of police without any 
delay, and investigation has been taken up. 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 6 of 199 
 
13. Action Taken: Since the above information reveals commission 
of offence(s) u/s as mentioned at Item No. 2, registered the case 
and took up the investigation. 
 
FIR read over to the complainant/Informant, admitted to be 
correctly recorded and a copy given to the Complainant/Informant 
free of cost.” 
 
 
6. 
During the course of the investigation, the mobile phone belonging to the 
respondent no. 1 was seized and sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory for 
analysis. The respondent no. 1 was also questioned whether he had ever 
viewed any pornographic content, to which the respondent no. 1 admitted 
that he used to regularly view pornography while he was in college. 
 
7. 
As per the Computer Forensic Analysis Report dated 22.08.2020 it was 
found that the mobile phone of the respondent no. 1 contained two video 
files relating to child pornography depicting two underage boys involved in 
sexual activity with an adult woman. The Computer Forensic Analysis 
Report further stated that more than hundred other pornographic video files 
were downloaded and stored in the said mobile phone. The relevant portion 
of the said Computer Forensic Analysis Report reads as under: - 
“COMPUTER FORENSIC ANALYSIS REPORT 
 
Received from 
: The Sessions Judge, Mahalir 
Neethi Mandram, (Fast Track 
Mahila Court) Tiruvallur. 
Crime No. & P.S. 
: 03/2020 of Ambattur AWPS 
Organization Report No. 
: CF/52/2020 
Case received Date 
: 28.02.2020 
Case received through 
: WHC 43450, Tmt. Poornima 
Seals status 
: Correct & Intact 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 7 of 199 
 
Nature of crime 
: 67(B) IT Act and 14(1) of 
POCSO Act 2012 
Tools used 
: UFED 4 PC. 
Report date 
: 22.08.2020 
Head of the Division 
: A. Visalakshi, M.Sc, PGDCA 
Examiner 
: S. Hemalatha, M.Sc., (FS), 
M.Sc., (CS) 
 
RECEIVED DEVICE DESCRIPTION 
One (1) sealed cloth-lined paper parcel marked, “PI No. 5/2020. Cr. 
No. 3/2020, Ambattur AWPS …” containing the following item: 
 
Marked 
as 
Name of the 
Item received 
Details of the Item 
Packing / 
Labelling details 
1 
Mobile phone 
 
 
 
 
SIM 1 
 
 
 
Memory Card 
Battery 
Make: MOTO 
Model: XT 1804 
IMEI1: 356477088126073 
IMEI2: 356477088126081 
 
Airtel 4G 128K 
ICCID: 
8991000902533662473U 
 
Strontium 16 GB 
Inbuilt 
 
 
Kept in a plastic 
box marked, “PI 
No: 05/2020”. 
 
Objective 
 
The above item was examined with a view to find if there is any 
facility of viewing video files using YouTube application and the 
details. And also to find if any media files pertaining to pornography 
were found accessed/downloaded/saved.  
 
EXAMINATION 
 
Mobile Phone : [MOTO] 
 
The internal memory of the mobile phone was acquired using 
file system extraction and examined using the forensic software tool 
“UFED 4 PC”. The retrieved details such as contacts, call logs, SMS 
messages and media files are generated as a report and the report (in 
pdf) is copied on to a Compact Disc marked as “CF 52/20”. Selected 
pages from the report are given as Annexure-I. Some of the findings 
from the report are as follows: - [...] 
 
[...] Above findings indicated that the mobile phone was found to be 
equipped with the facility of viewing videos through YouTube 
Application. 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 8 of 199 
 
4. (a) Video files pertaining to pornography (more than 100 Nos.) 
were found downloaded and stored in different paths, the details of 
the same are given as Annexure – II. [...] 
 
(b) Some of the vide files pertaining to pornographic nature were 
found 
stored 
under 
the 
path 
“Motorola 
GSM_XT1806 
MotoG5SPlus.zip/sdcard/ProgramData/Android/Language/.fr/Vid
eos/wat up pono”. [...] 
 
(c) Under the same path two video files which could be accounted for 
Child Pornography content were found stored. In the videos boys 
(under-teen) were found involved in sexual activity with a adult 
woman/girl. The details of the same are pasted below: - 
 
S. No. 
File Info 
Additional File Info 
1.  Name: 
VID-20190614-
WA0006.mp4 
 
Path: 
Motorola 
GSM_XT1806 
MotoG5SPlus.zip/sdcard/Program
Data/Android/Language/.fr/Videos/
wat 
up 
pono/ 
VID-20190614-
WA0006.mp4 
Size (bytes): 11256288 
 
Modified: 
6/14/2019 
15:44 (UTC +5:30) 
2.  Name: Unmayal sollungal Ennodu 
sellungal with Vadivel Balaji in AIE 
4-8-2012 – Youtube.3GP 
 
Path: 
Media/Internal 
shared 
storage/trending/adhu idu/Unmayal 
sollungal Ennodu sellungal with 
Vadivel Balaji in AIE 4-8-2012 – 
Youtube.3GP 
Size (bytes): 20467994 
 
Modified: 
9/5/2016 
23:12 (UTC +5:30) 
 
[...]  
Memory Card: [Strontium 16 GB] 
The memory card was acquired and examined using the forensic 
software tool “UFED 4 PC”. The retrieved details such as document, 
image and video files are generated as a report and the report (in pdf) 
is copied on to a Compact Disc marked as “CF 52/20”. The full 
report is given as Annexure-III. 
 
On perusing the medial files, multiple video snapshot images and 
video files were found related to pornography. The representative 
samples of the same are copied onto the CD mentioned earlier under 
a specified folder. [...]” 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 9 of 199 
 
8. 
Upon completion of the investigation, chargesheet dated 19.09.2023 was 
filed against the respondent no. 1 for the offences punishable under 
Section(s) 67B of the IT Act and 15(1) of the POCSO respectively. It may 
not be out of place to state at this stage, that although the FIR was registered 
for the offence punishable under Section 14(1) of the POCSO yet in light of 
the materials collected in the course of the investigation and the findings 
recorded in the Computer Forensic Analysis Report, the chargesheet was 
ultimately filed for the offence punishable under Section 15(1) of the 
POCSO. The relevant portion reads as under: - 
“Final Report 
 
Before the Hon’ble Mahila Fast Track Mahila Court, Tiruvallur 
 
Police Final Report under 173(i)  W28 Ambattur All Women Police 
Station Crim no- 3/2020 U/s 67(B) IT ACT & 14 (1) of POCSO ACT 
2012 @67 (B) IT ACT 15(1) of POCSO ACT 2012. [...] 
 
Nature of the case 
Mrs. Megallina, Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police, Women 
and Child Crime Branch, Chennai, West Zone LETTER RC.NO. 
03/ADC CWC/West/Camp/2020 Dated: 28.01.2020 in that mentioned 
Ref: 1. Do. Lr. No. 05/ ADGP- CWC/ camp/ NCMEC/ 2020, 2. 
C.No.30/ COP/ CO/ 2020, 3. R.CNO. 228 VIII/ DC CWC/ Genl/ 2020 
(CTR No. 49303278), 4. RC.No. 68/ japu- ii/ NCMEC/ 2020 as per 
the detail, Haris residing at 1st Main Road, Door No.03, VPC Nagar, 
Kallikuppam, Ambattur has reported to NCRB (National Crime 
Record Bureau) that he had seen child pornography on his mobile 
phone number 99406 87836 for more than two years at CTR No. 
49303278 has been obtained and a report on child exploitation and 
missing persons and details of those who have downloaded child 
pornography against children banned by the data collection system 
has been obtained. Aforesaid person OLD Size ID- KALLI 4/OLD 
Chm Id- CHM2307 Downloaded from the address No.2 Gopalsamy, 
3rd Main Road, Gangaiyamman Temple, Ampathur, Kallikuppam, 
with the malicious intention of viewing children's pornographic films 
for sexual purposes. As this evil act is considered to be a crime of 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 10 of 199 
 
disturbance of social morals, after being instructed to take 
appropriate action against the said person, the All Women Police 
Station registered a case in CRIME NO. 03/20 U/ S 67B IT ACT r/ w 
14(1) POCSO Act 2012 and the copy of the same was sent to the 
concerned court and the copies to the higher police officers without 
delay for investigation. [...] 
 
 
In the investigation conducted so far, crime scene no. 2, VPC 
Nagar to Main Road Kallikuppam Ambattur, Chennai is within the 
jurisdiction of Ambattur All Women Police Station.  
 
 
On 28.01.2000 Additional Deputy Commissioner, Women and 
Child Prevention Division, Chennai West Zone gone through the case 
received from (NCMEC) According to the National Center for 
Exploited Children in this case accused Harish AGE 24/S/o. 
Santhanam No. 2 VPC Nagar First Main Road Kallikuppam 
Ampathur Chennai has been using his phone number ( 99406 87836) 
for more than two years from his mobile phone number OLD Size ID- 
KALLI 4/OLD Chm Id- CHM2307 Downloaded from the address 
No.2 Gopalsamy, 3rd Main Road, Gangaiyamman Temple, 
Ampathur, Kallikuppam, with the malicious intention of viewing 
children's pornographic films for sexual purposes As this evil act is 
considered to be a crime of disturbance of social morals, as per CTR 
NO 49303278 a report of the crime has been received by NCRB. 
 
 
Therefore, the accused in this case is considered to have 
committed an offense of disturbing public morals and therefore has 
committed a cognizable offense under Section 67 (B) IT ACT & 15 (1) 
of the POCSO Act 2012. [...]” 
 
 
B.  
IMPUGNED ORDER 
9. 
Aggrieved by the aforesaid, the respondent no. 1 went before the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras by way of a quashing petition being the Criminal 
Original Petition (Crl. O.P.) No. 37 of 2024 for the purposes of getting the 
aforesaid chargesheet and the criminal proceedings arising therefrom 
quashed.  
 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 11 of 199 
 
10. The impugned judgment of the High Court is in three-parts. In other words, 
the High Court quashed the criminal proceedings essentially on three 
grounds: - 
(i) 
First, the High Court was of the view that to constitute an offence 
under Section 14(1) of POCSO, a child must have been used by the 
person accused for pornographic purposes. It observed that although 
the two videos depicting children engaged in a sexual activity were 
found to have been downloaded and stored in the mobile phone 
belonging to the respondent no. 1, and assuming that the accused had 
watched the same yet the same would not constitute an offence under 
Section 14(1) of the POCSO. The relevant observations read as under: 
- 
“9. To make out an offence under Section 14(1) of 
Protection of Child from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, a 
child or children must have been used for pornography 
purposes. This would mean that the accused person 
should have used the child for pornographic purposes. 
Even assuming that the accused person had watched child 
pornography video, that strictly will not fall within the 
scope of Section 14(1) of Protection of Child from Sexual 
Offences Act, 2012. Since he has not used a child or 
children for pornographic purposes, at the best, it can 
only be construed as a moral decay on the part of the 
accused person.” 
 
(ii) 
Secondly, the High Court held that, to constitute an offence under 
Section 67B of the IT Act, the person accused must have published, 
transmitted or created material depicting children in sexually explicit 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 12 of 199 
 
act or conduct. It held that although the respondent no. 1 had admitted 
that he was addicted to watching pornography, yet mere watching or 
downloading of child pornography without any transmission or 
publication of the same does not fall within the purview of Section 
67B of the IT Act. The relevant portion reads as under: - 
“6. This Court enquired the petitioner and he stated that 
his date of birth is 13.11.1995 and that he has an elder 
brother. After a lot of persuasion, the petitioner admitted 
that during his teens, he had the habit of watching 
pornography. However, the petitioner made it clear that 
he had never watched child pornography. That apart, he 
also stated that he had never attempted to publish or 
transmit any of the pornographic materials to others. He 
had merely downloaded the same and he had watched 
pornography in privacy.  
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
10. In order to constitute an offence under Section 67-B of 
Information Technology Act, 2000, the accused person 
must have published, transmitted, created material 
depicting children in sexual explicit act or conduct. A 
careful reading of this provision does not make watching 
a child pornography, per se, an offence under Section 67-
B of Information Technology Act, 2000. Even though 
Section 67-B of Information Technology Act, 2000, has 
been widely worded, it does not cover a case where a 
person has merely downloaded in his electronic gadget, a 
child pornography and he has watched the same without 
doing anything more.” 
 
(iii) 
Lastly, the High Court in light of its aforesaid discussion and by 
placing reliance on Section 292 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for 
short, the “IPC”) took the view that although the pornographic content 
was found to have been downloaded and stored in the mobile phone 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 13 of 199 
 
of the respondent no. 1 yet in the absence of any material to show that 
the respondent no. 1 had transmitted or published the same, no offence 
whatsoever could be said to have been made out either under the 
POCSO, IT Act or the IPC and thus quashed the criminal proceedings. 
The relevant observations read as under: - 
“8. This Court had the advantage of going through the 
entire CD file. The mobile phone that was seized from the 
petitioner did contain pornographic materials. However, 
for the purposes of this case, only two videos were 
identified as child pornography. Those two videos contain 
boys (under teen) involved in sexual activity with an adult 
woman/girl. 
Admittedly, 
those 
two 
videos 
were 
downloaded and available in the mobile phone belonging 
to the petitioner and it was neither published nor 
transmitted to others and it was within the private domain 
of the petitioner. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
11. The Kerala High Court had an occasion to deal with 
the scope of Section 292 IPC. That was a case where a 
person was caught watching porn videos and a First 
Information Report came to be registered against him. 
While dealing with this issue, the Kerala High Court held 
that, watching an obscene photo or obscene video by a 
person by itself will not constitute an offence under 
Section 292 IPC. This is in view of the fact that this act is 
done by the concerned person in privacy without affecting 
or influencing anyone else. The moment the accused 
person tries to circulate or distribute or publicly exhibits 
obscene photos or videos, then the ingredients of the 
offence starts kicking in. 
 
11. Thus, the High Court vide its impugned judgment and order dated 
11.01.2024 allowed the petition and thereby quashed the criminal 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 14 of 199 
 
proceedings in Spl. S.C. No. 170 of 2023 on the ground that no offence could 
be said to have been made out against the respondent no. 1 either under 
Section 14(1) of the POCSO or Section 67B of the IT Act. The operative 
portion of the Impugned Order reads as under: - 
“12. In the considered view of this Court, the materials that have been 
placed before this Court does not make out an offence against the 
petitioner under Section 67-B of Information Technology Act, 2000 
and Section 14(1) of Protection of Child from Sexual Offences Act, 
2012. 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
18. In the light of the above discussion, the continuation of the 
proceedings against the petitioner will amount to abuse of process of 
Court. That apart, it will be a stumbling block for the petitioner's 
career in future. Therefore, this Court is inclined to quash the 
proceedings in Spl.S.C.No.170 of 2023 on the file of the Sessions 
Judge, Mahila Neethi Mandram (Fast Track Court), Tiruvallur 
District. 
 
 
Accordingly, this Criminal Original Petition stands allowed 
and the proceedings in Spl.S.C.No.170 of 2023 on the file of the 
Sessions Judge, Mahila Neethi Mandram (Fast Track Court), 
Tiruvallur District, is hereby quashed. Consequently, connected 
criminal miscellaneous petition is closed.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (Emphasis supplied) 
 
12. From the aforesaid it could be said that the High Court laid down three 
propositions of law which are as follows: - 
i. 
Mere possession or storage of any pornographic material is not an 
offence under the POCSO. We are mindful of the fact that, whilst 
endorsing the aforesaid proposition of law, the High Court in its 
impugned Order either consciously did not deem it necessary to refer  
to Section 15 of the POCSO or inadvertently failed to refer to Section 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 15 of 199 
 
15 of the POCSO. Nevertheless, in either case that may be, the 
aforesaid proposition of law found favour with the High Court. 
 
ii. 
Section 67B of the IT Act only makes the act of transmission, 
publication or creation of material depicting children in sexually 
explicit manner an offence. Mere watching or downloading of child 
pornography in private domain is not punishable under the same. 
 
iii. 
In the absence of any material to indicate any transmission or 
publication of pornographic content involving child, no offence could 
be said to have been committed under the POCSO or the IT Act, and 
the criminal proceedings would be liable to be quashed. In other 
words, to attract the provisions of the POCSO or the IT Act it is not 
sufficient to merely establish storage or possession of child 
pornography and that transmission or publication of the same is also 
required to be established. In the absence of the same the criminal 
proceedings are liable to be quashed. 
 
13. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellants being aggrieved with 
the Impugned Order passed by the High Court have come up before this 
Court with the present appeal. 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 16 of 199 
 
C.  
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES 
i. 
Submissions on behalf of the Appellants. 
14. Mr. H.S. Phoolka, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants 
submitted that the interpretation of the relevant provisions of POCSO by the 
High Court for the purpose of holding that mere storage or possession of any 
child pornographic material does not amount to an offence, poses a 
significant threat to the well-being of children and may result in proliferation 
of child pornography, posing a significant threat to the very social fabric of 
the society at large. In support of his submissions, Mr. Phoolka relied on the 
Convention on Cybercrime and the United Nations Convention on the Rights 
of the Child, 1989. 
 
15. He further submitted that the chargesheet filed by the investigating agency 
specifically records that, as per the information received from the National 
Commission for Missing and Exploited Children, USA (NC-MEC), the 
accused had been watching child pornographic videos for the past two years. 
 
16. He further contended that the High Court erroneously proceeded under 
Section 14(1) of the POCSO, which deals with the use of children for 
pornographic purposes, without giving due consideration to Section 15(1) of 
the Act. 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 17 of 199 
 
17. He further submitted that Section 15(1) explicitly penalizes the downloading 
and failure to delete child pornography. In the present case, the respondent's 
stance that he had received two files containing child pornography via 
WhatsApp is falsified by the NC-MEC report. Furthermore, there is nothing 
on record to substantiate that the videos were received on WhatsApp.  
 
18. It was further argued that the High Court committed a serious error in 
quashing the criminal proceedings without addressing itself on Section 15 of 
the POCSO. He submitted that the impugned judgment poses a significant 
threat to child welfare and is contrary to several national and international 
commitments. 
 
19. He further submitted that the High Court also failed to distinguish between 
adult pornography and child pornography, as Sections 67 and 67A of the IT 
Act deal with adult pornography, while Section 67B was specifically 
introduced in 2009 to provide more stringent punishment for collecting, 
downloading, or watching child pornographic material. 
 
20. He further submitted that in view of Section 30 of the POCSO the High Court 
was legally obliged to presume the existence of a culpable mental state on 
the part of the accused for having committed any offence under the Act that 
requires such a mental state.  
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 18 of 199 
 
21. In the last, Mr. Phoolka submitted that a conjoint reading of Section 67B of 
the IT Act, Section 15, and Section 30 of the POCSO leaves no manner of 
doubt as regards the culpability of persons in possession of child 
pornography. 
 
ii. 
Submissions on behalf of the National Commission for Protection of 
Child Rights (NCPCR). 
 
22. Ms. Swarupama Chaturvedi, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR), submitted 
that there was a serious lapse on the part of the State in failing to register the 
FIR for the offence punishable under Section 15 of the POCSO, 2012, as the 
possession of pornographic material involving a child in any form by itself 
is an offence under Section 15(1) of the Act. It was also argued that the State 
as a Prosecuting agency failed in its duty to bring it to the notice of the High 
Court that chargesheet was ultimately filed for the offence under Section 
15(1) of the POCSO & not Section 14. 
 
23. She further submitted that the accused had downloaded pornographic 
material involving a child onto his mobile phone, retained possession of it, 
and failed to take any steps to delete the same for two years, as mandated 
under Section 19 of the POCSO, 2012. 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 19 of 199 
 
24. She contended that the High Court failed to appreciate the mandate of 
Section 30, which raises a presumption of a culpable mental state on the part 
of the accused for any offence under the Act that necessitates such a mental 
state. The provision, therefore, shifts the burden of proving the absence of a 
culpable mental state onto the accused. 
 
25. She would further submit that Section 19 of the POCSO imposes mandatory 
reporting of an offence under the Act if there was an apprehension that such 
offence is likely to be committed or knowledge that such an offence has been 
committed. It was pointed out that the failure to discharge this obligation by 
itself is punishable under Section 21 of the POCSO. She pointed out that the 
social media platforms claim to report such instances to the National Center 
for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC), a US-based NGO, which 
then reports them to the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB). However, 
Section 19 mandates reporting such cases to the Special Juvenile Police Unit 
(SJPU) or the Special Police. Therefore, reporting to an NGO cannot absolve 
the social media platforms of its liability under Section 21 of the POCSO.  
 
26. In the last, it was submitted that the issue as regards the plight of minors 
involved or used in child pornography is a matter of serious concern for one 
and all. She prayed for issuance of appropriate directions. She submitted that 
in an age when children require internet access for educational purposes, it 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 20 of 199 
 
has become imperative to provide them with a safe online environment in 
accordance with Article 12 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights 
of the Child (UNCRC). 
 
iii. 
Submissions on behalf of the respondent no. 1 / the Sole Accused. 
 
27. Mr. Prashant S. Kenjale, the learned Counsel appearing for the respondent 
no. 1 / the accused, submitted that the FIR was lodged for the offence under 
Section 14(1) of the POCSO and Section 67B of the IT Act, and thus, no 
error not to speak of any error of law could be said to have been committed 
by the High Court in passing the impugned order. 
 
28. He further submitted that the date of the receipt of the videos recovered from 
the mobile phone of the respondent no. 1 phone is 14.06.2019, at which point 
the 2019 amendment to Section 15 was not yet in force.  
 
29. He further contended that the two files found from the Respondent’s phone 
were named (a.) VID-20190614-WA005.mp4 and (b.) VID-20190823-
WA0020.mp4. The use of “WA” in the file names indicates that they were 
automatically downloaded by WhatsApp, which has an auto-download 
feature, as shown in a research study. He would submit that in such 
circumstances, the said videos had been automatically downloaded onto his 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 21 of 199 
 
phone and that the respondent no. 1 was unaware of their existence. He 
argued that the forensic evidence clearly indicates both the creation and 
modification date as 14.06.2019, thereby indicating that the files were never 
accessed. 
 
30. He further submitted that the mere possession of the aforesaid videos does 
not constitute an offence under Section 15(1) of the POCSO, as the 
respondent never had any intention to share or distribute them. He also 
argued that even if it is assumed that the respondent no. 1 had watched the 
said videos once and then failed to delete it, he cannot be charged under 
Section 15(1) of the POCSO, as he was unaware of its presence due to the 
government’s failure to publicize the law. 
 
31. He submitted that ignorance of law on the part of the respondent no. 1 was 
accompanied by a bona fide belief, and as such it would not constitute an 
offence under Section(s) 15 of the POCSO and 67B of the IT Act. In support 
of this argument, he placed reliance on the decisions of this Court in Chandi 
Kumar Das Karmarkar v. Abanidhar Roy, reported in AIR 1965 SC 585, 
and Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of U.P., reported in 
(1979) 2 SCC 409. 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 22 of 199 
 
iv. 
Submissions on behalf of the respondent nos. 2 & 3 / the State. 
 
32. Mr. D. Kumanan, the learned Counsel appearing for the State, submitted that 
the High Court, whilst passing the Impugned Order proceeded on an 
erroneous footing that an offence under Section 14 of the POCSO had been 
alleged against the accused, even-though both the chargesheet as-well as the 
quashing petition clearly mentioned that the indictment against the accused 
was under Section 15(1) of the POCSO. 
 
33. He further submitted that the High Court in its Impugned Order failed to look 
into Section 67B of the IT Act. The High Court whilst quashing the criminal 
proceedings neither discussed nor gave any due consideration to Section 
67B, eventhough chargesheet had been filed for an offence under it.  
 
34. It was submitted that both Section 15 of the POCSO and Section 67B of the 
IT Act had been enacted with the salutary object of curtailing child abuse by 
penalizing any form of use of child pornography, including watching of such 
pornographic content in order to tackle the larger problem of creation and 
dissemination of such material by the perpetrators.  
 
35. He submitted that more than hundred pornographic videos were found stored 
in the mobile phone of the respondent no. 1 / accused herein. Furthermore, 
the accused had himself admitted before the High Court that he along with 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 23 of 199 
 
his friends would regularly watch such pornographic material. In such 
circumstances it was argued that the accused had stored such material in his 
phone with the intention of sharing it with his friends.  
 
36. It was further submitted that the marginal note of Section 15 of the POCSO 
i.e. “Punishment for storage of pornographic material involving child” is 
self-explanatory and that sub-section (1) of the said provision punishes the 
storage or possession of any such pornographic material when done with an 
intention to share or transmit it. Reliance was placed on Section 30 of the 
POCSO to argue that the said provision specifically provides for 
presumption of a culpable mental state on part of the accused for any offence 
under the Act which requires such mental state, and as such the onus was on 
the accused to prove that he had no intention to share the material that was 
found stored in his phone, which was also overlooked by the High Court. 
 
37. In the last, it was submitted that once the chargesheet and the other materials 
on record prima-facie disclosed the commission of an offence, more 
particularly the pornographic videos that were found stored in the mobile 
phone of the accused, it was not proper for the High Court to exercise its 
inherent powers under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C to quash the criminal 
proceedings. 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 24 of 199 
 
D.  
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION   
38. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone 
through the materials on record, the following questions of law fall for our 
consideration: - 
I. 
What is the scope of Section 15 of the POCSO? In other words, what 
is the underlying distinction between sub-section(s) (1), (2) and (3) 
respectively of the POCSO?  
II. 
Whether, mere viewing, possessing or storing of any child 
pornographic material is punishable under the POCSO?  
III. 
What is the true scope of Section 67B of the IT Act? 
IV. 
What is the scope of Section 30 of the POCSO? In, other words, what 
are the foundational facts necessary for invoking the statutory 
presumption of culpable mental state in respect of Section 15 of the 
POCSO?  
V. 
Whether, the statutory presumption contained in Section 30 of the 
POCSO can be invoked only at the stage of trial by the Special Court 
alone established under the POCSO? In other words, whether it is 
permissible for the High Court in a quashing petition filed under 
Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. to resort to the statutory presumption of 
culpable mental state contained in Section 30 of the POCSO? 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 25 of 199 
 
E.  
ANALYSIS 
i. 
Relevant Statutory Scheme and Provisions. 
a.  
Legislative History and Scheme of the POCSO. 
39. Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, it would 
be apposite to first look into the statutory scheme and refer to the relevant 
provisions of the POCSO.  
 
40. As the long title, ‘Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012’ 
suggests, the POCSO was enacted by the Parliament to address the urgent 
need for a comprehensive law to protect children from sexual abuse and 
exploitation. 
 
41. Sexual exploitation of children is a pervasive and deeply rooted issue that 
has plagued the societies worldwide and has been a matter of serious concern 
in India. Prior to the enactment of the POCSO, India lacked a specific legal 
framework dedicated to dealing with sexual offenses against children. While 
the provisions related to sexual offenses existed in the IPC, they were not 
adequately tailored to address the unique vulnerabilities and the needs of 
children.  
 
42. The inadequacy of the existing laws to effectively deal and combat with the 
sexual abuse of children was starkly evident. The IPC, though equipped to 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 26 of 199 
 
handle sexual offences, did not explicitly recognize the various forms of 
sexual abuse that children might face. Under the IPC there was no distinction 
between an adult and a child victim for the purposes of the offences 
punishable under the Code nor did it account for the specific psychological 
and developmental needs of such child victims. Moreover, the procedural 
laws were not child-friendly, often resulting in secondary victimization 
during the legal process. The increasing incidence of child sexual abuse in 
India and the growing awareness of the long-term psychological impact on 
the victims underscored the need for a dedicated law. The POCSO was 
introduced to fill this gap and provide a robust legal mechanism to safeguard 
children from sexual crimes and protect them from offences of sexual 
assault, sexual harassment and pornography. 
 
43. The Statement of Objects and Reasons for the enactment of the POCSO 
makes it abundantly clear that since the sexual offences against children 
were not adequately addressed by the existing laws and a large number of 
such offences were neither specifically provided for nor were they 
adequately penalized, the POCSO has been enacted to protect the children 
from the offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment and pornography and 
to provide for establishment of Special Courts for trial of such offences and 
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.  
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 27 of 199 
 
44. It further states that the POCSO is a ‘self-contained comprehensive 
legislation’ for the purpose of enforcing the rights of all children to safety, 
security and protection from sexual abuse and exploitation countered 
through commensurate penalties as an effective deterrence for sexual 
offences and pornography and has been enacted keeping in mind Articles 15 
and 39 of the Constitution respectively and the United Nations Convention 
on the Rights of the Children. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 
POCSO reads as under: - 
“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
Article 15 of the Constitution, inter alia, confers upon the State 
powers to make special provision for children. Further, Article 39, 
inter alia, provides that the State shall in particular direct its policy 
towards securing that the tender age of children are not abused and 
their childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and they 
are given facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions 
of freedom and dignity.  
 
 
The United Nations Convention on Rights of Children, ratified 
by India on 11th December,1992, requires the State Parties to 
undertake all appropriate National, By-lateral and Multi lateral 
measures to prevent (a) the inducement or coercion of a child to 
engage in any unlawful sexual activity; (b) the exploitative use of 
children in prostitution or other unlawful sexual practices; and (c) 
the exploitative use of children in pornographic performances and 
materials.  
 
 
The data collected by the National Crime Records Bureau 
shows that there has been increase in cases of sexual offences against 
children. This is corroborated by the ‘study on child abuse: India 
2007’ conducted by the Ministry of Women and Child Department. 
Moreover, sexual offences against children are not adequately 
addressed by the extent laws. A large number of such offences are 
neither specifically provided for nor are they adequately penalized. 
The interests of the child, both as a victim as well as a witness, need 
to be protected. It is felt that offences against children need to be 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 28 of 199 
 
defined explicitly and countered through commensurate penalties as 
an effective deterrence.  
 
 
It is, therefore, proposed to enact a self-contained 
comprehensive legislation inter-alia to provide for protection of 
children from the sexual offences and pornography with due regard 
for safeguarding the interest and well being of the child at every stage 
of the Judicial process, incorporating child friendly procedures for 
reporting, recording of evidence, investigation and trial of offences 
and provision for establishment of Special Courts for speedy trial of 
such offences. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
45. The primary legislative intent behind the enactment of the POCSO was to 
create a comprehensive legal framework that would not only punish 
offenders but also provide a child-friendly system for the recording of 
evidence, investigation, and trial of offenses. The POCSO was designed to 
cover all forms of sexual abuse against children, including sexual 
harassment, child pornography, and aggravated sexual assault, among 
others. It aimed to ensure the safety and dignity of child victims during the 
legal process, with specific provisions that mandate in-camera trials, the 
presence of a trusted adult during the proceedings, and the prohibition of 
aggressive questioning of child victims. 
 
46. The POCSO is a manifestation of the unique scheme formed by Article(s) 
15 and 39 respectively of the Constitution and the obligation cast by the 
United Nations Convention on Rights of Children that was ratified by India. 
Article 15 more particularly sub-article (3) read with Article 39(f) of the 
Constitution i) enables the State to make special provisions for children 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 29 of 199 
 
AND ii) at the same time obligates the State to direct its policy towards 
ensuring that the tender and vulnerable age of children is not exploited or 
abused and to secure a dignified and healthy childhood and youth, free from 
any moral or material abandonment or exploitation. The UN Convention on 
Rights of Children prescribes a set of standards that have to be ensured by 
all State parties including India to secure the best interest of the child and to 
specifically undertake preventive measures against any form of exploitation 
of children such as prostitution, unlawful sexual activity or pornographic 
performances and depictions. The POCSO is a legislative manifestation 
towards realization of these constitutional provisions, by providing a 
specialized framework to combat and prevent any and all forms of sexual 
abuse and exploitation as stated in its long Preamble. The relevant portion of 
the long Preamble of the POCSO reads as under: - 
 
“An Act to protect children from offences of sexual 
assault, sexual harassment and pornography and provide for 
establishment of Special Courts for trial of such offences and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
 
Whereas clause (3) of article 15 of the Constitution, inter 
alia, empowers the State to make special provisions for children; 
 
 
And whereas, the Government of India has acceded on the 
11th December, 1992 to the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations, 
which has prescribed a set of standards to be followed by all 
State parties in securing the best interests of the child; 
 
 
And whereas it is necessary for the proper development of 
the child that his or her right to privacy and confidentiality be 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 30 of 199 
 
protected and respected by every person by all means and 
through all stages of a judicial process involving the child; 
 
 
And whereas it is imperative that the law operates in a 
manner that the best interest and well being of the child are 
regarded as being of paramount importance at every stage, to 
ensure the healthy physical, emotional, intellectual and social 
development of the child; 
 
 
And whereas the State parties to the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child are required to undertake all appropriate 
national, bilateral and multilateral measures to prevent –   
(a)  
the inducement or coercion of a child to engage in 
any unlawful sexual activity; 
(b)  
the exploitative use of children in prostitution or 
other unlawful sexual practices; 
(c)  
the exploitative use of children in pornographic 
performances and materials; 
 
 
And whereas sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of 
children are heinous crimes and need to be effectively 
addressed.”  
 
47. Section 2(1) sub-clause (d) of the POCSO defines the term “child” to mean 
any person below the age of eighteen years. Thus, the definition of the term 
“child” used under the POCSO is denuded of any gender i.e., the term is both 
gender neutral and gender fluid and as such will include any person who is 
below the age of 18-years. The relevant provision reads as under: - 
“2. Definitions. –  
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  – 
(d) “child” means any person below the age of eighteen years;” 
 
48. Section 2(1)(da) defines the term “child pornography” to mean and include 
any visual depiction of a child involved in any sexually explicit conduct such 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 31 of 199 
 
as photograph, video, image generated digitally or by a computer which is 
indistinguishable from an actual child i.e., any self-generated image of an 
actual child or any other image that has been created, adapted or modified, 
that appears to depict a child. The relevant provision reads as under: - 
“2. Definitions. –  
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  – 
(da) “child pornography” means any visual depiction of sexually 
explicit conduct involving a child which include photograph, video, 
digital or computer generated image indistinguishable from an actual 
child and image created, adapted, or modified, but appear to depict 
a child;” 
 
49. Section 15 of the POCSO delineates and provides when the storage or 
possession of pornographic material involving a child shall be a punishable 
offence under the POCSO and further prescribes the punishment for such 
storage or possession of pornographic material involving a child. The 
relevant provision reads as under: - 
“15. Punishment for storage of pornographic material 
involving child. –   
(1) Any person, who stores or possesses pornographic material 
in any form involving a child, but fails to delete or destroy or 
report the same to the designated authority, as may be 
prescribed, with an intention to share or transmit child 
pornography, shall be liable to fine not less than five thousand 
rupees and in the event of second or subsequent offence, with 
fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.  
 
(2) Any person, who stores or possesses pornographic material 
in any form involving a child for transmitting or propagating or 
displaying or distributing in any manner at any time except for 
the purpose of reporting, as may be prescribed, or for use as 
evidence in court, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 32 of 199 
 
description which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with 
both.  
 
(3) Any person, who stores or possesses pornographic material 
in any form involving a child for commercial purpose shall be 
punished on the first conviction with imprisonment of either 
description which shall not be less than three years which may 
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both and in the event of 
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either 
description which shall not be less than five years which may 
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.” 
 
50. It would be worthwhile to note that Section 15 of the POCSO had undergone 
a significant change by virtue of the Protection of Children from Sexual 
Offences (Amendment) Act, 2019 (for short, the “2019 Amendment Act”), 
whereby several key changes were introduced. We shall discuss the said 
provision viz-à-viz the unamended provision of Section 15 along with the 
object and purpose behind the 2019 Amendment Act in more detail in the 
latter part of this judgment. 
 
51. Section 30 of the POCSO provides for the presumption of culpable mental 
state and provides that where any offence under the POCSO requires a 
culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the existence of such mental 
state on the part of the accused shall be presumed by the Special Court, and 
that it shall be open for the accused to rebut this presumption. In other words, 
the accused can prove that he had no such mental state with respect to any 
offence under the Act. The relevant provision reads as under: - 
“30. Presumption of culpable mental state. –   

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 33 of 199 
 
(1) In any prosecution for any offence under this Act which requires 
a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the Special Court 
shall presume the existence of such mental state but it shall be a 
defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental 
state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution. 
 
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved only 
when the Special Court believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt 
and not merely when its existence is established by a preponderance 
of probability.  
 
Explanation. – In this section, “culpable mental state” includes 
intention, motive, knowledge of a fact and the belief in, or reason to 
believe, a fact.” 
 
52. This Court in its decision in Independent Thought v. Union of India & Anr. 
reported in 2017 INSC 1030 held that the preamble to the POCSO 
recognizes and mandates that the Act and its provisions ought to operate and 
be interpreted in a manner that would be in the best interest and well-being 
of the child. It should i) ensure that the sexual exploitation and abuse of 
children are addressed effectively and ii) induce a healthy physical, 
emotional, intellectual and social development of the child. The relevant 
observations read as under: - 
“42. [...] The Preamble to the POCSO Act also recognizes that it is 
imperative that the law should operate “in a manner that the best 
interest and well being of the child are regarded as being of 
paramount importance at every stage, to ensure the healthy, physical, 
emotional, intellectual and social development of the child”. Finally, 
the Preamble also provides that “sexual exploitation and sexual 
abuse of children are heinous crimes and need to be effectively 
addressed”. [...]” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 34 of 199 
 
53. In Attorney General for India v. Satish reported in 2021 INSC 762 this 
Court had the occasion to examine the entire legislative scheme of the 
POCSO. It held that each provision of the POCSO should be construed viz-
a-viz the other provisions of the Act and with reference to the context or 
background with which the legislation was enacted, so as to make the Act 
and its provisions more meaningful and effective. This Court further 
emphasized that, while construing the provisions of the POCSO, the impact 
of sexual assault and exploitation on the children should not be ignored and 
further the courts should avoid a narrow or pedantic interpretation that would 
the defeat the statute; rather, where the intention of the legislature cannot be 
given effect to or cannot be realized, a meaningful construction of the statute 
should be adopted to bring about a more effective result. The relevant 
observations read as under: - 
“33. [...] As per the rule of construction contained in the maxim “Ut 
Res Magis Valeat Quam Pereat”, the construction of a rule should 
give effect to the rule rather than destroying it. Any narrow and 
pedantic interpretation of the provision which would defeat the object 
of the provision, cannot be accepted. It is also needless to say that 
where the intention of the Legislature cannot be given effect to, the 
courts would accept the bolder construction for the purpose of 
bringing about an effective result. [...] 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
37. [...] However, it is equally settled legal position that the clauses 
of a statute should be construed with reference to the context vis-a-
vis the other provisions so as to make a consistent enactment of the 
whole Statute relating to the subject matter. The Court can not be 
oblivious to the fact that the impact of traumatic sexual assault 
committed on children of tender age could endure during their whole 
life, and may also have an adverse effect on their mental state. The 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 35 of 199 
 
suffering of the victims in certain cases may be immeasurable. 
Therefore, considering the objects of the POCSO Act, its provisions, 
more particularly pertaining to the sexual assault, sexual harassment 
etc. have to be construed vis-a-vis the other provisions, so as to make 
the objects of the Act more meaningful and effective.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
54. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat in his concurring opinion in Attorney General for 
India (supra) further observed that the POCSO and its nuanced provisions 
were designed keeping in mind the need to protect the autonomy and dignity 
of children. It was enacted to criminalize those acts and behaviour that have 
the propensity to harass, discomfit or demean minors, and as such it is the 
duty of the courts to ensure that the provisions of the POCSO are not 
interpreted in a manner that would undermine its purpose or the pressing 
needs of the times. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“11. The limitations in law in dealing with acts that undermined the 
dignity and autonomy of women and children, ranging from 
behaviour that is now termed “stalking” to pornography, or physical 
contact, and associated acts, which were not the subject matter of any 
penal law, were recognized and appropriate legislative measures 
adopted, in other countries. These have been alluded to in Trivedi, J’s 
judgment, in detail. These laws contain nuanced provisions 
criminalizing behaviour that involve unwanted physical contact of 
different types and hues, have the propensity to harass and discomfit 
women and minors (including minors of either sex), or demean them. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
33. In the end, I cannot resist quoting Benjamin Cardozo that “the 
great tides and currents which engulf the rest of men do not turn aside 
in their course and pass the judges by.” It is, therefore, no part of any 
judge’s duty to strain the plain words of a statute, beyond recognition 
and to the point of its destruction, thereby denying the cry of the times 
that children desperately need the assurance of a law designed to 
protect their autonomy and dignity, as POCSO does.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 36 of 199 
 
55. Similarly in Eera through Dr. Manjula Krippendorf v. State (Govt. of NCT 
of Delhi) & Anr. reported in 2017 INSC 658, this Court observed that the 
POCSO had been brought with the purpose of protecting the children from 
sexual exploitation and harassment. It had been designed to secure the well-
being and the best interests of the child with the protection of the child’s 
dignity being the backbone of the legislation. The dignity, protection and 
interest form the bedrock of the POCSO. The relevant observations read as 
under: - 
“18. The purpose of referring to the Statement of Objects and 
Reasons and the Preamble of the POCSO Act is to appreciate 
that the very purpose of bringing a legislation of the present 
nature is to protect the children from the sexual assault, 
harassment and exploitation, and to secure the best interest of 
the child. On an avid and diligent discernment of the preamble, 
it is manifest that it recognizes the necessity of the right to 
privacy and confidentiality of a child to be protected and 
respected by every person by all means and through all stages 
of a judicial process involving the child. Best interest and well 
being are regarded as being of paramount importance at every 
stage to ensure the healthy physical, emotional, intellectual and 
social development of the child. There is also a stipulation that 
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse are heinous offences and 
need to be effectively addressed. The statement of objects and 
reasons provides regard being had to the constitutional 
mandate, to direct its policy towards securing that the tender age 
of children is not abused and their childhood is protected against 
exploitation and they are given facilities to develop in a healthy 
manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity. There is also 
a mention which is quite significant that interest of the child, 
both as a victim as well as a witness, needs to be protected. The 
stress is on providing child-friendly procedure. Dignity of the 
child has been laid immense emphasis in the scheme of 
legislation. Protection and interest occupy the seminal place in 
the text of the POCSO Act. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 37 of 199 
 
63. [...] The POCSO Act, as I have indicated earlier, 
comprehensively deals with various facets that are likely to 
offend the physical identity and mental condition of a child. The 
legislature has dealt with sexual assault, sexual harassment and 
abuse with due regard to safeguard the interest and well being 
of the children at every stage of judicial proceeding in an 
extremely detailed manner. The procedure is child friendly and 
the atmosphere as commanded by the provisions of the POSCO 
Act has to be congenial. The protection of the dignity of the child 
is the spine of the legislation. [...]” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
56. In Nawabuddin v. State of Uttarakhand reported in 2022 INSC 162 this 
Court held that any act of sexual assault, exploitation or harassment of the 
children should be dealt with in a stringent manner and that no leniency 
should be shown when dealing with an offence under the POCSO in view of 
the object that is sought to be achieved by the Act. The relevant observations 
read as under: - 
“10. Keeping in mind the aforesaid objects and to achieve what has 
been provided under Article 15 and 39 of the Constitution to protect 
children from the offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment, the 
POCSO Act, 2012 has been enacted. Any act of sexual assault or 
sexual harassment to the children should be viewed very seriously 
and all such offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment on the 
children have to be dealt with in a stringent manner and no leniency 
should be shown to a person who has committed the offence under the 
POCSO Act. By awarding a suitable punishment commensurate with 
the act of sexual assault, sexual harassment, a message must be 
conveyed to the society at large that, if anybody commits any offence 
under the POCSO Act of sexual assault, sexual harassment or use of 
children for pornographic purposes they shall be punished suitably 
and no leniency shall be shown to them. Cases of sexual assault or 
sexual harassment on the children are instances of perverse lust for 
sex where even innocent children are not spared in pursuit of such 
debased sexual pleasure.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 38 of 199 
 
b.  
Relevant Provisions of the IT Act. 
57. For better and effective adjudication of the issues involved in the case at 
hand, it would be apposite to refer to the IT Act which also contains several 
provisions, more particularly Section(s) 67, 67A and 67B respectively, that 
penalize the use, transmission and publication of obscene materials 
including child pornography. These provisions together encompass and 
collectively form the umbrella scheme of comprehensive penal provisions 
contained in the IT Act in this regard.  
 
58. Section 67 of the IT Act is the principal provision that criminalizes the 
publication or transmission of “obscene material” in any electronic form and 
constitutes an offence. Section 67A of the IT Act, is a more aggravated 
offence, prescribing enhanced punishment than the preceding provision. It 
does so by further amplifying the scope of ‘obscene material’ by stipulating 
that any obscene material that contains or depicts any sexually explicit act 
or conduct, when published or transmitted shall be punishable under the said 
provision.  
 
59. Section 67B of the IT Act specifically deals with child pornographic 
materials. It provides for an even more severe form of offence by bringing 
within its ambit those obscene materials in any electronic form that depict a 
child in any sexually explicit act or conduct and by further expanding the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 39 of 199 
 
scope of ‘actus reus’ which is punishable under the provision to include not 
just publication or transmission but also the browsing, creation, collection, 
online facilitation or enticement of children into any sexual act or conduct 
etc. The said provision reads as under: - 
“67B. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material 
depicting children in sexually explicit act, etc., in electronic 
form. — Whoever — 
(a) publishes or transmits or causes to be published or 
transmitted material in any electronic form which depicts 
children engaged in sexually explicit act or conduct; or 
 
(b) creates text or digital images, collects, seeks, browses, 
downloads, advertises, promotes, exchanges or distributes 
material in any electronic form depicting children in obscene or 
indecent or sexually explicit manner; or 
 
(c) cultivates, entices or induces children to online relationship 
with one or more children for and on sexually explicit act or in 
a manner that may offend a reasonable adult on the computer 
resources; or 
 
(d) facilitates abusing children online; or 
 
(e) records in any electronic form own abuse or that of others 
pertaining to sexually explicit act with children, 
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to five years and with a 
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of 
second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years and also 
with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees: 
 
Provided that provisions of Section 67, Section 67-A and this 
section does not extend to any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, 
drawing, painting, representation or figure in electronic form— 
 
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for 
the public good on the ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, 
writing, drawing, painting, representation or figure is in the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 40 of 199 
 
interest of science, literature, art or learning or other objects of 
general concern; or 
 
(ii) which is kept or used for bona fide heritage or religious 
purposes. 
 
Explanation. — For the purpose of this section, “children” 
means a person who has not completed the age of 18 years.” 
 
ii. 
Scope of Section 15 of the POCSO and Section 67B of the IT Act. 
60. In the case at hand, we are concerned with the interpretation of Section 15 
of the POCSO and Section 67B of the IT Act, more particularly the scope of 
these two provisions and what would constitute an offence under each     of 
them. In other words, what exactly has been made punishable under 
Section(s) 15 of the POCSO and 67B of the IT Act respectively and what                     
are the necessary ingredients or elements to establish or make out an     
offence under it. 
 
a.  
Contradictory Views of different High Courts on the subject. 
61. Before proceeding with the analysis of the aforesaid two provisions, it would 
be appropriate to refer to the decisions of various High Courts and the 
cleavage of opinion that have been expressed as regards the scope of Section 
15 of the POCSO and Section 67B of the IT Act. 
 
62. In Nupur Ghatge v. State of Madhya Pradesh (MCRC No. 52596 of 2020), 
the accused therein was alleged to have uploaded child pornographic videos 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 41 of 199 
 
and photographs on his social media account, and thus, a case was registered 
against him under Section 67B of the IT Act. The Gwalior Bench of the 
Madhya Pradesh High Court held that Section 67B penalizes various forms 
of acts including the act of watching or transmitting any child pornographic 
material in electronic form. It further held that any defence of the accused as 
to the absence of any involvement in transmission or sharing of such material 
or the mental state of the accused cannot be looked into at the stage of 
quashing under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. The relevant observations read as 
under: - 
“From the whats-app chats filed by the applicant, it appears that 
the applicant himself was involved in porn activities, therefore, 
the provision of Section 67B of the Act, 2000 would be 
applicable as Section 67-B of the Act, 2000 also includes records 
in any electronic form own abuse or that of others pertaining to 
sexually explicit act with children. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
The burden is on the applicant to prove his defence which cannot 
be decided by this Court in exercise of powers under Section 482 
of CrPC.” 
 
 
63. In P.G. Sam Infant Jones v. State represented by Inspector of Police 
reported in 2021 SCC OnLine Mad 2241 the accused therein was alleged 
to have browsed, downloaded and transmitted child pornographic material 
through his e-mail and social media account. Accordingly, a case was 
registered against him for the offences under Section 15(1) of POCSO and 
Section 67B of the IT Act, whereupon the accused therein preferred an 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 42 of 199 
 
anticipatory bail application before the Madurai Bench of the Madras High 
Court. The Madras High Court observed that while viewing of pornography 
in private domain may not be an offence in view of an individual’s right to 
expression and privacy, child pornography falls outside the ambit of such 
individual rights and stands on a different footing. It held that Section 67B 
penalizes various kinds of acts pertaining to child pornography including the 
act of viewing such material. The relevant observations read as under: - 
3.The case of the prosecution is that on 27.06.2020 at 17.38:51 
hours, the petitioner browsed, downloaded and transmitted child 
pornographic 
material 
by 
using 
Airtel 
Sim 
bearing 
No.9787973370 through his e-mail and Facebook Account. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
5. Viewing pornography privately will not constitute an offence. 
Offence is an act that is forbidden by law and made punishable. 
That is the definition found in Section 40 of IPC. As on date, 
there is no provision prohibiting such private acts. There are 
some who even elevate it as falling within one's right to free 
expression and privacy. But child pornography falls outside this 
circle of freedom. Section 67-B of the Information Technology 
Act, 2000 penalises every kind of act pertaining to child 
pornography. [...] Therefore, even viewing child pornography 
constitutes an offence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
 
64. In Ajin Surendran v. State of Kerala & Anr. reported in 2022 KER 7207 
child pornographic videos were found stored in the mobile phone of the 
accused therein. The High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam observed that 
Section 15 of POCSO gets attracted when any person stores or possesses 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 43 of 199 
 
pornographic material in any form involving a child, with an intention to 
share or transmit it, whereas Section 67B of the IT Act gets attracted when 
a person browses or downloads any such material in any electronic form. 
Accordingly, it held that in view of the videos that were found stored in the 
accused’s mobile phone, prima-facie both of the aforesaid provisions are 
said to be squarely attracted, and thus the power under Section 482 cannot 
be invoked for quashing the criminal proceedings. The relevant observations 
read as under: - 
“3. I have gone through the first information statement as well 
as the final report. It would show that the mobile phone belongs 
to the petitioner and the sim card was examined and it was found 
that in the memory card, pornographic video of children were 
stored. Section 15 of POCSO Act gets attracted when any person 
stores or possesses pornographic material in any form involving 
a child, with an intention to share or transmit child 
pornography. Section 67B(b) of the IT Act gets attracted when a 
person among other things, browses or downloads material in 
any electronic form depicting children in obscene or indecent or 
sexually explicit manner. Thus, both the sections are squarely 
attracted. When prima facie case is made out, power under 
Section 482 cannot be invoked.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
65. In Manuel Benny v. State of Kerala reported in 2022 KER 9730 it was 
found that the accused person therein had downloaded and stored 
pornographic videos depicting children in a sexually explicit manner in his 
mobile phone from a messaging app; ‘Telegram’ for private viewing. 
Accordingly, a case was registered against the accused therein under Section 
15 of the POCSO and Section 67B of the IT Act. When the final report came 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 44 of 199 
 
to be filed, the offence under Section 15 of the POCSO was dropped, and 
chargesheet was filed only for the offence under Section 67B of the IT Act. 
The accused preferred a quashing petition before the High Court of Kerala 
at Ernakulam on the ground that even if the materials in the chargesheet were 
taken at their face value, no ingredients were made out to constitute the 
offence under Section 67B of the IT Act. A learned Single Judge of the High 
Court whilst quashing the criminal proceedings held that in order to attract 
the offence under Section 67B of the IT Act, the pornographic material in 
question must be voluntarily downloaded. It held that there should be an 
intention on the part of the accused to download any pornographic content 
in order to view it so as to constitute an offence under Section 67B of the IT 
Act. The learned Single Judge further observed that as per the FSL report, 
the child pornographic videos had been accessed through the messaging app 
‘Telegram’ wherein there is a possibility of automatic download of videos. 
Since there was no material to show that the accused therein had voluntarily 
downloaded or browsed the pornographic material in question, no prima 
facie offence had been made out under Section 67B of the IT Act, and thus 
the High Court quashed the criminal proceedings. The relevant observations 
read as under: - 
“5. A perusal of the final report would show that the only 
allegation against the petitioner is that he downloaded and 
enjoyed material depicting children in obscene, indecent and 
sexually explicit manner from the application called 'Telegram'. 
In order to attract the offence under Section 67B of the IT Act, 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 45 of 199 
 
the videos or material has to be voluntarily downloaded into any 
device. In other words, there should be intention on the part of 
the petitioner to download the material in order to view it. The 
definite case of the petitioner is that he did not download any 
offensive material. Even in Annexure A3 FSL report it is seen 
that the path of those images is from Android backup and the 
child pornographic videos were accessed through 'Telegram'. 
The learned Additional DGP submitted that the contents 
transmitted in the 'Telegram' can be automatically downloaded 
in the mobile phone by default. Hence, it cannot be said that the 
petitioner 
has 
intentionally 
downloaded 
the 
material, 
considering the features of the 'Telegram' App. 
 
 
Since there is no material to show that the petitioner has 
browsed or downloaded child pornographic material, the 
offence under Section 67B of the IT Act is not attracted. Hence, 
no purpose will be served in proceedings with the matter further. 
Accordingly, the Crl.M.C is allowed. All further proceedings 
pursuant to Annexure A2 final report in Crime No.531/2020 of 
Melukavu Police Station now pending as C.C.No.257/2021 on 
the files of the Judicial Magistrate of the First Class, Erattupetta 
stands hereby quashed.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
66. In Lakshya v. State of Maharashtra & Anr. (Criminal Writ Petition No. 
479 of 2022), the accused therein had viewed and stored a child 
pornographic video in his mobile, which he subsequently showed to his other 
friends and co-accused therein. On the basis of the aforesaid, a case was 
registered against the accused persons under Section(s) 15(1) and (3) of the 
POCSO along with Section 67B of the IT Act. The accused preferred a 
discharge application which came to be rejected by the Trial Court 
whereafter the accused therein went in appeal before the High Court of 
Judicature at Bombay, Nagpur Bench. The learned Single Judge of the High 
Court dismissed the appeal and upheld the rejection of the discharge 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 46 of 199 
 
application by the Trial Court. The High Court held that merely because the 
accused therein was not the creator of the pornographic material in question 
it cannot be said that no offence had been made out. It held that the act of the 
accused to store and forward the pornographic material and the failure on his 
part to delete or report the same would squarely fall within the ambit of 
Section(s) 15(1) and (2) of the POCSO and Section 67B of the IT Act. 
However, the High Court chose not to advert to the offence under Section 
15(3) of the POCSO that was contained in the chargesheet as a prima facie 
case had already been established against the accused therein for the other 
offences with which they were charged. The relevant observation reads as 
under: - 
“8. With the assistance of the learned Advocate for the accused 
and the learned APP for the State, I have gone through the 
provisions of Section 67-B of the I. T. Act and Section 15 of the 
POCSO Act. The main allegation against the accused is that they 
stored, forwarded and shared with each other porn video. Even 
if it is assumed for the sake of argument that they are not 
creators of the porn video, in my view, the benefit of discharge 
cannot be granted to them. [...] 
 
9. In my view, perusal of Section 15 of the POCSO Act in entirety 
would show that the act of the accused persons to store, forward 
and possess pornographic material involving a child is squarely 
covered under Section 15(1) and (2) of the POCSO Act. They 
failed to delete or destroy or report the same to the designated 
authority. As per the case of the prosecution, they stored, 
possessed and circulated the said porn video. Therefore, in my 
view, at this stage, it is very difficult for the accused to come out 
of the tentacles of Section 15(1) and (2) of the POCSO Act. 
 
10. Section 67-B of the I.T. Act provides a punishment for 
publishing or transmitting the material depicting children in 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 47 of 199 
 
Sexually explicit act, etc., in an electronic form. If the basic 
ingredient of Section 67-B, prima facie, are applied to the facts 
of the case on hand, it would show beyond doubt that the act of 
the accused is squarely covered within the ambit of Section 67-
B of the I. T. Act. In my view, in the teeth of the allegations 
against the accused and the material collected during the course 
of investigation and compiled in the charge-sheet, it would be 
very difficult to accept the contention of the accused persons. It 
is true that the applicants are young. They are students. They are 
from reputed family. However, while deciding the discharge 
application this could not be the consideration. If this 
submission is accepted on this ground then this would be nothing 
short of showing misplaced sympathy to the persons who are 
prima facie accused of the commission of offence.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
67. In Shantheeshlal T. v. State of Kerala reported in 2024 KER 35968, during 
investigation certain pornographic videos involving a child had been 
recovered from the device of the accused thereunder. Accordingly, 
chargesheet was submitted against the accused therein for the offences 
punishable under Section(s) 15(1) of the POCSO and 67B of the IT Act. The 
accused thereunder preferred a quashing petition before the High Court of 
Kerala at Ernakulam, wherein the learned Single Judge quashed the 
aforesaid 
chargesheet 
and 
the 
criminal 
proceedings 
taking 
the                     
view as under: - 
(i) 
First, the learned Single Judge held that in order to attract the 
provision of Section 15(1) of the POCSO there must be a storage or 
possession of child pornographic material and further such material 
should be shown to have been shared or transmitted by the person 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 48 of 199 
 
accused. Mere possession or storage of pornographic material by itself 
is not an offence under Section 15(1) of the POCSO unless it is shown 
that the accused person had indeed shared or transmitted such 
material. In other words, to constitute an offence under Section 15(1) 
there must be an actual act of transmission or sharing of the 
pornographic material depicting a child in a sexually explicit act or 
conduct that was found to be stored or in possession of the accused. 
The relevant observation reads as under: - 
“9. Reading the provision, it is emphatically clear that 
storing or possessing pornographic materials in any form 
involving a child and failure to delete or destroy or report 
the same to the designated authority, as may be 
prescribed, with an intention to share or transmit child 
pornography, shall be an offence. So mere storing or 
possessing pornographic material is not an offence under 
Section 15(1) of POCSO Act, if the said storing or 
possession is without any intention to share or transmit 
the same. Therefore, mere storing or possessing 
pornographic materials by itself is not an offence. Thus, 
in order to attract an offence under Section 15(1) of the 
POCSO Act, the stored or possessed pornographic 
materials should be shared or transmitted. In the instant 
case, there is no material available to hold that the 
accused either shared or transmitted pornographic 
materials, though storing of the same was detected. 
Therefore, the offence under Section 15(1) of the POCSO 
Act is not made out in the instant case.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
(ii) 
Secondly, it observed that, even for the purposes of Section 67B of 
the IT Act there must be some material to show that the accused 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 49 of 199 
 
person had either browsed, downloaded, published, transmitted or 
created any material in electronic form depicting a child in a sexually 
explicit act or conduct. To constitute an offence under Section 67B of 
the IT Act the accused person must have intentionally either 
downloaded, browsed, recorded or transmitted a pornographic 
material involving a child. In the absence of any material to show or 
establish specific intention on the part of the accused to share or 
transmit the pornographic material found, no offence could be said to 
have been made out under Section 67B of the IT Act. Any accidental 
or automatic download of such material will not fall within the 
purview of the said provision. The relevant observations read as 
under: - 
“11. Publishing, transmitting or causing any material in 
electronic form which depicts children engaged in 
sexually explicit act or conduct or creation of text or 
digital images etc. are the ingredients under Section 67B 
of the IT Act also. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
13. Therefore, going by the decision, automatic or 
accidental downloading of children engaged in sexually 
explicit act or conduct is not an offence under Section 
67B, once the specific intention to do so is not established, 
by the materials which form part of the prosecution 
records. 
 
14. In the present case, the materials collected during 
investigation would show that some pornographic 
messages, which would depict children engaged in 
sexually explicit act or conduct were found in the devise 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 50 of 199 
 
of the accused. But there are no materials to show that the 
petitioner intentionally downloaded or browsed or 
recorded the same. More particularly there are no 
materials to show that the petitioner had either shared, 
transmitted or published the same in any manner.  
 
15. Thus, the materials available do not suggest the 
ingredients to find prima facie, commission of offence 
under Section 67B of the IT Act.” 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
  
As besides the recovery of the pornographic material from the device 
of the accused there was nothing to show that he had either shared or 
transmitted or intentionally downloaded the same in the first place. In such 
circumstances, the learned Single Judge held that no prima facie offence had 
been made out either under Section(s) 15(1) of the POCSO or 67B of the IT 
Act and thus, proceeded to quash the criminal proceedings. 
 
68. Similarly, in Akash Vijay v. State of Kerala reported in 2024 KER 42626, 
the Kerala High Court placing reliance on the decision of Shantheeshlal T  
(supra) held that mere storage or possession of any pornographic material 
involving a child will not constitute an offence under Section(s) 15 of the 
POCSO or 67B of the IT Act in the absence of any material to show that the 
accused person either intentionally downloaded or browsed the said material 
or that he shared or transmitted the same. The relevant observations read as 
under: - 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 51 of 199 
 
“6. On perusal of the prosecution records, no materials 
collected during investigation to show that the petitioner 
intentionally downloaded or browsed or recorded the same and 
there are no materials available to show that the petitioner had 
either shared, transmitted or published the video, in any manner. 
The allegation is confined to that of presence of porn video in 
the mobile phone of the accused alone. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
8. Reading the facts of this case, the same is similar to the facts 
dealt in Shantheeshlal T.’s case (supra). Therefore, applying the 
same ratio, this Crl.M.C. is liable to be allowed.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
69. In Akhil Johny v. State of Kerala reported in 2024 KER 53767, the learned 
Single Judge of the Kerala High Court held that where the allegations are 
limited only to the presence of pornographic material involving a child in the 
mobile phone or hard disk of the accused, no offence could be said to have 
been made out under Section(s) 15 of the POCSO or 67B of the IT Act and 
as such the criminal proceedings would be liable to be quashed. The relevant 
observations read as under: - 
“6. On perusal of the prosecution records, no materials 
collected during investigation to show that the petitioner 
intentionally downloaded or browsed or recorded the same and 
there are no materials available to show that the petitioner had 
either shared, transmitted or published the video, in any manner. 
The allegation is confined to that of presence of porn video in 
the mobile phone of the accused alone. 
 
xxx  
xxx 
 
xxx 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 52 of 199 
 
8. Reading the facts of this case, the same is similar to the facts 
dealt in Shantheeshlal T.’s case (supra). Therefore, applying the 
same ratio, this Crl.M.C. is liable to be allowed.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
70. In Inayathulla N (1) v. State reported in 2024 KHC 26513, the accused 
therein was charged for browsing a website and viewing pornographic 
materials involving a child. Accordingly, a case was registered against him 
under Section(s) 67B of the IT Act. A learned Single Judge of the High Court 
of Karnataka held that the soul and essence of Section 67B lies in the act of 
publication or transmission of any material depicting a child in any sexually 
explicit conduct, and that mere browsing or watching of such material would 
not attract the aforesaid provision. It further held that in such cases even 
investigation should not be permitted to be continued and thus, proceeded to 
quash the criminal proceedings. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“7. [...] Section 67B of the IT Act punishes those persons who 
would publish, transmit the material depicting children in 
sexually explicit acts in electronic form. The soul of the provision 
is publishing or transmitting of material depicting children in 
sexually explicit act. 
 
8. The allegation against the petitioner is that he has watched a 
pornographic website. This, in the considered view of the Court, 
would not become publishing or transmitting of material, as is 
necessary under Section 67B of the IT Act. At best, as contended, 
the petitioner could be a porn addict, who has watched 
pornographic material. Nothing beyond this, is alleged against 
the petitioner. If the facts are pitted against the ingredients 
necessary to drive home Section 67B of the IT Act, what would 
unmistakably emerge is, further proceedings cannot be 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 53 of 199 
 
permitted to be continued, as it would become an abuse of 
process of law. [...]  
 
9. The Apex Court in the afore laid postulates holds that even if 
the facts that forms the complaint is accepted as true, it would 
not make out any offence. In such cases, even investigation 
should not be permitted to be continued. Therefore, the 
impugned proceedings cannot be permitted to be continued, as 
it does not make out an offence under Section 67B of the IT Act.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
71. We are conscious of the fact that the aforesaid decision of Inayathulla N (1) 
(supra) was subsequently taken in review by the learned Single Judge of the 
Karnataka High Court under the nomenclature  “recall” upon realising that 
Section 67B of the IT Act had been misinterpreted more particularly the 
failure to advert to sub-section (b) of the said provision which criminalizes 
the browsing of child pornographic sites. Consequently, in Inayathulla N 
(2) v. State reported in 2024 KHC 28204 the learned Single Judge set aside 
its earlier order in Inayathulla N (1) (supra) by observing that although 
Section 67B sub-section (a) of the IT Act may not apply in the absence of 
any transmission or publication of any child pornography, yet sub-section 
(b) of the said provision would indeed be applicable where the allegations 
involve browsing or viewing of any child pornographic material. It is 
relevant to note that although the court was apprised of the fact that even 
Section 15 of the POCSO was being contemplated to be added in the 
chargesheet, yet the High Court in view of the limited question before it did 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 54 of 199 
 
not deem it necessary to go into the applicability of the said provision at that 
stage. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“5. This Court accepting the facts had allowed the petition in 
terms of its order dated 10-07-2024. [...] After release of the 
order, the State appears to have noticed the short assistance 
rendered by it, as also the fact that the cyber tipline/2nd 
respondent was not heard in the matter. The further fact is that 
the State has filed an application before the Court to bring in 
Section 15 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offices Act, 
2012 (‘POCSO Act’ for short). [...] By a separate order passed 
on 19-07-2024, the I.A. filed by the State stood answered and the 
order dated 10-07-2024, by accepting the reasons indicated in 
the affidavit was recalled and the matter was restored to file. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
8. [...] The reliance placed by the petitioner is on Section 67B(a) 
of the Act which was relied on and proceedings quashed. What 
becomes applicable to the case at hand is Section 67B(b). 
Section 67B(b) open up prosecution against a person who 
creates text or digital images, collects, seeks, browses, 
downloads, advertises, promotes, exchanges or distributes 
material in any electronic form depicting children in obscene or 
indecent or sexually explicit manner. It is not in dispute that the 
petitioner, in the case at hand, has browsed child pornographic 
material for about 50 minutes. Browsing child pornographic 
material makes it an offence under Section 67B(b) of the Act.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
72. Thus, it appears from the aforesaid that there are divergent views expressed 
by different High Courts of the country as regards the ingredients necessary 
to constitute an offence under Section 15 of the POCSO and Section 67B of 
the IT Act. The Kerala High Court has taken the view that mere possession 
or viewing of pornographic material involving a child will not fall within the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 55 of 199 
 
ambit of Section 15 of the POCSO, rather what the provision criminalizes is 
the actual act of transmission or sharing of the said material. It has held that 
where the allegations are confined only to the possession of pornographic 
material and there is nothing to indicate the actual transmission of the same, 
the criminal proceedings shall be liable to be quashed. Whereas, the Bombay 
High Court appears to have taken the view that under Section 15(1) of the 
POCSO, what is penalized is the storage of child pornography and resultant 
failure to delete or report the same while under Section 15(2), it is the storage 
and consequent transmission of child pornography. Similarly, with respect 
to Section 67B, both the Karnataka High Court and the Kerala High Court 
have held that what is criminalized is the intentional browsing or 
transmission of child pornography, and not the mere possession of such 
material.  
 
b.  
Three distinct offences punishable under Section 15 of the POCSO. 
 
73. Prior to the 2019 Amendment Act, Section 15 of the POCSO as originally 
enacted, stipulated that any person who stores any pornographic material 
involving a child for commercial purposes shall be punishable under the said 
provision. Thus, under the erstwhile Section 15 of the POCSO only one act 
was criminalized; in other words, only the storage of child pornography for 
a commercial purpose was made a punishable offence. Storage of such 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 56 of 199 
 
material for any other purpose was outside the scope and purview of the said 
provision. The said provision as it then stood, reads as under: - 
“15. Punishment for storage of pornographic material 
involving child. –  
Any person, who stores, for commercial purposes any 
pornographic material in any form involving a child shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description which may 
extent to three years or with fine or with both.”  
 
74. Over a period of time, the legislature realized that despite the enactment of 
POCSO, there had been an increase rather than a decline in the number of 
cases pertaining to child sexual abuse. The legislature noted that some of the 
provisions of the POCSO were not proving to be effective in addressing the 
various forms of sexual degradation, abuse and exploitation of children in 
the country. The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Amendment) 
Act, 2019 earmarked a significant step by the legislature in response to the 
aforesaid problem, by introducing several new offences and further making 
the existing offences more stringent with enhanced punishments, as a form 
of deterrence to sexual predators and to combat the sexual exploitation of 
children in order to safeguard a secure and dignified environment for them. 
The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 2019 Amendment Act read as 
under: - 
“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
"1. The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 
2012 (the said Act) has been enacted to protect children from 
offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment and pornography 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 57 of 199 
 
and provide for establishment of Special Courts for trial of such 
offences and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
 
 
 
2. The said Act is gender neutral and regards the best 
interests and welfare of the child as a matter of paramount 
importance at every stage so as to ensure the healthy physical, 
emotional, intellectual and social development of the child.  
 
 
3. However, in the recent past incidences of child sexual 
abuse cases demonstrating the inhumane mind-set of the 
abusers, who have been barbaric in their approach towards 
young victims, is rising in the country. Children are becoming 
easy prey because of their tender age, physical vulnerabilities 
and inexperience of life and society. The unequal balance of 
power leading to the gruesome act may also detriment the mind 
of the child to believe that might is right and reported studies 
establish that children who have been victims of sexual violence 
in their childhood become more abusive later in their life. The 
report of the National Crime Records Bureau for the year 2016 
indicate increase in the number of cases registered under the 
said Act from 44.7 per cent. in 2013 over 2012 and 178.6 per 
cent. in 2014 over 2013 and no decline in the number of cases 
thereafter.  
 
 
4. The Supreme Court, in the matter of Machhi Singh vs. 
State of Punjab [1983 (3) SCC 470], held that when the 
community feels that for the sake of self-preservation the killer 
has to be killed, the community may well withdraw the protection 
by sanctioning the death penalty. But the community will not do 
so in every case. It may do so in rarest of rare cases when its 
collective conscience is so shocked that it will expect the holders 
of the judicial power centre to inflict death penalty irrespective 
of their personal opinion as regards desirability or otherwise of 
retaining death penalty. The same analogy has been reiterated 
by the Supreme Court in the matter of Devender Pal Singh vs. 
State (NCT of Delhi)[AIR 2002 SC 1661] wherein it was held 
that when the collective conscience of the community is so 
shocked, the court must award death sentence.  
 
 
5. In the above backdrop, as there is a strong need to take 
stringent measures to deter the rising trend of child sex abuse in 
the country, the proposed amendments to the said Act make 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 58 of 199 
 
provisions for enhancement of punishments for various offences 
so as to deter the perpetrators and ensure safety, security and 
dignified childhood for a child. It also empowers the Central 
Government to make rules for the manner of deleting or 
destroying or reporting about pornographic material in any 
form involving a child to the designated authority.  
 
 
6. The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences 
(Amendment) Bill, 2019, for the aforementioned purpose, which 
was introduced and pending consideration and passing in the 
Lok Sabha, lapsed on the dissolution of the Sixteenth Lok Sabha. 
Hence, the present Bill.  
 
 
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. NEW 
DELHI; The 12th July, 2019.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
75. Pursuant to the aforesaid 2019 Amendment Act, a slew of amendments were 
brought within the POCSO, which inter alia included i) the insertion of 
Section 2(da) by which “child pornography” came to be defined under the 
Act AND ii) the amendment of Section 15 of the Act whereby now three 
distinct offences are made punishable under the said provision. Again, at the 
cost of repetition, the amended Section 15 of the POCSO is reproduced 
hereunder: - 
“15. Punishment for storage of pornographic material 
involving child. –   
(1) Any person, who stores or possesses pornographic material 
in any form involving a child, but fails to delete or destroy or 
report the same to the designated authority, as may be 
prescribed, with an intention to share or transmit child 
pornography, shall be liable to fine not less than five thousand 
rupees and in the event of second or subsequent offence, with 
fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.  
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 59 of 199 
 
(2) Any person, who stores or possesses pornographic material 
in any form involving a child for transmitting or propagating or 
displaying or distributing in any manner at any time except for 
the purpose of reporting, as may be prescribed, or for use as 
evidence in court, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with 
both.  
 
(3) Any person, who stores or possesses pornographic material 
in any form involving a child for commercial purpose shall be 
punished on the first conviction with imprisonment of either 
description which shall not be less than three years which may 
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both and in the event of 
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either 
description which shall not be less than five years which may 
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
76. A bare perusal of the aforesaid provision makes it abundantly clear that 
Section 15 of the POCSO is in three parts. The legislature by virtue of the 
2019 Amendment Act has now made three different forms of storage or 
possession of child pornography a punishable offence under the said 
provision, unlike the erstwhile provision, which had criminalized only one 
form of storage of child pornography.  
 
77. Section 15 sub-section (1) of the POCSO now provides that any person who 
either stores or possesses any pornographic material involving a child and 
fails to either delete, destroy or report the same with the intention to share or 
transmit such material, shall be liable to fine of not less than rupees five 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 60 of 199 
 
thousand for the first offence, and a fine of not less than rupees ten thousand 
for any subsequent offence.  
 
78. On the other hand, Section 15 sub-section (2) of the POCSO provides that 
any person who either stores or possesses any pornographic material 
involving a child for transmitting, displaying, propagating, or distributing 
the same in any manner except for either reporting it or for using it as 
evidence shall be punishable with either imprisonment extending upto three-
years or with fine or both.  
 
79. Whereas, Section 15 sub-section (3) of the POCSO stipulates that any person 
who either stores or possesses any pornographic material involving a child 
for commercial purpose shall be punishable with imprisonment of not less 
than three-years, which may extend upto five-years, or with fine, or both for 
the first offence, and for any subsequent offence, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment not less than five-years, that may extend upto seven-years and 
along with fine. 
 
 
I. Concept of an Inchoate Crime – The ‘Actus Reus’ and ‘Mens Rea’ 
required under Section 15.  
 
80. Before proceeding further to discuss the scope of Section 15 of the POCSO 
and the ingredients necessary to constitute an offence thereunder, it would 
be apposite to first understand the true purpose and the nature of the said 
penal provision.  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 61 of 199 
 
81. A plain reading of Section 15 of the POCSO and the marginal note appended 
thereto would reveal that the common theme permeating across sub-
section(s) (1), (2) and (3) respectively is that there is no requirement 
whatsoever for an actual transmission of any child pornographic material in 
order to fall within the ambit of the said provision. What is sought to be 
penalized under Section 15 of the POCSO is the storage or possession of any 
child pornographic material when done with a particular intention or purpose 
as stipulated in sub-section(s) (1), (2) or (3), as the case may be. Thus, the 
bare textual reading of the said provision makes it clear that it is the intention 
which is being punished and not the commission of any criminal act in the 
traditional sense. This in the criminal jurisprudence is known as an ‘Inchoate 
Crime’ or ‘Inchoate Offence’. 
 
82. Inchoate crimes are defined as criminal acts that are committed in 
preparation for a further offence. The term "inchoate" itself means 
"undeveloped" or "incomplete."  
 
83. The Doctrine of Inchoate Crimes is a cornerstone of criminal jurisprudence. 
It is aimed at addressing the legal culpability of those who engage in a 
conduct that is preparatory to the commission of any substantive offence. 
Inchoate crimes, are often referred to and described as an incomplete or 
preliminary offence, that capture the essence of criminal intent and the 
preparatory actions that precede the commission of a criminal act. It 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 62 of 199 
 
underscores the principle that the law does not merely respond to offences 
already committed but also intervenes when a crime is in the process of being 
committed, thus thereby protecting public order and safety. Inchoate crimes 
represent a critical aspect of criminal law, embodying the legal system's 
proactive and deterrent approach to crime itself. 
 
84. The primary rationale for the existence of inchoate crimes within the legal 
framework is the prevention of harm by intervening at an early stage i.e 
before the potential damage is caused. It recognizes that though certain 
actions do not result in an offence, nonetheless those actions pose a sufficient 
threat to society to warrant legal intervention. The jurisprudence surrounding 
inchoate crimes has evolved as a balance struck between i) the need for early 
intervention on the one hand with ii) the cardinal principle of criminal law 
that no one should be punished merely for their thoughts or intentions on the 
other, by criminalizing only those actions of an individual that demonstrate 
a clear movement towards the commission of a criminal offense. It is deeply 
rooted in the preventive or deterrent nature or approach of a particular law 
by criminalizing those conduct, actions or intentions that pose a significant 
risk of harm. An inchoate offence requires towing a delicate balance between 
the need for prevention of potential threat to the society and the risk of 
undoing the sacrosanct fundamental principle of ‘actus non facit reum nisi 
mens sit rea’ in order to ensure that the law remains a powerful tool in the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 63 of 199 
 
maintenance of public order. This inherent tension between respecting the 
autonomy of an individual’s thought and state of mind with the societal 
interest and safety is often balanced and resolved by carefully shaping and 
defining the point at which any particular action or preparatory step becomes 
sufficiently proximate to the commission of an offence. In other words, the 
law would only intervene at the point where an individual has acquired the 
means to commit a further offence, and will not punish the mere thought of 
committing an offence in the absence of any overt steps towards the same. 
Thus, the critical or central component of any inchoate crime is the 
preliminary or preparatory actus reus that sufficiently reflects the essence or 
existence of a criminal intent. 
 
85. Offence pertaining to the possession of any contraband is a prime example 
and one of the facets of an inchoate crime, as they involve the possession of 
items that are prohibited by law due to their inherent dangerousness or their 
use in the commission of further criminal offences. The criminalization of 
possession as an inchoate crime is predicated on the idea that possession is 
not an innocuous act but a preparatory step towards more significant criminal 
conduct. This is because, first, it allows intervention at an early stage, before 
the contraband can be used to cause harm. Secondly, it acts as a deterrent by 
penalizing individuals who engage in activities that are likely to lead to more 
serious offenses. Thirdly, it reflects the societal interest in preventing the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 64 of 199 
 
accumulation and availability of dangerous items that have no legitimate 
purpose except for the further perpetuation of a more severe offence and 
harm to society at large. 
 
86. The POCSO as outlined in its Statement of Object and Reasons was 
specifically designed to provide commensurate penalties to serve as a 
deterrent against the sexual abuse and exploitation of children. Additionally, 
the Statement of Objects and Reasons accompanying the 2019 Amendment 
Act which inter-alia amended Section 15 of the Act to provide for three 
distinct offences punishable under it, explicitly emphasizes that the said 
amendments had been introduced in order to implement stringent measures 
aimed at addressing and deterring the alarming increase in child sexual 
abuse. The plain reading of sub-section(s) (1), (2) and (3) respectively of 
Section 15 of the POCSO along with the marginal note appended to it which 
reads “Punishment for storage of pornographic material involving child” 
indicates, that the said provision punishes only the storage of pornographic 
material involving a child when done with a specific intent prescribed 
thereunder and that there is no requirement for any actual transmission. It is 
trite to say that, in the absence of any inherent conflict or contradiction 
between the marginal note and the substantive parts of a particular provision, 
the marginal note may be used to aid in the interpretation of the provision. 
Thus, the aforesaid leaves no manner of doubt in the mind of this Court, that 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 65 of 199 
 
the provision of Section 15 of the POCSO is in the nature and form of an 
inchoate offence which penalizes the mere storage or possession of any 
pornographic material involving a child when stored with a specific intent 
prescribed thereunder, without requiring any actual transmission, 
dissemination etc.  
 
87. Under Section 15 sub-section (1), where a person either stores or possesses 
any child pornography and does not delete or report the same, in order to 
share or transmit the same, he will be liable under the said provision. The 
use of the words “with an intention to share or transmit child pornography” 
in the said provision makes it clear that no actual sharing or transmission is 
required to occur, rather what is required is only the intention to share or 
transmit because of which the said material was neither deleted, destroyed, 
or reported. In other words, the actus reus that is penalized under Section 15 
sub-section (1) is the failure to delete, destroy or report any child 
pornography that was stored or in possession of any person with an intention 
to share or transmit the same. Had the intent of the legislature been 
otherwise, it would have clearly used the words “transmits” or “shares” 
instead.  
 
88. Similarly, Section 15 sub-section (2) penalizes the storage or possession of 
any child pornographic material when done for the purpose of either 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 66 of 199 
 
transmitting, propagating, displaying or distributing the same in any manner. 
The use of the words “for transmitting or propagating or displaying or 
distributing in any manner at any time” clearly suggests that again no actual 
act of transmission, propagation, display or distribution is required to take 
place. Had the intent of the legislature been otherwise, it would have 
explicitly stated “any person, who stores or possesses pornographic 
material in any form involving a child and transmits or propagates or 
displays or distributes in any manner at any time”. The use of the words “for 
transmitting or propagating or displaying or distributing in any manner” in 
Section 15 sub-section (2) makes it crystal clear that the said provision deals 
with two kinds of actus reus being (I) first, the storage or possession of a 
pornographic material involving a child when done with an intention to 
either transmit it or to propagate it or to display or distribute it though no 
actual transmission, propagation, display or distribution might have occurred 
OR (II) secondly, the storage or possession of a pornographic material 
involving a child which was actually transmitted, propagated, displayed or 
distributed in any form or manner. In other words, the actus reus that is 
required under Section 15 sub-section (2) is that a pornographic material 
involving a child must be found to have been stored or in possession with an 
intention to either transmit it or to propagate it or to display or distribute it 
or the same must have been transmitted, propagated, displayed or distributed 
in any form or manner.  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 67 of 199 
 
89. The underlying difference in the actus reus under Section 15 sub-section(s) 
(1) and (2) is that in the former the storage or possession of any such material 
is due to the omission to delete, destroy or report the same whereas in the 
latter, the storage or possession of any such material is in order to facilitate 
the transmission, propagation, display or distribution of the same.  To further 
put the distinction into perspective, the actus reus under sub-section (1) must 
be such that indicates that the child pornographic material found in storage 
or possession was only due to an omission to delete or destroy. Whereas 
under sub-section (2) it must be shown that such material had been stored or 
in possession for a reason more than just mere omission i.e., for the reason 
of transmitting, propagating, displaying or distributing the same. The use of 
the words “any manner” in sub-section (2) makes it clear that apart from the 
storage or possession of such pornographic material, there must be 
something more to show either (I) the  actual transmission, propagation, 
display or distribution of such material OR (II) the facilitation of any 
transmission, propagation, display or distribution of such material, such as 
any form of preparation or setup done that would enable that person to 
transmit it or to display it. Thus, Section 15 sub-section (2) of the POCSO 
would cover both the actual transmission, propagation, display or 
distribution of any child pornography as-well as the facilitation of any of the 
abovementioned acts. 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 68 of 199 
 
90. On the other hand, the mens rea which is required to constitute an offence 
under Section 15(1) is the intent to share or transmit a pornographic material 
involving a child, and the said intention is to be gathered or gauged from the 
actus reus itself i.e., by culling out the manner in which there was an 
omission to delete, destroy or report such a material or the reason behind the 
same. This is evinced from the construction of the expression “but fails to 
delete or destroy or report the same to the designated authority, as may be 
prescribed, with an intention to share or transmit child pornography” which 
makes it clear that the scope of discerning the intent to share or transmit has 
been both limited AND tied to only the omission to delete, destroy or report 
i.e., the actus reus. The expression “with an intention to share or transmit” 
cannot be singled out and construed devoid of its context. Thus, it is the 
manner in which along with the attending circumstances attributable to the 
failure to delete, destroy or report that must sufficiently be indicative of the 
intent to share or transmit any material.  
 
91. In Section 15 sub-section (1) of the POCSO the legislature by qualifying and 
linking the expression “intent to share or transmit” to the omission to delete, 
destroy or report, has in its wisdom made the intention or mens rea under the 
said provision a matter of inference, to be ascertained from the actus reus 
itself. The degree of probability for inferring such intention would largely 
depend upon the manner in which the actus reus i.e., how the omission took 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 69 of 199 
 
place. It is for the courts to ascertain whether the manner in which the 
material was found in storage or possession, the attending circumstances to 
the omission and the conduct of the person accused sufficiently refutes or 
displaces the inference of an intention to share or transmit or not.  
 
92. The underlying reason behind tying the inference of intention to the omission 
alone is because the legislature was alive to the practical difficulty that exists 
in establishing an intention to share or transmit any child pornographic 
material from just the mere possession of such material. In offences 
pertaining to or involving the possession of any contraband, it is too uphill a 
task for the courts to peer through and look into the mind of the person 
accused and then cull out the intention of that person behind possessing or 
storing such material. Thus, in such cases instead of directly establishing the 
intention from the mental state of the person accused, it is established 
indirectly by inferring it from the manner in which the contraband was found 
to have been stored or in possession. Here again due to the infeasibility or 
difficulty in cogently establishing an inference of intention often due to the 
lack of any material and the very private and clandestine nature of the 
offence, the courts instead try to look for some material or circumstances 
that might displace the inference of such an intention, and wherever there is 
nothing to show the same, the courts may without hesitation proceed to infer 
the existence of such an intention.  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 70 of 199 
 
93. Whereas, under Section 15 sub-section (2) the mens rea is to be gathered 
from the manner in which the pornographic material was found to be stored 
or in possession and any other material apart from such possession or storage 
that would be indicative of any facilitation or actual transmission, 
propagation, display or distribution of such material. Thus, wherever in 
addition to the storage or possession of any child pornographic material, 
there exists any material or attending circumstances that would either show 
or indicate the facilitation or actual commission of any of the acts 
enumerated in Section 15 sub-section (2) of the POCSO, the said provision 
would get attracted in place of Section 15 sub-section (1). We say so 
because, the presence of such additional material may demonstrate that the 
intention of the person accused has gone beyond the contours of Section 15 
sub-section (1). It evinces a more significant manifestation of the intention 
of the person accused, which moved from what is required in sub-section (1) 
to a much higher degree of intention that is required under sub-section (2). 
In other words, the existence of such additional material strengthens the 
inference of that intention which is required and made punishable under 
Section 15 sub-section (2).  
 
94. Section 15 sub-section (3) penalizes the storage or possession of any child 
pornographic material when done for any commercial purpose. The term 
'commercial purpose' refers to and encompasses any activity or transaction 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 71 of 199 
 
that is carried out or undertaken as a means of any commercial enterprise 
i.e., with the object or intention of any gain, irrespective of whether it was in 
monetary terms or not. Thus, to constitute an offence under this provision, 
the requirement is that the storage or possession of any child pornography 
must be in lieu of any monetary gain or for receiving any other valuable 
consideration. Again, the words “any commercial purpose” indicate that the 
storage or possession must be with an intention to generate or acquire any 
monetary gain or any other form of valuable consideration, irrespective and 
regardless of whether such monetary gain or valuable consideration is 
actually generated or acquired. Thus, it is immaterial whether any monetary 
gain or any other benefit was actually realized or not. To establish an offence 
under Section 15 sub-section (3), besides the storage or possession of the 
pornographic material involving a child, there must be some additional 
material or attending circumstances that may sufficiently indicate that the 
said storage or possession was done with the intent of any form of gain or 
benefit. As soon as there is any material to indicate that the storage or 
possession of any child pornographic material was done in lieu or in 
expectation of some form of gain or benefit, it would constitute an offence 
under Section 15 sub-section (3) of the POCSO notwithstanding whether 
such gain was actually realized.  
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 72 of 199 
 
95. Thus, while Section 15 sub-section (1) requires the existence of the requisite  
mens rea or intention due to which the child pornographic material was not 
deleted, destroyed or reported, Section 15 sub-section (2) requires the 
existence of the requisite mens rea or intention which propelled or led the 
person accused to not only store or possess the said material but  also to take 
some additional steps towards either the actual transmission, propagation, 
display or distribution or the facilitation of the same. In contrast, Section 15 
sub-section (3) requires the existence of the requisite mens rea or intention 
due to which the person accused not only stored or possessed the child 
pornographic material but also compelled him to take some additional steps 
either for any gain or benefit or in lieu or expectation of some form of gain 
or benefit. 
 
96. For the sake of clarity, it would be apposite to give few illustrations as a 
guiding example to further demonstrate the fine but pertinent distinction that 
exists between sub-section (1), (2) and (3) of Section 15 of the POCSO. 
 
97. For illustration; say certain child pornographic material was found stored in 
the personal mobile phone of ‘A’ and the same was neither deleted, 
destroyed nor reported. Here though there is possession or storage of child 
pornographic material but since there is nothing to show any facilitation of 
transmission, propagation, display or distribution of the said material, this 
would attract the provision of Section 15(1). At the same time, since the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 73 of 199 
 
material in question was found in the personal mobile of ‘A’ the same is 
indicative that the omission to either delete, destroy or report in all likelihood 
was due to the intent to share or transmit. Here the manner in which the 
omission has occurred is sufficiently indicative of the intent to share or 
transmit, as there is nothing apart to show that the omission was attributable 
to any other reason but the intent to share or transmit, and thus it would 
constitute an offence under Section 15(1) of the POCSO. 
 
98. Conversely, say for example certain child pornographic material was found 
stored in a broken mobile phone of ‘A’ and the said material had never been 
deleted, destroyed or reported. Now again, there is nothing to show that there 
was either any actual transmission, propagation, display or distribution nor 
anything to show that something apart from and in addition to the storage or 
possession had been done by ‘A’ for facilitation of the transmission, 
propagation, display or distribution of such material. This would again 
attract the provision of Section 15(1) instead of 15(2) of the POCSO. 
However, since the material was found in a broken phone, it is likely that the 
failure to delete, destroy or report the same was attributable to the inability 
of ‘A’ to operate the broken mobile rather than the intent to share or transmit, 
thus, no offence would be made out under Section 15(1) of the POCSO. This 
is because, the manner in which the omission has occurred is not sufficiently 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 74 of 199 
 
indicative of the intent to share or transmit. Thus, no offence could be said 
to have been constituted under Section 15 sub-section (1) of the POCSO. 
 
99. Take for instance, certain child pornographic material was found stored in 
the mobile phone of ‘A’ but this time, the said material had found its way in 
the device due to an automatic download of media of which ‘A’ had no 
knowledge whatsoever. Here although there is possession or storage of such 
material, yet the omission to delete, destroy or report is clearly shown and 
established by ‘A’ that it was due to lack of knowledge about the existence 
of such material on his parts. Here the manner in which the omission has 
occurred is not sufficiently indicative of the intent to share or transmit, thus 
no offence could be said to have been made out under Section 15(1) of the 
POCSO. 
 
100. Take a case where certain child pornographic material was found stored in 
the mobile phone of ‘A’ but this time in addition to the aforesaid material 
few chats were also recovered wherein ‘A’ told his friend ‘B’ that he had 
some child pornographic material which he could share with him. Here, 
since there is additional material to show that ‘A’ had taken some overt steps 
in order to propagate the said material, he would be liable under Section 
15(2) of the POCSO.  
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 75 of 199 
 
101. For another illustration, say for example, again certain child pornographic 
material was found stored in the mobile phone of ‘A’ but this time ‘A’ 
creates a chat group consisting of several of his friends, and sends a message 
therein stating that he has some child pornographic material which he would 
forward on the group. Here, since there is additional material to show that 
‘A’ had taken some overt steps in order to distribute the said material, he 
would be liable under Section 15(2) of the POCSO. 
 
102. Conversely, say ‘A’ who has certain child pornographic material in his 
phone, again creates a group consisting of several of his friends, but this time 
he sends a message stating that he has some child pornographic material 
which he would send in exchange of some amount of money. Here, since 
there is additional material to show that ‘A’ had taken some overt steps in 
respect of the said material for some monetary gain, he would now be liable 
under Section 15(3) of the POCSO instead. 
 
103. We may at the cost of repetition clarify that there may be situations where 
the possession or storage of the pornographic material is found to be in a 
such a manner that the same by itself would be indicative of an intention to 
either transmit, display, propagate or distribute such material or that it was 
done in lieu or expectation of any gain. In such cases the storage or 
possession of child pornographic material itself would sufficiently be 
indicative of the requisite intention either under Section 15 sub-section(s) 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 76 of 199 
 
(2) or (3) as the case may be, and there would be no requirement to adduce 
any additional material as long as the manner of storage or possession of 
such material or the attending circumstances itself is sufficiently indicative 
of such intention. 
 
104. For illustration; say certain child pornographic material was found stored in 
five to six television devices in a hotel run by ‘A’. Here, because the 
pornographic material has been found to be stored in multiple devices that 
too at a place which has easy access for the public, the same would be 
indicative that the ‘A’ was using the hotel and the television devices therein 
as a means for facilitating display of such pornographic material, and thus, 
would be punishable under Section 15 sub-section (2) of the POCSO. 
 
105. For another illustration say again certain child pornographic material were 
found stored in five to six television devices in a hotel run by ‘A’, but this 
time some price was mentioned onto the pornographic material itself. Here, 
because some amount of money was found to be mentioned on the material 
itself and the said material was stored in a place with easy public access, the 
same would be indicative that the ‘A’ was using the hotel and the television 
devices therein as a means for facilitating display of such pornographic 
material in lieu of monetary gain, thus, would be punishable under Section 
15 sub-section (3) of the POCSO. 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 77 of 199 
 
106. The aforesaid illustrations have been provided only as a guiding example to 
highlight the distinction between sub-section(s) (1), (2) and (3) of Section 
15 of the POCSO. These illustrations should not be mechanically applied or 
construed by any court in any proceeding while dealing with any matter 
involving Section 15 of the POCSO devoid of the context in which these 
illustrations have been given and without applying its mind as to whether the 
necessary ingredients have been established or not in the individual facts and 
circumstances of the matter. Any matter involving Section 15 sub-section 
(1), (2) or (3) of the POCSO, must be dealt with independent of the 
illustrations narrated above and stricto-sensu in accordance with only the 
ratio of this decision. 
 
107. Lastly, we must also caution the police and the courts to be mindful of the 
fact that wherever in a given case a particular sub-section of Section 15 is 
found to be applicable, the other two remaining sub-sections of the said 
provision will cease to be applicable. Section 15 sub-section(s) (1), (2) and 
(3) respectively of the POCSO are independent and distinct offences. The 
three offences cannot coexist simultaneously in the same set of facts. They 
are distinct from each other and are not intertwined that they cannot survive 
without each other. This is because, the underlying distinction between 
Section 15 sub-section(s) (1), (2) and (3) respectively lies in the different 
degree of culpable mens rea that is required under each of the three 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 78 of 199 
 
provisions. The inception of the requisite culpable mens rea begins and takes 
shape from the intention specified under sub-section (1), then gradually 
continues to transform into the intention stipulated under sub-section (2) and 
finally culminates into the intention prescribed under sub-section (3). Under 
Section 15 sub-section (1) of the POCSO, the requisite intention therein is 
still in fieri i.e., in process of developing and culminating into either the 
intention under sub-section(s) (2) or (3). Whenever, the said intention 
ultimately crystalizes into the intention either under sub-section(s) (2) or (3), 
the other provisions would automatically become inapplicable. 
 
108. Yet one another important aspect, that the police and the courts should be 
mindful of is that while examining any matter involving the storage or 
possession of any child pornography, it finds that particular sub-section of 
Section 15 is not attracted, it must not jump to the conclusion that no offence 
at all is made out under Section 15 of the POCSO. The police at the time of 
investigation and the courts at the time of taking cognizance, should keep 
this aforesaid aspect in mind. In other words, both should try to ascertain that 
if offence is not made out in one particular sub-section, whether the same is 
made out in the other two sub-sections or not. 
 
 
II. 
Concept of ‘Possession’, ‘Constructive Possession’ and ‘Immediate 
Control’ under Section 15 of the POCSO. 
 
109. During the course of hearing, our attention was also drawn to a recent news 
article that reported how on social media, links to view child pornography 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 79 of 199 
 
were being circulated and sold for anywhere between Rs. 40 to Rs. 5,000. 
The news report indicates, how social media platforms are rife with child 
sexual abuse, and gave certain insight about the modus operandi of the 
distribution of such material on these platforms. It explained how the 
sellers and distributors of child pornographic material rather than sharing 
any downloads to such material, would ingeniously only share links to such 
material instead in lieu of money, so as to circumvent the penal provisions 
of the POCSO and IT Act, which criminalized only the storage of such 
material. By indefinitely forwarding links, they completely bypass the 
requirement of first storing such material onto any device, and similarly 
those who view such material also only use the links, without ever 
downloading such material onto their device. 
 
110. As earlier mentioned, prior to the 2019 Amendment Act, Section 15 of the 
POCSO only criminalized the storage of any child pornographic material for 
any commercial purpose.  Thereafter, the legislature in view of the 
increasing number of child sexual abuse cases, amended Section 15 of the 
POCSO, to recognize and criminalize three distinct forms or manner of 
storage of child pornographic material, as has been discussed in the 
preceding parts of this judgment.  
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 80 of 199 
 
111. One another subtle but significant change that was made to all three sub-
sections of Section 15 was the inclusion of the word “possession” in addition 
to storage, which was earlier not there in the erstwhile provision of Section 
15 of the POCSO. 
 
112. Thus, while the word “possession” was originally absent in the unamended 
Section 15 of the POCSO, the legislature in its wisdom, specifically added 
the said word in the amended Section 15, whereby now both the storage or 
the possession of any child pornographic material would be liable to be 
punished when done with any of the specified intention thereunder. 
 
113. We believe that the change referred to above was not made inadvertently or 
lightly, but rather was done specifically with the intention of making the 
provisions of Section 15 of the POCSO more stringent to effectively deter 
the dissemination and use of child pornography. 
 
114. An important aspect of the jurisprudence on possession as an inchoate crime 
is the doctrine of constructive possession. Constructive possession extends 
the concept of possession beyond physical control to situations where an 
individual has the power and intention to control the contraband, even if it is 
not in their immediate physical possession. This doctrine is particularly 
relevant in cases where contraband is found in a location that is not directly 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 81 of 199 
 
under the physical control of the accused, but where the accused has access 
to and control over the area where the contraband is found. 
 
115. In U.S. v. Tucker reported in 150 F. Supp. 2d 1263 (D. Utah. 2001), the 
U.S. District Court, Utah, explained and elaborated on the doctrine of 
constructive possession. In the said case, the defendant therein used to 
routinely view child pornography, but he never used to keep it stored in his 
computer, and would often delete any such material and its traces from its 
computer after he was finished viewing them. When charged with the 
offence of possession of child pornographic material, he challenged the 
same, contending that since no material had been stored in his disk, he cannot 
be said to be in possession of any child pornography. The court held that 
wherever a person exercises some form or manner of immediate control over 
any particular material, both tangible or intangible, such material would be 
said to be in his constructive possession. It observed that the control of a 
person over such material can be ascertained by seeing whether he could 
manipulate, alter, modify or destroy such material or not, if the answer to 
any of the above is in an affirmative, such material would be deemed to be 
in his conscious or constructive possession. 
 
116. Similarly in U.S. v. Romm reported in 455 F. 3d. 990 (9th Cir., 2006), the 
defendant therein admitted to viewing images of child pornography on the 
Internet. He would save them to disk, view them for about 5 minutes, then 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 82 of 199 
 
delete them. The Court held that a person can be said to possess child 
pornography even without downloading or storing it, if he or she seeks it out 
and exercises dominion or control over it. It observed that this dominion or 
control may be evident by factors such as when viewing the images on the 
screen, did the person have the ability to print them, save them, forward them 
or delete them. If he did, then he can be said to have knowingly exercised 
custody or control over those images and thus, consequently in possession 
of the same. 
 
117. Thus, for establishing constructive possession both the power to control the 
material in question and the knowledge of exercise of such control are 
required. The doctrine of constructive possession, is a crucial development 
in the criminal jurisprudence, especially pertaining to inchoate crimes where 
possession is sought to be punished, as it ensures that no person can evade 
liability by simply distancing themselves from the physical possession of 
contraband while retaining the ability to control it. 
 
118. We are of the considered view, that wherever a person indulges in any 
activity such as viewing, distributing or displaying etc. pertaining to any 
child pornographic material without actually possessing or storing it in any 
device or in any form or manner, such act would still tantamount to 
‘possession’ in terms of Section 15 of the POCSO, if he exercised an 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 83 of 199 
 
invariable degree of control over such material, applying the aforesaid 
doctrine of constructive possession. 
 
119.  Say for instance, ‘A’ routinely watches child pornography over the internet, 
but never downloads or stores the same in his mobile. Here ‘A’ would still 
be said to be in possession of such material, as while watching he exercises 
a considerable degree of control over such material including but not limited 
to sharing, deleting, enlarging such material, changing the volume etc. 
Furthermore, since he himself on his own volition is viewing such material, 
he is said to have knowledge of having control over such material. 
 
120. Conversely, say ‘A’ is sent an unknown link by ‘B’, which upon clicking 
opened a child pornographic video on the phone of ‘A’. Here although ‘A’ 
at the time of opening the link had control over the said link, yet he cannot 
be said to have a knowledge of that control over such material as he at that 
relevant point of time was unaware as to what would open from the said link; 
thus ‘A’ cannot be said to be in possession. We say so, because, ‘A’ had no 
information as to what the link pertained to, in order to have knowledge of 
control over such material, a person requires reasonable information such as 
what is involved in the material in question, what is the purpose of such 
material, etc. Without such information no person can decide whether he 
wants to view it, or delete it or further forward it i.e., he cannot effectively 
exercise the control that he has, without a certain degree of knowledge. 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 84 of 199 
 
 
121. However, in the aforementioned illustration, if ‘A’ rather than closing the 
link in a reasonable time, continues to view such material he would be 
deemed to be in possession of such material. This is because, after a 
reasonable window of time, he would be said to have sufficient information 
about such material to have knowledge for the effective exercise of his 
control over such material. 
 
122. Thus, we are of the considered view that any form of intangible or 
constructive possession of any child pornographic material will also amount 
to “possession” under Section 15 of the POCSO in terms of the Doctrine of 
Constructive Possession. There is no requirement of a physical or tangible 
“storage” or “possession” of such material in Section 15 of the POCSO. We 
may clarify with a view to obviate any confusion that, where any child 
pornographic material is in the constructive possession of an accused, there 
the failure or omission to report the same would constitute the requisite 
actus-reus for the purposes of Section 15 sub-section (1) of POCSO.  
 
123. For instance, say, ‘A’ is sent an unknown link by ‘B’, which upon clicking 
opened a child pornographic video on the phone of ‘A’. Now if ‘A’ 
immediately closes the link, although once the link is closed ‘A’ is no longer 
in constructive possession of the child pornography, this by itself does not 
mean that ‘A’ has destroyed or deleted the said material by merely closing 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 85 of 199 
 
the link. ‘A’ will only be absolved of any liability if he after closing the link 
further reports the same to the specified authorities. Thus, when it comes to 
constructive possession of an accused, it is the failure or omission to report 
that constitutes the requisite actus-reus for the purposes of Section 15 sub-
section (1) of POCSO. 
 
124. At this juncture we may also address ourselves on another pertinent aspect 
for constituting an offence under Section 15 of the POCSO. The term 
‘storage’ and ‘possession’ that has been used in the said provision does not 
require that such ‘storage’ or ‘possession’ must continue to be there at the 
time of registration of an FIR or any criminal proceeding. The provision of 
Section 15 is not fixated any particularly time-frame. What is simpliciter 
required to constitute an offence under Section 15 of the POCSO is the 
establishment of ‘storage’ or ‘possession’ of any child pornographic material 
with the specified intention under sub-section(s) (1), (2) or (3), at any 
relevant point of time. Even, if the said ‘storage’ or ‘possession’ no longer 
exists at the time of registration of the FIR, nonetheless an offence can be 
made out under Section 15 if it is established that the person accused had 
‘stored’ or ‘possessed’ of any child pornographic material with the specified 
intention at any particular point of time even if it is anterior in time. We say 
so because, any other view aside from the above, in our opinion would lead 
to a chilling effect with drastic consequences, whereby the provisions of the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 86 of 199 
 
POCSO may be defeated by a devious person.  If for instance, a person 
immediately after storing and watching child pornography in his mobile 
phone deletes the same before an FIR could be registered, could it be said 
that the said person is not liable under Section 15, because at the time of 
registration of the FIR, such material no longer existed on the device of the 
person accused? The answer to the aforesaid, must be an emphatic “no”.  
Thus, we clarify that there is no requirement under Section 15 of the POCSO 
that ‘storage’ or ‘possession’ must continue to exist at the time of initiation 
of the criminal proceeding, and no such requirement can be read into the said 
provision. An offence can be made out under Section 15 if it is established 
that the person accused had ‘stored’ or ‘possessed’ of any child pornographic 
material with the specified intention at any particular point of time even if it 
was before such initiation or registration of criminal proceedings. 
 
c.  
Pornographic Material must prima facie appear to involve a Child. 
 
125. At this stage, we may explain one another crucial aspect concerning       
Section 15 of the POCSO, more particularly the criteria for determining 
whether the material in question involves or depicts a ‘child’, or in other 
words whether such material can be considered a ‘child pornography’ or not. 
The determination of whether the individual involved is a ‘child’ or not, in 
terms of the POCSO is a crucial foundational element for constituting 
various offences under the Act. 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 87 of 199 
 
126. Section 2(1)(d) of the POCSO stipulates that the term ‘child’ means and 
refers to any person who is below the age of eighteen years. Thus, under the 
POCSO more particularly Section 2(1)(d) an objective criterion has been 
prescribed by the legislature for determining whether a person is a ‘child’ or 
not for the purposes of any offence under the Act. The said criteria is based 
on the age of the individual in question, and involves ascertaining and 
establishing whether he or she is under eighteen years of age, if so, such 
person would be considered a ‘child’ for the purposes of any offence in 
respect of such child that is punishable under the POCSO.  
 
127. Earlier under the POCSO, there was no specific definition of ‘child 
pornography’. Thus, under the erstwhile Section 15 of the POCSO, there was 
only one criteria for ascertaining whether the material in question can be 
regarded as ‘child pornography’ or not, which was by establishing that the 
material depicts or involves a person who is under the age of eighteen years. 
 
128. It was only with the enactment of the aforesaid 2019 Amendment Act, 
whereby the term “child pornography” was specifically defined under the 
POCSO by way of insertion of Section 2(1)(da) in the Act. At the cost of 
repetition, Section 2(1)(da) of the POCSO is reproduced below: - 
“2. Definitions. –  
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  – 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 88 of 199 
 
(da) “child pornography” means any visual depiction of sexually 
explicit conduct involving a child which include photograph, video, 
digital or computer generated image indistinguishable from an actual 
child and image created, adapted, or modified, but appear to depict 
a child;” 
 
 
129. A plain reading of the above would indicate that the term “child 
pornography” means any visual depiction of a child involved in any sexually 
explicit conduct. It further explains that the expression ‘visual depiction’ 
means and includes the following: -  
i. 
A photograph or video, which may be either in actual or any 
electronic form. 
ii. 
An image generated digitally or by a computer which is 
indistinguishable from an actual child i.e., any self-generated image 
which appears to depict a lifelike child indistinguishable from an 
actual child, and will not include any artistic or cartoon based 
depiction. 
 
iii. 
Any other image (including any video-based imagery) that has been 
created, adapted or modified.  
 
 
The above list of material mentioned is inclusive in nature i.e., the 
different types, form and manner of visual depiction that has been 
enumerated therein is not exhaustive in any manner. In the last, the said 
provision, more particularly the words “but appear to depict a child” lays 
down the test or criteria for ascertaining, whether any of the above 
mentioned visual depiction is a ‘child pornography’ or not, by prescribing 
a prima facie subjective satisfaction that the material appears to depict a 
child.  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 89 of 199 
 
130. The use of the comma before the words “but appear to depict a child” is 
significant. The legislature has used the aforesaid comma both as a 
disjunctive and a conjunctive to the words preceding it. It has been used as 
a disjunctive to stress, that the subjective criteria that the material in question 
appears to depict a child is not inextricably linked or limited to just one 
category of visual depictions i.e., the last category being “image created, 
adapted, or modified”. At the same time, it has been used as a conjunctive 
in relation to all types of visual depictions that have been illustrated in the 
said provision, to clearly indicate, that this subjective criterion applies to the 
entire provision i.e., to all types of visual depictions mentioned therein or in 
other words to ‘child pornography’. 
 
131. Thus, any visual depiction of a sexually explicit act which any ordinary 
person of a prudent mind would reasonably believe to prima facie depict a 
child or appear to involve a child, would be deemed as ‘child pornography’ 
for the purposes of the POCSO. Therefore, for any offence under the POCSO 
that relates to child pornographic material, such as Section 15, the courts 
would only be required to form a prima facie subjective satisfaction that the 
material appears to depict a child from the perspective of any ordinary 
prudent person. Such satisfaction may be arrived at from any authoritative 
and definitive opinion such as through a forensic science laboratory (FSL) 
report of such material or from any expert opinion on the material in 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 90 of 199 
 
question, or by the assessment of such material by the courts themselves, 
depending on the peculiar facts and circumstances of each case.  
 
132. This aforesaid test or criteria of ‘subjective satisfaction’ is not a superfluous 
or imaginary creation of the legislature, but a well-founded test, that exists 
in various other countries. In this regard, reference may be made to the 
decision of the Court of Appeal of England & Wales in Regina v. Michael 
Land reported in [1997] EWCA Crim J1010-15 wherein the court was 
dealing with an offence of possession of indecent photographs of children 
for the purpose of distribution under Section 1(1)(c) of the Protection of 
Children Act 1978. There the question arose whether the individual in the 
aforesaid photographs was under sixteen years of age or not. The court 
observed that often there lies an inherent difficulty in making any positive 
identification of the person in question, so as to establish their age 
conclusively. It held that, thus in such situations, the question whether such 
person is a child or not would have to be ascertained as a matter of inference 
from the facts and the material in question, without any need for a formal 
proof of the same. The court further rejected the contention that in the 
absence of any paediatric or other expert evidence, no such inference can be 
drawn. It observed that such fact-based questions of age can be assessed by 
the judge or the jury as the case may be by use of their critical faculties and 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 91 of 199 
 
senses such as their eyes, supplemented with their own judgement and 
experience.  
 
133. In John Leadbetter v. Her Majesty’s Advocate reported in [2020] HCJAC 
51, the High Court of Justiciary, Scottland held that no expert witness is 
required for proof of age of any person depicted in an obscene material in 
question. It further held that, such proof of age may be established by any 
witness or a person who demonstrates a certain extent of skill or knowledge 
in determination of the age on the basis of a wide range of evidence that may 
be available. 
 
134. In United States v. Katz reported in 178 F.3rd 368 (5th Cir. 1999), it was 
held by the U.S. Court of Appeals, Fifth Circuit, Louisiana, that the threshold 
question whether the age of any person in a child pornography may be 
determined by a ‘lay’ jury without the assistance of expert testimony where 
there is no conflict of opinion as to the age. However, it observed that where 
the individual in question appears to have reached puberty, there expert 
testimony or opinion as to proof of age would be necessary.  
 
135. In Commonwealth v. Robert reported in (829 A.2d. 127), the Superior 
Court of Pennsylvania observed that proof of age, like proof of any material 
fact, can be accomplished by the use of either direct or circumstantial 
evidence, or both. It held that the proof necessary to satisfy the element of 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 92 of 199 
 
age in a dissemination or possession of child pornography case is not limited 
to expert opinion testimony. 
 
136. What is discernible from the aforesaid is that, although, in the few decisions 
referred to by us, there is a difference of opinion as to whether an expert’s 
testimony or determination is necessary or not for the proof of age of an 
individual depicted in any pornographic material, yet in all of the 
aforementioned decisions it has been consistently held that the criteria for 
such determination is only the subjective satisfaction. 
 
137. The test or criteria of ‘subjective satisfaction’ is in view of the practical 
difficulty that exists in conclusively establishing the age of an individual in 
any pornographic material through any objective means or criteria.  This is 
owed to the fact that often, it is next to impossible to establish the identity of 
the victim, then to trace the whereabouts of such person, and then objectively 
determine their age. If such a criterion is adopted, then most of the cases 
pertaining to the possession of any child pornographic material would fail at 
the threshold, due to want of any means or information for conclusively 
proving the age of the victim.  
 
138. The aforesaid aspect may be looked at from one another angle. Any mandate 
of an objective determination of the age by conclusive means, could possibly 
result in absurd consequences. For instance, say a pornographic material 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 93 of 199 
 
involves an under-teen child who by virtue of his built on the face of it 
appears to be a child, yet such material will not be considered child 
pornographic material in the eyes of law, unless an objective determination 
of the exact age of such child is carried out in a conclusive manner. In the 
absence of any such determination, the prosecution of possession of such 
material would have to fail, merely due to technicalities and the inflexible 
character of the criteria or test for determining the age.  
 
139. The aforesaid provision of Section 2(1)(da) of the POCSO holds significant 
importance, as the legislature whilst giving teeth to the existing provision of 
Section 15 of the Act, and making three distinct offences punishable under 
it through the 2019 Amendment Act, also consciously defined the term ‘child 
pornography’ under the POCSO through the very same amendment. It 
indicates the legislature’s intention of construing both these provisions 
together as a whole; neither Section 15 of the POCSO nor Section 2(1)(da) 
can be interpreted or invoked in isolation from the other.  
 
140. The legislature through Section 2(1)(da) of the POCSO, made a conscious 
departure from the already existing objective criterion of determination of 
age in terms of Section 2(1)(d) which is generally applicable to the POCSO, 
as it was alive to aforementioned inherent difficulty that is posed by such 
criteria. The legislature was well aware, that if the proof of age in offences 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 94 of 199 
 
pertaining to child pornography such as under Section 15 of the POCSO 
would also have to be assessed by the existing objective test, it would lead 
to a very chilling effect, whereby the entire Section 15 of the POCSO could 
be rendered unworkable merely on account of a hyper-technical approach as 
to determination of age, thereby defeating the very object of the POCSO.  
 
 
141. The aforesaid aspect may also be looked at from one more angle. Section 
2(1)(da) of the POCSO was inserted by the legislature with two-fold purpose 
in mind. While one of the purpose of Section 2(1)(da) of the POCSO, was to 
explicitly define and delineate what type of visual depictions would be 
considered ‘child pornography’ to remove any ambiguity that existed earlier, 
the real purpose behind insertion of the said provision was to mitigate the 
tendency of the courts to refer and apply the objective criteria of age 
determination prescribed under Section 2(1)(d) of the POCSO, even when 
dealing with matters involving child pornography. Which is why the 
legislature in addition to explaining the contour of visual depiction in Section 
2(1)(da) of the POCSO, also specifically added the words “but appear to 
depict a child” in the end.  
 
142. If the courts while dealing with any matter involving child pornography, 
continue to refer and rely on Section 2(1)(d) of the POCSO, then the same 
will frustrate the intention behind Section 2(1)(da) more particularly the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 95 of 199 
 
words “but appear to depict a child” in the statute book, thereby render that 
portion of the aforesaid provision otiose and nugatory.  
 
143. The true purport of Section 2(1)(da) of the POCSO, is to ensure that for 
offences pertaining to child pornography, it is Section 2(1)(da) that is given 
due regard and not Section 2(1)(d).  Thus, in any offence pertaining to child 
pornography the definition of ‘child’ in Section 2(1)(d) would pale in 
comparison to the definition of ‘child pornography’ under Section 2(1)(da) 
of the POCSO. As such, the court while dealing with an offence under 
Section 15 of the POCSO, must be mindful of the fact, that it is Section 
2(1)(da) of the POCSO, which has to be referred to and relied upon and not 
Section 2(1)(d). In other words, it is the definition of ‘child pornography’ 
which is of relevance while considering whether Section 15 of the POCSO  
can be invoked or not. 
 
d.  
Scope of Section 67B of the IT Act. 
 
144. The IT Act was originally enacted with the object of providing a legal 
framework for inter-alia recognizing electronic records & digital signatures, 
facilitating electronic commerce, and providing a legal sanctity to                    
e-contracts. While the IT Act did include certain provisions to penalize 
cybercrimes, they were rudimentary and did not comprehensively address 
issues like creation and facilitation of sexual abuse of children, the online 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 96 of 199 
 
publication, transmission and distribution of child pornography or the sexual 
inducement, enticement and exploitation of children over the internet.  
 
145. The aforesaid was due to the fact that, the IT Act prior to the Information 
Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 (for short, the ‘2008 Amendment 
Act’), criminalized only one act being the publication or transmission of 
obscene material, under Section 67. The IT Act made no distinction between 
the publication or transmission of an ‘obscene material’ from the publication 
or transmission of an obscene material involving any sexually explicit act or 
conduct i.e., pornographic material or for that matter child pornographic 
material. More glaringly, there was no difference in either publication or 
transmission of such material from the distribution, facilitation and 
consumption of such material over the internet. The IT Act also did not 
recognize other forms of sexual abuse and exploitation of children over the 
internet as a punishable offence such as enticement of children into any 
sexual act.  
 
146. Over a period of time, as the age of internet evolved, the inadequacies of the 
IT Act became apparent, primarily due to more and more children using the 
internet and a corresponding increase in number of cyber-crimes being 
committed against them. Thus, there was a need for a more robust legal 
framework particularly for the protection of vulnerable population like 
children over the internet.  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 97 of 199 
 
147. The 50th Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology on 
the ‘Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2007’ noted that although 
a new provision in the form of Section 67A had been proposed for 
specifically criminalizing publication or transmission of pornographic 
material with enhanced punishment, yet there was no specific provision 
pertaining to child pornography. The Standing Committee, rejected the 
response of the Department of Information Technology that the provision of 
Section 67A in general would also include child pornography, and instead 
recommended that a specific provision for child pornography be 
incorporated, in order to not just criminalize the publication and transmission 
of child pornography with an enhanced punishment but also to tackle and 
criminalize other related forms of child sexual abuse such as, online 
enticement of children into sexual acts, distribution of child pornography and 
the facilitation or creation of such material. The relevant recommendations 
read as under: - 
“6. The Information Technology Act, 2000 was enacted keeping in 
view technology directions and scenario as it existed at that point of 
time. As the technology has a habit of reinventing itself into cheaper 
and more cost-effective options, it becomes imperative to give a fresh 
look to any technology driven law from time to time. Moreover, due 
to overall increase in e-commerce, growth in outsourcing business, 
new forms of transactions, new means of identification, consumers 
concern, promotion of e-governance and other information 
technology applications, technology neutrality from its present 
‘technology specific’ form in consonance with development all over 
the world, security practices and procedures for protection of Critical 
Information infrastructure, emergence of new forms of computer 
misuse like child pornography, video voyeurism, identity theft and e-
commerce frauds like phishing and online theft, rationalization of 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 98 of 199 
 
punishment in respect of offences with reference to the Indian Penal 
code, a need was felt to review the Indian Information Technology 
Act, 2000” 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
(iii) Child Pornography 
118. Clause 31 proposes to insert Section 67 A whereby punishment 
has been provided for publishing or transmitting of material 
containing sexually explicit act in electronic form.  
 
119. In the above context, a non-official witness as well as the CBI 
have been of the view that the proposed Section should be recast to 
include ‘child pornography’ also and specific provisions should be 
incorporated in this Section to criminalize child pornography in tune 
with the laws prevailing in advanced democracies of the world as well 
as Article 9 of the Council of Europe Convention on Cyber Crimes 
which states as under: - 
 
“Each Party shall adopt such legislative and other 
measures as may be necessary to establish as criminal 
offences under its domestic law, when committed 
intentionally and without right, the following conduct: 
(a) producing child pornography for the purpose of its 
distribution through a computer system; (b) offering or 
making available child pornography through a computer 
system; 
(c) 
distributing 
or 
transmitting 
child 
pornography through a computer system; (d) procuring 
child pornography through a computer system for oneself 
or for another person; (e) possessing child pornography 
in a computer system or on a computer-data storage 
medium. 
 
2. For the purpose of paragraph 1 above, the term “child 
pornography” shall include pornographic material that 
visually depicts:  
(a) a minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct;  
(b) a person appearing to be a minor engaged in sexually 
explicit conduct;  
(c) realistic images representing a minor engaged in 
sexually explicit conduct. 
 
3. For the purpose of paragraph 2 above, the term 
“minor” shall include all persons under 18 years of age. 
A Party may, however, require a lower age-limit, which 
shall be not less than 16 years.  
 
4. Each Party may reserve the right not to apply, in whole 
or in part, paragraphs 1, sub-paragraphs d. and e, and 
2, sub-paragraphs b. and c 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 99 of 199 
 
 
120. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Department 
of Information Technology in incorporating an express provision on 
defining child pornography as suggested by the Expert Committee, it 
was replied that a new Section 67A related to punishment for 
publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit 
acts has been proposed as per which stringent provision has been 
made relating to pornography in general and would also 
automatically cover child pornography.  
121. On the issue of criminalising child pornography and making 
penal provision towards that, the Department stated that, the advice/ 
assistance in the Commission of Crime (Pornography) through 
offering advice on information regarding the websites for facilitating 
any possession or downloading illegal content might be considered 
an offence.  
 
122. The Department of Information Technology also agreed to a 
suggestion that the pre-offence grooming i.e. the initial actions taken 
by the offender to prepare the child for sexual relationships through 
online enticement and distributing or showing pornography to a child 
should also be made a criminal offence. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
Child Pornography  
24. The Committee note that Clause 31 of the Bill intends to insert a 
new Section 67A which provides for stringent punishment for 
publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit 
acts in electronic form. But the Committee are concerned to find that 
the term ‘child pornography’ has nowhere been mentioned in the 
proposed Section. The Department’s argument that the Section while 
covering ‘pornography’ will automatically cover child pornography 
does not convince the Committee as there should be no scope for 
assumption or presumption when fresh amendments are being 
proposed. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department to 
include the term ‘child pornography’ in the proposed Section 67A in 
view of its growing menace. They also desire that specific provisions 
should be incorporated in this Section to criminalise child 
pornography in tune with the laws prevailing in the advanced 
Countries and Article 9 of the Council of Europe Convention on 
Cyber Crimes. In view of the several manifestations of sexual abuse 
of the children and its loathsome ramifications, the Committee desire 
that the act of grooming the child for sexual relationship through 
online enticement or distributing/showing pornography or through 
any other online means should also be made a criminal offence and 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 100 of 199 
 
a suitable provision be made in this regard in the proposed Section 
67A.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
148. From the aforesaid, it can be seen that the Standing Committee whilst 
making its recommendation, underscored that no useful purpose would be 
served if the publication or transmission of any child pornography is 
punished all the same as any other pornographic material. It highlighted, that 
while the IT Act had originally been enacted keeping in mind the 
requirements that existed then, yet now with the march of the age of internet, 
it has become imperative to undertake a fresh approach to the provisions of 
the IT Act particularly those relating to cyber-crime in light of the new 
emerging forms of misuse of the internet. It opined that, merely 
criminalizing the publication or transmission of child pornography will not 
be sufficient, and that other various forms of online sexual abuse and 
exploitation also need to be recognized and adequately punished, on par with 
the laws prevailing in various other countries.  
 
 
149. It was in the aforesaid backdrop that the legislature by virtue of the 
Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 inter-alia amended 
Section 67 of the IT Act and introduced Section 67A along with Section 67B. 
This was for the first time, that a specific provision had been made, to 
recognize and protect the vulnerable and tender age of children by 
criminalizing various forms of online sexual degradation, abuse and 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 101 of 199 
 
exploitation with enhanced punishment. At the cost of repetition, Section 
67B of the IT Act is being reproduced below: - 
“67-B. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material 
depicting children in sexually explicit act, etc., in electronic 
form. — Whoever — 
(a) publishes or transmits or causes to be published or 
transmitted material in any electronic form which depicts 
children engaged in sexually explicit act or conduct; or 
 
(b) creates text or digital images, collects, seeks, browses, 
downloads, advertises, promotes, exchanges or distributes 
material in any electronic form depicting children in obscene or 
indecent or sexually explicit manner; or 
 
(c) cultivates, entices or induces children to online relationship 
with one or more children for and on sexually explicit act or in 
a manner that may offend a reasonable adult on the computer 
resources; or 
 
(d) facilitates abusing children online; or 
 
(e) records in any electronic form own abuse or that of others 
pertaining to sexually explicit act with children, 
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to five years and with a 
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of 
second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years and also 
with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees: 
 
Provided that provisions of Section 67, Section 67-A and this 
section does not extend to any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, 
drawing, painting, representation or figure in electronic form— 
 
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for 
the public good on the ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, 
writing, drawing, painting, representation or figure is in the 
interest of science, literature, art or learning or other objects of 
general concern; or 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 102 of 199 
 
(ii) which is kept or used for bona fide heritage or religious 
purposes. 
 
Explanation. — For the purpose of this section, “children” 
means a person who has not completed the age of 18 years.” 
 
150. A conjoint reading of Section(s) 67 and 67A viz-a-viz 67B would reveal that 
unlike the former which penalizes only the publication or transmission of 
any obscene material or pornographic material, the scope and ambit of 
Section 67B is much wider inasmuch as it recognizes and penalizes five 
different forms / categories of actus reus, being: - 
(i) 
Section 67B sub-section (a): - 
a. Section 67B sub-section (a) of the IT Act pertains to the dissemination 
of child pornography and penalizes the publication or transmission of 
any material involving a child in any sexually explicit act or conduct, 
and the direct or indirect involvement in aiding or facilitating the 
dissemination of such material.  
b. In order, to constitute an offence under this provision, there must be 
an actual publication or transmission of any child pornographic 
material, though the said publication or transmission may be done 
either by the accused himself or be caused through someone else at 
the instance or behest of the accused. In other, words Section 67B sub-
section (a) punishes any person who is involved in a process, in any 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 103 of 199 
 
manner that leads to the publication or transmission of any child 
pornographic material.  
c. Thus, twin-conditions as prescribed under Section 67B(a) of the IT 
Act, need to be satisfied in order to constitute an offence: - (I) the 
actual publication or transmission of any child pornographic material 
AND (II) the involvement of the accused in such publication or 
transmission process in any manner.  
 
(ii) 
Section 67B sub-section (b): - 
a. It penalizes the creation of any text or image-based content in any 
electronic form, that depict children in any obscene or indecent or 
sexually explicit manner. It further penalizes the collection, solicitation, 
browsing i.e., online viewing, or downloading of such material. Thus, 
even the mere viewing of any child pornographic material that is stored 
in a mobile phone would tantamount to ‘browsing’ of such material in 
electronic form. Lastly, it also penalizes the advertising, promotion, 
exchange or distribution of any such material. Here again, what is 
punishable is only the actual commission of any of the above-mentioned 
acts. 
b. The scope of Section 67B sub-section (b), is more expansive than the 
preceding sub-section because, (i) first, the term ‘material’ here 
includes any electronic content depicting children in sexually explicit 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 104 of 199 
 
acts as well as in obscene or indecent contexts, and (ii) secondly, the 
actus reus encompasses not just the act of disseminating but also the 
acts of creating, propagating, or engaging with or using such material.   
c. In other words, Section 67B sub-section (b) penalizes the actual 
commission of any of the following: - 
i. 
the act of producing or creating any text or digital image based 
electronic material (incl. videos) that depict children in any 
obscene, indecent or sexually explicit manner;  
ii. 
the act of engaging or using such material by way of collecting, 
browsing, accessing, downloading, saving, seeking, actively 
searching such material from any computer resource, and;  
iii. 
the act of facilitating or propagating the circulation or 
dissemination of such material by advertising, promoting, 
exchanging or sharing, distributing or offering for sale such 
material from any computer resource on the internet. 
 
(iii) 
Section 67B sub-section (c): - 
a. Section 67B sub-section (c) of the IT Act penalizes the act of any person 
to induce or entice a child to participate or indulge in any sexually 
explicit act or any other act that would offend any adult of reasonable 
mind, using any computer resource.  
b. In order to constitute an offence under the said provision, what is 
required is only the actual commission of an act of inducement or 
enticement in any manner by the accused alone, and there is no 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 105 of 199 
 
requirement that such enticement or inducement must have resulted in 
the child indulging in any sexually explicit or any other offensive act.  
c. Thus, even where the accused merely attempts to entice a child to 
indulge in any such act, through a computer resource, he would be liable 
under this provision, irrespective of whether the child also indulges in 
such act or not. Furthermore, such enticement or inducement may be 
for having the child either indulge in any sexually or offensive act with 
the accused himself or with any other person at the instance or 
persuasion of the accused.  
d. In other words, what is penalized under Section 67B sub-section (c) is 
the act of enticing or inducing a child to indulge in any sexually explicit 
offensive act or behaviour.  
 
(iv) 
Section 67B sub-section (d): - 
a. Section 67B sub-section (d) penalizes any form or manner of facilitation 
of abuse of children, online i.e., it penalizes any form of degradation, 
exploitation, or abuse of children on any online platform. The actus reus 
punishable under the said provision is the doing, aiding or abetting of 
any act, either directly or indirectly that would facilitate or enable the 
abuse of children online in any indecent, lascivious or prurient manner.  
b. It is pertinent to note, that under Section 67B sub-section (d) there is no 
requirement that the act in question must have been done only with an 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 106 of 199 
 
intention to facilitate the abuse of children online. What is rather 
required to constitute an offence under the said provision is that the act 
must be such which likely would facilitate the abuse of children online.  
c. In other words, what is penalized is any act that has the propensity or 
likelihood to aid, enable or support the online abuse of children in any 
obscene, indecent, or lewd fashion.  
 
(v) 
Section 67B sub-section (e): - 
a. Section 67B sub-section (e) of the IT Act penalizes the act of recording 
through video or any other electronic means, the participation of any 
sexually explicit act with or in the presence of any child. The actus reus 
required is the use of any video or any other electronic means to record 
any sexually explicit act being done either by the accused himself or by 
anyone else in the presence of a child.   
b. It must be borne in mind, that the sexually explicit act itself need not be 
done in the actual presence of the child, rather what is required is that 
the child was made privy to such sexually explicit act, and the same was 
recorded by the accused in any electronic form. Say for instance, that in 
the presence of a child, a pornographic video is played, and the same is 
then recorded by the accused. Here since, the recording includes a child 
being subjected to a sexually explicit act in the form a pornographic 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 107 of 199 
 
video, an offence would be constituted under the said provision, even 
though no such act was done in the actual presence of the child.  
c. In other words, what is penalized under Section 67B sub-section (e) is 
the act of exposing or subjecting a child to any sexually explicit act by 
anyone, and recording the same in any electronic form. 
 
151. From the aforesaid, it is clear that Section 67B of the IT Act is a 
comprehensive provision designed to address and penalize the various 
electronic forms of exploitation and abuse of children online. It not only 
punishes the electronic dissemination of child pornographic material, but 
also the creation, possession, propagation and consumption of such material 
as-well as the different types of direct and indirect acts of online sexual 
denigration and exploitation of the vulnerable age of children.  
 
152. This Court in Sharat Babu Digumarti v. Govt. of NCT of Delhi reported in 
(2017) 2 SCC 18 held that Chapter XI of the IT Act, more particularly 
Section(s) 67 through 67B are a complete code in itself when it comes to 
offences relating to electronic forms of obscene and pornographic material. 
The relevant observations read as under: - 
“31. Having noted the provisions, it has to be recapitulated that 
Section 67 clearly stipulates punishment for publishing, 
transmitting obscene materials in electronic form. The said 
provision read with Sections 67-A and 67-B is a complete code 
relating to the offences that are covered under the IT Act. [...]” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 108 of 199 
 
153. Thus, Section(s) 67, 67A and 67B of the IT Act being a complete code, ought 
to be interpreted in a purposive manner that suppresses the mischief and 
advances the remedy and ensures that the legislative intent of penalizing the 
various forms of cyber-offences relating to children and the use of obscene / 
pornographic material through electronic means is not defeated by a narrow 
construction of these provisions.  
 
iii. 
The Presumption of Culpable Mental State under Section 30 of the 
POCSO.  
 
154. As discussed earlier, the POCSO is a special legislation that was specifically 
enacted to punish aggravated forms of offences related to sexual abuse and 
exploitation of children as well as including the well-being of the children. 
Its nuanced provisions have been deliberately designed to provide stringent 
measures in order to secure the dignity protection and interest of children. It 
was in this backdrop, that the legislature in its wisdom specifically provided 
for certain statutory presumptions as regards commission of certain specified 
offences as-well as presumption of the existence of a culpable mental state 
on the part of the person accused so as to ensure that the legislation is 
effective in addressing the increasing number of child sexual abuse cases. 
 
155. The provisions pertaining to statutory presumptions under the POCSO are 
contained in Section(s) 29 and 30 which provide for presumption as to 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 109 of 199 
 
certain offences and presumption of culpable mental state respectively. In 
the case at hand we are concerned with Section 30 of the POCSO which at 
the cost of repetition is being reproduced hereunder: - 
“30. Presumption of culpable mental state. –   
(1) In any prosecution for any offence under this Act which requires 
a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the Special Court 
shall presume the existence of such mental state but it shall be a 
defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental 
state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution. 
 
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved only 
when the Special Court believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt 
and not merely when its existence is established by a preponderance 
of probability.  
 
Explanation. – In this section, “culpable mental state” includes 
intention, motive, knowledge of a fact and the belief in, or reason to 
believe, a fact.” 
 
 
156. Section 30, sub-section (1) provides that where any offence under the 
POCSO requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the 
Special Court shall presume the existence of such mental state. It further 
provides that the accused may as a defence prove that he had no such mental 
state with respect to any act being sought to be punished under the Act. Thus, 
Section 30(1), makes it clear that the presumption of culpable mental state 
applies to any offence under the said Act that requires such mental state, and 
the use of the word “shall” makes it mandatory for the Special Court to 
presume the existence of such mental state. However, the said provision also 
clarifies that, although the said presumption is mandatory yet it is rebuttable 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 110 of 199 
 
inasmuch as the person accused is permitted to prove any fact to establish 
the contrary i.e., to show that no such mental state existed on his part. Section 
30 sub-section (2) further explains the manner and the circumstances under 
which the said presumption can be rebutted, insofar as it stipulates that in 
order to prove any fact to show that no such mental state existed, the person 
accused has to prove the same beyond a reasonable doubt and not on a mere 
preponderance of probability. Thus, the standard prescribed for rebutting the 
said statutory presumption of culpable mental state is beyond a reasonable 
doubt. Lastly, the Explanation appended to the said provision provides that 
‘culpable mental state’ shall include intention, motive, knowledge of a fact 
and the belief in, or the reason to believe a fact.  
 
a.  
Concept of Statutory Presumption and Principle of Foundational 
 
Facts. 
 
157. In Attorney General (supra) this Court while considering the aforesaid 
Section(s) 29 and 30 of the POCSO observed that the same had been 
specifically incorporated by the legislature in view of the serious nature of 
the offences punishable under the POCSO and the object behind the 
enactment of the said legislation. Furthermore, this Court in view of the 
importance of the aforesaid provisions, held that any offence under the Act 
pertaining to sexual, assault, harassment etc., ought to be construed viz-a-viz 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 111 of 199 
 
the other provision (sic Section(s) 29 and 30) of the POCSO. The relevant 
observations read as under: - 
“36. It may also be pertinent to note that having regard to the 
seriousness of the offences under the POCSO Act, the 
Legislature has incorporated certain statutory presumptions. 
Section 29 permits the Special Court to presume, when a person 
is prosecuted for committing or abetting or attempting to commit 
any offence under Section 3, 5, 7 and Section 9 of the Act, that 
such person has committed or abetted or attempted to commit 
the offence, as the case may be, unless the contrary is proved. 
Similarly, Section 30 thereof permits the Special Court to 
presume for any offence under the Act which requires a culpable 
mental state on the part of the accused, the existence of such 
mental state. Of course, the accused can take a defence and 
prove the fact that he had no such mental state with respect to 
the act charged as an offence in that prosecution. It may further 
be noted that though as per sub section (2) of Section 30, for the 
purposes of the said section, a fact is said to be proved only when 
the Special Court believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt 
and not merely when its existence is established by a 
preponderance of probability, the Explanation to Section 30 
clarifies that “culpable mental state” includes intention, motive, 
knowledge of a fact and the belief in, or reason to believe, a fact. 
Thus, on the conjoint reading of Section 7, 11, 29 and 30, there 
remains no shadow of doubt that though as per the Explanation 
to Section 11, “sexual intent” would be a question of fact, the 
Special Court, when it believes the existence of a fact beyond 
reasonable doubt, can raise a presumption under Section 30 as 
regards the existence of “culpable mental state” on the part of 
the accused. 
 
37. This takes the Court to the next argument of Mr. Luthra that 
there being an ambiguity, due to lack of definition of the 
expressions - “sexual intent”, “any other act”, “touching” and 
“physical contact”, used in Section 7, coupled with the 
presumptions under Sections 29 and 30 of the Act, the reverse 
burden of proof on the accused would make it difficult for him to 
prove his innocence and, therefore, the POCSO Act must be 
strictly interpreted. In the opinion of the Court, there cannot be 
any disagreement with the said submission of Mr. Luthra. In fact 
it has been laid down by this Court in catena of decisions that 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 112 of 199 
 
the Penal Statute enacting an offence or imposing a penalty has 
to be strictly construed. A beneficial reference of the decisions 
in the case of Sakshi v. Union of India reported in (2004) 5 SCC 
518, in the case of R. Kalyani v. Janak C. Mehta reported in 
(2009) 1 SCC 516 and in the case of State of Punjab v. Gurmeet 
Singh, (2014) 9 SCC 632 be made in this regard. However, it is 
equally settled legal position that the clauses of a statute should 
be construed with reference to the context vis-a-vis the other 
provisions so as to make a consistent enactment of the whole 
Statute relating to the subject matter. The Court can not be 
oblivious to the fact that the impact of traumatic sexual assault 
committed on children of tender age could endure during their 
whole life, and may also have an adverse effect on their mental 
state. The suffering of the victims in certain cases may be 
immeasurable. Therefore, considering the objects of the POCSO 
Act, its provisions, more particularly pertaining to the sexual 
assault, sexual harassment etc. have to be construed vis-a-vis the 
other provisions, so as to make the objects of the Act more 
meaningful and effective.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
158. The statutory presumption of culpable mental state is neither a concept 
which is alien to the law nor is it something which is exclusive to the POCSO 
alone. In fact, there are several legislations which also contain similar 
provisions relating to the statutory presumption of culpable mental state, 
such as Section 35 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 
1985 (for short, the “NDPS Act”), Section 138A of the Customs Act, 1962 
(for short, the “Customs Act”), Section 278E of the Income Tax Act, 1961 
(for short, the “Act, 1961”) to name a few. Since all of the aforesaid 
provisions are pari materia with Section 30 of the POCSO, it would be 
apposite to refer to the various decisions of this Court interpreting these 
analogous provisions.  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 113 of 199 
 
159. In Bhanabhai Khalpabhai v. Collector of Customs reported in 1994 Supp. 
(2) SCC 143, this Court whilst examining the scope of Section 138A of the 
Customs Act which relates to presumption of culpable mental state observed 
that the said statutory presumption had been incorporated by the legislature 
in view of the difficulty that the prosecution often faces in proving every link 
in respect of commission of certain offences by way of direct evidence. It 
further observed that such statutory presumption is an exception to the 
general criminal jurisprudence that the onus never shifts on the accused and 
he has only to raise a doubt in the mind of the court, in respect of the 
correctness of the prosecution version. The relevant observation reads as 
under: - 
 
“9. In the facts and circumstances of the case, it can also be held 
that the appellant was concerned with the specified goods in 
connection with ‘fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion’ of 
duty chargeable on the specified goods. It is well known, that it 
is very difficult for the prosecution, to prove every link, in respect 
of the commission of the offence under the Act by direct evidence. 
The whole process of smuggling, for evading payment of custom 
duty consists of different links. The links aid and abate each 
other, sometimes through a remote control. That is why, 
Parliament has introduced Section 138-A in the Act. [...] The 
provision relates only to burden and nature of proof at the trial, 
as such it was applicable in the present case. In view of the 
aforesaid section, a presumption has to be drawn, in respect of 
existence of the alleged mental state. An option has been given 
to the accused to prove by way of defence the fact, that he did 
not have any such mental state with respect to the act charged 
which is an offence. It can be said that the provision aforesaid is 
an exception to the general criminal jurisprudence that onus 
never shifts on the accused and he has only to raise a doubt in 
the mind of the court, in respect of the correctness of the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 114 of 199 
 
prosecution version. It is different from Sections 106 and 114 of 
the Evidence Act. In view of Section 138-A, once a presumption 
is raised about a culpable mental state on the part of the 
accused, that he had stored the silver ingots, to export them 
outside the country evading payment of custom duties, the 
accused has to prove as a defence that no such mental state with 
respect to the act charged, did exist. [...]” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
160. In another decision of this Court in Devchand Kalyan Tandel v. State of 
Gujarat reported in (1996) 6 SCC 255, it was reiterated that the statutory 
presumption engrafted in Section 138A of the Customs Act was out of 
necessity in view of the growing number of cases pertaining to evasion of 
duty or prohibitions or other alike economic offences and the inherent 
difficulty of the prosecution in establishing ingredients of such offences. It 
held that, once the recovery of prohibited goods from the accused person has 
been duly established by the prosecution, the statutory presumption would 
arise. It further held, that the question in such cases would be whether in the 
proved facts and circumstances, could the recourse of the statutory 
presumption be taken. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“10. [...] It is no doubt true that in a charge for violation of the 
provisions of Section 135(1)(a) it is required for the prosecution 
to establish that the accused have fraudulently evaded or 
attempted to evade any duty chargeable on the goods or have 
violated the prohibition imposed under the Act in respect of the 
goods. But if the prosecution establishes the aforesaid facts then 
there is no necessity of attracting the statutory presumption 
under Section 138-A and without such presumption an accused 
can be convicted under Section 135(1)(a). But the legislature 
having found it difficult to establish the necessary ingredients of 
such evasion of duty or prohibitions and the economic offences 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 115 of 199 
 
having grown in proportion beyond the control, came forward 
with the presumption available under Section 138-A of the Act. 
The main object of Section 138 A is to raise a presumption as to 
the culpable mental state on the part of the accused when he is 
prosecuted in a court of law. In other words, if a recovery is 
made from the accused of any prohibited goods within the 
notified area then the statutory presumption would arise that he 
was knowingly concerned in the fraudulent evasion or attempted 
evasion of any duty chargeable on the goods in question. In the 
case of Bhanabhai Khalpabhai v. Collector of Customs [1994 
Supp (2) SCC 143 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 882] this Court has held 
that in view of Section 138-A a presumption has to be drawn in 
respect of the existence of the alleged mental state. An option has 
been given to the accused to prove by way of defence the fact, 
that he did not have any such mental state with respect to the act 
charged which is an offence. The question, therefore, arises as 
to whether in the proved facts and circumstances the courts 
below were justified in taking recourse to the statutory 
presumption under Section 138-A of the Act. [...] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
161. In State of Punjab v. Baldev Singh reported in (1999) 6 SCC 172 a 
Constitution Bench of this Court held that a presumption is an inference of 
fact drawn from the facts which are known as proved and as such the 
statutory presumption under Section 54 of NPDS Act that an accused has 
committed an offence under the Act will only get attracted once the 
prosecution has established that the accused was found to be in possession 
of the contraband in a search conducted in accordance with the procedure 
laid down in the Act. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“54. Thus, even if it be assumed for the sake of argument that all 
the material seized during an illegal search may be admissible 
as relevant evidence in other proceedings, the illicit drug or 
psychotropic substance seized in an illegal search cannot by 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 116 of 199 
 
itself be used as proof of unlawful conscious possession of the 
contraband by the accused. An illegal search cannot also entitle 
the prosecution to raise a presumption under Section 54 of the 
Act because presumption is an inference of fact drawn from the 
facts which are known as proved. A presumption under Section 
54 of the Act can only be raised after the prosecution has 
established that the accused was found to be in possession of the 
contraband in a search conducted in accordance with the 
mandate of Section 50.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
162. In Seema Silk Sarees v. Directorate of Enforcement reported in (2008) 5 
SCC 580, although the provision involved therein is not pari materia with 
Section 30 of the POCSO, yet the observations made by this Court are 
relevant to the issue involved in the case at hand. Therein this Court whilst 
upholding the constitutional validity of Section 18 of the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act, 1973 which inter-alia provided for a statutory presumption 
of contravening the provisions of the said Act, held that such a statutory 
presumption would stand attracted once certain foundational facts are 
established by the prosecution. The relevant observation read as under: - 
“19. A legal provision does not become unconstitutional only 
because it provides for a reverse burden. The question as 
regards burden of proof is procedural in nature. [...] 
 
20. The presumption raised against the trader is a rebuttable 
one. Reverse burden as also statutory presumptions can be 
raised in several statutes as, for example, the Negotiable 
Instruments Act, Prevention of Corruption Act, TADA, etc. 
Presumption is raised only when certain foundational facts are 
established by the prosecution. The accused in such an event 
would be entitled to show that he has not violated the provisions 
of the Act. [...] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 117 of 199 
 
163. Similarly in Noor Aga v. State of Punjab & Anr. reported in (2008) 16 SCC 
417, the constitutional validity of Section 35 of the NDPS Act was 
challenged which as aforestated provided for the presumption of culpable 
mental state. This Court speaking through Justice S.B. Sinha (as he then was) 
whilst upholding the validity of the aforesaid provision observed that 
although the presumption of innocence being a human right cannot be 
thrown aside, yet the same would still be subject to exceptions. The court 
held that where a statute raises a presumption with regard to the culpable 
mental state on the part of the accused and also places the burden of proof 
on the accused to prove the contrary, the said presumption would be 
constitutionally valid and can be raised provided that the foundational facts 
pertaining to the establishing the actus reus of the requisite offence has been 
proved. It further held that despite such statutory presumption, the initial 
burden would always lie upon the prosecution to prove certain foundational 
facts clearly establishing the actus reus in respect of the offence that is 
sought to be punished. It is only after the prosecution has proved the 
foundational facts, that the statutory presumption gets attracted, whereafter 
the burden would shift onto the accused to prove otherwise. In the last it also 
held that the extent of burden to prove the foundational facts pertaining to 
the actus reus by the prosecution would depend upon the seriousness of the 
offence. The relevant observations read as under: - 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 118 of 199 
 
“35. A right to be presumed innocent, subject to the 
establishment of certain foundational facts and burden of 
proof, to a certain extent, can be placed on an accused. It must 
be construed having regard to the other international 
conventions and having regard to the fact that it has been held 
to be constitutional. Thus, a statute may be constitutional but 
a prosecution thereunder may not be held to be one. 
Indisputably, civil liberties and rights of citizens must be 
upheld. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
51. The Act specifically provides for the exceptions. It is a trite 
law that presumption of innocence being a human right cannot 
be thrown aside, but it has to be applied subject to exceptions. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
56. The provisions of the Act and the punishment prescribed 
therein being indisputably stringent flowing from elements 
such as a heightened standard for bail, absence of any 
provision for remissions, specific provisions for grant of 
minimum sentence, enabling provisions granting power to the 
court to impose fine of more than maximum punishment of Rs 
2,00,000 as also the presumption of guilt emerging from 
possession of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, the 
extent of burden to prove the foundational facts on the 
prosecution i.e. “proof beyond all reasonable doubt” would be 
more onerous. A heightened scrutiny test would be necessary 
to be invoked. It is so because whereas, on the one hand, the 
court must strive towards giving effect to the parliamentary 
object and intent in the light of the international conventions, 
but, on the other, it is also necessary to uphold the individual 
human rights and dignity as provided for under the UN 
Declaration of Human Rights by insisting upon scrupulous 
compliance with the provisions of the Act for the purpose of 
upholding the democratic values. It is necessary for giving 
effect to the concept of “wider civilisation”. The court must 
always remind itself that it is a well-settled principle of 
criminal jurisprudence that more serious the offence, the 
stricter is the degree of proof. A higher degree of assurance, 
thus, would be necessary to convict an accused. [...] 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 119 of 199 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
58. Sections 35 and 54 of the Act, no doubt, raise presumptions 
with regard to the culpable mental state on the part of the 
accused as also place the burden of proof in this behalf on the 
accused; but a bare perusal of the said provision would clearly 
show that presumption would operate in the trial of the accused 
only in the event the circumstances contained therein are fully 
satisfied. An initial burden exists upon the prosecution and 
only when it stands satisfied, would the legal burden shift. Even 
then, the standard of proof required for the accused to prove 
his innocence is not as high as that of the prosecution. Whereas 
the standard of proof required to prove the guilt of the accused 
on the prosecution is “beyond all reasonable doubt” but it is 
“preponderance of probability” on the accused. If the 
prosecution fails to prove the foundational facts so as to attract 
the rigours of Section 35 of the Act, the actus reus which is 
possession of contraband by the accused cannot be said to have 
been established. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
 
164. In Bhola Singh v. State of Punjab reported in (2011) 11 SCC 653 this Court 
while placing reliance on the decision in Noor Aga (supra) reiterated that the 
statutory presumption envisaged in Section 35 of the NDPS Act will only 
come into play after the prosecution had discharged its initial burden to prove 
certain foundational facts. It observed that the applicability of such statutory 
presumption is dependent upon the facts as spelt out by the prosecution, after 
which the burden would shift onto the accused to establish otherwise. It held 
that in the absence of any foundational facts pertaining to the alleged 
offence, no presumption can be drawn. The relevant observations read as 
under: - 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 120 of 199 
 
“10. While dealing with the question of possession in terms of 
Section 54 of the Act and the presumption raised under Section 
35, this Court in Noor Aga v. State of Punjab while upholding 
the constitutional validity of Section 35 observed that as this 
section imposed a heavy reverse burden on an accused, the 
condition for the applicability of this and other related sections 
would have to be spelt out on facts and it was only after the 
prosecution had discharged the initial burden to prove the 
foundational facts that Section 35 would come into play. 
 
11. Applying the facts of the present case to the cited one, it is 
apparent that the initial burden to prove that the appellant had 
the knowledge that the vehicle he owned was being used for 
transporting narcotics still lay on the prosecution, as would be 
clear from the word “knowingly”, and it was only after the 
evidence proved beyond reasonable doubt that he had the 
knowledge would the presumption under Section 35 arise. 
Section 35 also presupposes that the culpable mental state of an 
accused has to be proved as a fact beyond reasonable doubt and 
not merely when its existence is established by a preponderance 
of probabilities. We are of the opinion that in the absence of any 
evidence with regard to the mental state of the appellant no 
presumption under Section 35 can be drawn. [...]” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
 
165. In Baldev Singh v. State of Haryana reported in (2015) 7 SCC 554 this 
Court held that the presumption of culpable mental state contained in Section 
35 of the NDPS Act would come into play once the possession of the 
contraband in question by the accused has been established by the 
prosecution, whereafter, the onus would be on the accused to rebut the said 
presumption. It further held, that such presumption may be rebutted by the 
accused by either raising doubts in the prosecution’s case and the material 
relied upon it for establishing the possession or that it may adduce any other 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 121 of 199 
 
evidence to rebut the same. In the last, it also held that where the prosecution 
is unable to establish the possession or where the court has doubts over the 
prosecution’s case, the said presumption would automatically be discharged. 
The relevant observations read as under: - 
 
“12. [...] Once the physical possession of the contraband by the 
accused has been proved, Section 35 of the NDPS Act comes into 
play and the burden shifts on the appellant-accused to prove that 
he was not in conscious possession of the contraband. [...]The 
Explanation to sub-section (1) of Section 35 expanding the 
meaning of “culpable mental state” provides that “culpable 
mental state” includes intention, knowledge of a fact and 
believing or reason to believe a fact. Sub-section (2) of Section 
35 provides that for the purpose of Section 35, a fact is said to 
be proved only when the court believes it to exist beyond a 
reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence is 
established by a preponderance of the probability. Once the 
possession of the contraband by the accused has been 
established, it is for the accused to discharge the onus of proof 
that he was not in conscious possession. Burden of proof cast on 
the accused under Section 35 of the NDPS Act can be discharged 
through different modes. One of such modes is that the accused 
can rely on the materials available in the prosecution case 
raising doubts about the prosecution case. The accused may also 
adduce other evidence when he is called upon to enter on his 
defence. If the circumstances appearing in the prosecution case 
give reasonable assurance to the court that the accused could 
not have had the knowledge of the required intention, the burden 
cast on him under Section 35 of the NDPS Act would stand 
discharged even if the accused had not adduced any other 
evidence of his own when he is called upon to enter on his 
defence.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
166. What can be discerned from the above is that the idea behind providing for 
a statutory presumption of culpable mental state is in view of the exigency 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 122 of 199 
 
posed by the difficulty that often exists in establishing certain types of 
offences such as inchoate offences due to its clandestine nature. Such 
presumptions are in essence an exception to the cardinal principle of criminal 
jurisprudence that the act does not make a person guilty unless the mind is 
also guilty.  
 
167. Traditionally, it is the prosecution who bears the burden of proving every 
element in a particular offence, including the accused's mental state, beyond 
a reasonable doubt. In order to establish the commission of any offence, the 
prosecution must stand on its own legs i.e., the onus lies on the prosecution 
to prove beyond reasonable doubt not just the wrongful act but also the 
wrongful intention of the person in doing such an act. However, in certain 
offences particularly economic offences or inchoate offences like possession 
of child pornography where apart from the actus reus there exists no other 
material to depict or demonstrate the mens rea, it is too difficult for the 
prosecution to look into the mind of the accused to cull out with certainty 
what his intention was or could have been for doing a particular act let alone 
cogently establish the same beyond a reasonable doubt. Due to the elusive 
and concealed nature of such offences there is often little to no direct 
evidence available to establish what was in fact in the mind of the accused 
at the time when the particular act in question occurred or that the said act 
was done only with a particular intention.  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 123 of 199 
 
 
168. It is in such scenarios, the legislature consciously provides for a statutory 
presumption of a culpable mental state to overcome the aforesaid hurdles 
and assist the prosecution to prove its case. This presumption of a culpable 
mental state is neither a conclusive proof of guilt for any particular offence 
nor does it completely replace or absolve the prosecution of its burden of 
proof and should not be understood as such, but rather it is a potent tool to 
assist the prosecution in discharging its initial burden and establishing its 
case. It seeks to bridge the evidentiary gap that exists between the actus reus 
and the mens rea in complex clandestine offences which otherwise cannot 
be proved through conventional means.  
 
169. One good reason for providing such statutory presumptions in different 
legislations is owed to the fact that at times having regard to the peculiar case 
the prosecution may find it extremely difficult to know the mind of the 
accused so as to establish his intention and mental state. In contrast, the 
accused may not have to face the same degree of difficulty because he is 
fully aware of his mental state and can explain his intentions on the basis of 
his conduct or actions. 
 
170. However, since the courts were in seisin of the harshness of such 
presumptions and the inherent danger they pose –  particularly in blurring 
the line between the presumption of a culpable mental state and the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 124 of 199 
 
presumption of the guilt itself and thereby undoing or compromising the 
fairness of such criminal proceeding, this Court for the first time in Baldev 
Singh (supra) sowed the seeds for a test to ascertain as to when such 
presumption can be safely attracted which was later more fully evolved in 
Noor Aga (supra) wherein a brightline test was laid down in the form of the 
‘Rule or Principle of Foundational Facts’.  
 
171. This ‘Rule or Principle of Foundational Facts’ simpliciter lays down that 
before the statutory presumption of culpable mental state could be validly 
invoked, the prosecution must first establish certain foundational facts. 
These foundational facts typically involve or correspond to proving those 
facts or elements that cogently establish the actus reus required for the 
offence alleged by the prosecution. It is only after such foundational facts 
have been proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the prosecution may take 
recourse of the statutory presumption provided by the legislature. The 
rationale behind the same is two-fold. First, in the absence of any actus reus 
there is no possible way to ascertain the corresponding mens rea that is 
required to be established. This is because it is the actus reus which 
demarcates or delineates the mens rea which is to be looked for and 
established. Without an actus reus of any form there arises no question of 
establishing and consequently presuming the mens rea, in view of the 
fundamental principle of criminal jurisprudence, that no one should be 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 125 of 199 
 
punished for their thoughts or intention alone unless accompanied by some 
form of act. Secondly, and more importantly it ensures that the statutory 
presumption does not overreach or take the place of proof of guilt under the 
guise of ‘presumption of culpable mental state’.  
 
172. It would be too much to shift the entire onus onto the accused and to then 
ask him to prove a negative fact. Thus, any statutory presumption would 
operate only after the prosecution first lays the foundational facts necessary 
for the offences that have been alleged beyond a reasonable doubt. This is 
because a negative cannot be proved in the initial threshold, in order to prove 
a contrary fact, the fact whose opposite is sought to be established must be 
proposed first. Thus, in law it is trite that the initial burden always lies on the 
prosecution. This why, the establishment of foundational facts by the 
prosecution is a prerequisite for triggering the statutory presumption for 
shifting the onus on the accused to prove the contrary. It is a delicate balance 
struck between the practical need for such presumption in law and the 
cardinal principles of criminal jurisprudence to ensure that the presumption 
does not cross or transgress the fine line that demarcates presumption of 
‘culpable mental state’ from the ‘presumption of guilt’ itself. 
 
173. Since a negative cannot be proved, an accused cannot be asked to disprove 
his guilt even before the foundational allegations with supporting material 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 126 of 199 
 
thereof are placed and duly established by the prosecution before the court. 
Unless the prosecution is able to prove foundational facts in the context of 
the allegations made against the accused under any specific provision of the 
POCSO as the case may be, the statutory presumption of culpable mental 
state under Section 30 of the POCSO will not come into the picture. 
 
174. Even if the prosecution establishes such foundational facts and the 
presumption is raised against the accused, he can rebut the same either by 
discrediting prosecution’s case as improbable or absurd or the accused could 
lead evidence to prove his defence, in order to rebut the presumption, 
however the said presumption under Section 30 of the POCSO will be said 
to have been rebutted only where the accused by way of his defence 
establishes a fact contrary to the presumption and proves the same beyond a 
reasonable doubt. 
 
b.  
Foundational Facts required under Section 15 of the POCSO. 
 
175. Now coming to Section 15 of the POCSO, as discussed earlier, the 
foundational facts ordinarily pertain to the actus reus required under a 
particular offence. However, given the fact that Section 15 penalizes three 
distinct and varying degrees of intention and having regard to the mutually 
exclusive nature of each of the three offences provided thereunder, the mere 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 127 of 199 
 
storage or possession of a child pornographic material cannot become the 
foundational facts or basis for attracting all three of the said offences all the 
same. 
 
176. As discussed by us in the foregoing parts of this judgment, while on a plain 
reading Section 15 sub-section(s) (1), (2) and (3) it might appear that all 
require the same actus reus i.e., the storage or possession of the child 
pornographic material, however, such an interpretation is flawed as a closer 
examination of each of the sub-section would reveal that there exists a very 
fine but pertinent distinction in the actus reus which is required to constitute 
an offence under Section 15 sub-section(s) (1), (2) or (3) of the POCSO. 
 
177. Thus, for the purpose of Section 15 sub-section (1), the necessary 
foundational facts which the prosecution would first have to establish before 
it can be allowed to validly raise the statutory presumption of culpable 
mental state would simpliciter be the storage or possession of any child 
pornographic material and that the person accused had failed to delete, 
destroy or report the same. Once, the aforesaid is clearly established by the 
prosecution, a presumption would be raised in terms of Section 30 of the 
POCSO that the person accused had the knowledge of the child pornographic 
material that was found to be stored or possessed by him and that he had the 
intent to share or transmit the same due to which he failed to delete, destroy 
or report it.  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 128 of 199 
 
 
178. Whereas when it comes to Section 15 sub-section (2), since the actus reus 
required to constitute an offence thereunder requires the storage or 
possession of any pornographic material involving a child along with any 
additional mater to show either the actual transmission, propagation, display 
or distribution of any such material or the facilitation of any of the 
abovementioned acts. Thus, in order to invoke the statutory presumption of 
culpable mental state as contained in Section 30 of the POCSO, the 
prosecution would be required to first establish not just the storage or 
possession of any child pornographic material, but also any other material to 
indicate any actual transmission, propagation, display or distribution of any 
such material or any form of an overt act such as preparation or setup done 
for the facilitation of the transmission, propagation, display or distribution 
of such material, whereafter, the statutory presumption would stand 
attracted, and it shall be presumed by the courts that the said act was done 
with the intent of  transmitting, displaying, propagating or distributing such 
material and that the said act(s) had not been done for the purpose of either 
reporting or for use as evidence. We clarify that, though wherever any actual 
transmission, propagation, display or distribution of such material takes 
place, the offence under Section 15 sub-section (2) would be constituted, 
thereby seemingly not requiring any further to be proved. However, due to 
the two exceptions carved out in sub-section (2) namely that transmission, 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 129 of 199 
 
propagation, display or distribution of child pornographic material when 
done for either reporting the same or for use as evidence, the statutory 
presumption in such scenario will still continue to serve a useful purpose by 
aiding the prosecution in reinforcing that any of the abovementioned acts 
had not been done with the intention of either reporting the same or for using 
it as evidence, unless the contrary is proven.  
 
179. Lastly, for the purpose of Section 15 sub-section (3) of the POCSO, the actus 
reus required therein is the storage or possession of any child pornographic 
material and any other material to indicate that such storage or possession 
was done in lieu or in expectation of some form of gain or benefit. Thus, 
where the prosecution established the storage or possession of such material 
and further shows anything else that might indicate that the same had been 
done for some form of gain or benefit or the expectation of some gain or 
benefit, the foundational facts would be said to have been proved, and the 
statutory presumption envisaged under Section 30 of the POCSO can be 
validly raised. Then the onus would lie on the accused to prove that the 
storage or possession of such material had not been done with intention of 
any commercial purpose.  
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 130 of 199 
 
c.  
Whether the Presumption under Section 30 of the POCSO can be 
 
resorted to in a Quashing Proceeding? 
 
180. The last aspect which remains to be examined is whether the said statutory 
presumption of culpable mental state provided in Section 30 of the POCSO 
can be resorted to in a quashing proceeding by the High Courts in exercise 
of their inherent powers under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. (corresponding 
Section 530 of the Bhartiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, for short, the 
“BNSS”). In other words, at what stage can the aforesaid said statutory 
presumption be invoked at. Before proceeding with the analysis of the said 
aspect, it would be appropriate to refer to a few decisions of this Court on 
this issue. 
 
181. In State of M.P. v. Harsh Gupta reported in (1998) 8 SCC 630, this Court 
held that the statutory presumption contained in Section 69 of the Indian 
Forest Act, 1927 could not have been ignored by the High Court in deciding 
the quashing petition under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. The relevant 
observations read as under: - 
“3. It is rather surprising that at a stage when the only question 
to be considered was whether the complaint and its 
accompaniments disclosed any or all of the offences alleged 
against the respondent, the learned Judge not only went into a 
detailed discussion about his defence but recorded a conclusive 
finding that he was not guilty of the offences alleged against him. 
More surprising is that the learned Judge ignored the provisions 
of Section 69 of the Act which expressly raises a statutory 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 131 of 199 
 
presumption against a person arraigned that the forest produce 
recovered from him was a property of the Government, until the 
contrary is proved; and needless to say, the question of proof of 
the contrary can be answered after evidence is led. 
 
4. For the foregoing discussion, we allow this appeal, set aside 
the impugned judgment and direct the Magistrate to proceed 
with the case in accordance with law, without in any way being 
influenced by any of the observations made by the High Court in 
the impugned order.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
 
182. This Court in Prakash Nath Khanna v. CIT reported in (2004) 9 SCC 686 
examined the scope of Section 278E of the Act, 1961. It held that where 
there is a statutory presumption as regards the existence of a culpable mental 
state on the part of the accused in respect of any offence alleged, any defence 
in respect of the absence of such mental state can only be pleaded in the trial. 
It further held that in such scenario, it will not be open for the High Court to 
delve into the aspect of the absence of such mental state in a quashing 
proceeding. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“23. There is a statutory presumption prescribed in Section 278-
E. The court has to presume the existence of culpable mental 
state, and absence of such mental state can be pleaded by an 
accused as a defence in respect to the act charged as an offence 
in the prosecution. Therefore, the factual aspects highlighted by 
the appellants were rightly not dealt with by the High Court. This 
is a matter for trial. It is certainly open to the appellants to plead 
absence of culpable mental state when the matter is taken up for 
trial.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 132 of 199 
 
183. In another decision of this Court in R. Kalyani v. Janak C. Mehta & Ors. 
reported in (2009) 1 SCC 516 although the issue therein did not pertain to 
the applicability of any statutory presumption, yet the observations made 
therein are significant. This Court held that the High Court in a quashing 
petition in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction cannot go into the aspect of 
either the existence or absence of any mens rea or actus reus for a particular 
offence to pass an order in favour of the accused. The relevant observations 
read as under: - 
“15. Propositions of law which emerge from the said decisions 
are: 
(1) The High Court ordinarily would not exercise its inherent 
jurisdiction to quash a criminal proceeding and, in particular, a 
first information report unless the allegations contained therein, 
even if given face value and taken to be correct in their entirety, 
disclosed no cognizable offence. 
(2) For the said purpose the Court, save and except in very 
exceptional circumstances, would not look to any document 
relied upon by the defence. 
(3) Such a power should be exercised very sparingly. If the 
allegations made in the FIR disclose commission of an offence, 
the Court shall not go beyond the same and pass an order in 
favour of the accused to hold absence of any mens rea or actus 
reus. 
(4) If the allegation discloses a civil dispute, the same by itself 
may not be a ground to hold that the criminal proceedings 
should not be allowed to continue.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
184. In a recent decision of this Court in Rathis Babu Unnikrishnan v. The State 
(Govt. of NCT of Delhi) & Anr. reported in 2022 INSC 480 it was held that 
when there is a statutory presumption, it would not be judicious of the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 133 of 199 
 
quashing court to carry out a detailed enquiry on the facts alleged before first 
permitting the trial court to evaluate the evidence. It further observed that 
where a accused moves the court for quashing even before the 
commencement of trial, the High Courts in such cases should be slow and 
circumspect in prematurely extinguishing by discarding the legal 
presumption all together. The relevant observation reads as under: -  
“11. The legal presumption of the cheque having been issued in 
the discharge of liability must also receive due weightage. In a 
situation where the accused moves Court for quashing even 
before trial has commenced, the Court’s approach should be 
careful enough to not to prematurely extinguish the case by 
disregarding the legal presumption which supports the 
complaint. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
13. Bearing in mind the principles for exercise of jurisdiction in 
a proceeding for quashing, let us now turn to the materials in 
this case. On careful reading of the complaint and the order 
passed by the Magistrate, what is discernible is that a possible 
view is taken that the cheques drawn were, in discharge of a debt 
for purchase of shares. In any case, when there is legal 
presumption, it would not be judicious for the quashing Court to 
carry out a detailed enquiry on the facts alleged, without first 
permitting the trial Court to evaluate the evidence of the parties. 
The quashing Court should not take upon itself, the burden of 
separating the wheat from the chaff where facts are contested. 
To say it differently, the quashing proceedings must not become 
an expedition into the merits of factual dispute, so as to 
conclusively vindicate either the complainant or the defence. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
16. The proposition of law as set out above makes it abundantly 
clear that the Court should be slow to grant the relief of quashing 
a complaint at a pre-trial stage, when the factual controversy is 
in the realm of possibility particularly because of the legal 
presumption, as in this matter. What is also of note is that the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 134 of 199 
 
factual defence without having to adduce any evidence need to 
be of an unimpeachable quality, so as to altogether disprove the 
allegations made in the complaint. 
 
17. The consequences of scuttling the criminal process at a pre-
trial stage can be grave and irreparable. Quashing proceedings 
at preliminary stages will result in finality without the parties 
having had an opportunity to adduce evidence and the 
consequence then is that the proper forum i.e., the trial Court is 
ousted from weighing the material evidence. If this is allowed, 
the accused may be given an un-merited advantage in the 
criminal process. Also because of the legal presumption, when 
the cheque and the signature are not disputed by the appellant, 
the balance of convenience at this stage is in favour of the 
complainant/prosecution, as the accused will have due 
opportunity to adduce defence evidence during the trial, to rebut 
the presumption.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
185. From the above exposition of law, it is clear that there is no bar for the High 
Court to invoke the statutory presumption at the stage of deciding the 
quashing petition in respect to any offence to which such a presumption is 
applicable. Rather, any failure to give due weightage to the same, may result 
in dire consequences such as premature quashing of the criminal proceeding 
or allowing the accused to completely bypass the statutory presumption 
which otherwise would have been applicable in the trial. In light of our 
earlier discussion and without again referring to a plethora of decisions in 
this regard, it is clear how the statutory presumption plays a vital role when 
it comes to offences such as those under the POCSO. 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 135 of 199 
 
186. This Court in Attorney General (supra) specifically held that considering the 
objects of POCSO, its provisions, more particularly, pertaining to sexual 
assault etc should be construed viz-a-viz the other provisions of the Act more 
meaningful and effective. Any selective reference to a particular provision 
in complete ignorance of the other provision would result in a mutilation of 
the entire scheme and purport of the legislation and thereby defeat the 
purpose with which it was enacted. The High Courts as a matter of choice 
should not shy away from referring to the statutory presumption that has 
been incorporated in the Act, whilst deciding a quashing petition. The High 
Courts must not deal with a particular offence under any enactment devoid 
or in disregard of the rest of the statutory framework, it must recognize and 
refer to the legislation in toto. 
 
187. Otherwise, it would give an undue advantage to an accused by allowing him 
to mischievously prefer a quashing petition before the trial commences and 
completely bypass the statutory presumption provided by the legislature and 
walk right away from the criminal proceedings, thereby setting the entire 
legislation at naught. It is imperative for the courts to discourage any such 
attempts on part of the accused to short circuit the statutory provisions and 
procedure laid in a particular Act and evade trial entirely. In such situations, 
the statutory presumption becomes all the more important to effectively 
ensure that criminal process is not manipulated by any devious accused.  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 136 of 199 
 
188. As has been held in Prakash Nath Khanna (supra) and Rathis Babu 
Unnikrishnan (supra), any defence of the accused for the purpose of 
rebutting the said statutory presumption should ordinarily be left to the trial 
court to be looked into at-least when it comes to quashing petitions. Though, 
in certain exceptional circumstances, the High Court may entertain such 
defence to quash the criminal proceedings where it appears from the facts 
itself that the allegations themselves are completely false and bogus and by 
no stretch of imagination said to be established. But in doing so, the High 
Court must be slow and circumspect & must exercise some restraint. The 
statutory presumption may be ignored only where no foundational facts have 
been established from the material on record.  
 
189.  Once the foundational facts are prima facie established from the materials 
on record, it would be improper for the High Court in a quashing petition to 
conduct an intricate evidentiary inquiry into the facts and ascertain whether 
the requisite mental elements are present or not. All these aspects should be 
left to be decided by the trial court which is the appropriate forum for the 
evaluation of the same, especially where the statutory presumption has been 
attracted prima facie from the material on record. 
 
190. When the High Court quashes any criminal proceedings without considering 
the legal effect of the statutory presumption, it effectively scuttles the 
process of trial and thereby denies the parties the opportunity to adduce 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 137 of 199 
 
appropriate evidence and the right to a fair trial. This would not only defeat 
the very case of the prosecution but would also thwart the very object of a 
particular legislation and thereby undermine the public confidence in the 
criminal justice system. 
 
191. We are conscious of the fact that in Noor Aga (supra) this Court had held 
that the statutory presumption under Section 35 of the NDPS Act would only 
operate in the trial of the accused. However, a close reading of the said 
decision would reveal that this Court in Noor Aga (supra) only went so far 
as to say that before a statutory presumption could be invoked, the 
foundational facts must have been established by the prosecution. We may 
at the cost of repetition again reproduce the relevant observations of Noor 
Aga (supra) in this regard: - 
“58. Sections 35 and 54 of the Act, no doubt, raise 
presumptions with regard to the culpable mental state on the 
part of the accused as also place the burden of proof in this 
behalf on the accused; but a bare perusal of the said provision 
would clearly show that presumption would operate in the trial 
of the accused only in the event the circumstances contained 
therein are fully satisfied. An initial burden exists upon the 
prosecution and only when it stands satisfied, would the legal 
burden shift. Even then, the standard of proof required for the 
accused to prove his innocence is not as high as that of the 
prosecution. Whereas the standard of proof required to prove 
the guilt of the accused on the prosecution is “beyond all 
reasonable doubt” but it is “preponderance of probability” on 
the accused. If the prosecution fails to prove the foundational 
facts so as to attract the rigours of Section 35 of the Act, the 
actus reus which is possession of contraband by the accused 
cannot be said to have been established. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 138 of 199 
 
192. What has been conveyed by this Court in so many words in the aforesaid 
paragraph of Noor Aga (supra) is that despite the statutory presumption of 
culpable mental state, the initial burden to establish the foundational facts 
will still lie on the prosecution. This Court by no stretch of imagination could 
be said to have held that the statutory presumption of culpable mental state 
would only be applicable in trial. Even otherwise, since the decision of Noor 
Aga (supra) arose from a criminal appeal against conviction, this Court by 
no extent had the occasion to examine the applicability of the statutory 
presumption to proceedings other than the trial and appeal thereof.  
 
193. We are also in seisin of the fact that Section 30 sub-section (1) specifically 
provides that “the Special Court shall presume the existence of such mental 
state”. Similarly, Section 30 sub-section (2) also uses the words “Special 
Court”. However, this in no manner can be construed to hold that it is the 
Special Court alone which has been vested with the power to raise the 
presumption under Section 30 of the POCSO. We say so, because: - 
(i) 
First, the use of the words “the Special Court shall presume the 
existence of such mental state” in sub-section (1) and other mention 
of Special Courts in the provision is only explanatory in nature 
inasmuch as the legislature has used the said word to only explain how 
such presumption would ordinarily operate in a trial. It by no stretch 
can be understood as a bar on the applicability of such presumption to 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 139 of 199 
 
other proceedings, as the said provision does not in any manner 
delineate or lay down the scope of such presumption and rather only 
elucidates the nature of the presumption (i.e., presumption of culpable 
mental state), the manner in which it would operate (i.e., applicable to 
any offence under the POCSO  which requires any culpable mental 
state) and the standard of proof required to prove anything contrary 
(i.e., beyond a reasonable doubt). By no means it could be said that 
the legislature by the use of the words “Special Court” in Section 30 
of the POCSO intended to curtail the application of the said statutory 
provision only in trial. Any such interpretation would completely 
render the other penal provisions meaningless, wherever the accused 
at the earlier stages moves for a quashing petition. 
(ii) 
Secondly, the statutory presumption under Section 30 of the POCSO 
operates or gets attracted not by virtue of the court before which the 
matter happens to be at, but by the offence itself, for which the 
legislature specifically provides such presumption in the first place. 
Since, the presumption in essence is in respect of mens rea required 
for any offence under the POCSO, this presumption is inextricably 
linked to the offence alone and not the power conferred upon a 
particular court. This is evinced by Section 30 sub-section (1), more 
particularly the expression “In any prosecution for any offence under 
this Act which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 140 of 199 
 
accused”. Furthermore, the aforesaid expression is of wide import and 
the words “prosecution for any offence under this Act” occurring 
therein would subsume and include any proceeding in respect of an 
offence under the POCSO would.  
(iii) 
Thirdly, even otherwise, the mere usage of words “Special Court” in 
the said provision can by no extent defeat or override the inherent 
powers that have been vested in the High Court by virtue of Section(s) 
482 and 530 of the Cr.P.C. and BNSS, respectively. 
 
  
As such, the statutory presumption envisaged under Section 30 of 
the POCSO is applicable and can be invoked in any proceeding which 
involves an offence under the said Act that requires a culpable mental state, 
irrespective of the court where such proceeding is taking place. 
 
 
194. It is a settled position of law that a statute is an edict of the legislature, the 
elementary principle of interpreting or construing a statute is to gather the 
mens or sententia legis i.e., the true intention of the legislature. It is trite 
saying that while interpreting a statute, the courts should strive to ascertain 
the intention of the Legislature enacting it, and it is the duty of the Courts to 
accept an interpretation or construction which promotes the object of the 
legislation and prevents its possible abuse. Thus, we are of the considered 
view that any other interpretation of the provisions of the POCSO and of the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 141 of 199 
 
various issues that have been discussed by us in the foregoing paragraphs, 
would frustrate the very avowed and salutary object of the POCSO and its 
provisions. 
 
iv. 
Whether the case at hand was one fit for the High Court to quash? 
 
195. The undisputed facts are that, during investigation two videos depicting 
children involved in a sexual activity were recovered from the mobile phone 
of the respondent no. 1. As per the FSL Report, the aforesaid two videos 
were last modified in the memory of the accused person’s phone on 
05.09.2016 and 14.06.2019 respectively. The respondent no. 1 himself 
admitted before the High Court as recorded in the impugned order that he 
was addicted to watching pornography. In what circumstances such 
statement come to be recorded by the High court is a mystery.  Although, the 
FIR dated 29.01.2020 alleged offences under Section(s) 14(1) of the POCSO 
and 67B of the IT Act, yet in the chargesheet, the aforesaid offence under 
Section 14(1) of the POCSO was substituted and instead offence under 
Section 15(1) of the POCSO was alleged to have been committed. 
 
196. The High Court in its Impugned Order whilst quashing the criminal 
proceedings arising out of the aforesaid chargesheet dated 19.09.2023 
completely failed to advert to the actual charge that was alleged therein more 
particularly Section 15 sub-section (1) of the POCSO. Instead, the High 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 142 of 199 
 
Court appears to have just relied upon the FIR and premised its findings on 
Section 14 of the POCSO, even though the said offence had been dropped in 
the chargesheet. Thus, there appears to be a serious lapse on part of the High 
Court in failing to advert to Section 15 of the POCSO especially when the 
chargesheet had already been filed at the time of passing of the Impugned 
Order. It is no longer res-integra that once the investigation is over and 
chargesheet is filed, the FIR pales into insignificance. The court, thereafter, 
owes a duty to look into all the materials collected by the investigating 
agency in the form of chargesheet. 
 
197. It is no longer res-integra, that the High Court in exercise of its inherent 
powers under Section(s) 482 of the Cr.P.C. or 530 of the BNSS as the case 
must not conduct a mini trial or go into the truthfulness of the allegations 
while dealing with a quashing petition. The High Court may be justified in 
quashing the chargesheet if it appears to it that continuance of criminal 
proceedings would be nothing but gross abuse of the process of law. 
 
198. In R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab reported in AIR 1960 SC 866, this Court 
summarised some categories of cases where inherent power can, and should 
be exercised to quash the proceedings: - 
(i) 
where it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar 
against the institution or continuance e.g. want of 
sanction;  
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 143 of 199 
 
(ii) 
where the allegations in the first information report or 
complaint taken at its face value and accepted in their 
entirety do not constitute the offence alleged;  
 
(iii) 
where the allegations constitute an offence, but there is 
no legal evidence adduced or the evidence adduced 
clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge. 
 
199. This Court in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal reported in 1992 AIR SC 604 
held that the power of quashing must be used very sparingly and with 
circumspection. It must only be used in the rarest of the rare cases. While 
laying down the principles relating to quashing of criminal proceedings, this 
Court held that while examining a complaint or FIR, the quashing of which 
is sought, the Court cannot embark upon an enquiry as to the reliability or 
genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the FIR or in the 
complaint. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various 
relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the 
principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions 
relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article 
226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which 
we have extracted and reproduced above, we give the following 
categories of cases by way of illustration wherein such power 
could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any 
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may 
not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and 
sufficiently channelised and inflexible guidelines or rigid 
formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases 
wherein such power should be exercised.  
 
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or 
the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and 
accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any 
offence or make out a case against the accused.  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 144 of 199 
 
 
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and 
other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not disclose a 
cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers 
under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a 
Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code.  
 
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or 
complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same do 
not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case 
against the accused.  
 
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a 
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable offence, 
no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order 
of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the 
Code.  
 
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so 
absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no 
prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is 
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.  
 
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the 
provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a 
criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and 
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific 
provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing 
efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.  
 
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with 
mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted 
with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused 
and with a view to spite him due to private and personal 
grudge.” 
 
 
200. In S.M. Datta v. State of Gujarat reported in (2001) 7 SCC 659 this Court 
again cautioned that criminal proceedings ought not to be scuttled at the 
initial stage. Quashing of a complaint or FIR should rather be an exception 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 145 of 199 
 
and a rarity than an ordinary rule. This Court also held that if a perusal of the 
first information report leads to disclosure of an offence even broadly, law 
courts are barred from usurping the jurisdiction of the police, since the two 
organs of the State operate in two specific spheres of activities and one ought 
not to tread over the other sphere. 
 
201. In view of the aforesaid consistent line of decisions of this Court, the High 
Court in our considered view could be said to have committed an egregious 
error by quashing the criminal proceedings without even properly perusing 
the chargesheet and the other material on record. 
 
202. The High Court should neither be picky nor remain oblivious in deciding 
which provision to advert to while considering a quashing petition. When 
dealing with a quashing petition, there lies a duty on the High Court to 
properly apply its mind to all the material on record. The least which is 
expected of High Court in such situation is to carefully go through the 
allegations contained in the FIR and the charge-sheet, and to ascertain (i) 
whether, the offences alleged therein could be said to have been prima facie 
established from the material on record? or (ii) whether, apart from the 
offences alleged in the FIR or the charge-sheet, there is possibility of any 
other offence prima facie being made out? The High Court in exercise of its 
inherent powers, may be justified in quashing the criminal proceedings only 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 146 of 199 
 
where, neither any offence as alleged in the FIR or charge-sheet is disclosed 
nor any other offence is prima facie made out, and the continuance of the 
proceedings may be found to amount to abuse of process of law. 
 
203. In the case at hand, there is no dispute by either side that, the two videos 
infact depicted children in a sexual activity. It is also not the case of the 
respondent no. 1 that the said videos were not recovered from his mobile 
phone. In such circumstances, the child pornographic material that was 
recovered from the personal mobile phone of the accused which was 
regularly in use by him, prima facie establishes the storage or possession of 
child pornographic material at his hand. Further, since the aforesaid child 
pornographic material was found to have been stored in the said personal 
mobile phone since 2016 and 2019, prima facie it could be said there was a 
failure on the part of the respondent no.1 to delete, destroy or report such 
material.  
 
204. It was also sought to be contended on behalf of the respondent no. 1 that the 
2019 Amendment Act whereby and whereunder, the three distinct offences 
pertaining to the storage or possession of child pornography were made 
punishable under Section 15 of the POCSO came into force with effect from 
16.09.2019. Whereas the both the videos in question had been allegedly 
stored in the device before the 2019 Amendment Act came into force. Since, 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 147 of 199 
 
the present Section 15(1) of the POCSO was not in operation at the relevant 
time when the videos were allegedly stored, the respondent no. 1 cannot be 
punished under the said provision which did not exist at the time of storage 
of such video. 
 
205. However, we are not impressed with the aforesaid submission. What is 
sought to be punished under Section 15 is not the time when such material 
was stored or came to be possessed but rather the storage or possession itself, 
which may be continuous, wherein the relevant point of time of such storage 
or possession for constituting any offence under the POCSO more 
particularly Section 15 would be reckoned from the date of registration of 
the FIR. In the present case, it is not in dispute that when 2019 Amendment 
came into force and later when the FIR was registered, the aforesaid two 
videos were still stored in the mobile phone of the respondent no. 1. In such 
circumstances, Section 15 sub-section (1) could be said to be prima facie 
attracted. 
 
a.  
Plea of Ignorance of Law: Ignorance of Law viz-a-viz Incognizance of 
 
Law. 
 
206. At this juncture, we may address yet another submission that was canvassed 
on behalf of the accused as regards the plea of bona-fide ignorance of law. 
It was contended that the accused was not aware of the fact that storing of 
child-pornography was a punishable offence under Section 15 of POCSO 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 148 of 199 
 
and that the child pornographic material which was found stored in his 
mobile phone was due to his unawareness of the law accompanied by a bona-
fide belief that such storage was not an offence, and as such he ought not to 
be held liable. In this regard, reliance has been placed on two decisions of 
this Court in Chandi Kumar Das Karmarkar (supra) and Motilal Padampat 
Sugar Mills (supra). 
 
207. In Chandi Kumar Das Karmarkar (supra), the facts of the case are as 
follows; there was a civil dispute inter-alia between the accused persons 
therein and the complainant as regards the ownership of a water tank where 
fishes had been reared. The complainant therein had acquired possession of 
the said tank on the strength of an ex-parte decree against the accused 
persons. Eventually, that ex-parte decree was set-aside, however the final 
decision on the title was still pending. Although no application for restitution 
was preferred yet the accused, due to a bona-fide ignorance of law, was 
under the impression that he had regained possession of the said tank and 
again started catching fishes in the tank. The complainant lodged an FIR 
against the accused persons inter-alia alleging theft of fish from his tank. 
The accused therein in his defence pleaded ignorance of law stating that he 
was unaware that, the said tank and the fishes in that expanse of water under 
the law continued to be deemed to be the property of the complainant in the 
absence of any restitution or that the possession of the water reservoir had 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 149 of 199 
 
not reverted back to him. He further pleaded that; he was under a bona-fide 
belief that he had a right of possession of the said tank by virtue of the ex-
parte decree being set-aside. This Court held that any claim of right due to a 
bona-fide ignorance of law, if reasonable will not constitute an act of theft. 
It further explained that a claim to such right means one which is not a false 
pretence but a fair pretence, and not a complete absence of claim but a bona-
fide claim, however weak. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“6. The offence of theft consists in the dishonest taking of any 
moveable property out of the possession of another with his 
consent. Dishonest intention exists when the person so taking the 
property intends to cause wrongful gain to himself or wrongful 
loss to the other. This intention is known as animus furandi and 
without it the offence of theft is not complete. Fish in their free 
state are regarded as ferae naturae but they are said to be in the 
possession of a person who has possession of any expanse of 
water such as a tank, where they live but from where they cannot 
escape. Fishes are also regarded as being in the possession of a 
person who owns an exclusive right to catch them in a particular 
spot known as a fishery but only within that spot. There can thus 
be theft of fish from a tank which belongs to another and is in his 
possession, if the offender catches them without the consent of 
the owner and without any bona fide claim of right. 
 
7. Now the ordinary rule that mens rea may exist even with an 
honest ignorance of law is sometimes not sufficient for theft. A 
claim of right in good faith, if reasonable saves the act of taking 
from being theft and where such a plea is raised by the accused 
it is mainly a question of fact whether such belief exists or not. 
This court in Criminal Appeal No. 31 of 1961 (Suvvari Sanyasi 
Apparao v. Boddepalli Lakhminarayana decided on October 5, 
1961 observed as follows: 
 
“It is settled law that where a bona fide claim of right 
exists, it can be a good defence to a prosecution for theft. 
An act does not amount to theft, unless there be not only 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 150 of 199 
 
no legal right but no appearance or colour of a legal 
right.” 
 
8. By the expression “colour of a legal right” is meant not a false 
pretence but a fair pretence, not a complete absence of claim put 
a bona-fide claim, however weak. This Court observed in the 
same case that the law was stated in 2 East P.C. 659 to be: 
 
“If there be in the prisoner any fair pretence of property 
or right, or if it be brought into doubt at all, the court will 
direct an acquittal.” 
 
 
and reffered to 1 Hale P.C. 509 that “the best evidence is 
that the goods were taken quite openly”. The law stated by East 
and Hale has always been the law on the subject of theft in India 
and numerous cases decided by Indian Courts are to be found in 
which these principles have been applied. 
 
Niyogi, J. in his judgment also referred to some of the decisions 
of the Calcutta High Court and we find ourselves in particular 
agreement with the following statement of the law in Hamid Ali 
Bepari v. Emperor :  
  
“It is not theft if a person, acting under a mistaken 
notion of law and; believing that certain property is his 
and that he has the right to take the same … removes 
such property from the possession of another.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
208. In Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills (supra) the State Government therein had 
framed a policy for grant of sales tax exemption to new industrial units in 
the State. On the basis of the said policy, the appellant therein set-up an 
industrial unit and approached the State Government for claiming the 
exemption. The State Government informed him that he would be granted 
only partial concession in sales tax, to which the appellant was agreeable. 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 151 of 199 
 
However, subsequently, the State having second thoughts, rescinded the 
concession which was being granted to the appellant. Aggrieved by which 
the appellant preferred a writ petition claiming exemption from sale tax as 
per the policy. However, the State Government in response submitted that 
the appellant therein by accepting a partial concession on sales tax had 
waived its right to claim full exemption. This Court rejecting the said plea 
of waiver and estoppel held that, the appellant therein was unaware about 
the policy and the extent of the exemption in sales tax under the law. Thus, 
the appellant due to the ignorance of law had a bona-fide belief that the 
policy only provided for a partial concession rather than a complete 
exemption. This Court observed that it cannot be presumed that the appellant 
was fully informed about the policy and that he had waived or abandoned 
his right with full knowledge of the said policy. It further observed that often 
the maxim “ignorantia juris non excusat” i.e., “ignorance of the law is no 
excuse” is often misconstrued to mean that everyone is presumed to know 
the law. Accordingly, this Court rejecting the plea of promissory estoppel 
held that due to the ignorance of law on the part of the appellant, it cannot 
be said that he had full knowledge of its right to exemption so as to waive or 
abandon the same. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“6. [...] The claim of the appellant to exemption could be 
sustained only on the doctrine of promissory estoppel and this 
doctrine could not be said to be so well defined in its scope and 
ambit and so free from uncertainty in its application that we 
should be compelled to hold that the appellant must have had 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 152 of 199 
 
knowledge of its right to exemption on the basis of promissory 
estoppel at the time when it addressed the letter dated June 25, 
1970. In fact, in the petition as originally filed, the right to claim 
total exemption from Sales Tax was not based on the plea of 
promissory estoppel which was introduced only by way of 
amendment. Moreover, it must be remembered that there is no 
presumption that every person knows the law. It is often said that 
everyone is presumed to know the law, but that is not a correct 
statement : there is no such maxim known to the law. Over a 
hundred and thirty years ago, Maule, J., pointed out 
in Martindale v. Falkner: 
 
“There is no presumption in this country that every 
person knows the law : it would be contrary to common 
sense and reason if it were so.” 
 
Scrutton, L.J., also once said: 
“It is impossible to know all the statutory law, and not 
very possible to know all the common law.” 
 
But it was Lord Atkin who, as in so many other spheres, put the 
point in its proper context when he said in Evans v. Bartlam 
“… the fact is that there is not and never has been a 
presumption that every one knows the law. There is the 
rule that ignorance of the law does not excuse, a maxim 
of very different scope and application.” 
 
It is, therefore, not possible to presume, in the absence of any 
material placed before the Court, that the. appellant had full 
knowledge of its right to exemption so as to warrant an inference 
that the appellant waived such right by addressing the letter 
dated June 25, 1970. We accordingly reject the plea of waiver 
raised on behalf of the State Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
209. Thus, from the aforesaid, we are of the considered view that the reliance on 
the part of the accused on the two decisions of this Court in Chandi Kumar 
Das Karmarkar (supra) and Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills (supra) is 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 153 of 199 
 
completely misplaced. In Chandi Kumar Das Karmarkar (supra) the 
question before this Court was whether the accused therein due to the 
ignorance of law could be said to have a bona-fide belief of a right or claim 
to possession of the fish tank or in other words whether a plea of ignorance 
is a valid defence to any acts done pursuant to a bona-fide belief of existence 
of a right under the mistaken notion of law. Whereas in Motilal Padampat 
Sugar Mills (supra) the issue for consideration before this Court was 
whether the appellant therein due to the ignorance of law could be said to 
have wilfully waived his right, or in other words whether a plea of ignorance 
is a valid defence to any promissory estoppel to a right. 
 
210. Thus, both the aforesaid decisions in Chandi Kumar Das Karmarkar (supra) 
Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills (supra) are not applicable. We say so, 
because this Court in the aforesaid decisions has only gone so far as to say 
that a plea of ignorance of law can be used as a valid defence for either 
showing that the purported act was done or not done (as the case may be) 
due to a consequent bona-fide belief as to the existence of such a right or 
claim. In other words, a plea of ignorance of law can be a valid defence if it 
consequently gives rise to a legitimate and bona-fide mistake of fact as to 
the existence (or non-existence) of a particular right or claim.  
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 154 of 199 
 
211. This may be better understood through a four-prong test wherein for a valid 
defence, there must exist (1) an ignorance or unawareness of any law and (2) 
such ignorance or unawareness must give rise to a corresponding reasonable 
and legitimate right or claim (3) the existence of such right or claim must be 
believed bonafide and (4) the purported act sought to be punished must take 
place on the strength of such right or claim. It is only when all the four of 
the above conditions are fulfilled, that the person would be entitled to take a 
plea of ignorance of law as a defence from incurring any liability. 
 
212. As held in Chandi Kumar Das Karmarkar (supra) a plea of ignorance of 
law is a valid defence only to the acts said to have been done on the basis of 
a right or a claim, the existence of which was bona-fidely believed or 
entertained on the basis of ignorance of law or mistaken notion of law. Thus, 
for a plea of ignorance of law, the ignorance or mistake of law must be such 
which legitimately gives rise to a bona-fide belief of the existence of a right 
or a claim, and the said person commits any act on the strength of such right 
or claim. This is fortified from the following observation “A claim of right 
in good faith, if reasonable saves the act [...] where such a plea is raised” in 
paragraph 7 of Chandi Kumar Das Karmarkar (supra). Thus, a plea of 
ignorance of law is only valid for the defence of a bona-fide claim of right 
and any acts done thereunder. As such, where a person commits any act on 
the assertion of a right, the existence of which was bona-fidely believed due 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 155 of 199 
 
to a mistaken notion of law, such person will not be liable due to the honest 
but mistaken factum of such right or claim stemming from or accompanied 
by ignorance of law. 
 
213. Similarly, in Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills (supra) this Court only held that 
a plea of ignorance of law may be a valid defence for bona-fidely believing 
the existence of a wrong or incorrect right i.e., the right to only a partial 
concession of sale tax exemption. Accordingly, this Court held that where a 
person due to ignorance of law was not fully informed about a particular 
right, there can be no waiver of such right unless it is shown that such person 
was indeed aware of the said right.  
 
214. Thus, the aforesaid decisions of this Court in Chandi Kumar Das 
Karmarkar (supra) Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills (supra) are 
distinguishable for the simple reason that storage or possession of child 
pornographic material cannot be equated or traced to any right or assertion 
even if it was a mistaken one. Even if a person is unaware that the possession 
or storage of such material is punishable, it by no stretch can be considered 
to give rise to any right or assertion as there exists no such right to either 
store or possess such material, and thus it is not a valid defence. We say so 
because, no person of an ordinary prudent mind with the same degree of 
oblivion or unawareness as to the law, more particularly Section 15 of 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 156 of 199 
 
POCSO could as a natural corollary be led to a belief of existence of a right 
to store or possess any child pornographic material. The ignorance or 
unawareness must have a reasonable nexus with the right or assertion 
claimed i.e., the ignorance or unawareness must be such which could 
legitimately and reasonably give rise to a corresponding right or claim the 
and the existence of which must be bona-fidely believed. Otherwise, anyone 
could make a bald or blanket claim of having a bonafide belief of any right 
to wriggle out of any liability arising out of its actions on the touchstone of 
unawareness of any particular law. Thus, even if the accused was unaware 
about Section 15 of POCSO, this by itself does not give rise to a 
corresponding legitimate or reasonable ground to believe that there was any 
right to store or possess child pornographic material. As such the four-prong 
test is not fulfilled and the defence of ignorance of law by the accused must 
fail. 
 
215. Even otherwise, one must be mindful to the fact that such a plea is not a 
statutory defence with any legal backing, but rather a by-product of the 
doctrine of equity. Whether such a defence is to be accepted or not, largely 
depends upon the extant of equity in the peculiar facts and circumstances of 
each individual cases. It is an equally settled cannon of law that equity cannot 
supplant the law, equity has to follow the law if the law is clear and 
unambiguous. 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 157 of 199 
 
216. This Court in National Spot Exchange Ltd. v. Anil Kohli, Resolution 
Professional for Dunar Foods Ltd. reported in (2022) 11 SCC 761 after 
referring to a catena of its other judgments, had held that where the law is 
clear the consequence thereof must follow. The High Court has no option 
but to implement the law. The relevant observations made in it are being 
reproduced below: - 
“15.1. In Mishri Lal [BSNL v. Mishri Lal, (2011) 14 SCC 739 : 
(2014) 1 SCC (L&S) 387], it is observed that the law prevails 
over equity if there is a conflict. It is observed further that equity 
can only supplement the law and not supplant it. 
 
15.2. In Raghunath Rai Bareja [Raghunath Rai Bareja v. Punjab 
National Bank, (2007) 2 SCC 230] , in paras 30 to 37, this Court 
observed and held as under : (SCC pp. 242-43)  
 
“30. Thus, in Madamanchi Ramappa v. Muthaluru 
Bojjappa [AIR 1963 SC 1633] (vide para 12) this Court 
observed: (AIR p. 1637)  
 
‘12. … [W]hat is administered in Courts is 
justice according to law, and considerations 
of fair play and equity however important 
they may be, must yield to clear and express 
provisions of the law.’ 
 
31. 
In 
Council 
for 
Indian 
School 
Certificate 
Examination v. Isha Mittal [(2000) 7 SCC 521] (vide 
para 4) this Court observed: (SCC p. 522)  
 
‘4. … Considerations of equity cannot 
prevail and do not permit a High Court to 
pass an order contrary to the law.’  
 
32. Similarly, in P.M. Latha v. State of Kerala [(2003) 3 
SCC 541 : 2003 SCC (L&S) 339] (vide para 13) this 
Court observed: (SCC p. 546)  
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 158 of 199 
 
‘13. Equity and law are twin brothers and 
law should be applied and interpreted 
equitably but equity cannot override written 
or settled law.’  
 
33. In Laxminarayan R. Bhattad v. State of Maharashtra 
[(2003) 5 SCC 413] (vide para 73) this Court observed: 
(SCC p. 436)  
 
‘73. It is now well settled that when there is a 
conflict between law and equity the former 
shall prevail.’  
 
34. Similarly, in Nasiruddin v. Sita Ram Agarwal 
[(2003) 2 SCC 577] (vide para 35) this Court observed: 
(SCC p. 588)  
 
‘35. In a case where the statutory provision 
is plain and unambiguous, the court shall not 
interpret the same in a different manner, only 
because of harsh consequences arising 
therefrom.’  
 
35. Similarly, in E. Palanisamy v. Palanisamy [(2003) 1 
SCC 123] (vide para 5) this Court observed: (SCC p. 
127) 
 
‘5. Equitable considerations have no place 
where 
the 
statute 
contained 
express 
provisions.’ 
 
36. In India House v. Kishan N. Lalwani [(2003) 9 SCC 
393] (vide para 7) this Court held that: (SCC p. 398) 
 
‘7. … The period of limitation statutorily 
prescribed has to be strictly adhered to and 
cannot be relaxed or departed from for 
equitable considerations.’…” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 159 of 199 
 
217. Unawareness or incognizance of law should not be conflated with ignorance 
of law. This Court in Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills (supra) duly 
acknowledged that a plea of unawareness of law is fundamentally different 
in scope and application from the rule that ignorance of the law does not 
excuse anyone. The former as explained above, is a byproduct of the doctrine 
of equity whereas the latter is a cardinal rule of criminal jurisprudence and 
no person can claim to be absolved of any criminal offence or liability on a 
plea of ignorance of law. Thus, where something is specifically made 
punishable under the law, then in such cases the law would prevail over 
equity, and no plea of ignorance of law can be taken as a defence to absolve 
or dilute any liability arising out of such punishable offences. Thus, even if 
all four preconditions are satisfied, the courts are not bound to accept such a 
plea, if it is in negation or derogation of any law or the idea of justice. 
 
218. Equity modifies the applicable law or ensures its suitability to address the 
particular circumstances before a court to produce justice. The modification 
of general rules to the circumstances of the case is guided by equity, not in 
derogation or negation of positive law, but in addition to it. It supplements 
positive law but does not supplant it. In a second sense however, where 
positive law is silent as to the applicable legal principles, equity assumes a 
primary role as the source of law itself. Equity steps in to fill the gaps that 
exist in positive law. Thus, where no positive law is discernible, courts turn 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 160 of 199 
 
to equity as a source of the applicable law. However, where positive law 
exists, equity will always yield to it. [See M.  Siddiq v. Mahant Suresh Das, 
reported in 2020 1 SCC 1] 
 
219. It was further contended by the respondent no. 1 that although the said child 
pornographic material was found stored in his mobile phone, yet he had no 
knowledge of the same. He would submit that, the aforesaid videos that were 
found stored in his mobile as revealed by the FSL Report had been 
automatically downloaded into his mobile phone without his knowledge or 
volition.  
 
220. Even, assuming that the respondent no. 1 did not actually store the aforesaid 
two videos in his mobile phone, and that he had no knowledge of the 
existence of those videos, nonetheless, the aforesaid aspect cannot be looked 
into by us at the stage of quashing, more particularly while deciding whether 
a prima-facie case is said to be made out. Even otherwise, since the material 
on record adduced by the prosecution clearly establishes the possession or 
storage of child pornographic material and the failure on the part of the 
respondent no. 1 in deleting, destroying or reporting the same, the 
foundational facts necessary to invoke the statutory presumption of culpable 
mental state could be said to have been prima facie established.  
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 161 of 199 
 
221. In view of the statutory presumption of culpable mental state being attracted, 
any defence of the respondent no. 1 such as the absence of knowledge or 
intention would be a matter of trial. Absence of culpable mental state has to 
be established before the trial court by leading cogent evidence in that 
regard. Such defences should not be looked into by us at this stage. All that 
should be ascertained is whether a prima facie case is said to have been made 
out. 
v. 
Summary of our conclusion  
 
222. We summarize our final conclusion as under: - 
(I) 
Section 15 of the POCSO provides for three distinct offences that 
penalize either the storage or the possession of any child pornographic 
material when done with any particular intention specified under sub-
section(s) (1), (2) or (3) respectively. It is in the nature and form of an 
inchoate offence which penalizes the mere storage or possession of any 
pornographic material involving a child when done with a specific 
intent prescribed thereunder, without requiring any actual transmission, 
dissemination etc. 
(II) 
Sub-section (1) of Section 15 penalizes the failure to delete, destroy or 
report any child pornographic material that has been found to be stored 
or in possession of any person with an intention to share or transmit the 
same. The mens-rea or the intention required under this provision is to 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 162 of 199 
 
be gathered from the actus reus itself i.e., it must be determined from 
the manner in which such material is stored or possessed and the 
circumstances in which the same was not deleted, destroyed or reported. 
To constitute an offence under this provision the circumstances must 
sufficiently indicate the intention on the part of the accused to share or 
transmit such material. 
(III) Section 15 sub-section (2) penalizes both the actual transmission, 
propagation, display or distribution of any child pornography as-well as 
the facilitation of any of the abovementioned acts. To constitute an 
offence under Section 15 sub-section (2) apart from the storage or 
possession of such pornographic material, there must be something 
more to show i.e., either (I) the actual transmission, propagation, 
display or distribution of such material OR (II) the facilitation of any 
transmission, propagation, display or distribution of such material, such 
as any form of preparation or setup done that would enable that person 
to transmit it or to display it. The mens rea is to be gathered from the 
manner in which the pornographic material was found to be stored or in 
possession and any other material apart from such possession or storage 
that is indicative of any facilitation or actual transmission, propagation, 
display or distribution of such material. 
(IV) Section 15 sub-section (3) penalizes the storage or possession of any 
child pornographic material when done for any commercial purpose. To 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 163 of 199 
 
establish an offence under Section 15 sub-section (3), besides the 
storage or possession of the pornographic material involving a child, 
there must be some additional material or attending circumstances that 
may sufficiently indicate that the said storage or possession was done 
with the intent to derive any gain or benefit. To constitute an offence 
under sub-section (3) there is no requirement to establish that such gain 
or benefit had been actually realized.  
(V) 
Sub-section(s) (1), (2) and (3) respectively of Section 15 constitute 
independent and distinct offences. The three offences cannot coexist 
simultaneously in the same set of facts. They are distinct from each 
other and are not intertwined. This is because, the underlying distinction 
between the three sub-sections of Section 15 lies in the varying degree 
of culpable mens rea that is required under each of the three provisions.  
(VI) The police as well as the courts while examining any matter involving 
the storage or possession of any child pornography, finds that a 
particular sub-section of Section 15 is not attracted, then it must not 
jump to the conclusion that no offence at all is made out under Section 
15 of the POCSO. If the offence does not fall within one particular sub-
section of Section 15, then it must try to ascertain whether the same falls 
within the other sub-sections or not. 
(VII) Any act of viewing, distributing or displaying etc., of any child 
pornographic material by a person over the internet without any actual 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 164 of 199 
 
or physical possession or storage of such material in any device or in 
any form or manner would also amount to ‘possession’ in terms of 
Section 15 of the POCSO, provided the said person exercised an 
invariable degree of control over such material, by virtue of the doctrine 
of constructive possession. 
(VIII) Any visual depiction of a sexually explicit act which any ordinary 
person of a prudent mind would reasonably believe to prima facie 
depict a child or appear to involve a child, would be deemed as ‘child 
pornography’ and the courts are only required to form a prima facie 
opinion to arrive at the subjective satisfaction that the material appears 
to depict a child from the perspective of any ordinary prudent person 
for any offence under the POCSO that relates to child pornographic 
material, such as Section 15. Such satisfaction may be arrived at from 
any authoritative opinion like a forensic science laboratory (FSL) report 
of such material or opinion of any expert on the material in question, or 
by the assessment of such material by the courts themselves. 
(IX) Section 67B of the IT Act is a comprehensive provision designed to 
address and penalize the various electronic forms of exploitation and 
abuse of children online. It not only punishes the electronic 
dissemination of child pornographic material, but also the creation, 
possession, propagation and consumption of such material as-well as 
the different types of direct and indirect acts of online sexual 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 165 of 199 
 
denigration and exploitation of the vulnerable age of children. 
Section(s) 67, 67A and 67B respectively of the IT Act being a complete 
code, ought to be interpreted in a purposive manner that suppresses the 
mischief and advances the remedy and ensures that the legislative intent 
of penalizing the various forms of cyber-offences relating to children 
and the use of obscene / pornographic material through electronic 
means is not defeated by a narrow construction of these provisions. 
(X) 
The statutory presumption of culpable mental state on the part of the 
accused as envisaged under Section 30 of the POCSO can be made 
applicable provided the prosecution is able to establish the foundational 
facts necessary to constitute a particular offence under the POCSO that 
may have been alleged against the accused. Such presumption can be 
rebutted by the accused either by discrediting the prosecution’s case or 
by leading evidence to prove the contrary, beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(XI) The foundational facts necessary for the purpose of invoking the 
statutory presumption of culpable mental state for an offence under 
Section 15 of POCSO are as follows: - 
(a)  
For the purpose of sub-section (1), the necessary foundational 
 
facts that the prosecution may have to first establish is the 
 
storage or possession of any child pornographic material and 
 
that the person accused had failed to delete, destroy or report 
 
the same.  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 166 of 199 
 
(b)  
In order to invoke the statutory presumption of culpable 
 
mental state for an offence under sub-section (2) the 
 
prosecution would be required to first establish the storage or 
 
possession of any child pornographic material, and also any 
 
other fact to indicate either the actual transmission, 
 
propagation, display or distribution of any such material or 
 
any form of an overt act such as preparation or setup done for 
 
the facilitation of the transmission, propagation, display or 
 
distribution of such material, whereafter it shall be presumed 
 
by the court that the said act was done with the intent of 
 
transmitting, displaying, propagating or distributing such 
 
material and that the said act(s) had not been done for the 
 
purpose of either reporting or for use as evidence. 
 
(c)  
For the purpose of sub-section (3) the prosecution must 
 
establish the storage or possession of such material and further 
 
prove any fact that might indicate that the same had been done 
 
to derive some form of gain or benefit or the expectation of 
 
some gain or benefit. 
 
(XII) The statutory presumption of culpable mental under Section 30 of 
POCSO can be made applicable in a quashing proceeding pertaining to 
any offence under the POCSO.  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 167 of 199 
 
F.  
FEW MEANINGFUL SUGGESTIONS. 
223. Before, we close this matter, we must address ourselves on a very important 
aspect, as regards the need to effectively address the growing number of 
dissemination and use of child pornography. 
 
i. 
The Lingering Impact of Child Pornography on the Victimization & 
Abuse of Children. 
 
224. A child's victimization begins with the sexual act, continues through its 
recording, and perpetuates as photographs and videos that float through 
cyberspace, freely accessible to anyone who has the ability to surf the 
internet.1 Child sexual exploitation is one of the most heinous crimes 
imaginable, and the offence of Child Pornography is equally as heinous, if 
not more, as in the latter the victimization and exploitation of the child does 
not end with the initial act of abuse.2 The creation or dissemination of such 
pornographic material further extends and compounds the harm infinitely 
and at a far larger scale.3 It in essence turns the singular incident of an abuse 
into a ripple of trauma inducing acts where the rights and dignity of the child 
is continuously violated each time such material is viewed or shared. This is 
                                                
1 Eva J. Klain, Heather J Davies, Molly A. Hicks Et. Al., Child Pornography: The Criminal 
Justice-System Response, 8 (Penn State University Press, 2001). 
2 Philip Jenkins, Beyond Tolerance: Child Pornography on the Internet (New York University 
Press, 2003) 
3 Burgess, Ann W. & C.R. Hartman, Child Abuse Aspects of Child Pornography, 7 
PSYCHIATRIC ANNALS, 248 (1987). 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 168 of 199 
 
why it is imperative that we collectively as a society address this issue with 
the utmost seriousness. 
 
 
225. The impact of such continuous victimization is profound. Any act of sexual 
abuse inherently inflicts lasting physical and emotional trauma on the child. 
However, the dissemination of this act of abuse through pornographic 
material further accentuates and deepens the trauma into a psychological 
scar. The knowledge that their abuse is being watched by countless strangers, 
sometimes years after the actual event, exacerbates the psychological 
wounds on top of the trauma that was already induced by the act in the first 
place.4 This perpetuating violation deprives the victim of any remaining 
hope or chance to heal, recover from the abuse and find closure. 5 
 
226. One must also be mindful of the fact that the term "child pornography" is a 
misnomer that fails to capture the full extent of the crime. It is important to 
recognize that each case of what is traditionally termed "child pornography" 
involves the actual abuse of a child. The use of the term "child pornography" 
can lead to a trivialization of the crime, as pornography is often seen as a 
consensual act between adults. It undermines the victimization because the 
                                                
4 Audrey Rogers, The Dignity Harm of Child Pornography – From Producers to Possessors, 
in Carissa Byrne Hessick (Eds.), Refining Child Pornography Law – Crime, Language and 
Social Consequences (University of Michigan Press, 2016). 
5 Tali Gal, Child Victims and Restorative Justice – A Needs Rights Model, 17 (Oxford 
University Press, 2011) 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 169 of 199 
 
term suggests a correlation to pornography — conduct that may be legal, 
whose subject is voluntarily participating in, and whose subject is capable of 
consenting to the conduct.6 
 
227. The term "child sexual exploitation and abuse material" or “CSEAM” more 
accurately reflects the reality that these images and videos are not merely 
pornographic but are records of incidents, where a child has either been 
sexually exploited and abused or where any abuse of children has been 
portrayed through any self-generated visual depiction.7 
  
228. The term "child sexual exploitation and abuse material" (CSEAM) rightly 
places the emphasis on the exploitation and abuse of the child, highlighting 
the criminal nature of the act and the need for a serious and robust response. 
We are conscious that in the preceding parts of this judgment, we have used 
the term “child pornography”, however the same has been done only for the 
purposes of giving a better understanding of the nuances involved in the 
                                                
6 Jonah R. Rimmer, Child Sexual Exploitation, (Oxford Research Encyclopaedia Criminology, 
2024). 
7 Mary Graw Leary, The Language of Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation, in Carissa Byrne 
Hessick (Eds.), Refining Child Pornography Law – Crime, Language and Social Consequences 
(University of Michigan Press, 2016); see also, Danijela Frangež, Anton Toni Klančnik, Mojca 
Žagar Karer Et. Al., The Importance of Terminology Related to Child Sexual Exploitation, 
66(4) REV. ZA. KRIM. KRIMINOL. 291 (2015); see also, Kathryn C. Seigfried Spellar & Virginia 
Soldino, Child Sexual Exploitation: Introduction to a Global Problem, in Thomas J. Holt & 
Adam M. Bossler (Eds.), The Palgrave Handbook of International Cybercrime and 
Cyberdeviance, (Palgrave Macmillian, Cham, 2020) 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 170 of 199 
 
present matter. We further forbid the courts from using the term "child 
pornography" and instead the term "child sexual exploitation and abuse 
material" (CSEAM) should be used in judicial orders and judgements of all 
courts across the country. 
 
229. Although, there exists a tangible difference between the act of viewing 
CSEAM and the act of engaging in sexual abuse of children, yet the latter 
desire is always inherent in the former.8 Both the use of CSEAM and the act 
of child sexual abuse share a common, malevolent intent: the exploitation 
and degradation of a child for the sexual gratification of the abuser. The 
production of child sexual exploitative material is inherently linked to the 
act of sexual abuse. In both cases, the intent is clear: to sexually exploit and 
harm a child. The creation of such material is not a passive act but a 
deliberate one, where the abuser intentionally engages in the exploitation of 
a child, knowing full well the harm it causes.9 
 
230. This intent is what makes these crimes particularly heinous. The abuser is 
not only violating the child’s body but is also reducing them to an object for 
                                                
8 Vaughn I. Rickert & Owen Ryan, Is the Internet the Source?, 40 J. ADOLESC. HEALTH 104 
(2007); see also, Dr. Ethel Quayle, Assessment issues with young people who engage in 
problematic sexual behaviour through the Internet, in M.C. Calder (Ed.), New Developments 
with young people who sexually abuse (Russel House Publishing, Lyme Regis, UK, 2007). 
9 Matthew L Long, Laurence A. Alison & Michelle A McManus, Child pornography and 
likelihood of contact abuse: a comparison between contact child sexual offenders and 
noncontact offenders, 25(4) SEX ABUSE, 370 (2013). 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 171 of 199 
 
their own gratification, with little regard for the child’s dignity or well-being. 
This dehumanization is evident in the production and distribution of 
CSEAM, where the child is treated not as a person but as a commodity to be 
consumed. Those who consume such material may develop an increased 
desire to engage in further acts of child exploitation. The viewing of CSEAM 
can desensitize individuals to the horrors of child abuse, leading them to seek 
out more extreme forms of exploitation or even to commit acts of abuse 
themselves.10 
 
231. Moreover, the demand for such material will always incubate a 
corresponding production and distribution of CSEAM.11 Abusers may be 
motivated to create and distribute these materials to satisfy the demand, 
leading to the abuse of more children.12 This cycle of abuse and exploitation 
underscores the need for stringent measures to not only punish those who 
create and distribute CSEAM but also to deter potential consumers and 
reduce the demand for such material. 
 
232. Child sexual exploitative material is deeply degrading to the dignity of 
children. It reduces them to objects of sexual gratification, stripping them of 
                                                
10 Dr. Ethel Quayle Et. Al., The role of sexual images in online and offline sexual bheaviour 
with minors, 17(6) CURR. PSYCHIATRY REP. 1 (2019). 
11 Melissa Hamilton, The Child Pornography Crusade and Its Net- Widening Effect, 33 
CARDOZO L. REV. 1694 (2012). 
12 Esposito & Lesli C., Regulating the Internet: The Battle Against Child Pornography, 30 
CASEW. RES. J. INT’L. L. 5 (1998). 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 172 of 199 
 
their humanity and violating their fundamental rights. Children are entitled 
to grow up in an environment that respects their dignity and protects them 
from harm. However, CSEAM violates this right in the most egregious 
manner possible. 
 
233. The existence and circulation of CSEAM are affronts to the dignity of all 
children, not just the victims depicted in the material. It perpetuates a culture 
in which children are seen as objects to be exploited, rather than as 
individuals with their own rights and agency. This dehumanization is 
particularly dangerous because it can lead to a broader societal acceptance 
of child exploitation, further endangering the safety and well-being of 
children.13 
 
234. Given the severity and far-reaching consequences of child sexual 
exploitation, there is a clear legal and moral imperative to take strong action 
against those who produce, distribute, and consume CSEAM. This includes 
not only criminal penalties for those involved in CSEAM but also 
preventative measures, such as education and awareness campaigns. Laws 
must be robust and strictly enforced to ensure that perpetrators are brought 
                                                
13 Jason S. Carrol Et Al., Generation XXX, Pornography Acceptance and Use Among Emerging 
Adults, 23 J. ADOLESCENT RES. 6 (2008). 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 173 of 199 
 
to justice and that children are protected from further harm. The courts ought 
to be loathe in showing any form of leniency in such matters.14  
 
235. The impact of CSEAM on its victims is devastating and far-reaching, 
affecting their mental, emotional, and social well-being. Victims of such 
heinous exploitation often endure profound psychological trauma that can 
manifest as depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).15 
The relentless reminder that images and videos of their abuse are circulating 
online can lead to a persistent sense of victimization and helplessness, further 
exacerbating feelings of shame, guilt, and worthlessness. This awareness can 
make it highly challenging for victims to move forward, as the fear of being 
recognized and judged by others remains ever-present.16 
 
236. In our society, where social stigma and notions of honour and shame are 
deeply entrenched, the social repercussions for victims are particularly 
severe. Many victims face intense social stigmatization and isolation, finding 
it difficult to form and maintain healthy relationships due to trust issues and 
trauma-related challenges. The stigma attached to being a victim of CSEAM 
                                                
14 Clare McGlynn & Dr. Hannah Bows, Possessing Extreme Pornography: policing, 
prosecutions and the need for reform, 83(6) J. CRIM. LAW., 473 (2019). 
15 Dr. Ethel Quayle, Lars Loof and Tink Palmer, Child Pornography and Sexual Exploitation 
of Children Online, 64 (ECPAT International, 2008). 
16 See, Michael C. Seto, Kailey Roche, Nicole C Rodrigues Et. Al., Evaluating Child Sexual 
Abuse Perpetration Prevention Efforts: A Systematic Review, 33 J. CHILD SEX. ABUS. 22 
(2024). 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 174 of 199 
 
can create significant barriers in social interactions, causing victims to 
withdraw and feel alienated from their communities. The continuous re-
victimization through the sharing and viewing of these materials perpetuates 
the victims' suffering. Each instance of someone viewing or distributing the 
material represents a new violation, making it harder for victims to heal. This 
ongoing trauma can severely impact their self-esteem and self-worth, 
leading to long-term emotional and psychological damage. Furthermore, the 
impact extends to their education and employment opportunities. Many 
victims struggle to concentrate on their studies or work due to the 
overwhelming emotional burden they carry. This can lead to academic 
underachievement, difficulty in securing employment, and economic 
hardships, compounding their sense of insecurity and instability.17  
 
237. Providing compassionate and comprehensive support is crucial to help 
victims heal and reclaim their lives. Therapeutic interventions, including 
trauma-informed counselling and support groups, can offer a safe space for 
victims to process their experiences and begin to heal. Legal and social 
support services are also essential to help victims navigate the complexities 
of their situation and rebuild their lives. 
 
                                                
17 Paul G. Cassel, James Marsh & Jeremy M. Christiansen, The Case for Full Restitution for 
Child Pornography Victims, 82 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 61 (2013). 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 175 of 199 
 
238. In India, the misconceptions about sex education are widespread and 
contribute to its limited implementation and effectiveness. Many people, 
including parents and educators, hold conservative views that discussing sex 
is inappropriate, immoral, or embarrassing. This societal stigma creates a 
reluctance to talk openly about sexual health, leading to a significant 
knowledge gap among adolescents. 
 
239. One prevalent misconception is that sex education encourages promiscuity 
and irresponsible behaviour among youth. Critics often argue that providing 
information about sexual health and contraception will lead to increased 
sexual activity among teenagers. However, research has shown that 
comprehensive sex education actually delays the onset of sexual activity and 
promotes safer practices among those who are sexually active.18 
 
240. Another common belief is that sex education is a Western concept that does 
not align with traditional Indian values. This view has led to resistance from 
various state governments, resulting in bans on sex education in schools in 
some states. This type of opposition hinders the implementation of 
comprehensive and effective sexual health programs, leaving many 
adolescents without accurate information. This is what causes teenagers and 
                                                
18 Padminin Iyer & Peter Aggleton, Seventy years of sex education – A Critical Review, 74(1) 
HEALTH EDUC. J. 3 (2015). 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 176 of 199 
 
young adults to turn to the internet, where they have access to unmonitored 
and unfiltered information, which is often misleading and can plant the seed 
for unhealthy sexual behaviours.  
 
241. Additionally, there is a misconception that sex education only covers 
biological aspects of reproduction. Effective sex education encompasses a 
wide range of topics, including consent, healthy relationships, gender 
equality, and respect for diversity. Addressing these topics is crucial for 
reducing sexual violence and promoting gender equity.  
 
242. Despite some of these challenges, there are successful sex education 
programs in India, such as the Udaan program in Jharkhand. This program's 
success highlights the importance of community involvement, transparency, 
and government support in overcoming resistance and creating a supportive 
environment for sex education.19  
 
243. Positive age-appropriate sex education plays a critical role in preventing 
youth from engaging in harmful sexual behaviours, including the 
distribution, and viewing of CSEAM.20 Positive sex education focuses on 
                                                
19 See, the Udaan Adolescent Education Program by the Centre for Catalyzing Change in 
Jharkhand in India. 
20 Cortney Lollar, Child Pornography and the Restitution Revolution, 103 J. CRIM. L. & 
CRIMINOLOGY 343 (2013). 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 177 of 199 
 
providing accurate, age-appropriate information about sexuality, consent, 
and respectful relationships. Research indicates that comprehensive sex 
education can significantly reduce risky sexual behaviours, increase 
knowledge, enable healthy decision-making, reduce misinformation, delay 
sexual debut, decrease the number of sexual partners, and increase 
contraceptive use. The research done in India has shown the need for 
comprehensive sex education programs. A study of over 900 adolescents in 
Maharashtra found that students not exposed to scientific literature on 
reproductive and sexual health were more likely to initiate sex early.21 
 
244. Furthermore, positive sex education promotes healthy attitudes towards 
sexuality and relationships, which can counteract the distorted perceptions 
often associated with the consumption of child pornography. It can also help 
foster greater empathy and respect for others, reducing the likelihood of 
engaging in exploitative behaviours. Comprehensive sex education 
programs also teach youth about the importance of consent and the legal 
implications of sexual activities, helping them understand the severe 
consequences of viewing and distributing child pornography.   
 
                                                
21 Jagdish Khubchandani, Jeffrey Clark & Raman Kumar, Beyond Controversies: Sexuality 
Education for Adolescents in India, 3(3) J. FAMILY MED. PRIM. CARE. 175 (2014). 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 178 of 199 
 
245. It is of paramount importance that we begin to address misconceptions 
around sexual health, and promoting a comprehensive understanding of sex 
education's benefits is essential for improving sexual health outcomes and 
reducing the incidence of sexual crimes in India. This is especially crucial 
given India's growing population. 
 
246. Section 43 of the POCSO obligates the Central Government and the State 
Government to undertake measures and ensure that the provisions of the said 
Act are given wide publicity through media including the television, radio 
and the print media at regular intervals to make the general public, children 
as well as their parents and guardians aware of the legislation. It further 
requires the appropriate government to also impart proper training at tegular 
intervals to all government offices such as police on the implementation of 
the provisions of this Act. The relevant provision reads as under: - 
“43. Public awareness about Act.— 
The Central Government and every State Government, shall take 
all measures to ensure that—  
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity 
through media including the television, radio and 
the print media at regular intervals to make the 
general public, children as well as their parents and 
guardians aware of the provisions of this Act;  
(b) the officers of the Central Government and the 
State Governments and other concerned persons 
(including the police officers) are imparted periodic 
training 
on 
the 
matters 
relating 
to 
the 
implementation of the provisions of the Act.” 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 179 of 199 
 
247. Section 44 of the POCSO on the other hand obligates the National 
Commission for Protection of Child Rights and the State Commission for 
Protection of Child Rights constituted under the Act to regularly monitor and 
assist in the implementation of the provisions of this Act. The relevant 
provision reads as under: - 
“44. Monitoring of implementation of Act.— 
(1) The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
constituted under section 3, or as the case may be, the State 
Commission for Protection of Child Rights constituted under 
section 17, of the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights 
Act, 2005 (4 of 2006) shall, in addition to the functions assigned 
to them under that Act, also monitor the implementation of the 
provisions of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.  
 
(2) The National Commission or, as the case may be, the State 
Commission, referred to in sub-section (1), shall, while inquiring 
into any matter relating to any offence under this Act, have the 
same powers as are vested in it under the Commissions for 
Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 (4 of 2006).  
 
(3) The National Commission or, as the case may be, the State 
Commission, referred to in sub-section (1), shall, also include, 
its activities under this section, in the annual report referred to 
in section 16 of the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights 
Act, 2005 (4 of 2006).” 
 
248. We are of the considered view that the obligation of the appropriate 
government and the commission under Section(s) 43 and 44 of the POCSO 
respectively, does not end at just spreading awareness about the provisions 
of the POCSO. Since, one of the salutary and avowed object of the POCSO 
was the deterrence of offences of child sexual abuse and exploitation, thus, 
as a natural corollary, the obligation of the appropriate government and the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 180 of 199 
 
commission under the aforesaid provisions will also entail imparting of sex 
education and awareness amongst the general public, children as well as their 
parents and guardians, particularly in schools and places of education. The 
steps and efforts of the appropriate government and the commission towards 
the compliance of Section(s) 43 and 44 must go beyond just the textual 
wording of the said provisions and ought to earnestly take into account the 
pragmatic necessities for curtailing the issue of child abuse, exploitation and 
addiction to pornography. 
  
249. Ultimately, it is our collective responsibility to ensure that victims of child 
pornography receive the care, support, and justice they deserve. By fostering 
a compassionate and understanding society, we can help them find their path 
to recovery and regain a sense of safety, dignity, and hope. This includes 
changing societal attitudes towards victims, improving legal frameworks to 
protect them, and ensuring that perpetrators are held accountable. 
 
a.  
Obligation to report under Section(s) 19 & 20 respectively of the 
 
POCSO and Role of the Society and all Stakeholders.  
 
 
250. Section 19 read with 20 & 21 of the POCSO is one such step towards 
recognizing this collective responsibility of the society in curtailing the issue 
of abuse and exploitation of children. Section 19 places an obligation on any 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 181 of 199 
 
person who has an apprehension that an offence under POCSO is likely to 
be committed or has knowledge that such an offence has been committed, to 
report and provide information about the same to the Special Juvenile Police 
Unit or the local police. Section 19 further delineates the process and 
procedure in which such information or report has to be recorded by the 
authorities, and the course of action to be adopted. Section 20 extends such 
obligation to any and all personnel of media, hotels, hospitals, clubs or 
studios etc., to mandatorily report and provide information about any 
material or object which is sexually exploitative of a child (including 
pornographic, sexually-related or making obscene representation of a child 
or children) through the use of any medium to the authorities mentioned 
above. Any failure to do so, either in terms of Section 19 or 21 of POCSO 
shall be liable to be punished with imprisonment upto 6-months or fine or 
both. Further, any failure on the part of any employer or supervisor in 
reporting the commission of any offence or its apprehension in respect of a 
subordinate under his control, will also be liable to be punished with 
imprisonment which may extend to 1-year and also fine. The relevant 
provisions read as under: - 
“19. Reporting of offences.—  
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of1974) any person (including the child), 
who has apprehension that an offence under this Act is likely to 
be committed or has knowledge that such an offence has been 
committed, he shall provide such information to,—  
(a) the Special Juvenile Police Unit; or  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 182 of 199 
 
(b) the local police.  
 
(2) Every report given under sub-section (1) shall be —  
(a) ascribed an entry number and recorded in writing;  
(b) be read over to the informant;  
(c) shall be entered in a book to be kept by the Police Unit.  
 
(3) Where the report under sub-section (1) is given by a child, 
the same shall be recorded under sub-section (2) in a simple 
language so that the child understands contents being recorded.  
 
(4) In case contents are being recorded in the language not 
understood by the child or wherever it is deemed necessary, a 
translator or an interpreter, having such qualifications, 
experience and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, 
shall be provided to the child if he fails to understand the same. 
 
(5) Where the Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police is 
satisfied that the child against whom an offence has been 
committed is in need of care and protection, then, it shall, after 
recording the reasons in writing, make immediate arrangement 
to give him such care and protection including admitting the 
child into shelter home or to the nearest hospital within twenty-
four hours of the report, as may be prescribed.  
 
(6) The Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police shall, 
without unnecessary delay but within a period of twenty-four 
hours, report the matter to the Child Welfare Committee and the 
Special Court or where no Special Court has been designated, 
to the Court of Session, including need of the child for care and 
protection and steps taken in this regard.  
 
(7) No person shall incur any liability, whether civil or criminal, 
for giving the information in good faith for the purpose of sub-
section (1). 
 
20. Obligation of media, studio and photographic facilities to 
report cases.— 
Any personnel of the media or hotel or lodge or hospital or club 
or studio or photographic facilities, by whatever name called, 
irrespective of the number of persons employed therein, shall, on 
coming across any material or object which is sexually 
exploitative of the child (including pornographic, sexually-

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 183 of 199 
 
related or making obscene representation of a child or children) 
through the use of any medium, shall provide such information 
to the Special Juvenile Police Unit, or to the local police, as the 
case may be. 
 
21. Punishment for failure to report or record a case.— 
(1) Any person, who fails to report the commission of an offence 
under sub-section (1) of section 19 or section 20 or who fails to 
record such offence under sub-section (2) of section 19 shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description which may 
extend to six months or with fine or with both.  
 
(2) Any person, being in-charge of any company or an institution 
(by whatever name called) who fails to report the commission of 
an offence under sub-section (1) of section 19 in respect of a 
subordinate under his control, shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with 
fine.  
 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to a child 
under this Act.” 
 
 
251. Thus, it is evident that, to achieve the avowed purpose, a legal obligation has 
been imposed under the POCSO Act on any person to report an offence to 
the relevant authorities specified therein if they have knowledge that an 
offence under the Act has been committed. This obligation also extends to 
individuals who have reason to believe that an offence under the Act is likely 
to be committed. In addition to imposing this legal duty under Section 19, 
the legislature being in seisin of the paramount importance in collectively 
addressing the problems of child abuse and exploitation, deemed it expedient 
to make the failure to discharge this obligation punishable under Section 21 
of the Act. Such provisions have been inserted with a view to ensure strict 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 184 of 199 
 
compliance of the provisions under the POCSO and thereby to ensure that 
the tender age of children is not being abused and their childhood and youth 
is protected against exploitation. 
 
252. In Shankar Kisanrao Khade v. State of Maharashtra, reported in (2013) 5 
SCC 546, this Court expressing its anguish over the large number of cases 
of abuse and exploitation of children, held that such issues must be 
collectively dealt by all stakeholders in a child-centric manner by applying 
the best interest of child standard, since best interest of the child is 
paramount and not the interest of perpetrator of the crime. It further inter-
alia laid down the manner in which all persons in charge of the 
schools/educational institutions, special homes, children homes, shelter 
homes, hostels, remand homes, jails, etc. or wherever children are housed 
have to comply with the obligation(s) envisaged under Section(s) 19 & 21 
of the POCSO. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“72. I may also point out that, in large numbers of cases, 
children are abused by persons known to them or who have 
influence over them. Criminal courts in this country are galore 
with cases where children are abused by adults addicted to 
alcohol, drugs, depression, marital discord, etc. Preventive 
aspects have seldom been given importance or taken care of. 
Penal laws focus more on situations after commission of offences 
like violence, abuse, exploitation of the children. Witnesses of 
many such heinous crimes often keep mum taking shelter on 
factors like social stigma, community pressure, and difficulties 
of navigating the criminal justice system, total dependency on 
the perpetrator emotionally and economically and so on. Some 
adult members of family including parents choose not to report 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 185 of 199 
 
such crimes to the police on the plea that it was for the sake of 
protecting the child from social stigma and it would also do more 
harm to the victim. Further, they also take shelter pointing out 
that in such situations some of the close family members having 
known such incidents would not extend medical help to the child 
to keep the same confidential and so on, least bothered about the 
emotional, psychological and physical harm done to the child. 
Sexual abuse can be in any form like sexually molesting or 
assaulting a child or allowing a child to be sexually molested or 
assaulted or encouraging, inducing or forcing the child to be 
used for the sexual gratification of another person, using a child 
or deliberately exposing a child to sexual activities or 
pornography or procuring or allowing a child to be procured for 
commercial exploitation and so on. 
 
73. In my view, whenever we deal with an issue of child abuse, 
we must apply the best interest of child standard, since best 
interest of the child is paramount and not the interest of 
perpetrator of the crime. Our approach must be child-centric. 
Complaints received from any quarter, of course, have to be kept 
confidential without casting any stigma on the child and the 
family members. But, if the tormentor is the family member 
himself, he shall not go scot-free. Proper and sufficient 
safeguards also have to be given to the persons who come 
forward to report such incidents to the police or to the Juvenile 
Justice Board. 
 
74. The conduct of the police for not registering a case under 
Section 377 IPC against the accused, the agony undergone by a 
child of 11 years with moderate intellectual disability, non-
reporting of offence of rape committed on her, after having 
witnessed the incident either to the local police or to the Juvenile 
Justice Board compel us to give certain directions for 
compliance in future which, in my view, are necessary to protect 
our children from such sexual abuses. This Court as parens 
patriae has a duty to do so because the Court has guardianship 
over minor children, especially with regard to the children 
having intellectual disability, since they are suffering from legal 
disability. Prompt reporting of the crime in this case could have 
perhaps, saved the life of a minor child of moderate intellectual 
disability. 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 186 of 199 
 
76. Considering the entire facts and circumstances of the case, I 
am inclined to convert death sentence awarded to the accused to 
rigorous imprisonment for life and that all the sentences 
awarded will run consecutively. 
 
77. In my opinion, the case in hand calls for issuing the following 
directions to various stakeholders for due compliance: 
 
77.1. The persons in charge of the schools/educational 
institutions, special homes, children homes, shelter homes, 
hostels, remand homes, jails, etc. or wherever children are 
housed, if they come across instances of sexual abuse or assault 
on a minor child which they believe to have been committed or 
come to know that they are being sexually molested or assaulted 
are directed to report those facts keeping upmost secrecy to the 
nearest Special Juvenile Police Unit (SJPU) or local police, and 
they, depending upon the gravity of the complaint and its 
genuineness, take appropriate follow-up action casting no 
stigma to the child or to the family members. 
 
77.2. Media personnel, persons in charge of hotels, lodges, 
hospitals, clubs, studios and photograph facilities have to duly 
comply with the provision of Section 20 of Act 32 of 2012 and 
provide information to the SJPU, or local police. Media has to 
strictly comply with Section 23 of the Act as well. 
 
77.3. Children with intellectual disability are more vulnerable to 
physical, sexual and emotional abuse. Institutions which house 
them or persons in care and protection, if come across any act 
of sexual abuse, have a duty to bring to the notice of the Juvenile 
Justice Board/SJPU or local police and they in turn be in touch 
with the competent authority and take appropriate action. 
 
77.4. Further, it is made clear that if the perpetrator of the crime 
is a family member himself, then utmost care be taken and 
further action be taken in consultation with the mother or other 
female members of the family of the child, bearing in mind the 
fact that best interest of the child is of paramount consideration. 
 
77.5. If hospitals, whether government or privately-owned or 
medical institutions where children are being treated come to 
know that children admitted are subjected to sexual abuse, the 
same will immediately be reported to the nearest Juvenile Justice 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 187 of 199 
 
Board/SJPU and the Juvenile Justice Board, in consultation with 
SJPU, should take appropriate steps in accordance with the law 
safeguarding the interest of the child. 
 
77.6. The non-reporting of the crime by anybody, after having 
come to know that a minor child below the age of 18 years was 
subjected to any sexual assault, is a serious crime and by not 
reporting they are screening the offenders from legal 
punishment and hence be held liable under the ordinary criminal 
law and prompt action be taken against them, in accordance 
with law. 
 
77.7. Complaints, if any, received by Ncpcr, Scpcr, Child 
Welfare Committee (CWC) and Child Helpline, NGOs or 
women's organisations, etc., they may take further follow-up 
action in consultation with the nearest Juvenile Justice Board, 
SJPU or local police in accordance with law. 
 
77.8. The Central Government and the State Governments are 
directed to constitute SJPUs in all the districts, if not already 
constituted and they have to take prompt and effective action in 
consultation with the Juvenile Justice Board to take care of the 
child and protect the child and also take appropriate steps 
against the perpetrator of the crime. 
 
77.9. The Central Government and every State Government 
should take all measures as provided under Section 43 of Act 32 
of 2012 to give wide publicity to the provisions of the Act through 
media including television, radio and print media, at regular 
intervals, to make the general public, children as well as their 
parents and guardians, aware of the provisions of the Act.” 
 
253. This Court in its decision in State of Maharashtra & Anr. v. Maroti reported 
in (2023) 4 SCC 298 examined and explained the true purport of the 
obligations envisaged under Section(s) 19 & 21 of the POCSO. It held that 
prompt and proper reporting of offences under the POCSO is the bedrock of 
the obligations that have been cast under the said provisions, and any other 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 188 of 199 
 
view would defeat the very purpose and object of the Act. It further observed 
that merely because the failure to discharge the obligation under Section(s) 
19 & 21 is punishable with imprisonment for a short duration, does not mean 
that such an offence is not to be taken seriously. Accordingly, it held that 
strict compliance of such provisions must be ensured to protect the tender 
age and youth of children against exploitation. The relevant observations 
read as under: - 
“11. To achieve the avowed purpose, a legal obligation for 
reporting of offence under the POCSO Act is cast upon on a 
person to inform the relevant authorities specified thereunder 
when he/she has knowledge that an offence under the Act had 
been committed. Such obligation is also bestowed on person who 
has apprehension that an offence under this Act is likely to be 
committed. Besides casting such a legal obligation under Section 
19, the Legislature thought it expedient to make failure to 
discharge the obligation thereunder as punishable, under 
Section 21 thereof. True that under Section 21 (1), failure to 
report the commission of an offence under Sub Section 1 of 
Section 19 or Section 20 or failure to report such offence under 
Sub Section 2 of Section 19 has been made punishable with 
imprisonment of either description which may extend to six 
months or with fine or with both. Sub section 2 of Section 21 
provides that any person who being in-charge of any company 
or an institution (by whatever name called) who fails to report 
the commission of an offence under Sub-Section 1 of Section 19 
in respect of a subordinate under his control, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment with a term which may extend to one year or 
with fine. Certainly, such provisions are included in with a view 
to ensure strict compliance of the provisions under the POCSO 
Act and thereby to ensure that the tender age of children is not 
being abused and their childhood and youth is protected against 
exploitation. 
 
12. Looking at the penal provisions referred above, making 
failure to discharge the obligation under Section 19 (1) 
punishable only with imprisonment for a short duration viz., six 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 189 of 199 
 
months, one may think that it is not an offence to be taken 
seriously. However, according to us that by itself is not the test 
of seriousness or otherwise of an offence of failure to discharge 
the legal obligation under Section 19, punishable under Section 
21 of POCSO Act. We are fortified in our view, by the decisions 
of a three Judge Bench of this Court in Vijay Madanlal 
Choudhary & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors. and a two Judge-
Bench in Shankar Kisanrao Khade v. State of Maharashtra. 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
14. [...] the length of punishment is not only the indicator of the 
gravity of offence and it is to be judged by a totality of factors, 
especially keeping in mind the background in which the offence 
came to be recognized by the Legislature in the specific 
international context. In this context, it is also relevant to note 
that the United Nations Convention on Rights of Children, which 
was ratified by India on 11.12.1992, requires the State parties to 
undertake all appropriate national, bilateral and multilateral 
measures to prevent the inducement or coercion of child to 
engage in any unlawful sexual activity, the exploitative use of 
children in prostitution or other unlawful sexual practices etc. 
Articles 3 (2) and 34 of the Convention have placed a specific 
duty on the State to protect the child from all forms of sexual 
exploitation and abuse. 
 
15. Prompt and proper reporting of the commission of offence 
under the POCSO Act is of utmost importance and we have no 
hesitation to state that its failure on coming to know about the 
commission of any offence thereunder would defeat the very 
purpose and object of the Act. We say so taking into account the 
various provisions thereunder. Medical examination of the 
victim as also the accused would give many important clues in a 
case that falls under the POCSO Act. [...] We refer to the 
aforesaid provisions only to stress upon the fact that a prompt 
reporting of the commission of an offence under POCSO Act 
would enable immediate examination of the victim concerned 
and at the same time, if it was committed by an unknown person, 
it would also enable the investigating agency to commence 
investigation without wasting time and ultimately to secure the 
arrest and medical examination of the culprit. There can be no 
two views that in relation to sexual offences medical evidence 
has much corroborative value.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 190 of 199 
 
254. The role of “intermediaries” as defined under Section 2(w) of the IT Act in 
checking the proliferation of child pornography is significant. Section 79 of 
the IT Act, 2000 which relates to due diligence that is to be observed by an 
intermediary, provides an exemption from liability to such intermediaries in 
certain cases if they are in compliance with the due-diligence requirements 
prescribed under the said provision, more particularly sub-section (3)(b), this 
is known as the “safe harbour” protection or provision. “Safe Harbour” 
protection means that an intermediary will not be held liable for any third-
party information, data, or communication link made available or hosted by 
him. As per sub-section (2), in order to avail such protection, the 
intermediary foremost must not in any manner be involved in either initiating 
the transmission, or the receipt or the modification of the third-party data or 
information in question, and further is required to observe due diligence 
while discharging his duties under the IT Act and to also observe such other 
guidelines as the Central Government may prescribe in his behalf. Sub-
section (3) (b) of the above-mentioned provision stipulates that if an 
intermediary receives actual knowledge or is notified by the appropriate 
government or its agency that any information, data, or communication link 
residing in or connected to a computer resource controlled by the 
intermediary is being used to commit an unlawful act, the intermediary must 
expeditiously remove or disable access to that material on that resource 
without compromising the evidence in any manner. It further states that the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 191 of 199 
 
protection under Section 79 lapses and does not apply if the intermediary has 
conspired or abetted or aided or induced, whether by threats or promise or 
otherwise in the commission of the unlawful act, or if upon receiving “actual 
knowledge”, or if the intermediary fails to expeditiously remove or disable 
access to that material on that resource without vitiating the evidence in any 
manner on being notified by the appropriate Government or its agency that 
any information, data or communication link residing in or connected to a 
computer resource controlled by the intermediary is being used to commit 
the unlawful act. The relevant provision reads as under: - 
“79. Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain 
cases.— 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force but subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) 
and (3), an intermediary shall not be liable for any third-party 
information, data, or communication link made available or 
hosted by him. 
 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply if— 
(a) the function of the intermediary is limited to providing 
access to a communication system over which information 
made available by third parties is transmitted or 
temporarily stored or hosted; or 
(b) the intermediary does not— 
(i) 
initiate the transmission; 
(ii) 
select the receiver of the transmission; and 
(iii) 
select or modify the information contained in the 
transmission; 
 
(c) the 
intermediary 
observes 
due 
diligence 
while 
discharging his duties under this Act and also observes 
such other guidelines as the Central Government may 
prescribe in this behalf. 
 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply if— 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 192 of 199 
 
 
(a) the intermediary has conspired or abetted or aided or 
induced, whether by threats or promise or otherwise in the 
commission of the unlawful act; 
(b) upon receiving actual knowledge, or on being notified by 
the appropriate Government or its agency that any 
information, data or communication link residing in or 
connected to a computer resource controlled by the 
intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act, the 
intermediary fails to expeditiously remove or disable 
access to that material on that resource without vitiating 
the evidence in any manner. 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression 
‘third-party information’ means any information dealt with by 
an intermediary in his capacity as an intermediary.” 
 
 
255. Rule 11 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Rules, 2020 (for 
short, the “POCSO Rules”), places an obligation on the intermediaries to 
not only report offences under POCSO but also to hand over the necessary 
material including the source from which such material may have originated 
to the Special Juvenile Police Unit or the local police, or the cyber-crime 
portal. As per a MOU between the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) 
under the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) and the National Centre for 
Missing & Exploited Children (NCMEC), a US based NGO, all social media 
intermediaries are required to report cases of child abuse and exploitation to 
the NCMEC, which in turn reports these cases to the NCRB and the NCRB 
forwards this to the concerned State authorities in India through the national 
cybercrime reporting portal.  

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 193 of 199 
 
256. It has been brought to the notice of this Court that social media 
intermediaries do not report such cases of child abuse and exploitation to the 
local authorities specified under POCSO and rather only comply with the 
requirements stipulated in the MOU. In view of the salutary object and the 
mandatory character of the provisions of Sections 19 and 20 of the POCSO 
read with Rule 11 of the POCSO Rules, we are of the considered view, that 
an intermediary cannot claim exemption from the liability under Section 79 
of the IT Act for any third-party information, data, or communication link 
made available or hosted by it, unless due diligence is conducted by it and 
compliance is made of these provisions of the POCSO. We are also of the 
view that such due diligence includes not only removal of child pornographic 
content but also making an immediate report of such content to the 
concerned police units in the manner specified under the POCSO Act and 
the Rules thereunder.  
 
257. Section 42A of the POCSO provides that the Act shall be in addition to and 
not in derogation of the provisions of any other law and further provides that 
it shall have overriding effect on the provisions of any such law to the extent 
of the inconsistency. The relevant provision reads as under: - 
“42A. Act not in derogation of any other law.— 
The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in 
derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being 
in force and, in case of any inconsistency, the provisions of this 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 194 of 199 
 
Act shall have overriding effect on the provisions of any such 
law to the extent of the inconsistency.” 
 
258. In view of the overriding effect of the POCSO Act and the rules thereunder, 
merely because an intermediary is in compliance of the requirements 
specified under Section 79 of the IT Act, will not absolve it of any liability 
under the POCSO, unless it duly complies with the requirements and 
procedure set out under it, particularly Section 20 of POCSO Act and Rule 
11 of the POCSO Rules. It is a settled position of law, that when a statute 
describes or requires a thing to be done in a particular manner; it should be 
done in that manner or not at all. Thus, social media intermediaries in 
addition to reporting the commission or the likely apprehension of 
commission of any offence under POCSO to the National Centre for Missing 
& Exploited Children (NCMEC) is also obligated to report the same to 
authorities specified under Section 19 of POCSO i.e., the Special Juvenile 
Police Unit (SJPU) or the local police. 
 
259. We endorse the view and the directions issued by this Court in Shankar 
Kisanrao Khade (supra) and are of the considered view that a meaningful 
effect to the provisions of the POCSO can only be given if such directions 
are complied with to the letter and spirit. We further caution the courts to 
refrain from showing any form of leniency or leeway in offences under 
Section 21 of the POCSO, particularly to schools/educational institutions, 
special homes, children’s homes, shelter homes, hostels, remand homes, 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 195 of 199 
 
jails, etc. who failed to discharge their obligation of reporting the 
commission or the apprehension of commission of any offence or instance 
of child abuse or exploitation under the POCSO. Section(s) 19, 20 and 21 of 
the POCSO are mandatory in nature, and there can be no dilution of the 
salutary object and purport of these provisions. Merely because Section 21 
prescribes a lesser threshold of punishment, the same in no way derogates or 
detracts from the gravity or severity of the offence which has been sought to 
be punished as held in Maroti (supra). It is a settled position of law that the 
length of punishment is not the only indicator of the gravity of the offence 
and it is to be judged by a totality of factors, especially keeping in mind the 
background in which the offence came to be recognized by the legislature in 
the specific international context i.e., the United Nations Convention on 
Rights of Children, particularly Article(s) 3(2) and 34 of the said 
Convention. 
 
ii. 
Suggestions to the Union of India and to the courts. 
 
260. We propose to suggest the following to the Union of India in its Ministry of 
Women and Child Development: - 
 
(i) 
The Parliament should seriously consider to bring about an 
amendment to the POCSO for the purpose of substituting the term 
“child pornography” that with “child sexual exploitation and abuse 
material” (CSEAM) with a view to reflect more accurately on the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 196 of 199 
 
reality of such offences. The Union of India, in the meantime may 
consider to bring about the suggested amendment to the POCSO by 
way of an ordinance.  
 
(ii) 
We put the courts to notice that the term “child pornography” shall 
not be used in any judicial order or judgment, and instead the term 
“child sexual exploitation and abuse material” (CSEAM) should be 
endorsed. 
 
(iii) 
Implementing comprehensive sex education programs that include 
information about the legal and ethical ramifications of child 
pornography can help deter potential offenders. These programs 
should address common misconceptions and provide young people 
with a clear understanding of consent and the impact of exploitation. 
 
(iv) 
Providing support services to the victims and rehabilitation 
programs for the offenders is essential. These services should 
include psychological counselling, therapeutic interventions, and 
educational support to address the underlying issues and promote 
healthy development. For those already involved in viewing or 
distributing child pornography, CBT has proven effective in 
addressing the cognitive distortions that fuel such behaviour. 
Therapy programs should focus on developing empathy, 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 197 of 199 
 
understanding the harm caused to victims, and altering problematic 
thought patterns. 
 
(v) 
Raising awareness about the realities of child sexual exploitative 
material and its consequences through public campaigns can help 
reduce its prevalence. These campaigns should aim to destigmatize 
reporting and encourage community vigilance. 
 
(vi) 
Identifying at-risk individuals early and implementing intervention 
strategies for youth with problematic sexual behaviours (PSB) 
involves several steps and requires a coordinated effort among 
various stakeholders, including educators, healthcare providers, law 
enforcement, and child welfare services. Educators, healthcare 
professionals, and law enforcement officers should be imparted 
training to identify signs of PSB. Awareness programs can help 
these professionals recognize early warning signs and understand 
how to respond appropriately. 
 
(vii) Schools can also play a crucial role in early identification and 
intervention. Implementing school-based programs that educate 
students about healthy relationships, consent, and appropriate 
behaviour can help prevent PSB. 
 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 198 of 199 
 
(viii) To give meaningful effect to the above suggestions and work out the 
necessary modalities, the Union of India may consider constituting 
an Expert Committee tasked with devising a comprehensive 
program or mechanism for health and sex education, as well as 
raising awareness about the POCSO among children across the 
country from an early age, for ensuring a robust and well-informed 
approach to child protection, education, and sexual well-being. 
 
(ix) 
We urge the Parliament to consider amending  Section 15 sub-
section (1) of POCSO so as to make it more convenient for the 
general public to report by way of an online portal, any instance of 
storage or possession of CSEAM to the specified authorities for the 
purpose of the said provision. 
 
G.  
FINAL ORDER 
261. For all the foregoing reasons, we have reached the conclusion that the High 
Court committed an egregious error in passing the impugned judgment. We 
are left with no other option but to set aside the impugned judgment and 
order passed by the High Court, and restore the criminal proceedings in Spl. 
S.C. No. 170 of 2023 to the court of Sessions Judge, Mahila Neethi Mandram 
(Fast Track Court), Tiruvallur District. We accordingly pass such order. 
 
262. We direct the Registry to send one copy each of this judgment to the 
Principal Secretary, Ministry of Law & Justice, Union of India and to the 

Criminal Appeal Nos. 2161-2162 of 2024  
 Page 199 of 199 
 
Principal Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Union of 
India, for undertaking appropriate course of action.  
 
263. Pending application(s) if any, also stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
...................................................... CJI.  
(Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud)  
 
 
.......................................................... J.  
(J.B. Pardiwala)  
 
New Delhi 
23rd September, 2024