2024 INSC 717
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL No(s). 1014-1015 OF 2013 
 
PARVEEN KUMAR 
 
  
 
 
 
       …APPELLANT(s) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH  
 
   …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
 
1. Both the appeals arise out of the common Judgment and Order dated 
16.03.2011 passed by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh at Shimla in 
the Criminal Appeal No. 97 of 2000 preferred by the appellant-Parveen 
Kumar and the Criminal Appeal No. 325 of 2000 preferred by the State 
of Himachal Pradesh. 
2. The short facts as curled out from the record are that on 10.10.1992 the 
appellant had married Raksha Devi (the deceased).  The said Raksha 
Devi gave birth to a male child from the loins of the appellant at her 
parental home on 18.12.1993. As per the case of the prosecution, the 
appellant used to beat his wife even when she was pregnant and 
therefore, she had gone away to her parental home and had got 
Digitally signed by
Nisha Khulbey
Date: 2024.09.23
13:28:22 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
registered an FIR being No. 59 of 1993 for the offence under Section 
498-A of IPC on 12.09.1993 at the Police Station Ghumarwin. She also 
filed a petition under Section 125 of the Cr.P.C. seeking maintenance 
from the appellant, and also filed another complaint under Section 
107/151 Cr.P.C.  Somewhere in May 1994, the appellant brought back 
his wife to her matrimonial home. On 22.09.1994, the said Raksha Devi 
gave a statement in the Court of Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate in 
the proceedings under Section 125 of Cr.P.C. that she did not want to 
pursue the matter as she was living happily with the appellant. Similar 
statement was also allegedly given in the Court in respect of the 
complaint filed by her. However, on 26.09.1994 the wife of the appellant 
Raksha Devi consumed tablets of aluminum phosphide at about 1:45 
a.m. She was admitted in the hospital for treatment, however could not 
survive and died at 5.00 a.m. on the same day. 
3. The information regarding her death was reduced to writing by the SHO 
in the daily diary register vide DDR No. 30. The SHO sent the body of 
the deceased to the hospital for carrying out the post-mortem. On 
01.10.1994 the brother of the deceased, Sh. Madan Lal (PW-3) lodged 
an FIR being No. 97 of 1994 at the Police Station, Bhoranj alleging that 
the appellant had subjected his sister to cruelty and forced her to commit 
suicide. The Investigating Officer after carrying out the investigation 
submitted the chargesheet against the appellant for the offence under 

3 
 
Section 498-A and 306 of IPC. The Sessions Court, Hamirpur, H.P. after 
appreciating the evidence on record adduced by the prosecution as well 
as by the defence, convicted the appellant-accused for the offence 
under Section 498-A IPC and sentenced him to undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for a period of two years and pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- with 
the default clause, however, acquitted the appellant for the offence 
under Section 306 of IPC vide the Judgment and Order dated 
24.02.2000. 
4. Being aggrieved by the said Judgment and Order passed by the 
Sessions Court, the appellant preferred Criminal Appeal No. 97 of 2000 
against his conviction under Section 498-A IPC whereas the State of 
Himachal Pradesh preferred the Criminal Appeal No. 325 of 2000 
against the acquittal of the appellant from the offence under Section 306 
of IPC before the High Court. The High Court vide the impugned 
Judgment and Order dismissed the appeal preferred by the appellant 
whereas allowed the appeal preferred by the State and convicted the 
appellant for the offence under Section 306 of IPC. He was directed to 
undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of five years and to pay a 
fine of Rs.3,000/- with default clause of the offence under Section 306 
of IPC, while confirming the conviction and sentence imposed by the 
Sessions Court for the offence under Section 498-A of IPC. 

4 
 
5. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that out of 
the three cases filed by the deceased – Raksha Devi against the 
appellant, the complaint lodged under Section 107/151 of Cr.P.C. was 
dismissed by the concerned Court on 04.04.1994, and the other two 
cases filed under Section 125 Cr.P.C.  and FIR No. 59/93 under Section 
498-A IPC were settled between the parties as per the Order dated 
22.09.1994 passed by the concerned Court. According to him the 
settlement between the parties could not be treated as admission of 
guilt, on the contrary after the settlement the deceased had come to her 
matrimonial home to stay with the appellant. He further submitted that 
there were no allegations of cruelty made between the period June 1993 
till she committed suicide on 26.09.1994 and therefore no presumption 
under Section 113A of the Indian Evidence Act could be raised against 
the appellant. Placing reliance of the decision of this Court in Hans Raj 
Vs. State of Haryana1 and in case of Naresh Kumar vs. State of 
Haryana2 he submitted that the conviction could not be based on 
conjectures and surmises. 
6. Per contra the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-State 
submitted that the appellant had tried to mislead the investigation by 
stating that the deceased had taken the tablets of aluminum phosphide 
 
1 2004(12) SCC 257 
2 2024 (3) SCC 573 

5 
 
as an insecticide by mistake. He further submitted that the death had 
happened within two years of the marriage and during the said two years 
the deceased had filed three complaints against the appellant alleging 
harassment and cruelty and therefore the presumption under Section 
113A of the Evidence Act was rightly raised by the High Court for 
convicting the appellant under Section 306 of IPC. According to him 
though the appellant had examined two defense witnesses, the 
testimony of both the witnesses did not inspire any confidence. 
7. For better appreciation of the submissions made by the learned counsel 
for the parties it would be beneficial to reproduce the provisions 
contained in Section 498-A and 306 IPC as also Section 113A of the 
Indian Evidence Act. The said provisions read as under: 
“498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman 
subjecting her to cruelty. —Whoever, being the husband or the 
relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to 
cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “cruelty” 
means— (a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is 
likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave 
injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) 
of the woman; or (b) harassment of the woman where such 
harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person related 
to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable 
security or is on account of failure by her or any person related 
to her to meet such demand. 
 
306. Abetment of suicide. —If any person commits suicide, 
whoever abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
 

6 
 
113A. Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married 
woman. ––When the question is whether the commission of 
suicide by a woman had been abetted by her husband or any 
relative of her husband and it is shown that she had committed 
suicide within a period of seven years from the date of her 
marriage and that her husband or such relative of her husband 
had subjected her to cruelty, the court may presume, having 
regard to all the other circumstances of the case, that such 
suicide had been abetted by her husband or by such relative of 
her husband.  
Explanation. –– For the purposes of this section, “cruelty” shall 
have the same meaning as in section 498A of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).” 
8. From the explanation to Section 498-A IPC, it is discernible that the word 
‘Cruelty’ means, (i)  any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is 
likely to drive the woman to commit suicide (ii) any wilful conduct which 
is of such a nature as is likely  to cause grave injury or danger to life, 
limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or (iii) 
harassment of the woman with a view to coercing her or any person 
related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable 
security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to 
meet such demand. So far as the instant case is concerned, as per the 
case of the prosecution the appellant had subjected the deceased to 
Cruelty i.e. had committed wilful conduct which was of such a nature, 
that drove her to commit suicide. Undoubtedly, the allegations of Cruelty 
as contemplated under Section 498A have to be established beyond 
reasonable doubt.  Similarly, the charge under Section 306 also has to 
be proved by the Prosecution beyond reasonable doubt by leading 
cogent evidence that the appellant abetted the deceased to commit 

7 
 
suicide as contemplated in Section 107 of IPC. Of course, Section 113A 
of the Evidence Act permits the Court to raise a presumption as to 
abetment of suicide, if the Suicide was committed within seven years of 
the marriage and if it is proved that she was subjected to the “Cruelty” 
as explained in Section 498A by her husband or the relative of the 
husband. However, for the purpose of raising the presumption by the 
Court under Section 113A of the Evidence Act, the basic facts as 
contemplated in the said provision, need to be proved by the 
Prosecution. 
9. In the light of the above legal position, if the facts of the present case 
are appreciated, it appears that there are certain facts which have not 
been disputed, rather have been duly proved by the prosecution.  Apart 
from the fact of the appellant had married the deceased on 10.10.1992, 
and the deceased had given birth to a male child from the loins of the 
appellant on 18.12.1993, the filing of three cases by the deceased 
during her life time against the appellant, i.e. (i) FIR No. 59/1993 dated 
12.07.1993 under Section 498-A and 506 IPC; (ii) complaint/Kalendra 
under Section 107/151 of Cr.P.C. dated 01.07.1993 and (iii) case under 
Section 125 Cr.P.C in May, 1994 seeking maintenance for herself and 
her child, is also not disputed. The fact of the deceased having 
committed suicide by consuming tablets of aluminum phosphide, which 
is supposed to be an insecticide, is also duly proved by the prosecution. 

8 
 
It is also pertinent to note that the trial Court and the High Court have 
concurrently held the appellant guilty of the offence under Section 498-
A IPC by holding that the appellant had subjected the deceased to 
cruelty. 
10. Though it was sought to be submitted on behalf of the appellant that as 
per the suicide note Exhibit DF, the suicide was committed by the 
deceased on account of her intolerable pain and illness and not due to 
the Cruelty of the Appellant, the said contention deserves to be 
considered for rejection only. Apart from the fact that the said suicidal 
note does not appear to have been duly exhibited for being admitted in 
evidence, the fact that the appellant had not even bothered to inform the 
parents of the deceased immediately after the incident smacked of his 
guilt. The two defense witnesses claiming to be the neighbours of the 
appellant were examined to prove that the relationship between the 
appellant and his wife was cordial and not discordant, however they also 
do not inspire any confidence, in view of the undisputed and proved 
facts that the deceased had filed three cases against the appellant 
during her lifetime in respect of harassment and cruelty subjected to her 
by the Appellant. 
11. In that view of the matter, the High Court has rightly raised the 
presumption under Section 113A of the Evidence Act to hold that the 
suicide was abetted by the Appellant. There cannot be any 

9 
 
disagreement to the proposition laid down by this Court in case of Hans 
Raj vs. State of Haryana (supra) and Naresh Kumar vs. State of 
Haryana (supra)  relied upon by the learned Counsel for the Appellant, 
to submit that unlike Section 113B of the Evidence Act, a statutory 
presumption does not arise in Section 113A by operation of law merely 
on the proof of the circumstances enumerated in the said provision, and 
that Section 113A gives a discretion to the Court to raise a presumption. 
As discussed hereinabove the prosecution by leading cogent evidence 
had established that the deceased had committed suicide within a 
period of seven years from the date of her marriage and that the 
Appellant that is her husband had subjected her to cruelty as 
contemplated in Section 498-A of IPC. We therefore, do not find any 
illegality or infirmity in the impugned order passed by the High Court 
convicting the Appellant for the offences under Section 498-A r/w 
Section 306 of IPC.  
12. The Appeals being devoid of merits are dismissed. Dismissed 
accordingly. 
……………………………………J.
 
 
 
  [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 
 
.……………..……………………. J. 
  [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
23rd SEPTEMBER, 2024