2024 INSC 14
 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 1 of 32 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9133 OF 2019 
 
DBS BANK LIMITED SINGAPORE 
.....  
APPELLANT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
  
 
RUCHI SOYA INDUSTRIES LIMITED  
AND ANOTHER 
 
.....  
 
RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 787 OF 2020 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
SANJIV KHANNA, J. 
The issue that arises for consideration in the present appeals 
is: 
Whether Section 30(2)(b)(ii) of the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 20161, as amended in 2019, entitles 
the dissenting financial creditor to be paid the minimum 
value of its security interest? 
 
2. 
Appellant - DBS Bank Limited Singapore had extended financial 
debt of around USD 50,000,000 (fifty million dollars only) or Rs. 
 
1 For short, “IBC” or “the Code”, as the case may be. 
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2024.01.03
18:11:29 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 2 of 32 
 
243,00,00,000 (rupees two hundred forty three crore only) to M/s. 
Ruchi Soya Industries Limited2, the corporate debtor.   
 
3. 
The financial debt was secured by: (i) a sole and exclusive first 
charge over certain immovable and fixed assets of the Corporate 
Debtor in Kandla, Gujarat; and (ii) sole and exclusive first charge 
over assets of the Corporate Debtor in Baran, Rajasthan; Guna, 
Madhya Pradesh; Dalauda, Madhya Pradesh; Gadarwara, Madhya 
Pradesh; and a commercial office space at Nariman Point, Mumbai.   
 
4. 
On 15.12.2017, Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process3 was 
initiated against the Corporate Debtor under the provisions of the 
Code. The company petition seeking to initiate CIRP was admitted 
and a Resolution Professional4 was appointed.   
 
5. 
The appellant had submitted its claim, which was admitted by the 
RP at Rs. 242,96,00,000 (rupees two hundred forty two crore ninety 
six lakh only). 
 
6. 
On 20.03.2019, Patanjali Ayurvedic Limited submitted a resolution 
plan for Rs. 4134,00,00,000 (rupees four thousand one hundred 
thirty four crore only) against the aggregate claims of around Rs. 
 
2 For short, “Corporate Debtor”. 
3 For short, “CIRP”. 
4 For short, “RP”. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 3 of 32 
 
8398,00,00,000 (rupees eight thousand three hundred ninety eight 
crore only), representing approximately 49.22% of the total 
admitted claims of the financial creditors. 
 
7. 
On 12.04.2019,  by a communication, the appellant informed the 
Committee of Creditors5 that the sole and exclusive nature of 
security held by the appellant by way of mortgage/hypothecation 
over immovable and fixed assets of the Corporate Debtor was of 
greater value compared to collaterals held by other creditors.  
Emphasising the specific treatment of the exclusive and superior 
security, the appellant requested the CoC to take into account the 
liquidation value of such security while considering the distribution 
of proceeds and to make such distribution in a “fair and equitable” 
manner.   
 
8. 
In the 21st and 22nd CoC meetings held on 15.04.2019 and 
23.04.2019 respectively, the appellant’s concern regarding 
treatment/proposed pay-out was noted.  However, in the meeting 
held on 23.04.2019, the CoC approved pari passu distribution of 
the resolution plan proceeds.  
 
 
5 For short, “CoC”. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 4 of 32 
 
9. 
On 30.04.2019, the resolution plan was approved by 96.95% of the 
CoC.  The appellant had voted against the resolution plan, thereby 
becoming a dissenting financial creditor. 
 
10. 
The resolution plan was filed for approval before the National 
Company Law Tribunal6, Mumbai. Separately, the appellant 
challenged the distribution mechanism of the resolution plan 
proceeds by way of an application before the NCLT, Mumbai. 
 
11. 
On 24.07.2019, the NCLT granted provisional/conditional approval 
to the resolution plan.  By the same order dated 24.07.2019, the 
NCLT dismissed the appellant’s application challenging the 
distribution mechanism of the resolution plan proceeds. 
 
12. 
On 31.07.2019, the appellant challenged the dismissal of its 
application before the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal7.   
 
13. 
During pendency of the appeal, Section 6 of the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 20198, was notified by way of 
a gazette notification dated 16.08.2019. It amended Section 
30(2)(b) of the Code. Amended Section 30(2)(b)(ii) of the Code 
provides that operational and dissenting financial creditors shall not 
 
6 For short, “NCLT”. 
7 For short, “NCLAT”. 
8 For short, “Amendment Act”. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 5 of 32 
 
be paid an amount lesser than the amount to be paid to creditors in 
the event of liquidation of the Corporate Debtor under Section 53(1) 
of the Code.  Explanation 2 added thereby makes the amended 
Section 30(2)(b) applicable to pending proceedings. Section 30(4) 
was also amended to state the CoC shall take into account “the 
order of priority” amongst creditors as laid down in Section 53(1) of 
the Code. 
 
14. 
On 30.08.2019, at the 26th CoC meeting, the appellant requested 
the CoC to reconsider the distribution of the resolution proceeds in 
light of the amendments to the Code.  The appellant had submitted 
that if the amendments were considered, it would be entitled to 
receive Rs. 217,86,00,000 (rupees two hundred seventeen crore 
eighty six lakh only) which is the liquidation value of the security 
interest.   The CoC, however, did not accept the prayer, observing 
inter alia that the appellant had already filed an appeal before the 
NCLAT, which was pending.  The CoC was of the view that there 
was a fair amount of ambiguity in the amendments, and no view 
should be expressed by them. 
   
15. 
The NCLT vide order dated 04.09.2019 finally approved the 
resolution plan, which was already provisionally approved vide 
order dated 24.07.2019. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 6 of 32 
 
 
16. 
On 11.10.2019, the appellant challenged the final approval order 
dated 04.09.2019 by way of an appeal before the NCLAT.  The first 
NCLAT appeal preferred by the appellant on 31.07.2019 was still 
pending. 
 
17. 
The two appeals preferred by the appellant against the 
orders/judgments of the NCLT dated 24.07.2019 and dated 
04.09.2019 were taken up for hearing by the NCLAT.  By order 
dated 18.11.2019, the first appeal preferred by the appellant was 
dismissed. By the subsequent order dated 09.12.2019, the NCLAT 
dismissed the second appeal filed by the appellant. 
 
18. 
The orders dated 18.11.2019 and 09.12.2019 passed by the 
NCLAT are in challenge before us. This Court, vide order dated 
06.12.2019, was pleased to issue notice in the appeal preferred 
against the order dated 18.11.2019 and by way of an interim order, 
has directed that Rs. 99,74,00,000 (rupees ninety nine crore 
seventy four lakh only), being the difference between the amount 
which the appellant would have received in terms of the 
amendments noticed above and the amount received by the 
appellant on pro rata distribution of proceeds, should be deposited 
in an escrow account.  Accordingly, Rs. 99,74,00,000 (rupees 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 7 of 32 
 
ninety nine crore seventy four lakh only) had been set aside and 
kept in an escrow account.   
 
19. 
The appellant, it should be stated, has made no claims against 
Patanjali Ayurvedic Limited. 
 
20. 
As per the appellant, the pro rata distribution of proceeds does not 
give regard to the sole, exclusive and higher value of their security 
interest. 
The 
appellant 
will 
receive 
approximately 
Rs. 
119,00,00,000 (rupees one hundred nineteen crore only) as against 
the liquidation value of the security interest of Rs. 217,86,00,000 
(rupees two hundred seventeen crore eighty six lakh only). The 
admitted claim of the appellant is  Rs. 242,96,00,000 (rupees two 
hundred forty two crore ninety six lakh only). Thus, the appellant, 
notwithstanding the amendments to Section 30 of the Code, has 
been deprived of its due share given its superior security assets.  
Equating the appellant with financial creditors having inferior 
security interest has resulted in unjust enrichment and windfall 
benefits to the dissimilarly placed creditors to the detriment of the 
appellant.   
 
21. 
To appreciate the legal question, which requires an answer, we 
would like to reproduce Section 30(2) and Section 30(4) of the 
Code, with the amendments made vide the IBC (Amendment) Act, 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 8 of 32 
 
2019, which for clarity have been highlighted in italics and bold. 
Relevant portions of the two sections read: 
“30. Submission of resolution plan.— 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
(2) The resolution professional shall examine each 
resolution plan received by him to confirm that each 
resolution plan— 
 
(a) provides for the payment of insolvency resolution 
process costs in a manner specified by the Board in 
priority to the payment of other debts of the corporate 
debtor; 
 
(b) provides for the payment of debts of operational 
creditors in such manner as may be specified by the 
Board which shall not be less than— 
 
(i) the amount to be paid to such creditors in the 
event of a liquidation of the corporate debtor under 
Section 53; or 
 
(ii) the amount that would have been paid to such 
creditors, if the amount to be distributed under the 
resolution plan had been distributed in accordance 
with the order of priority in sub-section (1) of 
Section 53, 
 
whichever is higher, and provides for the payment 
of debts of financial creditors, who do not vote in 
favour of the resolution plan, in such manner as 
may be specified by the Board, which shall not be 
less than the amount to be paid to such creditors in 
accordance with sub-section (1) of Section 53 in the 
event of a liquidation of the corporate debtor. 
 
Explanation 1.—For the removal of doubts, it is 
hereby clarified that a distribution in accordance 
with the provisions of this clause shall be fair and 
equitable to such creditors. 
 
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this clause, it 
is hereby declared that on and from the date of 
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 9 of 32 
 
Code (Amendment) Act, 2019, the provisions of this 
clause shall also apply to the corporate insolvency 
resolution process of a corporate debtor— 
 
(i) where a resolution plan has not been approved 
or rejected by the Adjudicating Authority; 
 
(ii) where an appeal has been preferred under 
Section 61 or Section 62 or such an appeal is not 
time barred under any provision of law for the time 
being in force; or 
 
(iii) where a legal proceeding has been initiated in 
any court against the decision of the Adjudicating 
Authority in respect of a resolution plan; 
 
(c) provides for the management of the affairs of the 
corporate debtor after approval of the resolution plan; 
 
(d) the implementation and supervision of the resolution 
plan; 
 
(e) does not contravene any of the provisions of the law 
for the time being in force; 
 
(f) conforms to such other requirements as may be 
specified by the Board. 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of clause (e), if any 
approval of shareholders is required under the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) or any other law for 
the time being in force for the implementation of actions 
under the resolution plan, such approval shall be 
deemed to have been given and it shall not be a 
contravention of that Act or law. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
(4) The committee of creditors may approve a resolution 
plan by a vote of not less than sixty-six per cent of voting 
share of the financial creditors, after considering its 
feasibility and viability the manner of distribution 
proposed, which may take into account the order of 
priority amongst creditors as laid down in sub-
section (1) of Section 53, including the priority and 
value of the security interest of a secured creditor, 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 10 of 32 
 
and such other requirements as may be specified by the 
Board: 
xx 
xx 
xx 
  
 
22. 
The first issue that arises for consideration in these appeals is 
whether the amendments made in the substantive portion of 
Section 30(2), in terms of Explanation 2 will be applicable when the 
first appeal was heard by the NCLAT.  The Amendment Act was 
notified and came into effect on 16.08.2019.  The appellant had 
preferred the first appeal before the NCLAT on 31.07.2019, which 
appeal was directed against the provisional approval order passed 
by the NCLT on 24.07.2019.  In our opinion, Explanation 2(ii) clearly 
states that an appeal preferred under Section 61 or 62, when it is 
not barred by time under any provision of law, shall be heard and 
decided after considering the amended Section 30(2)(b) under the 
Amendment Act. In fact, Explanation 2(i) states that the amended 
clause shall “also” apply to the CIRP of the corporate debtor where 
a resolution plan has not been approved or rejected by the 
adjudicating authority. Explanation 2(iii) states that the amended 
Section 30(2)(b) shall “also” apply where legal proceedings have 
been initiated in any court against the decision of the adjudicating 
authority. Clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of Explanation 2 reflect the wide 
expanse and width of the legislative intent viz. the application of the 
Amendment Act, whether proceedings are pending before the 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 11 of 32 
 
adjudicating authority, the appellate authority, or before any court 
in a proceeding against an order of the adjudicating authority in 
respect of a resolution plan. Only when the resolution plan, as 
approved, has attained finality as no proceedings are pending, that 
the amendments will not apply to re-write the settled matter. 
 
23. 
A three Judge Bench of this Court in Committee of Creditors of 
Essar Steel India Limited v. Satish Kumar Gupta & Ors.9, in 
paragraph 130, has observed that Explanation 2 applies to the 
substituted Section 30(2)(b) to pending proceedings either at the 
level of the adjudicating authority, appellate authority or in a writ or 
civil court. Referring to several decisions, it is observed that no 
vested right inheres in any resolution applicant who has plans 
approved under the Code. Further, an appellate proceeding is a 
continuation of the original proceeding.  A change in law can always 
be applied to original or appellate proceedings. Thus, Explanation 
2 is constitutionally valid and despite having retrospective 
operation, it does not impair vested rights. 
 
24. 
We must also take note of the second submission of the appellant 
in this regard relying upon Explanation 2(i), inter alia, on the ground 
that the final approval to the resolution plan by the NCLT was vide 
 
9 (2020) 8 SCC 531. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 12 of 32 
 
order dated 04.09.2019, which is after the notification of the 
Amendment Act on 16.08.2019. The first order provisionally/ 
conditionally approving the resolution plan was dated 24.07.2019 
and hence, the effect of the Amendment Act could not have been 
considered and applied by the NCLT. There is merit in the 
contention of the appellant, but we need not firmly decide this issue, 
for we are of the opinion that the Amendment Act was certainly 
applicable when the appeals were heard and decided by the 
NCLAT on 18.11.2019 and 09.12.2019, which was post the 
enforcement of the Amendment Act. 
 
25. 
The second question relates to the interpretation of Section 
30(2)(b)(ii) of the Code.  As we read Section 30(2)(b)(ii), the 
dissenting financial creditor is entitled to payment, which should not 
be less than the amount payable under Section 53(1), in the event 
of the liquidation of the corporate debtor. The provision recognises 
that all financial creditors need not be similarly situated. Secured 
financial creditors may have distinct sets of securities. There are a 
number of decisions of this Court, viz. Committee of Creditors of 
Essar Steel India Limited (supra), Swiss Ribbons Private 
Limited and Another v. Union of India and Others10, and Vallal 
 
10 (2019) 4 SCC 17. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 13 of 32 
 
RCK v. Siva Industries and Holdings Limited and Others11, 
which have held that the commercial wisdom of the CoC must be 
respected.  Therefore, the resolution plan accepted by the requisite 
creditors/members of the CoC upon voting, is enforceable and 
binding on all creditors. The CoC can decide the manner of 
distribution of resolution proceeds amongst creditors and others, 
but Section 30(2)(b) protects the dissenting financial creditor and 
operational creditors by ensuring that they are paid a minimum 
amount that is not lesser than their entitlement upon the liquidation 
of the corporate debtor. 
 
26. 
The Code had been enacted to balance the interests of various 
stakeholders, inter alia, by facilitating the resolution of insolvency, 
promoting investment, maximising the value of assets, and 
increasing the availability of credit.  Secured credit is important for 
commerce as it reduces credit risk and carries lower interest due to 
lower loss value in the event of failure.  On the resolution plan being 
approved, an unwilling secured creditor does and must forgo the 
security, albeit such an unwilling secured creditor is entitled to the 
value of the security as payable on the liquidation of the corporate 
debtor.  The provision is enacted to protect the minority autonomy 
 
11 (2022) 9 SCC 803. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 14 of 32 
 
of creditors. It should not be read down to nullify the minimum 
entitlement. Section 30(2)(b)(ii) forfends the dissenting financial 
creditor from settling for a lower amount payable under the 
resolution plan.  
 
27. 
The order passed by the NCLAT dated 18.11.2019 noticing the 
amendments states that Section 30(4) had not been given 
retrospective effect but is prospective in nature. While it was open 
to the CoC to follow the amended Section 30(4), it was not 
mandatory to follow the same. A financial creditor can dissent if the 
resolution plan is discriminatory or against a provision of law. 
However, a dissenting financial creditor cannot take advantage of 
Section 30(2)(b)(ii). A secured creditor cannot claim preference 
over another secured creditor at the stage of distribution on the 
ground of a dissent or assent, otherwise the distribution would be 
arbitrary and discriminative. The purpose of the amendment was 
only to ensure that a dissenting financial creditor does not get 
anything less than the liquidation value, but not for getting the 
maximum of the secured assets.  
 
28. 
In India Resurgence ARC Private Limited v. Amit Metaliks 
Limited & Another.12, a two Judge Bench of this Court has referred 
 
12 2021 SCC Online SC 409. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 15 of 32 
 
to a judgment by a three Judge Bench of this Court in Jaypee 
Kensington Boulevard Apartments Welfare Association & 
Others. v. NBCC (India) Limited & Others.13, to observe and hold: 
“18. In the case of Jaypee Kensington (supra), the 
proposal in the resolution plan was to the effect that if 
the dissenting financial creditors would be entitled to 
some amount in the nature of liquidation value in terms 
of Sections 30 and 53 of IBC read with Regulation 38 of 
the CIRP Regulations, they would be provided such 
liquidation value in the form of proportionate share in 
the equity of a special purpose vehicle proposed to be 
set up and with transfer of certain land parcels 
belonging to corporate debtor. Such method of meeting 
with the liability towards dissenting financial creditors in 
the resolution plan was disapproved by the Adjudicating 
Authority; and this part of the order of the Adjudicating 
Authority was upheld by this Court with the finding that 
the proposal in the resolution plan was not in accord 
with the requirement of ‘payment’ as envisaged by 
clause (b) of Section 30(2) of the Code. In that context, 
this Court held that such action of ‘payment’ could only 
be by handing over the quantum of money or allowing 
the recovery of such money by enforcement of security 
interest, as per the entitlement of a dissenting financial 
creditor. This Court further made it clear that in case a 
valid security interest is held by a dissenting financial 
creditor, the entitlement of such dissenting financial 
creditor to receive the amount could be satisfied by 
allowing him to enforce the security interest, to the 
extent of the value receivable by him and in the order of 
priority available to him. This Court clarified that by 
enforcing such a security interest, a dissenting financial 
creditor would receive payment to the extent of his 
entitlement and that would satisfy the requirement of 
Section 30(2)(b) of the Code. This Court, inter alia, 
observed and held as under: 
 
“121.1. Therefore, when, for the purpose of 
discharge of obligation mentioned in the second 
part of clause (b) of Section 30(2) of the Code, the 
dissenting financial creditors are to be “paid” an 
“amount” quantified in terms of the “proceeds” of 
 
13 (2022) 1 SCC 401. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 16 of 32 
 
assets receivable under Section 53 of the Code; 
and the “amount payable” is to be “paid” in priority 
over their assenting counterparts, the statute is 
referring only to the sum of money and not anything 
else. In the frame and purport of the provision and 
also the scheme of the Code, the expression 
“payment” is clearly descriptive of the action of 
discharge of obligation and at the same time, is 
also prescriptive of the mode of undertaking such 
an action. And, that action could only be of handing 
over the quantum of money, or allowing the 
recovery of such money by enforcement of security 
interest, as per the entitlement of the dissenting 
financial creditor. 
 
121.2. We would hasten to observe that in case a 
dissenting financial creditor is a secured creditor 
and a valid security interest is created in his favour 
and is existing, the entitlement of such a dissenting 
financial creditor to receive the “amount payable” 
could also be satisfied by allowing him to enforce 
the security interest, to the extent of the value 
receivable by him and in the order of priority 
available to him. Obviously, by enforcing such a 
security interest, a dissenting financial creditor 
would receive “payment” to the extent of his 
entitlement and that would satisfy the requirement 
of Section 30(2)(b) of the Code….” 
 
29. 
Thereafter, this Court in India Resurgence ARC Private Limited 
(supra) has observed: 
“19. In Jaypee Kensington (supra), this Court 
repeatedly made it clear that a dissenting financial 
creditor would be receiving the payment of the 
amount as per his entitlement; and that entitlement 
could also be satisfied by allowing him to enforce the 
security interest, to the extent of the value receivable 
by him. It has never been laid down that if a dissenting 
financial creditor is having a security available with 
him, he would be entitled to enforce the entire of 
security interest or to receive the entire value of the 
security available with him. It is but obvious that his 
dealing with the security interest, if occasion so arise, 
would be conditioned by the extent of value 
receivable by him. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 17 of 32 
 
 
20. The extent of value receivable by the appellant is 
distinctly given out in the resolution plan i.e., a sum of 
INR 2.026 crores which is in the same proportion and 
percentage as provided to the other secured financial 
creditors with reference to their respective admitted 
claims. Repeated reference on behalf of the appellant 
to the value of security at about INR 12 crores is 
wholly inapt and is rather ill-conceived. 
 
21. The limitation on the extent of the amount 
receivable by a dissenting financial creditor is innate 
in Section 30(2)(b) of the Code and has been further 
exposited in the decisions aforesaid. It has not been 
the intent of the legislature that a security interest 
available to a dissenting financial creditor over the 
assets of the corporate debtor gives him some right 
over and above other financial creditors so as to 
enforce the entire of the security interest and thereby 
bring about an inequitable scenario, by receiving 
excess amount, beyond the receivable liquidation 
value proposed for the same class of creditors.” 
 
 
30. 
Our attention is also drawn to paragraph 17 and 22 of India 
Resurgence ARC Private Limited (supra), wherein after 
elucidating on the ratio in Jaypee Kensington (supra), the Bench 
has observed: 
“17. Thus, what amount is to be paid to different classes 
or subclasses of creditors in accordance with provisions 
of the Code and the related Regulations, is essentially 
the commercial wisdom of the Committee of Creditors; 
and a dissenting secured creditor like the appellant 
cannot suggest a higher amount to be paid to it with 
reference to the value of the security interest. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
22. It needs hardly any emphasis that if the propositions 
suggested on behalf of the appellant were to be 
accepted, the result would be that rather than 
insolvency resolution and maximisation of the value of 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 18 of 32 
 
assets of the corporate debtor, the processes would 
lead to more liquidations, with every secured financial 
creditor opting to stand on dissent. Such a result would 
be defeating the very purpose envisaged by the Code; 
and cannot be countenanced. We may profitably refer 
to the relevant observations in this regard by this Court 
in Essar Steel as follows: 
 
“85. Indeed, if an “equality for all” approach 
recognising the rights of different classes of 
creditors as part of an insolvency resolution 
process is adopted, secured financial creditors 
will, in many cases, be incentivised to vote for 
liquidation rather than resolution, as they would 
have better rights if the corporate debtor was to 
be liquidated rather than a resolution plan being 
approved. This would defeat the entire objective 
of the Code which is to first ensure that resolution 
of distressed assets takes place and only if the 
same is not possible should liquidation follow.”” 
 
31. 
We believe that there is a contradiction in the reasoning given in 
the judgment of this Court in India Resurgence ARC Private 
Limited (supra), which is in discord with the ratio decidendi of the 
decisions of the three Judge Bench in Committee of Creditors of 
Essar Steel India Limited (supra) and Jaypee Kensington 
(supra). 
 
32. 
In Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited (supra), 
this Court had referred to the UNCITRAL Legislative Guide on the 
treatment of dissenting creditors to observe that it is essential to 
provide a way of imposing a plan agreed upon by a majority of a 
class upon the dissenting minority to increase the chances of 
success of the reorganisation. However, it is also necessary 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 19 of 32 
 
depending upon the mechanism that is chosen for voting on the 
plan and whether the creditors vote in class, to consider whether 
the plan can be made binding upon dissenting classes of creditors 
and other affected parties. To the extent that the plan can be 
approved and enforced upon the dissenting parties, there is a need 
to ensure that the plan provides appropriate protection for the 
dissenting parties and, in particular, the rights may not be unfairly 
affected. Thereupon, the UNCITRAL Legislative Guide states: 
“…The law might provide, for example, that dissenting 
creditors cannot be bound unless assured of certain 
treatment. As a general principle, that treatment might 
be that the creditors will receive at least as much under 
the plan as they would have received in liquidation 
proceedings. If the creditors are secured, the treatment 
required may be that the creditor receives payment of 
the value of its security interest, while in the case of 
unsecured creditors it may be that any junior interests, 
including equity holders, receive nothing…” 
 
33. 
In our opinion, the provisions of Section 30(2)(b)(ii) by law provides 
assurance to the dissenting creditors that they will receive as 
money the amount they would have received in the liquidation 
proceedings. This rule also applies to the operational creditors. This 
ensures that dissenting creditors receive the payment of the value 
of their security interest.  
 
34. 
In paragraph 128 in the case of Committee of Creditors of Essar 
Steel India Limited (supra), it has been clearly held: 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 20 of 32 
 
“128. When it comes to the validity of the substitution of 
Section 30(2)(b) by Section 6 of the Amending Act of 
2019, it is clear that the substituted Section 30(2)(b) 
gives operational creditors something more than was 
given earlier as it is the higher of the figures mentioned 
in sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of sub-clause (b) that is now 
to be paid as a minimum amount to operational 
creditors. The same goes for the latter part of sub-
clause (b) which refers to dissentient financial creditors. 
Ms Madhavi Divan is correct in her argument that 
Section 30(2)(b) is in fact a beneficial provision in favour 
of operational creditors and dissentient financial 
creditors as they are now to be paid a certain minimum 
amount, the minimum in the case of operational 
creditors being the higher of the two figures calculated 
under sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (b), and the 
minimum in the case of dissentient financial creditor 
being a minimum amount that was not earlier payable. 
As a matter of fact, pre-amendment, secured financial 
creditors may cram down unsecured financial creditors 
who are dissentient, the majority vote of 66% voting to 
give them nothing or next to nothing for their dues. In 
the earlier regime it may have been possible to have 
done this but after the amendment such financial 
creditors are now to be paid the minimum amount 
mentioned in sub-section (2). Ms Madhavi Divan is also 
correct in stating that the order of priority of payment of 
creditors mentioned in Section 53 is not engrafted in 
sub-section (2)(b) as amended. Section 53 is only 
referred to in order that a certain minimum figure be 
paid to different classes of operational and financial 
creditors. It is only for this purpose that Section 53(1) is 
to be looked at as it is clear that it is the commercial 
wisdom of the Committee of Creditors that is free to 
determine what amounts be paid to different classes 
and sub-classes of creditors in accordance with the 
provisions of the Code and the Regulations made 
thereunder.” 
 
35. 
The reasoning and the ratio in Jaypee Kensington (supra) is also 
the same: 
“164.2. We would hasten to observe that in case a 
dissenting financial creditor is a secured creditor and a 
valid security interest is created in his favour and is 
existing, the entitlement of such a dissenting financial 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 21 of 32 
 
creditor to receive the “amount payable” could also be 
satisfied by allowing him to enforce the security interest, 
to the extent of the value receivable by him and in the 
order of priority available to him. Obviously, by 
enforcing such a security interest, a dissenting financial 
creditor would receive “payment” to the extent of his 
entitlement and that would satisfy the requirement of 
Section 30(2)(b) of the Code.”       
 
 
36. 
We have reservation on portions of the view expressed in 
paragraphs 17, 21 and 22 in the judgment of India Resurgence 
ARC Private Limited (supra). Paragraph 17 is respectfully correct 
in its observations when it refers to the provisions of Section 30(4) 
and that the voting is essentially a matter which relates to 
commercial wisdom of the CoC. The observation that a dissenting 
secured creditor cannot suggest that a higher amount be paid to it 
is also correct. However, this does not affect the right of a dissenting 
secured creditor to get payment equal to the value of the security 
interest in terms of Section 30(2)(b)(ii) of the Code. Paragraph 21 
in India Resurgence ARC Private Limited (supra) again in our 
respectful view is partially correct. It is correct to the extent that the 
legislature has not stipulated that the dissenting financial creditor 
shall be entitled to enforce the security interest. However, it is 
incorrect to state that the dissenting financial creditor would not be 
entitled to receive the liquidation value,  the amount payable to him 
in terms of Section 53(1) of the Code. Paragraph 22 refers to the 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 22 of 32 
 
Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel (supra), which we have 
already quoted and is apposite to the view expressed by us. The 
reasoning given in the earlier portion of paragraph 22 in our 
respectful opinion is in conflict with the ratio in Committee of 
Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited (supra) as it does not take 
into account the legal effect of Section 30(2)(b)(ii) of the Code. 
While it is important to maximise the value of the assets of the 
corporate debtor and prevent liquidation, the rights of operational 
creditors or dissenting financial creditors also have to be protected 
as stipulated in law. 
 
37. 
In Jaypee Kensington (supra), it has been held that the dissenting 
financial creditor, if the occasion arises, is entitled to receive the 
extent of value in money equal to the security interest held by him.  
It would not be proper to read Jaypee Kensington (supra), as 
laying down that the dissenting financial creditor would be entitled 
to the extent of amounts receivable by him in the resolution plan. 
This would undo the very object and purpose of the amendment. It 
would make the portion of Section 30(2)(b)(ii) specifying the amount 
to be paid to such creditor in accordance with Section 53(1), 
redundant and meaningless. 
38. 
Our reasoning finds resonance in the reasoning given in Jaypee 
Kensington (supra), which states that for the purpose of discharge 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 23 of 32 
 
of obligation mentioned in the second part of Section 30(2)(b) of the 
Code, the dissenting financial creditors are to be paid an amount 
quantified in terms of the proceeds of assets receivable under 
Section 53 of the Code.  This amount payable is to be paid on 
priority over the dissenting counterparts.  However, Section 30(2) 
refers only to the sum of money and nothing else, that is, it does 
not permit the dissenting financial creditor to enforce the security 
and sell the same. This would be counterproductive and may nullify 
the resolution plan. What the dissenting financial creditor is entitled 
to is the payment, which should not be less than the amount/value 
of the security interest held by them.  The security interest gets 
converted from the asset to the value of the asset, which is to be 
paid in the form of money. This is clear from the relevant portions 
of paragraphs 164.1, 164.2, 166.4, and 167 in Jaypee Kensington 
(supra), which read as under: 
“164.1. Therefore, when, for the purpose of discharge 
of obligation mentioned in the second part of clause (b) 
of Section 30(2) of the Code, the dissenting financial 
creditors are to be “paid” an “amount” quantified in 
terms of the “proceeds” of assets receivable under 
Section 53 of the Code; and the “amount payable” is to 
be “paid” in priority over their assenting counterparts, 
the statute is referring only to the sum of money and not 
anything else. In the frame and purport of the provision 
and also the scheme of the Code, the expression 
“payment” is clearly descriptive of the action of 
discharge of obligation and at the same time, is also 
prescriptive of the mode of undertaking such an action. 
And, that action could only be of handing over the 
quantum of money, or allowing the recovery of such 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 24 of 32 
 
money by enforcement of security interest, as per the 
entitlement of the dissenting financial creditor. 
 
164.2. We would hasten to observe that in case a 
dissenting financial creditor is a secured creditor and a 
valid security interest is created in his favour and is 
existing, the entitlement of such a dissenting financial 
creditor to receive the “amount payable” could also be 
satisfied by allowing him to enforce the security interest, 
to the extent of the value receivable by him and in the 
order of priority available to him. Obviously, by 
enforcing such a security interest, a dissenting financial 
creditor would receive “payment” to the extent of his 
entitlement and that would satisfy the requirement of 
Section 30(2)(b) of the Code [ Though it is obvious, but 
is clarified to avoid any ambiguity, that the “security 
interest” referred herein for the purpose of money 
recovery by dissenting financial creditor would only be 
such security interest which is relatable to the “financial 
debt” and not to any other debt or claim.] . In any case, 
that is, whether by direct payment in cash or by allowing 
recovery of amount via the mode of enforcement of 
security interest, the dissenting financial creditor is 
entitled to receive the “amount payable” in monetary 
terms and not in any other term. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
166.4. The suggestion about prejudice being caused to 
the assenting financial creditors by making payment to 
the dissenting one has several shortcomings. As 
noticeable, in the scheme of IBC, a resolution plan is 
taken as approved, only when voted in favour by a 
majority of not less than 66% of the voting share of CoC. 
Obviously, the dissenting sect stands at 34% or less of 
the voting share of CoC. Even when the financial 
creditors having a say of not less than 2/3rd in the 
Committee of Creditors choose to sail with the 
resolution plan, the law provides a right to the remainder 
(who would be having not more than 34% of voting 
share) not to take this voyage but to disembark, while 
seeking payment of their outstanding dues. Even this 
disembarkment does not guarantee them the time value 
for money of the entire investment in the corporate 
debtor; what they get is only the liquidation value in 
terms of Section 53 of the Code. Of course, in the 
scheme of CIRP under the Code, the dissenting 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 25 of 32 
 
financial creditors get, whatever is available to them, in 
priority over their assenting counterparts. In the given 
scheme of the statutory provisions, there is no scope for 
comparing the treatment to be assigned to these two 
divergent sects of financial creditors. The submissions 
made on behalf of assenting financial creditors cannot 
be accepted. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
167. To sum up, in our view, for a proper and 
meaningful implementation of the approved resolution 
plan, the payment as envisaged by the second part of 
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 30 could only be 
payment in terms of money and the financial creditor 
who chooses to quit the corporate debtor by not putting 
his voting share in favour of the approval of the 
proposed plan of resolution (i.e. by dissenting), cannot 
be forced to yet remain attached to the corporate debtor 
by way of provisions in the nature of equities or 
securities. In the true operation of the provision 
contained in the second part of sub-clause (ii) of clause 
(b) of sub-section (2) of Section 30 (read with Section 
53), in our view, the expression “payment” only refers to 
the payment of money and not anything of its equivalent 
in the nature of barter; and a provision in that regard is 
required to be made in the resolution plan whether in 
terms of direct money or in terms of money recovery 
with enforcement of security interest, of course, in 
accordance with the other provisions concerning the 
order of priority as also fair and equitable distribution. 
We are not commenting on the scenario if the 
dissenting financial creditor himself chooses to accept 
any other method of discharge of its payment obligation 
but as per the requirements of law, the resolution plan 
ought to carry the provision as aforesaid.” 
 
39. 
Similar view has been taken by a two Judge Bench of this Court in 
Vistra 
ITCL 
(India) 
Limited 
& 
Ors. 
v. 
Dinkar 
Venkatasubramanian & Anr.14, wherein it was observed in 
paragraphs 34, 41.2 and 42 as under: 
 
14 (2023) 7 SCC 324. 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 26 of 32 
 
“34. The amendment introduced by Act 26 of 2019 
ensures that the operational creditors under the 
resolution plan should be paid the amount equivalent to 
the amount which they would have been entitled to, in 
the event of liquidation of the corporate debtor under 
Section 53 of the Code. In other words, the amount 
payable under the resolution plan to the operational 
creditors should not be less than the amount payable to 
them under Section 53 of the Code, in the event of 
liquidation of the corporate debtor. The amended 
provision also provides that the financial creditors who 
have not voted in favour of the resolution plan shall be 
paid not less than the amount which would be paid to 
them in accordance with sub-section (1) to Section 53 
of the Code, in the event of liquidation of the corporate 
debtor. Explanation (1) to clause (b) of Section 30(2) of 
the Code, for the removal of doubts, states and clarifies 
that the distribution in accordance with this clause shall 
be fair and equitable to such creditors. 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
41.2. The second option is to treat Appellant 1-Vistra as 
a secured creditor in terms of Section 52 read with 
Section 53 of the Code. In other words, we give the 
option to the successful resolution applicant — DVI 
(Deccan Value Investors) to treat Appellant 1-Vistra as 
a secured creditor, who will be entitled to retain the 
security interest in the pledged shares, and in terms 
thereof, would be entitled to retain the security 
proceeds on the sale of the said pledged shares under 
Section 52 of the Code read with Rule 21-A of the 
Liquidation Process Regulations. The second recourse 
available, would be almost equivalent in monetary 
terms for Appellant 1-Vistra, who is treated as a secured 
creditor and is held entitled to all rights and obligations 
as applicable to a secured creditor under Sections 52 
and 53 of the Code. This to our mind would be a fair and 
just solution to the legal conundrum and issue 
highlighted before us. 
 
42. We wish to clarify that the directions given by us 
would not be a ground for the successful resolution 
applicant — DVI to withdraw the resolution plan which 
has already been approved by Nclat and by us. The 
reason is simple. Any resolution plan must meet with 
the requirements/provisions of the Code and any 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 27 of 32 
 
provisions of law for the time being in force. What we 
have directed and the option given by us ensures that 
the resolution plan meets the mandate of the Code and 
does not violate the rights given to the secured creditor, 
who cannot be treated as worse off/inferior in its claim 
and rights viz an operational creditor or a dissenting 
financial creditor.” 
 
40. 
One of the contentions raised by the respondent no. 2  - the CoC is 
that Section 30(2)(b)(ii) refers only to Section 53 of the Code and 
not to Section 52. We find it difficult to accept the said submission 
to read down Section 30(2)(b)(ii) of the Code. Reference to Section 
53 of the Code in Section 30(2)(b)(ii) is made with a specific 
purpose and objective and accordingly, we have to understand and 
give a cogent and effective meaning to the words to effectuate the 
intent.  Section 53 of the Code refers to Section 52 thereof. We 
would not isolate Section 53, when we refer to Section 30(2)(b)(ii) 
and make it meaningless and undo the legislative intent behind the 
amended provision, which is clear and apparent.  Whenever 
required, in a reference made to Section 53 of the Code, we would 
have to refer to Section 52 to give meaning to Section 30(2)(b)(ii) 
of the Code. A dissenting financial creditor is entitled to not partake 
the proceeds in the resolution plan, unless a higher amount in 
congruence with its security interest is approved in the resolution 
plan. The “amount” to be paid to the dissenting financial creditor 
should be in accordance with Section 53(1) in the event of 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 28 of 32 
 
liquidation of the corporate debtor. In other words, in our opinion, 
the dissenting financial creditor is entitled to a minimum value in 
monetary terms equivalent to the value of the security interest.  
 
41. 
The submission that the secured creditor’s entitlement to 
distribution under Section 53(1)(b)(ii) is applicable where the 
secured creditor relinquishes its security interest under Section 52 
of the Code, and, therefore, is not applicable to dissenting financial 
creditors like the appellant is erroneous and unacceptable. 
 
42. 
Apart from the reasons stated above, a dissenting financial creditor, 
as held in Jaypee Kensington (supra) is only entitled to the 
monetary value of the assets. The dissenting financial creditor loses 
the security interest, that is, it relinquishes the security interest. 
Dissenting financial creditor, therefore, cannot enforce the security 
interest. It is necessary to clearly state this position, as in case a 
dissenting financial creditor enforces the security interest, the 
resolution plan itself may fail and become unworkable. The 
dissenting financial creditor has to statutorily forgo and relinquish 
his security interest on the resolution plan being accepted, and his 
position is same and no different from that of a secured creditor who 
has voluntarily relinquished security and is to be paid under Section 
53(1)(b)(ii) of the Code.  

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 29 of 32 
 
 
43. 
The reasoning also takes care of the argument that the Explanation 
to Section 53 incorporates the principle of pari passu distribution 
into Section 53(1) with each class of creditors mentioned therein. 
We wish to clarify that Section 53(1) is referred to in Section 
30(2)(b)(ii) with the purpose and objective that the dissenting 
financial creditor is not denied the amount which is payable to it 
being equal to the amount of value of the security interest. The 
entire Section 53 is not made applicable. 
 
44. 
We would, for the above reasons, reject the submission on behalf 
of the respondents that Section 30(2)(b)(ii) is unworkable because 
it involves deeming fiction relating to liquidation, which is 
inapplicable during the CIRP period. This would be contrary to the 
legislative intent and is unacceptable. 
 
45. 
Respondent no. 2 – CoC has submitted that the appellant has 
dissented because it did not approve the manner of distribution of 
the proceeds under the resolution plan. The appellant did not 
dispute the resolution plan itself.  Accordingly, Section 30(2)(b)(ii) 
is not applicable. The argument is fallacious and must be rejected. 
Section 30(2)(b)(ii) relates to the proportion of the proceeds 
mentioned in the resolution plan or the amount which the dissenting 
financial creditor would be entitled to in terms of the waterfall 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 30 of 32 
 
mechanism provided in Section 53(1), if the corporate debtor goes 
into liquidation. The dissenting financial creditor does not have any 
say when the resolution plan is approved by a two-third majority of 
the CoC. The resolution plan will be accepted when approved by 
the specified majority in the CoC. The dissenting financial creditor 
cannot object to the resolution plan, but can object to the 
distribution of the proceeds under the resolution plan, when the 
proceeds are less than what the dissenting financial creditor would 
be entitled to in terms of Section 53(1) if the corporate debtor had 
gone into liquidation. This is the statutory option or choice given by 
law to the dissenting financial creditor. The option/choice should be 
respected. 
 
46. 
Respondent no. 2 – CoC had referred to the objections referred to 
in the CoC meetings dated 15.04.2019 and 23.04.2019. We are of 
the view that the objections raised by the appellant relate to the 
distribution of the proceeds in terms of the liquidation plan.  
According to them, they were entitled to money of value not less 
than the amount that they would have received under Section 53(1) 
of the Code. 
 
47. 
It is also argued that the NCLAT had rejected the first appeal on the 
ground that the appellant had only challenged the distribution of the 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 31 of 32 
 
pay-out under the plan inter se the financial creditors of the 
corporate debtor and not the resolution plan. Accordingly, the 
amendment to Section 30(2)(b) vide the Amendment Act of 2019 
was not applicable. We have already rejected this argument, for the 
reasons set out above. In our opinion, the contention that the 
appellant is not the dissenting financial creditor is to be rejected. 
 
48. 
The contention on behalf of the respondent that there is conflict 
between sub-section (4), as amended in 2019, and the amended 
clause (b) to sub-section (2) to Section 30 of the Code does not 
merit a different ratio and conclusion. Section 30(4) states that the 
CoC may approve the resolution plan by a vote not less than 66% 
of the voting share of the financial creditor. It states that the CoC 
shall consider the feasibility and viability, the manner of distribution 
proposed, which may take into account the order of priority amongst 
creditors under sub-section (1) to Section 53, including the priority 
and value of the security interest of the secured creditors, and other 
requirements as may be specified by the Board. These are the 
aspects that the CoC has to consider. It is not necessary for the 
CoC to provide each assenting party with liquidation value. 
However, a secured creditor not satisfied with the proposed pay-
out can vote against the resolution plan or the distribution of 
proceeds, in which case it is entitled to full liquidation value of the 

 
Civil Appeal No. 9133 of 2019 & Anr. 
 
Page 32 of 32 
 
security payable in terms of Section 53(1) on liquidation of the 
corporate debtor.  The conflict with sub-clause (ii) to clause (b) to 
sub-section (2) to Section 30 does not arise as it relates to the 
minimum payment which is to be made to an operational creditor or 
a dissenting financial creditor. A dissenting financial creditor does 
not vote in favour of the scheme. Operational creditors do not have 
the right to vote. 
 
49. 
In view of the aforesaid discussion, and as we are taking a different 
view and ratio from India Resurgence ARC Private Limited 
(supra) on interpretation of Section 30(2)(b)(ii) of the IBC, we feel 
that it would be appropriate and proper if the question framed at the 
beginning of this judgment is referred to a larger Bench. The matter 
be, accordingly placed before the Hon’ble the Chief Justice for 
appropriate orders. 
 
 
......................................J. 
(SANJIV KHANNA) 
 
 
 
......................................J. 
(S.V.N. BHATTI) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
JANUARY 03, 2024.