2024 INSC 729
1 
 
     NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 8387 OF 2013 
 
 
 
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.                      
.…APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
 
DOLY LOYI                                                  ...RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
 
1. 
The instant appeal by special leave takes exception to the 
judgment dated 26th April, 2013 passed by the High Court of Delhi 
in Writ Petition(C) No. 7960 of 2012 whereby the writ petition 
preferred by the appellant herein i.e., the Union of India was 
dismissed and the order passed by Central Administrative 
Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi(hereinafter being referred to 
as ‘Tribunal’) was upheld, whereby the Tribunal allowed Original 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.09.24
16:16:52 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Application No. 3716 of 2011 filed by the respondent herein 
challenging the denial of promotional benefits to him. 
2. 
The brief facts in a nutshell relevant and essential for the 
disposal of the instant appeal are noted hereinbelow. 
3. 
The respondent was appointed as Assistant Commissioner of 
Income Tax on 16th December, 1987. He was granted due 
promotions to the post of Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax, 
Joint Commissioner of Income Tax, and Additional Commissioner 
of Income Tax in December 1991, July 2001, and November 2001, 
respectively. On 31st December, 2001, an FIR was registered 
against the respondent for the offences punishable under Section 
120B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, and Sections 13(1) and 
13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, alleging inter 
alia that the respondent, while working as the Special 
Secretary(Finance), Government of Arunachal Pradesh acted in 
conspiracy with other officers and committed criminal misconduct 
by abusing his position as a public servant. A sanction dated 2nd 
June, 2006, was accorded by the CBDT (Department of Revenue, 
Ministry of Finance, Government of India) for the prosecution of 
the respondent in respect of the aforesaid allegations before the 
concerned Court. 

3 
 
 
4. 
Thereafter, on 22nd February, 2007, the Departmental 
Promotion Committee (hereinafter being referred to as ‘DPC’) was 
convened to consider the promotion of Additional Commissioner of 
Income Tax to the post of Commissioner of Income Tax. Since the 
respondent had attained eligibility for promotion to the post of 
Commissioner of Income Tax, his case was also considered for 
promotion by the DPC. However, the vigilance certificate of the 
respondent was withheld and the recommendations of the DPC 
with regard to the promotion of the respondent were kept in a 
sealed cover on the basis that the ‘Prosecution for criminal charge’ 
was pending against him, and thus, he was deprived from being 
considered for promotion along with his batchmates. 
5. 
Being aggrieved by the withholding of the vigilance clearance 
and adoption of the sealed cover procedure, the respondent filed 
Original 
Application 
No. 
8 
of 
2011 
before 
the 
Central 
Administrative Tribunal, Guwahati Bench. Original Application No. 
8 of 2011 was allowed vide order dated 28th June, 2011 and the 
appellants were directed to consider the case of the respondent and 
pass a reasoned order within two months. In compliance of the said 
direction, the appellants considered the case of the respondent for 

4 
 
promotion and vide communication dated 15th September, 2011, 
rejected the same holding that there was no justification for the 
opening of ‘Sealed Cover’ and considering the case of the 
respondent herein for promotion along with his batchmates. 
6. 
The order dated 15th September, 2011 was challenged by the 
respondent before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal 
Bench, New Delhi by preferring Original Application No. 3716 of 
2011. The Tribunal vide order dated 7th March, 2012 allowed the 
aforesaid Original Application, quashed the communication dated 
15th September, 2011, and directed the appellants herein to open 
the sealed cover adopted in the case of promotion of the respondent 
and give effect to the same, and if he was found fit for promotion, 
then to promote him and also award back wages with costs 
quantified at Rs. 10,000/-. 
7. 
Challenging the order dated 7th March, 2012, the appellants 
herein filed Writ Petition(C) No. 7960 of 2012 before the learned 
Division Bench of High Court of Delhi, which stands rejected vide 
order 26th April, 2013. The said order is subjected to challenge in 
this appeal by special leave. 
8. 
Leave was granted by this Court on 16th November, 2013. 
Learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants was directed 

5 
 
to produce the ‘Sealed Cover’ containing the recommendation of 
DPC in relation to the respondent vide order dated 13th June, 2024 
and the same was submitted by the learned counsel for the perusal 
of this Court. 
Submissions on behalf of the appellants: - 
9. 
Shri Wasim Qadri, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf 
of the appellants drew the Court’s attention towards the Office 
Memorandum (in short ‘OM’) dated 14th September, 1992 dealing 
with the ‘Promotion of Government servants against whom 
disciplinary/court proceedings are pending or whose conduct is 
under investigation-Procedure and guidelines to be followed’. The 
extract of the OM dated 14th September, 1992 relied upon by the 
learned counsel for the appellants is reproduced below:- 
“2. At the time of consideration of the cases of Government 
servant for promotion, details of Government servant in the 
consideration zone for promotion falling under the following 
category should be specifically brought to the notice of the 
Departmental Promotion Committee: - 
i) 
Government servants under suspension; 
ii) 
Government servants in respect of whom a 
charge sheet has been issued and the disciplinary 
proceedings are pending; and 
iii) Government servants in respect of whom 
prosecution for criminal charge is pending. 
2.1 The Departmental Promotion Committee shall assess the 
suitability of Government servants coming within the 
purview of the circumstances mentioned above along with 
other eligible candidates without taking into consideration 
the disciplinary case/criminal prosecution pending. The 

6 
 
assessment of the DPC including 'unfit for promotion' and the 
grading awarded by it will be kept in a sealed cover. The cover 
will be superscribed 'Findings regarding suitability for promotion 
to the grade/post of of Shri.. ...in respect (name of the Government 
servant). Not to be opened till the termination of the disciplinary 
case/criminal prosecution against Shri.......'. The proceeding of 
the DPC need only contain the note. The findings are contained in 
the attached sealed cover'. The authority competent to fill the 
vacancy should be separately advised to fill the vacancy in the 
higher grade only in an officiating capacity when the findings of 
the DPC in respect of the suitability of a Government servant for 
his promotion are kept in a sealed cover.”  
  
 
 
 
 
                        (emphasis supplied) 
10. Learned counsel, while placing emphasis on clause(iii) of Para 
No. 2 i.e. ‘Government servants in respect of whom prosecution 
for a criminal charge is pending’ submitted that this expression 
has to be read in light of the object sought to be achieved i.e. a 
tainted officer should not be allowed to be promoted till the cloud 
is clear and during this period, the sealed cover procedure is to be 
adopted. 
11. He submitted that the said OM does not specifically indicate 
as to before which forum or at what stage, the prosecution for 
criminal charge is required to be pending in order to attract the 
sealed cover procedure and thus, this expression should be 
interpreted in a wider sense to even cover a case in which 
investigation for a criminal charge is pending with the Investigating 
Agency. 
 

7 
 
12. He further submitted that the said OM does not specify the 
stage when the prosecution for a criminal charge can be stated to 
be pending and hence the definition of pendency of judicial 
proceedings provided in Rule 9(6)(b)(i) of the CCS(Pension) Rules, 
1972, should be adopted, which provides that the judicial 
proceedings shall be deemed to be instituted in the case of criminal 
proceedings, on the date on which the complaint or report of Police 
officer, of which Magistrate takes cognizance is made. The relevant 
portion of the extant rules as relied upon by the learned counsel is 
as below:  
“(b)     Judicial proceedings shall be deemed to be instituted– 
(i) in the case of criminal proceedings, on the date on which 
the complaint or report of a Police Officer, of which the 
Magistrate takes cognizance, is made.” 
 
 
13. He further submitted that in a criminal prosecution, the 
sanction for prosecution whether under Section 197 of Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or Section 19 of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988 is an event of utmost importance relating to 
the criminal charge as the sanction is accorded by the concerned 
authority on the basis of contents of FIR and the entire material 
collected during the course of investigation. He thus urged that 

8 
 
once the sanction is granted, the prosecution for criminal charge 
can be said to be pending. 
14. He concluded his submissions by urging that the department 
was justified in invoking the sealed cover procedure while 
considering the case of the respondent for promotion, since, the 
FIR was lodged on 31st December, 2001 and sanction was granted 
on 2nd June, 2006, whereas, the DPC was convened in the month 
of February 2007, which is well after the lodging of FIR and grant 
of sanction, thus, the case of respondent falls under clause(iii) of 
Para No.2 i.e. ‘Government servants in respect of whom 
prosecution for the criminal charge was pending’. 
On these grounds, the learned counsel for the appellants 
implored this Court to set aside the impugned judgment and allow 
the appeal. 
Submissions on behalf of the Respondent: - 
15. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent, vehemently 
and fervently opposed the submissions advanced by learned 
counsel for the appellants and urged that the denial of promotion 
to the respondent by resorting to ‘the sealed cover procedure’ is ex-
facie illegal and bad in eyes of law.  

9 
 
 
16. He submitted that on the relevant date of DPC being convened 
as well as on the date of issuance of the promotion orders whereby 
the batchmates of the respondent were promoted, there was no 
impediment in the promotion of the respondent in terms of Para 
No. 2 of OM dated 14th September, 1992(reproduced supra), as the 
respondent’s case does not fall under any of the three clauses 
enumerated in the said Para. The respondent was not placed under 
suspension; no departmental proceedings were ever initiated 
against the respondent and no criminal charge was pending 
against him and thus the restrictive clauses would not ex-facie 
operate against the respondent’s right to be considered for 
promotion. 
17. He further drew the Court’s attention to clause(iii) of Para No. 
2 of OM dated 12th January, 1988, as per which the sealed cover 
procedure could be adopted with regard to a Government servant 
in respect of whom the prosecution for a criminal charge was 
pending or sanction for prosecution had been issued or a decision 
had been taken to accord sanction for prosecution. The relevant 
para of OM dated 12th January, 1988 is reproduced hereinbelow:  
 

10 
 
 
“Cases of Government Servants to whom Sealed Cover 
Procedure will   be applicable. 
2. 
At the time of consideration of the cases of Government 
servants for promotion, details of Government servants in the 
consideration zone for promotion falling under the following 
categories should be specifically brought to the notice of the 
Departmental Promotion Committee: - 
(i) 
Government servants under suspension; 
 
(ii) 
Government servants in respect of whom disciplinary 
proceedings are pending or a decision has been taken to initiate 
disciplinary proceedings; 
 
(iii) Government servants in respect of whom prosecution 
for a criminal charge is pending or sanction for prosecution 
has been issued or a decision has been taken to accord 
sanction for prosecution. 
 
(iv) Government servants against whom an investigation on 
serious allegations of corruption, bribery or similar grave 
misconduct is in progress either by the CBI or any other agency, 
departmental or otherwise.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
He thus urged that the Central Government, while framing the 
OM dated 14th September, 1992, specifically and consciously 
deleted the requirement of a sealed cover procedure in respect of 
Government servants against whom the sanction for prosecution 
is granted as was mentioned in the second part of clause(iii) of Para 
2 of the earlier OM of 1988. He contended that by mere grant of 
sanction, the prosecution for a criminal charge could not be said 
to be pending against a government servant. 
 

11 
 
 
18. On these grounds, he urged that the impugned judgment 
doesn’t suffer from any infirmity and implored the court to dismiss 
the appeal.  
19. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have perused the impugned 
judgments. With the assistance of learned counsel for the parties, 
we have thoroughly examined the material available on record. 
Discussion and Conclusion: - 
20. The core issue for consideration before this Court is: “Whether 
by the mere grant of prosecution sanction, it could be said that the 
prosecution for a criminal charge is pending against the 
respondent Government Servant and whether grant of sanction for 
prosecution could be a valid ground for putting the DPC 
recommendations in a sealed cover”? 
21. On a bare perusal of OM dated 14th September, 1992, which 
covers the issue, it is clear that it prescribes the conditions under 
which the assessment done by the DPC is to be kept in the sealed 
cover. According to this OM, the sealed cover procedure can be 
resorted to in respect of three categories of Government servants 

12 
 
i.e. Government servants under suspension, Government servants 
in respect of whom a charge sheet has been issued and the 
disciplinary proceedings are pending, and Government servants in 
respect of whom prosecution for criminal charge is pending. 
22. Learned counsel for appellant made a pertinent submission 
that the case of the respondent falls under the third clause of the 
above OM, i.e. Government servants in respect of whom 
prosecution for criminal charges is pending. Thus, the question 
requiring consideration is as to whether a mere grant of 
prosecution sanction would be sufficient to infer that the 
prosecution for a criminal charge was pending against the 
respondent.  Similar issue came up for consideration before this 
Court in the case of Union of India v. K.V. Jankiraman1, wherein 
it was held that sealed cover procedure is to be resorted to only 
after the charge memo/charge sheet is issued. The relevant extract 
is reproduced hereinbelow: 
“16. On the first question, viz., as to when for the purposes 
of the sealed cover procedure the disciplinary/criminal 
proceedings can be said to have commenced, the Full Bench 
of the Tribunal has held that it is only when a charge-memo 
in a disciplinary proceedings or a charge-sheet in a criminal 
prosecution is issued to the employee that it can be said that 
the departmental proceedings/criminal prosecution is 
initiated against the employee. The sealed cover procedure 
is to be resorted to only after the charge-memo/charge-sheet 
 
1 (1991) 4 SCC 109 

13 
 
is issued. The pendency of preliminary investigation prior to 
that stage will not be sufficient to enable the authorities to 
adopt the sealed cover procedure. We are in agreement with 
the Tribunal on this point. The contention advanced by the 
learned counsel for the appellant-authorities that when there are 
serious allegations and it takes time to collect necessary evidence 
to prepare and issue charge-memo/charge-sheet, it would not be 
in the interest of the purity of administration to reward the 
employee with a promotion, increment etc. does not impress us. 
The acceptance of this contention would result in injustice to the 
employees in many cases. As has been the experience so far, the 
preliminary investigations take an inordinately long time and 
particularly when they are initiated at the instance of the 
interested persons, they are kept pending deliberately. Many 
times they never result in the issue of any charge-memo/charge-
sheet. If the allegations are serious and the authorities are keen 
in investigating them, ordinarily it should not take much time to 
collect the relevant evidence and finalise the charges. What is 
further, if the charges are that serious, the authorities have the 
power to suspend the employee under the relevant rules, and the 
suspension by itself permits a resort to the sealed cover 
procedure. The authorities thus are not without a remedy.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
23. At this stage, it is pertinent to note that the Ministry of 
Personnel, Government of India vide OM dated 2nd November, 2012 
issued certain clarifications regarding the stage when a 
prosecution for criminal charge can be said to be pending, keeping 
in view the dicta laid down in K.V. Jankiraman(supra). Para Nos. 
6 and 8 of OM dated 2nd November, 2012 states as under: 
“6. When a government servant comes under a cloud, he may pass 
through three stages, namely, investigation for a criminal charge 
in departmental proceedings and or prosecution of criminal 
charges 
followed 
by 
either 
penal/conviction 
or 
exoneration/acquittal. During the stage of investigation prior to 
issue of charge-sheet in disciplinary proceedings or prosecution, 
if the Government is of the view that the charges are serious and 
the officer should not be promoted, it is open to the Government 
to suspend the officer which will lead to DPC recommendation to 

14 
 
be kept in sealed cover. The sealed cover procedure is to be 
resorted to only after the charge memo/charge-sheet is 
issued or the officer is placed under suspension. The 
pendency of preliminary investigation prior to that stage is 
not adopt the sealed cover procedure.” 
  (emphasis supplied) 
24. Considering the above position, the disciplinary/criminal 
proceedings can be said to be initiated against the employee only 
when a charge memo is issued to the employee in a disciplinary 
proceeding or a charge-sheet for a criminal prosecution is filed in 
the competent Court. The sealed cover procedure is to be resorted 
to only after issuance of the charge-memo/charge-sheet is issued. 
The pendency of investigation and grant of prosecution sanction 
will not be sufficient to enable the authorities to adopt the sealed 
cover procedure. 
25. In view of the aforesaid legal position, the crucial aspect 
requiring examination is as to whether the prosecution for criminal 
charge was pending against the respondent when the DPC meeting 
was held.  
26. It is not in dispute that the sanction to prosecute the 
respondent was granted on 2nd June, 2006 and the charge sheet 
was filed by CBI, after completion of investigation on 25th October, 
2008, whereas the DPC to consider the promotion of Additional 
Commissioners of Income Tax was convened on 22nd February, 

15 
 
2007, wherein the sealed cover procedure was adopted qua the 
respondent. It is thus clear that the charge sheet against the 
respondent was filed well after the meeting of the DPC was 
convened. Hence, it could not be said that the prosecution for a 
criminal charge was pending against the respondent when the DPC 
was convened. Therefore, the move on the part of DPC to resort to 
the sealed cover procedure was unjustified and unsustainable on 
facts and in law. 
27. Resultantly, we have no hesitation in holding that the 
impugned judgment of the High Court dated 26th April, 2013 is 
based on apropos consideration of facts and law and hence the 
same does not warrant interference. 
28. The ‘Sealed Cover’ wherein the assessment of the respondent 
was considered by the DPC was presented to the Court by learned 
counsel for the appellant and was opened. The letter shows that 
the DPC assessed the respondent to be ‘FIT’ for promotion. 
Consequential steps in light of the above recommendations shall 
follow. 
29. This appeal lacks merit and is dismissed in the aforesaid 
terms.  No order as to costs. 

16 
 
30. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
  
 
 
 
 
        (R. MAHADEVAN) 
New Delhi; 
September 24, 2024.