2024 INSC 737
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 4003/2024 
ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL) No. 4044 of 2018 
 
KAILASHBEN MAHENDRABHAI PATEL  
& ORS. 
 
                 
 
 
 
    ...APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.  
 
...RESPONDENT(S) 
J U D G M E N T 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
  
1. 
Leave granted.  
2. 
This criminal appeal is against the dismissal of a petition 
under Section 482 of the CrPC to quash the FIR and the 
subsequent chargesheet against the appellants herein. By order 
dated 01.05.2018, this Court issued notice in the Special Leave 
Petition and stayed the criminal proceedings. The short and 
necessary facts for disposal of this criminal appeal are as follows.  
3. 
Respondent no. 2 is the complainant. She was married to one 
Niraj Mahendrabhai Patel in 2002, and he is not a party in these 
proceedings. On 01.03.2013, the complainant filed a complaint, 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.09.25
17:50:11 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
pursuant to which an FIR was registered on 25.03.2013 at P.S. 
Jalna, Maharashtra under Sections 498A, 323, 504, 506 read with 
Section 34 IPC against the appellants, who are her step mother-
in-law (appellant no. 1), step brother-in-law (appellant no. 2), 
father-in-law (appellant no. 3), and the Munim (appellant no. 4). 
The chargesheet in this case was filed on 30.07.2013.  
4. 
A precise but accurate description of the allegations in the 
FIR are that, i) her husband is the son of the appellant no. 3 and 
his late first wife. Thereafter, the appellant no. 3 married appellant 
no. 1 and their son is appellant no. 2. She lived with her husband, 
son and daughter in Mumbai, from where her husband was 
managing the family business by giving complete accounts to the 
family, ii) at the time of marriage her father gave certain articles 
and cash as dowry, and iii) she also held a joint locker at a bank 
in Anand, Gujarat with appellant no. 1, keys to which were kept 
by appellant no. 1 alone. iv) At the time of the birth of her daughter, 
which was eight years before the complaint, appellant nos. 1 and 
3 visited her at the hospital and threatened to deprive her of a 
share in the property and refused to return the gold and silver 
ornaments 
that 
were 
kept 
in 
the 
locker. 
v) 
About  
2-4 months after the delivery, when she returned to her 

3 
 
matrimonial house in Mumbai, appellant nos. 1 and 3 initially 
refused to take her and later deprived her of food and physically 
assaulted her. vi) Even when her son was born, which was four 
years before the complaint, appellants no. 1 to 3 visited her at 
Jalna and threatened to deprive her and her husband any share 
in the property. vii) She has also alleged that appellant no. 2 
hindered her daughter’s education by cancelling her school 
admission. viii) Against appellant no. 4, who is the Munim, she has 
alleged that he threatened her that the family property only 
belongs to appellant no. 2 and that the complainant, and her 
husband will have no share in it. ix) Under these circumstances, 
being frightened, she left the house of the appellants along with 
her husband and children and started living in Jalna, her parental 
home. x) Even at Jalna, the accused persons threatened her and 
asked her to bring Rs. 50,00,000/- for the future of her son and 
daughter. There is danger to her life and also to the life of her 
husband and children and therefore the complaint on 01.03.2013. 
The FIR was registered on 25.03.2013, and chargesheet came to 
be filed on 30.07.2013. 
5. 
The appellants filed a petition under Section 482 of the CrPC, 
1973 for quashing the FIR dated 25.03.2013 and the chargesheet 

4 
 
dated 30.07.2013. By the order impugned herein, the High Court 
held that a prima facie case of cruelty is made out under Section 
498A. The High Court also observed that the complainant 
specifically referred to instances of cruelty and attributed overt 
acts to each appellant. Rejecting the contention of the appellants 
that neither the Police Station, nor the Courts will have 
jurisdiction, the Court held that Jalna would have jurisdiction as 
per Sections 178 and 179 of the CrPC as some part of the offence 
was committed there. 
6. 
The appellants have preferred the present appeal against the 
High Court’s order. While issuing notice on 01.05.2018, this Court 
also stayed further proceedings.  
7. 
We have heard Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Mr Sidharth 
Luthra, learned senior counsels for the appellants and Mr. 
Shrirang B Varma, learned counsel for the State of Maharashtra 
and Mr. Sanjeev Despande, learned senior counsel for respondent 
no. 2.  
7.1 The learned senior counsels for the appellants have 
contended that the allegations in the FIR are general and omnibus 
in nature and lack material particulars bereft of any details, 
rendering the complaint vague and obscure. There is an existing 

5 
 
civil dispute between the father and the son and as such this FIR 
is an abuse of the process of criminal law. Further, Section 161 
statements of witnesses are identical and are based on information 
from respondent no. 2. They are vague and do not have material 
particulars about the date and time of the incident. Our attention 
is also drawn to the judgment and order dated 16.01.2019, passed 
by the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Jalna dismissing identical 
allegations, but under Section 12 of the Domestic Violence Act. On 
the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent supported 
the decision and reasoning adopted by the High Court. 
8. 
Analysis: After identifying certain allegations in the 
Complaint/FIR, the High Court came to a quick conclusion that 
there are specific allegations against each of the accused. After 
referring to certain precedents on the scope and ambit of the power 
under Section 482 CrPC, the High Court came to a conclusion that 
exercise 
of 
power 
under 
Section 
482 
for 
quashing 
an 
FIR/Complaint is not warranted in the facts and circumstances of 
the case. Beyond holding that there are specific allegations, there 
is no other analysis. The duty of the High Court, when its 
jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC or Article 226 of the 
Constitution is invoked on the ground that the Complaint/FIR is 

6 
 
manifestly frivolous, vexatious or instituted with ulterior motive for 
wreaking vengeance, to examine the allegations with care and 
caution is highlighted in a recent decision of this Court in 
Mohammad Wajid and Another v. State of U.P. and Others1: 
“34. At this stage, we would like to observe something 
important. Whenever an accused comes before the Court 
invoking either the inherent powers under Section 482 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) or extraordinary jurisdiction 
under Article 226 of the Constitution to get the FIR or the 
criminal proceedings quashed essentially on the ground that 
such proceedings are manifestly frivolous or vexatious or 
instituted with the ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance, 
then in such circumstances the Court owes a duty to look into 
the FIR with care and a little more closely. We say so because 
once the complainant decides to proceed against the accused 
with an ulterior motive for wreaking personal vengeance, etc., 
then he would ensure that the FIR/complaint is very well 
drafted with all the necessary pleadings. The complainant 
would ensure that the averments made in the FIR/complaint 
are such that they disclose the necessary ingredients to 
constitute the alleged offence. Therefore, it will not be just 
enough for the Court to look into the averments made in the 
FIR/complaint alone for the purpose of ascertaining whether 
the necessary ingredients to constitute the alleged offence are 
disclosed or not. In frivolous or vexatious proceedings, the 
Court owes a duty to look into many other attending 
circumstances emerging from the record of the case over and 
above the averments and, if need be, with due care and 
circumspection try to read in between the lines. The Court 
while exercising its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the CrPC 
or Article 226 of the Constitution need not restrict itself only to 
the stage of a case but is empowered to take into account the 
overall circumstances leading to the initiation/registration of 
the case as well as the materials collected in the course of 
investigation. Take for instance the case on hand. Multiple 
FIRs have been registered over a period of time. It is in the 
background of such circumstances the registration of multiple 
FIRS assumes importance, thereby attracting the issue of 
wreaking vengeance out of private or personal grudge as 
alleged.” 
 
 
1 2023 SCC OnLine SC 951. 

7 
 
8.1 Keeping in mind the broad principle as enunciated in the 
above referred precedent, we will now examine the Complaint/FIR 
challenged by the appellants in the Section 482 proceeding. 
9. 
The FIR in this case is rather unique, in as much as the 
complainant has chosen not to involve her husband in the criminal 
proceedings, particularly when all the allegations relate to demand 
of dowry. It appears that the complainant and her husband have 
distributed amongst themselves, the institution of civil and 
criminal proceedings against the appellants. While the husband 
institutes the civil suit, his wife, the complainant has chosen to 
initiate criminal proceedings. Interestingly, there is no reference of 
one proceeding in the other. On 27.02.2013, the husband filed the 
Special Civil Suit No. 35 of 2013 in Anand against the three 
appellants, i.e. his father, stepmother and stepbrother seeking for 
a declaration that the property is ancestral in nature and that the 
father has no right to alienate or dispose of the property. In that 
suit the husband also sought a declaration that he is entitled to 
use the trademark of the family business. Though the written 
statement filed by the appellants in the suit is brought on record, 
we are not inclined to examine the details of the civil dispute, but 
suffice to note the existence of a highly contentious civil dispute 

8 
 
between the complainant’s husband at one hand and her father-
in-law and others on the other hand.  
9.1  While the husband chose to institute the civil suit on 
27.02.2013, the complainant filed the present criminal complaint 
on 01.03.2013 alleging demand of dowry and threat by appellants 
that she and her husband will be denied a share in the property. 
The provocation for the Complaint/FIR is essentially the property 
dispute between father and son. 
9.2  Further, the rights and claims in the suit are the very basis 
and provocation for filing the criminal cases. The Complaint/FIR is 
replete with just one theme i.e. that the appellants are threatening 
them that they will deny share in the property. The Complaint/FIR 
is intended only to further their interest of the civil dispute. In G. 
Sagar Suri v. State of U.P 2 this Court cautioned that: 
“8. Jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code has to be 
exercised with great care. In exercise of its jurisdiction the 
High Court is not to examine the matter superficially. It is to be 
seen if a matter, which is essentially of a civil nature, has been 
given a cloak of criminal offence. 
Criminal proceedings are not a short cut of other remedies 
available in law. Before issuing process a criminal court has 
to exercise a great deal of caution. For the accused it is a 
serious matter. This Court has laid certain principles on the 
basis of which the High Court is to exercise its jurisdiction 
under Section 482 of the Code. Jurisdiction under this section 
has to be exercised to prevent abuse of the process of any court 
or otherwise to secure the ends of justice." 
 
2 (2000) 2 SCC 636. 

9 
 
 
9.3 The duty of the court, when FIR has predominating and 
overwhelming civil flavour is also reflected in the opinion of this 
Court in Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab3, this court observed 
that: 
"19. From the above discussion on the settled legal principles, 
it is clear from the facts of the present case that there was a 
clear abuse of the process of the Court and further that the 
Court had a duty to secure the ends of justice. We say so for 
the following reasons;  
a) The allegations made in the FIR had an overwhelmingly 
and predominatingly a civil flavour inasmuch as the 
complainant alleged that he had paid money to Gurmeet 
Singh, the main accused to get employment for his son 
abroad. If Gurmeet Singh failed the complainant could have 
filed a suit for recovery of the amount paid for not fulfilling 
the promise.  
… 
20. In our considered view, the High Court erred in firstly not 
considering the entire material on record and further in not 
appreciating the fact that the dispute, if any, was civil in 
nature and that the complainant had already settled his score 
with the main accused Gurmeet Singh against whom the 
proceedings have been closed as far back as 26.09.2014. In 
this scenario, there remains no justification to continue with 
the proceedings against the appellant.” 
 
 
10. We will now examine the ‘specific allegations’ in the 
FIR/complaint. Firstly, the complainant referred to certain items 
which are said to have been given by her father at the time of 
marriage. These items are (i) one Scorpio car; (ii) T.V.; (iii) fridge; 
(iv) DVD Tape; (v) silver utensils; (vi) 100 to 150 tolas gold; (vii) and 
 
3 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1007. 

10 
 
Rs. 5 lacs. This allegation relates to the year 2002 and the present 
complaint is of the year 2013. It is important to mention at this 
very stage that identical allegations in a DV case filed by the 
complainant were taken up at trial and the Judicial Magistrate, 
First Class had disbelieved the complainant’s version. We will be 
dealing with the judgment of the Judicial Magistrate, First Class in 
little more detail in the succeeding paras of the judgment. The 
second allegation relates to a bare statement that there exists a 
joint locker and that the keys of the said locker are with her 
stepmother-in-law, that is the appellant no. 1. Even on this, the 
Judicial Magistrate, First Class has observed that there are no 
details whatsoever, about the bank or the locker.  
10.1  The tendency to make general, vague, and omnibus 
allegation is noticed by this Court in many decisions. In Usha 
Chakraborty v. State of W.B.4, this court observed that: 
"16... the respondent alleged commission of offences under 
Sections 323, 384, 406, 423, 467, 468, 420 and 120B, IPC 
against the appellants. A bare perusal of the said allegation 
and the ingredients to attract them, as adverted to 
hereinbefore would reveal that the allegations are vague and 
they did not carry the essential ingredients to constitute the 
alleged offences.... The ingredients to attract the alleged 
offence referred to hereinbefore and the nature of the 
allegations contained in the application filed by the respondent 
would undoubtedly make it clear that the respondent had 
failed to make specific allegation against the appellants herein 
 
4 2023 SCC OnLine SC 90. 

11 
 
in respect of the aforesaid offences. The factual position thus 
would reveal that the genesis as also the purpose of criminal 
proceedings are nothing but the aforesaid incident and further 
that the dispute involved is essentially of civil nature. The 
appellants and the respondents have given a cloak of criminal 
offence in the issue ...” 
10.2    Similarly, dealing with allegations lacking in particulars 
and details, in Neelu Chopra v. Bharti5, this court observed that: 
"7. ...what strikes us is that there are no particulars given as 
to the date on which the ornaments were handed over, as to 
the exact number of ornaments or their description and as to 
the date when the ornaments were asked back and were 
refused. Even the weight of the ornaments is not mentioned in 
the complaint and it is a general and vague complaint that the 
ornaments were sometime given in the custody of the 
appellants and they were not returned. What strikes us more 
is that even in Para 10 of the complaint where the complainant 
says that she asked for her clothes and ornaments which were 
given to the accused and they refused to give these back, the 
date is significantly absent.” 
 
11. The third allegation is against appellant no. 1, the mother-in-
law, who is said to have threatened the complainant when she gave 
birth to a girl child. The threat is that the complainant will not get 
her gold and silver ornaments, and her husband will not get any 
share in the property. The allegations are again vague, lacking in 
basic details. The essence of the complaint is in the alleged threat 
to deprive the husband any share in the property with respect to 
which the husband has already filed the suit for declaration. 
 
5 (2009) 10 SCC 184. 

12 
 
12. The complaint also refers to a small incident where the 
complainant’s brother accompanied her to the matrimonial house, 
when the appellants no. 1 and 3 are alleged to have refused to take 
her back but on persuasion by her brother, she was allowed to stay. 
There is also a vague allegation that, when the complainant gave 
birth to a second child, appellants 1 and 2 came and “quarrelled” 
with the complainant, her brother, parents and threatened them. 
This Court had occasion to examine the phenomenon of general 
and omnibus allegations in the cases of matrimonial disputes. In 
Mamidi Anil Kumar Reddy v. State of A.P.6 this Court observed that: 
“14. ...A bare perusal of the complaint, statement of witnesses' 
and the charge-sheet shows that the allegations against the 
Appellants are wholly general and omnibus in nature; even if 
they are taken in their entirety, they do not prima facie make 
out a case against the Appellants. The material on record 
neither discloses any particulars of the offences alleged nor 
discloses the specific role/allegations assigned to any of the 
Appellants in the commission of the offences. 
 
15. The phenomenon of false implication by way of general 
omnibus allegations in the course of matrimonial disputes is 
not unknown to this Court. In Kahkashan Kausar alias Sonam 
v. State of Bihar, this Court dealt with a similar case wherein 
the allegations made by the complainant-wife against her in-
laws u/s. 498A and others were vague and general, lacking 
any specific role and particulars. The court proceeded to quash 
the FIR against the accused persons and noted that such a 
situation, if left unchecked, would result in the abuse of the 
process of law.” 
 
 
6 2024 SCC OnLine SC 127. 

13 
 
13. There is also an allegation against the appellant no. 2 about 
which the complainant passingly mentioned that “my daughter’s 
education disturbed since my brother-in-law Rahul cancelled her 
school admission by signing fraudulently”. The complaint is again 
silent about when such an act was done, where was it done, which 
was the school in which the admission was cancelled, what 
documents were signed for such cancellation, and what is fraud 
played by him. It is impossible to conceive of any offence on the 
basis of such vague and unclear allegations. Lastly, there is an 
allegation against the appellant no. 4, the Munim against whom it 
is said “Vijay Ranchhodbhai Patel is telling stories to my in-laws 
against me, my husband and my children and making them to 
mentally torture us”. The Munim is said to have threatened them 
and ask them to go away as there is nothing left for them as the 
entire property belongs to Rahul, appellant no. 2. 
 
13.1    In Kahkashan Kausar v. State of Bihar7 this Court noticed 
the injustice that may be caused when parties are forced to go 
through tribulations of a trial based on general and omnibus 
allegations. The relevant portion of the observation is as under: 
“11. …in recent times, matrimonial litigation in the country has 
also increased significantly and there is a greater disaffection 
 
7 (2022) 6 SCC 599.  

14 
 
and friction surrounding the institution of marriage, now, more 
than ever. This has resulted in an increased tendency to 
employ provisions such as Section 498-A IPC as instruments 
to settle personal scores against the husband and his 
relatives. 
 
18. ... upon a perusal of the contents of the FIR dated 1-4-
2019, it is revealed that general allegations are levelled 
against the appellants. The complainant alleged that "all 
accused harassed her mentally and threatened her of 
terminating her pregnancy". Furthermore, no specific and 
distinct allegations have been made against either of the 
appellants herein i.e. none of the appellants have been 
attributed any specific role in furtherance of the general 
allegations made against them. This simply leads to a 
situation wherein one fails to ascertain the role played by each 
accused in furtherance of the offence. The allegations are, 
therefore, general and omnibus and can at best be said to 
have been made out on account of small skirmishes... 
However, as far as the appellants are concerned, the 
allegations made against them being general and omnibus, do 
not warrant prosecution. 
 
21. …it would be unjust if the appellants are forced to go 
through the tribulations of a trial i.e. general and omnibus 
allegations cannot manifest in a situation where the relatives 
of the complainant's husband are forced to undergo trial. It has 
been highlighted by this Court in varied instances, that a 
criminal trial leading to an eventual acquittal also inflicts 
severe scars upon the accused, and such an exercise must, 
therefore, be discouraged.” 
 
14. One important event that gives us a clear impression that the 
criminal proceedings were instituted with a mala fide intention, 
only to harass the appellants, is the filing of the Domestic Violence 
case. After the institution of the Civil Case on 27.02.2013 and 
thereafter the present Criminal Complaint/FIR, respondent no. 2 
filed a complaint under Section 12 of the Domestic Violence Act on 
06.04.2013, based on similar allegations. The DV complaint refers 

15 
 
to the same items, a Scorpio car, T.V., fridge, DVD Tape, silver 
articles, 100 to 150 tolas gold and cash of Rs. 5 lacs as dowry. 
Again, there is an allegation that the accused have threatened that 
she will not get a share in the property as she gave birth to a girl 
child. There are similar allegations against appellant no. 2 as well 
as the Munim, the appellant no. 4. The domestic violence complaint 
went to trial and culminated in a detailed judgment of the Judicial 
Magistrate, First Class, Jalna dated 16.01.2019. We are informed 
that the judgment and order has become final as there was no 
appeal against the said order. While dismissing the domestic 
violence complaint, the learned judge observed as under: 
“19. During cross examination, the applicant admitted that the 
property dispute is going on in between her and respondents. 
Again, she voluntarily stated that the property dispute is 
pending in between her husband and parents in law. 
Moreover, the applicant appears deposed specifically that 
where ever Joint Bank Accounts are in the name of 
respondents, her and her husband, in such cases, 
respondents shall be prohibited from operation said accounts 
and she shall be allowed to operate. It further appears that the 
applicant 
family 
shall 
be 
provided 
same 
level 
of 
accommodation as holding by respondents. 
 
20. The above ocular evidence and admission are clearly 
suggesting that the applicant has brought the present 
application at the behest of her husband and with ulterior 
motive to grab property which the husband of the applicant 
may be entitled by other provisions of law. The wordings used 
in the application reveal selfish nature of the applicant. Hence, 
in the given circumstances, I am of opinion that it would be 
unsafe to rely on the sole testimony of the applicant without 
corroboration.  
 

16 
 
21. It seems that the applicant has not brought any other 
cogent and reliable evidence in support of her said oral 
evidence. Moreover, it appears that the case filed U/s 498(A) 
of IPC bearing RCC No. 376/2014 is not yet concluded. There 
is no record showing that respondents have been held guilty 
till today in that matter. It means that said allegations are not 
yet proved and not available for corroboration purpose. 
Therefore, I am coming to the conclusion that there is no cogent 
and reliable evidence as to domestic violence and accordingly 
I record my finding to Point No. 1 as “No”.” 
15. We are not referring to all the findings of the Court dismissing 
the domestic violence complaint. It is sufficient to note that 
identical allegations were examined in detail, subjected to strict 
scrutiny, and rejected as being false and untenable. This case is 
yet another instance of abuse of criminal process and it would not 
be fair and just to subject the appellants to the entire criminal law 
process. In Achin Gupta v. State of Haryana8, this court observed 
that: 
"20. It is now well settled that the power under Section 482 of 
the Cr. P.C. has to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with 
caution, only where such exercise is justified by the tests laid 
down in the Section itself. It is also well settled that Section 
482 of the Cr. P.C. does not confer any new power on the High 
Court but only saves the inherent power, which the Court 
possessed before the enactment of the Criminal Procedure 
Code. There are three circumstances under which the inherent 
jurisdiction may be exercised, namely (i) to give effect to an 
order under the Code, (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of 
Court, and iii) to otherwise secure the ends of justice. 
 
21. …It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any 
action which would result in injustice and prevent promotion 
of justice. In exercise of the powers, the court would be 
justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that the initiation 
or continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of court 
 
8 2024 SCC OnLine SC 759. 

17 
 
or quashing of these proceedings would otherwise serve the 
ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the complaint, 
the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint 
is sought to be quashed, it is permissible to look into the 
materials to assess what the complainant has alleged and 
whether any offence is made out even if the allegations are 
accepted in toto. 
 
36. For the foregoing reasons, we have reached to the 
conclusion that if the criminal proceedings are allowed to 
continue against the Appellant, the same will be nothing short 
of abuse of process of law & travesty of justice. This is a fit 
case wherein, the High Court should have exercised its 
inherent power under Section 482 of the Cr. P.C. for the 
purpose of quashing the criminal proceedings.” 
 
16. It is submitted on behalf of the respondent that after 
investigation, charge sheet has already been filed and that this 
Court should not interfere with the judgment of the High Court. 
The chargesheet is on record and we have examined it carefully, it 
simply reproduces all the wordings of the complaint. There is 
nothing new even after investigation, the allegations made in the 
FIR/complaint are exactly the allegations in the charge sheet. Even 
otherwise, the position of law is well entrenched. There is no 
prohibition against quashing of the criminal proceedings even after 
the charge sheet has been filed. In Anand Kumar Mohatta v. State 
(NCT of Delhi)9. 
"14. First, we would like to deal with the submission of the 
learned Senior Counsel for Respondent 2 that once the charge-
sheet is filed, petition for quashing of FIR is untenable. We do 
not see any merit in this submission, keeping in mind the 
position of this Court in Joseph Salvaraj A. v. State of Gujarat... 
 
9 (2019) 11 SCC 706. 

18 
 
 
15. Even otherwise it must be remembered that the provision 
invoked by the accused before the High Court is Section 482 
CrPC and that this Court is hearing an appeal from an order 
under Section 482 CrPC…. 
 
16. There is nothing in the words of this section which restricts 
the exercise of the power of the Court to prevent the abuse of 
process of court or miscarriage of justice only to the stage of 
the FIR. It is settled principle of law that the High Court can 
exercise jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC even when the 
discharge application is pending with the trial court. Indeed, it 
would be a travesty to hold that proceedings initiated against 
a person can be interfered with at the stage of FIR but not if it 
has advanced and the allegations have materialised into a 
charge-sheet. On the contrary it could be said that the abuse 
of process caused by FIR stands aggravated if the FIR has 
taken the form of a charge-sheet after investigation. The power 
is undoubtedly conferred to prevent abuse of process of power 
of any court." 
 
Similar view is taken by this Court in Joseph Salvaraj A. v. State 
of Gujarat10; A.M. Mohan v. State11; Mamta Shailesh Chandra v. 
State of Uttarakhand12.  
17. Having considered the matter in detail, we are of the opinion 
that none of the ingredients of Sections 498A, 323, 504, 506 read 
with Section 34 IPC are made out. We have no hesitation in 
arriving at the conclusion that if the criminal proceedings are 
allowed to continue against the appellants, the same will be 
nothing short of abuse of process of law and travesty of justice. 
Though the appellants have also argued on the ground that Jalna 
 
10 (2011) 7 SCC 59. 
11 2024 SCC OnLine SC 339. 
12 2024 SCC OnLine SC 136. 

19 
 
Police Station and the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jalna did not 
have jurisdiction, we are not inclined to examine that position in 
view of our finding that the Complaint/FIR and the chargesheet 
cannot be sustained.  
18. For the reasons above mentioned, we allow the present 
appeal, set aside the impugned judgment and order of the High 
Court in Criminal Application No. 4015 of 2014 dated 05.05.2017, 
and quash FIR dated 25.03.2013 bearing Crime No. 81/2013 filed 
under Sections 498A, 323, 504, 506 read with Section 34 IPC at 
P.S. Jalna and the chargesheet dated 30.07.2013 bearing 
Chargesheet No. 123/2013 in the above FIR. 
 
………………………………....J. 
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 
………………………………....J. 
[PANKAJ MITHAL] 
NEW DELHI; 
September 25, 2024.