2024 INSC 735
Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 1 of 26 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1031 OF 2015 
 
 
VIJAY SINGH@VIJAY KR. SHARMA  ...APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
THE STATE OF BIHAR  
 
      ...RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1578 OF 2017 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 765 OF 2017 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1579 OF 2017 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J. 
 
1. 
On 30.08.1985, Neelam breathed her last in Simaltalla, PS 
Sikandra, District Munger, Bihar. The factum of her death was 
discovered in furtherance of the written report lodged by the 
Digitally signed by
Nisha Khulbey
Date: 2024.10.05
14:38:46 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 2 of 26 
 
informant and brother-in-law of the deceased, namely,   
Ramanand Singh (examined as PW18 before the Trial Court1 ) 
wherein he alleged that Neelam was abducted by seven persons 
from their house in an incident which occurred at around 10:00 
PM on the said day. On the basis of this information, an FIR 
bearing no. 127 of 1985 was lodged at PS Sikandra and 
investigation was commenced which led to the filing of a 
chargesheet against the seven accused persons,  namely –  
Krishna Nandan Singh (Accused No.1), Ram Nandan Singh 
(Accused No.2), Raj Nandan Singh (Accused No.3), Shyam 
Nandan Singh (Accused No.4), Bhagwan Singh (Accused No. 5), 
Vijay Singh (Accused No. 6) and Tanik Singh (Accused No.7).  
2. 
The Trial Court charged all seven accused persons for the 
commission of offences punishable under Sections 323, 302, 364, 
449, 450, 380/34 and 120-B of the Indian Penal Code, 18602. 
Later, accused nos. 6 and 7 were distinctly charged for the 
commission of offences punishable under Sections 342, 506 read 
with Section 34 of IPC. After trial, the Trial Court, vide order 
dated 05.06.1992, convicted the accused persons listed as 
accused nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 for the commission of offences   
under Section 302/34 and 364/34 of IPC. They were acquitted of 
 
1 Prosecution witness or PW 
2 Hereinafter referred as “IPC” 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 3 of 26 
 
all other charges, and accused nos. 6 and 7 were acquitted of all 
the charges.  
3. 
The convicts preferred an appeal before the Patna High 
Court against the order of conviction and the State preferred an 
appeal before the High Court against the order of acquittal of the 
two accused persons. The Patna High Court, vide a common 
judgment dated 26.03.20153, upheld the conviction of the five 
convicts and set aside the acquittal of accused nos. 6 and 7 by 
finding them guilty of the commission of offences under      
Sections 364/34 and 302/34 of IPC. Accordingly, accused nos. 6 
and 7 were also convicted and were sentenced to undergo     
rigorous life imprisonment on each count. The present batch of 
appeals assail the order/judgment dated 26.03.2015 of the Patna 
High Court.  
BRIEF FACTS 
4. 
Shorn of unnecessary details, the facts reveal that deceased 
Neelam was the wife of one Ashok Kumar who happened to be 
the son of PW3/Ganesh Prasad Singh, and the informant 
PW18/Ramanand Singh was the brother of Ashok Kumar. The 
informant’s case was that at the relevant point of time, the 
deceased was residing with her husband and the informant in the 
house belonging to her late father Jang Bahadur Singh, who 
 
3 Passed in Govt. Appeal (DB) No. 16/1992, Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 219/1992 and 
Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 271/1992 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 4 of 26 
 
belonged to Simaltalla. The house was  partially occupied by the 
deceased, her husband and her brother-in-law and the remaining 
portion was rented out and tenants were residing in those 
portions.  
5. 
As per the prosecution case, on 30.08.1985 at about 10:00 
PM, PW18 was sitting outside the house on a rickshaw along 
with one Doman Tenti, Daso Mistry and Soordas, and Neelam 
was sleeping inside the house. Her husband, Ashok Kumar, had 
gone to his native place Ghogsha. Suddenly, the seven accused 
persons, including the appellants before us, came from north 
direction along with 15 other unknown assailants. Accused Vijay 
Singh/A-6 caught hold of the informant/PW18 and as soon as he 
raised alarm and started shouting, two unknown persons pointed 
out pistols towards him and directed him to maintain silence. 
Thereafter, the accused persons who had caught the informant, 
assaulted him with fists and slaps, and confined him near the well 
situated on the north side of the house. Meanwhile, A-1 entered 
the house with 5-7 other accused persons by getting the house 
unlatched through a  resident namely Kumud Ranjan Singh and 
dragged Neelam out of the house. As soon as they dragged her 
out, four persons caught hold of Neelam by her arms and legs, 
lifted her and started moving towards Lohanda. As per the 
informant, the    accused persons also picked up two sarees, two 
blouses, two petticoats and a pair of slippers from Neelam’s room 
while going out.  

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 5 of 26 
 
6. 
As the informant raised alarm, other people of the mohalla 
also gathered around including PW2 Vinay Kumar Singh, PW4 
Chandra Shekhar Prasad Singh and PW5 Ram Naresh Singh. The 
said three witnesses witnessed the accused persons taking away 
Neelam but could not stop them. The informant explained that no 
one dared to follow the accused persons as they had pointed 
pistols and had threatened of dire consequences. The informant 
also explained the motive behind the commission of the crime. It 
transpires from his statement that Neelam’s late father Jang 
Bahadur Singh had no son and his house was in possession of his 
daughter Neelam. She was abducted in order to forcefully obtain 
the possession of the house belonging to her father. The second 
limb of motive stems from the pending litigation between A-1 to 
A-5 (appellants) on one side and deceased Neelam, her maternal 
grandfather and her two sisters on the other side. The accused 
persons had obtained letters of administration and probate of the 
Will left by late Jang Bahadur Singh from the competent court 
and the said order came to be challenged before the Patna High 
Court by the deceased, her maternal grandfather and younger 
sisters. In the said appeal, the Patna High Court had injuncted the 
accused persons from alienating any part of the property. The 
High Court also restrained the execution of the probate of the 
Will by restraining the delivery of possession of the property to 
the    accused persons. Thus, deceased Neelam was residing in 
her father’s house along with her husband and brother-in-law in  

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 6 of 26 
 
order to retain the possession of the property. In this backdrop, 
the matter went for trial.  
BEFORE THE TRIAL COURT 
7. 
The Trial Court, while acquitting A-6 and A-7, observed 
that the motive attributed for the commission of the crime was 
not attributable to the said two accused persons as no interest of 
theirs could be disclosed in the pending litigation. Further, it  also 
found that A-6 was not named in the FIR registered upon the 
information supplied by PW18 and in his oral testimony, no 
statement of assault by A-6 and A-7 was given by him. It      
further held that no evidence sur-faced during the trial to indicate 
the participation of A-6 and A-7 in the acts of abduction and 
commission of murder.  
8. 
While convicting A-1 to A-5 on the charges under Sections 
302/34 and 364/34 of IPC, the Trial Court primarily relied upon 
the oral testimonies of PW18/informant, PW2, PW4 and PW5. 
The motive for the commission of the offence was supplied by 
the pending legal dispute relating to the property belonging to 
late Jang Bahadur Singh. The Court also replied upon 
circumstantial evidence borne out from the testimonies of PW7 
(maternal uncle of the de-ceased), PW3 (father-in-law of the 
deceased), PW23 (sister of the deceased) and PW13 (doctor) to 
arrive at the finding of guilt.  
 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 7 of 26 
 
BEFORE THE HIGH COURT 
9. 
A reading of the impugned judgment passed by the High 
Court suggests that the High Court carried out a fresh 
appreciation of evidence. The High Court firstly examined the 
question whether Neelam was actually residing in the house from 
which she was abducted. Relying upon the testimonies of PW7 
(maternal uncle of deceased), PW18 (broth-er-in-law of deceased 
and informant) and PW21 (Investigating Officer), the Court 
concluded that Neelam was indeed re-siding in the said house. In 
doing so, the Court discarded the fact that the other independent 
occupants of the house such as Ram Chabila Singh, his son, 
Kumud Ranjan Singh etc. did not come in support of the said fact. 
To overcome this deficiency, the Court relied upon the statements 
of PW21 and PW23 (sister of deceased) that some make-up 
articles were found in a bag lying in the room, which was 
suggestive of the fact that a woman was residing in the said room.  
10. 
In further consideration, the High Court excluded the 
evidence of PW5 for the reason that his presence at the place of 
incident was doubtful. For, PW5 deposed that he was heading 
towards his home from Deoghar and on the way from Lakhisarai 
to Simaltalla, he stopped at Sikandra Chowk along with PW2 and 
PW4. It was at this point that they heard the hulla and ended up 
witnessing the commission of offence. The High Court took note 
of the fact that while going from Deoghar to Simaltalla, 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 8 of 26 
 
Lakhisarai and Ghogsha would come first and thus, there was no 
reason for PW5 to come all the way to Sikandra Chowk if he was 
going to his home in Ghogsha as he could have directly 
proceeded from Lakhisarai to Ghogsha. Nevertheless, the High 
Court duly relied upon the evidence of PW2, PW4 and PW18 as 
well as on circumstantial evidence comprising of the testimonies 
of PW23, PW13 (doctor) and absence of suitable explanation in 
the statements of accused persons under Section 313 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 19734  as regards the fatal injuries 
suffered by the deceased. Thus, the High Court upheld the finding 
of guilt of  A-1 to A-5.  
11.  
As regards A-6 and A-7, the High Court reversed the 
finding of acquittal of the Trial Court into that of conviction. 
Primarily, the High Court observed that the said two accused 
persons were acquitted on the basis of the exonerating testimony 
of PW5 and the same cannot be sustained as the    testimony of 
PW5 has been excluded by the High Court in appeal. Further, the 
Court held that the testimonies of PW2, PW4 and PW18 were 
consistent regarding the participation of A-6 and A-7 and thus, 
they were convicted for the commission of the offences under 
Sections 364 and 302 of IPC read with Section 34 of IPC. The 
applicability of Section 34 IPC was based on the fact that A-6 and 
A-7 had confined PW18 near the well in order to eliminate any 
 
4 Hereinafter referred as “CrPC” 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 9 of 26 
 
chances of resistance in the acts committed by the other five 
accused per-sons.  
SUBMISSIONS 
12. 
On behalf of A-6 and A-7, it is submitted that there was no 
motive for the said accused persons to have indulged in the 
commission of the offence in question. The motive, if any,      
existed only for the remaining five accused persons who were 
interested in the outcome of the pending litigation between the 
parties. It is further contended that the High Court ought not to 
have entered into the exercise of re-appreciation of the entire 
evidence without finding any infirmity in the view taken by the 
Trial Court. To buttress this submission, it is submitted that since 
the view taken by the Trial Court was a possible view, it could 
not have been disturbed by the High Court in appeal. In this 
regard, reliance has been placed upon the decisions of this Court 
in State of Goa v. Sanjay Thakran5, Chandrappa v. State of 
Karnataka6, Nepal Singh v. State of Haryana7, Kashiram v. 
State of M.P.8, Labh Singh v. State of Punjab9  and Suratlal v. 
State of M.P.10   
 
5 (2007) 3 SCC 755 
6 (2007) 4 SCC 415 
7 (2009) 12 SCC 351 
8 (2002) 1 SCC 71 
9 (1976) 1 SCC 181 
10 (1982) 1 SCC 488 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 10 of 26 
 
13. 
It is further submitted that no reliance could be placed 
upon the testimonies of PW2 and PW4 as their presence at the 
spot was doubtful. Further, if they were 400 yards away when 
hue and cry was raised, they could not have seen A-6 taking away 
PW18 towards the well as the said fact took place prior to the hue 
and cry. It is further submitted that in the FIR, no pistol was 
assigned to A-6, whereas, the said fact was brought forward at 
the time of evidence. The appellants have also raised a     question 
regarding the time of incident on the basis of medical evidence. 
It is stated that the post-mortem report indicated that half-
digested food was found in the stomach of the deceased, whereas, 
the informant PW18 deposed that the incident took place 
immediately after dinner. If such was the case, the death ought to 
have occurred around 1-2 AM in the intervening night of 
30.08.1985-31.08.1985, but the post-mortem report, based on the 
post-mortem conducted at around 05:30 PM on 31.08.1985, 
indicated that death took place about 24 hours ago and thus, the 
time of death was around 05:00 PM on 30.08.1985 and not 10:00 
PM, as alleged.  
14. 
The appellants have also submitted that the prosecution 
has not proved that the deceased was actually residing in the 
concerned house at Simaltalla.  
15. 
Per contra, it is submitted on behalf of the State that mere 
non-examination of some independent witnesses shall not be 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 11 of 26 
 
fatal to the case of the prosecution. Reliance has been placed 
upon the decision of this Court in Rai Saheb & ors. v. State of 
Haryana11  to contend that at times, independent witnesses may 
not come forward due to fear. It is further submitted that the High 
Court has correctly appreciated the evidence in order to arrive at 
the finding of guilt of the accused persons. It is further submitted 
that the testimonies of PW2, PW4 and PW18 are consistent and 
the High Court has correctly placed reliance   upon their 
testimonies. As regards motive as well, it is submitted that the 
evidence is sufficient to reveal motive for the commission of the 
crime.  
16. 
We have heard learned counsels for the appellants as well 
as for the State. We have also carefully examined the record. 
DISCUSSION 
17. 
In light of the rival contentions raised by the parties, the 
principal issue that arises before the Court is whether the finding 
of guilt of the appellants arrived at by the High Court is 
sustainable in light of the evidence on record. As a corollary of 
this issue, it also needs to be examined whether the approach of 
the High Court was in line with the settled law for reversing an 
acquittal into conviction in a criminal appeal.  
 
11 (1994) Supp.1 SCC 74 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 12 of 26 
 
18. 
After two rounds of litigation before the Trial Court and 
the High Court, it is fairly certain the case is to be examined only 
with respect to the offences under Sections 364 and 302 of IPC 
read with Section 34 IPC. With respect to the offence under 
Section 364 IPC, the case of the prosecution is based on direct 
oral evidence, and with respect to the offence under Section 302 
IPC, the case of the prosecution is essentially based on          
circumstantial evidence as no direct evidence of the commission 
of murder could be collected. However, it is quite evident that the 
offence of murder was committed after the commission of the 
offence of abduction. There is a sequential relationship     between 
the two offences and thus, in order to set up a case for the 
commission of the offence of murder, it is necessary to prove the 
commission of the offence of abduction by the accused 
persons/appellants. For, the chain, in a case based on 
circumstantial evidence, must be complete and consistent.  
19. 
In order to prove the offence under Section 364 IPC, the 
prosecution has relied upon the oral testimonies of four eye   
witnesses – PW-2, PW-4, PW-5 and PW-18. Their testimonies 
have been assailed on various counts. The appellants have termed 
the said witnesses as interested and chance witnesses. The former 
charge originates from the fact that the witnesses were related to 
the deceased, and the latter charge originates from the fact that 
the witnesses had no rea-son to be present at the place of offence 
and they just appeared unexpectedly as a matter of chance. Let us 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 13 of 26 
 
examine both the aspects. We may first examine the testimonies 
of the witnesses independently, without going into their 
relationship with the deceased.  
20. 
The informant PW18 has deposed that he was standing 
near a rickshaw outside his house and the deceased was sleeping 
inside the house. PW18 was standing along with three 
independent persons namely, Doman Tenti, Daso Mistry and 
Soordas. The seven accused persons came along with 15 other 
persons. A-6 and A-7, along with unknown persons, first came to 
PW18 and took him away towards the well and confined him 
there. Thereafter, the remaining accused persons, along with 
other unknown assailants, entered the house wherein the 
deceased was sleeping. Interestingly, as per the version of the 
informant, the house was bolted from inside and was opened by 
a tenant namely Ku-mud Ranjan Singh. The problem with the 
informant’s version begins from this point itself. As per his  
version, the first eye witnesses of the incident ought to have been 
Doman Tenti, Daso Mistry, Soordas and Kumud Ranjan Singh. 
One person, namely Soordas, was stated to be blind and thus, he 
may be excluded. Nevertheless, the prosecution ought to have 
examined the three natural witnesses of the incident namely, 
Doman Tenti, Daso Mistry and Kumud Ranjan Singh. There is 
no explanation for non-examination of the natural eye witnesses. 
The version becomes more doubtful when it is examined in light 
of his statement that he could not prevent the accused persons as 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 14 of 26 
 
A-6 had threatened him with a pistol. In the FIR, no pistol has 
been attributed to A-6, whereas in the    statement recorded before 
the Trial Court, this fact was  introduced for the first time, which 
is indicative of improvement. Furthermore, PW18 got it recorded 
in the FIR that A-6 and others had assaulted him with fists and 
slaps, but the said fact was not deposed before the Trial Court in 
his examination in chief. The discrepancy assumes greater 
seriousness in light of the fact that no pistol has been recovered 
from any of the accused persons and if the factum of branding of 
pistol is un-der the cloud of doubt, the entire conduct of PW18 
becomes doubtful and unnatural, as he did not try to   prevent the 
accused persons from entering the premises or from abducting 
the deceased or from taking away the deceased on their shoulders 
in front of his eyes as he was the brother-in-law of the deceased.  
21. 
The other eye witnesses, PW2, PW4 and PW5, de-posed 
collectively in favour of the prosecution as they had arrived at the 
scene of crime together. At around 10:00 PM on the fateful night, 
the said eye witnesses happened to be present at Sikandra Chowk 
and they heard some hue and cry at the house of the deceased. 
The witnesses were coming together in a jeep from Lakhisarai 
and were going towards their home in Ghogsha village, the 
village wherein the deceased was married and also the native 
village of PW18/informant. PW2 was the driver of PW4. The 
testimo-nies of the said PWs have made it clear that while coming 
from Lakhisarai to Sikandra Chowk, Ghogsha came first, 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 15 of 26 
 
followed by Lohanda and Simaltalla. In such circumstances, their 
presence at Sikandra Chowk at 10:00 PM must be explained to 
the satisfaction of the Court. For, if they were going to their 
village, there was no occasion for them to come to Simaltalla as 
it did not fall on their way. But no such ex-planation is 
forthcoming from the material on record.  
22. 
Interestingly, this lacuna was duly noted by the High Court 
with respect to PW5 as there was no reason for him to be present 
at Sikandra Chowk at the time of incident and his testimony was 
excluded. However, the same logic was not     extended to the 
testimony of PW4 as well, as it was equally   improbable for him 
to be present at Sikandra Chowk at 10:00 PM on the date of 
incident. His visit to Sikandra Chowk was not necessitated for 
going to his village. Even otherwise, since the three eye witnesses 
were similarly placed as per their own version, the rejection of 
testimony of one witness ought to have raised a natural doubt on 
the testimonies of the other two witnesses unless they had a better 
explanation. However, no such doubt was entertained by the High 
Court and the impugned judgment offers no explanation for the 
same. In light of their own testimonies, none of the three eye 
witnesses were required to visit Sikandra Chowk or Simaltalla 
for going to their village.  
23. 
The testimonies of the eye witnesses are also impeachable 
in light of the other evidence on record. PW21 was the 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 16 of 26 
 
investigating officer in the case and he had examined the    
aforesaid PWs as eye witnesses of the incident. The version put 
forth by the eye witnesses meets a serious doubt when examined 
in light of the evidence of DW3 and DW4, the concerned Deputy 
Superintendent and Superintendent of Police respectively who 
had supervised the investigation of the present case. Both these 
officers were examined as defence witnesses on behalf of the 
appellants. As per the supervision notes prepared by DW3 during 
the course of investigation, PW2 and PW4 got to know about the 
incident only when PW18 came running to them after the 
incident. PW2, at that time, was sitting in a hotel with Umesh 
Singh to have ‘prasad’. Similarly, the   evidence of DW4 
indicates that on the date of incident, at around 10:00 PM, PW4 
was coming from Lakhisarai in his jeep and he saw six-seven 
persons fleeing away in a jeep and he identified them as the 
accused persons. Thus, PW4 entered the scene after the 
commission of offence and he did not witness the act of 
abduction. The testimony of PW2 strengthens the doubt as he 
deposed that when they reached the police station after the 
incident with PW18, neither him nor PW4 in-formed the IO that 
they had directly seen the incident. The stark difference between 
the versions put forth by the PW21 and DW3/DW4 raises serious 
concerns regarding the fairness of  investigation conducted by 
PW21 and it is a reasonable  possibility that the eye witnesses 
were brought in to create a fool proof case. The evidence of DW3 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 17 of 26 
 
and DW4, both senior officers who had exercised supervision 
over the investigation conducted by PW21, indicates that the so-
called eye witnesses of the incident were actually accessories 
after the fact and not accessories to the fact.  
24. 
The second limb of the objection against the testimonies 
of the eye witnesses is that none of the eye witnesses is an 
independent witness of fact. Ordinarily, there is no rule of law to 
discard the testimonies of the witnesses merely be-cause they 
were known to the victim or belonged to her family. For, an   
offence may be committed in circumstances that only the family 
members are present at the place of occurrence in natural course. 
However, the present case does not fall in such category. In the 
facts of the present case, the natural presence of the eye witnesses 
at the place of occurrence is under serious doubt, as discussed 
above, and for unexplained reasons, the   naturally present public 
persons were not examined as witnesses in the matter. The non-
examination of natural witnesses such as Doman Tenti, Daso 
Mistry, Soordas, Kumud Ranjan Singh and many other 
neighbours who admittedly came out of their houses to witness 
the offence, coupled with the fact that the projected eye witnesses 
failed to explain their presence at the place of  occurrence, 
renders the entire version of the prosecution as   improbable and 
unreliable. The eye witnesses, being family members, were 
apparently approached by PW18 who in-formed them about the 
incident and later, their versions were fabricated to make the case 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 18 of 26 
 
credible. Notably, when the version put forth by the interested 
witnesses comes under a shadow of doubt, the rule of prudence 
demands that the independent public witnesses must be examined 
and corroborating material must be gathered. More so, when 
public witnesses were readily available and the offence has not 
taken place in the bounds of closed walls.  
25. 
Pertinently, the conduct of the eye witnesses also ap-pears 
to be unnatural considering that they were all relatives of the 
deceased. Firstly, PW18 did not try to prevent the ab-duction. 
Even if it is believed that he was held against a pistol, the 
statement regarding the existence of pistol comes as an  
improvement from his first information given to the police, as 
already noted above. Nonetheless, it is admitted that PW2, PW4 
and PW5 came in a jeep and they saw the accused persons  
leaving with Neelam after abducting her. It is also admitted that 
they had identified the accused persons, who were essentially the 
relatives of the eye witnesses. In such circumstances, as per 
natural human conduct, the least that they could have done was 
to follow the accused persons in their jeep. They admittedly had 
a ready vehicle with them. Despite so, there was no such attempt 
on their part, so much so that the dead body of Neelam was not 
even discovered until the following morning as none of the eye 
witnesses had any clue as to where the accused persons had taken 
away the deceased after abducting her.  

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 19 of 26 
 
26. 
One crucial foundational fact in the present case is that the 
deceased was residing in her father’s house at Simaltalla. 
Although, the Trial Court and High Court have not doubted the 
said fact, we have our reservations regarding the same. In 
addition to the statements of PW18 (informant), PW23 (sister of 
deceased) and PW7 (maternal uncle of deceased), no other   
witness has deposed to prove the factum of residence. The   
admitted evidence on record sufficiently indicates that various 
other tenants were residing in the same house, including Kumud 
Ranjan Singh, Education Officer Ram Chabila Singh along with 
his daughter and son.  
27. 
The investigating officer PW21 had inspected the house 
and no direct material, except some make-up articles, could be 
gathered so as to indicate that Neelam was actually residing there. 
Admittedly, another woman namely, Chando Devi (sister of Ram 
Chabila Singh) was also residing in the same portion of the 
house. The High Court did take note of this fact but  explained it 
away by observing that since Chando Devi was a widow, the 
make-up articles could not have belonged to her as there was no 
need for her to put on make-up being a widow. In our opinion, 
the observation of the High Court is not only legally untenable 
but also highly objectionable. A sweeping  observation of this 
nature is not commensurate with the sensitivity and neutrality 
expected from a court of law,  specifically when the same is not 
made out from any evidence on record.  

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 20 of 26 
 
28. 
Be that as it may, mere presence of certain make-up     
articles cannot be a conclusive proof of the fact that the  deceased 
was residing in the said house, especially when another woman 
was admittedly residing there. Furthermore, if Neelam was 
indeed residing there, her other belongings such as clothes etc. 
ought to have been found in the house and even if not so, the 
other residents of the same house could have come forward to 
depose in support of the said fact.  
29. 
Notably, certain clothes such as two sarees, two blouses 
and two petticoats were recovered along with the dead body of 
the deceased. The prosecution version is that the accused      
persons had taken away the said clothes from the house of the 
deceased while abducting her. There is absolutely no explanation 
for the said conduct on the part of the accused persons. It is 
difficult to understand as to why the accused  persons would take 
her clothes along while abducting her. On the contrary, this fact 
actually serves the case of the prosecution in proving that the de-
ceased was actually residing at the house in Simaltalla. The 
clothes appear to have been planted along with the dead body in 
order to support the fact of actual residence of the deceased at her 
father’s house in Simaltalla. In light of the material on record, it 
could be concluded that no material whatsoever could be found 
at the house of Jang Bahadur Singh to directly indicate that the 
deceased was residing there. The make-up articles were linked 
with the deceased on the basis of a completely unacceptable 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 21 of 26 
 
reasoning and without any corroborative material. The 
prosecution has failed to examine even one cohabitant to prove 
the said fact. Furthermore, no personal belongings of the 
deceased, such as clothes, footwear, utensils etc., could be found 
in the entire house. Therefore, we are not inclined to believe that 
the  deceased was actually residing in the house at Simaltalla. In 
the same breath, we may also note that even for PW18, no 
material was found in the said house to indicate that he was in 
fact  residing there. Apart from his own statement, no witness has 
come forward to depose that the informant was a resident of the 
said house. The prosecution has not spotted any room in the    
entire house wherein PW18 was residing and thus, his own 
presence at the place of occurrence is doubtful.  
30. 
The appellants have also raised certain objections with 
respect to the time of death. The discrepancy has been flagged in 
light of the post mortem report, based on the post-mortem 
conducted at around 5:30 PM on 31.08.1985, which indicates that 
death took place around 24 hours ago. It indicates that the time 
of death must have been around 5:00 PM on 30.08.1985, which 
is contrary to the evidence of PW18 that the incident took place 
around 10:00 PM on 30.08.1985. A post mortem   report is 
generally not considered as conclusive evidence of the facts 
mentioned in the re-port regarding the cause of death, time of 
death etc. It could always be corroborated with other direct 
evidence on record such as ocular evidence of the eye witnesses. 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 22 of 26 
 
However, when there is no other credible evidence on record to 
contradict the report, the facts stated in the post mortem report 
are generally taken as true. In the present matter, the evidence of 
the eye witnesses has been declared as wholly unreliable 
including on the aspect of time of death. Thus, there is no rea-son 
to doubt the post mortem report and the findings there-in.  
31. 
At this stage, we may also note that the approach of the 
High Court in reversing the acquittal of A-6 and A-7 was not in 
line with the settled law pertaining to reversal of acquittals. The 
Trial Court had acquitted the said two accused persons on the 
basis of a thorough appreciation of evidence and the High Court 
merely observed that their acquittal was based on the  improbable 
statement of PW5 and since the evidence of PW5 stood excluded 
from the record, there was no reason left for the acquittal of A-6 
and A-7. Pertinently, the High Court did not arrive at any finding 
of illegality or perversity in the opinion of the Trial Court on that 
count. Furthermore, it did not arrive at any positive finding of 
involvement of the said two accused persons within the sphere of 
common intention with the remaining accused persons. Equally, 
the exclusion of the evidence of PW5, without explaining as to 
how the evidence of PW2 and PW4 was not liable to be excluded 
in the same  manner, was in-correct and erroneous.  
32. 
We do not intend to say that the High Court could not have 
appreciated the evidence on record in its exercise of appellate 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 23 of 26 
 
powers. No doubt, the High Court was well within its powers to 
do so. However, in order to reverse a finding of  acquittal, a 
higher threshold is required. For, the presumption of innocence 
operating in favour of an accused through-out the trial gets 
concretized with a finding of acquittal by the Trial Court. Thus, 
such a finding could not be reversed merely because the 
possibility of an alternate view was alive. Rather, the view    taken 
by the Trial Court must be held to be completely unsustainable 
and not a probable view. The High Court, in the impugned 
judgment, took a cursory view of the matter and     reversed the 
acquittal of A-6 and A-7 without arriving at any finding of 
illegality or perversity or impossibility of the Trial Court’s view 
or non-appreciation of evidence by the Trial Court.  
33. 
We may usefully refer to the exposition of law in Sanjeev 
v. State of H.P.12, wherein this Court summarized the position in 
this regard and observed as follows: 
“7. It is well settled that: 
7.1. While dealing with an appeal against 
acquittal, the reasons which had weighed 
with the trial court in acquitting the 
accused must be dealt with, in case the 
appellate court is of the view that the 
acquittal        rendered by the trial court 
deserves to be upturned (see Vijay Mohan 
 
12 (2022) 6 SCC 294 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 24 of 26 
 
Singh v. State of Karnataka13, Anwar Ali 
v. State of H.P.14 ) 
7.2. With an order of acquittal by the trial 
court, 
the 
normal 
presumption 
of 
innocence in a criminal matter gets 
reinforced (see Atley v. State of U.P.15 ) 
7.3. If two views are possible from the 
evidence on record, the appellate court 
must be extremely slow in interfering with 
the 
appeal 
against 
acquittal 
(see  
Sambasivan v. State of Kerala16 )” 
 
34. 
Having observed that the case of the prosecution is full of 
glaring doubts as regards the offence of abduction, we may 
briefly note and reiterate that the offence of murder is entirely 
dependent on circumstantial evidence. Although, the post     
mortem report indicates that the death of the deceased was     
unnatural and the commission of murder can-not be ruled out. 
But there is no direct evidence on record to prove the         
commission of murder by the accused per-sons. The link of    
causation between the accused persons and the alleged offence is 
conspicuously missing. The circumstantial evidence emanating 
from the facts sur-rounding the offence of abduction, such as the 
testimonies of eye witnesses, has failed to meet the test of proof 
and cannot be termed as proved in the eyes of law. Therefore, the 
 
13 (2019) 5 SCC 436 
14 (2020) 10 SCC 166 
15 AIR 1955 SC 807 
16 (1998) 5 SCC 412 

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 25 of 26 
 
foundation of circumstantial evidence having fallen down, no 
inference could be drawn from it to infer the commission of the 
offence under Section 302 IPC by the accused persons. It is trite 
law that in a case based on  circumstantial evidence, the chain of 
evidence must be complete and must give out an inescapable 
conclusion of guilt. In the pre-sent case, the prosecution case is 
far from meeting that standard.  
35. 
As regards motive, we may suffice to say that motive has 
a bearing only when the evidence on record is sufficient to prove 
the ingredients of the offences under consideration. Without the 
proof of foundational facts, the case of the prosecution cannot 
succeed on the presence of motive alone. Moreover, the motive 
in the present matter could operate both ways. The accused 
persons and the eyewitnesses belong to the same family and the 
presence of a property related dispute is evident. In a hypothetical 
sense, both the sides could benefit from implicating the other. In 
such circumstances, placing reliance upon motive alone could be 
a double-edged sword. We say no more.  
36. 
The above analysis indicates that the prosecution has failed 
to discharge its burden to prove the case beyond reasonable 
doubt. The reasonable doubts, indicated above, are irreconcilable 
and strike at the foundation of the prosecution’s case. Thus, the 
appellants are liable to be acquitted of all the charges.  

Criminal Appeal No. 1031/2015 and others                                          Page 26 of 26 
 
37. 
In light of the foregoing discussion, we hereby conclude 
that the findings of conviction arrived at by the Trial Court and 
the High Court are not sustainable. Moreover, the High Court 
erred in reversing the acquittal of A-6 and A-7. Accordingly, the 
impugned judgment as well as the judgment rendered by the Trial 
Court (to the extent of conviction of A-1 to A-5) are set aside, and 
all seven accused persons (appellants) are hereby acquitted of all 
the charges levelled upon them. The appellants are directed to be 
released forthwith, if lying in custody.  
38. 
The captioned appeals stand disposed of in terms of this 
judgment. Interim application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed 
of. No costs.  
 
 
 
……………………………………J. 
  [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 
 
 
 
 
……………………………………J. 
             [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
 
NEW DELHI 
SEPTEMBER 25, 2024