2024 INSC 762
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO.10913 OF 2024
(Arising out of SLP(C) No.15073/2024)
MANISHA RAVINDRA PANPATIL             
APPELLANT
                         VERSUS
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ORS.
RESPONDENTS
O R D E R
1.
Leave granted.
2.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
3.
The  appellant  is  an  elected  Sarpanch  of  Gram
Panchayat,  Vichkheda  situated  in  Jalgaon  District  of
Maharashtra. She contested in the panchayat elections and
won  in  February,  2021.  A  dispute  subsequently  arose
between  the  appellant  and  respondent  nos.  5  to  7
(hereinafter referred as ‘the private respondents’), who
sought her disqualification on the ground that she was
allegedly  residing  with  her  mother-in-law  in  a  house
erected upon government land. The appellant however, had
vehemently  contended  that  she  does  not  reside  in  that
particular dwelling, and that she lives separately with
her husband and children in a rented accommodation. She
further contended that the concerned dwelling was in such
a dilapidated condition that it could not be inhabited. 
1
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2024.10.04
16:37:37 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

4. 
However,  without  appropriately  verifying  these
factual issues and on the basis of bald statements, the
concerned  Collector  passed  an  order  disqualifying  the
appellant  from  continuing  as  Sarpanch.  This  order  was
thereafter  confirmed  by  the  Divisional  Commissioner.
Subsequently,  the  High  Court  vide the  impugned  order,
dismissed  the  appellant’s  writ  petition  against  the
Commissioner’s order on a technical ground, thus putting
a seal of approval on her removal from office. 
5. 
This seems to us a classic case where the residents
of the village could not reconcile with the fact that the
appellant, being a woman, was nevertheless elected to the
office  of  the  Sarpanch  of  their  village.  They  were
perhaps further unable to come to terms with the reality
that  a  female  Sarpanch  would  make  decisions  on  their
behalf de jure and that they would have to abide by her
directions. 
6. 
It is patently obvious that these were the primary
motivations which led the private respondents to initiate
their  orchestrated  efforts  towards  the  removal  of  the
appellant, from her duly elected position. Having found
no instance of professional misconduct on the part of the
appellant  that  they  could  etch  away  at,  the  private
respondents  instead  embarked  on  a  mission  to  cast
aspersions  upon the  appellant, by  any means  necessary.
This  initiative  was  undertaken  by  them,  with  the
intention of securing her removal from public office.
2

7.
Though the private respondents grasped at straws in
their bid to evict the appellant from her position, their
cause  was  perhaps  aided  by  the  mechanical  and  summary
orders  passed  by  government  authorities,  at  various
levels.  These  orders  were  passed  in  a  lackadaisical
manner,  without making  any effort  towards conducting  a
fact-finding  exercise,  so  as  to  confirm  whether  the
allegations  levied  by  the  private  respondents  were
sufficiently  made  out.  There  is  nothing  on  record  to
suggest  that  any  objection  of  the  appellant’s  family
having  encroached upon  government land  was ever  raised
when she filed her nomination papers. 
8. 
At this juncture, we would like to note that the
vagaries of the present factual matrix is far from unique
and is unfortunately somewhat of a norm. While there is
no  doubt in  our mind  that the  private respondents  may
have operated in a discriminatory manner, what is more
worrying  is  the  casual  approach  adopted  by  government
authorities
 
in
 
summarily
 
removing
 
an
 
elected
representative. This is all the more concerning when the
representative in question is a woman and elected in the
reservation quota, thereby indicating a systemic pattern
of prejudicial treatment, permeating through all levels
of administrative functioning.
9. 
This scenario gets further exacerbated when we as a
country  are attempting  realize the  progressive goal  of
gender parity and women empowerment across all spheres,
3

including  public  offices  and  most  importantly  adequate
women  representative  in  the  elected  bodies,  such
instances at the grass-root level cast a heavy shadow on
any headway that we may have achieved.
10. 
That being said and having regard to the facts and
circumstances of the case at hand, we see no credible and
convincing material on record to substantiate the private
respondents’  allegations  of  encroachment  of  government
land  by  the  appellant  before  or  post  her  election  as
Sarpanch. All that we would like to reiterate is that the
matter  of  removal  of  an  elected  public  representative
should  not  be  treated  so  lightly,  especially  when  it
concerns  women  belonging  to  rural  areas.  It  must  be
acknowledged  that these  women who  succeed in  occupying
such  public  offices,  do  so  only  after  significant
struggle. 
11.
In  this  vein,  the  concerned  authorities  need  to
sensitize  themselves  and  work  towards  creating  a  more
congenial atmosphere where women, such as the appellant,
can  prove  their  worth  by  rendering  their  services  as
Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat.
12.
In our considered view, the nature of allegations
and  the  consequential  punishment  awarded  to  the
appellant,  namely,  her  removal  from  the  office  of
Sarpanch, is highly disproportionate. 
13.
For  the  reasons  afore-stated,  the  appeal  is
allowed.  The impugned  order dated  03.08.2023 passed  by
4

the  High  Court  is  set  aside.  The  appellant,  in  whose
favour stay had already been granted, shall be allowed to
continue and perform the duties of Sarpanch of the Gram
Panchayat till the completion of her tenure.
14. 
Ordered accordingly.    
...................J.
 (SURYA KANT)
...................J.
 (UJJAL BHUYAN)
New Delhi;
September 27, 2024
5

ITEM NO.40               COURT NO.4               SECTION IX
               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C) No(s).15073/2024
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 03-08-2023
in WP No.4577/2023 passed by the High Court of Judicature At Bombay
At Aurangabad)
MANISHA RAVINDRA PANPATIL                          Petitioner(s)
                                VERSUS
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ORS.                    Respondent(s)
(IA  No.  60000/2024  -  EXEMPTION  FROM  FILING  C/C  OF  THE  IMPUGNED
JUDGMENT, IA No. 60001/2024 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)
 
Date : 27-09-2024 This matter was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :  HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SURYA KANT
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE UJJAL BHUYAN
For Petitioner(s)  Mr. Sudhanshu S. Choudhari, Sr. Adv.
                   Mr. Vatsalya Vigya, AOR
                   Ms. Gautami Yadav, Adv.
                   Ms. Pranjal Chapalgaonkar, Adv.
                   Ms. Sapna Sinha, Adv.
                   Mr. Akshay Sinha, Adv.
                                      
For Respondent(s)
Mr. Prashant Shrikant Kenjale, AOR
                   
                   Mr. Shrirang B. Varma, Adv.
                   Mr. Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Adv.
                   Mr. Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, AOR
                   Mr. Bharat Bagla, Adv.
                   Mr. Sourav Singh, Adv.
                   Mr. Aditya Krishna, Adv.
                   Ms. Preet S. Phanse, Adv.
                   Mr. Adarsh Dubey, Adv.
                                     
          UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R
1.
Leave granted.
2.
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed reportable order.
3.
All pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
(ARJUN BISHT)                                   (PREETHI T.C.)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                         ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
(signed reportable order is placed on the file)
6