2024 INSC 742
1 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.      OF 2024 
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 27699 OF 2018) 
 
 
 
PUNJAB STATE CIVIL SUPPLIES 
CORPORATION LIMITED & ANR.                       …APPELLANT(S) 
  
 
VERSUS 
 
 
M/S SANMAN RICE MILLS & ORS.               
…RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
 
 
PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The challenge in this Civil Appeal is to the judgment and 
order dated 10.01.2017 passed by the High Court of Punjab 
& Haryana at Chandigarh in exercise of powers under 
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2024.09.27
17:09:36 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Section 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 19961 
setting aside the order dated 07.04.2015 passed under 
Section 34 of the Act and also the arbitral order dated 
08.11.2012. 
 
FACTS:  
3. 
The appellant - Punjab State Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd.2 
entered into an agreement dated 06.10.2008 with M/s 
Sanman Rice Mills3 whereunder the Corporation was to 
supply paddy to the Rice Mill for the purpose of milling that 
had to supply back the resultant rice to the Corporation.  
4. 
A total of 2,02,850 bags of Grade ‘A’ variety of paddy weighing 
70,997.50 quintals was supplied by the Corporation to the 
Rice Mill. However, after processing, the Rice Mill resupplied 
only a part of the same with a shortfall of 35110.39 quintals 
of rice. Thus, this shortage in quantity of rice equivalent to a 
total cost of Rs.7,16,15,716/- was recoverable from the Rice 
Mill. Against the aforesaid outstanding amount, the Rice Mill 
 
1 hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’ 
2 hereinafter referred to as ‘the Corporation’ 
3 hereinafter referred to as ‘the Rice Mill’ 

3 
 
paid ten cheques of Rs.50 lakh each amounting to Rs.5 crore 
to the Corporation leaving a balance of Rs.2,16,15,716/-. 
Thus, there arose a dispute between the parties with regard 
to the recovery of the balance amount. The dispute was 
referred to the Arbitrator.  
5. 
The Arbitrator passed an award on 08.11.2012 and awarded 
a sum of Rs.2,67,66,804/- in favour of the Corporation as 
against the Rice Mill. The amount awarded was to be paid 
with interest @ 12 per cent per annum. The said award was 
objected to by the Rice Mill by filing a petition under Section 
34 of the Act before the Additional District Judge. It was 
dismissed on 07.04.2015 with the finding that there is no 
illegality in the award within the scope of interference 
permissible under Section 34 of the Act. Not satisfied by the 
aforesaid order, the Rice Mill filed an appeal under Section 
37 of the Act before the High Court. The appeal has been 
allowed by the impugned judgment and order 10.01.2017 
and not only the judgment and order passed by the 
Additional District Judge under Section 34 of the Act has 
been set aside but also the Arbitral order dated 08.11.2012.  

4 
 
6. 
It is in the above factual scenario that the Corporation has 
preferred the present appeal for setting aside the impugned 
judgment and order dated 10.01.2017 passed by the High 
Court in an appeal under Section 37 of the Act.  
7. 
Learned counsel for the parties were heard at length. 
 
POINT OF DETERMINATION: 
8. 
The short question on the submission of the parties, which 
arises for our consideration is about the scope of powers of 
the Appellate Court under Section 37 of the Act and whether 
the Appellate Court was justified in setting aside the award 
dated 08.11.2012 which had already been confirmed under 
Section 34 of the Act.  
 
LEGAL POSITION: 
9. 
The object of the Act is to provide for a speedy and 
inexpensive alternative mode of settlement of dispute with 
the minimum of intervention of the courts. Section 5 of the 
Act is implicit in this regard and prohibits interference by the 
judicial authority with the arbitration proceedings except 
where so provided in Part-I of the Act. The judicial 

5 
 
interference, if any, is provided inter-alia only by means of 
Sections 34 and 37 of the Act respectively.  
10. Section 34 of the Act provides for getting an arbitral award 
set aside by moving an application in accordance with sub-
Section (2) and sub-Section (3) of Section 34 of the Act which 
inter-alia provide for the grounds on which an arbitral award 
is liable to be set aside. One of the main grounds for 
interference or setting aside an award is where the arbitral 
award is in conflict with the public policy of India i.e. if the 
award is induced or affected by fraud or corruption or is in 
contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law or it 
is in conflict with most basic notions of morality and justice. 
A plain reading of Section 34 reveals that the scope of 
interference by the court with the arbitral award under 
Section 34 is very limited and the court is not supposed to 
travel beyond the aforesaid scope to find out if the award is 
good or bad. 
11. Section 37 of the Act provides for a forum of appeal inter-alia 
against the order setting aside or refusing to set aside an 
arbitral award under Section 34 of the Act. The scope of 

6 
 
appeal is naturally akin to and limited to the grounds 
enumerated under Section 34 of the Act. 
12. It is pertinent to note that an arbitral award is not liable to 
be interfered with only on the ground that the award is illegal 
or is erroneous in law that too upon reappraisal of the 
evidence adduced before the arbitral trial. Even an award 
which may not be reasonable or is non-speaking to some 
extent cannot ordinarily be interfered with by the courts. It is 
also well settled that even if two views are possible there is 
no scope for the court to reappraise the evidence and to take 
the different view other than that has been taken by the 
arbitrator. The view taken by the arbitrator is normally 
acceptable and ought to be allowed to prevail.  
13. In paragraph 11 of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd.  v.  L.K.Ahuja,4 
it has been observed as under:  
“11. There are limitations upon the scope of 
interference in awards passed by an arbitrator. 
When the arbitrator has applied his mind to the 
pleadings, the evidence adduced before him and 
the terms of the contract, there is no scope for the 
court to reappraise the matter as if this were an 
 
4 (2001) 4 SCC 86 

7 
 
appeal and even if two views are possible, the 
view taken by the arbitrator would prevail. So 
long as an award made by an arbitrator can be 
said to be one by a reasonable person no 
interference is called for. However, in cases 
where an arbitrator exceeds the terms of the 
agreement or passes an award in the absence of 
any evidence, which is apparent on the face of 
the award, the same could be set aside.” 
 
14. It is equally well settled that the appellate power under 
Section 37 of the Act is not akin to the normal appellate 
jurisdiction vested in the civil courts for the reason that the 
scope of interference of the courts with arbitral proceedings 
or award is very limited, confined to the ambit of Section 34 
of the Act only and even that power cannot be exercised in a 
casual and a cavalier manner.  
15. In Dyna Technology Private Limited  v.  Crompton 
Greaves Limited5, the court observed as under:  
“24. There is no dispute that Section 34 of the 
Arbitration Act limits a challenge to an award 
only on the grounds provided therein or as 
interpreted by various courts. We need to be 
cognizant of the fact that arbitral awards should 
 
5 (2019) 20 SCC 1 

8 
 
not be interfered with in a casual and cavalier 
manner, unless the court comes to a conclusion 
that the perversity of the award goes to the root 
of the matter without there being a possibility of 
alternative interpretation which may sustain the 
arbitral award. Section 34 is different in its 
approach and cannot be equated with a normal 
appellate 
jurisdiction. 
The 
mandate 
under 
Section 34 is to respect the finality of the arbitral 
award and the party autonomy to get their 
dispute adjudicated by an alternative forum as 
provided under the law. If the courts were to 
interfere with the arbitral award in the usual 
course on factual aspects, then the commercial 
wisdom behind opting for alternate dispute 
resolution would stand frustrated. 
25. Moreover, umpteen number of judgments of 
this Court have categorically held that the courts 
should not interfere with an award merely 
because an alternative view on facts and 
interpretation of contract exists. The courts need 
to be cautious and should defer to the view taken 
by the Arbitral Tribunal even if the reasoning 
provided in the award is implied unless such 
award portrays perversity unpardonable under 
Section 34 of the Arbitration Act.” 
 
16. It is seen that the scope of interference in an appeal under 
Section 37 of the Act is restricted and subject to the same 
grounds on which an award can be challenged under Section 
34 of the Act. In other words, the powers under Section 37 

9 
 
vested in the court of appeal are not beyond the scope of 
interference provided under Section 34 of the Act.  
17. In paragraph 14 of MMTC Limited    v.   Vedanta Limited,6 
it has been held as under:  
“14. As far as interference with an order made 
under Section 34, as per Section 37, is concerned, 
it cannot be disputed that such interference 
under Section 37 cannot travel beyond the 
restrictions laid down under Section 34. In other 
words, 
the 
court 
cannot 
undertake 
an 
independent assessment of the merits of the 
award, and must only ascertain that the exercise 
of power by the court under Section 34 has not 
exceeded the scope of the provision. Thus, it is 
evident that in case an arbitral award has been 
confirmed by the court under Section 34 and by 
the court in an appeal under Section 37, this 
Court must be extremely cautious and slow to 
disturb such concurrent findings.” 
 
18. 
Recently a three-Judge Bench in Konkan Railway 
Corporation 
Limited 
v. 
Chenab 
Bridge 
Project 
Undertaking7 referring to MMTC Limited (supra) held that 
the scope of jurisdiction under Section 34 and Section 37 of 
the Act is not like a normal appellate jurisdiction and the 
 
6 (2019) 4 SCC 163 
7 (2023) 9 SCC 85 

10 
 
courts should not interfere with the arbitral award lightly in 
a casual and a cavalier manner. The mere possibility of an 
alternative view on facts or interpretation of the contract does 
not entitle the courts to reverse the findings of the arbitral 
tribunal.  
19. 
In Bombay Slum Redevelopment Corporation Private 
Limited  v.  Samir Narain Bhojwani8, a Division Bench of 
this Court followed and reiterated the principle laid down in 
the case of MMTC Limited (supra) and UHL Power Company 
Limited v. State of Himachal Pradesh9. It quoted and 
highlighted paragraph 16 of the latter judgment which 
extensively relies upon MMTC Limited (supra). It reads as 
under: 
“16. As it is, the jurisdiction conferred on courts 
under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act is fairly 
narrow, when it comes to the scope of an appeal 
under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act, the 
jurisdiction of an appellate court in examining an 
order, setting aside or refusing to set aside an 
award, is all the more circumscribed. In MMTC 
Ltd. v. Vedanta Ltd. [MMTC Ltd. v. Vedanta Ltd., 
(2019) 4 SCC 163: (2019) 2 SCC (Civ) 293], the 
 
8 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1656 
9 (2022) 4 SCC 116 

11 
 
reasons for vesting such a limited jurisdiction on 
the High Court in exercise of powers under 
Section 34 of the Arbitration Act have been 
explained in the following words: (SCC pp. 166-
67, para 11)  
"11. As far as Section 34 is concerned, 
the position is well- settled by now that 
the Court does not sit in appeal over the 
arbitral award and may interfere on 
merits on the limited ground provided 
under Section 34(2)(b)(ii) i.e. if the 
award is against the public policy of 
India. As per the legal position clarified 
through decisions of this Court prior to 
the amendments to the 1996 Act in 
2015, a violation of Indian public policy, 
in turn, includes a violation of the 
fundamental policy of Indian law, a 
violation of the interest of India, conflict 
with justice or morality, and the 
existence of patent illegality in the 
arbitral 
award. 
Additionally, 
the 
concept of the "fundamental policy of 
Indian law" would cover compliance 
with statutes and judicial precedents, 
adopting 
a 
judicial 
approach, 
compliance 
with 
the 
principles 
of 
natural 
justice, 
and 
Wednesbury 
[Associated Provincial Picture Houses 
Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corpn., [1948] 1 
Κ.Β. 
223 
(CA)] 
reasonableness. 
Furthermore, "patent illegality" itself 
has been held to mean contravention of 
the 
substantive 
law 
of 
India, 
contravention of the 1996 Act, and 

12 
 
contravention of the terms of the 
contract."” 
 
CONCLUSION: 
 
20. 
In view of the above position in law on the subject, the scope 
of the intervention of the court in arbitral matters is virtually 
prohibited, if not absolutely barred and that the interference 
is confined only to the extent envisaged under Section 34 of 
the Act. The appellate power of Section 37 of the Act is 
limited within the domain of Section 34 of the Act. It is 
exercisable only to find out if the court, exercising power 
under Section 34 of the Act, has acted within its limits as 
prescribed thereunder or has exceeded or failed to exercise 
the power so conferred. The Appellate Court has no 
authority of law to consider the matter in dispute before the 
arbitral tribunal on merits so as to find out as to whether 
the decision of the arbitral tribunal is right or wrong upon 
reappraisal of evidence as if it is sitting in an ordinary court 
of appeal. It is only where the court exercising power under 
Section 34 has failed to exercise its jurisdiction vested in it 
by Section 34 or has travelled beyond its jurisdiction that 

13 
 
the appellate court can step in and set aside the order 
passed under Section 34 of the Act. Its power is more akin 
to that superintendence as is vested in civil courts while 
exercising revisionary powers. The arbitral award is not 
liable to be interfered unless a case for interference as set 
out in the earlier part of the decision, is made out. It cannot 
be disturbed only for the reason that instead of the view 
taken by the arbitral tribunal, the other view which is also a 
possible view is a better view according to the appellate 
court.  
21. 
It must also be remembered that proceedings under Section 
34 of the Act are summary in nature and are not like a                
full-fledged regular civil suit. Therefore, the scope of Section 
37 of the Act is much more summary in nature and not like 
an ordinary civil appeal. The award as such cannot be 
touched unless it is contrary to the substantive provision of 
law; any provision of the Act or the terms of the agreement. 
22. 
In the case at hand, the arbitral award dated 08.11.2012 is 
based upon evidence and is reasonable. It has not been 

14 
 
found to be against public policy of India or the fundamental 
policy of Indian law or in conflict with the most basic notions 
of morality and justice. It is not held to be against any 
substantive provision of law or the Act. Therefore, the award 
was rightly upheld by the court exercising the powers under 
Section 34 of the Act. The Appellate Court, as such, could 
not have set aside the award without recording any finding 
that the award suffers from any illegality as contained in 
Section 34 of the Act or that the court had committed error 
in upholding the same. Merely for the reason that the view 
of the Appellate Court is a better view than the one taken by 
the arbitral tribunal, is no ground to set aside the award. 
23. 
Thus, in our opinion, the Appellate Court committed 
manifest error of law in setting aside the order passed under 
Section 34 of the Act and consequently the arbitral award 
dated 08.11.2012. 
24. 
Accordingly, the impugned judgment and order dated 
10.01.2017 passed under Section 37 is hereby set aside and 

15 
 
the arbitral award dated 08.11.2012 is restored to be 
implemented in accordance with law. 
25. 
The appeal is allowed with no order as to costs. 
26. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
...................………………………….. J. 
(PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA) 
 
 
 
.............……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
SEPTEMBER 27, 2024