2024 INSC 749
WPC 609/2024
Reportable
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
Writ Petition (Civil) No 609 of 2024
Atul Kumar
     
      Petitioner 
 
Versus
The Chairman (Joint Seat Allocation 
Respondents
Authority) and Others
O R D E R
1
The petitioner is a meritorious student. He belongs to the Scheduled Caste
category. He appeared for the JEE (Advanced) 2024 Examination and secured
a rank of 1455 in his category. He was allotted a seat at the Indian Institute
of Technology Dhanbad for a four year Bachelor of Technology course in
Electrical Engineering. This was the second attempt and, therefore, the last
chance for the petitioner to secure admission since only two attempts are
permissible.  The petitioner has disclosed that his father is a daily wager. The
petitioner completed his higher secondary education from Khatauli, District
Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh. The family income is below the poverty line.
1
Digitally signed by
Chetan Kumar
Date: 2024.10.01
13:09:38 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

WPC 609/2024
2
The time frame for the completion of online reporting, including the payment
of fees and uploading of documents was till 5 pm on 24 June 2024. The
petitioner has stated that his parents arranged the funds required for the
payment of fees. The fees were deposited in his brother’s account by 4.45
pm.  The  petitioner  states  that  he  logged  into  the  portal  of  the  first
respondent at 4.45 pm and applied in the ‘float category’ of admission and
uploaded the documents. The portal closed at 5 pm and his payment was not
processed. 
3
The  petitioner  thereafter  addressed  an  email  to  the  first  respondent.  A
response was received on 26 June 2024 from the IIT Bombay Office for JEE
(Advanced)  redirecting  the  candidate  to  the  organizing  IIT,  which  is  IIT
Madras. Eventually, these attempts did not bear any fruit. 
4
The  petitioner  approached  the  Jharkhand  High  Court  Legal  Aid  Service
Committee and he was directed to the Legal Services Committee of the
Madras High Court. A writ petition was instituted before the High Court of
Madras, but when the case came up for hearing, he was advised to approach
this Court. 
5
The facts as they have been revealed before this Court indicate that there is
no  dispute  about  three  critical  aspects:  (i)  the  allotment  of  the  seat  in
Electrical Engineering to the petitioner at IIT Dhanbad; (ii) the Scheduled
Caste status of the petitioner; and (iii) the steps which were taken by the
2

WPC 609/2024
petitioner to comply with all formalities pursuant to the allotment to him of a
seat for the course. 
6
Counsel appearing on behalf of the first respondent has furnished to the
Court the log-in details of the petitioner, which indicate that he was diligent
in accessing the portal and did everything within his power to secure the
realization  of  his  admission.  The  petitioner  logged  in  on  24  June  2024
between 15.12 hours and 16.57 hours, on as many as six occasions. This
evidently indicates that he was making earnest efforts to log into the portal.
There is no conceivable reason why the petitioner would not have done so if
he had the wherewithal to pay the fees of Rs 17,500. A talented student like
the petitioner who belongs to a marginalized group of citizens and has done
everything to secure admission should not be left in the lurch.  The power of
this Court under Article 142 of the Constitution to do substantial justice is
meant precisely to cover such a situation. 
7
We  accordingly  order  and  direct  that  the  petitioner  should  be  granted
admission to IIT Dhanbad against the seat which was allotted to him in the
branch of Electrical Engineering. The petitioner will be admitted to the same
batch to which he would have been admitted in pursuance of the order of
allotment. The petitioner is ready and willing to pay fees of Rs 17,500, which
may be paid over personally at the time when admission is granted to him. A
supernumerary seat shall be created for the petitioner, if so required, for the
purpose  of  complying  with  this  order  and  no  existing  student  shall  be
3

WPC 609/2024
disturbed  in  consequence.  The  petitioner  would  be  entitled  to  all  the
consequential  benefits  of  admission,  including  allotment  of  hostel
accommodation and other facilities. 
8
Since the admission of the petitioner has been delayed for no fault of his, we
request the Director of IIT Dhanbad to use his good offices to ensure that the
petitioner  can  duly  complete  the  course  work  for  the  period  which  has
already  elapsed  during  this  academic  year.  This  will  ensure  that  the
petitioner is abreast of his class and does not suffer for the delay in granting
him admission.
9
The Petition is disposed of in the above terms.
10
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
….....…...….......…………………..CJI.
                                                                 [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]
..…....…........……………….…........J.
                             
[J B Pardiwala]
..…....…........……………….…........J.
                             
[Manoj Misra]
 
New Delhi; 
September 30, 2024
CKB
4