2024 INSC 746
1 
 
 REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.            OF 2024 
(@ SLP Criminal No. 4360 of 2022) 
 
K. Vadivel  
 
 
 
 
 
 …Appellant (s) 
 
Versus 
 
K. Shanthi & Ors. 
 
 
 
 
...Respondent(s) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
K.V. Viswanathan, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeal mounts a challenge to the judgment 
and order dated 30.04.2021 of the Madurai Bench of the 
Madras High Court in Criminal R.C. (MD) No.533 of 2020. 
By the said judgment, the High Court has, by a cryptic order, 
and long after final arguments had been concluded on 
19.10.2019 in the trial court, ordered further investigation in 
the matter. The aggrieved accused is before this Court with a 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.09.30
15:15:47 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
grievance that the direction was not justified in law 
particularly when already an attempt by the wife of the 
deceased to summon certain witnesses under Section 311 of 
the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (Cr.P.C.) had been 
rebuffed by the Trial Court and the High Court as early as in 
December 2019. 
3. 
The question that arises for consideration is whether the 
High Court was, on the facts of the case, justified in ordering 
further investigation? 
4. 
The basic facts essential for adjudication of the present 
controversy are as follows:- 
5. 
On 31.03.2013, a First Information Report (FIR) being 
Crime No. 27 of 2013 was registered on the complaint given 
by one Padikasu (subsequently examined as PW-1) stating 
that when he along with the deceased Kumar were doing their 
morning walk around 5:00 AM and were returning back, 
three persons alighted from a car with weapons and hacked to 
death, the deceased Kumar. 

3 
 
6. 
On 11.07.2013, a final report was filed setting up eight 
accused for trial, including the appellant. 
7. 
On 20.12.2016, PW-1 - Padikasu was examined. He 
testified that among the two persons who alighted from the 
car to attack Kumar, Ganapathy had a sickle in his hand; 
upon seeing them he began to run; that he phoned the family 
of deceased Kumar and spoke to the son of the deceased. 
PW-1 testified that he had not seen the hacking. He further 
testified that within five to ten minutes, the family members 
of Kumar came to the place and that he went to the Police 
Station at 6:45 AM and gave the complaint. 
8. 
PW-1-Padikasu was declared hostile and sought to be 
cross-examined by the prosecution. In the cross-examination 
he denied the suggestion that he had told the Police that he 
saw Ganapathy and Vadivel (appellant) hacking the deceased 
and Chinnaraja (the other accused) stabbing the deceased 
with a spear. On a question by the Court, he reiterated that he 
saw Ganapathy among the persons who alighted having a 

4 
 
sickle and since he was perturbed and began to run though he 
saw others, he was not in a position to identify them. His 
deposition was recorded on 20thof December 2016.   
9. 
Thereafter, on 18th of March 2017, the first respondent 
Shanthi - wife of the deceased was examined. She 
corroborated the phone call received from PW-1 and also 
stated that PW-1 told her that Ganapathy, Vadivel (appellant) 
and Karthick were the accused who hacked her husband with 
sickle and that while Chinnaraj and Selvaraj stabbed her 
husband 
with 
spear-stick, 
Madhavan, 
Murugan 
and 
Palaniyappan caught hold of her husband. She also testified 
that when after receiving the phone call she went to the place 
of the incident with Sathappa Subramanian and Subramanian, 
her brothers-in-law and that her own brothers also 
accompanied her.  On 18.03.2017 itself, PW-3, Subbaiah and 
PW-4, Duraimurugan were examined.  
10. On 25.07.2019, PW-1 - Padikasu was recalled at the 
behest of accused A1 and A2 wherein he stated that he did 

5 
 
not specifically state to the Police about A1 Ganapathy being 
present in the place of occurrence and that he had only stated 
that three unidentified persons had attacked the deceased. He 
further added that he mentioned about A1 Ganapathy only on 
account of the Police threatening him.  
11. On 19.10.2019, on the conclusion of the trial, final 
arguments were heard, and the case was fixed for filing of 
written arguments. 
12. At this stage, on 22.10.2019, Respondent No. 1 
(examined as PW-2/wife of the deceased) filed Crl. 
M.P.No.245 of 2019 under Section 311 of the Cr.P.C. She 
contended that PW-1 - Padikasu has given false evidence; 
that the Investigating Officer has failed to enquire the proper 
eye-witnesses; 
that 
the 
direct 
eye-witnesses 
to 
the 
occurrence-K. Ganesh S/o Kumar, P. Karmegam S/o 
Periyakaruppan, K. Rajendran S/o Kasi, Sembulingam S/o 
Padikasu and C. Andiappan S/o Chinnaiah have not been 
examined and that they deserve to be summoned. According 

6 
 
to the application filed by respondent No. 1, these witnesses 
would speak about the cell phone recovered by the Police 
from the occurrence spot and that the cell phone was of 
Nokia Brand holding the sim of Vodafone company which 
belonged to her. She averred that the Police failed to produce 
the material object and that the cell phone and call details 
ought to have been produced by the Police. In view of the 
above, she prayed that the additional witnesses be summoned 
and examined.  
13. The accused opposed the Section 311 petition by 
pointing out the delay of 6 years and 9 months in filing the 
petition and also about respondent No.1 (PW-2) not 
whispering about any of these facts during her examination. 
They contended that the persons sought to be examined were 
none other than her son, brother, brothers-in-law and other 
close relatives. 
14.  The State also filed its response opposing the 
application by averring that when the statement of 

7 
 
Respondent No. 1 was recorded nothing was mentioned by 
her and that during the investigation also nothing of the 
nature as alleged now was forthcoming; that even while 
being examined as PW-2 the applicant had not mentioned 
these facts; that no phone was seized and no sim card was 
seized and that investigation was properly conducted and 
final report filed.  
15. On 29.11.2019, the Trial Judge dismissed the 
application filed by respondent No. 1. The Court observed 
that the application was filed after the examination of the 
prosecution witnesses had concluded and when the case was 
posted for questioning the accused under Section 313. That 
respondent No. 1 was already examined as PW-2 on 
18.03.2017 and that on that day itself, together with her, 
Subbaiah alias Subramanian and Duraimurugan were also 
examined as PW-3 and PW-4 respectively. The Court 
observed that though the power under Section 311 is 
available to the Court to reach a just decision, it cannot be 

8 
 
exercised unless the facts and circumstances of the case make 
it apparent as otherwise it would result in causing serious 
prejudice to the accused resulting in miscarriage of justice. 
The Court observed that though the power is available, it has 
to be exercised judiciously and not arbitrarily. 
16. The first respondent, vide Crl. O.P (MD) No. 18701 of 
2019, challenged the order dated 29.11.2019 dismissing the 
petition under Section 311 Cr.P.C. before the High Court. 
The State vehemently opposed the said petition by reiterating 
its contention in the courts below. The High Court, by its 
order of 16.12.2019, dismissed Crl. O.P. (MD) No. 18701 of 
2019 holding in its operative portion as follows: 
“9. It is seen that P.W.1 is the person who stated to have 
accompanied the deceased victim at the time of 
occurrence. He had been examined by the respondent 
police. He had not stated anything as if the occurrence 
was witnessed either by other persons other than him. He 
was examined in chief before the trial court on 
18.03.2017. On that date also, he has not spoken about 
the occurrence having been witnessed by any other 
persons 
other 
than 
him. 
Further, 
during 
cross 
examination, he has also resiled from his earlier 
statement. P.W.2 has been examined in chief on 

9 
 
18.03.2017. She has also not spoken about the additional 
witnesses having seen the occurrence or that they have 
been left out by the prosecution to be added as witnesses 
in the final report. Further, after final report has been filed 
on 11.07.2013, if it is true that the eyewitnesses have 
been left out, she would have filed the petition for further 
investigation even at that time, which has also not been 
done. Therefore, this Court is of the opinion that the 
petition is filed much belatedly only for the purpose of 
delaying the trial.  
 
10. In view of the above, this Court does not find any 
infirmity in the order passed by the trial Judge. 
Accordingly, 
this 
Criminal 
Original 
Petition 
is 
dismissed.” 
 
17.    Taking a cue, as it were, from the observations of the 
High Court that the first respondent would have filed a 
petition seeking for further investigation at that time if 
eyewitnesses have been left out, the first respondent in 
January, 2020 filed Cr. M.P. No 40/2020 in S.C. No. 61/2014 
before the Court of the Additional District and Sessions 
Judge with a prayer for directing the State to conduct further 
investigation or reinvestigation by examining the related 
occurrence and eyewitnesses of the crime mentioned in the 

10 
 
application and submit additional (or) supplementary charge-
sheet. In the application, it was averred that the Investigating 
Officer had failed to enquire Kattarimani who had 
accompanied her husband-deceased Kumar and also had 
failed to examine proper eyewitnesses; that PW-1 Padikasu 
had given false statements and evidence and that Padikasu 
had expressed fear and mentioned about the threatening 
influences of the accused and other pressures brought by the 
accused; that investigation has been carried out in a 
haphazard manner; that there is lack of collection of material 
evidence; that the cell phone used by PW-1 Padikasu and the 
cell phone of deceased Kumar has not been properly secured 
and placed for tracing the call details. That non-examination 
of R. Natarajan, M. Muthu, S. Ramasamy who are the 
occurrence witnesses and eye witnesses K. Ganesan S/o Late 
Kumar, P. Karmagan S/o Periyakaruppan, K. Rajendran S/o 
Kasi, Sembulingam S/o Padikasu and C. Audiappan S/o 

11 
 
Chinnaiah are designed at the behest of the inspector of 
police.  
18.  It will be noticed from the application that insofar as the 
eyewitnesses, who according to the first respondent were not 
enquired, the names are common as mentioned in her earlier 
Section 311 application. Under the category of occurrence 
witnesses, she has added three names which surfaced for the 
first time in this application. This aspect will be considered 
later in this judgment.  
19.  The application was strongly opposed by the accused. 
The accused, in their counter, averred that the application was 
not maintainable without the consent of the public prosecutor 
and that the misconceived application was intended to fill up 
the lacunae in the prosecution; the allegation that any threat 
to witnesses were denied and it was contended that no such 
complaint was made in the last seven years about any such 
threats being administered and even on 18.03.2017 when the 
respondent no. 1 (PW-2) along with her brothers PW-3 and 

12 
 
PW-4 were examined, no such complaint was made.  The 
accused further averred that further investigation cannot be 
ordered at the post cognizance stage either suo moto or at the 
instance of victims/complainants and it can only be done at 
the behest of the investigating agency. The accused further 
averred that after the section 311 Cr.P.C. petition, namely, 
Crl. O.P. (MD) No. 18701 of 2019 was dismissed even 
Section 313 Cr.P.C. examination had been concluded and 
thereafter the accused had concluded oral arguments and filed 
written arguments. So contending, they had prayed for the 
dismissal of the petition for further investigation.  
20.  The State also opposed the application stating that the 
case has been investigated properly and charge-sheet filed; 
that the respondent no. 1 has recorded her statement and her 
earlier application to examine additional witnesses has been 
dismissed and that the present application is only with an 
intent to drag the proceeding.  

13 
 
21.   The trial court dismissed the petition for further 
investigation by its order of 23rd July, 2020. The trial court 
held that the respondent no. 1 (PW-2) in her examination on 
18.03.2017 in court did not speak anything as to about what 
she is mentioning now in the application. That final report 
was filed as early as on 11.07.2013 and if her contention is 
correct, she would have filed a petition for further 
investigation at that very time. The trial court further held 
that further investigation cannot be ordered at the post 
cognizance stage either suo moto or at the instance of 
victims/complainants or at the instance of anyone else except 
the investigating agency and that the petition was only filed 
to prolong the proceeding.  
22.   The respondent No. 1 filed a criminal revision before the 
High Court to which the accused filed a counter reiterating 
the contentions. By the impugned order, without any 
discussion whatsoever and holding the following in the 
operative portion, the High Court allowed the application:  

14 
 
“10. It is seen that an opportunity to examine additional 
witness was not given by this Court on the ground that 
the petitioner has not filed a petition for further 
investigation. In the above circumstances, dening (sic.) a 
relief of further investigation may cause prejudice to the 
petitioner. It is stated that P.W.1 turned hostile. This is a 
murder case. For the above reasons, it is decided that 
further investigation is necessary. The order passed in 
Crl.M.P.No.40 of 2020 in S.C.No.61 of 2014 dated 
23.07.2020 on the file of the learned Additional District 
Judge, Pudukottai is set aside. The investigation agency is 
hereby directed to take up the case for further 
investigation and to complete the investigation, after 
examining all the witnesses referred by the petitioner and 
to file a additional chargesheet within a period of three 
months.  
 
11. On receipt of the additional chargesheet, the trial 
Court is directed to frame charges afresh and to proceed 
with the trial and to dispose of the case as expeditiously 
as possible.” 
 
23.   The present Special Leave Petition has been filed on 
14.03.2022.  By an order of 16.08.2022, this Court, while 
issuing notice, stayed the operation of the impugned order. It 
appears that before the filing of the Special Leave Petition, 
the additional charge-sheet also came to be prepared on 
02.12.2021.  

15 
 
24. We have heard Mr. Jayanth Muth Raj, learned senior 
advocate, for the appellant as well as Shri Amit Anand 
Tiwari, learned Additional Advocate General, for the State as 
well as Shri S. Nagamuthu, learned senior advocate, for the 
respondent No. 1 (wife of the deceased).  
25.   The learned senior counsel for the appellant contends 
that the present application filed by respondent no. 1 is a 
disguised attempt to reopen the earlier proceedings under 
Section 311 which attained finality; that after framing of 
charges, respondent no. 1, who is not a complainant, cannot 
file an application for further investigation under Section 
173(8) of Cr.P.C.; that the trial court had no jurisdiction to 
entertain the application under Section 173(8) of Cr.P.C. after 
framing of charges; that no grounds have been made out for 
further investigation and that the High Court ought not to 
have interfered with the order of trial court in the exercise of 
its revisional jurisdiction. Learned senior counsel relied on 
several judgments of this Court to support the contentions. 

16 
 
26.  The learned Additional Advocate General for the State 
and the learned senior counsel for the respondent no. 1 
strongly defended the impugned order. They contended that 
the interest of justice is paramount and it will even trump the 
need to avoid any delay being caused in the proceedings; that 
the investigating agency has carried out further investigation 
in compliance with the impugned order and prepared the 
additional charge-sheet on 02.12.2021 bringing out certain 
new facts and material; that no prejudice is caused to the 
defence as the material will be furnished to the accused 
persons and they will have ample opportunity to put forth 
their defence. To support their stand, learned senior counsel 
referred to several precedents. 
27.  We have carefully considered the submissions of the 
learned counsels for the parties, perused the records as well 
as written submissions filed by them.  
 

17 
 
28.  The legal position on the aspect of further investigation 
is fairly well settled. Under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, pursuant to the recommendation of the Law 
Commission, in its 41st Report, Section 173(8) has been 
expressly engrafted setting at rest any controversy that may 
have obtained earlier. Section 173(8) reads as under: 
“173(8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to 
preclude further investigation in respect of an offence 
after a report under sub-section (2) has been forwarded to 
the Magistrate and, where upon such investigation, the 
officer-in-charge of the police station obtains further 
evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the 
Magistrate a further report or reports regarding such 
evidence in the form prescribed; and the provisions of 
sub-sections (2) to (6) shall, as far as may be, apply in 
relation to such report or reports as they apply in relation 
to a report forwarded under sub-section (2).”  
 
29.   The question really is, under what circumstances could 
this power be invoked and whether on the facts of this case, is 
a further investigation warranted.  
30. There was some debate at the Bar as to whether the 
Addl. District and Sessions Judge before whom the 

18 
 
application was filed by the respondent no. 1 under Section 
173(8) after the conclusion of the evidence could have 
ordered further investigation. The premise of the argument 
was even though in the present case the Addl. District and 
Sessions Judge has not ordered and it was the High Court 
which had ordered it, while exercising jurisdiction under 
Section 397 read with 401 of Cr.P.C.  The contention was 
that as per the law laid down by this Court in Vinubhai 
Haribhai Malaviya & Ors. vs. State of Gujarat & Anr. 
(2019) 17 SCC 1, further investigation could at best have 
been ordered till the commencement of the trial.  
31. In the present case, though the Trial Judge rejected the 
application, the High Court has ordered further investigation. 
Considering the fact that we are inclined to set aside the order 
of the High Court, on merits, we deem it unnecessary to 
discuss the issue of jurisdiction.  
 

19 
 
32.   Ultimately, the contextual facts and the attendant 
circumstances have to be singularly evaluated and analyzed 
to decide the needfulness of further investigation or 
reinvestigation to unravel the truth and mete out justice to the 
parties (see Pooja Pal vs. Union of India & Ors. (2016) 3 
SCC 135, para 83).  As noticed in Ram Lal Narang vs. State 
(Delhi Administration) (1979) 2 SCC 322, (para 20) where 
fresh materials come to light which would implicate persons 
not previously accused or absolve persons already accused or 
where it comes to the notice of the investigating agency that a 
person already accused of an offence has a good alibi, it may 
be the duty of the investigating agency to investigate the 
genuineness of the same and submit a report to the court.  
33.   However, the further investigation cannot be permitted 
to do a fishing and roving enquiry when the police had 
already filed a charge-sheet and the very applicant for further 
investigation, in this case respondent no. 1, has not whispered 
about anything new in her evidence as is now sought to be 

20 
 
averred in the application. There must be some reasonable 
basis which should trigger the application for further 
investigation so that the court is able to arrive at a satisfaction 
that ends of justice require the ordering/permitting of further 
investigation.  In Hasanbhai Valibhai Qureshi vs. State of 
Gujarat & Ors., (2004) 5 SCC 347), this Court held as 
under:- 
“13. In Ram Lal Narang v. State (Delhi Admn.) [1979) 2 
SCC 322] it was observed by this Court that further       
investigation is not altogether ruled out merely because 
cognisance has been taken by the court. When defective 
investigation comes to light during course of trial, it may 
be cured by further investigation, if circumstances so 
permitted. It would ordinarily be desirable and all the 
more so in this case, that the police should inform the 
court and seek formal permission to make further          
investigation when fresh facts come to light instead of  
being silent over the matter keeping in view only the need 
for an early trial since an effective trial for real or actual 
offences found during course of proper investigation is as 
much relevant, desirable and necessary as an expeditious 
disposal of the matter by the courts. In view of the     
aforesaid position in law, if there is necessity for further 
investigation, the same can certainly be done as           
prescribed by law. The mere fact that there may be       
further delay in concluding the trial should not stand in 
the way of further investigation if that would help the 
court in arriving at the truth and do real and substantial as 
well as effective justice. We make it clear that we have 
not expressed any final opinion on the merits of the case.” 

21 
 
 
34.   In Vinay Tyagi vs. Irshad Ali alias Deepak & Ors., 
(2013) 5 SCC 762, this Court dealing with the aspect of the 
power of Magistrate to direct further investigation had the 
following to say:  
“41. …..The power of the Magistrate to direct “further 
investigation” is a significant power which has to be 
exercised sparingly, in exceptional cases and to achieve 
the ends of justice. To provide fair, proper and 
unquestionable investigation is the obligation of the 
investigating agency and the court in its supervisory 
capacity is required to ensure the same. Further 
investigation conducted under the orders of the court, 
including that of the Magistrate or by the police of its 
own accord and, for valid reasons, would lead to the 
filing of a supplementary report. Such supplementary 
report shall be dealt with as part of the primary report. 
This is clear from the fact that the provisions of Sections 
173(3) to 173(6) would be applicable to such reports in 
terms of Section 173(8) of the Code.” 
 
35. It is essential to note that this Court emphasized that 
though power to order further investigation is a significant 
power it has to be exercised sparingly and in exceptional 
cases and to achieve the ends of justice (see Devendra Nath 
Singh vs. State of Bihar & Ors., (2023) 1 SCC 48, para 45).  

22 
 
Whether further investigation should or should not be ordered 
is within the discretion of the Magistrate and the said 
discretion is to be exercised on the facts of each case in 
accordance with law. This Court also held that in an 
appropriate case, where the High Court feels that the 
investigation is not in the proper direction and to do complete 
justice where the facts of the case so demand, the inherent 
powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. could be exercised to 
direct further investigation or even reinvestigation. This 
Court reiterated the principle that even under Section 482 
Cr.P.C. the wide powers are to be exercised fairly with 
circumspection and in exceptional cases.  
36.  In Himanshu Kumar and Others vs. State of 
Chhattisgarh and others, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 884 dealing 
with the prayer for transfer of investigation to CBI, this Court 
had the following to say: 
“47.   ….We are conscious of the fact that though a 
satisfaction of want of proper, fair, impartial and effective 
investigation eroding its credence and reliability is the 

23 
 
precondition for a direction for further investigation or re-
investigation, submission of the charge sheet ipso facto or 
the pendency of the trial can, by no means, be a 
prohibitive impediment. The contextual facts and the 
attendant circumstances have to be singularly evaluated 
and analyzed to decide the needfulness of further 
investigation or re-investigation to unravel the truth and 
mete out justice to the parties. The prime concern and the 
endeavour of the court of law should be to secure justice 
on the basis of true facts which ought to be unearthed 
through a committed, resolved and a competent 
investigating agency.” 
 
37. Applying the above law to the facts of the present case, 
we find that for the following reasons the direction for further 
investigation is absolutely unwarranted:-  
i. 
The application for further investigation was filed in 
January 2020 by respondent no. 1. The charge sheet 
under Section 173 Cr.P.C. too had been filed as early as 
on 11.07.2013.  
ii. On 20th December, 2016, PW-1 Padikasu was 
examined, he was recalled and cross-examined on 
25.07.2019.  

24 
 
iii. Respondent No. 1 (who is the applicant for further 
investigation) herself was examined on 18.03.2017. 
There is no whisper in her deposition about what she 
now seeks to contend in the application for further 
investigation. There was nothing that had prevented her 
from deposing in the box about any failure of the 
investigating officer, to enquire Kattarimani or any 
person concerned; about R. Natrajan, M. Muthu and S. 
Ramasamy being occurrence witnesses and about 
K.Ganesan S/o Late Kumar, P. Karmagan S/o 
Periyakaruppan, K. Rajendran S/o Kasi, Sembulingam 
S/o Padikasu and C. Audiappan S/o Chinnaiah being 
eye witnesses, and about how such failure has caused 
prejudice. 
iv. In fact, seeking the examination of these five witnesses 
mentioned 
hereinabove, 
first 
respondent 
filed 
application under Section 311 Cr.P.C. which came to be 
dismissed by the trial court on 29.11.2019 and was 

25 
 
confirmed by the High Court. The application under 
Section 311 Cr.P.C. itself was filed on 22.10.2019, that 
is after a period of about six years after the filing of the 
charge-sheet.  
v. It is only when the High Court dismissed her petition 
under Section 311 Cr.P.C. stating that she had not made 
any prayer for further investigation that she filed the 
present application in January, 2020. At the stage when 
she filed the application for further investigation, the 
accused had concluded oral arguments and had also 
filed written arguments.   
vi. The trial court dismissed the application stating that the 
respondent no. 1 when examined as PW-2 did not speak 
anything about what she had mentioned in her 
application and that though the final report was filed as 
early as on 11.07.2013, respondent no. 1 has filed the 
application for further investigation only in January, 
2020. Though, the trial court held that no further 

26 
 
investigation could be ordered at the post cognizance 
stage, we have, as explained above, not proceeded on 
that reasoning, since that is clearly erroneous.  
vii. The High Court has not recorded any reason whatsoever 
and has not set out any legal principle which is relevant 
and applicable to the facts. All that is said is the Section 
311 petition of the respondent no. 1 has been denied on 
the ground that she has not filed a petition for further 
investigation; that denial of relief would cause prejudice 
to respondent no. 1; that PW-1 has turned hostile and 
that being a murder case, it is decided to order for 
further investigation. Not one of the legal principles 
adverted to hereinabove has been considered by the 
Court.  
viii. As pointed out hereinabove, the failure to claim further 
investigation at that stage was not the only basis for the 
High Court to reject the revision against the dismissal of 
the Section 311 application.  The High Court had given 

27 
 
other detailed reasons also like PW-1 and PW-2 not 
whispering about the additional witnesses, when they 
deposed in Court.     
38. We are convinced that ordering the additional charge 
sheet to be taken on record at this stage pursuant to the 
further investigation will not be in accordance with law. It 
will be contrary to the settled principles as laid down by this 
Court. We have also to satisfy ourselves examined the 
additional charge sheet placed before us.  Primarily, apart 
from explaining the motive which is already set out in the 
evidence of PW-2, there is a reference to three of these 
witnesses named in this application as having come to rescue 
of the deceased after hearing the noise raised by the deceased. 
It is now alleged that A-5 tried to prevent the said two 
witnesses from approaching Kumar and threatened them with 
the sickle. It is also alleged that at that point these witnesses 
saw A-1 and A-4 committing overt acts on the deceased.  

28 
 
39.  As pointed out earlier, when the application under 
Section 311 Cr.P.C. was filed on 22.10.2019, the State, in its 
response and in the arguments before the Court vehemently 
opposed the application.  Even before the High Court in the 
Revision filed against the dismissal of the application under 
Section 311 Cr.P.C., the Additional Public Prosecutor 
appearing for the State had expressly contended that the 
respondent no. 1 was examined more than five times by the 
investigating officer and even in her deposition in court had 
not adverted to any of these aspects.  
40. Before the trial court and the High Court in the present 
set of proceedings concerning the application for further 
investigation, the State had opposed the prayer contending 
that the investigation of the case has been done properly and 
charge-sheet had been duly filed arraigning all the allegedly 
involved individuals.  
41.  It is only in this Court that the State has vehemently 
defended the order. A counter affidavit was filed by the State 

29 
 
in this Court in September, 2024 without offering any tenable 
justification for the need for further investigation.  We direct 
that for all these reasons the additional charges ought not to 
be taken on the record of the trial Court.  
42. A brief postscript. While it is true that delay in trial will 
cede to the pursuit of truth, however, a distinction should be 
made between cases where there exist genuine grounds to 
hold up the proceedings and cases where such grounds do not 
exist. This case is a classic example of the latter category. 
The FIR was filed on 31.03.2013 and the charge-sheet on 
11.07.2013. At the fag end of the trial in October 2019, on 
the eve of the final arguments, the first round of applications 
under Section 311 of Cr.P.C. came to be filed, which 
culminated in its dismissal in December, 2019.  
43. Soon thereafter in January, 2020, virtually the same 
grounds which had been rejected earlier were rehashed in the 
form of an application under Section 173(8) Cr.P.C. on 
behalf of the respondent no. 1. The State, which had hitherto 

30 
 
opposed all the applications up to the High Court, turned 
turtle and stoutly supported the respondent no. 1 in this Court 
without offering any tenable justification as to how the earlier 
investigation which had arrayed eight accused for trial lacked 
credibility. 
44. The net result has been that all the stakeholders in the 
process have contributed to the delay and in spite of eleven 
years having elapsed after the incident, the trial has still not 
concluded. No doubt, the High Court allowed the further 
investigation which we have today reversed. The judgment of 
the High Court also gave no valid justification for ordering a 
further investigation.  
45. The victims of crime, the accused, and the society at 
large have a legitimate expectation that justice will be 
available to the parties within a reasonable time. It is beyond 
cavil that speedy and timely justice is an important facet of 
rule of law. Denial of speedy and timely justice can be 
disastrous to rule of law in the long term. Even if the     

31 
 
parties involved in a case themselves, with no valid 
justification attempt to delay the proceedings, the courts need 
to be vigilant and nip any such attempt in the bud instantly. 
The administration of justice feeds on the faith of the 
citizenry and nothing should be done to even remotely shake 
that faith and confidence.  
46. The legal profession has an important role to play in the 
process. Any proceeding or application which prima facie 
lacks merit should not be instituted in a court. We are 
constrained to observe this because of late we notice that 
pleadings/petitions with outrageous and ex facie unbelievable 
averments are made with no inhibition whatsoever. This is 
especially so in some family law proceedings, both civil and 
criminal. Reading some of the averments therein, we are left 
to wonder whether at all the deponents were conscious of 
what has been written purportedly on their behalf, before 
appending their signatures. These misadventures directly 
impinge on the rule of law, because they add to the pendency 

32 
 
and the consequential delay in the disposal of other cases 
which are crying for justice. It is time that such frivolous and 
vexatious proceedings are met with due sanctions in the form 
of exemplary costs to dissuade parties from resorting to such 
tactics. If we have desisted from such a course in this case, it 
is only because the High Court allowed the petition and it is  
here that we have, reversing the High Court, dismissed the 
petition for further investigation.   
47. In view of what has been stated hereinabove, we set 
aside the judgment of the High Court dated 30.04.2021 in 
Criminal RC (MD) No. 533 of 2020. Consequently Cr. M.P. 
No 40/2020 in S.C. No. 61/2014 filed by the respondent no. 1 
before the Court of Additional District and Sessions Judge for 
further investigation under Section 173(8) Cr.P.C. would 
stand dismissed. We further direct that, in view of the 
dismissal of the application, the additional charge sheet dated 
02.12.2021 will not be taken on record. The appeal is, 
accordingly, allowed. 

33 
 
48.  We direct that after hearing arguments of parties afresh, 
the trial should be concluded and judgment pronounced 
within eight weeks from today.  
 
…....…………………J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (B.R. Gavai) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.…...…………………J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          (K.V. Viswanathan) 
New Delhi; 
September 30, 2024.