2024 INSC 768
Reportable
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
Civil Appeal Nos 10046-10047 of 2024
Kerala State Electricity Board Ltd
     
Appellant
 
Versus
Jhabua Power Limited and Others
                
Respondent(s)
J U D G M E N T 
1.
These appeals arise from a judgment of the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity1
dated 26 July 2024.
2.
Kerala State Electricity Board Limited, the appellant, floated two separate
tenders for the procurement of power through a competitive bidding process
under Section 63 of the Electricity Act 20032. The first was for procuring 450
MW of power and the second was for 400 MW.
1
“APTEL”
2 “Act”
1
Digitally signed by
Chetan Kumar
Date: 2024.10.14
11:30:50 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

3.
Two entities emerged as L1 bidders in respect of the two tenders which were
floated. However, the L1 bidders did not bid for the entire tender quantum.
The L1 bidder in the first bid offered to supply only 200 MW out of the total
quantum of 450 MW. Similarly, the L1 bidder in the second bid offered to
supply only 100 MW as against the 400 MW for which the bid had been
invited. The appellant invited the other bidders to match the tariff quoted by
the L1 bidders for the remaining quantum. None of the other bidders in the
first bid were willing to match the tariff quoted by the L1 bidder therein.
However, in relation to the second bid, the L2 to L5 bidders conveyed their
willingness to match the tariffs quoted by the L1 bidder.
4.
With regard to the first bid, despite the L2 bidder refusing to match the tariff
of the L1 bidder, the appellant accepted its tariff for 115 MW and justified it
on the ground that the tariff was competitive and less than the tariff quoted
by the L1 bidder in the second bid. Since the tariff quoted by the remaining
bidders in the first bid was either equal to or more than the tariff derived in
the second bid, the appellant did not consider their offers. Therefore, in the
first bid out of the tendered quantity of 450 MW, the appellant accepted
offers for a quantum of 315 MW and issued letters of acceptance to L1 and
L2 for 200 MW and 115 MW, respectively.
5.
With regard to the second bid, the appellant accepted the offers of the L2,
L3, L4 and L5 bidders, who matched the tariff quoted by the L1 bidder. As
against the tendered quantity of 400 MW, the appellant accepted offers for a
2

total quantum of 550 MW. The appellant justified this decision in view of the
“likely power shortages in the forthcoming years” and on the ground that the
tariff offered was competitive.
6.
Seven  Power  Supply  Agreements3 were  accordingly  executed  with  the
various generators for a total quantum of 865 MW of power. The appellant
sought the approval of the Kerala State Electricity Regulatory Commission4 to
adopt the tariff laid down in the respective PSAs. The KSERC  prima facie
observed  that  the  appellant  had  deviated  from  the  standard  bidding
guidelines issued by the Ministry of Power, Government of India5 and failed to
obtain prior approval from the KSERC or the Central Government in relation
to these deviations. Accordingly, by an Order dated 30 August 2016, the
KSERC approved the PSAs with the L1 bidders in both bids, but with regard to
the remaining PSAs, it deferred the decision to obtain the approval of the
Central Government and the views of the Government of Kerala with respect
to the process of bidding which was adopted by the appellant.6
7.
In view of the critical need for power procurement in the state, KSERC passed
orders in 2016-2017 permitting the appellant to provisionally procure power
from the generators and, as a consequence, the appellant states that it has
been procuring power under the four PSAs since then till 2023.
3
“PSAs”
4
“KSERC”
5 “standard bidding guidelines”
6
OP No. 13 of 2015
3

8.
In  2020,  the  appellant  moved  the  KSERC  seeking  approval  of  the  fuel
surcharge rate under some of the unapproved PPAs in the second bid. The
KSERC did not approve the fuel surcharge rate and directed the appellant to
limit payment at the rate of the L1 bidder in the second bid until the PSAs
were approved. The case travelled to the APTEL and in parallel, the appellant
filed a petition before the KSERC seeking final orders on the approval of the
PSAs. The order of the APTEL was challenged before this Court, and KSERC
was called upon to decide the petition for final approval expeditiously, in no
later than three months.7
9.
By an order dated 10 May 2023, KSERC declined to grant approval for the
PSAs and concluded that the tariff determined by the appellant did not follow
a  transparent  process  and  grossly  deviated  from  the  standard  bidding
guidelines.  KSERC  further  held  that  the  deviations  were  against  public
interest and created long-term financial implications for the consumers and
the state.8 The appellant moved the APTEL in appeal.
10.
On 10 October 2023, while the appeal was pending before the APTEL, the
Government of Kerala invoked the provisions of Section 108 of the Act9 and
issued policy directions highlighting the public interest that would be served
7
Civil Appeal No. 41/2021
8
OP No. 05 of 2021
9
S.108, Electricity Act 2003. [Section 108. (Directions by State Government): ---- (1) In the
discharge of its functions, the State Commission shall be guided by such directions in matters of
policy involving public interest as the State Government may give to it in writing. 
(2) If any question arises as to whether any such direction relates to a matter of policy involving
public interest, the decision of the State Government thereon shall be final]
4

by approving the PSAs. The state government opined that the non-approval
of the PSAs would compel the appellant to purchase power at higher rates,
resulting in immense financial implications and a power crisis in the state.
The liability of higher rates of power procurement would, it was opined, be
passed  on to  the consumers,  increasing  the  cost  of power  in  the  state.
Alternative means, it was opined, should have been sought earlier and the
public should not be held liable for procedural flaws. The Government of
Kerala, accordingly, directed as follows:
“NOW THEREFORE, after detailed examination of the
matter,  considering  all  facts  and  observations,
without  prejudice  to  any  enquiry  ongoing  in  the
matter  and  without  ratifying  the  procedural
irregularities pointed out by KSERC, keeping in view
the  larger  interest  of  the  public,  the  Government
deems  it  appropriate  to  invoke  the  power  under
section 108 of Electricity Act 2003 and accordingly,
in exercise of the said power, Government hereby
direct  Kerala  State  Electricity  Regulatory
Commission to reconsider/review their orders
in  O.P  No.5/2021  filed  by
 Kerala  State
Electricity  Board  Limited,  in  accordance  with
the  policy  of  the  Government  for  the  best
interest of the State and public at large.”
(emphasis supplied)
11.
In view of the above directive, the appellant  withdrew its appeal before
APTEL. While allowing the request for withdrawal, APTEL by its order dated
31 October 2023, directed as follows:
“We consider it appropriate, in such circumstances,
to permit the Appeal to be withdrawn, with liberty to
the Appellant to invoke the review jurisdiction of the
Commission.  It  is  made  clear  that  the  order  now
passed by us shall  not disable the Appellant, if
need  be  later,  from  availing  their  appellate
5

remedy against the original  order passed by
the Commission dated 10.05.2023.”
(emphasis supplied)
12.
The appellant moved a petition before the KSERC seeking a review of its
order dated 10 May 2023. On 29 December 2023, KSERC allowed the review
petition and approved the four PSAs in view of the public interest highlighted
in the policy directions issued under Section 108 by the State government.
The KSERC held that it was bound by the directions of the state government.
Further,  it  was  held  that  the  subsequent  directions  issued  by  the  state
government fell within the ambit of “any other sufficient reasons” to review a
previous  order,  as  required  by  Order  XLVII  Rule  1  of  the  Code  of  Civil
Procedure 190810 read with Section 94 of the Act.
13.
Two of the generators who are now respondents before this Court, moved the
APTEL in appeal. They contended that the above order of the KSERC violated
Order XLVII Rule 1 of the CPC read with Section 94 of the Act as it was passed
solely  on  the  ground  that  a  subsequent  direction  issued  by  the  State
Government under Section 108 is binding on the KSERC.
14.
By its impugned judgment, APTEL allowed the appeals and set aside the
order of KSERC. The findings of the APTEL are summarized below.
 
a.
After recapitulating the decisions of this Court pertaining to the scope of the
phrase “any other sufficient reasons” in Order XLVII Rule 1 of the CPC, the
APTEL held that the threshold was not satisfied in the present case. The
10 “CPC”
6

KSERC failed to point out any error in its previous order and instead relied
solely on the subsequent directions issued by the state government under
Section 108 to review its earlier order. None of the grounds which weighed
with  the  KSERC  in  its  previous  order  were  even  referred  to,  thereby,
defeating the purpose for which the power of review is exercised; 
b.
The  APTEL  traced  the  decisions  of  this  Court  and  its  own  decisions
pertaining to the scope of Section 108 of the Act and held that the KSERC
was  not  bound  by  the  directives  of  the  state  government.  The  state
government  could  not  have  issued  a  directive  to  compel  the  KSERC  to
exercise its quasi-judicial powers in a particular manner. Such powers are to
be exercised independently by the KSERC in accordance with the Act; and 
c. APTEL held that Section 86(1)(b) of the Act expressly confers the function of
regulating the price at which electricity should be procured by distribution
licensees from  generating companies  to  the KSERC.  Under the  Act,  this
power must be exercised solely in terms of Sections 62 and 63 of the Act.
While approving the tariff under Section 63 of the Act, the KSERC can only
adopt the tariff if it has been determined through a transparent process of
bidding  and  is  in  accordance  with  the  standard  bidding  guidelines.  The
KSERC had, in the exercise of its power under Section 86(1)(b) read with
Section 63, already passed an order, declining to adopt the tariff, since it
was satisfied that the process of bidding was not in accordance with the
standard bidding guidelines. A policy directive could not, therefore, override
the statutory functions already exercised by the KSERC.
7

15.
We have heard Mr V Giri, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant.
Mr  Aryama  Sundaram,  senior  counsel  appears  for  the  first  respondent
(Jhabua Power Limited) and Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi, senior counsel for the
second respondent (Jindal India Power Thermal Limited).
16.
We are in agreement with the judgment of APTEL insofar as it holds that the
directive which was issued by the State government under Section 108 could
not have displaced the adjudicatory function which was entrusted to KSERC.
The State government while issuing a policy directive in the exercise of its
power  under  Section  108  cannot  impinge  on  the  adjudicatory  discretion
which is vested in an authority under the Act. In this regard, we may helpfully
refer to the observations of this Court in A.P. TRANSCO v. Sai Renewable
Power  (P)  Ltd.,11 in  the  context  of a  similar  provision  in  the  erstwhile
Andhra Pradesh Electricity Reforms Act 1998 (which was repealed by the
Electricity Act  2003). A two-judge bench of this Court, speaking through
Justice Swatanter Kumar, observed:
“59. Section  12  of  the  Act  vests  the  State
Government with the power to issue policy directions
on  matters  concerning  electricity  in  the  State
including the overall planning and coordination.  All
policy directions shall be issued by the State
Government  consistent  with  the  objects
sought  to  be  achieved  by  this  Act  and,
accordingly,  shall  not  adversely  affect  or
interfere with the functions and powers of the
Regulatory  Commission  including,  but  not
limited  to,  determination  of  the  structure  of
tariffs  for  supply  of  electricity  to  various
11 (2011) 11 SCC 34.
8

classes of consumers. The State Government is
further  expected  to  consult  the  Regulatory
Commission in regard to the proposed legislation or
rules concerning any policy direction and shall duly
take  into  account  the  recommendation  by  the
Regulatory  Commission  on  all  such  matters.  Thus
the  scheme  of  these  provisions  is  to  grant
supremacy to the Regulatory Commission and
the State is not expected to take any policy
decision  or  planning  which  would  adversely
affect  the  functioning  of  the  Regulatory
Commission  or  interfere  with  its  functions.
This provision also clearly implies that fixation
of  tariff  is  the  function  of  the  Regulatory
Commission and the State Government has a
minimum role in that regard.”
17.
That the state regulatory commissions are not ‘bound’ by the directions of
the state government, or the Central Government is also evident from the
text of Section 108. The provision reads: “In the discharge of its functions,
the State Commission shall be guided by such directions in matters of policy
…”. This indicates that the state commission shall only be ‘guided’ by the
directions issued by the state government and is not automatically bound by
them. This interpretation is strengthened by the divergence in the language
used in other provisions of the Act, such as Section 11 of the Act which reads
as follows: 
“Section 11. (Directions to generating companies):
--- (1) Appropriate Government may specify that a
generating  company
 shall,  in  extraordinary
circumstances operate and maintain any generating
station  in  accordance  with  the  directions  of  that
Government. 
Explanation. - For the purposes of this section, the
expression  “extraordinary  circumstances”  means
circumstances arising out of threat to security of the
9

State,  public  order  or  a  natural  calamity  or  such
other circumstances arising in the public interest. 
…”
18.
The  above  provision  uses  mandatory  language  and  provides  that  the
generating company “shall … operate and maintain any generating station in
accordance  with  the  directions  of  that  Government”  in  extraordinary
circumstances. This can be distinguished from the language in Section 108,
which  merely  requires  that  the  state  commission  “be  guided  by”  the
directions of the State Government.  The provision, in no manner, seeks to
control the exercise of quasi-judicial power by the state commissions based
on directions issued by the state government.
19.
Similarly, the findings of the APTEL on the limited scope of the review are
also consistent with settled law. Section 94(f) of the Act provides that the
state commission has the same powers as vested in a civil court under the
CPC in respect of reviewing its decisions, directions and orders. Order XLVII
Rule 1 of the CPC provides for review on limited grounds. An order cannot be
made the subject of an appeal under the garb of a review. While reviewing an
order,  the  court  or  tribunal  must  be  satisfied  that  there  was  an  error
apparent in its previous order, which warrants the exercise of its power to
review. While allowing the review petitions, the KSERC failed to explain how
this threshold was met and did not point out any errors of that nature in its
previous  order.  Instead,  sole  reliance  was  placed  on  the  subsequent
directions of the State Government, which highlighted the purported ‘public
10

interest’ that would be served by approving the PSAs. Therefore, there is no
infirmity in the decision of the APTEL to set aside the order of KSERC on the
ground that it exceeded its jurisdiction under Section 94 of the Act.
 
20.
We are in agreement with the judgement of the APTEL on the above aspects.
However, having said so, it emerges from the earlier order of APTEL dated 31
October 2023, that while permitting the appeal filed by the appellant to be
withdrawn,  APTEL  had  permitted  the  appellant  to  invoke  the  review
jurisdiction of KSERC. APTEL, however, expressly made it clear that “the
order now passed … shall not disable the appellant, if need be later, from
availing their appellate  remedy against the original order passed by the
Commission dated 10.05.2023”.
21.
Consequently, while we do not find fault with the impugned order of APTEL
insofar as it set aside the order passed by KSERC, at the same time, the
appropriate course of action would be to allow for restoration of the original
appeal filed against the order of KSERC dated 10 May 2023. This appeal,
being Appeal No 518 of 2023, shall stand restored to the file of APTEL.
22.
We, however, clarify that issues which are covered by the impugned order of
APTEL shall not be re-agitated. The appeal which has been restored to the
file of APTEL shall, in other words, be considered on any other grounds that
were raised before APTEL prior to the withdrawal of the appeal.
11

23.
The appeals shall stand disposed of accordingly.
24.
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
 
 
 
….....…...….......…………………..CJI.
                                                                 [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]
..…....…........……………….…........J.
                             
[J B Pardiwala]
..…....…........……………….…........J.
                             
[Manoj Misra]
 
New Delhi; 
September 30, 2024
CKB
12