2024 INSC 751
1 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.           OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP(C) No. 33094 of 2017) 
 
 
 
KHALSA UNIVERSITY AND ANOTHER      …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF PUNJAB  
AND ANOTHER 
 
 
 
 
…RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
 
1. 
Leave granted.  
2. 
The present appeal challenges the final judgment and 
order dated 1st November 2017 passed by the Division Bench 
of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in 
C.W.P. No. 17150 of 2017 (O&M), whereby the High Court 
dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellants inter-alia 
seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari praying for quashing 
“The Khalsa University (Repeal) Act 2017” dated 17th July 
2017. 
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2024.10.03
12:33:31 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
FACTS: 
3. 
The facts giving rise to this appeal lie in a narrow 
compass. 
3.1. In the year 2010, the State of Punjab framed the Punjab 
Private Universities Policy, 20101.  
3.2. The Khalsa College Charitable Society, Amritsar,2 
(appellant No.2 herein), which was in existence since 1892, 
submitted a proposal to the State Government for setting up 
a self-financing University in the State of Punjab on the basis 
of the 2010 Policy.  
3.3. On 5th March 2011, the Higher Education Department, 
Government of Punjab, after examining the proposal, issued 
a Letter of Intent to Khalsa Society for establishing and 
running the Khalsa University, Amritsar3.  
3.4. On 7th November 2016, the Punjab Vidhan Sabha 
passed The Khalsa University Act, 20164 (Punjab Act No. 44 
of 2016). The 2016 Act received the assent of the Hon’ble 
Governor of Punjab on 7th November 2016 and the same was 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as the “2010 Policy” 
2 Hereinafter referred to as the “Khalsa Society” 
3 Hereinafter referred to as “Khalsa University” 
4 Hereinafter referred to as “2016 Act” 

3 
published in the Punjab Government Gazette Extraordinary 
on 17th November 2016. 
3.5. The Khalsa University (appellant No.1 herein), after its 
establishment, was imparting courses in 26 programmes and 
215 students were admitted for the Academic Session 2016-
17.  
3.6. On 18th January 2017, the Registrar of Khalsa 
University 
communicated 
to 
the 
Principal 
Secretary, 
Department of Higher Education, Government of Punjab, 
that they have enacted the Statutes of the Khalsa University 
in consonance with the 2010 Policy, the 2016 Act and 
University Grants Commission5 guidelines.  
3.7. On 6th April 2017, the Superintendent of Higher 
Education 
Department, 
Government 
of 
Punjab, 
communicated to Khalsa University that no admission 
process will be started till the Statues of the University are 
approved by the State Government. The same was reiterated 
by another communication dated 17th May 2017.  
3.8. On 30th May 2017, the State Government promulgated 
an Ordinance thereby repealing the 2016 Act. Shortly 
 
5 Hereinafter referred to as “UGC” 

4 
thereafter, the Punjab Vidhan Sabha passed The Khalsa 
University (Repeal) Act 20176. The Impugned Act received 
assent of the Hon’ble Governor on 4th July 2017 and the 
same was published in the Punjab Government Gazette 
Extraordinary on 17th July 2017.  
3.9. Aggrieved by the communications dated 6th April 2017 
and 17th May 2017, the promulgation of the Ordinance and 
passing of the Impugned Act, the Khalsa University and 
Khalsa Society (hereinafter referred to as “appellants”) filed a 
Writ Petition being C.W.P. No. 17150 of 2017 (O&M) before 
the Punjab and Haryana High Court.  
3.10. 
Vide final judgment and order dated 1st November 
2017, the High Court dismissed the Writ Petition filed by the 
appellants. Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal 
arises.  
SUBMISSIONS: 
4. 
We have heard Shri P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants and Shri 
Shadan Farasat, learned Additional Advocate General (AAG) 
appearing on behalf of the respondents. 
 
6 Hereinafter referred to as the “Impugned Act” 

5 
5. 
Shri Patwalia, learned Senior Counsel appearing on 
behalf of the appellants submits that the Impugned Act is 
patently arbitrary, mala fide, discriminatory and violative of 
Article 14 of the Constitution of India. 
6. 
Shri Patwalia submits that the mala fides in passing of 
the Impugned Act are apparent inasmuch as the statements 
made by Captain Amarinder Singh, who at the relevant time 
was in the opposition, would clearly show that he was 
opposed to the establishment of the Khalsa University. It is 
submitted that Captain Amarinder Singh had made public 
statements that he was “touchy” about the Khalsa College, 
that he would not permit the ruling party to tinker with the 
status of the same and that, after he comes to power, he will 
reverse the decision. It is submitted that immediately after 
Captain Amarinder Singh became the Chief Minister of 
Punjab in 2017, an Ordinance was promulgated repealing 
the 2016 Act, and shortly thereafter, the said Ordinance got 
the imprimatur of the legislature by the passing of the 
Impugned Act dated 17th July 2017. 
7. 
Shri Patwalia further submitted that the State of Punjab 
had come up with the 2010 Policy and under the said Policy, 

6 
16 Universities were established, however, it was only the 
Khalsa University which was picked up and abolished. He 
submitted that picking up a single University out of 16 
Universities which were established as per the 2010 Policy is 
patently arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of Article 14 
of the Constitution. 
8. 
Shri Patwalia further submitted that the Impugned Act 
is passed on a non-existent factual matrix. He submitted that 
the Statement of Objects and Reasons7  of the Impugned Act 
shows that the only reason for passing it is to “protect the 
heritage character of Khalsa College”.  He submitted that the 
SOR shows that the Impugned Act was passed on the basis 
that the Khalsa College has, over a period of time, become a 
significant icon of Khalsa Heritage and the Khalsa University 
established in 2016 was likely to shadow and damage its 
character and pristine glory. He submitted that the Khalsa 
College was established in 1892 and the appellants had 
clearly given an undertaking that the establishment of the 
Khalsa University would not touch the Khalsa College. He 
submitted that the Khalsa Society comprises of various other 
 
7 Hereinafter referred to as “SOR” 

7 
establishments apart from Khalsa College and that the 
Khalsa University was established to provide affiliation for 
only three colleges namely Khalsa College of Pharmacy, 
Khalsa College of Education and Khalsa College for Women. 
He submits that all the three institutions were started after 
more than half a century of establishment of Khalsa College. 
It is submitted that Khalsa University (appellant No.1) had 
also 
planned/established 
various 
other 
colleges 
or 
institutions which would be affiliated to it, however, the same 
was to be done without in any way affecting the Khalsa 
College. As such, it is submitted that the reasoning given in 
the SOR that the Impugned Act was being passed only to 
protect the heritage character of Khalsa College is formed on 
a factually erroneous matrix.   
9. 
Shri Patwalia further submitted that the Impugned Act 
was patently arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of Article 
14 of the Constitution. It is submitted that the Constitution 
Bench of this Court in the case of Shayara Bano v. Union 
of India and Others (Ministry of Women and Child 
Development Secretary and Others)8 has held that the 
 
8 (2017) 9 SCC 1 : 2017 INSC 785 

8 
ground of manifest arbitrariness is also available for 
examining the validity of a legislation. It is submitted that if 
it is found that the legislative enactment is not based on an 
intelligible differentia, then such a classification would not be 
permissible and the enactment would be liable to be struck 
down on the ground of manifest arbitrariness.  
10. Per contra, Shri Farasat, learned AAG appearing on 
behalf of the respondents submits that a reasonable 
classification having a nexus with the object to be achieved is 
permissible under Article 14 of the Constitution. He submits 
that merely because Khalsa University (appellant No.1) has 
been singled out as against the other Universities established 
under the 2010 Policy cannot be a ground for holding the 
Impugned Act to be invalid.  
11. The learned AAG submits that there is a presumption 
with regard to the validity of a legislative action. He submits 
that the burden with regard to invalidity is on the person 
who challenges it. It is submitted that the classification is 
based on the fact that the Khalsa College had, over a period 
of century, received a heritage status. The name “Khalsa” 
was identified with the Khalsa College. He submitted that the 

9 
establishment of Khalsa University tinkered with the heritage 
status of Khalsa College.  
12. The learned AAG further submitted that the Khalsa 
University and the Khalsa College have been established in 
the same premises and therefore there is a possibility of 
confusion being caused in the minds of a general observer. 
He further submitted that it was, over a period of time, the 
Khalsa College had earned a huge reputation and was 
playing a leading role in Punjabi socio-religious society. It is 
submitted that the establishment of a private University 
could diminish its nature. It is submitted that there was 
further a possibility that Khalsa Society (appellant No.2) 
would allocate greater attention and resources to the private 
university and neglect Khalsa College which has a historic 
value. To buttress his submissions, he relies on the 
judgments of this Court in the cases of Chandan Banerjee 
and Others v. Krishna Prosad Ghosh and Others9 and 
State of Tamil Nadu and Another v. National South 
Indian River Interlinking Agriculturist Association10. 
 
9 (2022) 15 SCC 453 : 2021 INSC 516 
10 (2021) 15 SCC 534 : 2021 INSC 777 

10 
13. Shri Farasat further submitted that the appellants had 
no vested right in their status as a University. It is submitted 
that shortly after the 2016 Act was enacted, the Impugned 
Act came to be enacted. During that short period, a few 
students were admitted, however, the Impugned Act also 
took care of the said students inasmuch as the colleges 
where they were studying were affiliated with the other 
Universities. He therefore submits that there is no merit in 
the appeal and the appeal deserves to be dismissed. 
CONSIDERATION: 
14. The facts in the present case are not in dispute. The 
Government of Punjab, Department of Higher Education had 
come up with the 2010 Policy. The 2010 Policy was framed in 
order to attract high quality private sector investment and 
expertise in the realm of higher education and provides for 
establishment and incorporation of private self-financed 
Universities in the State of Punjab. By the 2010 Policy, it was 
decided to permit establishment of self-financed universities 
which shall not receive any grant or aid from the State 
Government. However, it provided for laying down a rationale 
proposal and well-defined conditions for the establishment of 

11 
such universities in order to safeguard the interest of the 
stakeholders, ex-students, staff members and genuine 
promoters.  
15. In furtherance of the 2010 Policy, Khalsa Society 
(appellant No.2) applied to the State Government for 
establishing Khalsa University. The State Government vide 
communication dated 5th March 2011 issued Letter of Intent 
to the Khalsa Society on various conditions mentioned 
therein. 
16. Subsequently, the 2016 Act came to be enacted on 7th 
November 2016. It will be relevant to refer to the SOR of the 
2016 Act, which read thus: 
“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
As the Punjab Private Universities Policy - 2010 
has been formulated to provide greater access and 
to 
ensure 
quality 
in 
higher 
education, 
the 
Government 
of 
Punjab 
wishes 
to 
allow 
the 
establishment of self financed private universities to 
supplement the efforts of the State Universities. The 
object of the Khalsa University is to impart 
comprehensive education at all levels to achieve 
excellence and to promote research and teaching in 
areas of Education, Engineering and Technology, 
Languages, Laws, Life Sciences and other courses 
under 
the 
general 
heads 
of 
the 
Arts 
and 
Humanities, Social Sciences etc. 
 
2. As the establishment of such private self financed 
universities requires a broadly uniform set of 

12 
guidelines 
for 
ensuring 
academic 
standards, 
prevention 
of 
commercialization 
and 
mismanagement 
etc., 
it 
deemed, 
therefore, 
expedient to provide for promulgation of 'The 
Khalsa University Bill- 2016.” 
 
17. Subsequent to the enactment of the 2016 Act, Khalsa 
University (appellant No.1) received a communication dated 
15th February 2017 from the UGC informing it that, in view 
of its establishment, its name has been included in the list 
maintained by the UGC. It was also informed to it that it was 
required 
to 
follow 
the 
UGC 
(Establishment 
of 
and 
Maintenance 
of 
Standards 
in 
Private 
Universities) 
Regulations, 2003. 
18. It appears that thereafter there was a change of regime 
in the Government of Punjab. It further appears that from 
April, 2017 onwards, Khalsa University started receiving 
communications that it should not admit any more students 
till the Statutes of the University were approved by the State 
Government. 
19. Thereafter on 30th May 2017, the State Government 
promulgated an Ordinance thereby repealing the 2016 Act. 
The Impugned Act came to be passed by Punjab Vidhan 
Sabha, which received the assent of the Hon’ble Governor on 

13 
4th July 2017 and published in the Punjab Government 
Gazette (Extraordinary) on 17th July 2017.  
20. The SOR of the Impugned Act read thus: 
“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Khalsa University (Repeal) Ordinance, 2017 
aims to repeal the Khalsa University Act, 2016 with 
a view to protect heritage character of Khalsa 
College, Amritsar. The Khalsa College, Amritsar has, 
over a period of time, become a significant icon of 
Khalsa Heritage and the University established in 
2016 is likely to shadow and damage its character 
and pristine glory. Therefore, the Act ibid is 
proposed to be repealed.” 
 
 
21. The Impugned Act, which consists of three sections, 
reads thus: 
“Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of 
Punjab in the Sixty-eight year of the Republic of 
India as follows: - 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Khalsa University 
(Repeal) Act, 2017. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with 
effect from the 30th day of May, 2017. 
2. The Khalsa University Act, 2016 (Punjab Act 
No.44 of 2016), is hereby repealed: - 
Provided that admission to the affected students 
shall be given in other appropriate educational 
institutions of the State of Punjab as per their 
eligibility, so that the interests of the students are 
not prejudicially affected. 
3. The Khalsa University (Repeal) Ordinance, 2017 
(Punjab Ordinance No. l of 2017), is also hereby 
repealed.” 

14 
 
22. It is thus clear that by the 2016 Act under the 2010 
Policy of the State Government, Khalsa University was 
established as one of the private universities. The Impugned 
Act has been enacted with the sole purpose of repealing the 
2016 Act by which the Khalsa University was established. It 
is also clear that the Impugned Act deals with only a single 
entity/institution i.e. the Khalsa University. 
23. At the outset, we clarify that we do not propose to go 
into the question with regard to the allegation of mala fides 
attributed to any individual involved in the passing of the 
Impugned Act. In fact, the former Chief Minister of Punjab 
Captain Amarinder Singh was arrayed as respondent No.2 in 
the present appeal, however, by an order dated 8th August 
2018, the name of Captain Amarinder Singh was deleted. Be 
that as it may, for the purpose of the present appeal, we 
propose to examine only two questions.  
24. The first question is, whether an enactment for giving 
out a differential treatment to a single entity is valid in law or 
not and secondly, whether the Impugned Act is liable to be 
struck down on the ground of manifest arbitrariness. 

15 
A. 
Whether an enactment for giving out a differential 
treatment to a single entity is valid in law or not? 
  
25. For considering the first issue, we propose to examine 
certain landmark judgments of this Court on the issue.  
26. In the case of Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri v. The Union 
of India and Others11, the Constitution Bench of this Court 
was faced with a situation where the Governor General of 
India had promulgated an Ordinance on the basis of a 
finding that, on account of mismanagement and neglect, a 
situation had arisen concerning the affairs of the Sholapur 
Spinning and Weaving Company Ltd.12 which had not only 
prejudicially 
affected 
the 
production 
of 
an 
essential 
commodity but also had caused serious unemployment 
amongst a certain section of the community. On account of 
such an emergency, a situation had arisen which rendered it 
necessary to make a special provision for the proper 
management and administration of the Sholapur Mill. The 
aforesaid Ordinance was subsequently re-enacted in the form 
of an Act of the Legislature called the Sholapur Spinning and 
Weaving Company (Emergency Provisions) Act, 195013. The 
 
11 [1950] SCR 869 : 1950 INSC 36 
12 Hereinafter referred to as “Sholapur Mill” 
13 Hereinafter referred to as “Sholapur Mill Act”. 

16 
net result of the Sholapur Mill Act was that the Managing 
Agents of the Sholapur Mill were dismissed and the Directors 
holding the office automatically vacated their office.  
27. The Sholapur Mill Act was challenged on various 
grounds.  One of the grounds was that since the application 
of the said Act was found to affect only one person, it was, 
therefore, plainly discriminatory in character and within the 
constitutional inhibition of Article 14 of the Constitution. The 
said ground was rejected by the Constitution Bench by a 
majority of 3:2.   
28. One of the arguments that was made before this Court 
was that there would be other companies wherein similar 
allegations of mis-management and neglect would be 
available. It was sought to be argued that the provisions of 
the Companies Act were sufficient to deal with the said 
situation. However, the passing of an enactment whereby the 
Sholapur Mill was singled out for giving a “special treatment” 
was not permissible under Article 14 of the Constitution. 
While rejecting the said contention, Saiyid Fazl Ali, J. (one of 
the Judges forming part of the majority) observed thus: 
“…….The Government of India, as a matter of 
precaution and lest it should be said that they were 

17 
going to interfere unnecessarily in the affairs of the 
Company and were not allowing the existing 
provisions of the law to take their own course, 
consulted other interests and placed the matter 
before the Standing Committee of the Industrial 
Advisory Council where a large number of leading 
industrialists of the country were present, and 
ultimately it was realised that this was a case where 
the 
Government 
could 
rightly 
and 
properly 
intervene and there would be no occasion for any 
criticism coming from any quarter. It appears from 
the discussion on the floor of the House that the 
total number of weaving and spinning mills which 
were closed down for one reason or the other was 
about 35 in number. Some of them are said to have 
closed for want of cotton, some due to overstocks, 
some for want of capital and some on account of 
mismanagement. The Minister for Industry, who 
sponsored 
the 
Bill, 
in 
explaining 
what 
distinguished the case of Sholapur Mill from the 
other mills against whom there might be charges 
of mismanagement, made it clear in the course 
of the debate that “certain conditions had to be 
fulfilled before the Government can and should 
intervene”, and he set out these conditions as 
follows: 
(1) The undertaking must relate to an 
industry 
which 
is 
of 
national 
importance. 
Not 
each 
and 
every 
undertaking which may have to close 
down 
can 
be 
taken 
charge 
of 
temporarily by the Government. 
(2) 
The 
undertaking 
must 
be 
an 
economic unit. If it appears that it is 
completely uneconomic and cannot be 
managed at all, there is no sense in 
the Government taking charge of it. If 
anything, it will mean the Government 
will have to waste money which 
belongs 
to 
the 
taxpayer 
on 
an 
uneconomic unit. 

18 
(3) There must be a technical report as 
regards the condition of the plants, 
machinery, etc., which either as they 
stand, or after necessary repairs and 
reconditioning 
can 
be 
properly 
utilised. 
(4) Lastly, and this is of considerable 
importance, there must be a proper 
enquiry held before the Government 
takes any action. The enquiry should 
show that managing agents have so 
misbehaved that they are no longer fit 
and proper persons to remain in 
charge 
of 
such 
an 
important 
undertaking. [Parliamentary Debates, 
Vol. III, No. 14, 31-3-1950 at pp. 2394-
95] 
It appears from the same proceedings that 
Sholapur Mill is one of the largest mills in Asia 
and employs 13,000 workers. Per shift, it is 
capable of producing 25 to 30 thousand pounds 
of yarn, and also one lakh yards of cloth. It was 
working two shifts when it was closed down on 
29-8-1949. The closure of the Mill meant a loss 
of 25 lakhs yards of cloth and one-and-a-half 
lakhs pounds of yarn per month. Prior to 1947, 
the highest dividend paid by the Company was 
Rs 525 per share and the lowest Rs 100, and, in 
1948, when the management was taken over by 
the managing agents who have been removed by 
the impugned Act, the accounts showed a loss of 
Rs 30 lakhs, while other textile companies had 
been able to show very substantial profits during 
the same period.  
Another fact which is brought out in the 
proceedings is that the managing agents had 
acquired control over the majority of the shares 
of 
the 
Company 
and 
a 
large 
number 
of 
shareholders who were dissatisfied with the 
management had been rendered powerless and 
they could not make their voice heard. By 

19 
reason of the preponderance of their strength, 
the managing agents made it impossible for a 
Controller under the Essential Supplies Act to 
function and they also made it difficult for the 
Company to run smoothly under the normal law. 
It was against this background that the Act 
was passed, and it is evident that the facts 
which were placed before the legislature with 
regard to Sholapur Mill were of an extraordinary 
character, and fully justified the Company being 
treated 
as 
a 
class 
by 
itself. 
There 
were 
undoubtedly other mills which were open to the 
charge of mismanagement, but the criteria 
adopted by the Government which, in my 
opinion, cannot be said to be arbitrary or 
unreasonable, is not applicable to any of them. 
As we have seen, one of the criteria was that a 
mere allegation of mismanagement should not 
be enough and no drastic step such as is 
envisaged in the Act should be taken without 
there being a complete enquiry. In the case of 
Sholapur Mill, a complete enquiry had been 
made and the revelations which were made as a 
result of such enquiry were startling.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
29. It can thus be seen that Fazl Ali, J. found that before 
the Act was passed, the matter was placed before the 
Standing Committee of the Industrial Advisory Council where 
a large number of leading industrialists of the country were 
present. It was ultimately realized that, that was a case 
where the Government could rightly and properly intervene. 
It was further found that when the matter was discussed on 
the floor of the House, it emerged that there were about 35 

20 
weaving and spinning mills which were closed for one reason 
or the other. Some of them were closed for want of cotton, 
some due to overstock, some for want of capital and some on 
account of mismanagement. However, while singling out the 
Sholapur Mill, the Parliament had taken into consideration 
various factors. One of them was that the undertaking was 
related to an industry which was of national importance. It 
was found that the Sholapur Mill was one of the largest mills 
in Asia and employed 13,000 workers. Another factor was 
that it was an economic unit and was working in two shifts 
before it was closed down. It was further found that prior to 
1947, the highest dividend paid by the Company was Rs. 
525/- per share and the lowest was Rs. 100/-. It was further 
noticed that only when the management was taken over by 
the Managing Agents, Sholapur Mill started showing losses. 
It was further found that the Managing Agents had acquired 
the control over the majority of the shares of the Sholapur 
Mill and a large number of shareholders who were 
dissatisfied with the management had been rendered 
powerless. It was further found that, by reason of the 
preponderance of their strength, the managing Agents made 

21 
it impossible for a Controller under the Essential Supplies 
Act to function. In the totality of the circumstances, the 
Court found that a situation of an extraordinary character 
had arisen which fully justified the Sholapur Mill being 
treated as a class by itself. It was further found that though 
the other companies were also open to the charge of 
mismanagement, however, the criterion made applicable by 
the Government to Sholapur Mill for singling out could not 
be said to be arbitrary or unreasonable. It could further be 
noticed that 4 reasons were given by the Government for 
singling out the Sholapur Mill. 
30. It will also be pertinent to note the observations made 
by Mukherjea, J. (who again formed a part of the majority) in 
the said judgment, which read thus: 
“It must be admitted that the guarantee 
against the denial of equal protection of the laws 
does not mean that identically the same rules of 
law should be made applicable to all persons 
within the territory of India in spite of 
differences of circumstances and conditions. As 
has been said by the Supreme Court of America, 
“equal protection of laws is a pledge of the 
protection of equal laws [Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 30 L 
Ed 220 : 118 US 356 at p. 369 (1886) : 1886 SCC 
OnLine US SC 188] ” (L Ed p. 226), and this means 
“subjection to equal laws applying alike to all in the 
same situation [Southern Railway Co. v. Greene, 54 
L Ed 536 : 216 US 400 at p. 412 (1910) : 1910 SCC 

22 
OnLine US SC 59] ” (L Ed p. 539). In other words, 
there should be no discrimination between one 
person and another if as regards the subject-
matter of the legislation their position is the 
same. I am unable to accept the argument of Mr 
Chari that a legislation relating to one individual 
or one family or one body corporate would per se 
violate the guarantee of the equal protection 
rule. There can certainly be a law applying to 
one person or to one group of persons and it 
cannot be held to be unconstitutional if it is not 
discriminatory 
in 
its 
character 
[ 
Willis 
: Constitutional Law at p. 580.] . It would be bad 
law: “if it arbitrarily selects one individual or a 
class of individuals, one corporation or a class of 
corporations, and visits a penalty upon them 
which is not imposed upon others guilty of like 
delinquency [Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway 
Co. v. Ellis, 41 L Ed 666 : 165 US 150 at 159 (1897) 
: 1897 SCC OnLine US SC 20] ….” (L Ed p. 669 : US 
p. 159) The legislature undoubtedly has a wide field 
of choice in determining and classifying the subject 
of its laws, and if the law deals alike with all of a 
certain class, it is normally not obnoxious to the 
charge of denial of equal protection; but the 
classification should never be arbitrary. It must 
always rest upon some real and substantial 
distinction bearing a reasonable and just relation to 
the things in respect to which the classification is 
made; 
and 
classification 
made 
without 
any 
substantial basis should be regarded as invalid 
[Southern Railway Co. v. Greene, 54 L Ed 536 : 216 
US 400 at p. 412 (1910) : 1910 SCC OnLine US SC 
59].  
The question is whether judged by this test the 
impugned Act can be said to have contravened the 
provision embodied in Article 14 of the Constitution. 
Obviously, the Act purports to make provisions 
which are of a drastic character and against the 
general law of the land as laid down in the Indian 
Companies Act, in regard to the administration and 
management of the affairs of one Company in 

23 
Indian territory. The Act itself gives no reason for 
the legislation but the Ordinance, which was a 
precursor of the Act, expressly stated why the 
legislation was necessary. It said that owing to 
mismanagement and neglect, a situation had arisen 
in the affairs of the Company which prejudicially 
affected the production of an essential commodity 
and caused serious unemployment amongst a 
certain section of the community. Mr Chari's 
contention in substance is that there are various 
textile companies in India situated in a similar 
manner as Sholapur Company, against which the 
same charges could be brought and for the control 
and regulation of which all the reasons that are 
mentioned in the Preamble to the Ordinance could 
be applied. Yet, it is said, the legislation has been 
passed with regard to this one Company alone. The 
argument seems plausible at first sight, but on a 
closer examination I do not think that I can accept 
it as sound. It must be conceded that the legislature 
has a wide discretion in determining the subject-
matter of its laws. It is an accepted doctrine of the 
American courts and which seems to me to be well 
founded on principle, that the presumption is in 
favour of the constitutionality of an enactment and 
the burden is upon him who attacks it to show that 
there has been a transgression of constitutional 
principles. As was said by the Supreme Court of 
America in Middleton v. Texas Power and Light 
Co. [Middleton v. Texas Power and Light Co., 63 L Ed 
527 : 249 US 152, 157 (1919) : 1919 SCC OnLine 
US SC 50] : (L Ed p. 531) “… [It must be presumed] 
that 
a 
legislature 
understands 
and 
correctly 
appreciates the needs of its own people, that its 
laws are directed to problems made manifest by 
experience and that its discriminations are based 
upon adequate grounds.” (US p. 157) This being 
the position, it is for the petitioner to establish 
facts which would prove that the selection of 
this particular subject by the legislature is 
unreasonable and based upon arbitrary grounds. 
No allegations were made in the petition and no 

24 
materials were placed before us to show as to 
whether there are other companies in India 
which come precisely under the same category 
as Sholapur Spinning and Weaving Company and 
the reasons for imposing control upon the latter 
as mentioned in the Preamble to the Ordinance 
are applicable to them as well. Mr Chari argues 
that these are matters of common knowledge of 
which we should take judicial notice. I do not think 
that this is the correct line of approach. It is quite 
true that the legislature has, in this instance, 
proceeded against one company only and its 
shareholders; but even one corporation or a 
group of persons can be taken as a class by itself 
for the purpose of legislation, provided it 
exhibits some exceptional features which are not 
possessed by others. The courts should prima facie 
lean in favour of constitutionality and should 
support the legislation if it is possible to do so on 
any reasonable ground, and it is for the party who 
attacks the validity of the legislation to place all 
materials before the court which would go to show 
that the selection is arbitrary and unsupportable. 
Throwing out of vague hints that there may be other 
instances of similar nature is not enough for this 
purpose. 
We 
should 
bear 
in 
mind 
that 
a 
corporation, which is engaged in production of a 
commodity vitally essential to the community, has a 
social character of its own, and it must not be 
regarded as the concern primarily or only of those 
who invest their money in it. If its possibilities are 
large and it had a prosperous and useful career for 
a long period of time and is about to collapse not for 
any economic reason but through sheer perversity 
of the controlling authority, one cannot say that the 
legislature has no authority to treat it as a class by 
itself and make special legislation applicable to it 
alone in the interests of the community at large. 
The combination of circumstances which are 
present here may be of such unique character as 
could not be existing in any other institution. 
But all these, I must say, are matters which require 

25 
investigation on proper materials which we have not 
got before us in the present case. In these 
circumstances I am constrained to hold that the 
present application must fail on the simple 
ground that the petitioner made no attempt to 
discharge the prima facie burden that lay upon 
him and did not place before us the materials 
upon which a proper decision on the point could 
be arrived at. In my opinion, therefore, the attack 
on the legislation on the ground of the denial of 
equal protection of law cannot succeed. We have 
not even before us any statement on oath by the 
petitioner that what has been alleged against 
this particular Company may be said against 
other companies as well. If there was any such 
statement, the respondents could have placed 
before us the whole string of events that led up 
to the passing of this legislation. If we are to take 
judicial notice of the existence of similar other badly 
managed companies, we must take notice also of 
the facts which appear in the parliamentary 
proceedings in connection with this legislation 
which have been referred to by my learned Brother, 
Fazl Ali, J. in his judgment and which would go to 
establish that the facts connected with this 
corporation are indeed exceptional and the 
discrimination that has been made can be 
supported on just and reasonable grounds. I 
purposely refrain from alluding to these facts or 
basing my decision thereon as we had no 
opportunity of investigating them properly during 
the course of the hearing. As matters stand, no 
proper materials have been placed before us by 
either side and as I am unable to say that the 
legislature cannot be supported on any reasonable 
ground, I think it to be extremely risky to overthrow 
it on mere suspicion or vague conjectures. If it is 
possible to imagine or think of cases of other 
companies where similar or identical conditions 
might prevail, it is also not impossible to conceive of 
something 
“peculiar” 
or 
“unusual” 
to 
this 
corporation which led the legislature to intervene in 

26 
its affairs. As has been laid down by the Supreme 
Court of America, “The Legislature is free to 
recognise degrees of harm and it may confine its 
restrictions to those classes of cases where the need 
is deemed to be the clearest [Radice v. New York, 68 
L Ed 690 : 264 US 292 (1924) : 1924 SCC OnLine 
US SC 62] .” (L Ed p. 695). We should bear in mind 
that a corporation, which is engaged in production 
of a commodity vitally essential to the community, 
has a social character of its own, and it must not be 
regarded as the concern primarily or only of those 
who invest their money in it. If its possibilities are 
large and it had a prosperous and useful career for 
a long period of time and is about to collapse not for 
any economic reason but through sheer perversity 
of the controlling authority, one cannot say that the 
legislature has no authority to treat it as a class by 
itself and make special legislation applicable to it 
alone in the interests of the community at large. The 
combination of circumstances which are present 
here may be of such unique character as could not 
be existing in any other institution. But all these, I 
must say, are matters which require investigation 
on proper materials which we have not got before us 
in the present case. In these circumstances I am 
constrained to hold that the present application 
must fail on the simple ground that the petitioner 
made no attempt to discharge the prima facie 
burden that lay upon him and did not place before 
us the materials upon which a proper decision on 
the point could be arrived at. In my opinion, 
therefore, the attack on the legislation on the 
ground of the denial of equal protection of law 
cannot succeed.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
31. It can be seen that His Lordship rejected the arguments 
that the legislation relating to one individual or one family or 
one body corporate would violate the guarantee of the equal 

27 
protection rule. His Lordship further held that there can be 
certainly a law applying to one person or to one group of 
persons and it cannot be held to be unconstitutional if it is 
not discriminatory in its character. However, it would be bad 
law if it arbitrarily selects one individual or a class of 
individuals, one corporation or a class of corporations, and 
visits a penalty upon them which is not imposed upon others 
guilty of like delinquency. The contention of the appellants 
therein as recorded by His Lordship was that there were 
various textile companies in India situated in a similar 
manner as the Sholapur Mill, but the legislation was passed 
only with regard to one Company i.e. the Sholapur Mill. 
While dealing with the said contention, His Lordship 
observed that neither any allegations were made in the 
petition nor any materials were placed before the Court to 
show as to whether there were other companies in India 
which came precisely under the same category as that of 
Sholapur Mill. His Lordship found that the legislature can 
enact a law in respect of one undertaking or a group of 
persons by treating them as a class by itself provided it 
exhibits some exceptional features which are not possessed 

28 
by others. His Lordship further observed that the courts 
should prima facie lean in favour of constitutionality and 
support the legislation if it is possible to do so on any 
reasonable ground. It has been held that it is for the party 
who attacks the validity of the legislation to place all 
materials before the court which would go to show that the 
selection was arbitrary and unsupportable. His Lordship 
specifically noticed that leave aside placing any material on 
record, there was not even any allegation/statement placed 
on record by the petitioner therein. 
32. Patanjali Sastri and Das, JJ. disagreed with the 
majority in the said case. Sastri, J. observed thus: 
“It is obvious that the legislation is directed 
solely 
against 
a 
particular 
Company 
and 
shareholders and not against any class or 
category 
of 
companies 
and 
no 
question, 
therefore, of reasonable legislative classification 
arises. If a law is made applicable to a class of 
persons or things and the classification is based 
upon differentia having a rational relation to the 
object sought to be attained, it can be no 
objection to its constitutional validity that its 
application is found to affect only one person or 
thing. For instance, a law may be passed imposing 
certain restrictions and burdens on joint stock 
companies with a share capital of, say, Rs 10 crores 
and upwards, and it may be found that there is only 
one such Company for the time being to which the 
law could be applied. If other such companies are 
brought into existence in future the law would apply 

29 
to them also, and no discrimination would thus be 
involved. But the impugned Act, which selects 
this particular Company and imposes upon it 
and its shareholders burdens and disabilities on 
the ground of mismanagement and neglect of 
duty on the part of those charged with the 
conduct 
of 
its 
undertaking, 
is 
plainly 
discriminatory in character and is, in my 
judgment, within the constitutional inhibition of 
Article 14. Legislation based upon mismanagement 
or other misconduct as the differentia and made 
applicable to a specified individual or corporate 
body is not far removed from the notorious 
parliamentary procedure formerly employed in 
Britain of punishing individual delinquents by 
passing bills of attainder, and should not, I think, 
receive judicial encouragement. 
It was next urged that the burden of proving 
that the impugned Act is unconstitutional lay on 
the petitioner, and that, inasmuch as he has failed 
to adduce any evidence to show that the selection of 
this Company and its shareholders for special 
treatment under the impugned Act was arbitrary, 
the application must fail. Whilst all reasonable 
presumption must undoubtedly be made in support 
of the constitutional validity of a law made by a 
competent legislature, the circumstances of the 
present case would seem, to my mind to exclude 
such presumption. Hostile discrimination is writ 
large over the face of the impugned Act and it 
discloses 
no 
grounds 
for 
such 
legislative 
intervention. For all that appears no compelling 
public interests were involved. Even the Preamble to 
the original Ordinance was omitted. Nor did 
Respondents 1 and 2 file any counter-statement in 
this proceeding explaining the circumstances which 
led to the enactment of such an extraordinary 
measure. There is thus nothing in the record even 
by way of allegation which the petitioner need take 
steps to rebut. Supposing, however, that the 
impugned Act was passed on the same grounds as 
were mentioned in the Preamble to the repealed 

30 
Ordinance, namely, mismanagement and neglect 
prejudicially affecting the production of an essential 
commodity and causing serious unemployment 
amongst a section of the community, the petitioner 
could hardly be expected to assume the burden of 
showing, not that the Company's affairs were 
properly managed, for that is not his case, but that 
there 
were 
also 
other 
companies 
similarly 
mismanaged, for that is what, according to the 
respondents, he should prove in order to rebut the 
presumption of constitutionality. In other words, he 
should be called upon to establish that this 
Company and its shareholders were arbitrarily 
singled out for the imposition of the statutory 
disabilities. How could the petitioner discharge such 
a burden? Was he to ask for an investigation by the 
Court of the affairs of other industrial concerns in 
India where also there were strikes and lockouts 
resulting 
in 
unemployment 
and 
cessation 
of 
production of essential commodities? Would those 
companies be willing to submit to such an 
investigation? And even so, how is it possible to 
prove that the mismanagement and neglect which is 
said to have prompted the legislation in regard to 
this Company was prevalent in the same degree in 
other companies? In such circumstances, to cast 
upon the petitioner a burden of proof which it is as 
needless for him to assume as it is impracticable to 
discharge is to lose sight of the realities of the case.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
33. His Lordship Sastri, J. found that the enactment 
dealing with the single entity i.e., Sholapur Mill was plainly 
discriminatory in character and within the constitutional 
inhibition of Article 14 of the Constitution. His Lordship 
observed that if a law is made applicable to a class of persons 

31 
or things and the classification is based upon differentia 
having a rational relation to the object sought to be attained, 
there can be no objection to its constitutional validity. In 
such cases, even legislation dealing with single entity would 
be valid.  
34. While disagreeing with the majority view with regard to 
burden of proving that the impugned enactment was 
unconstitutional lay on the petitioner and that the petitioner 
had failed to adduce any evidence in that regard, His 
Lordship observed that though all reasonable presumption 
must be made in support of the constitutional validity of a 
law made by a competent legislature, the facts and 
circumstances of the said case would seem to exclude such a 
presumption.  
35. His 
Lordship 
further 
observed 
that 
hostile 
discrimination was writ large over the face of the impugned 
enactment and it disclosed no grounds for such legislative 
intervention. It was further observed that asking the 
petitioner therein to establish that the Sholapur Mill and its 
shareholders were arbitrarily singled out for imposition of 
statutory disabilities cast upon the petitioner a burden of 

32 
proof which was needless for him to assume and 
impracticable to discharge and was to lose sight of the 
realities of the case. 
36. Das, J., while giving separate dissenting opinion, 
observed thus: 
“…… 
But 
if 
mismanagement 
affecting 
production and resulting in unemployment is to be 
the basis of a classification for making a law for 
preventing 
mismanagement 
and 
securing 
production and employment, the law must embrace 
within its ambit all companies which now are or 
may hereafter become subject to the vice. This basis 
of classification by its very nature cannot be 
exclusively applicable to any particular company 
and its shareholders but is capable of wider 
application and, therefore, the law founded on that 
basis must also be wide enough so as to be capable 
of being applicable to whoever may happen at any 
time 
to 
fall 
within 
that 
classification. 
Mismanagement affecting production can never be 
reserved as a special attribute peculiar to a 
particular company or the shareholders of a 
particular company. If it were permissible for the 
legislature to single out an individual or class 
and to punish him or it for some delinquency 
which may equally be found in other individuals 
or classes and to leave out the other individuals 
or classes from the ambit of the law the 
prohibition of the denial of equal protection of 
the laws would only be a meaningless and barren 
form 
of 
words. 
The 
argument 
that 
the 
presumption being in favour of the legislature, 
the onus is on the petitioner to show there are 
other individuals or companies equally guilty of 
mismanagement 
prejudicially 
affecting 
the 
production of an essential commodity and 
causing 
serious 
unemployment 
amongst 
a 

33 
certain section of the community does not, in 
such circumstances, arise, for the simple reason 
that here there has been no classification at all 
and, in any case, the basis of classification by its 
very nature is much wider and cannot, in its 
application, be limited only to this Company and 
its shareholders and, that being so, there is no 
reason to throw on the petitioner the almost 
impossible burden of proving that there are 
other companies which are in fact precisely and 
in all particulars similarly situated. In any event, 
the petitioner, in my opinion, may well claim to have 
discharged the onus of showing that this Company 
and its shareholders have been singled out for 
discriminating treatment by showing that the Act, 
on the face of it, has adopted a basis of 
classification which, by its very nature, cannot be 
exclusively applicable to this Company and its 
shareholders but which may be equally applicable 
to other companies and their shareholders and has 
penalised 
this 
particular 
Company 
and 
its 
shareholders, leaving out other companies and their 
shareholders who may be equally guilty of the 
alleged vice of mismanagement and neglect of the 
type referred to in the preambles. In my opinion the 
legislation in question infringes the fundamental 
rights of the petitioner and offends against Article 
14 of our Constitution.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
37. It can be seen that His Lordship observed that if the 
mismanagement affecting production and resulting in 
unemployment is to be the basis of a classification for 
making a law for preventing mismanagement and securing 
production and employment, then the law must embrace 

34 
within its ambit all companies which now are or may 
hereafter become subject to the vice. His Lordship held that 
the basis of classification by its very nature cannot be 
exclusively applicable to any particular company and its 
shareholders but was capable of wider application and, 
therefore, the law founded on that basis must also be wide 
enough so as to be capable of being applicable to whoever 
may happen at any time to fall within that classification. His 
Lordship observed that the basis of classification by its very 
nature was much wider and that there would be no 
classification at all and, therefore, there was no reason to 
throw on the petitioner the almost impossible burden of 
proving that there were other companies which were in fact 
precisely and in all particulars similarly situated. His 
Lordship observed that in the facts of the said case, the 
petitioner could very well claim to have discharged the onus 
of showing that the Company and its shareholders had been 
singled out for discriminating treatment, by showing that the 
Act, on the face of it, had adopted a basis of classification 
which, by its very nature, could not have been exclusively 
applicable to the Company and its shareholders, but which 

35 
could also be equally applicable to the other companies and 
their shareholders. 
38. It can thus be seen that though there appears to be 
disagreement on other aspects but all the opinions 
unanimously hold that even a legislation dealing with a 
single entity or an undertaking would be permissible in law, 
if it is based on a reasonable classification having nexus with 
the object to be achieved. The classification should be such 
wherein an entity or an undertaking to whom a special 
treatment is provided can be singled out on the basis of some 
reasonable classification from the others in the same class. 
39. However, there appears to be disagreement with regard 
to the discharge of burden. Whereas the majority is of the 
view that there is a presumption with regard to validity of the 
enactment and that the burden is on the person who 
challenges the validity thereof, the minority holds that in 
such cases wherein an entity has been singled out, then once 
the petitioner points out that he has been singled out from a 
class similarly circumstanced, the same should be taken as 
having discharged the burden. It has been held by the 
minority that asking the petitioner to discharge the burden 

36 
by placing the evidence in such cases would be asking him to 
do an impossibility. However, even from the majority view, it 
appears that in the facts and circumstances of the said case, 
the majority found that quite apart the petitioner placing any 
material on record to discharge the burden, there was not 
even a single statement on affidavit with regard to 
discrimination. 
40. In the case of D.S. Reddy v. Chancellor, Osmania 
University and Others14, the Constitution Bench of this 
Court was considering the constitutional validity of Section 5 
of the Osmania University (Second Amendment) Act, 1966 
which introduced Section 13A into the original Act. The 
challenge of the petitioner therein was that, by virtue of 
Section 13A, a differentiation was made between the 
appellant who was a Vice-Chancellor on the date of the 
commencement of the said Act and other persons who were 
to be appointed Vice-Chancellors thereafter. It was argued 
that the differentiation was without any basis and that such 
a classification did not have any reasonable relation to the 
main object of the legislation.  
 
14 [1967] 2 SCR 214 : 1966 INSC 259 

37 
41. It will be relevant to refer to the observations of the 
Constitution Bench in the said case, which read thus: 
“There can be no controversy that Section 13-
A, 
introduced 
by 
Section 
5 
of 
the 
Second 
Amendment Act, deals only with the appellant. In 
fact, the stand taken on behalf of the respondents 
in the counter affidavit filed before the High Court, 
was to the effect that the legislature had chosen to 
treat the Vice-Chancellor holding office at the time 
of the commencement of the Second Amendment 
Act, as a class by himself and with a view to enable 
the Chancellor to make fresh appointments, Section 
13-A of the Act was enacted. 
Therefore, it is clear that Section 13-A applies 
only to the appellant. Though, no doubt, it has been 
stated, on behalf of the respondents, that similar 
provisions were incorporated, at about the same 
time, in two other Acts, relating to two other 
Universities viz. the Andhra University and the Sri 
Venkateswara 
University, 
and 
though 
this 
circumstance has also been taken into account by 
the learned Judges of the High Court, in our 
opinion, those provisions have no bearing in 
considering the attack levelled by the appellant on 
Section 13-A of the Act. 
This is a clear case where the statute itself 
directs its provisions by enacting Section 13-A, 
against one individual viz. the appellant; and 
before it can be sustained as valid, this Court 
must be satisfied that there is a reasonable basis 
for grouping the appellant as a class by himself 
and that such reasonable basis must appear 
either in the statute itself or must be deducible 
from other surrounding circumstances according 
to learned Counsel for the appellant, all Vice-
Chancellors of the Osmania University come under 
one group and can be classified only as one unit 
and there is absolutely no justification for grouping 
the appellant under one class and the Vice-

38 
Chancellors to be appointed in future under a 
separate class. In any event, it is also urged that the 
said classification has no relation or nexus to the 
object of the enactment. 
…………… 
In our view, the Vice-Chancellor, who is 
appointed under the Act, or the Vice-Chancellor 
who was holding that post on the date of the 
commencement of the Second Amendment Act, form 
one single group or class. Even assuming that the 
classification of these two types of persons as 
coming under two different groups can be made 
nevertheless, 
it 
is 
essential 
that 
such 
a 
classification must be founded on an intelligible 
differentia which distinguishes the appellant from 
the Vice-Chancellor appointed under the Act. We 
are not able to find any such intelligible differentia 
on the basis of which the classification can be 
justified. 
…………….. 
For the above reasons, we accept the 
contentions of the learned Counsel for the 
appellant, and hold that Section 5 of the Second 
Amendment Act (Act 11 of 1966), introducing 
Section 13-A in the Act, is discriminatory and 
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and, 
as 
such, 
has 
to 
be 
struck 
down 
as 
unconstitutional. The result is that the appeal is 
allowed, and the appellant will be entitled to his 
costs in the appeal, payable by the respondents, 
here and in the High Court.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
42. It can thus be seen that the Constitution Bench found 
that Section 13A was applied only to the appellant therein. 
The Court further found that the Vice-Chancellor, who was 

39 
appointed under the said Act or the Vice-Chancellor who was 
holding that post on the date of the commencement of the 
Second Amendment Act, formed one single group or class. 
The Court found that though the classification of these two 
types of persons as coming under two different groups could 
be made, however, the same could not be made unless the 
classification was founded on an intelligible differentia which 
distinguished 
the 
appellant 
from 
the 
Vice-Chancellor 
appointed under the Act. The Court found that before 
upholding an enactment applicable to one individual, this 
Court must be satisfied that there is a reasonable basis for 
grouping such an individual as a class by himself and that 
such reasonable basis must appear either in the statute itself 
or must be deducible from other surrounding circumstances. 
The Court found that there was no such intelligible 
differentia on the basis of which such classification could be 
justified. 
43. In the case of S.P. Mittal v. Union of India and 
Others15, the Constitution Bench of this Court was 
considering 
the 
provisions 
of 
Auroville 
(Emergency 
 
15 (1983) 1 SCC 51 : 1982 INSC 81 

40 
Provisions) Act, 1980. In the said case also, an argument was 
advanced that a legislation singling out Sri Aurobindo Society 
amounted to hostile treatment. Dealing with the said 
argument, speaking for the majority, R.B. Misra, J. observed 
thus: 
“163. It was further contended by Mr Venugopal 
that if the management of the institution had been 
taken over by the Government on the ground of 
mismanagement, there could be other institutions 
where similar situation might be prevailing. There 
should have been a general legislation rather than 
singling out Sri Aurobindo Society for hostile 
treatment. 
164. The argument cannot be accepted for two 
reasons. Firstly, because it has not been pointed 
out which were the other institutions where similar 
situations were prevailing. Besides, there is a 
uniqueness with this institution inasmuch as the 
Government is also involved. Even a single 
institution may be taken as a class. The 
situation 
prevailing 
in 
the 
Auroville 
had 
converted the dream of the Mother into a 
nightmare. There had arisen acute law and order 
situation in the Auroville, numerous cases were 
pending against various foreigners, the funds 
meant for the Auroville had been diverted 
towards other purposes and the atmosphere was 
getting out of hand. In the circumstances the 
Government intervened and promulgated the 
Ordinance and later on substituted it by the 
impugned enactment. It cannot be said that it is 
violative of Article 14 on that account….. 
…………… 
171. We are afraid the argument has no substance. 
Obviously, there were serious irregularities in the 
management of the said Society as has been pointed 

41 
out in the earlier part of the judgment. There has 
been misutilisation of funds and their diversion to 
other purposes. This is evident from the audit 
report. There was no material change in the 
situation on the date of the impugned Ordinance or 
the Act, rather the situation had grown from bad to 
worse and the sordid situation prevailing in the 
Auroville so pointed out by the parties fully justified 
the promulgation of the Ordinance and the passing 
of the enactment. Of course, each party tried to 
apportion the blame on the other. Whosoever be 
responsible, the fact remains that the prevailing 
situation in the Auroville was far from satisfactory. 
The amount donated for the construction of the 
cultural township Auroville and other institutions 
was to the tune of Rs 3 crores. It was the 
responsibility of the Government to see that the 
amount was not misutilised and the management 
was properly carried out. So, the basis of the 
argument that the facts as pointed out in the 
Preamble were non est is not correct.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
44. No doubt that the Court held that even a single 
institution may be taken as a class, in the facts of the said 
case, the Court found that from the Preamble of the 
impugned enactment itself, it was clear that there were 
serious irregularities in the management of the society. The 
Court found that there had arisen acute law and order 
situation in the Auroville, numerous cases were pending 
against various foreigners, the funds meant for the Auroville 
had been diverted towards other purposes and the 

42 
atmosphere was getting out of hand. It was found that in 
such circumstances, the intervention of the Government by 
promulgating the Ordinance and later on substituted it by 
the impugned enactment could not be held to be violative of 
Article 14 of the Constitution. 
45. In the case of Dharam Dutt and Others v. Union of 
India and Others16, the Court was considering the validity 
of Indian Council of World Affairs Act, 2001. In the said case, 
again a similar argument was advanced before the Division 
Bench of this Court. Rejecting the said argument, the Court 
observed thus: 
“56. Article 14 of the Constitution prohibits class 
legislation and not reasonable classification for the 
purpose of legislation. The requirements of the 
validity of legislation by reference to Article 14 of the 
Constitution are : that the subject-matter of 
legislation should be a well-defined class founded 
on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes 
that subject-matter from the others left out, and 
such differentia must have a rational relation with 
the object sought to be achieved by the legislation. 
The laying down of intelligible differentia does not, 
however, mean that the legislative classification 
should be scientifically perfect or logically complete. 
57. We have already pointed out in an earlier 
part of this judgment that in the present case 
successive 
Parliamentary 
Committees 
found 
substance in the complaints received that an 
institution of national importance was suffering 
 
16 (2004) 1 SCC 712 : 2003 INSC 667 

43 
from mismanagement and maladministration. 
The Central Government acted on such findings. 
Circumstances warranting an emergent action 
satisfied the President of India, resulting in his 
promulgating ordinances which earlier could not 
culminate in legislative enactments on account 
of 
fortuitous 
circumstances. 
At 
the 
end 
Parliament exercised its legislative power under 
Article 245 of the Constitution read with Entries 62 
and 63 of List I. The legislation cannot be said to be 
arbitrary or unreasonable. 
58. It was further submitted that the provisions of 
the Societies Registration Act, 1860 were effective 
enough which, if invoked, could have taken care of 
the alleged grievances. If there was any truth or 
substance therein the same could have been found 
on enquiries being held. In our opinion, in a given 
set of facts and circumstances, merely because an 
alternative action under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 could have served the purpose, a case 
cannot be and is not made out for finding fault with 
another legislation if the same be within the 
legislative competence of Parliament, which it is, as 
will be seen hereinafter. 
59. A similar submission was made and repelled 
in S.P. Mittal case [(1983) 1 SCC 51] . The 
contention there was that provisions in the Societies 
Registration Act were available to meet the situation 
in Auroville and that the law and order situation 
could be controlled by resorting to provisions of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure. The Constitution 
Bench held : (SCC p. 116, para 169) 
“169. Whether the remedies provided under the 
Societies Registration Act were sufficient to meet the 
exigencies of the situation is not for the Court to 
decide but it is for the Government and if the 
Government thought that the conditions prevailing 
in the Auroville and the Society can be ameliorated 
not by resorting to the provisions of the Societies 
Registration Act but by a special enactment, that is 

44 
an area of the exercise of the discretion of the 
Government and not of the Court.” 
The 
Constitution 
Bench 
also 
observed 
that 
assuming the facts brought to the notice of the 
legislature were wrong, it will not be open to the 
Court to hold the Act to be bad on that account. 
60. It was then submitted that the institution ICWA 
was singled out and though there were several other 
institutions run by societies or other organizations 
which 
were 
in 
the 
grip 
of 
more 
serious 
mismanagement and maladministration, they were 
not even touched and Parliament chose to legislate 
as to one institution only. This submission too 
holds no merit. Firstly, no other institution is 
named or particularized so as to be comparable with 
ICWA. Secondly, there can be a legislation in 
respect of a single institution as is clear from the 
language itself of Entries 62 and 63 of List I. A 
single institution is capable of being treated as a 
class by itself for the purpose of legislation if 
there are special circumstances or reasons 
which are applicable to that institution and such 
legislation would not incur the wrath of Article 
14. In S.P. Mittal [(1983) 1 SCC 51] the impugned 
legislation brought with the object and purpose of 
taking away the management of Auroville from the 
Aurobindo Society and to bring it under the 
management of the Central Government under the 
provisions of the impugned Act was held to be valid. 
The exercise of legislative power by Parliament was 
sought to be justified as falling within the field of 
Entry 63 of List I. Their Lordships referred to 
several decisions wherein the constitutional validity 
of similar legislations was upheld. In Ram Krishna 
Dalmia v. Justice S.R. Tendolkar [AIR 1958 SC 538 : 
1959 SCR 279] legislation relating to a single 
“individual”, in Raja Bira Kishore Deb v. State of 
Orissa [AIR 1964 SC 1501 : (1964) 7 SCR 32] 
legislation in respect of a single “temple” and 
in Charanjit Lal Chowdhury v. Union of India [1950 
SCC 833 : AIR 1951 SC 41 : 1950 SCR 869] a 

45 
separate law enacted for one company were held not 
to offend Article 14 of the Constitution on the 
ground that there were special reasons for passing 
such legislation.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
  
46. It can thus clearly be seen that in the said case also, 
the Court took note of the successive Parliamentary 
Committees finding substance in the complaints received 
that an institution of national importance was suffering from 
mismanagement and maladministration. It was found that 
the Central Government acted on such findings. It was also 
found that the circumstances warranted an emergent action. 
Relying on the case of S.P. Mittal (supra), the Court found 
that a single institution was capable of being treated as a 
class by itself for the purpose of legislation if there were 
special circumstances or reasons which were applicable to 
that institution and in such circumstances, the legislation 
would not incur the wrath of Article 14 of the Constitution. 
47. In the case of P. Venugopal v. Union of India17, this 
Court was considering the proviso to Section 11 (1-A) of the 
All-India Institute of Medical Sciences Act, 1956 vide which 
the tenure of the petitioner therein was sought to be 
 
17 (2008) 5 SCC 1 : 2008 INSC 607 

46 
curtailed. Relying on the other judgments of this Court, the 
Court 
held 
the 
said 
proviso 
to 
Section 
11 
(1-A) 
unconstitutional and ultra vires. It was found that the facts 
of the said case were similar to that of D.S. Reddy (supra). 
48. It is thus a settled position of law that though a 
legislation affecting a single entity or a single undertaking or 
a single person would be permissible in law, it must be on 
the basis of reasonable classification having nexus with the 
object to be achieved. There should be a reasonable 
differentia on the basis of which a person, entity or 
undertaking is sought to be singled out from the rest of the 
group. Further, if a legislation affecting a single person, 
entity or undertaking is being enacted, there should be 
special circumstances requiring such an enactment. Such 
special circumstances should be gathered from the material 
taken into consideration by the competent legislature and 
shall include the Parliamentary/Legislative Debates.  
49. In the case of Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri (supra), this 
Court found that the Sholapur Mill was an undertaking of 
national importance employing 13,000 people, it was found 
that till the Managing Agents took over, it was running in 

47 
profits and only thereafter, it started running in losses. It 
was further found that the Managing Agents were indulging 
in serious mismanagement and irregularities. The Court 
found that before the enactment was passed, the matter was 
placed before the Standing Committee of the Industrial 
Advisory 
Council 
where 
a 
large 
number 
of 
leading 
industrialists of the country were present. It was further 
found that before such an enactment was passed, it was 
persuaded by wide-scale consultations with the stakeholders. 
The Court also took note of the 4 factors taken into 
consideration by the Government for singling out the 
petitioner 
therein 
from 
the 
other 
industries 
facing 
mismanagement. They were: (i) that the undertaking was of 
national importance; (ii) the undertaking was an economic 
unit; (iii) the technical report showed that the condition of 
the plants, machinery etc., which either as they stand, or 
after necessary repairs and reconditioning can be properly 
utilized; and (iv) there was a proper enquiry held before the 
Government took any action. It was further found that the 
enquiry had shown that the Managing Agents had so 

48 
mismanaged that they were no longer fit and proper persons 
to remain in charge of such an important undertaking. 
50. Insofar as the case of S.P. Mittal (supra) is concerned, 
this 
Court 
found 
that 
not 
only 
there 
was 
serious 
mismanagement in the society but the situation had become 
precarious and had also led to law and order situation 
wherein the Government found it necessary to take emergent 
and extreme steps.  
51. Similarly, in the case of Dharam Dutt (supra), this 
Court found that the Indian Council of World Affairs was an 
institute of national importance and the Parliamentary 
Committee Report found that there was mismanagement and 
as such, it was necessary to take an emergent action. 
52. Per contra, in the case of D.S. Reddy (supra), the Court 
held that a legislation pertaining to a single individual which 
was not based on a reasonable basis for grouping one person 
as a class by itself and that such a classification was not 
founded on an intelligible differentia and as such was 
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. Similarly, in the 
case of P. Venugopal (supra), the Court struck down a 

49 
legislation which was made singly applicable to the appellant 
therein being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.  
53. It can thus be seen that wherever this Court has upheld 
the legislation affecting the single entity, institution or 
undertaking, it found that it was done in emergent and 
extreme circumstances preceded by enquiries, parliamentary 
debates, etc. It was done when the legislature took into 
consideration the relevant material and found it expedient to 
do so. 
54. It is also settled by this Court that there will be a 
presumption with regard to the validity of the enactment and 
the burden would be on the person who challenges the same. 
In the case of Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri (supra), the majority 
found that quite apart from not discharging the burden of 
hostile discrimination, the petitioners therein had not even 
averred with regard to such a discrimination by a statement 
on affidavit. No doubt that Shastri and Das, JJ. disagreed 
and held that in such cases asking the petitioner to 
discharge the burden would be asking him to do an 
impossibility. 

50 
55. In the light of the aforesaid legal position, we have to 
examine the present case.  
56. Undisputedly, the Impugned Act is a single entity 
legislation repealing the 2016 Act by which the Khalsa 
University was established. The only reasoning as could be 
found in the SOR of the Impugned Act is that the Khalsa 
College, Amritsar has, over a period of time, become a 
significant icon of Khalsa Heritage and the appellant was 
likely to shadow and damage its character and pristine glory.  
57. In the writ petition filed before the High Court, the 
appellants have specifically placed on record their challenge 
on the ground of discrimination which reads thus: 
“There are 16 apart from the petitioner private 
Universities are operating in the State of Punjab. 
These are detailed as under: - 
(i) Shri Guru Granth Sahib World University, 
Fatehgarh Sahib. 
(ii) Chandigarh University, Chandigarh. 
(iii) Desh Bhagat University, Mandi Gobindgarh. 
(iv) RIMT University, Mandi Gobindgarh. 
(v) Rayat Bahara University, Mohali. 
(vi) Adesh Medical University, Bathinda. 
(vii) Akal University Bathinda. 
(viii) Guru Kanshi University, Bathinda. 
(ix) Thapar University, Patiala 
(x) CT University, Ludhiana . 

51 
(I) Chitkara University, Rajpura 
(xii) Khalsa University, Amritsar 
(xiii) 
Shri 
Guru 
Ramdas 
Medical 
University, 
Amritsar. 
(xiv) LPU, Jalandhar. 
(xv) D.A.V. Jalandhar. 
(xvi) GNA University, Phagwara. 
(xvii) Baba Bhag Singh University, Padhiana Sahib, 
Phagwara. 
All the private Universities apart from the Thapar 
University, Lovely Professional University have been 
established in the past 10 years. It is only the 
petitioner University which is being singled out by 
the State Government. There is absolutely no 
reason or justification whereby the petitioner 
University can be ordered to be shut down in such a 
discriminatory manner. 
Still further it is respectfully submitted that in the 
Malwa region of Punjab with population share of 52 
per cent there are 22 Universities. In the Doaba 
region with 19 per cent population there are 7 
Universities; but in the Majha region with 29 per 
cent population there are only 3 Universities one 
being the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, the 
second being Sri Guru Ramdas University wherein 
only B.D.S., M.B.B.S., M.D., M.D.S. and Nursing 
courses are imparted and the third being the 
petitioner Khalsa University which by virtue of the 
impugned Act today stands shut down. The action 
is thus violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of 
India as well.” 
 
58. It can thus clearly be seen that the Khalsa University 
has specifically averred that it has been singled out by the 
State Government amongst 16 Universities. It has also been 
averred that there is absolutely no reason or justification 

52 
whereby the Khalsa University could be ordered to be shut 
down in such a discriminatory manner. The Khalsa 
University has also made specific averments with regard to 
discrimination inasmuch as there are more number of 
Universities in Malwa region and Doaba region as against the 
Majha region.  
59. Though a detailed reply has been filed on behalf of 
respondent No.1 before the High Court, the reply does not 
deal with the submissions made by the appellants on the 
ground of discrimination. In any case, no material is placed 
on record as to what was the compelling and emergent 
situation so as to enact a law which could affect the Khalsa 
University (appellant No.1). No material is placed on record to 
show that there were any discussions prior to the Impugned 
Act being passed or as to what material was placed and 
taken into consideration by the competent legislature. Even 
going by the law laid down by the majority in the case of 
Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri (supra), since the Khalsa 
University had specifically pleaded a ground regarding 
discrimination, it was incumbent upon the respondents to 
have dealt with the said challenge. We therefore find that the 

53 
Impugned Act singled out the Khalsa University (appellant 
No.1) amongst 16 private Universities in the State and no 
reasonable 
classification 
has 
been 
pointed 
out 
to 
discriminate the Khalsa University (appellant No.1) against 
the other private Universities. The Impugned Act therefore 
would be discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the 
Constitution. 
B. 
Whether the Impugned Act is liable to be struck 
down on the ground of manifest arbitrariness? 
 
60. The next ground on which the Impugned Act is 
challenged is that the Impugned Act suffers from manifest 
arbitrariness. Reliance in this respect is placed on the 
Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in the case of 
Shayara Bano (supra).  In the said case, R.F. Nariman, J., 
speaking for himself and Uday U. Lalit, J., after referring to 
various earlier judgments, in para 70 onwards, observed 
thus: 
“95. On a reading of this judgment in Natural 
Resources Allocation case [Natural Resources 
Allocation, In re, Special Reference No. 1 of 
2012, (2012) 10 SCC 1] , it is clear that this 
Court 
did 
not 
read McDowell [State 
of 
A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] as 
being an authority for the proposition that 
legislation can never be struck down as being 
arbitrary. Indeed the Court, after referring to all 

54 
the earlier judgments, and Ajay Hasia [Ajay 
Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, (1981) 1 SCC 
722 : 1981 SCC (L&S) 258] in particular, which 
stated that legislation can be struck down on the 
ground that it is “arbitrary” under Article 14, 
went on to conclude that “arbitrariness” when 
applied to legislation cannot be used loosely. 
Instead, it broad based the test, stating that if a 
constitutional infirmity is found, Article 14 will 
interdict such infirmity. And a constitutional 
infirmity is found in Article 14 itself whenever 
legislation is “manifestly arbitrary” i.e. when it is not 
fair, 
not 
reasonable, 
discriminatory, 
not 
transparent, capricious, biased, with favouritism or 
nepotism and not in pursuit of promotion of healthy 
competition and equitable treatment. Positively 
speaking, it should conform to norms which are 
rational, informed with reason and guided by public 
interest, etc. 
96. Another 
Constitution 
Bench 
decision 
in Subramanian 
Swamy v. CBI [Subramanian 
Swamy v. CBI, (2014) 8 SCC 682 : (2014) 6 SCC 
(Cri) 42 : (2014) 3 SCC (L&S) 36] dealt with a 
challenge to Section 6-A of the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment 
Act, 
1946. 
This 
section 
was 
ultimately struck down as being discriminatory and 
hence violative of Article 14. A specific reference had 
been made to the Constitution Bench by the 
reference 
order 
in Subramanian 
Swamy v. CBI [Subramanian Swamy v. CBI, (2005) 
2 SCC 317 : 2005 SCC (L&S) 241] and after 
referring 
to 
several 
judgments 
including Ajay 
Hasia [Ajay 
Hasia v. Khalid 
Mujib 
Sehravardi, 
(1981) 1 SCC 722 : 1981 SCC (L&S) 258] , Mardia 
Chemicals [Mardia Chemicals Ltd. v. Union of India, 
(2004) 
4 
SCC 
311] 
, Malpe 
Vishwanath 
Acharya [Malpe 
Vishwanath 
Acharya v. State 
of 
Maharashtra, (1998) 2 SCC 1] and McDowell [State 
of A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] , the 
reference, inter alia, was as to whether arbitrariness 
and unreasonableness, being facets of Article 14, 

55 
are or are not available as grounds to invalidate a 
legislation. 
97. After referring to the submissions of the 
counsel, 
and 
several 
judgments 
on 
the 
discrimination aspect of Article 14, this Court held: 
(Subramanian 
Swamy 
case [Subramanian 
Swamy v. CBI, (2014) 8 SCC 682 : (2014) 6 SCC 
(Cri) 42 : (2014) 3 SCC (L&S) 36] , SCC pp. 721-22, 
paras 48-49) 
“48. 
In E.P. 
Royappa [E.P. 
Royappa v. State of T.N., (1974) 4 SCC 3 : 
1974 SCC (L&S) 165] , it has been held 
by this Court that the basic principle 
which informs both Articles 14 and 16 
are 
equality 
and 
inhibition 
against 
discrimination. This Court observed in 
para 85 as under: (SCC p. 38) 
‘85. … From a positivistic point of 
view, equality is antithetic to 
arbitrariness. In fact equality and 
arbitrariness are sworn enemies; 
one belongs to the rule of law in a 
republic while the other, to the 
whim and caprice of an absolute 
monarch. 
Where 
an 
act 
is 
arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it 
is unequal both according to 
political logic and constitutional 
law and is therefore violative of 
Article 14, and if it affects any 
matter 
relating 
to 
public 
employment, it is also violative of 
Article 16. Articles 14 and 16 
strike at arbitrariness in State 
action and ensure fairness and 
equality of treatment.’ 
Court's approach 
49. Where there is challenge to the 
constitutional validity of a law enacted by 
the legislature, the Court must keep in 

56 
view that there is always a presumption 
of constitutionality of an enactment, and 
a clear transgression of constitutional 
principles 
must 
be 
shown. 
The 
fundamental nature and importance of 
the legislative process needs to be 
recognised by the Court and due regard 
and deference must be accorded to the 
legislative process. Where the legislation 
is sought to be challenged as being 
unconstitutional and violative of Article 
14 of the Constitution, the Court must 
remind itself to the principles relating to 
the applicability of Article 14 in relation 
to invalidation of legislation. The two 
dimensions of Article 14 in its application 
to legislation and rendering legislation 
invalid are now well recognised and these 
are: (i) discrimination, based on an 
impermissible or invalid classification, 
and (ii) excessive delegation of powers; 
conferment of uncanalised and unguided 
powers on the executive, whether in the 
form of delegated legislation or by way of 
conferment 
of 
authority 
to 
pass 
administrative 
orders—if 
such 
conferment is without any guidance, 
control or checks, it is violative of Article 
14 of the Constitution. The Court also 
needs to be mindful that a legislation 
does not become unconstitutional merely 
because there is another view or because 
another method may be considered to be 
as good or even more effective, like any 
issue of social, or even economic policy. It 
is well settled that the courts do not 
substitute their views on what the policy 
is.” 
98. Since the Court ultimately struck down Section 
6-A on the ground that it was discriminatory, it 
became unnecessary to pronounce on one of the 
questions referred to it, namely, as to whether 

57 
arbitrariness could be a ground for invalidating 
legislation under Article 14. Indeed the Court said 
as much in para 98 of the judgment as under: 
(Subramanian 
Swamy 
case [Subramanian 
Swamy v. CBI, (2014) 8 SCC 682 : (2014) 6 SCC 
(Cri) 42 : (2014) 3 SCC (L&S) 36] , SCC p. 740) 
“98. Having considered the impugned 
provision contained in Section 6-A and 
for the reasons indicated above, we do 
not think that it is necessary to consider 
the other objections challenging the 
impugned provision in the context of 
Article 14.” 
99. However, in State of Bihar v. Bihar Distillery 
Ltd. [State of Bihar v. Bihar Distillery Ltd., (1997) 2 
SCC 
453] 
, 
SCC 
at 
para 
22, 
in State 
of 
M.P. v. Rakesh Kohli [State of M.P. v. Rakesh Kohli, 
(2012) 6 SCC 312 : (2012) 3 SCC (Civ) 481] , SCC at 
paras 
17 
to 
19, 
in Rajbala v. State 
of 
Haryana [Rajbala v. State of Haryana, (2016) 2 SCC 
445] , SCC at paras 53 to 65 and in Binoy 
Viswam v. Union of India [Binoy Viswam v. Union of 
India, (2017) 7 SCC 59] , SCC at paras 80 to 
82, McDowell [State of A.P. v. McDowell and Co., 
(1996) 3 SCC 709] was read as being an absolute 
bar to the use of “arbitrariness” as a tool to strike 
down legislation under Article 14. As has been 
noted 
by 
us 
earlier 
in 
this 
judgment, McDowell [State of A.P. v. McDowell and 
Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] itself is per incuriam, not 
having noticed several judgments of Benches of 
equal or higher strength, its reasoning even 
otherwise 
being 
flawed. 
The 
judgments, 
following McDowell [State of A.P. v. McDowell and 
Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] are, therefore, no longer 
good law. 
100. To complete the picture, it is important to note 
that subordinate legislation can be struck down on 
the ground that it is arbitrary and, therefore, 
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. In Cellular 
Operators Assn. of India v. TRAI [Cellular Operators 

58 
Assn. of India v. TRAI, (2016) 7 SCC 703] , this 
Court referred to earlier precedents, and held: (SCC 
pp. 736-37, paras 42-44) 
“Violation of fundamental rights 
42. We have already seen that one of the 
tests for challenging the constitutionality 
of 
subordinate 
legislation 
is 
that 
subordinate legislation should not be 
manifestly arbitrary. Also, it is settled law 
that 
subordinate 
legislation 
can 
be 
challenged 
on 
any 
of 
the 
grounds 
available for challenge against plenary 
legislation. 
[See Indian 
Express 
Newspapers (Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. Union of 
India [Indian 
Express 
Newspapers 
(Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (1985) 
1 SCC 641 : 1985 SCC (Tax) 121] , SCC 
at p. 689, para 75.] 
43. The test of “manifest arbitrariness” is 
well explained in two judgments of this 
Court. In Khoday Distilleries Ltd. v. State 
of 
Karnataka [Khoday 
Distilleries 
Ltd. v. State of Karnataka, (1996) 10 SCC 
304] , this Court held: (SCC p. 314, para 
13) 
‘13. It is next submitted before us 
that the amended Rules are 
arbitrary, 
unreasonable 
and 
cause 
undue 
hardship 
and, 
therefore, violate Article 14 of the 
Constitution. 
Although 
the 
protection of Article 19(1)(g) may 
not be available to the appellants, 
the Rules must, undoubtedly, 
satisfy the test of Article 14, 
which is a guarantee against 
arbitrary action. However, one 
must bear in mind that what is 
being 
challenged 
here 
under 
Article 14 is not executive action 

59 
but 
delegated 
legislation. The 
tests of arbitrary action which 
apply to executive actions do not 
necessarily apply to delegated 
legislation. In order that delegated 
legislation can be struck down, 
such 
legislation 
must 
be 
manifestly arbitrary; a law which 
could not be reasonably expected 
to emanate from an authority 
delegated with the law-making 
power. 
In Indian 
Express 
Newspapers 
(Bombay) 
(P) 
Ltd. v. Union 
of 
India [Indian 
Express Newspapers (Bombay) (P) 
Ltd. v. Union of India, (1985) 1 
SCC 641 : 1985 SCC (Tax) 121] , 
this Court said that a piece of 
subordinate legislation does not 
carry 
the 
same 
degree 
of 
immunity which is enjoyed by a 
statute passed by a competent 
legislature. A 
subordinate 
legislation 
may 
be 
questioned 
under Article 14 on the ground 
that 
it 
is 
unreasonable; 
“unreasonable not in the sense of 
not being reasonable, but in the 
sense 
that 
it 
is 
manifestly 
arbitrary”. Drawing a comparison 
between the law in England and 
in 
India, 
the 
Court 
further 
observed that in England the 
Judges would say, “Parliament 
never intended the authority to 
make 
such 
rules; 
they 
are 
unreasonable and ultra vires”. In 
India, 
arbitrariness 
is 
not 
a 
separate ground since it will come 
within the embargo of Article 14 of 
the Constitution. But subordinate 
legislation must be so arbitrary 

60 
that it could not be said to be in 
conformity with the statute or that 
it 
offends 
Article 
14 
of 
the 
Constitution.’ 
44. Also, in Sharma Transport v. State of 
A.P. [Sharma Transport v. State of A.P., 
(2002) 2 SCC 188] , this Court held: (SCC 
pp. 203-04, para 25) 
‘25. … The tests of arbitrary 
action applicable to executive 
action do not necessarily apply to 
delegated legislation. In order to 
strike 
down 
a 
delegated 
legislation as arbitrary it has to 
be 
established 
that 
there 
is 
manifest arbitrariness. In order to 
be described as arbitrary, it must 
be 
shown 
that 
it 
was 
not 
reasonable 
and 
manifestly 
arbitrary. 
The 
expression 
“arbitrarily” 
means: 
in 
an 
unreasonable manner, as fixed or 
done capriciously or at pleasure, 
without 
adequate 
determining 
principle, not founded in the 
nature of things, non-rational, 
not done or acting according to 
reason or judgment, depending 
on the will alone.’ ” 
(emphasis in original) 
101. It will be noticed that a Constitution Bench of 
this Court in Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) 
(P) Ltd. v. Union of India [Indian Express Newspapers 
(Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (1985) 1 SCC 641 
: 1985 SCC (Tax) 121] stated that it was settled law 
that subordinate legislation can be challenged on 
any of the grounds available for challenge against 
plenary legislation. This being the case, there is no 
rational distinction between the two types of 
legislation when it comes to this ground of challenge 
under Article 14. The test of manifest arbitrariness, 

61 
therefore, as laid down in the aforesaid judgments 
would apply to invalidate legislation as well as 
subordinate legislation under Article 14. Manifest 
arbitrariness, therefore, must be something done by 
the legislature capriciously, irrationally and/or 
without adequate determining principle. Also, when 
something 
is 
done 
which 
is 
excessive 
and 
disproportionate, 
such 
legislation 
would 
be 
manifestly arbitrary. We are, therefore, of the view 
that 
arbitrariness 
in 
the 
sense 
of 
manifest 
arbitrariness as pointed out by us above would 
apply to negate legislation as well under Article 14.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
61. It is to be noted that Nariman, J. wrote the judgment for 
himself and Lalit, J., and concurred with the judgment 
delivered by Kurian Joseph, J. As such, the views expressed 
by Nariman, J. would be part of the majority view. 
62. It can thus be seen that in the said case, it was held 
that the test of manifest arbitrariness as laid down by this 
Court in various judgments would also apply to invalidate 
legislation as well as subordinate legislation under Article 14. 
It was held that manifest arbitrariness must be something 
done by the legislature capriciously, irrationally and/or 
without adequate determining principle. It further goes on to 
hold that when something is done which is excessive and 
disproportionate, such a legislation would be manifestly 

62 
arbitrary. It, in unequivocal terms, held that arbitrariness in 
the sense of manifest arbitrariness would apply to negate 
legislation under Article 14 of the Constitution. In para 95, it 
was 
observed 
that 
the 
case 
of 
Natural 
Resources 
Allocation, In re, Special Reference No. 1 of 201218, did 
not lay down a proposition that legislation can never be 
struck down as being arbitrary. This Court, after referring to 
all the earlier judgments including Ajay Hasia and Others 
v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and Others19, stated that 
legislation can be struck down on the ground that it is 
arbitrary under Article 14 of the Constitution. However, 
arbitrariness when applied to legislation cannot be used 
loosely. 
63. In touchstone of the aforesaid parameters, let us 
examine the Impugned Act. 
64. The only reasoning given in the SOR of the Impugned 
Act is that the Khalsa College has, over a period of time, 
become a significant icon of Khalsa heritage and the 
University established in 2016 is likely to shadow and 
damage its character and pristine glory. It is to be noted that 
 
18 (2012) 10 SCC 1 
19 (1981) 1 SCC 722 : 1980 INSC 218 

63 
the Khalsa College which was established in 1892 is not a 
part of the Khalsa University. The only colleges which were 
affiliated with the Khalsa University are the Khalsa College of 
Education, Amritsar established in 1954, Khalsa College for 
Women, Amritsar established in 1968 and Khalsa College of 
Pharmacy, Amritsar established in 2009. Apart from that, 
the appellants have given a specific undertaking stating thus: 
“It is accordingly respectfully submitted that the 
majestic façade and visual appeal of the building of 
the Khalsa College has not been touched or 
adversely affected by the establishment of the 
Khalsa University in any way what so ever. The 
Khalsa 
University 
has 
been 
established 
by 
converting the pre-existing 3 colleges viz College of 
Pharmacy, College for Women and College of 
Education 
into 
departments 
in 
the 
Khalsa 
University.” 
 
 
65. Though it is the stand of the appellants that they were 
in the process of establishing new institutions for getting 
them affiliated with the Khalsa University, a specific 
undertaking was given that the Khalsa College would not be 
touched or adversely affected by the establishment of the 
Khalsa University. Even during the course of hearing, a 
specific statement has been made by the appellants that the 
Khalsa College would not be affiliated with the Khalsa 

64 
University. The maps have been placed on record which show 
the placement of Khalsa College in the campus along with 
the other institutions. The perusal of the said map would 
clearly reveal that it is only the Khalsa College established in 
1892 which is a heritage one. All other buildings have been 
subsequently constructed having no resemblance with the 
Khalsa College building. It can thus be seen that the very 
foundation that Khalsa University would shadow and 
damage the character and pristine glory of Khalsa College 
which has, over a period of time, become a significant icon of 
Khalsa heritage is on a non-existent basis. It could thus be 
seen that the Impugned Act, which was enacted with a 
purpose which was non-existent, would fall under the ambit 
of manifest arbitrariness and would therefore be violative of 
Article 14 of the Constitution. We are therefore of the 
considered view that the Impugned Act is also liable to be set 
aside on the same ground. 
66. In the result, we pass the following order: 
(i) 
The appeal is allowed; 
(ii) 
The impugned judgment and order dated 1st 
November 2017 passed by the High Court of Punjab 

65 
and Haryana at Chandigarh in C.W.P. No. 17150 of 
2017 (O&M) is quashed and set aside;  
(iii) Writ Petition being C.W.P. No. 17150 of 2017 (O&M) 
is allowed and the Khalsa University (Repeal) Act, 
2017 is struck down as being unconstitutional. The 
consequent direction is also issued to the effect that 
the Khalsa University Act, 2016 would be deemed to 
be in force and status quo as it obtained on 29th May 
2017 would stand restored; and  
(iv) 
In the facts and circumstances of the case, no order 
as to costs. 
67. We place on record our appreciation for the valuable 
assistance provided by Shri P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior 
Counsel and Shri Shadan Farasat, Additional Advocate 
General for the State of Punjab.  
68. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
  
..............................J.                
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
..............................J.   
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)   
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
OCTOBER 03, 2024