2024 INSC 757
1 
 
  
REPORTABLE 
 
  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  11005 OF 2024 
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 17383/2024)   
 
BANSHIDHAR CONSTRUCTION PVT. LTD.   
          APPELLANT(S) 
 
 VERSUS 
 
BHARAT COKING COAL LIMITED & OTHERS             RESPONDENT(S)
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
J U D G M E N T 
 
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
 
1. Leave granted. 
2. The short question that falls for consideration before this Court is 
whether the Respondent Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL) was 
justified in rejecting the Technical bid of the Appellant, while accepting 
the Technical bid of the Respondent no. 8 - Company, and declaring it 
to be successful bidder, though the Respondent no. 8 had not complied 
with the mandatory requirement of submitting the important documents 
relating to the qualification criteria as contained in Clause 10 of the 
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) dated 16.08.2023, and thereby had failed 
to qualify the Eligibility criteria laid down therein? 
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2024.10.04
11:25:24 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
3. The Appellant-Banshidhar Construction Private Limited has assailed the 
Judgment and Order dated 18.07.2024 passed by the High Court of 
Jharkhand at Ranchi in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 2896 of 2024, whereby 
the High Court has dismissed the said writ petition, confirming the 
impugned decision dated 06.05.2024 of the Technical Bid Committee of 
the Respondent-BCCL rejecting the Technical bid of the Appellant. 
4. The Respondent no.1- BCCL is a subsidiary of Coal India Limited and 
the Respondent Nos. 2-7 are the authorities/employees of the BCCL. 
On 16.08.2023 the Respondent no. 1 floated a Tender bearing 
reference 
No. 
NIT 
no. 
BCCL/CMC/MDO-RS/SIMLABAHAL/ 
BASTACOLLA Area/2023/318 for the project to “Re-open, salvage, 
rehabilitate, develop, construct and operate for excavation I extraction 
of coal from Amalgamated East Bhuggatdih Simlabahal Coal Mine and 
delivery thereof to the Authority at Bastacolla Area of BCCL” on revenue 
sharing basis, for a period of twenty-five years. The Appellant-company 
vide Board Resolution dated 07.11.2023 resolved to authorise its 
Director Lalti Devi for the purpose of participating in the said Tender and 
also executed a Power of Attorney in the prescribed format in her favour. 
The said Power of Attorney was notarized on 14.11.2023. Accordingly, 

3 
 
the Appellant participated in the said Tender by submitting its bid on 
29.11.2023. 
5. The Technical bids of the said Tender were opened on 04.12.2023 and 
after the evaluation of the same, the Appellant was declared to be 
technically disqualified on 06.05.2024. As per the Tender Summary 
Reports dated 07.05.2024, the Technical bid of the Appellant was stated 
to have been rejected on the ground that it did not comply with the 
Clause 10 of NIT (Part I/Cover I other important documents (OID) Point 
No. 02 Appendix II (Power of Attorney for signing of bid.) 
6. The Financial bids of the two technically qualified bidders were opened 
on 07.05.2024 and the Respondent no. 8-Company was declared to be 
the successful bidder. The Appellant being aggrieved by the said 
decision of the respondent-BCCL, had filed the Writ Petition before the 
High Court, which has been dismissed by the High Court vide the 
impugned order.  
7. On 23.08.2024 the Court had issued Notices to the Respondents and 
the learned counsel appearing for Respondents on caveat, had orally 
assured the Court that they shall not proceed further with the project in 
question. In order to have clarity on the decision taken by the Tender 
Recommendation Committee of the BCCL on 06.05.2024, we had 

4 
 
called for the original file in respect of the entire tender proceedings from 
the Respondents nos.1 to 7 vide the order dated 17.09.2024 and the 
same was produced for our perusal.  
 
SUBMISSION BY THE LEARNED ADVOCATES: - 
8. Learned Senior Advocate Mr. Ravi Shankar Prasad appearing for the 
Appellant vehemently submitted that the reason for rejecting the 
Appellant’s Technical bid was grossly arbitrary and discriminatory in as 
much as not only the bid of Respondent No. 8 was accepted though it 
was not accompanied by important documents, but it was allowed to 
subsequently file the said documents to make up the lack of eligibility.  
He further submitted that the Appellant had complied with all the 
conditions of the NIT, however The Technical bid of the Appellant was 
rejected on the extraneous ground by the Technical Bid Committee of 
the Respondent-BCCI that the bid documents were signed on 
13.11.2023, and other documents including Power of Attorney were 
notarized on 14.11.2023. According to him the bid documents were 
uploaded/filed on 29.11.2023 i.e. within the stipulated time, which 
complied with all the mandatory requirements of Clause 10 of the NIT. 
Mr. Prasad has relied upon various decisions of this Court to submit that 
the decision of the Government and its instrumentalities must not only 

5 
 
be tested by the application of Wednesbury principle of reasonableness 
but also must be free from arbitrariness. Invoking the Public Trust 
Doctrine, Mr. Prasad lastly submitted that Appellant’s bid was much 
more competitive and favourable (Rs. 700 crores approx.) to the 
Respondent BCCL, and by allotting the tender to the Respondent no. 8 
which even otherwise was ineligible, a commensurate loss was caused 
to the public through the Respondent BCCL.   
9. However, the learned Solicitor General Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned 
senior counsel Mr. Anupam Lal Das and Mr. Vikramjit Banerjee, ASG 
appearing for Respondent no. 1 to 7 justifying the decision of Tender  
Evaluation Committee rejecting the Technical Bid of the Appellant, 
submitted that the Power of Attorney was dated 07.11.2023, which was 
notarized on 14.11.2023, whereas the mandatory bid documents were 
executed  on 13.11.2023, which was not in consonance  with clause 10 
Part I/Cover 1 (OID) of NIT. According to them, the mandatory bid 
documents were executed on 13.11.2023, when the Executant had no 
authority to execute the said bid documents. A person submitting the 
bid was required to have a valid Power of Attorney in his favour at least 
on the date on which he was signing and executing the bid documents, 
and therefore the Appellant did not meet with the Eligibility criteria 

6 
 
prescribed under the terms of the NIT. They further submitted that 
during the course of evaluation the Respondent BCCL could seek 
shortfall documents from the Bidders, but could not permit them to 
replace the bid documents. So far as Respondent no.8 - Company was 
concerned, the Tender Committee had sought clarification on 
09.04.2024 regarding the Audited Annual Reports, which approach and 
methodology of the Committee was consistent with the other bidders 
also who were similarly situated as the Respondent no. 8.  The learned 
Counsels also submitted that as per the settled legal position the project 
being infrastructure project and of national importance, and the scope 
of judicial review in the matter of award of Contracts being very limited, 
the Court may not interface with the same, even if the Court finds that 
there was total arbitrariness or that the tender was granted in a malafide 
manner. The ld. Counsels have relied upon catena of decisions to 
buttress their submissions, which shall be dealt with hereinafter as may 
be necessary. 
10. The learned senior counsel Mr. Balbir Singh appearing for Respondent 
no. 8 while adopting the submissions made on behalf of Respondent 
nos. 1 to 7 submitted that the Respondent no. 8 was declared as 
successful bidder on 10.06.2024 and thereafter the Respondent no.1-

7 
 
BCCL and M/s. Simlabahal Coal Mines Private Limited (a Special 
Purpose Vehicle constituted by the respondent no. 8-company) have 
also entered into a Coal Mining Agreement dated 27.06.2024. He further 
submitted that there was no pleading of malafide raised in the Appeal 
by the Appellant and as per the settled legal position, the Courts should 
not use magnifying glass while scanning the decision-making process 
of the authorities to make small mistake to appear like a big blunder. 
 
ANALYSIS: - 
11. The undisputed facts as discernible from the pleadings and the 
documents on record and from the submissions made by the learned 
Counsels for the parties are that the Notice Inviting Tender for the 
project in question was issued by the Respondent BCCL on 16.08.2023, 
in response to which, the Appellant and the Respondent No.8 had 
submitted their respective bid documents. The Appellant Company vide 
the Board Resolution dated 07.11.2023 had authorised its Director Lalti 
Devi for the purpose of participating in the tender and a Power Of 
Attorney dated 07.11.2023 was executed in her favour. The said Power 
Of Attorney was notarised before the Notary on 14.11.2023. It is also 
not disputed that the Appellant submitted/uploaded the bid documents 
on 29.11.2023, that is before the last date of submission, 01.12.2023. It 

8 
 
is also not disputed that the Technical bids were opened on 04.12.2023 
and the Appellant was declared technically disqualified on 06.05.2024. 
The extract of Tender Summary Report dated 07.05.2024 stated in the 
Column ‘Remarks’ that the Appellant ‘Did not comply with Clause No. 
10 of NIT (Part I/ Cover I Other Important Documents (OID) Point No. 
02 Appendix II (Power of attorney for signing of bid).” 
12. It is also not disputed that the Respondent No.8 had not submitted the 
scanned copies of the Audited balance sheets required to be submitted  
as per Clause 10 of the NIT in relation to the financial capacity, while 
submitting/ uploading the tender documents and that it was only when 
a clarification was sought from the Respondent No.8 about the shortfall 
of documents, the said Audited balance sheets were submitted on 
17.04.2024, after the Technical bids were opened on 04.12.2023. It is 
further not disputed that the Financial bids of the eligible two technically 
qualified bidders were opened on 07.05.2024 and the Respondent No.8 
Company was found to be the successful bidder.  
13. In the instant case the entire controversy centres around the 
interpretation of the Clause 10 of the NIT dated 16.08.2023, hence the 
same is reproduced for the sake of convenience.  
 

9 
 
“10. For substantiating the Financial Capacity, the Bidders are required 
to furnish the following information online:  
 
(a) Value of Net Worth (to be submitted in Indian Rupees and in the 
format provided at Annex III of Appendix I of RFB); 
 
(b) Value of Total Income in the last 3 (three) financial years as chosen 
by the Bidder (to be submitted in Indian Rupees and in the format 
provided at Annex III of Appendix I of RFB); 
 
(c) Membership number of the chartered accountant£, where applicable; 
and 
 
(d) Scanned copies of the documents as specified in Paragraph 10 of the 
NIT, in relation to the Financial Capacity. 
 
Note: In case the Bidder is a Consortium, the aforesaid certificates and 
information shall be submitted in respect of all the Members and the 
Financial Capacity of the Consortium will be assessed by adding the 
information so furnished. 
 
Bidders shall submit the information in an objective manner confirmed by 
the uploaded documents. The documents related to the information 
furnished online, based on which the auto evaluation takes place, will 
only be considered. If a Bidder uploads any other document, it will not be 
given any cognizance. 
 
A scanned copy of the following documents shall be submitted online by 
the Bidders in support of the information / declaration furnished by the 
Bidder at the time of submission of their Bids: 
 
Sl. No. 
Submission of 
documents 
related 
to 
qualification 
criteria 
Scanned copy of documents (self-
certified and notarized/ certified® ) 
to be uploaded by Bidders in 
support 
of 
information 
/ 
declaration furnished online by 
the 
Bidder 
against 
each 
qualification 
criteria 
(CONFIRMATORY DOCUMENT) 
 
1. 
Bidder’s 
Covering 
Letter 
and acceptance 
of bid conditions 
Copy of the Bidder’s Covering Letter, 
acceptance of the Bid conditions and 
making commitments on the Bidder’s 
letter head as per proforma (provided 
at Appendix I of RFB) 

10 
 
Note: In case the Bidder is a 
Consortium, the above documents 
are to be signed by all the 
Members. 
2. 
Financial 
Capacity 
i) Certificate having UDIN number 
specifying the Net Worth of the 
Bidder as at the close of the latest 
financial year among the 3 (three) 
financial years as chosen by the 
Bidder, from a chartered accountant 
based on the financial statements 
audited 
by 
statutory 
auditor∞ 
exhibiting the information submitted 
by the Bidder and confirming that the 
methodology adopted for calculating 
the Net Worth conforms to the 
provisions of the Bidding Documents;  
 
 ii) Certificate having UDIN number 
specifying the average Total Income 
of the Bidder during the last 3 (three) 
financial years, as chosen by the 
Bidder, from a chartered accountant 
based on the financial statements 
audited 
by 
statutory 
auditor∞ 
exhibiting the information submitted 
by the Bidder online and also 
specifying the methodology adopted 
for calculating the average Total 
Income; 
 
iii) Audited annual reports of the 
Bidder for the last 3 (three) financial 
years, as chosen by the Bidder, 
comprising of the audited balance 
sheets and profit and loss accounts 
of the Bidder. 
 
iv) A duly filled in Annex III (provided 
at Appendix I of RFB).  
 
Notes:  
i. For the purpose of Financial 
Capacity, the Bidder can choose 
any 3 (three) financial years from 
the 
4 
(four) 
immediately 

11 
 
completed consecutive financial 
years as on the date of invitation 
of Bids. However, the 3 (three) 
financial years chosen by the 
Bidder shall be the same for each 
Member (in case of Consortium) 
and 
the 
Associate(s), 
whose 
Financial Capacity is furnished 
and relied upon by the Bidder. 
ii. In case the Bidder is a 
Consortium, the above documents 
are to be submitted in respect of 
all the Members. 
iii. The Bidder shall submit the 
documents 
reflecting 
the 
Net 
Worth of the Associate(s) whose 
Technical 
Capacity 
and/or 
Financial Capacity is furnished 
and relied upon. 
 
3. 
Integrity 
pact 
Duly signed and witnessed integrity 
pact as per proforma provided at 
Appendix VIII of RFB. 
 
Note: In case the Bidder is a 
Consortium, the integrity pact is to 
be signed by all the Members. 
 
 
______________________ 
 
 
∞In jurisdictions that do not have statutory auditors, the firm of auditors 
which audits the annual accounts of the Bidder may provide the 
certificates required under this RFB.  
 
£Any approximate equivalent of a chartered accountant may provide the 
relevant certificates required under this RFB. Jurisdictions which do not 
have a license/ certification/ membership requirement for accountants to 
describe themselves or to practice as chartered accountants (or any 
approximate equivalent), any qualified accountant may provide the 
certificates required under this RFB. 
 
® For a power of attorney executed and issued overseas, the document 
will also have to be legalised by the Indian Embassy and notarised in the 
jurisdiction where the power of attorney is being issued. However, the 

12 
 
power of attorney provided by Bidders/ Members from countries that have 
signed the Hague Convention, 1961 are not required to be legalised by 
the Indian Embassy if it carries a conforming Apostille certificate.  
 
 
4. 
Authorization for 
Digital Signature 
Certificate 
(“DSC”) 
a) If the Bidder itself is the DSC 
holder bidding online, then self-
declaration of the Bidder to this effect; 
or 
b) If the DSC holder is bidding online 
on behalf of the bidder then the power 
of attorneyβ granted by the Bidder, 
evidencing authorization granted to 
the DSC holder to submit the Bid on 
behalf of the Bidder. 
 
5. 
Undertaking 
in 
Support of the 
authenticity 
of 
submitted 
information and 
documents 
and 
other 
commitments 
 
An undertaking is to be given by the 
Bidder as per the format given at 
Enclosure I of this NIT, confirming the 
genuineness 
of 
the 
information 
furnished 
online, 
authenticity 
of 
scanned 
copy 
of 
documents 
uploaded 
and 
such 
other 
declarations. 
 
Note: In case the Bidder is a 
Consortium, the undertaking is to be 
signed by all the Members. (Original 
undertaking shall be submitted as per 
the provisions of NIT) 
 
 
6.Any other document to support the qualification information as 
submitted by the Bidder online. 
 
Note: Only one file in .pdf format can be uploaded against each 
qualification criteria. Any additional/ other relevant documents to 
support the information/declaration furnished by Bidder online 
against qualification criteria may also be added by the Bidder in 
the same file (in .pdf format) to be uploaded against respective 
qualification criteria. 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
Part-1/Cover-1-Other Important Documents ("OID”) 
 
 
Sl. No. 
Criteria 
Scanned copy of documents 
(self-certified and notarized/ 
certified® ) to be uploaded by 
Bidder in support of information/ 
declaration furnished online by 
the Bidder against each criteria 
(CONFIRMATORY DOCUMENT) 
1. 
Legal status of 
the Bidder 
Documents to be submitted as 
applicable: 
1. Affidavit or any other document to 
prove the proprietorship/ individual 
status of the Bidder (applicable only 
where the Bidder is an individual or 
sole proprietor); 
2. Partnership deed/ agreement 
containing name of partners and 
Certificate 
of 
Incorporation 
(applicable only where the Bidder is a 
partnership firm or a limited liability 
partnership); 
3. Memorandum and Articles of 
Association 
with 
certificate 
of 
incorporation containing name of 
Bidder 
or 
any 
similar 
charter/ 
constitutional documents (applicable 
where the Bidder is a company); 
4. 
 
Appropriate 
documents 
as 
applicable for any other Bidder not 
mentioned above. 
5. Annex I (Appendix I of RFB) duly 
filled in and uploaded 
6.  In case of Consortium: 
(i) Details of all Member(s) as at 1/2/3 
(as applicable) above, 
(ii) Joint Bidding Agreement as per 
format provided at Appendix IV of 
RFB:  
(iii) Annex I (Appendix I of RFB) duly 
filled in and uploaded; 
(iv) Annex IV (Appendix I of RFB) 
duly filled in and uploaded 
 

14 
 
7. An undertaking in the format given 
in Enclosure-III with respect to the 
ultimate beneficial ownership of the 
Bidder/Members, in light of the 
General Financial Rules, 2017 read 
with the OM No. F. No. 6/18/2019- 
PPD dated 23rd July 2020 the 
Consolidated FDI Policy (effective 
from 15th October 2020) and the 
Press Note No. 3 (2020 Series) dated 
17th April 2020 issued by the 
Department for Promotion of Industry 
and Internal Trade (FDI Policy 
Section), Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry, Government of India, each 
as amended or supplemented from 
time to time. 
8. GST registration certificate. 
2. 
Power 
of 
attorneyβ  
As per the format annexed as 
Appendix II (as applicable) and 
Appendix III (in case the Bidder is a 
Consortium) 
 
3. 
Mandate 
Form 
for 
Electronic 
Fund Transfer 
Copy of mandate form duly filled in as 
per proforma provided at Enclosure II 
of this NIT 
 
4. 
Any other document to support the qualification 
information as submitted by the Bidder online.  
 
 
 
 
14.  It is pertinent to note that the Request For Bid (RFB) annexed to the 
NIT, contained “Instructions to Bidders” in Section II thereof. The Clause 
2.1.6 of the said Instructions stated that non-compliance with any of the 
bidding instructions may lead to rejection of the Bid. Further, Clause 
2.2.5 thereof specifically stated that the Bidder shall furnish the requisite 
documents listed in Paragraphs 9 and Paragraphs 10 of NIT. 

15 
 
15. From the bare perusal of the afore stated Clause 10, it clearly transpires 
that the Bidders were required to furnish the information and the 
scanned copies of the documents relating to qualification criteria 
particularly to substantiate their Financial capacity. For the purpose of 
substantiating Financial Capacity, the Bidders were obliged to submit 
the scanned copies (self-certified and notarised/certified) of the Audited 
Annual Reports for the last three financial years as chosen by the 
Bidder, comprising of the audited balance sheets and profit and loss 
accounts of the Bidder, along with other documents as stated therein. 
This was the mandatory requirement of the NIT, the same being related 
to the qualification criteria as also transpiring from Clause 2.2.5 of the 
RFB. 
16.  Admittedly, the Respondent No.8 had not submitted the scanned 
copies of its audited Annual Reports for the last three financial years, at 
the time of submitting/uploading the bid documents, before the last date 
fixed i.e 01.12.2023 and the same were submitted on 17.04.2024 only 
when the clarification was sought from the Respondent No.8, after the 
Technical bids were opened on 04.12.2023. 
17. When the Technical bid of the Appellant was rejected by the 
Respondents on 06.05.2024 on the ground that it did not comply with 

16 
 
the Clause 10 of the NIT namely Part I/ Cover I Other Important 
Documents (OID) Point No. 02 Appendix II (Power of attorney for 
signing of bid), there was no justification on the part of the Respondent 
authorities for accepting the Technical bid of the Respondent No.8, 
which clearly was not in compliance with the same mandatory Clause 
10 of NIT. The Respondent BCCL has miserably failed to justify as to 
how the Technical bid of the Respondent no.8 was accepted when it 
had not submitted the requisite important documents related to the 
qualification criteria as mentioned in Clause 10 of the NIT. 
18. A lame submission was made on behalf of the Respondent BCCL that 
the Tender Evaluation Committee could call for the shortfall of 
documents and could not allow replacement of the documents, and that 
the Respondent no.8 was asked to submit the shortfall documents only. 
We are neither impressed nor can accept the said submissions. Further, 
apart from the fact that the Technical bid of the Respondent no.8 
deserved to be rejected at the threshold for non-compliance of Clause 
10 of NIT, there was also no legal and justifiable reason for rejecting the 
Technical bid of the Appellant. Admittedly when the tender documents 
were submitted by the Appellant, the Power Of Attorney authorising the 
concerned signatory to act on behalf of the Appellant was duly 

17 
 
notarised. Merely because the bid documents were signed on 
13.11.2023 by the authorized signatory Ms. Lalti Devi on the basis of 
the Power of Attorney executed in her favour on 07.11.2023, and the 
said Power Of Attorney was notarised on 14.11.2023, it could not be 
said that the said representative of the Appellant Company did not 
possess the requisite authority to submit the documents on the day 
when the bid documents were submitted, nor could it be said that there 
was any non-compliance of the mandatory requirement of the Clause 
10 of the NIT as sought to be projected by the Respondent BCCL. It was 
nowhere stated in the NIT that the Power Of Attorney had to be 
notarised before signing the bid documents. As per Part-1/Cover I of 
Clause 10 of NIT, pertaining to the other important documents, the only 
requirement was to furnish the scanned copies of documents (self 
certified and notarised/certified) to be uploaded by the bidder in support 
of the information/declaration furnished online by the Bidder against 
each criteria, and against the criteria for Power Of Attorney, it was stated 
that it should be as per the format annexed. The Power Of Attorney 
submitted by the Appellant was as per the format and duly notarised on 
14.11.2023, and all the requisite documents along with notarised POA 
were submitted before the last date fixed for submission.  

18 
 
19. It would be apposite to note that as per Section 2 of the Power Of 
Attorney Act, 1882, the donee of a power-of-attorney may, if he thinks 
fit, execute or do any instrument or thing in and with his own name and 
signature, and his own seal, where sealing is required, by the authority 
of the donor of the power; and every instrument and thing so executed 
and done, shall be as effectual in law as if it had been executed or done 
by the donee of the power in the name, and with the signature and seal, 
of the donor thereof. In the instant case, the POA was duly executed in 
favour of the donee, the signatory of the documents, and was duly 
notarised before its submission along with other important documents 
required to be submitted as per the NIT by the Appellant, before the last 
date of submission fixed by the Respondent BCCL. Hence, there was 
no legal or justifiable ground to reject the Technical bid of the Appellant. 
20. Thus, the said action of the Respondent BCCL in rejecting the Technical 
bid of the Appellant on absolutely extraneous ground and accepting the 
Technical bid of the Respondent no.8 though submitted in utter non-
compliance of the mandatory requirement of Clause 10 of the NIT, and 
subsequently calling upon the Respondent no.8 to furnish the shortfall 
of documents after the opening of technical bids of the Bidders, was 
totally arbitrary and illegal.  

19 
 
21. There cannot be any disagreement to the legal proposition propounded 
in catena of decisions of this Court relied upon by the learned counsels 
for the Respondents to the effect that the Court does not sit as a Court 
of Appeal in the matter of award of contracts and it merely reviews the 
manner in which the decision was made; and that the Government and 
its instrumentalities must have a freedom of entering into the contracts. 
However, it is equally well settled that the decision of the government/ 
its instrumentalities must be free from arbitrariness and must not be 
affected by any bias or actuated by malafides. Government bodies being 
public authorities are expected to uphold fairness, equality and public 
interest even while dealing with contractual matters. Right to equality 
under Article 14 abhors arbitrariness. Public authorities have to ensure 
that no bias, favouritism or arbitrariness are shown during the bidding 
process and that the entire bidding process is carried out in absolutely 
transparent manner.  
22. At this juncture, we may reiterate the well-established tenets of law 
pertaining to the scope of judicial intervention in Government contracts.  

20 
 
23. In Sterling Computers Limited vs. M/s. M & N Publications Limited 
and Others1, this Court while dealing with the scope of judicial review 
of award of contracts held: - 
“18. While exercising the power of judicial review, in respect of 
contracts entered into on behalf of the State, the Court is 
concerned primarily as to whether there has been any infirmity in 
the “decision making process”. In this connection reference may 
be made to the case of Chief Constable of the North Wales 
Police v. Evans [(1982) 3 All ER 141] where it was said that: (p. 
144a) 
“The purpose of judicial review is to ensure that the 
individual receives fair treatment, and not to ensure 
that the authority, after according fair treatment, 
reaches on a matter which it is authorised or enjoined 
by law to decide for itself a conclusion which is correct 
in the eyes of the court.” 
 
By way of judicial review the court cannot examine the details of 
the terms of the contract which have been entered into by the 
public bodies or the State. Courts have inherent limitations on the 
scope of any such enquiry. But at the same time as was said by 
the House of Lords in the aforesaid case, Chief Constable of the 
North Wales Police v. Evans [(1982) 3 All ER 141] the courts can 
certainly examine whether “decision-making process” was 
reasonable, rational, not arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the 
Constitution.” 
 
 
24.  In Tata Cellular vs. Union of India2, this Court had laid down certain 
priniciples for the judicial review of administrative action. 
“94. The principles deducible from the above are: 
 
(1) 
The modern trend points to judicial restraint in 
administrative action. 
 
1 (1993) 1 SCC 445 
2 (1994) 6 SCC 651 

21 
 
(2) 
The court does not sit as a court of appeal but merely 
reviews the manner in which the decision was made. 
(3)   The court does not have the expertise to correct the 
administrative decision. If a review of the administrative decision 
is permitted it will be substituting its own decision, without the 
necessary expertise which itself may be fallible. 
(4)   The terms of the invitation to tender cannot be open to 
judicial scrutiny because the invitation to tender is in the realm of 
contract. Normally speaking, the decision to accept the tender or 
award the contract is reached by process of negotiations through 
several tiers. More often than not, such decisions are made 
qualitatively by experts. 
(5)   The Government must have freedom of contract. In other 
words, a fair play in the joints is a necessary concomitant for an 
administrative body functioning in an administrative sphere or 
quasi-administrative sphere. However, the decision must not 
only be tested by the application of Wednesbury principle of 
reasonableness (including its other facts pointed out above) but 
must be free from arbitrariness not affected by bias or actuated 
by mala fides. 
(6)  Quashing decisions may impose heavy administrative 
burden on the administration and lead to increased and 
unbudgeted expenditure. 
Based on these principles we will examine the facts of this case 
since they commend to us as the correct principles.” 
 
 
25. It has also been held in ABL International Limited and Another vs. 
Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Limited and Others3, 
as under: - 
“53. From the above, it is clear that when an instrumentality of 
the State acts contrary to public good and public interest, unfairly, 
unjustly and unreasonably, in its contractual, constitutional or 
statutory obligations, it really acts contrary to the constitutional 
guarantee found in Article 14 of the Constitution.” 
 
 
3 (2004) 3 SCC 553 

22 
 
26.  In Jagdish Mandal vs. State of Orissa and Others4, this Court after 
discussing number of judgments laid down two tests to determine the 
extent of judicial interference in tender matters. They are: - 
“22. (i) Whether the process adopted or decision made by the 
authority is mala fide or intended to favour someone; 
or 
Whether the process adopted or decision made is so arbitrary 
and irrational that the court can say: “the decision is such that no 
responsible authority acting reasonably and in accordance with 
relevant law could have reached;” 
 
(ii) Whether public interest is affected. 
If the answers are in the negative, there should be no 
interference under Article 226. Cases involving blacklisting or 
imposition of penal consequences on a tenderer/contractor or 
distribution of State largesse (allotment of sites/shops, grant of 
licences, dealerships and franchises) stand on a different footing 
as they may require a higher degree of fairness in action.” 
 
 
27. In Mihan India Ltd. vs. GMR Airports Ltd. and Others5, while 
observing that the government contracts granted by the government 
bodies must uphold fairness, equality and rule of law while dealing with 
the contractual matters, it was observed in Para 50 as under: -  
“50. In view of the above, it is apparent that in government 
contracts, if granted by the government bodies, it is expected to 
uphold fairness, equality and rule of law while dealing with 
contractual matters. Right to equality under Article 14 of the 
Constitution of India abhors arbitrariness. The transparent 
bidding process is favoured by the Court to ensure that 
constitutional requirements are satisfied. It is said that the 
constitutional guarantee as provided under Article 14 of the 
Constitution of India demands the State to act in a fair and 
 
4(2007) 14 SCC 517 
5(2022) SCC Online SC 574 

23 
 
reasonable manner unless public interest demands otherwise. It 
is expedient that the degree of compromise of any private 
legitimate interest must correspond proportionately to the public 
interest.” 
 
 
28. It was sought to be submitted by the learned Counsels for the 
Respondents relying upon the observations made in Central Coalfields 
Limited and Another vs. SLL-SML (Joint Venture Consortium) and 
Others6,  that whether a term of NIT is essential or not is a decision 
taken by the employer which should be respected. However, in the said 
judgment also it is observed that if the employer has exercised the 
inherent authority to deviate from the essential term, such deviation has 
to be made applicable to all the bidders and potential bidders. It was 
observed in Para 47 and 48 as under: -  
“47. The result of this discussion is that the issue of the 
acceptance or rejection of a bid or a bidder should be looked at 
not only from the point of view of the unsuccessful party but also 
from the point of view of the employer. As held in Ramana 
Dayaram 
Shetty [Ramana 
Dayaram 
Shetty v. International 
Airport Authority of India, (1979) 3 SCC 489] the terms of NIT 
cannot be ignored as being redundant or superfluous. They must 
be given a meaning and the necessary significance. As pointed 
out in Tata Cellular [Tata Cellular v. Union of India, (1994) 6 SCC 
651] there must be judicial restraint in interfering with 
administrative action. Ordinarily, the soundness of the decision 
taken by the employer ought not to be questioned but the 
decision-making process can certainly be subject to judicial 
review. The soundness of the decision may be questioned if it is 
irrational or mala fide or intended to favour someone or a 
decision “that no responsible authority acting reasonably and in 
accordance with relevant law could have reached” as held 
 
6  (2016) 8 SCC 622 

24 
 
in Jagdish Mandal [Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa, (2007) 14 
SCC 517] followed in Michigan Rubber [Michigan Rubber (India) 
Ltd. v. State of Karnataka, (2012) 8 SCC 216]. 
 
48. Therefore, whether a term of NIT is essential or not is a 
decision taken by the employer which should be respected. Even 
if the term is essential, the employer has the inherent authority to 
deviate from it provided the deviation is made applicable to all 
bidders and potential bidders as held in Ramana Dayaram 
Shetty [Ramana 
Dayaram 
Shetty v. International 
Airport 
Authority of India, (1979) 3 SCC 489] . However, if the term is 
held by the employer to be ancillary or subsidiary, even that 
decision should be respected. The lawfulness of that decision 
can be questioned on very limited grounds, as mentioned in the 
various decisions discussed above, but the soundness of the 
decision cannot be questioned, otherwise this Court would be 
taking over the function of the tender issuing authority, which it 
cannot.” 
 
 
29.  The submissions made by the learned Counsels for the Respondents 
that the project in question being Infrastructure project and also one of 
the Mega projects, this Court may not interfere more particularly in view 
of the fact that agreement has already been entered into between the 
Respondent BCCL and the Special Purpose Vehicle of the Respondent 
no.8, cannot be accepted, when we have found that the impugned 
decision of the Respondent BCCL was grossly arbitrary, illegal, 
discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. As 
held earlier, the Government bodies/ instrumentalities are expected to 
act in absolutely fair, reasonable and transparent manner, particularly in 
the award of contracts for Mega projects. Any element of arbitrariness 

25 
 
or discrimination may lead to hampering of the entire project which 
would not be in the public interest.  
30. In that view of the matter, the impugned decision of the Respondent – 
BCCL dated 06.05.2024 rejecting the Technical bid of the Appellant and 
further declaring the Respondent no.8 as successful bidder is set aside. 
Any action/ process undertaken or agreement entered into pursuant to 
the said decision also stand set aside. It shall be open for the 
Respondent – BCCL to initiate fresh tender process for the Project and 
to process the same in question in accordance with law.  
31. The Appeal is allowed accordingly.   
                                                                           
 
                                                                          .......……..…..................................J. 
                                                                [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 
 
 
 
 
                                                                ..………..…..................................J. 
                                                           [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
OCTOBER 04th , 2024