2024 INSC 760
Civil Appeal No.6274 of 2013 
 
 
Page 1 of 7 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6274 OF 2013 
 
M/s. Shriram Investments    
                      … Appellant 
    
 
versus 
 
 
The Commissioner of Income Tax III  
Chennai       
          
 
 
 
  … Respondent 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The appellant-assessee filed a return of income on 19th 
November 1989 under the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short, ‘IT 
Act’) for the assessment year 1989-90.  On 31st October 1990, 
the appellant filed a revised return.  As per intimation issued 
under Section 143(1)(a) of the IT Act on 27th August 1991, the 
appellant paid the necessary tax amount.  On 29th October 
1991, the appellant filed another revised return.  The assessing 
officer did not take cognizance of the said revised return.  
Therefore, the appellant preferred an appeal before the 
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) (for short, ‘CIT 
(Appeals)’). By the order dated 21st July 1993, the CIT (Appeals) 
dismissed the appeal on the ground that in view of Section 
139(5) of the IT Act, the revised return filed on 29th October 
1991 was barred by limitation.  
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.10.04
16:03:01 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Civil Appeal No.6274 of 2013 
 
 
Page 2 of 7 
 
2. 
Being aggrieved, the appellant-assessee preferred an 
appeal before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (for short, ‘the 
Tribunal).  The Tribunal partly allowed the appeal by 
remanding the case back to the file of the assessing officer.  The 
assessing officer was directed to consider the assessee’s claim 
regarding the deduction of deferred revenue expenditure.  The 
respondent Department preferred an appeal before the High 
Court of Judicature at Madras. By the impugned judgment, the 
High Court proceeded to set aside the order of the Tribunal on 
the ground that after the revised return was barred by time, 
there was no provision to consider the claim made by the 
appellant.  
SUBMISSIONS 
3. 
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant has 
taken us through the orders of the Tribunal and the High 
Court.  He relies upon a decision of this Court in the case of 
Wipro Finance Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax1.  The 
learned counsel pointed out that the Tribunal did not direct 
consideration of the revised return but the Tribunal was rightly 
of the view that the assessing officer can consider claim made 
by the appellant regarding deduction of deferred revenue 
expenditure in accordance with law.  He submitted that the 
appellant was entitled to make a claim during the course of the 
assessment proceedings which otherwise was omitted to be 
specifically claimed in the return.  
 
1 2022 (137) taxmann.com 230 (SC) 

Civil Appeal No.6274 of 2013 
 
 
Page 3 of 7 
 
4. 
Learned ASG relied upon decisions of this Court in the 
case of Goetzge (India) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax2 
and Principal Commissioner of Income Tax & Anr. v. Wipro 
Limited3. He submitted that after the revised return was 
barred by limitation, there was no question of considering the 
claim for deduction made by the appellant in the revised 
return. He submitted that the High Court was absolutely 
correct in coming to the conclusion that after the revised return 
was barred by limitation, the assessing officer had no 
jurisdiction to consider the case of the appellant.   
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS  
5. 
We have carefully considered the submissions made 
across the bar.  We have carefully perused the judgment of this 
Court in the case of Wipro Finance Ltd1.  The issue which 
arose before this Court was not regarding the power of the 
assessing officer to consider the claim after the revised return 
was barred by time.  This Court considered the appellate power 
of the Appellate Tribunal under Section 254 of the IT Act.  
Paragraphs 10 and 11 of the said decision in the case of Wipro 
Finance Ltd1 read thus:- 
“10. The learned ASG appearing for the 
department had faintly argued that since the 
appellant in its return had taken a conscious 
explicit plea with regard to the part of the claim 
being ascribable to capital expenditure and 
partly to revenue expenditure, it was not open 
for the appellant to plead for the first time 
before the ITAT that the entire claim must be 
 
2 (2006) 157 Taxman 1 (SC) 
3 (2022) 446 ITR 1 

Civil Appeal No.6274 of 2013 
 
 
Page 4 of 7 
 
treated as revenue expenditure. Further, it was 
not open to the ITAT to entertain such fresh 
claim for the first time. This submission needs 
to be stated to be rejected. In the first place, the 
ITAT was conscious about the fact that this 
claim was set up by the appellant for the first 
time before it, and was clearly inconsistent and 
contrary to the stand taken in the return filed 
by the appellant for the concerned assessment 
year including the notings made by the officials 
of the appellant. Yet, the ITAT entertained 
the claim as permissible, even though for 
the first time before the ITAT, in appeal 
under Section 254 of the 1961 Act, by 
relying on the dictum of this Court in 
National Thermal Power Co. Ltd. Further, 
the ITAT has also expressly recorded the no 
objection given by the representative of the 
department, allowing the appellant to set up 
the fresh claim to treat the amount declared 
as capital expenditure in the returns (as 
originally filed), as revenue expenditure. As 
a result, the objection now taken by the 
department cannot be countenanced. 
 
11. Learned ASG had placed reliance on the 
decision of this Court in Goetze (India) Ltd. 
vs. Commissioner of Income Tax in support 
of the objection pressed before us that it is 
not open to entertain fresh claim before the 
ITAT. According to him, the decision in 
National Thermal Power Co. Ltd. merely 
permits raising of a new ground concerning 
the claim already mentioned in the returns 
and not an inconsistent or contrary plea or 
a new claim. We are not impressed by this 
argument. For, the observations in the 
decision in Goetze (India) Ltd. itself make it 
amply clear that such limitation would 
apply to the “assessing authority”, but not 
impinge upon the plenary powers of the 
ITAT bestowed under Section 254 of the Act. 

Civil Appeal No.6274 of 2013 
 
 
Page 5 of 7 
 
In other words, this decision is of no avail to 
the department.” 
(emphasis added) 
In this case, the Court did not consider the question of the 
power of the assessing officer to consider a claim made after a 
revised return was barred by time.  This Court considered the 
appellate powers of the Tribunal under Section 254 of the IT 
Act.  Moreover, this was a case where the department gave no 
objection for enabling the assessee to set up a fresh claim.  
6. 
In the case of Goetzge (India) Ltd2, this Court held that 
the assessing officer cannot entertain any claim made by the 
assessee otherwise than by following the provisions of the IT 
Act.  In this case, there is no dispute that when a revised return 
dated 29th October 1991 was filed, it was barred by limitation 
in terms of section 139(5) of the IT Act.  
7. 
Section 139(5) of the IT Act, at the relevant time, read 
thus:  
“(5) If any person, having furnished a return 
under sub-section (1), or in pursuance of a 
notice issued under sub-section (1) of section 
142, discovers any omission or any wrong 
statement therein, he may furnish a revised 
return at any time before the expiry of one 
year 
from 
the 
end 
of 
the 
relevant 
assessment year or before the completion of 
the assessment, whichever is earlier: 
 
Provided that where the return relates to 
the previous year relevant to the assessment 
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988, 
or any earlier assessment year, the reference to 
one year aforesaid shall be construed as a 

Civil Appeal No.6274 of 2013 
 
 
Page 6 of 7 
 
reference to two years from the end of the 
relevant assessment year.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
In the case of Wipro Limited3, in paragraph no.9, this Court 
held thus:   
“9. In such a situation, filing a revised return 
under section 139(5) of the Income-tax Act 
claiming 
carrying 
forward 
of 
losses 
subsequently would not help the assessee. In 
the present case, the assessee filed its original 
return under section 139(1) and not under 
section 139(3). Therefore, the Revenue is right 
in submitting that the revised return filed by 
the assessee under section 139(5) can only 
substitute its original return under section 
139(1) and cannot transform it into a return 
under section 139(3), in order to avail of the 
benefit of carrying forward or set-off of any loss 
under section 80 of the Income-tax Act. The 
assessee can file a revised return in a case 
where there is an omission or a wrong 
statement. But a revised return of income, 
under section 139(5) cannot be filed, to 
withdraw the claim and subsequently claiming 
the carried forward or setoff of any loss. Filing 
a revised return under section 139(5) of the 
Income-tax Act and taking a contrary stand 
and/or claiming the exemption, which was 
specifically not claimed earlier while filing the 
original return of income is not permissible. By 
filing the revised return of income, the assessee 
cannot be permitted to substitute the original 
return of income filed under section 139(1) of 
the Income-tax Act. Therefore, claiming benefit 
under section 10B(8) and furnishing the 
declaration as required under section 10B(8) in 
the revised return of income which was much 
after the due date of filing the original return of 
income under section 139(1) of the Income-tax 

Civil Appeal No.6274 of 2013 
 
 
Page 7 of 7 
 
Act, cannot mean that the assessee has 
complied with the condition of furnishing the 
declaration before the due date of filing the 
original return of income under section 139(1) 
of the Act. As observed hereinabove, for 
claiming the benefit under section 10B(8), both 
the conditions of furnishing the declaration 
and to file the same before the due date of filing 
the original return of income are mandatory in 
nature.” 
8. 
Coming to the decision of the Tribunal, we find that the 
Tribunal has not exercised its power under Section 254 of the 
IT Act to consider the claim. Instead, the Tribunal directed the 
assessing officer to consider the appellant's claim. The 
assessing officer had no jurisdiction to consider the claim made 
by the assessee in the revised return filed after the time 
prescribed by Section 139(5) for filing a revised return had 
already expired. 
9. 
Therefore, we find no reason to interfere with the 
impugned judgment of the High Court. The appeal is, 
accordingly, dismissed.  
 
...…………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
(Abhay S Oka) 
 
 
 
...…………………………….J. 
                                                   (Augustine George Masih) 
 
New Delhi; 
October 4, 2024.