2024 INSC 772
Page 1 of 11 
 
 REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                  OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP (Criminal) No.6583 of 2024) 
 
SOMJEET MALLICK  
 
 
   
… APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF JHARKHAND & OTHERS        … RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
MANOJ MISRA, J. 
 
1. 
Leave Granted. 
2. 
This appeal impugns judgment and order of the High 
Court1dated 01.02.2024 passed in Cr. M.P. No.3796 of 2018 
whereby, exercising powers under Section 482 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 19732, the High Court quashed the order 
dated 20.02.2020, by which cognizance was taken, and all 
 
1 High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi 
2 CrPC 
Digitally signed by
Gulshan Kumar Arora
Date: 2024.10.14
18:10:44 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 11 
 
further proceedings in connection with Case No.78 of 2016, 
registered at P.S. Sakchi, corresponding to G.R. No.1627 of 
2016, pending in the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate3, 
Jamshedpur.   
 
Factual Matrix 
3. 
The 
appellant 
(original 
complainant) 
filed 
an 
application, under Section 156(3) CrPC, alleging that the 
second and third respondents (original accused) offered to take 
appellant’s Truck (Trailor No.NL 01K 1250) on a monthly rent 
of Rs.33,000, exclusive of driver’s/helper’s salary, for plying it 
between Tata Steel Jamshedpur and Kalinganagar; pursuant 
to that offer, an agreement was entered into between the 
appellant and the accused on 10.07.2014 thereby letting the 
vehicle to the accused for a period up to 31.03.2016 with effect 
from 14.07.2014; and, in furtherance thereof, possession of 
the Truck was given to the accused. In return, they paid one 
month rent, after deducting TDS.  But thereafter, though the 
Truck had been in possession of the accused since July 2014, 
 
3 CJM 

Page 3 of 11 
 
rent including arrears amounting to Rs.12,49,780 was not 
paid despite repeated false assurances.  
4. 
On the aforesaid application under Section 156(3) CrPC, 
the learned CJM vide order dated 12.11.2016 directed the 
police to institute a case and investigate. 
5. 
During investigation when despite notice under Section 
41A CrPC the accused did not appear, the police applied to the 
CJM for issuance of NBW4 against the accused. The said 
application was allowed vide order dated 30.06.2017.   
6. 
Aggrieved with the order dated 30.06.2017, the second 
and third respondents filed application under Section 482 
CrPC for quashing the aforesaid order as well as proceedings 
pursuant to the FIR5 registered as Case No.78 of 2016 at P.S. 
Sakchi.  
7. 
In the application under Section 482 CrPC it was, inter 
alia, alleged that no agreement was executed; that appellant 
intended to let out his Truck parked inside Tata Steel Factory, 
but, despite payment of advance rent of one month, necessary 
papers concerning the Truck were not provided, therefore, no 
agreement was executed; and even if it is taken that agreement 
 
4 Non-bailable Warrant 
5 First Information Report 

Page 4 of 11 
 
was executed, no offence punishable under Sections 406 and 
420 IPC is made out. 
8. 
While the application under Section 482 CrPC was 
pending before the High Court, on a police report, cognizance 
was taken by CJM on 20.02.2020 and processes were issued 
under Section 204 CrPC. Consequently, respondent nos. 2 and 
3 (original accused) sought amendment in their prayer before 
the High Court so as to include the prayer to quash the 
cognizance order.  
9. 
The High Court vide impugned order quashed the order 
of cognizance and all further proceedings in the case 
concerned while leaving it open to the original complainant to 
take recourse to civil remedies.  
 
Reasoning of the High Court 
10. 
 The High Court reasoned thus: 
a. 
There is no allegation of entrustment in the FIR, 
therefore, offence of criminal breach of trust, 
punishable under Section 406 IPC6, is not made out. 
 
6 The Indian Penal Code, 1860  

Page 5 of 11 
 
b. 
Admittedly, one month rent was paid, therefore, 
dishonest intention from the very beginning was not 
there. The application is only for recovery of rent, which 
can be realised by taking recourse to appropriate civil 
proceeding. Hence, no offence punishable under 
Section 420 IPC is made out.  
11. 
Aggrieved by the order of the High Court, original 
complainant is before us. 
12. 
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have 
perused the materials on record. 
 
Submissions on behalf of Appellant 
13. 
On behalf of the appellant, it was submitted: 
a. 
The FIR did disclose that after making 
payment of one month rent, no rent was paid 
despite false assurances. In such circumstances, a 
case for investigation was made out. 
b. 
The High Court did not consider the 
materials collected during investigation which 
resulted in filing of charge sheet. As charge sheet 
was submitted, the High Court ought to have 
considered 
the 
materials 
collected 
during 

Page 6 of 11 
 
investigation before concluding whether offence has 
been committed or not. 
c. 
The High Court failed to consider that 
whereabouts of the Truck was not known. 
Otherwise also, since the Truck was not returned, it 
could be taken that it has been misappropriated or 
disposed of by the accused in violation of the 
agreement, thereby disclosing commission of an 
offence of criminal breach of trust. 
 
Submissions on behalf of Accused-respondents 
14. 
On behalf of accused respondent(s), it was submitted: 
a. 
The FIR did not disclose commission of any 
offence, therefore the High Court was justified in 
quashing the entire proceeding. 
b. 
There was no specific allegation in the FIR 
regarding disposal or misappropriation of the 
Truck, hence no case of criminal breach of trust was 
made out. 
c. 
The offence of cheating is not made out 
inasmuch as dishonest intention from the very 

Page 7 of 11 
 
beginning is not disclosed by the averments in the 
FIR. 
d. 
The High Court was justified in quashing the 
cognizance order and further proceedings.  
Submissions on behalf of State 
15. 
 On behalf of State, it is submitted through an affidavit 
that the original complainant had informed that as per 
agreement between the parties, the Truck/Trailor was rented 
to the accused for plying. However, Truck’s present location 
was neither known to the original complainant nor could be 
ascertained despite hectic efforts.  
 
Analysis 
16. 
Before we proceed to test the correctness of the 
impugned order, we must bear in mind that at the stage of 
deciding whether a criminal proceeding or FIR, as the case 
may be, is to be quashed at the threshold or not, the 
allegations in the FIR or the police report or the complaint, 
including the materials collected during investigation or 
inquiry, as the case may be, are to be taken at their face value 
so as to determine whether a prima facie case for investigation 
or proceeding against the accused, as the case may be, is made 

Page 8 of 11 
 
out. The correctness of the allegations is not to be tested at 
this stage.  
17. 
To commit an offence, unless the penal statute provides 
otherwise, mens rea is one of the essential ingredients.  
Existence of mens rea is a question of fact which may be 
inferred from the act in question as well as the surrounding 
circumstances and conduct of the accused. As a sequitur, 
when a party alleges that the accused, despite taking 
possession of the Truck on hire, has failed to pay hire charges 
for months together, while making false promises for its 
payment, a prima facie case, reflective of dishonest intention 
on the part of the accused, is made out which may require 
investigation. In such circumstances, if the FIR is quashed at 
the very inception, it would be nothing short of an act which 
thwarts a legitimate investigation.  
18. 
It is trite law that FIR is not an encyclopedia of all 
imputations. Therefore, to test whether an FIR discloses 
commission of a cognizable offence what is to be looked at is 
not any omission in the accusations but the gravamen of the 
accusations contained therein to find out whether, prima facie, 
some cognizable offence has been committed or not.  At this 

Page 9 of 11 
 
stage, the Court is not required to ascertain as to which 
specific offence has been committed.  It is only after 
investigation, at the time of framing charge, when materials 
collected during investigation are before the Court, the Court 
has to draw an opinion as to for commission of which offence 
the accused should be tried. Prior to that, if satisfied, the Court 
may even discharge the accused. Thus, when the FIR alleges 
a dishonest conduct on the part of the accused which, if 
supported by materials, would disclose commission of a 
cognizable offence, investigation should not be thwarted by 
quashing the FIR.   
19. 
No doubt, a petition to quash the FIR does not become 
infructuous on submission of a police report under Section 
173 (2) of the CrPC, but when a police report has been 
submitted, particularly when there is no stay on the 
investigation, the Court must apply its mind to the materials 
submitted in support of the police report before taking a call 
whether the FIR and consequential proceedings should be 
quashed or not.  More so, when the FIR alleges an act which 
is reflective of a dishonest conduct of the accused.   

Page 10 of 11 
 
20. 
In the instant case, the FIR alleges that the accused took 
original complainant’s Truck/ Trailor on hire for a period 
starting from 14.07.2014 up to 31.03.2016 at a monthly rent 
of Rs.33,000/- but, after payment of 1st month rent, the rent 
was not paid despite false assurances. The allegation that rent 
was not paid by itself, in ordinary course, would presuppose 
retention of possession of the vehicle by the accused. In such 
circumstances as to what happened to that Truck becomes a 
matter of investigation. If it had been dishonestly disposed of 
by the accused, it may make out a case of criminal breach of 
trust. Therefore, there was no justification to quash the FIR at 
the threshold without looking into the materials collected 
during the course of the investigation. 
21. 
In our view, the High Court ought to have considered 
the materials collected during investigation before taking a call 
on the prayer for quashing the FIR, the cognizance order and 
the proceedings in pursuance thereof.  
22. 
To peruse the police report and to understand as to 
what type of investigation was carried out by the police, on 
19.07.2024 we required the State to place the charge-sheet on 
record. However, unfortunately, though the State filed its 

Page 11 of 11 
 
affidavit, the charge-sheet was not produced.  The affidavit 
filed by the State only indicates that they were not able to trace 
out the Truck/ Trailor. In these circumstances, we have no 
option but to remit the matter to the High Court to decide the 
quashing petition afresh in accordance with law after 
considering the materials collected by the investigating agency 
during the course of the investigation.  
23. 
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. The impugned order 
of the High Court is set aside. The quashing petition shall be 
restored to its original number and shall be decided afresh by 
the High Court in accordance with law and in the light of the 
observations above.  All contentions and pleas are kept open 
for the parties to urge before the High Court. 
24. 
Pending application(s), if any stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
......................................J. 
            (J.B. PARDIWALA) 
 
......................................J. 
                
            (MANOJ MISRA) 
NEW DELHI; 
OCTOBER 14, 2024