2024 INSC 72
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                  OF 2024 
(Arising out of Petition for Special Leave to Appeal 
(Criminal) No.4415 OF 2023) 
 
SACHIN GARG  
 
 
 
 
 
     …APPELLANT 
VERSUS 
STATE OF U.P & ANR.   
 
 
 
…RESPONDENTS 
J U D G M E N T 
 
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.  
 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The appellant, at the material point of time, stood posted as 
the Head of factory of Exide Industries Limited (“EIL”), a corporate 
entity, situated at Bawal, District Rewari, Haryana.  The 
respondent no.2, ran a proprietary concern, Ambika Gases. He 
was the supplier of Dissolved Acetylene Gas (“DA Gas”), which is 
used for manufacturing battery in the said factory.  So far as the 
present appeal is concerned, the dispute is over a purchase order 
issued for the supply of the said item.  The original purchase order 
dated 01.04.2019 was amended twice on the basis of 
representations made by the respondent no.2. The first 
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2024.01.30
17:33:31 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
amendment was made on 18.07.2019 by which the rate was 
increased from Rs.1.55 per unit to Rs.1.65 per unit and the second 
amendment was made on 20.12.2019 through which the rate per 
unit was brought down to Rs.1.48 from Rs.1.65. An invoice was 
raised by the respondent no.2 with the aforesaid rates for a total 
sum of Rs.9,36,693.18/-. The dispute revolves around non-
payment of the said sum.  However, it has been contended by the 
appellant that EIL, after ascertaining the market price of DA Gas 
from other vendors, by a letter dated 29.06.2020, reconciled the 
accounts by informing respondent no.2 of what it claimed was foul 
play with respect to revision of rates and appropriated the alleged 
illegal amounts claimed by the vendor (respondent no.2) from the 
invoice. 
3. 
The respondent no.2 instituted a complaint case in the Court 
of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ghaziabad and the substance of 
the complaint would be revealed from the following passages of the 
petition 
of 
complaint 
(registered 
as 
Misc. 
Application 
No.317/2020):- 
“….The Applicant through his aboenamed work do the job 
work of D.A. Gas. Opposite Party Sachin Garg is posted as 
Material Head of Exide Industries Ltd. situated at Plot No. 
179, Sector-3, Bawal, District- Rewari, Haryana and 
Opposite Party Sachin Garg also used to issue Purchase 
Order to the Applicant’s company on behalf of the Exide 
Company and only the Opposite Party Sachin Garg used to 

3 
 
make payment of Job Work to the Applicant. Previously, the 
Transaction of Opposite Party was normal with the 
Applicant’s company and no problem was ever persisted in 
the payment, due to which, the Applicant started trusting on 
the Opposite Party and Company. Sachin Garg through the 
aforesaid company in the capacity of Purchase Head, 
issued Purchase Order to the Applicant’s Company, in 
which, it was agreed between the Opposite Party and 
Applicant to do job work @ Rs.1.65/- per piece w.e.f. 
18.02.2019, which remained continued on the same rates 
till December, 2019 and the Opposite Party was regularly 
making the payment of job work to the Applicant on the 
same rates. In the month of December, in pursuance of the 
Purchase Order of Opposite Party, According to Purchase 
No. 4800253593 dated 01.04.2019, done the job work of 
Filled DA Gases HSN Code 290129910 quantity 3,07,114/- 
pieces @ Rs.165 to the tune of Rs.5,06,738.10/-, and Filled 
DA Gases H{SN Code 29012910 quantity 1,93,966/- pieces 
@ Rs.1.48 per piece to the tune of Rs. 2,87,069.68/- and 
18% GST to the tune of Rs.1,42,885.40/-0, in this manner 
did the job work of total amount Rs.9,36,693.18/-. The 
material Head of Opposite Company namely Sachin Garg 
by admitting the job work done by the Applicant vide 
Purchaser Order No. 4800253593 dated 01.04.2019, and 
got done the job work according to the piece rate quoted by 
the Applicant. On 03.07.2020, Applicant sent Bill/Invoice 
No. 
AG.SR/20-21/01 
dated 
02.07.2020 
of 
Rs.9,36,693.18/- to the Material Head of Opposite Party 
Company namely Sachin Garg through registered post and 
also sent the aforesaid invoice through email on 
14.07.2020, which were received by Opposite Party Sachin 
Garg. Applicant repeatedly requested the Opposite Party for 
payment through email, but, the Opposite Party did not 
make payment of Rs.9,36,693.18/- of job work done by the 
Applicant Company in the month of December, 2019 and he 
by keeping the Applicant in dark, kept giving assurances of 
making full payment. When, the Applicant put more 
pressure on the Opposite Party for payment, then, Opposite 
Party stopped to get done the job work from the Applicant 
Company, and on 29.06.2020, sent a letter with quotation 
to the Applicant Company, in which, the Opposite Party has 
fixed the rate of job work done by the Applicant company @ 
Rs.1.40/- per piece w.e.f. April, 2019, whereas, the job 
work of Opposite Party was completed by the Applicant 
Company in the month of December, 2019, in which, 
Opposite Party on 20.12.2019, requested to change the rate 
of job work at the rate of Rs.1.48/- per piece, which was 
accepted by the Applicant w.e.f. 20.12.2019. In this 
manner, after 20.12.2019, Rs.1.48/- per piece and prior to 

4 
 
that the rate of Rs.1.65/- per piece was payable by the 
Opposite Party, but, the Opposite Party with intention to 
cheat the Applicant in deliberate manner, and with intention 
to cause financial loss to him and not to pay the money, has 
committed criminal breach of trust with the Applicant, which 
is a cognizable offence. On demanding money by the 
Applicant, the Opposite Party is abusing him with filthy 
language and threatening him to kill…..” 
(quoted verbatim from the paperbook) 
 
4. 
The learned Magistrate upon recording initial deposition of 
Saurabh Sharma, the proprietor of the supplier firm and his father 
Padam Kant Sharma issued summons for trial under Sections 406, 
504 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“1860 Code”) on 
18.08.2021. 
5. 
The appellant had approached the High Court at Allahabad 
under Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (“the 1973 
Code”) 
by 
filing, 
Criminal 
Miscellaneous 
Application 
No.18603/2021, for quashing the said summons and also the 
complaint case itself. The judgment of the High Court was 
delivered dismissing the application filed by the appellant on 
23.03.2023 and it is this judgment which is under appeal before 
us. The main reason for dismissal of the appellant’s quashing plea 
was that the subject-complaint involved adjudication of disputed 
questions of fact. Referring to the judgments of this Court in the 
cases of Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. -vs- State of 
Maharashtra and Ors. [(2021) 19 SCC 401], R.P. Kapur -vs- State 

5 
 
of Punjab [AIR 1960 SC 866], State of Haryana and Ors. -vs- 
Bhajan Lal and Ors. [1992 SCC (Cr.) 426], State of Bihar and 
Anr. -vs- P. P. Sharma, IAS and Anr. [1992 SCC (Cr.) 192] and 
lastly Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. and Ors. -vs- Mohd. 
Sharaful Haque and Another [2005 SCC (Cr.) 283], the High 
Court refrained from considering the defence of the accused.  
6. 
In the case of Neeharika Infrastructure Ltd (supra), a three-
judge Bench of this Court examined the factors which were to be 
considered by the High Court for quashing an F.I.R. at the 
threshold, relating to factors which would apply to a proceeding 
which forms the subject-matter of the present case. Referring to 
the judgment in the case of R.P. Kapur (supra), principles for 
quashing were set down as:-  
“10.1 The first case on the point which is required to be 
noticed is the decision of this Court in the case of R.P. 
Kapur (supra). While dealing with the inherent powers of 
the High Court under Section 561-A of the earlier Code 
(which is pari materia with Section 482 of the Code), it is 
observed and held that the inherent powers of the High 
Court under Section 561 of the earlier Code cannot be 
exercised in regard to the matters specifically covered by the 
other provisions of the Code; the inherent jurisdiction of the 
High Court can be exercised to quash proceedings in a 
proper case either to prevent the abuse of the process of any 
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice; ordinarily 
criminal proceedings instituted against an accused person 
must be tried under the provisions of the Code, and the High 
Court would be reluctant to interfere with the said 
proceedings at an interlocutory stage. After observing this, 
thereafter this Court then carved out some exceptions to the 
above-stated rule, which are as under: 

6 
 
“(i) Where it manifestly appears that there is a 
legal bar against the institution or continuance of 
the criminal proceeding in respect of the offence 
alleged. Absence of the requisite sanction may, for 
instance, furnish cases under this category. 
(ii) Where the allegations in the first information 
report or the complaint, even if they are taken at 
their face value and accepted in their entirety, do 
not constitute the offence alleged; in such cases 
no question of appreciating evidence arises; it is a 
matter merely of looking at the complaint or the 
first information report to decide whether the 
offence alleged is disclosed or not. 
(iii) Where the allegations made against the 
accused person do constitute an offence alleged 
but there is either no legal evidence adduced in 
support of the case or the evidence adduced 
clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge. In 
dealing with this class of cases it is important to 
bear in mind the distinction between a case where 
there is no legal evidence or where there is 
evidence 
which 
is 
manifestly 
and 
clearly 
inconsistent with the accusation made and cases 
where there is legal evidence which on its 
appreciation may or may not support the 
accusation 
in 
question. 
In 
exercising 
its 
jurisdiction under Section 561-A the High Court 
would not embark upon an enquiry as to whether 
the evidence in question is reliable or not. That is 
the function of the trial Magistrate, and ordinarily 
it would not be open to any party to invoke the 
High Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend 
that on a reasonable appreciation of the evidence 
the accusation made against the accused would 
not be sustained.”” 
 
7. 
In the same decision (i.e. Neeharika Infrastructure Ltd.) 
(supra), the seven-point edict laid down in the case of Bhajan Lal 
(supra) was also referred to. These are:-  
“102.(1) Where the allegations made in the first information 
report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face 
value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie 

7 
 
constitute any offence or make out a case against the 
accused. 
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and 
other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not 
disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by 
police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under 
an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) 
of the Code. 
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or 
complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same 
do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out 
a case against the accused. 
(4) Where the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a 
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable 
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer 
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under 
Section 155(2) of the Code. 
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are 
so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which 
no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that 
there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the 
accused. 
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of 
the provisions of the Code or the Act concerned (under which 
a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and 
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a 
specific provision in the Code or the Act concerned, providing 
efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party. 
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with 
mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously 
instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on 
the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and 
personal grudge.” 
 
8. 
It was observed in the judgment under appeal that the 
applicant has got the right of discharge which could be freely taken 
up by him before the Trial Court.  Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned 
senior counsel has appeared in this matter on behalf of the 
appellant along with Mr. Guru Krishna Kumar, while the case of 
respondent no.2 has been argued by Ms. Divya Jyoti Singh.  State 

8 
 
was represented before us by Mr. Sarvesh Singh Baghel. The main 
contentions urged by Mr. Rohatgi is that the complaint made 
against the appellant does not disclose any criminal offence and at 
best, it is a commercial dispute, which ought to be determined by 
a Civil Court. In so far as the allegations of commission of offence 
under Sections 405 and 406 are concerned, he has relied on a 
judgment of this Court in the case of Deepak Gaba and Ors. -vs- 
State of Uttar Pradesh and Another [(2023) 3 SCC 423]. This 
decision deals with the basic ingredients of a complaint under 
Sections 405 and 406 of the 1860 Code and it has been held in 
this judgment:- 
“15. For Section 405 IPC to be attracted, the following have 
to be established: 
(a) the accused was entrusted with property, or entrusted 
with dominion over property; 
(b) the accused had dishonestly misappropriated or 
converted to their own use that property, or dishonestly 
used or disposed of that property or wilfully suffer any other 
person to do so; and 
(c) such misappropriation, conversion, use or disposal 
should be in violation of any direction of law prescribing the 
mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal 
contract which the person has made, touching the discharge 
of such trust.” 
 
9. 
The judgment in Deepak Gaba (supra) was delivered in a case 
in which there was subsisting commercial relationship between 
the parties and the complainant had made allegations of a forged 

9 
 
demand, for a sum of around rupees six and a half lakhs. On that 
basis a summoning order was issued for trial under Section 406 of 
the 1860 Code. A coordinate Bench of this Court held:-  
“17. However, in the instant case, materials on record fail 
to satisfy the ingredients of Section 405 IPC. The complaint 
does not directly refer to the ingredients of Section 405IPC 
and does not state how and in what manner, on facts, the 
requirements are satisfied. Pre-summoning evidence is also 
lacking and suffers on this account. On these aspects, the 
summoning order is equally quiet, albeit, it states that “a 
forged demand of Rs 6,37,252.16p had been raised by JIPL, 
which demand is not due in terms of statements by 
Shubhankar P. Tomar and Sakshi Tilak Chand”. A mere 
wrong demand or claim would not meet the conditions 
specified by Section 405IPC in the absence of evidence to 
establish 
entrustment, 
dishonest 
misappropriation, 
conversion, use or disposal, which action should be in 
violation of any direction of law, or legal contract touching 
the discharge of trust. Hence, even if Respondent 2 
complainant is of the opinion that the monetary demand or 
claim is incorrect and not payable, given the failure to prove 
the requirements of Section 405 IPC, an offence under the 
same section is not constituted. In the absence of factual 
allegations which satisfy the ingredients of the offence 
under Section 405IPC, a mere dispute on monetary demand 
of Rs 6,37,252.16p, does not attract criminal prosecution 
under Section 406IPC.” 
 
10. The same view was expressed by this Court in the cases of 
Prof. R.K. Vijayasarathy and Anr. -vs- Sudha Seetharam and 
Anr. [(2019) 16 SCC 739] and Vijay Kumar Ghai and Ors. -vs- 
State of West Bengal and Ors. [(2022) 7 SCC 124].  The judgment 
of this Court in the case of Dalip Kaur and Ors. -vs- Jagnar Singh 
and Anr. [(2009) 14 SCC 696] has also been cited in support of the 
appellant’s case and in this decision it has been, inter-alia, held:- 

10 
 
“10. The High Court, therefore, should have posed a question 
as to whether any act of inducement on the part of the appellant 
has been raised by the second respondent and whether the 
appellant had an intention to cheat him from the very inception. 
If the dispute between the parties was essentially a civil dispute 
resulting from a breach of contract on the part of the appellants 
by non-refunding the amount of advance the same would not 
constitute an offence of cheating. Similar is the legal position in 
respect of an offence of criminal breach of trust having regard 
to its definition contained in Section 405 of the Penal Code.” 
 
This goes for allegations relating to Section 406 of the 1860 Code. 
11. So far as the allegations of commission of offence under 
Sections 504 and 506 of the 1860 Code are concerned, we have 
gone through the petition of complaint as well as the initial 
depositions.  The allegations pertaining to the aforesaid provisions 
of the 1860 Code surfaces in the last portion of the petition of 
complaint.  The complainant, in his initial deposition has not made 
any statement relatable to criminal intimidation. But his father 
made the following statement at that stage under Section 202 of 
the 1973 Code:-  
“…With effect from 18.07.2019, the Opposite Party had fixed 
rate of job work as Rs.1.65/- per piece with the company of my 
son, which remained continued till December, 2019 and 
Opposite Party used to make payment of job work to my son, 
also on this rate and an amount of Rs. 9,36,693.18/- of my son 
was due for payment on the Opposite Party, due to which, he 
demanded the Opposite Party to make payment, but, Opposite 
Party did not make payment and after doing calculation on less 
rates, he said that no amount is due for payment and on 
demanding money, the Opposite Party has abused my son with 
filthy language and has threatened him to kill. An amount of 
Rs. 9,36,693.18/- of my son is due for payment on the Opposite 
Party, which he clearly refused to pay the same.” 
(quoted verbatim from paperbook) 
 

11 
 
12. On behalf of the complainant, it has been urged that a 
detailed description of the offending acts need not be disclosed at 
the stage at which the appellant wants invalidation of the 
complaint. He has drawn our attention to the judgment of this 
Court in the case of Jagdish Ram -vs- State of Rajasthan and 
Another [(2004) 4 SCC 432].  In this judgment it has been, inter-
alia, held:-  
“10…. It is well settled that notwithstanding the opinion of 
the police, a Magistrate is empowered to take cognizance if 
the material on record makes out a case for the said 
purpose. The investigation is the exclusive domain of the 
police. The taking of cognizance of the offence is an area 
exclusively within the domain of a Magistrate. At this stage, 
the Magistrate has to be satisfied whether there is sufficient 
ground for proceeding and not whether there is sufficient 
ground for conviction. Whether the evidence is adequate for 
supporting the conviction, can be determined only at the trial 
and not at the stage of inquiry. At the stage of issuing the 
process to the accused, the Magistrate is not required to 
record reasons.” 
  
Similar views have been expressed by this Court in the case of 
Birla Corporation Ltd. -vs- Adventz Investments and Holdings 
Ltd. and Ors. [(2019) 16 SCC 610] as also Smt Nagawwa -vs-
Veeranna Shivalingappa Konjalgi and Others [(1976) 3 SCC 
736].  
 
13. As far as the allegations of criminal intimidation are 
concerned, our attention has been drawn to the judgment of this 

12 
 
Court in the case of Fiona Shrikhande -vs- State of Maharashtra 
and Another [(2013) 14 SCC 44].  It has been held in this case 
that the petition of complaint need not repeat the actual words or 
language of insult word by word and the complaint has to be read 
as a whole. If the Magistrate comes to a conclusion, prima facie, 
that there has been an intentional insult so as to provoke any 
person to break the public peace or to commit any other offence it 
should be sufficient to bring the complaint within the ambit of the 
aforesaid provision.  It has also been argued on behalf of the 
respondent no.2 that the appellant in any event has got the right 
to apply for discharge and the petition of complaint does not suffer 
from the defect of not having made out any offence at all. This was 
the view taken by the High Court.  
14. Past commercial relationship between the appellant’s 
employer and the respondent no.2 is admitted. It would also be 
evident from the petition of complaint the dispute between the 
parties centred around the rate at which the assigned work was to 
be done.  Neither in the petition of complainant nor in the initial 
deposition of the two witnesses (that includes the complainant) the 
ingredients of the offence under Section 405 of the 1860 Code 
surfaced.  Such commercial disputes over variation of rate cannot 

13 
 
per se give rise to an offence under Section 405 of the 1860 Code 
without presence of any aggravating factor leading to the 
substantiation of its ingredients. We do not find any material to 
come to a prima facie finding that there was dishonest 
misappropriation or conversion of any material for the personal 
use of the appellant in relation to gas supplying work done by the 
respondent no.2.  The said work was done in course of regular 
commercial transactions. It cannot be said that there was 
misappropriation or conversion of the subject property, being 
dissolved acetylene gas which was supplied to the factory for the 
purpose of battery manufacturing at EIL.  The dispute pertains to 
the revision of rate per unit in an ongoing commercial transaction. 
What has emerged from the petition of complaint and the initial 
deposition made in support thereof that the accused-appellant 
wanted a rate variation and the entire dispute arose out of such 
stand of the appellant. On the basis of these materials, it cannot 
be said that there was evidence for commission of offence under 
Section 405/406. The High Court also did not apply the test 
formulated in the case of Dalip Kaur (supra). We have narrated 
the relevant passage from that decision earlier. 

14 
 
15.  In the case of Binod Kumar and Ors. -vs- State of Bihar 
and Another [(2014) 10 SCC 663], a coordinate Bench of this 
Court dealt with a criminal complaint arising out of retention of 
bill amount in course of commercial transaction. The Court found 
essential ingredients of criminal breach of trust or dishonest 
intention of inducement, which formed the foundation of the 
complaint were missing.  The High Court’s judgment rejecting the 
plea for quashing the criminal proceeding was set aside by this 
Court. The reasoning for quashing the criminal proceeding would 
be revealed from paragraphs 18 and 19 of the Report, which 
reads:- 
“18. In the present case, looking at the allegations in the 
complaint on the face of it, we find that no allegations are 
made attracting the ingredients of Section 405 IPC. 
Likewise, there are no allegations as to cheating or the 
dishonest intention of the appellants in retaining the money 
in order to have wrongful gain to themselves or causing 
wrongful loss to the complainant. Excepting the bald 
allegations that the appellants did not make payment to the 
second respondent and that the appellants utilised the 
amounts either by themselves or for some other work, there 
is no iota of allegation as to the dishonest intention in 
misappropriating the property. To make out a case of 
criminal breach of trust, it is not sufficient to show that 
money has been retained by the appellants. It must also be 
shown that the appellants dishonestly disposed of the same 
in some way or dishonestly retained the same. The mere 
fact that the appellants did not pay the money to the 
complainant does not amount to criminal breach of trust. 
19. Even if all the allegations in the complaint taken at the 
face value are true, in our view, the basic essential 
ingredients of dishonest misappropriation and cheating are 
missing. Criminal proceedings are not a shortcut for other 
remedies. Since no case of criminal breach of trust or 

15 
 
dishonest intention of inducement is made out and the 
essential ingredients of Sections 405/420 IPC are missing, 
the prosecution of the appellants under Sections 406/120-
B IPC, is liable to be quashed.” 
 
16. So far as the criminal complaint and the initial depositions 
with which we are concerned in this case, the factual basis is 
broadly similar. We have reproduced these materials earlier in this 
judgment. We do not find they carry the ingredients of offence as 
specified in Section 405 of the 1860 Code.   
17. The allegation of criminal intimidation against the accused is 
made in the complaint statements made by the appellant, no 
particulars thereof have been given. Both in the complaint petition 
and the initial deposition of one of the witnesses, there is only 
reproduction of part of the statutory provision giving rise to the 
offence of criminal intimidation.  This would constitute a mere bald 
allegation, short of any particulars as regards to the manner in 
which threat was conveyed.  
18. While it is true that at the stage of issuing summons a 
magistrate only needs to be satisfied with a prima facie case for 
taking cognizance, the duty of the magistrate is also to be satisfied 
whether there is sufficient ground for proceeding, as has been held 
in the case of Jagdish Ram (supra). The same proposition of law 
has been laid down in the case of Pepsi Foods Ltd. and Anr. -vs- 

16 
 
Special Judicial Magistrate and Ors. [(1998) 5 SCC 749]. The 
learned Magistrate’s order issuing summons records the 
background of the case in rather longish detail but reflects his 
satisfaction in a cryptic manner. At the stage of issue of summons, 
detailed reasoning as to why a Magistrate is issuing summons, 
however, is not necessary. But in this case, we are satisfied that 
the allegations made by the complainant do not give rise to the 
offences for which the appellant has been summoned for trial. A 
commercial dispute, which ought to have been resolved through 
the forum of Civil Court has been given criminal colour by lifting 
from the penal code certain words or phrases and implanting them 
in a criminal complaint. The learned Magistrate here failed to apply 
his mind in issuing summons and the High Court also failed to 
exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the 1973 Code to 
prevent abuse of the power of the Criminal Court. 
19. It is true that the appellant could seek discharge in course of 
the proceeding itself before the concerned Court, but here we find 
that no case at all has been made out that would justify invoking 
the machinery of the Criminal Courts. The dispute, per se, is 
commercial in nature having no element of criminality. 

17 
 
20. The appellant also wanted dismissal of the complaint and the 
orders passed in ensuing proceeding on another ground. The 
respondent no. 2’s allegations were against EIL, for whom he did 
the job-work. The appellant’s argument on this point is that the 
complaint should not have been entertained without arraigning 
the principal company as an accused. The judgment relied upon 
on this point is a decision of a Coordinate Bench in the case of 
Sharad Kumar Sanghi -vs- Sangita Rane [(2015) 12 SCC 781]. 
This was a case where complaint was made by a consumer for 
being sold a damaged vehicle under Section 420 of the 1860 Code. 
But arraigned as accused was the managing director of the dealer, 
the latter being a corporate entity. Cognizance was taken in that 
case and summons were issued. The accused failed to get relief 
after invoking the High Court’s jurisdiction, but two-judge Bench 
of this Court quashed the proceeding primarily on the ground that 
the company was not made an accused. The Coordinate Bench 
found that the allegations were made against the company, which 
was not made a party. Allegations against the accused (managing 
director of that company) were vague. So far the present case is 
concerned, the ratio of the decision in the case of Sharad Kumar 
Sanghi (supra) would not be applicable for ousting the complaint 

18 
 
at the threshold on this ground alone. The perceived wrongdoing 
in this case has been attributed to the appellant, though the 
complaint petition acknowledges that the job-work was being done 
for EIL. Moreover, the allegation of criminal intimidation is against 
the appellant directly – whatever be the value or quality of such 
allegations. Thus, for that reason the complaint case cannot be 
rejected at the nascent stage on the sole ground of not implicating 
the company. But as otherwise we have given our reasons for 
quashing the complaint and the summons, we do not find any 
reason to dilate further on this point.  
21. We accordingly set aside the impugned judgment and quash 
the Criminal Complaint Case No.7990 of 2020 as also the 
summoning order issued on 18.08.2021. The appeal stands 
allowed in the above terms. All consequential steps in connection 
with the said proceeding shall stand quashed.  
 
 
 
………………………………. J.  
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE)  
 
 
 
 
……………………………… J.  
(SANJAY KUMAR) 
  
NEW DELHI;  
30th JANUARY, 2024