2024 INSC 779
1 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.             of 2024  
(ARISING OUT OF THE SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) 
NO.251 OF 2020) 
 
 
EKNATH KISAN KUMBHARKAR  
        …APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA  
               …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 J U D G M E N T 
 
Aravind Kumar, J.  
1. 
Leave granted.  
 
2. 
The sole accused who is the appellant before us was charged for 
murdering his pregnant daughter and being dissatisfied with the judgement 
dated 06/08/2019 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in 
Confirmation Case No.3 of 2017, by which the High Court confirmed the 
judgement and order of death sentence awarded by the Trial Court for the 
offences punishable under Section 302, Section 316 (10 years rigorous 
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2024.10.16
15:25:24 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
imprisonment and fine of Rs.5,000/-) and Section 364 (life imprisonment) 
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the present appeal has been preferred.  
 
BRIEF FACTS 
3. 
As per the case of the prosecution, the deceased Pramila was the 
daughter of appellant/accused and PW1/Smt. Aruna Kumbharkar and she is 
said to have married Mr. Deepak Kamble in the year 2013 against the wishes 
of her father and it was an inter-caste marriage. On 28/06/2013 at 5:30 AM, 
the appellant is said to have left his house and travelled in the auto rickshaw 
of PW2/Complainant/Pramod Ahire by informing him that his brother 
Navnath had met with an accident and requested PW2 to go to Kailash 
Nagar, Nandurnaka.  Appellant is said to have informed PW2 on the way 
that there was no incident of accident of his brother, however, his mother 
was serious, and her last wish was to see her granddaughter Ms. Pramila.  
Hence, they proceeded to the house of Pramila and, appellant is said to have 
informed Pramila’s mother-in-law/Sangita Kamble/PW3 that the health of 
his mother had deteriorated and she was in serious condition and she was 
longing to meet Pramila. PW3 is said to have informed the appellant that 
Pramila was nine months pregnant and that she had an appointment with the 
Doctor at 11:00 AM.  However, the appellant is said to have promised to get 
Pramila back by 10:00 AM and accordingly appellant and PW2 took her in 
the autorickshaw to Savkar Hospital. When they reached near the hospital, 

3 
 
the appellant told the PW2/Complainant that his maternal uncle is working 
in Savkar Hospital as a watchman and instructed PW2 to secure him. 
Accordingly, PW2 entered inside the hospital and called him and there was 
no response and after some time it was intimated by the ward boy of the 
hospital that watchman whom the PW2 was searching was not working 
there. Thereafter PW2 returned towards his auto rickshaw and at that point 
of time he saw, Pramila lying down on the lap of the appellant in the auto 
rickshaw and her neck was being strangulated by a rope in the hand of the 
appellant and he found foam was oozing out from her mouth. PW2 rushed 
towards the autorickshaw and questioned the appellant and was informed 
that he was not concerned with the consequence as she had spoiled his 
reputation.  PW2 started screaming and people from nearby area came near 
the autorickshaw but did not lend any helping hand. Thereafter PW2 dragged 
the appellant out of autorickshaw.  PW2 is said to have attempted to save 
Pramila by dragging the appellant away from her and at that point of time 
appellant is said to have ran away from the spot. PW2 immediately took her 
to Savkar Hospital and the doctor informed him to take her to civil hospital 
as it was a police case.  Hence, PW2 immediately took her to civil hospital 
where the doctor declared Pramila as dead. Subsequently, PW2 lodged a 
police complaint and on the basis of the same, police registered an FIR in 
CR No.159/2013.  
 

4 
 
4. 
After due investigation, the charge-sheet came to be filed against 
appellant under Sections 302, 316 and 364 of IPC. The case was committed 
to the Court of Session. The Trial Court framed charges against the appellant 
for offences punishable under Section 302, 316 and 364 of IPC and after 
pleading not guilty, he came to be tried for the aforesaid offences.  
 
5. 
To prove the charges against the accused, the prosecution examined 
10 witnesses. After closure of evidence of the prosecution, further statement 
of the accused under Section 313 CrPC was recorded. The case of the 
accused was of a total denial. He deposed that on account of previous 
monetary transactions between him and PW2, there was a dispute between 
them and he has been falsely implicated in the case.  Appellant did not 
examine any witness in support of his defence. The Trial Court after 
appreciation of the facts and evidence on record, convicted the appellant for 
the offences punishable under Sections 302, 316 and 364 of IPC and 
sentenced him as noted hereinabove.  The reference made by the Trial Court 
was numbered as Confirmation Case No.3/2017 before the High Court.  
 
6. 
By the impugned judgement and order, the High Court affirmed the 
reference made by the Trial Court and confirmed the death penalty and 
sentences awarded by the Trial Court under Sections 302, 316 and 364 IPC. 
Feeling aggrieved by the impugned judgement and order passed by the High 

5 
 
Court in confirming the reference made by the Trial Court, the appellant has 
preferred the present appeal.  
 
SUBMISSIONS 
7. 
Learned Senior Counsel, Dr. Aditya Sondhi appearing on behalf of 
the appellant has vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances 
of the case, both the Trial Court and the High Court have erred in convicting 
the appellant for the offences punishable under Sections 302, 316 and 364 
IPC. 
 
7.1 
It is further submitted that the motive for killing the deceased is not 
proved. It is submitted that the PW1's statement that appellant was angry 
with the deceased Pramila as she got married out of caste, is a vague 
statement and without basis. It is further submitted that appellant did not 
have any anger towards the deceased and same was evident, as he and 
deceased used to visit each other's house and the same is confirmed by PW1 
and PW3.  It is further submitted that deceased was married for over a year 
and it is unexplained by the prosecution as to why the appellant would wait 
for a year to commit the offence and that too in a public place. The learned 
counsel relied on the judgments of this Court in Balaji v State of 

6 
 
Maharashtra1, Dandu Jaggaraju v State of A.P.2 to contend that motive 
was not established as the accused knew of the inter caste marriage for long.  
 
7.2 
It is further submitted that the eyewitness PW2 is not reliable. It is 
submitted that PW2 had raised a loan by mortgaging appellant's second-hand 
motorcycle and that appellant and PW2 had heated exchange regarding the 
monetary transaction 15 days prior to the incident.   
 
7.3 
It is submitted that non examination of the wife of PW2 is fatal to 
the story of prosecution, as presence of appellant in the house of PW2 and 
appellant having left PW2’s autorickshaw along with him raises a serious 
doubt.  It is submitted that the appellant’s visit to the deceased house is also 
not proved.  
 
7.4 
It is further submitted that there are material contradictions in the 
testimonies of PW1 and PW3 regarding the events that occurred on 
28/06/2013, which casts a serious doubt on the reliability of these two 
witnesses.  
 
7.5 
It is further submitted that adverse inference has to be drawn against 
the prosecution for non-examination of material and independent witnesses, 
Narayan Ramrao i.e. owner of the tea stall located near the scene of incident; 
 
1 (2019) 15 SCC 575 
2 (2011) 14 SCC 674 

7 
 
Prakash Pawar and Jitendra Chaugule i.e. persons residing near Savkar 
Hospital and Babu Patil (ward boy of Savkar Hospital), despite their 
statements being recorded by Rajesh Arkhade/investigating officer/PW10.  
 
7.6 
It is submitted that even those persons who came to the spot after 
PW2 shouted for help, are also not examined by the prosecution. The learned 
counsel relied on the judgments in Jaikam Khan v. State of UP3, Jagadish 
v. State of Haryana4, Hem Raj v. State of Haryana5 to contend that non-
examination of independent witness by the prosecution is a serious infirmity 
and is fatal to the case of the prosecution.  
 
7.7 
It is submitted that evidence of Dr. Vikrant Savkar/PW5 is not 
trustworthy and reliable, and there are material contradictions in the 
testimonies of PW2 and PW5 regarding the events that occurred at the 
hospital.  
 
7.8 
It is further submitted that seizure and sealing of the string which is 
said to have been used by the accused to strangulate the deceased is not 
proved and there are discrepancies regarding the length of the same. It is 
submitted that it is not the case of the prosecution that string is linked and it 
was not seized from or at the behest of the appellant and it is also not the 
 
3 (2021) 13 SCC 716 
4 (2019) 7 SCC 711 
5 (2005) 10 SCC 614 

8 
 
case of prosecution that said string could have caused the ligature mark 
found around the neck of the deceased. 
 
7.9 
It is further submitted that the cause of injury nos.2 to 4 i.e. 
curvilinear scratches on the deceased's face and nose bridge is not proved by 
the prosecution.  
 
7.10 
It is submitted that multiple investigative errors are committed by 
the prosecution which casts a serious doubt on the entire prosecution case.  
 
7.11 
In the background of aforesaid submissions, learned counsel has 
prayed for appeal being allowed and appellant being acquitted for the 
offences for which he was tried.  In the alternative, it is prayed to convert 
the death sentence into life imprisonment, by contending that both Courts 
have failed to consider the mitigating circumstances in proper perspective.  
 
8. 
On the contrary, learned counsel appearing for the Respondent,     
Mr. Siddharth Dharmadhikari would support the case of the prosecution and 
contend that both the courts on proper evaluation of evidence have rightly 
arrived at a conclusion that appellant had committed the offences alleged 
and both the courts have rightly awarded the death sentence.  
 
8.1 
It is submitted that impugned judgement and order of the High Court 
is well reasoned and has been passed after considering the entire facts and 

9 
 
circumstances and same is not to be interfered with by this Court in exercise 
of jurisdiction vested under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.  
8.2 
It is submitted that the prosecution has been successful in proving 
the motive of the accused to take revenge and kill his daughter for having 
married outside the caste as clearly spoken to by the wife of the accused 
namely PW-1. 
8.3 
It is further submitted that the prosecution has been successful in 
establishing and proving that the deceased went with the appellant at his 
instance and that the appellant was seen strangulating her neck with 
rope/string and subsequently fleeing from the spot on being confronted by 
PW2.  All these circumstances will singularly point towards the guilt of the 
accused and does not give scope for raising any doubt.  
8.4 
It is further submitted that death of deceased Pramila was homicidal 
death, which has been established and proved by examining the doctors who 
conducted the post-mortem.  
8.5 
It is also submitted that this is a fit case to award death sentence and 
the case would fall into the “rarest of the rare case”. It is further submitted 
that the balance of mitigating and aggravating circumstances would not lie 
in favour of the appellant and he has committed a heinous crime by killing 
his own daughter who was in advanced pregnancy stage in a merciless 
manner. Therefore, it is prayed to dismiss the present appeal and confirm the 
death sentence awarded by the High Court.  

10 
 
 
9. 
Heard the learned counsel appearing for the respective parties at 
length. We have also gone through in detail the judgement and order passed 
by the Trial Court and High Court.  
 
DISCUSSION AND FINDING  
10. 
After considering the rival contentions and on perusal of the 
evidence tendered by the prosecution in general and in particular the 
depositions of PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3 it would clearly emerge that wife of 
the appellant (PW-1) has spoken in no uncertain terms that her husband was 
nursing grudge against their daughter namely the deceased Ms. Pramila for 
having married a person from a lower caste and thereby it had tarnished his 
image in the society.  She has further deposed that appellant used to feel that 
the community people of his caste had not accepted him, and he was being 
defamed in the society because of his daughter's inter-caste marriage. She 
further states, though appellant used to visit the house of Pramila, he had 
grouse against Pramila for having married out of their caste. She has further 
deposed that appellant strangulated Pramila with the string of her petticoat 
which he had carried and same was handed over by her to the police. PW-2, 
who is the complainant has reiterated his statement made under section 161 
Cr.P.C. before the police. He has deposed in extenso, the manner, the 
method, the mode in which appellant had perforced him to proceed towards 
the house of the brother of the appellant initially and in the mid-way had 

11 
 
changed his version namely, mother being serious and she intended to see 
her grand daughter i.e., deceased. He has also deposed that deceased was 
picked up from her marital home after informing the mother-in-law of the 
deceased and assuring her to be brought back before 10 AM in order to 
enable her visit to the Doctor who was attending to Ms. Pramila for 
pregnancy related tests.  PW-2  has also narrated the manner in which he 
was made to believe the words  of the appellant and was coaxed to fetch the 
watchman of Savkar Hospital. He has clearly deposed by the time he 
returned he had seen as to how Ms. Pramila was lying on the lap of the 
appellant who had strangulated her resulting in foam oozing out of her 
mouth and as a result he had shouted at the appellant which resulted in 
drawing the attention of the neighbours and help was sought from the public. 
Appellant is said to have escaped from the scene of occurrence leaving the 
deceased in the auto and she was rushed to Savkar Hospital initially and later 
shifted to the civil hospital, where she was pronounced dead.  
 
11. 
The testimony of PW1 and PW2 fortifies the case of the prosecution 
the motive of the appellant for commission of the crime. There was no 
reason for PW1 to depose falsely against her husband and it is also not the 
case of the appellant that his wife had any enmity towards him and she has 
falsely deposed against him. The evidence of PW1 is not shaken in the cross 

12 
 
examination. As such the contention of the appellant that motive for 
commission of crime is not proved by the appellant is liable to be rejected.  
 
 
12. 
It is an established principle of law that conviction can be based on 
the testimony of a sole eyewitness. This Court in the case of Vadivelu 
Thevar and another Vs. State of Madras6 has held that the court can act on 
the testimony of a single witness though uncorroborated. Unless 
corroboration is insisted upon by a statute, courts should not insist on 
corroboration except in cases where the nature of the testimony of the single 
witness itself requires as a rule of prudence that corroboration should be 
insisted upon. Whether corroboration of the testimony of a single witness is 
or is not necessary, would depend upon facts and circumstances of each case 
and depends upon the judicial discretion. In other words, this Court has held 
that court would be considered with the quality and not the quantity of the 
evidence necessary for proving or not proving a fact. 
 
13. 
Keeping the aforesaid principles in mind when we turn our attention 
to the testimony of eyewitness relied upon by the prosecution PW-2, it 
clearly fortifies the case of the prosecution. We find no reason to doubt the 
testimony of PW-2 as nothing worthwhile has been elicited in the cross-
 
6 AIR 1957 SC 614 

13 
 
examination to discredit his testimony or in other words it can be safely 
concluded that the testimony of PW-2 has stood the scrutiny. 
 
14. 
The thrust of the arguments canvassed on behalf of the appellant is 
to the effect that non-examination of the owner of the tea stall located near 
the scene of crime; non-examination of the ward boy of Savkar hospital; 
non-examination of independent witnesses who had assembled near the 
scene of crime on hue and cry being raised by PW-2; was fatal to the 
prosecution case. Though at first blush, said arguments looks attractive, on 
deeper examination it has to be answered against the appellant as it is settled 
principle of law that non-examination of independent witnesses by itself 
would not give rise to adverse inference against the prosecution. It would 
only assume importance when the evidence of eyewitness raises a serious 
doubt about their presence at the time of actual occurrence.7 
 
15. 
Yet another plea was raised that due to financial dispute between 
appellant and PW-2, he (PW-2) had falsely implicated the appellant. During 
course of examination, it was suggested to PW2 that there was some dispute 
between him and the appellant on account of monetary transaction. Though 
PW2 accepted that he had demanded a hand loan from the accused, he has 
denied that appellant had mortgaged his bike with the friend of PW2 and has 
 
7 Guru Dutt Pathak v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2021) 6 SCC 116 

14 
 
also denied the receipt of hand loan from the appellant. Section 103 of the 
Evidence Act, mandates that burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on 
that person who wishes the court to believe its existence. As such, burden 
was on the appellant to tender evidence for the purpose of proving the 
alleged financial transaction. Apart from making a bald statement in his  
statement  recorded under Section 313 of Cr.P.C., no efforts have been made 
by the appellant to either examine the friend of PW2 as a witness or tender 
any documentary evidence to prove the so called financial transaction. 
Hence, the plea of the appellant regarding alleged financial transaction with 
PW2 is not established.  
 
16. 
The evidence of PW3/Sangita Dashrath Kamble/Mother-in-law of 
the deceased would also strengthen the case of the prosecution. The 
testimony of PW3 is to the effect that appellant had visited her house on the 
date of incident around 7:00 AM to 7:30 AM and informed her that his 
mother was ill and she intended to see Pramila and as such he intended to 
take her with him. On being informed by PW3 that Pramila was 9 months 
pregnant and she needs to be taken to hospital at 11AM, appellant had 
assured to bring back Pramila at about 10AM. She has deposed that when 
Pramila did not return at 10:00 AM, she had asked her son Deepak to call 
his mother-in-law (PW-1) and on enquiry PW1 had questioned them as to 
why they had sent Pramila with her husband i.e. appellant. She is said to 

15 
 
have received information to visit Civil Hospital, accordingly, they all went 
to Civil Hospital and saw the dead body of Pramila. 
 
17. 
The testimony of PW3 corroborates with the testimony of PW2 on 
the aspect of the appellant visiting the house of deceased Pramila on the date 
of incident and taking her with him on the pretext, that his mother i.e. 
grandmother of Pramila was not keeping well and that she was desirous to 
see Pramila.  
 
18. 
After considering the evidence of PW1, PW2 and PW3 it is clear 
that appellant with the motive of killing his daughter had visited her 
matrimonial home along with PW2 and has taken her in an auto rickshaw on 
the pretext of visiting his mother and had strangulated her. The appellant is 
said to have asked PW2 to stop the auto near Savkar hospital and asked him 
to search for the watchman. By the time PW2 was back, the appellant was 
strangulating Pramila by means of a rope or string. The chain of events 
establish the guilt of the appellant beyond reasonable doubt and there are no 
other circumstances to disbelieve the theory of the prosecution. 
 
19. 
The case of the prosecution is further fortified by the testimony of 
PW6/Sri. Anand Vilas Pawar who performed the autopsy of Pramila. The 
testimony of PW6 is that death had occurred due to asphyxia consequent 
upon ligature strangulation via ligature mark and same is antemortem and 

16 
 
sufficient in ordinary course of nature to cause death. It was further deposed 
that death of the child in the womb of the mother was caused due to the death 
of the mother. He has further deposed that Injury No.1 was possible by the 
string (Article-B) seized by Police and the said string was identified by PW2 
and PW6.  
 
20. 
The appellant has drawn the attention of this court to some minor 
discrepancies in the evidence some of the prosecution witnesses. This Court 
in the case of Rohtash Kumar v State of Haryana8 has held that undue 
importance should not be given to minor omissions, contradictions and 
discrepancies which do not go to the heart of the matter and shake the basic 
version of the prosecution. 
 
21. 
This Court in the case of Manoj Suryavanshi v State of 
Chhattisgarh9 has held there are bound to be some discrepancies between 
the narration of different witnesses, when they speak on details, and unless 
the contradictions are of a material dimension, the same should not be used 
to jettison the evidence in its entirety. It is further observed that corroboration 
of evidence with mathematical niceties cannot be expected in criminal cases. 
Minor embellishment, there may be, but variations by reason therefore 
should not render the evidence unbelievable. Trivial discrepancies ought not 
 
8 (2013) 14 SCC 434 
9 (2020) 4 SCC 451 

17 
 
to obliterate an otherwise acceptable evidence. As such the contention of the 
appellant raised in this regard is liable to be rejected and accordingly it is 
rejected.  
 
22. 
For the reasons aforestated, we are of the opinion that High Court 
has not committed any error in upholding the conviction of the accused for 
the offences punishable under Sections 302, 316 and 364 IPC and we are in 
complete agreement with the view taken by the Trial Court and the High 
Court in that regard. 
 
23. 
The next question or incidental question that arises for our 
consideration is: Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, the 
capital punishment imposed on appellant by the Trial Court and confirmed 
by the High Court deserves to be maintained or not? 
 
24. 
This Court in the case of Madan v State of Uttar Pradesh10 has 
summarised the principles regarding the imposition of death penalty as 
punishment. It has been held after noticing the Constitution Bench case of 
Bachan Singh v State of Punjab11, that normal rule is that the offence of 
murder shall be punished with sentence of life imprisonment and the court 
can depart from that rule and impose the sentence of death only if there are 
special reasons for doing so and reasons are required to be recorded in 
 
10 2023 SCC Online SC 1473 
11 (1980) 2SCC 684 

18 
 
writing before imposing the death sentence. It has been further held that the 
guidelines indicated  in Bachan Singh’s case will have to be  applied to the 
facts of each individual case where the question of imposing of death 
sentence arises and after noticing the propositions emerging from the 
Bachan Singh’s case, it has been held that if it shocks the collective 
conscious of the society and fall in the category of ‘rarest of rare cases’, the 
imposition of death penalty may be warranted. As to whether the facts and 
circumstances of the case, warrants imposition of death penalty or not cannot 
be applied in any straight jacket formula and it would be on facts and 
circumstances unravelled in each case. It depends upon the terrain of facts 
and circumstances it may have travelled and takes its colour from the same 
or in other words with mathematical precision it cannot be moulded.  
 
25. 
Hence, the question which arises for our consideration in the instant 
case is whether the present case would fall in the category of “rarest of rare 
case” so as to confirm the death penalty or the sentence can be commuted? 
 
26. 
This Court vide order dated 25/04/2023 had called for a Prison 
Conduct Report, Probation Officer's Report of accused, Psychological 
Evaluation Report of Accused and Mitigation Investigation Report.  
 
27. 
As per prison conduct report dated 06/07/2023 forwarded by 
Superintendent, District Jail, Yervada, it is opined that appellant is aged 47 

19 
 
years and his conduct and behaviour is satisfactory with other inmates and 
prison staff. Same is the report of the probation officers dated 28/06/2023 
and they further state that appellant is not involved in any criminal activity 
in jail for the past 6 years and his behaviour with jail staff and inmates is 
satisfactory.  
 
28. 
As per the Mitigation Investigation Report forwarded by Ms. Neha 
Kangralkar dated 25/04/2023 titled ‘Mitigation Investigation Report for 
Eknath Kisan Kumbharkar’, the following mitigation circumstances are 
identified.  
i.Time spent in prison: Appellant has spent about 11 
years behind bars. 
ii.Absence of criminal antecedents 
iii. Socio-economic background: Appellant comes from a 
poor nomadic community in Maharashtra. He had an 
alcoholic father, and was forced to start working since 
the age of 5 to support his family, doing odd jobs such 
as cattle rearing and selling milk. After his marriage, he 
tried different jobs including driving an auto. 
iv.Adverse childhood experiences: Appellant suffered 
from parental neglect due to poverty and it was 
primarily his elder sisters who brought him up. He grew 
up witnessing his alcoholic father’s physical and verbal 
abuse, and dropped out of school when he was 10 years 
old and had to enter the workforce at an early age. 
v.Efforts to bring family out of poverty: Appellant 
made constant efforts to bring his family out of poverty, 
including by borrowing money to buy autos to earn 
more. However, due to his poverty and debt, he was 
unable to keep the autos. 
vi.Mental and emotional disturbance: Appellant was 
under immense pressure from his community due to the 
inter-caste marriage of the deceased as well as prior 
ostracization from their community due to a family 

20 
 
conflict. Further, the death of his son and subsequent 
substance dependence and pressures of poverty even 
prior to the incident may have already put him under 
mental and emotional disturbance. 
vii. During the mitigation interviews, he displayed speech 
issues, as also confirmed by the state reports. He has 
experienced social isolation in Yerwada, since prisoners 
called him yeda (mad) after the stroke. As a possible 
coping mechanism, he spent his time engaging in 
conversations with Mata- an imaginary woman. 
viii.Post conviction mental Illness: Appellant’s permanent 
cognitive impairment will only worsen with age. His 
mental health concerns including speaking to ‘Mata’ 
and having a confused understanding of the death 
sentence and what it entails. 
ix.During the early years of incarceration, Appellant 
engaged in multiple prison activities- learning English, 
doing art, and making bags.”  
 
29. 
The psychiatric assessment report dated 19/06/2023 submitted by 
Sasson General Hospital notes that the appellant has speech issues and 
significant cognitive impairment due to a stroke that he suffered from while 
in prison in 2021. The cardiological evaluation report from Sasson hospital 
records that the appellant had an angioplasty in 2014. He has ischemic heart 
disease, which requires continued medical management. The neurological 
evaluation notes that he has right sided hemiparesis due to his stroke in 2021 
and left frontoparietal gliosis per CT brain done in 2023. He has persistent 
speech deficit due to the stroke, which will continue and require continuous 
medical management throughout his life.  
 

21 
 
30. 
We have scrutinized the aforesaid reports submitted to this court. We 
find that the present case would not fall in the category of “rarest of rare 
cases” wherein it can be held that imposition of death penalty is the only 
alternative. We are of the considered opinion that the present case would fall 
in the category of middle path as held by this court in various judgments of 
this court12.  
 
31. 
In the instant case, it is to be noted that appellant hails from a poor 
nomadic community in Maharashtra. He had an alcoholic father and suffered 
parental neglect and poverty. He dropped out of school when he was 10 
years old and was forced to start working to support his family, doing odd 
jobs. All efforts put by the appellant to bring his family out of poverty did 
not yield desired results. Neither the appellant nor any of his family members 
have any criminal antecedent. It cannot be presumed that appellant is a 
hardened criminal who cannot be reformed. Hence, it cannot be said that 
there is no possibility of reformation, even though the appellant has 
committed a gruesome crime. 
 
32. 
The appellant was aged about 38 years at the time of commission of 
the crime. He has no criminal antecedents and there are various other 
 
12 Swamy Shraddananda (2) v. State of Karnataka, (2008) 13 SCC 767; Shankar Kisanrao Khade v. State 
of Maharasthra, (2013) 5 SCC 546; Gandi Doddabasappa alias Gandhi Basavaraj v. State of Karnataka, 
(2017) 5 SCC 415; Prakash Dhawal Khairnar (Patil) v. State of Maharastra, (2002) 2 SCC 35, Mohinder 
Singh v. State of Punjab, (2013) 3 SCC 294; Madan v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 2023 SCC Online SC 1473 
 

22 
 
mitigating circumstances existing in his favour as per the reports which we 
have discussed above. The medical reports of the appellant would disclose 
that he has speech issues, and he has undergone an angioplasty in 2014, apart 
from suffering other serious ailments, as already noted herein above. The 
conduct report from the prison would disclose that the behaviour of the 
appellant in the jail is satisfactory with everyone for the past six years. 
Considering these factors, we are of the considered view that even though 
the crime committed by the appellant is unquestionably grave and 
unpardonable, it is not appropriate to affirm the death sentence that was 
awarded to him. The doctrine of “rarest of rare” requires that death sentence 
should not be imposed only by taking into consideration the grave nature of 
crime but only if there is no possibility of reformation by a criminal. Being 
conscious of the fact that sentence of life imprisonment is subject to 
remission, which would not be appropriate in view of the gruesome crime 
committed by the appellant, the course of middle path requires to be adopted 
in the instant case. In that view of the matter, we find that the death penalty 
needs to be converted to a fixed sentence during which period the appellant 
would not be entitled to apply for remission.  
 
33. 
The appeal is therefore, partly allowed. The order of conviction as 
recorded by the Trial Court and confirmed by the High Court of Judicature 
at Bombay vide order dated 06/08/2019 in Confirmation Case No.3/2017 is 

23 
 
affirmed. However, the sentence of death penalty imposed by the courts 
below under Section 302 is converted to 20 years of rigorous imprisonment 
without remission. It is made clear that appellant-accused shall not be 
entitled to make any representation for remission till he completes 20 years 
of actual rigorous imprisonment.  
 
34. 
The appeal is allowed to the extent noted herein above. Pending 
application(s), if any, stands consigned to records. 
 
 
 
…….………………….J. 
 (B.R. Gavai) 
 
 
 
…….………………….J. 
 (Aravind Kumar) 
 
 
 
…….………………….J. 
 (K.V. Viswanathan) 
 
New Delhi, 
October 16, 2024