2024 INSC 818
1
[NON-REPORTABLE]
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.3398/2024
VIMALAKKA RAMAPPA KOLI @ TALWAR                  Appellant(s)
                            VERSUS
THE STATE OF KARNATAKA                          Respondent(s)
JUDGMENT
ABHAY S.OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.
The appellant-accused was prosecuted for the offences
punishable under Sections 196, 198, and 420 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘the IPC’).  The allegation of
the  prosecution  is  that  on  an  application  made  by  the
appellant on 9th September, 2022 to the competent authority
falsely claiming that she belongs to Hindu Holer Caste, which
was a Scheduled Caste, a caste certificate was issued stating
that she belongs to Hindu Holer Caste.  Based on the caste
certificate, the appellant applied for a grant of a loan to
Karnataka  Scheduled  Caste  and  Scheduled  Tribe  Development
Corporation Limited, Belgaum and the loan was granted.  Later
on, the certificate was scrutinized by the District Caste
Verification Committee (the Committee), which concluded that
the appellant did not belong to the Hindu Holer Caste but
Digitally signed by
KAVITA PAHUJA
Date: 2024.11.20
17:56:08 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
belonged  to  the  Hindu  Talwar  Caste.  Accordingly,  the
Committee  invalidated  the  caste  certificate.  Based  on  the
First Information Report registered, a charge sheet was filed
against  the  appellant  for  the  offences  punishable  under
Sections 196, 198 and 420 of the IPC.  
2.  The  learned  Judicial  Magistrate  passed  an  order  of
acquittal.  In an appeal against acquittal preferred by the
respondent-State, the Sessions Court, by judgment dated 21st
January,  2015,  overturned  the  order  of  acquittal  and
convicted  the  appellant  for  the  offences  punishable  under
Sections 196, 198 and 420 of the IPC.  The appellant was
sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for three years and
a  fine  of  Rs.5,000/-.   In  default,  he  was  sentenced  to
undergo  simple  imprisonment  for  three  months.   The  same
sentence  was  imposed  for  the  offences  punishable  under
Sections 198 and 420 of the IPC.
3.
In a revision petition filed by the appellant, the High
Court confirmed the conviction for the offences punishable
under  Sections  198  and  420  of  the  IPC  by  the  impugned
judgment. However, it acquitted the appellant for the offence
punishable under Section 196 of the IPC.  The High Court
reduced the substantive sentence to six months.
SUBMISSIONS
4.
The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the
appellant is that while overturning the order of acquittal,

3
there  is  no  finding  recorded  by  the  Sessions  Court  that
ingredients of offences punishable under Sections 196, 198
and 415 read with Section 420 of the IPC were proved by the
prosecution.   He  submitted  that  the  Sessions  Court  was
impressed by the fact that the appellant did not challenge
the  order  cancelling  the  caste  certificate.   The  learned
counsel  appearing  for  the  State  supported  the  impugned
judgments of the Sessions Court and High Court.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
5.
We have carefully perused the judgment of the Trial and
Sessions Courts. As far as an appeal against acquittal is
concerned, the law is well settled. The Appellate Court has
to examine whether the findings recorded in the acquittal
judgment are plausible findings that could have been recorded
based on the evidence on record.  Only if the Appellate Court
is satisfied that the guilt of the accused is duly proved was
the only plausible finding which could have been recorded
based  on  the  evidence  on  record,  the  Appellate  Court  can
overturn  the  order  of  acquittal.  In  this  case,  no  such
finding  has  been  recorded  by  the  Sessions  Court.    Only
because it is possible to take another view is no ground to
overturn an order of acquittal. 
6.
We find that the Sessions Court has not adverted to the
ingredients  of  the  offences  for  which  the  appellant  was
convicted.  Perhaps the Sessions Court felt troubled because

4
there were many cases where the caste certificates issued by
the competent authority were being invalidated, and people
were taking undue advantage of such certificates.  Moreover,
the  Sessions  Court  was  impressed  by  the  fact  that  the
appellant  did  not  challenge  the  Committee’s  order
invalidating the caste certificate.
7.
As there is no finding recorded that the ingredients of
the  offences  alleged  have  been  proved,  the  order  of
conviction passed by the Sessions Court cannot be sustained.
Section 198 of the IPC reads thus:
“198. Using as true a certificate known to
be  false.—Whoever  corruptly  uses  or
attempts to use any such certificate as a
true  certificate,  knowing  the  same  to  be
false  in  any  material  point,  shall  be
punished in the same manner as if he gave
false evidence.” 
(Underline supplied)          
The Section used the word “corruptly”. Therefore, it is
obvious  that  mens  rea is  an  essential  ingredient  of  the
offence.  Only because the appellant could not establish her
caste claim before the Committee, one cannot conclude that
the  appellant  corruptly  used  the  caste  certificate.
Moreover, corruptly using the certificate is not sufficient.
The  accused  must  have  knowledge  that  the  certificate  is
false. The allegation that the certificate is false to the
knowledge of the appellant must be proved by the prosecution.

5
8.
When the competent authority grants a caste certificate,
it can be invalidated on various grounds.  One reason can be
that the person could not substantiate his caste claim.  The
second  can  be  that  fabricated  or  forged  documents  were
produced to support the caste claim. There is no finding that
the caste certificate was invalidated on this ground.  It is
not in dispute that the caste certificate was issued by the
authority which was competent to issue it after following due
procedure.  Therefore, the caste certificate, per se, cannot
be false or fabricated. If a caste certificate is invalidated
as the applicant could not prove his caste cannot be termed
false only on the ground that it was invalidated. There is no
evidence  to  show  that  the  caste  certificate  was  false.
Therefore, the ingredients of Section 198 of the IPC were not
made out.  
9.  The same is the case with cheating, defined by Section
415 of the IPC and punishable under Section 420 of the IPC.
Fraudulent  or  dishonest  acts  are  essential  ingredients  of
cheating.  The Sessions Court has recorded no such finding
regarding any fraudulent or dishonest acts on the part of the
appellant.
10.
This is not a case where the Committee had recorded a
categorical  finding  on  facts  that  the  claim  made  by  the
appellant was false.
11.
Considering the above discussion, it is evident that the

6
Sessions  Court  could  not  have  overturned  the  order  of
acquittal.  The High Court while confirming the order of the
Sessions  Court  has  not  even  considered  the  fact  that  the
Sessions Court has not recorded a finding that ingredients of
the  offences  were  established.  Therefore,  the  appeal  must
succeed.  Judgment and order dated 21st January, 2015 passed
by the Learned VII Additional District and Sessions Judge,
Belgaum in Criminal Appeal No.2/2014 and judgment and order
dated 11th August, 2015 passed by the High Court in Criminal
Revision Petition No.100045/2015 are hereby set aside, and
the  judgment  of  the  learned  Magistrate  dated  26th August,
2013 in CC No.374/2005 is hereby restored.
12.
The Appeal is accordingly allowed.
13.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
                             ..........................J.
                        (ABHAY S.OKA)  
  
   ..........................J.
(AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)
NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 16, 2024.

7
ITEM NO.108               COURT NO.6            SECTION II-C
               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Criminal Appeal  No.3398/2024
VIMALAKKA RAMAPPA KOLI @TALWAR                   Appellant(s)
                                VERSUS
THE STATE OF KARNATAKA                          Respondent(s)
(IA No. 95851/2024 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.
IA No. 95848/2024 - PERMISSION TO FILE ADDITIONAL 
DOCUMENTS/FACTS/ANNEXURES)
 
Date : 16-10-2024 This matter was called on for hearing 
today.
CORAM : 
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ABHAY S. OKA
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH
For Appellant(s)   Mr. Chandrashekhar A. Chakalabbi, Adv.
                   Mr. S.K Pandey, Adv.
                   Mr. Awanish Kumar, Adv.
                   Mr. Anshul Rai, Adv.
                   M/S. Dharmaprabhas Law Associates, AOR
                   
For Respondent(s)  Mr. D. L. Chidananda, AOR
                   
       UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R
The  Appeal  is  allowed  in  terms  of  the  signed  Non-
Reportable Judgment.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
  (KAVITA PAHUJA)                            (AVGV RAMU)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                     COURT MASTER (NSH)
[Signed order is placed on the file]