2024 INSC 814
1-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
 NON-REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).                              OF 2024 
(Arising out of  Special Leave Petition Nos. 9202-9204 of 2016) 
 
JOGINDER SINGH (DEAD) THR. LRs        
            …  APPELLANT(S) 
Versus 
DR. VIRINDERJIT SINGH GILL (DEAD)  
THR. LRS. & ORS.   
            
 
 
 
... RESPONDENT(S) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
SANJAY KAROL J. 
Leave to Appeal is granted.  
2. 
Questioned in these appeals are three judgements of the High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana passed in CR No. 4418 of 2012 (O & M) dated 6th May 
2015 and 16th September 2015 along with RA-CR No. 265-CII of 2015 in CR 
No. 4418 of 2012, dated 20th November 2015. The orders in civil revision (dated 
6th May and 16th September 2015) were interim and final, respectively, 
dismissing such a revision against order and judgment dated 17th January 2012 
of the Additional District Judge, Moga, which allowed the appeal against the 
order and judgment dated 17th January 2009 of the Civil Judge, Junior Division 
Digitally signed by
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2024.10.23
17:11:00 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
who had allowed the objections taken by the Appellants herein in the execution 
petition filed to enforce the final decree in  Civil Suit No. 266 of 1987. 
BACKGROUND OF THE INSTANT DISPUTE 
3. 
Although the bone of contention before this court relates to execution 
proceedings and the objections taken therein, the factual milieu in which the 
controversy has come to stand, as it does today, is important for the purpose of 
disposal of these appeals. 
3.1 
 Civil Suit No.66 of 19791 was filed by Mukand Singh (father of the 
Appellant, now represented by LRs) and Chanan Singh against a total of thirty-
three persons, including Dr. Thakar Singh (father of the Respondent 1 & 2) and 
LRs of Nand Singh, seeking declaration and separate possession of a half share 
of the land in Khasra No.6363, Khatauni No.7257 and Khasra No.2259 
(measuring 2 Kanals - 18 Marlas). Out of the thirty-three defendants only two, 
namely, Dr. Thakar Singh and one Karamjit Singh were represented, while 
others remained ex-parte. The suit was decreed and the plaintiffs were declared 
owners and possessors of half share of the above property. An appeal was filed 
thereagainst, but the same came to be dismissed vide order and judgment dated 
18th October 1982. In pursuance thereof, a warrant of possession in favour of 
Mukand Singh was issued on 21st September 1985.   
 
1 First Partition Suit 

3-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
The dispute before this court pertains only to Khasra No.2259 (2 Kanals - 18 
Marlas), which is part of Schedule ‘D’ properties described in the plaint. 
3.2 
Subsequently in 1987, Dr Thakar filed Civil Suit No.2662 against  the LRs 
Nand Singh and approximately seventy other defendants,  for his individual one-
fourth share of 58 marlas (Khasra No.2259).   It is to be noted that plaintiffs in 
the first partition suit were defendants in this second partition suit, which 
included Mukand Singh, the father of Joginder Singh (now represented through 
LRs). The Additional Senior Sub-Judge, First Class, Moga, framed the following 
issues :- 
1. Whether the plaintiff is owner to the extent of share in the 
property as detailed in the head note of the plaint?  OPP 
 
2. Whether suit is not maintainable? OPD 
 
3. Whether suit is not properly valued for court fees and 
jurisdiction? OPD 
 
4. Whether suit is bad for misjoinder of parties? OPD 
 
5. Whether plaintiff is entitled to the decree of possession as 
prayed for? OPP 
 
6. Relief. 
 
For Issues 1 and 5, the learned civil court held that “the plaintiff is owner in 
possession as co-sharer to the extent of share as mentioned and detailed in 
Schedule ABCD in the headnote and as such he is entitled to the decree in 
possession by way of partition. Accordingly, I decide both these issues in favour 
 
2 Second Partition Suit 

4-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
of the plaintiff and against the defendants.” Similarly, Issues 2, 3 and 4 were 
also decided in favour of the plaintiff, and the suit was accordingly decreed with 
costs. In a subsequent application, the learned civil court appointed a local 
commissioner.  The first report came on 15th December 1996, and an additional 
report was submitted on 25th October 1997. 
3.3 
On 4th February, 1998, a final decree was drawn up in the above suit with 
only one respondent, namely, Karamjit Singh being represented and others ex-
parte.  In respect of the contested portion, the final decree records “…Properties 
shown in headnote ‘D’ of the plaint be partitioned as suggested by local 
commissioner and possession of khasra nos. 2258/1 and 2258/2 as shown be 
letters A.B.C.D.E.F.G.H.I.J.K.L.M., and possession of Kh.o.2259 as shown by 
letters N.O.P.Q, in the site plan Annexure LC-VI be delivered to the plaintiffs-
applicants.”.  On 25th January 2002, the Respondents herein, i.e., the decree 
holders filed an execution petition.  
3.4 
The present appellant, now represented by LRs (son of Mukand Singh) 
filed objections to the execution petition on 25th January, 2002, under Order XXI 
Rule 58, 97 r/w Section 47 and 151 of the Code Civil Procedure, 19083. 
Objections to the Execution 
4.  
The objections so filed4 are reproduced below for reference: 
“The objector most respectfully submits as under :- 
 
3 Hereinafter referred to as ‘CPC’ 
4 Annexure P-6 

5-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
1. That the above noted execution is pending in this Hon’ble Court and is 
fixed for today. 
2. That in the instant execution apart from other property, property 
bearing Khasra no.2259 (2 Kanals-18 Marlas) is also the subject 
matter. 
 
3. That the above said execution application is not maintainable against 
the property bearing khasra Nos.2259/1 (1-6), 2259/2 (0-4), 2259/3    
(0-12), 2259/1 (0-16) as entered in the jamabandi for 1997-98, which 
is owned and possessed by the objector. 
 4. That the above said execution is liable to be dismissed - qua the 
property duly shown in the site plan, which is part of khasra 
nos.2259/1, 2259/2, 2259/1 for the reasons noted below :- 
i. That the property measuring 14.60 marlas which is part of khasra 
no.2259 is owned and possessed by the objector since 25.5.1989 by 
virtue of civil court decree passed in civil suit no.107-1 of 27.4.1989 
decided on 25.5.1989 by the court of the then Additional Senior Sub 
Judge Moga.  Since then the objector is the owner in possession of 
14.60 marlas out of khasra no.2259 and he has raised huge 
construction on it by spending more than Rs.15.0 lacs.  After 
construction, the objection has rented out parts of the premises 
constructed on khasra no.2259 to different persons and in same 
portion, he himself is in possession. 
ii.  That vide warrants of possession dated 8.9.85 passed in execution 
No.116-10 of 12.5.84 by the court of Shri B.C. Rajput, P.C.S., the then 
Additional Senior Sub Judge Moga, 14.60 marlas out of this property 
was given in possession to father of the objector i.e. Mukand Singh. 
iii. That father of objector Shri Mukand Singh died in the year of 1993 
and he used to reside along with the objector at Ludhiana since 1965 
and as such no proper service either of the objector or his father was 
ever got effected by the decree holders.  Rather the decree holders 
have mis-guided the honourable court as he was very well within his 
knowledge that Mukand Singh had died in the year of 1993 and he is 
residing at Ludhiana.  Further more since 1989, the objector is the 
owner in possession of the property in question and this fact is in the 
knowledge of the decree holder and his Legal representatives, but with 
ulterior motive, neither the decree holder Thakur Singh nor his L/Rs 
ever informed or brought to the notice of the court that the property 
described & shown in the site plan, which is part of khasra No.2259 is 
owned and possessed by the objector and by misguiding the 
honourable court, got the property into their shares, which was owned 
and possessed by the objector. 
iv. That the objector had no knowledge regarding the pendency of the 
litigation regarding the property in dispute, as he had no occasion to 
know the same, as the decree holder willfully and with ulterior 
motive, kept the honourable court in dark regarding the possession 
and ownership of the objector.  Had the decree holder brought the fact 
regarding ownership and possession of the objector over the property 

6-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
in dispute, the Honourable court must have called the objectors.  Even 
in law, the objector was a necessary party, as he was got title in the 
property, which is the subject matter of the property, which is under 
execution in the instant petition. 
v. That the objector is a bonafide transferee of the property in dispute 
vide civil court decree detailed and described above.  Mutation 
no.6016 on the basis of above said decree was also entered and 
sanctioned in his favour.  Even in revenue record, name of the objector 
is clearly, mentioned, but with ulterior motive, the decree holder has 
not brought the revenue record before the Honourable court, so that 
truth should not come to the knowledge of the court.  Under the garb 
of the orders of the Hon’ble Court and by concealment, the decree 
holder might get the possession of the property, which is duly shown 
in the attached site plan and which bears khasra Nos.2259/1 etc. as 
detailed above. 
vi. That Varinderjit Gill d/o Dr. Thakur Singh filed an injunction suit 
against the objector and his son Manprit Singh, which is also pending 
in this Hon’ble Court.  Son of the objector is not residing with him 
and is living separately at Moga, as he is not on good terms with the 
objector.  Son of the objector told the objector on 22.1.2002 regarding 
the fact that he has received the summons from this Honourable court.  
After inquiry it came to the notice of the objector regarding pendency 
of injunction suit and from the plaint of the injunction suit, the 
objector came to know regarding the passing of the final decree dated 
4.2.1998 and the preliminary decree regarding the property in dispute 
and he was stunned to know that by frustrating the provisions of law 
and by concealment, the decree holder was going to cause a huge 
irreparable loss to him by misguiding the Honourable Court. 
vii.   That it is mentioned here that father of the objector and the 
objector himself left Moga in the year 1979 and since then, they are 
permanently residing at Ludhiana.  It is not understood that how the 
service of the objector or his father was got effected.  As a matter of 
fact, neither the objector nor his father ever received any service nor 
they ever refused to accept the service from the Hon’ble Court. 
 
It seems that the D.H. by mis-guiding the Hon’ble Court and 
concealment, got the ex-parte decree against father of the objector, 
although after 25.9.1989 the objector became the owner in possession 
of 14.6 marlas of the property.  
5. That both in law & equity the property described in the site plan & of 
which the objector was made owner in possession vide judgment & 
decree dt. 25.5.1989 is not liable to any execution of any final decree 
dt. 4.2.98 or any preliminary decree, as the objector was not party in 
the same and he was neither served nor summoned.  The objector as 
Legal heir of his father Mukand Singh will file appropriate application 
for setting aside the final decree & pre-decree. 
6. That the D.Hs are stopped by their act & conduct & on the principle of 
acquisance to file execution reg: the property shown in the site plan, 

7-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
as D.Hs have been seen the objector raising the construction, but 
never objected them. 
7.  That cause of action arose to the objector on 22.1.2002 his son 
Manprit Singh talked to him reg: pendency of the injunction suit. 
8.  That the property is situated within the jurisdiction of this Hon’ble 
Court. 
9. Hence it is prayed that the objection petition may kindly be accepted 
and the instant execution be dismissed qua 14.60 marlas of the 
property duly shown in the attached site plan, which is owned and 
possessed by the objector & in which the D.Hs have got no right, title 
or interest.”" 
5.  
A response to objections was filed on 22nd March, 20025, where 
preliminary objections of locus standi and maintainability were taken. The said 
objections are extracted in toto, as under:- 
“It is respectfully submitted as under :- 
Preliminary Objections :- 
1. That the objector has no locus standi to file objections. 
 
2. The objections as framed are not maintainable. 
 
On Merits :- 
 
1. Para No.1 needs no reply 
 
2. Para No.2 is matter of record. 
 
3. Para No.3 is wrong & denied.  It is wrong and denied that Khasra 
No.2259/1 to 2259/3 & 2259/1 as alleged is owned by objector.  The 
total area of these Khasra numbers comes to 2K-18M.  The objector in 
Para No.4(1) below claims 14 ½ marlas on the basis of Civil Court 
Decree, but in this para claims the whole.  The objector cannot blow 
hot & cold. 
 
4. Para no.4 is wrong and denied. 
(i) This sub para is wrong and denied, the perusal of decree (Final 
shows that D.H. is claiming 1q/4 share in Khasra No.2259.  The ¼  
share comes to 14 ½ Marlas meaning thereby that whole of Khasra 
No.2259 is not claimed by the D.H.  It is wrong & denied that objector 
has any right, title or interest in the portion of Khasra No.2259 allotted 
 
5 Annexure P-7 

8-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
to D.H. in partition proceeds through civil court.  Moreover Mukand 
Singh was very much a party to the Civil Court Decree. 
(ii)   Sub Para (ii) is wrong and denied. 
(iii) Sub Para (iii) is wrong and denied.  It is wrong & denied that 
there was no proper service as alleged of Mukand Singh.  Plaintiff 
filed suit on 11-06-87 which was decreed by way of preliminary 
decree on 15-10-90.  Final decree proceedings initiated on 26-3-91 
became final on 4-2-98.  The objector has no right, title or interest in 
the property allotted to D.H. out of Khasra No.2259. 
(iv) Sub Para (iv) is wrong and denied.  Detailed reply has been given 
above. 
(v) Sub Para (v) is wrong and denied.  Detailed reply has been given 
above. 
(vi) This sub para is wrong & denied as alleged.  Pendency of 
injunction suit is admitted.  The very objector is a party to the said 
suit.  It is wrong & denied the objector learnt about the suit on 22-1-
2002 as alleged.  Nothing has been concealed by D.H. 
(vii)   This sub para is wrong & denied.  In Sub para (iii) above 1965 
is the alleged year & this sub para 1979 is the alleged year of 
departure from Moga and whereas the alleged Civil Court Decree is 
dated 27-04-89.  The fact is that neither the objector nor his father 
ever left Moga & reside at Moga.  Service was effect in according 
with law. 
 
5. Para No.5 is wrong and denied. 
 
6. Para No.6 is wrong and denied. 
 
7.  Para No.7 is wrong and denied. 
 
8.  Para No.8 is wrong and denied. 
 
9.  Para No.9 is wrong and denied. 
It is, therefore, prayed that the objection petition may kindly be 
dismissed with costs.”  
 
6. 
The Civil Judge, Junior Division, found the objections raised fully 
maintainable. A perusal of the said judgment and order reveals the following 
reasons for such a conclusion- 
(i) 
The objector (appellant herein) is a co-sharer in the property, 
having one-fourth share thereof. The decree holder does not have a 
better title than the objector; 

9-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
(ii) 
It was held that if the decree holder is entitled to get his share, the 
objector shares such entitlement. The decree only qua the shares of 
the decree holder is non-executable without determination of shares 
of the other parties and as such, modification of the decree is 
required. 
(iii) 
On the aspect of maintainability it was observed that since the 
objector is a co-sharer, he possesses the requisite locus standi to file 
objections.  
(iv) 
The submission of the decree holder in regard to the maintainability 
of the objections was dismissed by the learned Judge having 
observed that the principle of res judicata does not apply to 
execution proceedings. 
7. 
An appeal against such a finding was filed before the Additional District 
Judge, Moga, as Civil Misc. Appeal RT No.105/27.05.2011, which was allowed 
vide Order dated 17th January 2012. The reasoning therefor may be summarized 
as under:- 
(i) 
No fault can be found with the preliminary decree on the ground 
that the learned Civil Court did not decide the shares of the 
remaining parties at the time of passing of the decree.   
(ii) 
Reliance was placed on the well-recognized principle that the 
executing court cannot go behind the decree nor can it modify the 
same.  Modification can only be carried out by the court which 
passed the decree.    
(iii) 
If there was any defect in service to the predecessor-in-interest of 
the objector, such ground should have been raised in modification 
of the decree in appeal, however, such recourse was not taken 
and instead he filed objections to the execution. 

10-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
(iv) 
Relying on Usha Sinha v. Dina Sinha6 it was held that per the 
doctrine of lis pendens, the objector was bound by the decree under 
execution.  Lis pendens on its own is a notice to the purchaser that 
he is bound by a decree that may be entered in the pending suit.  
Given that the property was transferred in the name of the objector 
by his father, Mukand Singh during the pendecy of the suit, he 
would be bound by the decree.   
(v) 
The objector ought to have raised all objections before the Civil 
Court by filing an application for setting aside the ex-parte decree 
against his father and predecessor-in-interest, Mukand Singh and 
not by filing objections to the execution.   
 
8. 
Aggrieved by allowing the appeal, the High Court was approached under 
Article 227 of the Constitution of India.  The appellant’s revision petition was 
dismissed observing that- 
(i) 
 The objections raised under Order XXI Rule 58 read with Order 
XXI Rule 97 read with Section 47 of the C.P.C. have to be rejected 
at the threshold since the latter deals with all issues relating to the 
subject of execution and cannot adjudicate on individual rights of 
the persons who are not parties.  Order XXI Rule 58 enables third 
parties to present their claims in relation to the suit.  The 
objector/appellant being the son of the judgment debtor, is not a 
third party to the suit.   
(ii) 
Objection under XXI Rule 97 would have to be discarded by 
virtue of Order XXI Rule 102 which bars the creation of any 
obstruction, pendente lite.    
(iii) 
If a decision was under Order XXI Rule 58 or 97, an appeal was 
the only possible remedy, which the objector has utilized.  If the 
 
6 (2008) 7 SCC 144 

11-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
objection is under Section 47, only revision is maintainable.  The 
case erroneously made its way to the Court of the Additional 
District Judge because the Executing Court allowed “a 
meaningless petition to be entertained which contained a reference 
to inconsistent provisions”.  In other words, if Section 47 was 
taken recourse to as a successor in interest, then a petition under 
Order XXI Rule 58 or Order XXI Rule 97 could not have been 
maintained. 
(iv) 
The duty of determining the share of each party arises only when 
such party seeks said determination.  The absence of such a prayer 
does not take away the competence of a Court to uphold a 
plaintiff’s claim and determination of his share.   
(v) 
Having observed thus, the matter was kept pending for the 
executing court to appoint a local commissioner who was to be the 
Naib Tehsildar of the concerned district.  The remit was to identify 
the property in Khasra No.2259 and locate 58 Marlas in that 
Khasra number; assess the nature of construction and the extent of 
vacant land and draw up a plan accordingly.  
(vi) 
The matter was taken up on 16th September, 2015.  The relevant 
portion of the order is extracted : 
 
“2. The property inspected and the report submitted to 
Court by the Naib Tehsildar, Moga would show that 
there is no vacant space available in 2259/4 except in 
an extent of 50’x33’ adjoining the Maruti Showroom 
which is stated to have been sold to yet another sharer.  
I was only looking for availability of vacant space on 
the western side for that was the property which was 
vacant at the time when the suit was instituted.  If 
constructions have come subsequently and the 
defendant himself has allowed for such constructions to 
come up after the institution of the suit, he cannot have 
the benefit of retention of the property unless the 
property where the construction has come was 
subsequently allotted to him in the final decree.  He had 
not applied for final decree and the plaintiff has been 

12-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
granted the share which is now occupied by the 
defendant.  The final decree must go to the next logical 
stage of making available the property for recovery of 
possession and the objection taken by the defendant in 
relation to the execution of the decree after the final 
decree was passed cannot be sustained.  The Court has 
the power to demolish the construction, if the 
petitioner-objector does not voluntarily do so.” 
 
9. 
Aggrieved by the above findings, revision was preferred thereagainst and 
by order dated 20th November, 2015, the same was dismissed.   
10. 
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.  The question that arises 
for our consideration is whether the objections filed by the present appellant, 
now represented through LRs, are maintainable and warrant interference with 
the decree of the learned civil court.   
 
RELEVANT PROVISIONS AND THE POSITION OF LAW  
11. 
As noticed supra, the objections filed are under Order XXI Rules 58 and 
97 read with Section 47 of the C.P.C.  It is necessary to avert to the provisions 
and the position of law settled by this Court prior to proceeding to the merits of 
the matter.   
“Section 47. Questions to be determined by the Court executing 
decree.— 
 
(1) All questions arising between the parties to the suit in which the 
decree was passed, or their representatives, and relating to the 
execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree, shall be determined 
by the Court executing the decree and not by a separate suit.  
(2)  ... 
(3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not the 
representative of a party, such question shall, for the purposes of this 
section, be determined by the Court.   
 

13-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
[Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff whose 
suit has been dismissed and a defendant against whom a suit has been 
dismissed are parties to the suit.  
 
Explanation II.—(a) For the purposes of this section, a purchaser of 
property at a sale in execution of a decree shall be deemed to be a 
party to the suit in which the decree is passed; and (b) all questions 
relating to the delivery of possession of such property to such 
purchaser or his representative shall be deemed to be questions 
relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree within 
the meaning of this section.] 
 
x 
 
 
x 
 
 
x 
 
ORDER XXI 
 
                      Execution of Decrees and Orders  Payment under Decree 
 
Rule 58 : 
 
 
58. Adjudication of claims to or objections to attachment of, 
property.— 
 
(1) Where any claim is preferred to, or any objection is made to the 
attachment of, any property attached in execution of a decree on the 
ground that such property is not liable to such attachment, the Court 
shall proceed to adjudicate upon the claim or objection in accordance 
with the provisions herein contained: Provided that no such, claim or 
objection shall be entertained —  (a) where, before the claim is 
preferred or objection is made, the property attached has already been 
sold; or (b) where the Court considers that the claim or objection was 
designedly or unnecessarily delayed. 
 
(2) All questions (including questions relating to right, title or interest 
in the property attached) arising between the parties to a proceeding or 
their representatives under this rule and relevant to the adjudication of 
the claim or objection, shall be determined by the Court dealing with 
the claim or objection and not by a separate suit.  
 
(3) Upon the determination of the questions referred to in sub-rule (2), 
the Court shall, in accordance with such determination,—  (a) allow 
the claim or objection and release the property from attachment either 
wholly or to such extent as it thinks fit; or (b) disallow the claim or 
objection; or (c) continue the attachment subject to any mortgage, 
charge or other interest in favour of any person; or (d) pass such order 
as in the circumstances of the case it deems fit.  
 
(4) Where any claim or objection has been adjudicated upon under 
this rule, order made thereon shall have the same force and be subject 
to the same conditions as to appeal or otherwise as if it were a decree.  

14-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
 
(5) Where a claim or an objection is preferred and the Court, under the 
proviso to sub-rule (I), refuses to entertain it, the party against whom 
such order is made may institute a suit to establish the right which he 
claims to the property in dispute; but, subject to the result of such-suit, 
if any, an order so refusing to entertain the claim or objection shall be 
conclusive. 
 
Resistance of delivery of possession to decree-holder or purchaser  
 
Rule 97 : 
 
97. Resistance or obstruction to possession of immovable 
property.— 
 
(1) Where the holder of a decree for the possession of immovable 
property or the purchaser of any such property sold in execution of a 
decree is resisted or obstructed by any person in obtaining possession 
of the property, he may make an application to the Court complaining 
of such resistance or obstruction.  
 
(2) Where any application is made under sub-rule (1), the Court shall 
proceed to adjudicate upon the application in accordance with the 
provisions herein contained.” 
 
 
12. 
 This Court has had occasions to expound on the scope, purpose, and 
applicability of Section 47, CPC.  
12.1     In  Deep Chand v. Mohan Lal7, the purpose of  execution proceedings 
was taken note of in the following terms: 
“5.….the purpose of an execution proceeding is to enable the decree-
holder to obtain the fruits of his decree. In case where the language of 
the decree is capable of two interpretations, one of which assists the 
decree-holder to obtain the fruits of the decree and the other prevents 
him from taking the benefits of the decree, the interpretation which 
assists the decree-holder should be accepted. The execution of the 
decree should not be made futile on mere technicalities which does 
not, however, mean that where a decree is incapable of being executed 
under any provision of law it should, in all cases, be executed 
notwithstanding such bar or prohibition. A rational approach is 
necessitated keeping in view the prolonged factum of litigation 
resulting in the passing of a decree in favour of a litigant. The policy 
of law is to give a fair and liberal and not a technical construction 
enabling the decree-holder to reap the fruits of his decree.” 
 
7 (2000) 6 SCC 259 

15-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
 
The observations in Rahul S. Shah v. Jinendra Kumar Gandhi & Ors.8 by a 
Bench of three learned Judges in this regard are also educative. The scope of the 
section is recognized as:- 
“24. In respect of execution of a decree, Section 47 CPC contemplates 
adjudication of limited nature of issues relating to execution i.e. 
discharge or satisfaction of the decree and is aligned with the 
consequential provisions of Order 21 CPC. Section 47 is intended to 
prevent multiplicity of suits. It simply lays down the procedure and 
the form whereby the court reaches a decision. For the applicability of 
the section, two essential requisites have to be kept in mind. Firstly, 
the question must be the one arising between the parties and secondly, 
the dispute relates to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the 
decree. Thus, the objective of Section 47 is to prevent unwanted 
litigation and dispose of all objections as expeditiously as possible. 
25. These provisions contemplate that for execution of decrees, 
executing court must not go beyond the decree. However, there is 
steady rise of proceedings akin to a retrial at the time of execution 
causing failure of realisation of fruits of decree and relief which the 
party seeks from the courts despite there being a decree in their 
favour. Experience has shown that various objections are filed before 
the executing court and the decree-holder is deprived of the fruits of 
the litigation and the judgment-debtor, in abuse of process of law, is 
allowed to benefit from the subject-matter which he is otherwise not 
entitled to.” 
 
12.2      It is all too well-settled that a Court cannot ‘go behind’ a decree. 
Reference may be made to Rajasthan Financial Corpn. v. Man Industrial 
Corpn. Ltd.9; SBI v. Indexport Registered10; J&K Bank Ltd. v. Jagdish C. 
Gupta11; and Rajasthan Udyog v. Hindustan Engg. & Industries Ltd.12  
 
8 (2021) 6 SCC 418 
9 (2003) 7 SCC 522 
10 (1992) 3 SCC 159   
11 (2004) 10 SCC 568 
12 (2020) 6 SCC 660 

16-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
12.3      In Sushil Kumar Mehta v. Gobind Ram Bohra13, it has been held that 
if a decree is passed by a competent court after due adjudication of merits, it 
operates as re judicata.  If the same is nullity, its validity can be questioned at 
any stage.  It was observed: 
“26. Thus it is settled law that normally a decree passed by a court of 
competent jurisdiction, after adjudication on merits of the rights of the 
parties, operates as res judicata in a subsequent suit or proceedings 
and binds the parties or the persons claiming right, title or interest 
from the parties. Its validity should be assailed only in an appeal or 
revision as the case may be. In subsequent proceedings its validity 
cannot be questioned. A decree passed by a court without jurisdiction 
over the subject matter or on other grounds which goes to the root of 
its exercise or jurisdiction, lacks inherent jurisdiction. It is a coram 
non judice. A decree passed by such a court is a nullity and is non est. 
Its invalidity can be set up whenever it is sought to be enforced or is 
acted upon as a foundation for a right, even at the stage of execution 
or in collateral proceedings. The defect of jurisdiction strikes at the 
authority of the court to pass a decree which cannot be cured by 
consent or waiver of the party. If the court has jurisdiction but there is 
defect in its exercise which does not go to the root of its authority, 
such a defect like pecuniary or territorial could be waived by the party. 
They could be corrected by way of appropriate plea at its inception or 
in appellate or revisional forums, provided law permits. The doctrine 
of res judicata under Section 11 CPC is founded on public policy. An 
issue of fact or law or mixed question of fact and law, which are in 
issue in an earlier suit or might and ought to be raised between the 
same parties or persons claiming under them and was adjudicated or 
allowed uncontested becomes final and binds the parties or persons 
claiming under them. Thus the decision of a competent court over the 
matter in issue may operate as res judicata in subsequent suit or 
proceedings or in other proceedings between the same parties and 
those claiming under them. 
(Emphasis Supplied) 
This was followed/referred in Sabitri Dei v. Sarat Chandra Rout14, Jamia 
Masjid v. K.V. Rudrappa15.  
 
13 (1990) 1 SCC 193 
14(1996) 3 SCC 301 
15 (2022) 9 SCC 225 

17-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
12.4  The executing court is to determine all questions inter se the parties to 
the decree, as flows from the statutory text, have been reiterated in 
Jugalkishore Saraf v. Raw Cotton Co. Ltd.16 by SR Das, J. (as his Lordship the 
then was) in the following terms -  
“Section 47 of the Civil Procedure Code does require that the 
executing court alone must determine all questions arising between 
the parties or their representatives and relating to the execution, 
discharge or satisfaction of the decree and authorises it even to treat 
the proceedings as a suit.” 
 
Similar observations have been made by Vivian Bose, J. in Jai Narain Ram 
Lundia v. Kedar Nath Khetan17 as follows - 
“23. The only question that remains is whether the executing court can 
consider whether the defendant is in a position to perform his part of 
the decree. But of course it can. If the executing court cannot consider 
this question who can? The executing court has to see that the 
defendant gives the plaintiff the very thing that the decree directs and 
not something else, so if there is any dispute about its identity or 
substance nobody but the court executing the decree can determine it. 
It is a matter distinctly relating to the execution, discharge and 
satisfaction of the decree and so under Section 47 of the Civil 
Procedure Code, it can only be determined by the court executing the 
decree...”  
 
12.5    An executing court is to execute the decree as it stands and cannot modify 
its terms. It has been so held in C.F. Angadi v. Y.S. Hirannayya18.  The relevant 
extract is as under: 
“10.   A Court executing the decree shall execute it as it stands. It 
cannot modify or vary the terms of the decree. No exception can be 
taken to that general principle. But the execution court has the right to 
construe a decree in the light of the applicable provisions of law and if 
in this case on a construction of the decree in the light of the 
 
16 1955 SCC OnLine SC 26 
17 1956 SCC OnLine SC 50 
18 (1972) 1 SCC 191 

18-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
applicable provision of law, it found that the deposit made by the 
respondent on January 2, 1960, was according to law a deposit in 
compliance with the terms of the decree, then the execution Court was 
not varying the terms of the decree but executing the decree as it stood 
after considering the effect of the deposit in the light of the relevant 
law.” 
        [See also: Deepa Bhargava & Anr. v. Mahesh Bhargava & Ors.19] 
12.6   A decree passed by a Court not having the jurisdiction to do so, does not 
ipso facto, render it illegal. The recourse is for the aggrieved to have it set aside 
as per law. If they fail to do so, they shall be bound thereby. In Rafique Bibi v. 
Syed Waliuddin20 it was held: 
“8.   A distinction exists between a decree passed by a court having no 
jurisdiction and consequently being a nullity and not executable and a 
decree of the court which is merely illegal or not passed in accordance 
with the procedure laid down by law. A decree suffering from 
illegality or irregularity of procedure, cannot be termed inexecutable 
by the executing court; the remedy of a person aggrieved by such a 
decree is to have it set aside in a duly constituted legal proceedings or 
by a superior court failing which he must obey the command of the 
decree. A decree passed by a court of competent jurisdiction cannot be 
denuded of its efficacy by any collateral attack or in incidental 
proceedings.” 
 
The view taken herein was affirmed by a Bench of three judges in Balvant N. 
Viswamitra v. Yadav Sadashiv Mule21, and followed recently, in Asma Lateef 
v. Shabbir Ahmad22. 
12.7   Execution petition dismissed for default of the decree-holder does not 
operate as res judicata qua “further execution of the decree.” Shivashankar 
Prasad Shah v. Baikunth Nath Singh23 records the position of law as below:- 
 
19 (2009) 2 SCC 294 
20 (2004) 1 SCC 287 
21 (2004) 8 SCC 706 
22 (2024) 4 SCC 696 

19-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
“6. The courts in India have generally taken the view that an execution 
petition which has been dismissed for the default of the decree-holder 
though by the time that petition came to be dismissed, the judgment-
debtor had resisted the execution on one or more grounds, does not 
bar the further execution of the decree in pursuance of fresh execution 
petitions filed in accordance with law — see Lakshmibai Anant 
Kondkar v. Rayji Bhikaji Kondkar [XXXI, BLR 400] . Even the 
dismissal for default of objections raised under Section 47 of the Civil 
Procedure Code does not operate as res judicata when the same 
objections are raised again in the course of the execution—see Bahir 
Das Pal v. Girish Chandra Pal [AIR 1923 Cal 287] ; Bhagwati 
Prasad Sah v. Radha Kishan Sah [AIR 1950 Pat 354] ; Jethmal v. Mst. 
Sakina [AIR 1961 Raj 59] ; Bisvavannath Kundu v. Smt Subala 
Dassi [AIR 1962 Cal 272] . We do not think that the decision 
in Ramnarain v. Basudeo [ILR XXV Pat 595] on which the learned 
counsel for the appellant placed great deal of reliance is correctly 
decided. Hence, we agree with the High Court that the plea of res 
judicata advanced by the appellant is unsustainable.” 
 
 A judgment of far more recent vintage reiterates this position. See Bhagyoday 
Coop. Bank Ltd. v. Ravindra Balkrishna Patel24. 
12.8    In landlord-tenant disputes, writ petitions cannot be entertained when 
the executing court is seized of applications seeking setting aside of decree of 
eviction and order of possession. This Court in Hameed Kunju v. Nazim25 
held- 
“26. In any case, in our considered view, the executing court having 
seized of the applications filed by the respondent, there was no 
justification on the part of the High Court to have entertained the writ 
petition and decided them like an original court. All that the High 
Court, in such circumstances, could do was to request the executing 
court to dispose of the pending applications (IAs) filed by the 
respondent on their respective merits leaving the parties to challenge 
the orders once passed on such applications by filing appeal, before 
the appellate authorities. It was, however, not done.” 
 
 
23 (1969) 1 SCC 718 
24 (2022) 14 SCC 417 
25 (2017) 8 SCC 611 

20-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
12.9   In scenarios where a compromise decree is entered into between the 
parties, the question to be asked is whether the Court whose duty it is to 
execute the decree is the one to have recorded the compromise. The following 
discussion made in Lakshmi Narayanan v. S.S. Pandian26 is insightful :-  
“11. Where in any execution proceedings objection to executability of 
a decree is taken under Section 47 CPC on the ground that by virtue of 
a compromise, the decree got extinguished and became inexecutable, 
the germane question that should be asked is whether the compromise 
was recorded by the court whose duty it is to execute the decree. 
 
12. As long back as in 1939, the Privy Council in Oudh Commercial 
Bank Ltd. v. Thakurain Bind Basni Kuer [(1938-39) 66 IA 84 : AIR 
1939 PC 80] laid down the law on the subject as follows: 
 
“If it appears to the court, acting under Section 47, that the 
true effect of the agreement was to discharge the decree 
forthwith in consideration of certain promises by the 
debtor, then no doubt the court will not have occasion to 
enforce the agreement in execution proceedings, but will 
leave the creditor to bring a separate suit upon the 
contract. If, on the other hand, the agreement is intended 
to govern the liability of the debtor under the decree and to 
have effect upon the time or manner of its enforcement, it 
is a matter to be dealt with under Section 47. In such a 
case to say that the creditor may perhaps have a separate 
suit is to misread the Code, which by requiring all such 
matters to be dealt with in execution discloses a broader 
view of the scope and functions of an executing court. 
Their Lordships are in agreement with the statement in the 
case of Gobardhan Das [Gobardhan Das v. Dau Dayal, 
ILR (1932) 54 All 573 : AIR 1932 All 273] that ‘in 
numerous cases a compromise between the decree-holder 
and the judgment-debtor entered into in the course of 
execution proceedings, which was duly recorded, has been 
enforced’ and they are not of opinion that the practice, 
which is both widespread and inveterate, is contrary to the 
Code. They are of opinion that in the present case the 
compromises can and should be enforced in these 
execution proceedings.” 
 
14. In a case where parties compromise after the decree in a case has 
been passed, the effect of the compromise on the executability of the 
 
26 (2000) 7 SCC 240 

21-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
decree depends upon the intention of the parties, which is a mixed 
question of law and fact and has to be determined by the executing 
court on an application under Section 47 CPC on interpretation of the 
decree and the compromise in the light of the facts and circumstances 
of each case. If on such determination it is gathered that the intention 
of the parties is to extinguish the decree and either the decree-holder 
or the judgment-debtor got the compromise recorded under Rule 2 of 
Order 21 CPC by the court whose duty it is to execute the decree, the 
execution of the decree cannot be proceeded with by the executing 
court. But if the intention of the parties is to keep the decree alive and 
to give effect to it in the manner agreed upon between the parties in 
the compromise, the decree will be given effect to accordingly or 
executed as it is depending upon whether the compromise is recorded 
by the court as aforementioned or not.” 
(Emphasis Supplied) 
  
13.   Having considered the application of Section 47 CPC, as above, let us now 
turn to the present facts. The High Court, in our view, has correctly held that the 
objector-appellant is not a third party to the dispute. The objections brought by 
him can rightly be considered under this section. In order to properly appreciate 
the genesis of the objections, let us take an example. A suit is filed by ‘A’ and 
‘A1 ’ for half share of the piece of land owned jointly by them with others such 
as ‘B’. In time, the suit is decreed and ‘A’ and ‘A1’ are declared owners and 
possessors of said half of the property. Further down in time, a 2nd suit comes to 
be filed by ‘B’ against ‘C’ and others, including ‘A’ and ‘A1’, seeking one-fourth 
share of the very same piece of land, which was the subject matter of the suit 
filed earlier by ‘A’. The suit was accordingly decreed granting him rights over 
one fourth share in the property. Objections come to be filed by the successors in 
interest of A, stating that the very same piece of land granted to their forebears 
by the earlier suit, now stands granted to ‘B’.  

22-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
14.   We have already noted above that the dispute, which has travelled up to this 
Court, pertains to the execution of decree of the second partition suit. The share 
sought to be divided was a result of the first partition suit. Let us, therefore, 
understand the import of the first suit. The prayer made thereunder, is 
reproduced below: 
“Suit for declaration to the effect that plaintiffs are owners of ½ share 
of the land measuring Khasra No.6363 Khatauni No. 7257, Khasra 
No.2259 (2 Kanals-18Marlas) as entered in Jamabandi 1969-70 
situated at Moga Mehla Singh and entitled to separate possession of ½ 
share of the land in question and possession by land in dispute way of 
consequential relief or to any other relief to which the plaintiffs are 
entitled.” 
  
The Court on 22nd September, 1979 decreed the suit in favour of the Plaintiffs in 
the following terms. 
“As a result of my findings on the above issues, I decree the suit of the 
Plaintiffs for a declaration that there are the owners of half share of the 
suit land and for possession. The defendants will also bear the costs of 
the suit.” 
 For clarity, it is mentioned that Mukand Singh, father of the objector/appellant 
herein was the plaintiff in the said suit.  An appeal titled ‘Civil Appeal No.16-II 
of 1982, Dr. Thakar Singh v Mukand Singh & Ors.’ was filed before the 
Additional District Judge, Faridkot, which was dismissed as meritless vide 
judgment dated 18.10.1982. Handing over of possession was recorded by 
Additional Senior Sub-Judge, Moga, on 21st September, 1985 to the LRs of 
Mukand Singh and Chanan Singh. 
 

23-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
Copy of Nazir Report  
In the Court of Sh. B.C. Rajput, PCS, Addl. Senior Sub Judge, 
Moga. 
Ex. No. 116-10of 05/12.84 
                                                                               Decided on: 
21.09.85 
Mukand Singh S/o Lal Singh, Chaman Singh deceased represented by 
Smt. Parakash Kaur, window, Parvinder Kaur, & Jatinder Kaur 
daughter of Chaman Singh rs/of Moga. 
                                                           Vs. 
Lakhminder Singh S/o Bachan Singh & Ors. 
Sir,  
        On spot, after demarcation possession of land measuring half of 
the 58 Marlas i.e. 29 Marlas given to decree holder. On the sport 14 1/2 
marlas of land towards each side of the property of Dwarka Dass and 
14 ½ marlas of land towards his west side has been given to Jatinder 
Kaur, Parvinder Kaur, Smt. Parkash Kaur and sons of Mukund Singh 
decree holder. I did not face any difficulty and during the process, 
munadi was conducted and munadi fee was taken charged from the 
decree holder. Report is presented. 
“Amar Nath N.N. 8.9.85 
Sd/- Decree holder  
1.  Smt. Parkash Kaur wd/o Chanan Singh 
2.  Parvinder Kaur D/o Chanan Singh; 
3.  Jatinder Kaur D/o Chanan Singh; 
4.  Joginder Singh Sodhi S/o Mukand Singh, all residents of Moga. 
    Witnesses: 
5.  Matinder Singh S/o Banta Singh (Witness) 
6.  Sh. Rupinder Singh S/o Nazar Singh (Witness) 
7.  Sh. Sarawant Singh Arora S/o Dayal Singh (Witness) 
 
Sir, possession given. Sd/- dated 20.08.85 
 
15.    To put the grievance of the objector in context, it is that the lands decreed 
in second partition suit included Khasra No.2259 and in the execution, it is that 
part of the land that he received from his father Mukand Singh, which has been 
shown as belonging to the decree holders-respondents herein.  

24-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
16. With the appeal before the Additional District Judge, Faridkot, being 
dismissed, the decree of 1979 in the first partition suit has attained finality.  
Therefore, the remit of the second partition suit necessarily has to exclude the 
portions which already stand decreed per the first partition suit. As already 
noticed above, by virtue of the first partition decree, the legal representatives of 
Mukand Singh and Chanan Singh have been in possession of the decreed lands 
since 21st September, 1985. Any decision qua Khasra No.2259 taken in the 
second partition suit has to protect the property as allotted to the legal 
representatives of the above-named persons. The Trial Court in its judgment 
dated 15th October, 1990 records that ‘as regards khasra no.2259 and 2262 
plaintiff alongwith Nand Singh are owners in possession of 1/2 share (1/4 share 
each) out of these Khasra numbers…’. It is evident from the above that Thakkar 
Singh and Nand Singh both acknowledged that their rights extended only to half 
the share of Khasra No.2259.  
17.  It is unclear from the record as to whether the portion of Khasra No.2259 
styled ‘NOPQ’ by the final decree is the very same plot of land granted to the 
LRs of Mukand Singh by the warrant of possession dated 21st September 1985, 
or not. Till and such time a clear determination in this regard is made, this 
dispute cannot be put to rest since there is no dispute as to the entitlement of 
one-fourth share. It is only, what part of the land constitutes the respective one-
fourth share which has led to the present judgment being passed. The 
respondents herein have alleged that the warrant of possession is a ‘self prepared 

25-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
document’ and ‘not genuine’ since there was no demarcation of shares. Both 
these questions are not for this Court to decide.  
18. The impugned orders of the High Court dismissing the revision application 
are to be interfered with, for that instance, the procedure has managed to 
compromise the substantive right of the objector. The ground taken by the High 
Court to dismiss the revision application is that the appellant herein misapplied 
the provisions in filing his objections before the executing court, inasmuch as 
the objection petition mentioned both Section 47 as also Order XXI Rule 58 and 
97 of the CPC. The High Court found that both these sets of provisions could 
not be applied together given that the method of assailing the orders passed 
therein are different and cannot co-exist.  Whilst looking at it purely from a 
procedural point of view, this may have some merit; however, as has been long 
established, procedural irregularity cannot defeat substantive rights or cannot 
subvert substantive justice. Since the objector or his father already had a decree 
in their favour, fruits thereof cannot be denied to them by virtue of the fact that 
while attempting to protect their rights in a subsequent suit which would have 
affected their enjoyment of such property, the Sections or Orders under which 
they sought such protection, were incorrect. 

26-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
19.   This Court cannot help but be reminded of the famous saying that 
procedure is the handmaiden of justice. This Court in Jai Jai Ram Manohar Lal 
v. National Building Material Supply, Gurgaon27 : 
“5. …. Rules of procedure are intended to be a handmaid to the 
administration of justice. A party cannot be refused just relief merely 
because of some mistake, negligence, inadvertence or even infraction 
of the Rules of procedure.”  
 
We also find support for our conclusion in the judgment of this Court passed in 
Uday Shankar Triyar v. Ram Kalewar Prasad Singh and Another28 : 
“17. Non-compliance with any procedural requirement relating to a 
pleading, memorandum of appeal or application or petition for relief 
should not entail automatic dismissal or rejection, unless the relevant 
statute or rule so mandates. Procedural defects and irregularities which 
are curable should not be allowed to defeat substantive rights or to 
cause injustice. Procedure, a handmaiden to justice, should never be 
made a tool to deny justice or perpetuate injustice, by any oppressive 
or punitive use. The well-recognised exceptions to this principle are:  
 
(i) 
where the statute prescribing the procedure, also prescribes 
specifically the consequence of noncompliance;  
 
(ii) 
where the procedural defect is not rectified, even after it is 
pointed out and due opportunity is given for rectifying it;  
 
(iii) 
where the non-compliance or violation is proved to be 
deliberate or mischievous; 
 
(iv) 
where the rectification of defect would affect the case on 
merits or will affect the jurisdiction of the court;  
 
(v)     in case of memorandum of appeal, there is complete absence of 
authority and the appeal is presented without the knowledge, 
consent and authority of the appellant.”  
 
20.  Further, The High Court with respect to the first partition suit, observed that 
it could not have been decreed by virtue of the Punjab Pre-Emption (Repeal) 
 
27 (1969) 1 SCC 869 
28 (2006) 1 SCC 75 

27-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
Act, 1973, but then noted that this is not an aspect which requires delineation 
given that the entitlement of share is admitted by the parties. Be that as it may.  
We find the said observation to be in error for the reason that the discussion of 
pre-emption in the judgment rendered in the first partition suit appears to 
correspond to an earlier transaction having taken place somewhere in the 1930s 
and 1940s by one Lal Singh, father of the plaintiffs in the first partition suit. 
21. In view of the aforesaid discussion, the matter is remanded to the First 
Appellate Court to take a decision on the objections of the appellant afresh, on 
merits. It stands clarified that this Court has not expressed any view on the facts 
of the case. Considering the fact that this matter has been doing the rounds of 
various Court halls for more than two decades, we request the concerned Court 
to take all steps necessary for expeditious disposal. After all it was as far back as 
1872 that the Privy Council in General Manager of the Raj Durbhunga v. 
Coomar Ramaput Sing29 lamented that the problems of the litigant in India, 
begin once he has obtained the decree. In Messer Griesheim GmbH v. Goyal 
MG Gases Pvt Ltd.30 a hundred and fifty years later this Court observed that 
‘there has been no improvement and still the decree holder faces the same 
problem what was being faced in the past.’ When a litigant approaches the 
Court, what he is interested in getting is not the imprimatur of the Court on his 
right over a certain amount of money or in this case property, what he actually 
 
29 (1871-72) 14 MIA 605:20 ER 912 
30 (2022) 11 SCC 549 

28-SLP(C) 9202-9204 OF 2016 
 
wants is the actual money and/or property, and the rights that flow from 
possessing it, i.e., enjoyment of the same in whatever manner he sees fit.  
Needless to add, it shall be open to any party to the instant lis to approach this 
Court subsequent to the disposal, should the need so arise. 
22.  The appeals are allowed to the aforesaid extent. The Registry is directed to 
forward a copy of this judgment to the learned Registrar General of the High 
Court of Punjab & Haryana who shall then ensure its passage to the concerned 
Court, expeditiously. 
       Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of accordingly. 
 
 
 
….……………………J.  
(J.B. PARDIWALA) 
 
 
….……………….…..J. 
(SANJAY KAROL) 
 
New Delhi; 
October 17, 2024