2024 INSC 787
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 7881 OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP(C) No(s). 25114 of 2019) 
 
 
Sajeena Ikhbal & Ors.   
 
 
 
… Appellants  
Versus  
Mini Babu George & Ors. 
 
 
 
… Respondents 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J. 
 
 
1. 
Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment and order dated 
23.07.2019 passed by the High Court of Kerala in MACA No. 
3331 of 2016 dismissing the appellants’ appeal while affirming 
the Award passed by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal1 by 
 
1 ‘MACT’ 
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2024.10.17
12:16:17 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
which the appellants’ claim was dismissed. The parties are 
referred to in this judgment as they appear in the claim petition.  
2. 
The widow, minor child and parents of the deceased Ikhbal 
are the appellants in the present proceedings. Ikhbal died in an 
accident on 10.06.2013 being knocked down by a car as he was 
proceeding in his motorcycle from Thodupuzha to Muttom. He 
died of the injuries sustained in the said accident which allegedly 
occurred on account of the negligence of the driver of the car. 
Respondent nos. 1 to 3 are the owner, driver and insurer of the 
car respectively. Respondent nos. 2 and 3 contested the claim 
petition while respondent no. 1 remained ex-parte.  
3. 
According to the appellants, while the deceased was 
travelling on a motorcycle and reached near ‘Mrala’ junction, a 
K.S.R.T.C. bus, which was going in front, stopped at the bus 
stop. The deceased attempted to overtake the bus and at that 
time the subject car driven by respondent no. 2 came from the 
opposite direction and hit at the motorcycle of the deceased on 
which he fell down and sustained fatal injuries. He was taken to 
the hospital, but he succumbed to the injuries. The deceased 

3 
 
was an employee as U.D. Clerk in Registration Department and 
had monthly income of Rs. 21,456/-.  
4. 
 Respondent nos. 2 and 3 denied the involvement of the car 
in the accident. According to them, respondent no. 2 was driving 
the car carefully and the accident occurred due to the negligence 
of the deceased because he attempted to overtake the parked 
K.S.R.T.C. bus. In the process, the motorcycle hit on the bus and 
the deceased fell down and sustained fatal injuries. The 
deceased was taken to the hospital by respondent no. 2 who 
reached the spot soon after the accident. The car of respondent 
no. 2 did not hit the deceased’s motorcycle. The respondent no. 
3 admitted the policy.  
5. 
The appellants examined six witnesses before the MACT 
while the respondents examined two witnesses. Both the parties 
exhibited number of documents in their evidence. The MACT 
assessed the compensation to hold that the appellants are 
entitled to a total compensation of Rs. 46,31,496/-. However, 
the claim petition was dismissed on the ground that the 
appellants have failed to prove that the accident occurred due to 
negligent driving of respondent no. 2/driver, nor it is proved that 

4 
 
the car was involved in the accident. The said findings have been 
affirmed by the High Court.  
6. 
Mr. Thomas P. Joseph, learned senior counsel for the 
appellants submits that there is ample evidence demonstrating 
involvement of the car in the subject accident and the findings 
to the contrary is utterly perverse. It is argued that the MACT 
and the High Court as well have recorded the findings adverse 
to the appellants basing on conjectures and surmises and by 
complete misreading the evidence. It is vehemently argued that 
the statement of witnesses have to be read in conjunction with 
principle of res ipsa loquitur, which the courts below have failed. 
Learned counsel prayed for allowing the appeal to award the sum 
assessed by the MACT.  
7. 
Per contra, Mr. Atul Nanda, learned senior counsel for 
respondent no. 3 would submit that the courts below have 
correctly held that the subject car owned by respondent no. 1 
was not involved in the accident. Referring to the statement of 
witnesses, learned senior counsel has argued that none of the 
witnesses have seen the car hitting the motorcycle driven by the 
deceased. It is lastly argued that both the courts below have 

5 
 
recorded the findings after careful examination of the evidence 
which warrants no interference by this Court in exercise of power 
under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.  
8.  Before proceeding to dwell on the merits of the matter we 
remind ourselves that the present is an appeal under Article 136 
of the Constitution of India wherein, ordinarily, this Court would 
not reappreciate the evidence. However, this Court in Mangla 
Ram v. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. & Ors.2 has held that in 
an appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, 
ordinarily this Court will not engage itself in reappreciation of the 
evidence as such but can certainly examine the evidence on 
record to consider the challenge to the findings recorded by 
Tribunal or the High Court, being perverse or replete with error 
apparent on the face of the record and being manifestly wrong. 
This being the legal position, we proceed to examine the 
evidence on record to examine the correctness of the finding 
recorded by the courts below as to whether the subject car was 
involved in the accident or not. 
 
2 (2018) 5 SCC 656 

6 
 
9. 
It was the case of the appellants from the inception that 
the deceased was hit by the subject car which came driven from 
the opposite direction as a result of which he was thrown on the 
road and sustained fatal injuries. The final report (closure report) 
of FIR No. 342 of 2013 records that the damage occurred to the 
subject car is due to the skied motorcycle glide to the road and 
hit to the front bumper and grill of the car, which was coming at 
that time and the accident occurred for which the drivers of the 
bus or the car were not responsible. However, it clearly records 
that there was damage to the car on account of the accident.   
10. PW-2 in his deposition stated that the accident was a result 
of collision between the car and the bike. This witness is the 
driver of the bus. He was sitting on the driver seat and after 
hearing the sound of the accident, he looked back and saw the 
deceased was lying on the road. Nearby people told him that the 
deceased was hit by the car due to over speeding. In cross-
examination he denied that the car driver was not involved in 
the accident.  
11. PW-3 is the Teashop owner at the place of occurrence. He 
says that he heard the sound of accident, and the mudguard of 

7 
 
the car was detached. In cross-examination, he states that as 
the car hit, the wheel of the bike rotated. He denied the 
suggestion that the bike touched the bus and fell down or that 
he has not seen the offence.   
12. PW-5 was the SHO of Karimkunnam Police Station who has 
prepared the Mahazar of the car, bus and the bike. In the 
Mahazar of the car, it was noted that the paint on the right side 
of the head light is lost, and scratches are seen here and there 
on the right side of the body. According to him, the grill of the 
car is dented, and parking light is broken.  
13. PW-6 is an important witness who was presented as an 
eyewitness to the accident. He had seen the motorcycle 
overtaking the bus and at that time the car hit the motorcycle. 
The car forwarded a little and stopped and the injured was taken 
to the hospital in the same car which hit him. This witness has 
remained firm in the cross-examination.  
14. RW-2 is respondent no. 2 as also the driver of the subject 
car. He says that the bike skied and fell in front of the car. He 
admits in cross-examination that when the motorcycle skied and 

8 
 
reached in front of the car, the bus was 100 feet away and he 
stopped the car on the spot where the bike hit the car.  
15. From the above evidence of the witnesses, it is apparent 
that (I) the car had suffered damages; (II) the car driver admits 
that the bus was 100 feet away when the motorcycle hit the car; 
(III) PW-6, an eyewitness, has narrated the accident and (IV) 
PW-2, the driver of the bus also speaks about hearing the sound 
of the accident and nearby people telling him that the car had 
hit the bike.  
16. The courts below have recorded the finding of non-
involvement of the car in the accident by disbelieving the 
eyewitness, PW-6 only on the ground that in the police 
investigation, he was not examined as an eyewitness. In our 
considered view, a witness who is otherwise found trustworthy 
cannot be disbelieved, in a motor accident case, only on the 
ground that the police have not recorded his statement during 
investigation. There is abundance of evidence pointing to the fact 
that the car was involved in the accident and the courts below 
have not considered the evidence in true perspective and have 
misguided themselves to record perverse finding regarding non-

9 
 
involvement of the car in the accident. In claim cases, arising 
out of motor accident, the court has to apply the principles of 
preponderance of probability and cannot apply the test of proof 
beyond reasonable doubt. The evidence available in the present 
case tested on the principles of preponderance of probability can 
record only one finding that the car was involved in the accident, 
otherwise, the damage found to the car in the Mahazar 
(Annexure P-2) was not possible. The Mahazar clearly records 
that the front bumper right side of the car is broken, front right 
parking light is broken, the grill fitted above the front bumper is 
curved. With such damages to the front side of the body of the 
car, it is impossible to record a finding that the car was not 
involved in the accident.  
17. In the light of the evidence on record, we set aside the 
finding of the courts below that the car was not involved in the 
accident, resultantly, holding that the deceased died as a result 
of accident involving the car insured with respondent no. 3. We, 
therefore, set aside the judgment and order of the courts below 
and allow the claim petition to award compensation to the 
appellants at Rs. 46,31,496/- with interest @ 9% per annum 

10 
 
from the date of filing of the claim petition till the realisation of 
the payment, which shall be made within three months from 
today, failing which, the award amount shall carry interest @ 
12% per annum. 
18. The appeal is allowed accordingly in the above stated 
terms. The parties shall bear their own costs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………………………J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (C.T. RAVIKUMAR) 
 
 
………………………………………J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
OCTOBER 17, 2024.  
NEW DELHI.