2024 INSC 791
Page 1 of 53 
 
Reportable  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
Civil Appeal Nos. 3098-3099 of 2023 
 
 
 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India  
 
…Appellant  
 
 
 
Versus 
 
Delhi International Airport Ltd. & Ors.  
 
 
      …Respondents  
 
 
 
With  
Civil Appeal Nos.1798-1799 of 2021 
 
With  
Civil Appeal No.1806 of 2021 
 
With  
Civil Appeal Nos. 10668-10670 of 2024  
 
With  
Civil Appeal Nos. 3697-3698 of 2022 
 
With  
Civil Appeal No. 8217 of 2023 
 
With  
Civil Appeal No. 7767 of 2023  
 
With  
Civil Appeal Nos.10691-10692 of 2024 
 
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2024.10.18
14:43:55 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 53 
 
With  
Civil Appeal No. 393 of 2024  
 
With 
Civil Appeal No. 10678 of 2024  
 
And With  
Civil Appeal No. 10659 of 2024  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 3 of 53 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
 
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 
 
 
INDEX 
A. Statutory Background .................................................................................. 4 
B. Submissions ................................................................................................ 11 
C. 
Issues ....................................................................................................... 14 
D. Analysis ....................................................................................................... 15 
i. 
Authorities exercising ‘adjudicatory functions’ cannot defend their 
orders in appeal .............................................................................................. 15 
ii. 
Necessary and proper parties in regulatory proceedings ................... 21 
iii. The test of quasi-judicial functions: A misnomer................................. 29 
iv. The test for determining an ‘adjudicatory function’: Exploring Sitaram 
Sugar ............................................................................................................... 36 
v. 
Whether tariff determination is an adjudicatory function:  PTC and 
GRIDCO ........................................................................................................... 39 
vi. Tariff determination for aeronautical services by AERA is a regulatory 
function ........................................................................................................... 43 
vii. 
Interpretation of Sections 18 and 31 of the AERA Act ...................... 49 
E. Conclusion .................................................................................................. 53 
 
 

PART A  
Page 4 of 53 
 
1. 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority1 has instituted proceedings under 
Section 31 of the Airport Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act 20082 for 
challenging the judgments of the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate 
Tribunal3. TDSAT is the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of the AERA Act 
and it has the competence to hear appeals against orders of AERA. The 
respondents have raised a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the 
appeals on the ground that AERA, which is a quasi-judicial body, cannot file 
an appeal against the judgment of TDSAT. This judgment disposes of the 
preliminary issue of whether the appeals filed by AERA under Section 31 of 
the AERA Act are maintainable.  
A. Statutory Background 
2. 
The long title of the AERA Act provides that it is an Act to establish AERA and 
to a) regulate tariff and other charges for aeronautical services rendered at 
airports; (b) monitor performance standards of airports; and (c) for other 
incidental and connected matters.4 The Act applies to all airports where air 
transport services are operated or are intended to be operated, other than 
airports in the control of the Armed Forces or paramilitary forces of the Union.5 
 
1 “AERA” 
2 “AERA Act” 
3 “TDSAT” 
4 “An Act to provide for the establishment of an Airports Economic Regulatory Authority to regulate tariff and 
other charges for the aeronautical services rendered at airports and to monitor performance standards of 
airports and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.” 
5 AERA Act; Section 1(3)(a) 

PART A  
Page 5 of 53 
 
The Act also applies to all private and leased airports6, all civil enclaves7 and 
all major airports8.  
3. 
Section 3 of the AERA Act stipulates that the Central Government must, by a 
notification, establish AERA within three months from the date of 
commencement of the Act. By a notification dated 12 May 2009, the Central 
Government established AERA. Section 13 of the AERA Act prescribes the 
functions of AERA. AERA must perform the following functions in respect of 
major airports:  
a. Determine tariff for aeronautical services [Section 13(1)(a)]; 
b. Determine the amount of development fees [Section 13(1)(b)]; 
c. Determine the passengers service fee levied under Rule 88 of the 
Aircraft Rules 1937 notified under the Aircraft Act 1934 [Section 
13(1)(c)]; 
d. Monitor the performance standards relating to quality, continuity and 
reliability of service as specified by the Central Government or any other 
authority authorised by it [Section 13(1)(d)]; 
e. Call for information necessary to determine the tariff [Section 13(1)(e)]; 
and 
f. Perform such other functions relating to tariff which may be entrusted to 
it by the Central Government or which may be necessary to carry out the 
provisions of the Act [Section 13(1)(f)]. 
 
6 AERA Act; Section 1(3)(b) 
7 AERA Act; Section 1(3)(c) 
8 AERA Act; Section 1(3)(d) 

PART A  
Page 6 of 53 
 
4. 
Section 13(1)(a) also prescribes the factors which AERA must take into 
consideration to “determine” tariff. The following are the seven factors 
provided by the provision:  
a. The capital expenditure incurred and timely investment in improvement 
of airport facilities; 
b. The service provided, its quality and other relevant factors; 
c. The cost of improving efficiency; 
d. Economic and viable operation of major airports; 
e. Revenue received from services other than aeronautical services;  
f. The concession offered by the Central Government in any agreement or 
memorandum of understanding or otherwise; and 
g. Any other factor which may be relevant for the purposes of this Act.  
The proviso to Section 13(1)(a) provides that different tariff structures may be 
determined for different airports, having regard to all or any of the considerations 
stipulated in the provision.  
5. 
Section 13(2) provides that AERA must determine the tariff once in five years 
and may amend the tariff at any time within the five years in public interest.9 
Section 13 (1A) provides that notwithstanding anything in Clauses (1) and (2) 
of Section 13, AERA will not determine the tariff or the structure of tariff or the 
development fees if it is incorporated in the bidding document which is the 
basis for award of operatorship.10 However, the proviso to Section 13(1A) 
 
9 13(2): “The Authority shall determine the tariff once in every five years and may if so considered appropriate 
and in public interest, amend, from time to time during the said period of five years, the tariff so determined.” 
10 AERA Act; Section 13(1A) 

PART A  
Page 7 of 53 
 
requires AERA to be “consulted” in advance regarding the tariff or 
development fee which is proposed to be included in the bidding document 
and such fee is required to be notified in the Official Gazette.11 Section 13(3) 
provides that AERA is required to act in the interest of the sovereignty and 
integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign states, 
public order, decency or morality while discharging its functions.12 Section 
13(4) provides that AERA while discharging its functions must ensure 
transparency by, inter alia, (a) holding due consultations with all stake-holders 
with the airport; (b) allowing all stake-holders to make submissions before it; 
and (c) making all decisions of the Authority fully documented and explained.  
6. 
Section 2(a) defines “aeronautical service” as the service provided for the 
following:  
a. For navigation, surveillance and supportive communication for air 
traffic management; 
b. For the landing, housing or parking of an aircraft or any other ground 
facility offered in connection with aircraft operations at an airport; 
c. For ground safety services at an airport; 
d. For ground handling services relating to aircraft, passengers and 
cargo at an airport; 
e. For the cargo facility at an airport; 
f. For supplying fuel to the aircraft at an airport; and  
g. For stake holder at an airport.  
 
11 AERA Act; proviso to Section 13(1A) 
12 AERA Act; Section 13(3) 

PART A  
Page 8 of 53 
 
7. 
Section 14 confers AERA with the power to call for an information and conduct 
investigation regarding the activities of a service provider. The provision 
confers it with the power to do the following by an order in writing:  
a. Call upon the service provider to furnish in writing such information or 
explanation relating to its functions to access the performance of the 
service provider; 
b. Appoint persons to inquire into the affairs of a service provider; 
c. Direct the inspection of book of accounts or other documents of any 
service provider; and  
d. Issue directions to monitor the performance of service providers.  
8. 
The service provider is bound to produce all books of account and documents 
relating to the subject matter of the inquiry and furnish such statement or 
information. Section 15 confers AERA with the power to issue directions to 
service providers to discharge its functions under the Act.13 
9. 
Section 17 provides that TDSAT established under the Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India Act 1997 will be the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of 
the AERA Act. TDSAT exercises original jurisdiction and appellate jurisdiction 
under the Act. Section 17(a) confers TDSAT with the original jurisdiction to 
adjudicate any dispute that arises between (a) service providers; or (b) 
service providers and consumers. The proviso to the Clause states that 
TDSAT can obtain the opinion of AERA on any matter relating the above 
 
13 “15. Power of Authority to issue directions.- The Authority may, for the purpose of discharge of its functions 
under this Act, issue, from time to time to the service providers, such directions, as it may consider 
necessary.” 

PART A  
Page 9 of 53 
 
disputes. Section 17(b) confers TDSAT with appellate jurisdiction over “any 
direction, decision or order” of AERA.14  
10. Section 18 of the AERA Act deals with the procedure for settlement of disputes 
and appeals to the Appellate Tribunal. Sub-sections  (1) and (2) of Section 18 
provide that the Central Government, the State Government, a Local Authority 
or any person may make an application for adjudication of a dispute covered 
by Section 17(a) or prefer an appeal against the order of AERA. Section 18(4) 
stipulates that TDSAT must pass orders after giving the “parties to the dispute 
or the appeal” the opportunity of being heard. Section 18(5) provides that 
TDSAT must send a copy of the order to the parties to the dispute or the 
appeal and the Authority, “as the case may be”: 
“(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of 
every order made by it to the parties to the dispute 
or the appeal and to the Authority, as the case may 
be.” 
  
 
 
         (emphasis supplied) 
 
14 “Appellate Tribunal.- The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal established under section 
14 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997) shall, on and from the commencement 
of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), be the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of 
this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it 
by or under this Act] to—  
(a) adjudicate any dispute—  
(i) between two or more service providers;  
(ii) between a service provider and a group of consumer:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, if considers appropriate, obtain the opinion of the Authority 
on any matter relating to such dispute: 
 Provided further that nothing in this clause shall apply in respect of matters—  
(i) 
relating to the monopolistic trade practice, restrictive trade practice and unfair trade practice 
which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices 
Commission established under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Monopolies and 
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (54 of 1969);  
(ii) 
 relating to the complaint of an individual consumer maintainable before a Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Forum or a Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission or the National 
Consumer Redressal Commission established under section 9 of the Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986 (68 of 1986); 
(iii) 
 Which are within the purview of the Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003); 
(iv) 
 relating to an order of eviction which is appealable under section 28K of the Airports 
Authority of India Act, 1994 (55 of 1994).  
(b) hear and dispose of appeal against any direction, decision or order of the Authority under this Act. 

PART A  
Page 10 of 53 
 
11. In terms of sub-section (6), TDSAT must endeavour to dispose the application 
or the appeal within ninety days of the receipt of it. It must record reasons in 
writing if it is unable to dispose the application within the specified period. 
Sub-section (7) provides that TDSAT may call for the records relevant to 
disposing the appeal or application15. 
12. Section 31(1) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Civil Procedure 190816 or any other law, an appeal will lie against the order 
of the Tribunal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the grounds stipulated 
in Section 100 of CPC.17  
 
 
15 “18. Application for settlement of disputes and appeals to Appellate Tribunal.—(1) The Central Government 
or a State Government or a local authority or any person may make an application to the Appellate Tribunal 
for adjudication of any dispute as referred to in clause (a) of section 17.  
(2) The Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or any person aggrieved by any 
direction, decision or order made by the Authority may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. 
 (3) Every appeal under sub-section (2) shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date on which 
a copy of the direction or order or decision made by the Authority is received by the Central Government or 
the State Government or the local authority or the aggrieved person and it shall be in such form, verified in 
such manner and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed: 
 Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. 
 (4) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1) or an appeal under sub-section (2), the Appellate 
Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the dispute or the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such 
orders thereon as it thinks fit. 
 (5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the dispute or the 
appeal and to the Authority, as the case may be. 
(6) The application made under sub-section (1) or the appeal preferred under sub-section (2) shall be dealt 
with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the application or 
appeal finally within ninety days from the date of receipt of application or appeal, as the case may be: 
Provided that where any such application or appeal could not be disposed of within the said period of ninety 
days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the application or appeal 
within that period. 
(7) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality or propriety or correctness, of any 
dispute made in any application under sub-section (1), or of any direction or order or decision of the Authority 
referred to in the appeal preferred under sub-section (2), on its own motion or otherwise, call for the records 
relevant to disposing of such application or appeal and make such orders as it thinks fit.” 
16 “CPC” 
17 “31. Appeal to Supreme Court.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908) or in any other law, an appeal shall lie against any order, not being an interlocutory order, 
of the Appellate Tribunal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the grounds specified in section 100 of that 
Code.” 

PART B 
Page 11 of 53 
 
B.  Submissions  
13. Mr K K Venugopal, Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Mr Arvind Datar and Mr 
Prashanto Chandra Sen, Senior Counsel, and Ms Neelam Rathore, counsel 
appeared for the respondents. They submitted that the appeal filed by AERA 
is not maintainable for the following reasons:  
a. AERA which is a tariff fixing authority, cannot be an “aggrieved party” 
at any stage of the proceedings. Since it cannot file an appeal before 
TDSAT, it also cannot file an appeal before this Court under Section 
31 of the Act assailing the order of TDSAT. Section 18(2) provides that 
“any person” aggrieved by any direction, decision or order made by 
the Authority may prefer an appeal to TDSAT. AERA will not be 
covered by the expression “any person” since that would amount to 
AERA challenging its own order;  
b. AERA cannot defend its own actions in the appeal against its order 
since tariff determination is a quasi-judicial function: 
i. Numerous judgments of this Court have held that tariff 
determination is a quasi-judicial exercise (see PTC India v. 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission18, BSES 
Rajdhani Power Limited v. Delhi Electricity Regulatory 
Commission19, Sitaram Sugar Co. Ltd v. Union of India20 
 
18 (2010) 4 SCC 603 
19 (2023) 4 SCC 788 
20 (1990) 3 SCC 223 

PART B 
Page 12 of 53 
 
and GRIDCO v. Western Electricity Supply Company of 
Orissa Limited21);  
ii. The procedure followed by AERA while fixing tariff elucidates 
that it is a quasi-judicial exercise. Section 13(4) requires AERA 
to follow principles of natural justice before determining the 
tariff of aeronautical services;  
c. The AERA Act does not expressly provide that AERA must be 
impleaded as a respondent to the appeal against its order before 
TDSAT; 
d. The interests of affected parties will be safeguarded even if AERA 
does not file an appeal against the order of TDSAT under Section 31. 
Section 18(2) permits any aggrieved person or even the Central 
Government who may act as a parens patriae to prefer an appeal 
against the order of AERA, and by extension the order of TDSAT; 
e. Section 31 does not expressly empower AERA to file an appeal 
against the order of TDSAT, unlike Section 53T of the Competition Act 
200222 which empowers the Competition Commission to prefer an 
appeal before the Supreme Court against an order of the Appellate 
Tribunal; 
 
21 2023 SCC Online 1249 
22 “Competition Act” 

PART B 
Page 13 of 53 
 
f. Section 18(5) provides that TDSAT must send a copy of all its orders 
to (a) parties to the dispute or appeal; and (b) the Authority. The 
provision by specifying the Authority separately from the parties to the 
dispute or appeal clarifies that it cannot be a party to the dispute or 
appeal, and consequently cannot prefer an appeal; and 
g. TDSAT or this Court may have to remand matters back to AERA for 
redetermination of tariff. AERA cannot be both a contesting party and 
also redetermine tariff. It would result in the possible operation of bias.  
14. Mr Venkataramani, Attorney General for India and Mr Tushar Mehta, Solicitor 
General appearing for the Union Government, and Mr N Venkataraman, 
Additional Solicitor General appearing for AERA made the following 
submissions:  
a. An association representing the passengers may not necessarily 
prefer appeals in every case. While stakeholders may be allowed to 
make submissions before AERA in terms of Section 13(4), there is no 
statutory obligation on them to contest disputes or maintain appeals. 
AERA is concerned with the outcome of the decision by TDSAT on, 
inter alia, ‘tariff determination’ in its own interest as a regulatory body 
and in the interest of the general public; 
b. AERA will always be a contesting respondent when an appeal against 
its order or direction is filed before TDSAT. It will be covered by the 
expression “parties to the appeal” in Section 18(5). However, it will 
not be a party to the dispute. It is to  cover  such  situations  that  the 

PART C 
Page 14 of 53 
 
“Authority” has been separately referred. This is evident from the 
expression “as the case may be” in the provision; 
c. AERA is not a quasi-judicial authority. It is a regulator which performs 
multiple functions other than determination of tariff; 
d. Even assuming that AERA is a quasi-judicial authority, the embargo 
that applies to judicial authorities, that they cannot contest an appeal 
against their own orders, need not always apply to quasi-judicial 
authorities; 
e. A comparison cannot be made with Section 53T of the Competition 
Act. Section 53T identifies the parties that can file an appeal, as 
opposed to Section 31 of the AERA Act which only mandates that “an 
appeal shall lie against any order, not being an interlocutory order of 
the Appellate Tribunal to the Supreme Court”; and 
f. Institutional bias is not recognised in Indian jurisprudence. An 
institution or authority is independent of its officers who act under it. 
C.  Issues 
15. The following issues arise for the consideration of this Court:  
a. Whether AERA has a right to contest an appeal against its order 
determining tariff for aeronautical services before TDSAT, and then 
consequently prefer an appeal against the order of TDSAT before this 
Court under Section 31 of the AERA Act; and

PART D 
Page 15 of 53 
 
b. Even if AERA does not have a right to contest an appeal against its 
order determining tariff for aeronautical services before TDSAT, does 
it have a right to prefer an appeal against the order of TDSAT before 
this Court in terms of Section 31 of the AERA Act. 
D.  Analysis  
i. 
Authorities exercising ‘adjudicatory functions’ cannot defend their orders in 
appeal  
16. The respondents referred to judgments of this Court and of various High 
Courts for the proposition that statutory authorities exercising quasi-judicial 
functions cannot defend their orders in appeal. Before we proceed to 
determine if AERA is a quasi-judicial authority, it is necessary that we first 
clarify the contours of this proposition. 
17. The judicial principle that a judicial or quasi-judicial authority must not be 
impleaded as a party to an appeal against its order is premised on two 
reasons, both rooted in constitutional philosophy. The first reason is that with 
the impleadment of the judicial or quasi-judicial authorities as respondents, 
they will be required to justify their decision before the Appellate Court. This 
is contrary to the established principle that Judges only speak through their 
judgments. Any dilution of this principle would lead to a situation where every 
judicial authority would be called upon to justify their decisions in the Court of 
appeal. This would break down the entire edifice of the judicial system.  

PART D 
Page 16 of 53 
 
18.  In Savitri Devi v. District Jugde, Gorakhpur23, a civil suit for maintenance 
was filed in the Court of the Munsif, Gorakhpur. The plaintiff filed a revision in 
the Court of the District Judge, Gorakhpur which was dismissed. The order of 
the District Judge was challenged in a writ petition before the High Court 
which was also dismissed. A Special Leave Petition was instituted assailing 
the order of the High Court. In the writ petition before the High Court and the 
Special Leave Petition before this Court, the District Judge, Gorakhpur and 
the 4th Additional Civil Judge (Junior Division) were impleaded as respondents 
and contesting respondents respectively. A three-Judge Bench of this Court 
deprecated the practice of impleading judicial officers who had disposed of 
“the matter in a civil proceeding”: 
“14. We do not approve of the course adopted by the 
petitioner 
which 
would 
cause 
unnecessary 
disturbance to the functions of the judicial officers 
concerned. They cannot be in any way equated to 
the officials of the Government. It is high time that 
the practice of impleading judicial officers disposing 
of civil proceedings as parties to writ petitions under 
Article 226 of the Constitution of India or special 
leave petitions under Article 136 of the Constitution 
of India was stopped. We are strongly deprecating 
such a practice.”  
 
19. In Md. Omer v. S Noorudin24, an appeal was preferred against an order of 
the Registrar of Trade Marks before the High Court of Bombay. The Solicitor 
General of India put an appearance for the Registrar. The Solicitor General  
submitted that “he appeared to help the Court by pointing out certain errors in 
 
23 (1999) 2 SCC 577 
24 AIR 1952 Bom 165 

PART D 
Page 17 of 53 
 
the judgment of the lower Court.” The Division Bench of the High Court of 
Judicature at Bombay held that though there are certain cases in which the 
Registrar should appear, this was not one such case. Chief Justice Chagla, 
writing for the Division Bench observed that the Solicitor General made a 
startling proposition by which the Judge of the Court of first instance appears 
before the Court of second appeal to argue that his judgment was correct and 
the judgment of the Court of the first appeal was wrong. The Bench observed 
that: (a) there may be cases in which the Registrar could be a contesting 
respondent; and (b) the Registrar acting as a Court of first instance cannot 
appear before the second appellate Court “merely” to point the errors in the 
judgment of the Court of first appeal.25  
20. The second reason for this principle is that the impleadment of the judicial 
authority as a respondent would contravene one of the primary tenets of 
natural justice, that an adjudicating authority must not be biased. It is in 
deviation of the principle that an authority exercising adjudicatory functions is 
required to be a ‘neutral arbitrator’ which does not have a ‘personal interest’ 
in the matter. In Jindal Therma Power Company Ltd. v. Karnataka Power 
 
25 “14. […]  I have never heard of a Judge of first instance briefing counsel in a Court of appeal in order to 
point out that the judgment of the lower appellate Court was wrong and his judgment was right. If this were 
the true principle, then every time we hear a second appeal we should look to being guided by the Judge of 
the trial Court appearing by counsel and telling us what the mistakes in the judgment of the lower Court are. 
We take it that this Court is sufficiently competent to find out for itself, with the guidance of the counsel of 
parties, as to what errors, if any, have been committed by the lower Court. We, therefore, think that it was 
entirely wrong on the part of the Registrar in this case to have appeared merely for the purpose of 
elucidating his own judgment and pointing out the errors in the judgment of the Court below. That is 
not the proper function of the Court of first instance, and in this case the Registrar is nothing else except 
the Court of first instance. […] But, as I said before, this Court neither needs illumination nor guidance from 
the Judge of the first instance as to what are the errors in the judgment of the lower appellate Court.” 
[emphasis supplied]; Also see the judgments of the Delhi High Court in Union Public Service Commission 
v. Shiv Shambhu25 and SBI v. Mohd. Shahjahan25 in which the impleadment of the Competition Commission 
of India as a respondent in writ petitions filed challenging its orders was reprimanded. 

PART D 
Page 18 of 53 
 
Transmission Corporation Ltd.26, an appeal under Section 41 of the 
Karnataka Electricity Reforms Act 1999 was preferred before the High Court 
against the orders passed by the Karnataka Electricity Regulatory 
Commission by which the Power Purchase agreement between the appellant 
and the respondent was modified27. One of the issues before the High Court 
was whether the Electricity Regulatory Commission was either a necessary 
or a proper party to the appeal. The High Court held that the Electricity 
Regulatory Commission was neither a proper nor a necessary party in the 
appeal. The Court observed that an Authority must not take sides when an 
appeal is filed against its quasi-judicial order because if it exhibits an 
abnormal interest in the appeal “normally unknown to statutory authorities 
performing quasi-judicial function” it would give the impression that it is more 
of an “affected party”.28   
21. Hari Vishnu Kamath v. Syed Ahmad Ishaque29 was one of the first 
judgments in which this Court held that a Tribunal was not required to be 
impleaded as a respondent in an appeal against its order.  In that judgment, 
a seven-Judge Bench of this Court heard an appeal against the decision of 
the High Court on a writ of certiorari for quashing the decision of the Election 
Tribunal. One of the issues before this Court was whether the High Court 
 
26 2004 SCC OnLine Kar 204 
27 “Electricity Regulatory Commission” 
28  2004 SCC OnLine Kar 204 [31, 33] “33. We also find considerable force in the contention of Dr. Singhvi 
that if ultimately this Court decides to remand the proceedings to the Commission for fresh consideration in 
exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, the Commission having contested the matter before this Court with 
abnormal interest and psyche of a private contesting litigant, cannot be fair enough to decide the issue with 
impartiality and disinterestedness required of it and that the confidence reposed by the appellant on the 
impartiality of the Commission will be lost. It is true if this Court in exercise of its appellate jurisdiction remands 
the proceedings to the Commission for reconsideration of evidence, there will be likelihood of the appellant 
entertaining apprehension that the Commission is not impartial in the decision making…” 
29 (1954) 2 SCC 881 

PART D 
Page 19 of 53 
 
could not have issued a writ of certiorari because the Election Tribunal was 
an ad hoc body which became functus officio, having served its purpose, upon 
the pronouncement of the decision. It was contended that there would be no 
authority against which the writ could be issued if the Tribunal had become 
functus officio. This Court rejected the argument and held that the fact that 
the Tribunal had become functus officio did not affect the jurisdiction of the 
Court to quash the order because the presence of the Election Tribunal, 
though proper, was not necessary.30  
22. However, in Udit Narain Singh Malpaharia v. Additional Member Board of 
Revenue31, a four-Judge Bench of this Court drew a fine line of distinction 
between an appeal against a decree and a writ of certiorari to quash the order 
of the Tribunal. Justice K Subba Rao (as the learned Chief justice then was), 
writing for the Bench observed that the Tribunal is a necessary party if a writ 
of certiorari is filed to quash its order because: (a) otherwise the order of 
quashing could be ignored; and (b) a writ of certiorari is filed to quash orders 
of the Tribunal which are outside their jurisdiction as opposed to a regular 
appeal where the Court decides if the order is erroneous.32  
 
30 (1954) 2 SCC 881 [13] 
31 AIR 1963 SC 786 
32 “8. […] But there is an essential distinction between an appeal against a decree of a subordinate court and 
a writ of certiorari to quash the order of a tribunal or authority: in the former, the proceedings are regulated by 
the Code of Civil Procedure and the court making the order is directly subordinate to the appellate court and 
ordinarily acts within its bounds, though sometimes wrongly or even illegally, but in the case of the latter, 
a writ of certiorari is issued to quash the order of a tribunal which is ordinarily outside the appellate or 
revisional jurisdiction of the court and the order is set aside on the ground that the tribunal or the authority 
acted without or in excess of jurisdiction. If such a tribunal or authority is not made a party to the writ, it can 
easily ignore the order of the High Court quashing its order, for not being a party, it will not be liable to 
contempt. In these circumstances whoever else is a necessary party or not the authority or tribunal is certainly 
a necessary party to such a proceeding. In this case, the Board of Revenue and the Commissioner of Excise 
were rightly made parties in the writ petition.” (emphasis supplied) 

PART D 
Page 20 of 53 
 
23. In Jogendrasinhji Vijaysinghji v. State of Gujarat33, a two-Judge Bench of 
this Court culled out the following principles on the impleadment of Tribunals 
and Courts as parties in appeals against their orders after analysing the above 
three judgments. Justice Dipak Misra (as the learned Chief Justice then was) 
writing for the Bench made the following observations:34 
a. Civil Courts are “courts in the strictest sense of the term”. The Court 
and the judicial officer do not contest the order. The High Court in its 
revisional jurisdiction can call for the records (if required) without 
impleading the court or the presiding officer as a party; and 
b.  Many Tribunals only adjudicate and have nothing to do with the “lis”. 
Tribunals must be impleaded as a necessary party if in law they are 
entitled to defend the order passed by them. 
24. It is clear from the above judgments that the principle that a judicial or quasi-
judicial authority cannot be a respondent in the appeal is circumscribed by 
certain other factors. The first factor applied by this Court is based on the relief 
sought.   A judicial or a quasi-judicial authority may be required to be 
impleaded as a party in a challenge against its order if it is necessary as in 
case of a writ of certiorari. Second, this Court has consistently drawn a 
distinction between Courts in the “strictest sense” and Tribunals because the 
former are nearly never involved in a ‘lis’ and perform a purely adjudicatory 
function. However, a statutory authority may be entrusted with the 
 
33 (2015) 9 SCC 1 
34 (2015) 9 SCC 1 [41] 

PART D 
Page 21 of 53 
 
performance of both adjudicatory and regulatory functions. This Court has 
held that while it need not be impleaded as a respondent in an appeal against 
an adjudicatory order, it may be made a contesting party in an appeal against 
an order issued in exercise of its regulatory functions because then it may 
have a vital interest in the ‘lis’ bearing on matters of public interest. 
25. However, it must be noted that the judgment in Jogendrasinhji Vijaysinghji 
(supra) also holds that a Tribunal is entitled to defend the order in the appeal 
only if it is provided by law. That leads us to the subsequent question of 
whether the statute establishing the Authority and conferring it with powers 
and functions must expressly stipulate that it must be impleaded as a 
respondent in an appeal or it can be inferred by necessary implication.  
ii. 
Necessary and proper parties in regulatory proceedings 
26. In Syed Yakoob v. KS Radhakrishnan35, the State Transport Authority36 
constituted under the Motor Vehicles Act 1988 and the State Transport 
Appellate Tribunal37 were impleaded as respondents in the appeal against the 
judgment of the High Court. The High Court held that the STA and STAT had 
overlooked material considerations while issuing transport permits. The 
counsel who appeared for STA and STAT before this Court asked for costs. 
Rejecting the argument, Justice PB Gajendragadkar writing for the majority 
of the Constitution Bench, observed that though STA and STAT were proper 
and necessary parties in the proceedings, it is unusual for them to be 
 
35 1963 SCC OnLine SC 24 
36 “STA” 
37 “STAT” 

PART D 
Page 22 of 53 
 
represented by counsel unless allegations are made against them for which 
they need to respond because “they are not interested in the merits of the 
dispute”: 
“19. […] It may be that in such proceedings, the 
Authority and the Appellate Tribunal are proper and 
necessary parties, but unless allegations are made 
against them which need a reply from them, it is not 
usual for the authorities to be represented by 
lawyers in Court. In ordinary cases, their position is 
like that of court or other Tribunals against whose 
decisions writ proceedings are filed; they are not 
interested in the merits of the dispute in any 
sense, and so, their representation by lawyers in 
such proceedings is wholly unnecessary and even 
inappropriate.” 
  
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
27. In State Transport Authority Tribunal and Regional Transport Authority, 
Meerut v. Mohd. Lucman Shariff38, this Court refused to entertain an appeal 
filed by the Transport Authorities against the judgment of the High Court 
because they were not “aggrieved parties”. In Bar Council of Maharashtra 
v. MV Dabholkar39, the issue before a seven-Judge Bench of this Court was 
whether the State Bar Council was an ‘aggrieved party’ to maintain an appeal 
under Section 38 of the Advocates Act 196140. Section 38 provides that “any 
aggrieved person” may prefer an appeal before this Court against the order 
made by the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India. Chief Justice 
A N Ray, writing the opinion for the majority held that the State Bar Council 
was an aggrieved person for the following reasons: 
 
38 C.A No. 878 of 1963  
39  (1975) 2 SCC 702 
40 “Advocates Act” 

PART D 
Page 23 of 53 
 
a. Under the provisions of the Advocates Act, the State Bar Council may 
initiate disciplinary proceedings either on its own or upon the receipt 
of information. Thus, there was no ‘lis’ in the proceedings before the 
Disciplinary Committee like there is in a suit between parties;41 and 
b. The expression “person aggrieved” must be interpreted widely in 
terms of the purpose and the provisions of the enactment. The test to 
be applied to interpret the expression “person aggrieved” is whether 
“a person has a genuine grievance because an order has been made 
which prejudicially affects his interests”.42  The interest need not 
be personal or pecuniary. The Advocates Act confers the Bar Council 
a statutory interest in the rights and privileges of the advocates and 
the purity and dignity of the profession.43 
28. Justice Bhagwati, in his concurring opinion agreed with the conclusions in the 
opinion of Chief Justice Ray but diverged on the limited point of whether there 
was a ‘lis’ between the delinquent advocates and the Bar Council. The learned 
Judge distinguished between the executive functions (ensuring professional 
conduct of advocates) and adjudicatory functions of the Bar Council (acting 
through the Disciplinary Committee).44 Irrespective of the divergence on 
whether this dispute could be termed as a ‘lis’, it is clear that this Court was 
of the uniform view that a statutory authority can be impleaded as an 
interested party.  
 
41 (1975) 2 SCC 702 [25] 
42 (1975) 2 SCC 702 [28] 
43 (1975) 2 SCC 702 [29] 
44 (1975) 2 SCC 702 [40] 

PART D 
Page 24 of 53 
 
29. In Competition Commission of India v. Steel Authority of India45, this 
Court has in detail dealt with the issue that concerns us. In that case, Jindal 
Steels and Powers invoked the provisions of Section 19 read with Section 
26(1) of the Competition Act by providing information to allege that SAIL had 
abused its dominant position by entering into an exclusive supply agreement 
with Indian Railways. The Competition Commission of India rejected the 
application for extension of time by SAIL. It held that a prima facie case was 
made out against SAIL and directed the Director General to make an 
investigation. SAIL challenged the above order before the Competition 
Appellate Tribunal. The Commission filed an application for impleadment 
before the Competition Appellate Tribunal on the ground that it was a 
necessary and proper party. Emphasis was placed on Section 18 of the 
Competition Act to contend that the powers, functions and duties of the 
Commission required it to be impleaded as a party in the appeals filed before 
the Tribunal. The Tribunal dismissed the application for impleadment. An 
appeal was preferred against this order. This issue framed by this Court was 
: “whether the Commission would be a necessary or at least a proper party in 
the proceedings before the Tribunal in an appeal preferred by a party”.46 A 
three-Judge Bench of this Court held that the Commission was a necessary 
party in cases where it initiated a suo moto inquiry and that it was a proper 
party in all other proceedings before the Competition Tribunal: 
“31(3). The Commission, in cases where the inquiry 
has been initiated by the Commission suo moto, 
shall be a necessary party and in all other cases the 
 
45 (2010) 10 SCC 744 
46 (2010) 10 SCC 744 [30.3] 

PART D 
Page 25 of 53 
 
Commission shall be a proper party in the 
proceedings before the Competition Tribunal. The 
presence of the Commission before the Tribunal 
would help in complete adjudication and effective 
and expeditious disposal of matters. Bring an expert 
body, its views would be of appropriate assistance to 
the Tribunal. Thus, the Commission in the 
proceedings before the Tribunal would be a 
necessary or a proper party, as the case may be.” 
30. While arriving at this conclusion, this Court relied on the following aspects:  
a. Section 53-S(3) of the Competition  Act provides that the Commission 
may authorise one or more Chartered Accountants, Company 
Secretaries, Cost Accountants or legal practitioners to present the 
case of the Commission with respect to any appeal before the 
Appellate Tribunal.47 The Commission’s legal right to representation 
before the Appellate tribunal would be diluted if the Commission was 
absent;48 
b. The Competition Commission can initiate suo moto proceedings in 
terms of Section 19 read with Section 26 of the Competition Act. 
Principles of fairness require that such a party be heard by the 
Tribunal before any orders “adverse to it are passed”. Thus, the 
Competition Commission is a necessary party in cases where an 
appeal is preferred against orders or directions in proceedings 
initiated suo moto by it since it is a dominus litus in such 
proceedings;49 
 
47 The Competition Act 2002; Section 53S; Also see the Competition Commission of India (General) 
Regulations 2009; Regulation 51 
48 (2010) 10 SCC 744 [104] 
49 (2010) 10 SCC 744 [105,112] 

PART D 
Page 26 of 53 
 
c. The Competition Commission is a proper party in other matters for 
the following reasons: 
i. The Commission is an expert body and discharges regulatory 
functions50. The assistance rendered by the Commission would 
be useful for a complete and effective adjudication;51 and 
ii. Regulations 24 to 26 of the Competition Commission of India 
(General) Regulations 200952 define the powers of the 
Commission to join or substitute parties in proceedings, allow 
persons or enterprises to take part in proceedings and to strike 
out unnecessary parties. The 2009 Regulations stipulate that 
the person or enterprise to be impleaded must have a 
substantial interest in the outcome of the proceedings and/or 
that it must be necessary in public interest.53 This principle 
must be extended to the exercise of jurisdiction by the Tribunal. 
The Competition Commission has a substantial interest in the 
outcome of the proceedings in most cases as the judgments of 
the Tribunal: (i) will be binding on it; (ii) provide guidelines for 
determining various matters of larger public interest; and (iii) 
affect the economic policy of the country. 
 
50 See Brahm Dutt v. Union of India, AIR 2005 SC 730 
51 (2010) 10 SCC 744 [106] 
52 “2009 Regulation” 
53 The Competition Commission of India (General) Regulations 2009; Regulation 25(1) 

PART D 
Page 27 of 53 
 
31. The Competition Act, unlike the AERA Act, expressly provides the statutory 
authority with the right to present its case before the Appellate Tribunal.54 
Section 52T of the Competition Act also expressly grants the Competition 
Commission the right to file an appeal before this Court against an order of 
the Appellate Tribunal.55 The judgment of this Court in Competition 
Commission of India (supra), however, does not hinge only on the express 
stipulations in the Competition Act. This Court drew a functional analysis of 
the role of the Competition Commission. This Court by creating a distinction 
between proceedings initiated by the Competition Commission suo moto and 
others, in effect made a classification between matters in which the 
Commission is an “interested party” and the ones in which it would assist in 
“effective adjudication”. When the Commission initiates proceedings suo 
motu, it is discharging its duty to: (a) eliminate practices having an adverse 
effect on competition; (b) promote and sustain competition; (c) protect the 
interests of consumers; and (d) ensure the freedom of trade by other 
participants in markets in India. Thus, when it initiates a suo moto proceeding, 
it is discharging its function as a party vitally interested in the elimination of 
anti-competitive practices. In appeals against the orders of the Commission 
in inquiries initiated otherwise (on receipt of information or on a reference 
made to it by the Central Government or a State Government or a statutory 
 
54 Competition Commission of India Act 2002; Section 53S(2) 
55 “53T. Appeal to Supreme Court.- The Central Government or any State Government or the Commission 
or any statutory authority or any local authority or any enterprise or any person aggrieved by any decision or 
order of the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of 
communication of the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal to them: 
 
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient 
cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed after the expiry of the said period of 
sixty days.” [emphasis supplied] 

PART D 
Page 28 of 53 
 
authority56), the representation of the Commission is seen as necessary for 
the effective adjudication in view of its expertise in the field. Thus, the  
Competition Commission of India (supra) lays down the clear proposition 
of law that a statutory authority can be impleaded as a respondent in an 
appeal against its order even if the statute does not provide for it. It can be 
read by necessary implication based on the role conferred upon the authority 
by the statute.  
32. Order 1 Rule 10 of CPC grants the Court the power to strike out or add parties. 
The Rule provides that the Court may either with or without the application of 
the party, add the name of the party who ought to have been joined or whose 
presence before the Court may be necessary for the Court to effectively 
adjudicate upon the questions involved in the suit.57 This Court has sufficiently 
dealt with proper and necessary parties referable to Order 1 Rule 10 of CPC. 
A necessary party is defined as someone who is indispensable to the suit and 
without whom the suit cannot effectively proceed. A proper party, on the other 
hand, is a party who has an interest in the adjudication of the suit though they 
may not be a person in whose favour or against whom a decree ought to be 
made.58 This Court has further held that a party would not become a 
necessary party merely because she has an interest in the correct solution of 
 
56 The Competition Act, 2002; Section 19(1) 
57 Order 1 Rule 10(2): “Court may strike out or add parties.- The Court may at any stage of the proceedings, 
either upon or without the application of either party, and on such terms as may appear to the Court to be 
just, order that the name of any party improperly joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, be struck out, and 
that the name of any person who ought to have been joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose 
presence before the Court may be necessary in order to enable the Court effectually and completely to 
adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in the suit, be added.  
 
58 See Vidus Impex & Traders Ltd. v. Tosh Apartments Pvt. Ltd. (2012) 8 SCC 384; Thomson Press (India) 
Ltd. v. Nanak Builders & Investors P. Ltd. (2013) 5 SCC 397 

PART D 
Page 29 of 53 
 
the question involved. She would be a necessary party only when she would 
be bound by the result of the action and has a direct or a legal interest in the 
proceeding.59 In view of the judgments of this Court in Competition 
Commission of India (supra) and Dabholkar (supra), a statutory authority 
would have a legal interest in appeals against orders made by it in discharge 
of its regulatory duty.  
33. In view of the above discussion, the following principles emerge:  
a. An authority (either a judicial or quasi-judicial authority) must not be 
impleaded in an appeal against its order if the order was issued solely 
in exercise of its “adjudicatory function”; 
b. An authority must be impleaded as a respondent in the appeal against 
its order if it was issued in exercise of its regulatory role since the 
authority would have a vital interest in ensuring the protection of 
public interest; and 
c. An authority may be impleaded as a respondent in the appeal against 
its order where its presence is necessary for the effective adjudication 
of the appeal in view of its domain expertise.  
iii. 
The test of quasi-judicial functions: A misnomer  
34. The next issue is whether AERA is undertaking an adjudicatory function in 
determining tariff under Section 13(1)(a) of the AERA Act. We have already in 
 
59 See Ramesh Hirachand Kundanmal v. Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay (1992) 2 SCC 524(14);  
Also see karthuri v. Uyyamperumal (2005) 6 SCC 733 

PART D 
Page 30 of 53 
 
the preceding section clarified that the test to be adopted is whether the 
authority was undertaking an adjudicatory exercise. However, before we 
proceed with this analysis, we deem it necessary to deal with the concept of 
‘quasi-judicial’ functions since judgments of larger Benches have approached 
the issue of whether an authority can contest an appeal against its order 
based on whether it was issued in exercise of its quasi-judicial functions. 
35. The respondents placed reliance on certain observations of the Constitution 
Bench of this Court in Express Newspaper Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of India60 on 
the tests to be adopted to determine whether an administrative body is 
exercising a quasi-judicial function. One of the issues before this Court in that 
case was whether the functions performed by the Wage Board constituted 
under the Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act 1955 are administrative, judicial, quasi-judicial or legislative in 
character. This Court had to determine this question to decide if the decisions 
of the Wage Board were open to judicial view and whether the principle of 
audi alteram partem applied to the proceedings before the Wage Boards.61 
The Constitution Bench laid down the following test to determine if an 
administrative body is exercising a quasi-judicial function: 
“112. In order, therefore, to determine whether an 
administrative body is exercising a quasi-judicial 
function, it would be necessary to examine in the first 
instance, whether it has to decide on evidence 
between a proposal and an opposition and secondly, 
whether it under a duty to act judicially in the matter 
of arriving at its decision.” 
 
60 1959 SCR 12 
61 1959 SCR 12 [93] 

PART D 
Page 31 of 53 
 
 
36. In the subsequent section, we will refer to the meaning of the phase “quasi-
judicial” and its legal underpinnings.  We will explain how the test of the duty 
to act ‘judicially’ was a standard that was evolved to ensure the compliance 
of the principles of natural justice and how it is no more relevant in view of the 
constitutionalising of the principles of natural justice.  
37. In the 1950s, a functional distinction was drawn between executive and 
judicial62 actions and between an action that deprives rights and an action that 
deprives privileges63 for deciding the applicability of the principles of natural 
justice.64 It was presumed that only a judicial body must act ‘judicially’ by 
following the principles of natural justice. Numerous judgments of this Court 
(similar to the judgment in Express Newspaper (supra) discussed above) 
speak of the ‘duty to act judicially’. To act ‘judicially’ meant to comply with the 
principles of natural justice. Courts began diluting the distinction between 
quasi-judicial and administrative actions to ensure that administrative actions 
or proceedings by authorities which are not Courts in a strict sense also 
comply with the principles of natural justice. The term “quasi-judicial” came 
into vogue to describe the exercise of power which though administrative in 
some respects was required to be exercised judicially, that is, in accordance 
with the principles of natural justice because of its impact on the rights of 
persons affected.65  
 
62 The King v. Inspector of Leman Street Police Station, Ex Parte Venicoff, (1920) 3 K.B. 72 
63 Nakkuda Ali v. MF De S Jayaratne, [1951] AC 66 
64 id 
65 Wade & Forsyth’s Administrative Law (12th ed. Oxford University Press) 393 

PART D 
Page 32 of 53 
 
38.   In R v. ex p London Electricity Joint Committee Co. (1920) Ltd.66, Lord 
Atkin laid down the following three components of a “quasi-judicial order”: (a) 
there must be a legal authority; (b) the authority must determine questions 
affecting rights of subjects; and (c) the authority must have a duty to act 
judicially. This test has been applied by this Court in Province of Bombay v. 
Khushaldas S Advani67, Shivji Nathubhai v. Union of India68 and Indian 
National Congress (I)69 to determine if a function is quasi-judicial.  
39. In Khushaldas S Advani (supra), the issue before a four-Judge Bench of this 
Court was whether an order requisitioning a flat under Section 3 of the 
Bombay Land Requisition Ordinance70 was quasi-judicial. Section 3 of the 
Ordinance stipulated that the Provincial Government may by an order in 
writing requisition any land for a public purpose provided that it is necessary 
or expedient to do so. Sections 10 and 11 of the Ordinance stipulated that the 
Provincial Government may obtain information, enter and inspect land. One 
of the arguments was that a decision is quasi-judicial whenever there is a 
determination of a fact which affects the rights of parties.71 
40.  Chief Justice Harilal Kania held that the test to be applied to determine if a 
decision is quasi-judicial is if the law under which the authority is making a 
decision itself requires a quasi-judicial approach. The learned Chief Justice 
considered two factors in arriving at the conclusion that Section 3 of the 
 
66 (1924) 1 KB 171 (CA)  
67 1950 SCR 621 
68 AIR 1960 SC 606  
69 (2002) 5 SCC 685.  
70 “Ordinance” 
71 1950 SCR 621 [11] 

PART D 
Page 33 of 53 
 
Ordinance did  not confer a quasi-judicial power: first, whether the opinion can 
be revised by another authority or whether it can only be challenged on the 
grounds on which legislative actions are challenged72; and second, Sections 
10 and 11 of the Ordinance which conferred the Provincial Government with 
the power to inspect and make inquires, were not mandatorily required to be 
followed.  Justice Fazl Ali in his concurring opinion observed that an order will 
be quasi-judicial or judicial if issued by a person or an authority who is “legally 
bound to or authorised to act as if he was a court or a Judge.”73  The learned 
Judge further expanded that to act as a Judge or a Court included the 
following: (a) right to representation; and (b) inquiry, hearing and weighing of 
evidence. Justice SR Das in his concurring opinion, made a crucial 
observation. The learned Judge held that an action will be quasi-judicial even 
if there was no lis between two parties, provided the statutory authority has 
the power to do an act which will prejudicially affect the subject:74 
“81. In other words, while the presence of two parties 
besides the deciding authority will prima facie, and 
in the absence of any other factor impose upon the 
authority the duty to act judicially, the absence of two 
such parties is not decisive in taking the act of the 
authority out of the category of quasi-judicial act if 
the authority is nevertheless required by the statute 
to act judicially.” 
41. In Ridge v. Baldwin75, Lord Reid observed that the judicial character of the 
duty must be inferred from the nature of the duty itself.  Since the decision in 
Ridge (supra), Courts have inferred the duty to act judicially, that is, in 
 
72 1950 SCR 621 [14] 
73 1950 SCR 621 [21] 
74 1950 SCR 621 [80.2] 
75 [1964] A.C 40 

PART D 
Page 34 of 53 
 
compliance with the principles of natural justice based on whether the 
decision adversely affects legal rights. Over time, Courts have abandoned the 
classification between quasi-judicial and administrative functions because the 
duty to act fairly, in compliance with the principles of natural justice has been 
read into administrative actions as well.76 MP Jain and SN Jain in their treatise 
on Administrative law elucidate the reasons for the blurring of this distinction77: 
“Differentiation 
between 
quasi-judicial 
and 
administrative seems to be merely an artificial 
formality, as many a time such a distinction is elusive 
and mostly a manner of judicial policy. Also, since the 
functions of the Administration have been expanding 
adversely affecting the rights and interests of 
individuals, the courts are convinced that it is 
essential to concede the right of hearing on a 
broader scale, but, at the same time, it may be 
artificial to call a function as quasi-judicial as it may 
have no judicial element involved. Or, in a 
situation, the court may feel that the function of the 
Administration is such that it is susceptible to the 
application of only a few but not all the elements of 
natural justice. […] Further, when a proceeding is 
characterised as administrative, the person whose 
interests are adversely affected thereby may be left 
with no effective means of redress of his grievances 
as he could claim no procedural safeguards. To 
overcome these difficulties, the new trend has 
emerged. The advantage is that procedural fairness 
can be imposed on a large number of decision-
making bodies without having to characterise their 
functions as quasi-judicial. This approach has 
resulted in applying hearing procedure to a large 
chunk of administrative process. The nexus between 
hearing and quasi-judicial no longer exists in 
administrative process. This approach does away 
with the conceptual approach of calling a 
function as quasi-judicial when not much of 
judicial element is discernible there. […] The 
emphasis is now placed on the element of injury 
to the concerned person by the administrative 
 
76 See In r HK (An Infant), (1967) 1 All ER 226 
77 MP Jain & SN Jain, “Principles of Administrative Law” (7th ed. Vol I, LexisNexis) 352 

PART D 
Page 35 of 53 
 
action in question to concede hearing to the 
affected person.” 
       
 
 
      (emphasis supplied) 
 
42. In AK Kraipak v. Union of India,78 a Constitution Bench renounced the 
distinction between quasi-judicial and administrative functions for the purpose 
of a compliance of the principles of natural justice. Relying on the judgment 
of the Queen’s Bench Division in In re H.K (An Infant)79 and the constitutional 
imperative of the rule of law80, the Constitution Bench held that the principles 
of natural justice will apply even to administrative decisions.81  The judgment 
of the Constitution Bench in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India82 has 
cemented this interpretation.83  
43. The above discussion elucidates that the exercise of power by Authorities and 
Tribunals was described as “quasi-judicial’ to ensure that the principles of 
natural justice were complied with. However, with the evolution of the doctrine 
of fariness and reasonableness, all administrative actions (even if there is 
 
78 (1969) 2 SCC 262 
79 (1967) 2 QB 617; “But at the same time, I myself think that even if an immigration officer is not in a judicial 
or a quasi-judicial capacity, he must at any rate give the immigrant an opportunity of satisfying him of the 
matters in the sub-section, and for that purpose let the immigrant know what his immediate impression is so 
that the immigrant can disabuse him.” In this context, also see the observations of Lord Parker C.J., in Reginal 
v. Criminal Injuries Compensation Board Ex parte Lain, (1967) 2 QB 684: “With regard to Mr Bridge’s second 
point, I cannot think that Atkin L.J., intended to confine his principle to cases in which the determination 
affected rights in the sense of enforceable rights. Indeed, in the Electricity Commissioners case the rights 
determined were at any rate not immediately enforceable rights. […] the remedy is available even though the 
decision is merely a step as a result of which legally enforceable rights may be affected.” 
80 (1969) 2 SCC 262 [13] 
81 “20. […] If the purpose of the rules of natural justice is to prevent miscarriage of justice one fails to see why 
those rules should be made inapplicable to administrative enquiries. Often times it is not easy to draw the 
line that demarcates administrative enquiries from quasi-judicial enquires. […] Arriving at a just decision I 
the aim of both quasi-judicial enquiries as well as administrative enquiries.” [emphasis supplied]  
82 AIR 1978 SC 597 
83 “The law must, therefore, now be taken to be well settled that even in an administrative proceeding, which 
involved civil consequences, the doctrine of natural justice must be held to be applicable.” Also see SL Kapoor 
v. Jagmohan, AIR 1981 SC 136 

PART D 
Page 36 of 53 
 
nothing ‘judicial (or adjudicatory)’ about them) are required to comply with the 
principles of natural justice. The evolution of the fairness doctrine has 
transcended many boundaries. Thus, the reason for which the expression 
‘quasi-judicial’ came into vogue is no longer relevant. Neither are the tests to 
identify them because the functions of an authority no more need to have any 
semblance to ‘judicial functions’ for it to act judicially (that is, comply with the 
principles of natural justice).    
44. The observations in judgments of this Court that a quasi-judicial authority 
must not be impleaded as a party in an appeal against its order must be 
interpreted in view of the doctrinal expansion of the principle of fairness. The 
substitution of the standard of whether the Authority undertakes a quasi-
judicial function with the test of adjudication is thus, not an aberration. It is a 
standard which is true to the purpose of the principle and which accounts for 
the subsequent constitutional developments.  
iv. 
The test for determining an ‘adjudicatory function’: Exploring Sitaram 
Sugar 
45. Before we proceed to determine if tariff-determination by AERA is an 
adjudicatory function, we must answer a more preliminary question: what are 
the tests to identify if a function is an adjudicatory one?  
46. In Sitaram Sugar (supra), the constitutional validity of notifications issued 
under Section 3(3C) of the Essential Commodities Act 1995 was before a 
Constitution Bench of this Court. Section 3(3C) provides that where producers 
are required to sell sugar, they must be paid an amount calculated with 

PART D 
Page 37 of 53 
 
reference to the price of sugar determined by the Central Government. The 
provision also lays down the factors which must be considered by the Central 
Government while determining the price of sugar.84 The provision further 
provides that different prices may be determined from time to time for (a) 
different areas or; (b) for different factories; or (c) for different kinds of sugar. 
This Court distinguished between legislation and adjudication. The 
Constitution Bench held that the former affects the rights of individuals in an 
abstract manner while adjudication operates “upon individuals in their 
individual capacity.”85 Relying on the following observations of this Court in 
Union of India v. Cynamide India Ltd.86, the Bench held that price fixation 
is usually a legislative measure and that it may occasionally take an 
adjudicatory character when it relates to an individual: 
“A price fixation measure does not concern itself with 
the interests of an individual manufacturer or 
producer. It is generally in relation to a particular 
commodity 
or 
class 
of 
commodities 
or 
transactions. It is a direction of a general character, 
not directed against a particular situation. It is 
intended to operate in the future. It is conceived in 
the interests of the general consumer public. Viewed 
from whatever angle, the angle of general 
application, the prospectiveness of its effect, the 
public interest served, and the rights and obligations 
flowing therefrom, there can be no question that 
price fixation is ordinarily a legislative activity.” 
 
“Price fixation may occasionally assume an 
administrative or quasi-judicial character when it 
relates to acquisition or requisition of goods or 
property 
from 
individuals 
and 
it 
becomes 
 
84 (a) the minimum price, if any, fixed for sugarcane by the Central Government under this section; 
    (b) the manufacturing cost of sugar; 
    (c) the duty or tax, if any, paid or payable thereon; 
    (d) the securing of a reasonable return on the capital employed in the business of manufacturing sugar, 
 
85 (1990) 3 SCC 223 [34] 
86 (1987) 2 SCC 729 

PART D 
Page 38 of 53 
 
necessary to fix the price separately in relation to 
such individuals. Such situations may arise when the 
owner of property or goods is compelled to sell his 
property or goods to the government or its nominee 
and the price to be paid is directed by the legislature 
to be determined according to the statutory 
guidelines laid down by it. In such situations the 
determination of price may acquire a quasi-judicial 
character”. 
  
 
 
      (emphasis supplied) 
 
47. On the facts of the case, the Bench held that price fixation is of a legislative 
character but the amount determined based on the price is adjudicatory 
because the former applies generally to a class of commodities while the latter 
is decided after taking individual aspects into consideration. This Court also 
held that price fixation can be of a legislative character even if it is based on 
an objective criteria87. 88  
48. Two principles are deducible from the judgment of this Court in Sitaram 
Sugar (supra). The first is that one of the factors to determine if an order was 
issued in exercise of an adjudicatory function, is whether it was specific to an 
individual or of general application. The second is that it is not necessary that 
a legislative action must always be ‘subjective’ and an adjudicatory function 
‘objective’. The Constitution Bench repudiated this distinction by observing 
that a legislative action can also be based on an objective set of factors.  
 
87 (1990) 3 SCC 223 [41]; See Saraswati Industrial Syndicate Ltd. v. Union of India, (1974) 2 SCC 630 
88 “41. The impugned orders, duly published in the official gazettes notifying the prices determined for sugar 
of various grades and produced in various zones, and applicable to all producers of such sugar, can, in our 
view, be legitimately characterised as legislative. These orders are required by sub-section (6) to be laid 
before both Houses of Parliament. The notified prices are applicable without exception to all persons falling 
within well defined groups. The prices are determined in accordance with the norms postulated in the sub-
section. It is with reference to such predetermined prices of sugar that the “amount” payable to each producer, 
who has sold sugar in compliance with an order made with reference to clause (f) of sub-section (2), is 
calculated. The calculation of such amount is, in contradistinction to the determination of “price of sugar”, a 
non-legislative act.” 

PART D 
Page 39 of 53 
 
v. 
Whether tariff determination is an adjudicatory function:  PTC and GRIDCO 
49. In PTC (supra), a Constitution Bench of this Court made certain observations 
on the fixation of tariff by the Electricity Commission under the provisions of 
the Electricity Act 200389. Section 61 of the Electricity Act provides that the 
Appropriate Commission (which is defined under the Act to mean Central 
Regulatory Commission, State Regulatory Commission or Joint Commission) 
must, subject to the provisions of the Electricity Act, specify the terms and 
conditions for the determination of tariff. The provision also stipulates factors 
that the Appropriate Commission must be guided by. Section 62 deals with 
the “determination of tariff”. The provision confers the Appropriate 
Commission with the power to determine tariff for supply, transmission, 
wheeling and retail sale of electricity. Section 63 deals with “determination of 
tariff by bidding process”. The provision provides that notwithstanding Section 
62, the Appropriate Commission must adopt the tariff determined through a 
transparent bidding process. Section 64 of the Electricity Act prescribes the 
procedure to determine tariff under Section 62 which includes filing an 
application and provision for suggestions and objections. Referring to these 
provisions, the Constitution Bench made the following observations: 
“ 26. The term “tariff” is not defined in the 2003 Act. 
The term “tariff” includes within its ambit not only the 
fixation of rates but also the rules and regulations 
relating to it. If one reads Section 61 with Section 62 
of the 2003 Act, it becomes clear that the appropriate 
Commission shall determine the actual tariff in 
accordance with the provisions of the Act, including 
the terms and conditions which may be specified by 
the appropriate Commission under Section 61 of the 
 
89 “Electricity Act” 

PART D 
Page 40 of 53 
 
said Act. Under the 2003 Act, if one reads Section 
62 with Section 64, it becomes clear that 
although tariff fixation like price fixation is 
legislative in character, the same under the Act 
is made appealable vide Section 111. These 
provisions, namely, Sections 61, 62 and 64 indicate 
the dual nature of functions performed by the 
Regulatory Commissions viz. decision-making and 
specifying 
terms 
and 
conditions 
for 
tariff 
determination. 
49. On the above analysis of various sections of the 
2003 Act, we find that the decision-making and 
regulation-making functions are both assigned to 
CERC. Law comes into existence not only through 
legislation but also by regulation and litigation. Laws 
from all three sources are binding. According to 
Professor 
Wade, 
“between 
legislative 
and 
administrative 
functions 
we 
have 
regulatory 
functions”. A statutory instrument, such as a rule or 
regulation, emanates from the exercise of delegated 
legislative power which is a part of administrative 
process resembling enactment of law by the 
legislature whereas a quasi-judicial order comes 
from adjudication which is also a part of 
administrative process resembling a judicial decision 
by a court of law. (See Shri Sitaram Sugar Co. 
Ltd. v. Union of India [(1990) 3 SCC 223] .) 
50. Applying the above test, price fixation exercise is 
really legislative in character, unless by the terms 
of a particular statute it is made quasi-judicial as 
in the case of tariff fixation under Section 62 
made appealable under Section 111 of the 2003 
Act, though Section 61 is an enabling provision 
for the framing of regulations by CERC. If one 
takes “tariff” as a subject-matter, one finds that under 
Part VII of the 2003 Act actual determination/fixation 
of tariff is done by the appropriate Commission under 
Section 62 whereas Section 61 is the enabling 
provision for framing of regulations containing 
generic propositions in accordance with which the 
appropriate Commission has to fix the tariff. This 
basic scheme equally applies to the subject-matter 
“trading margin” in a different statutory context as will 
be demonstrated by discussion hereinbelow.” 
  
 
 
          (emphasis supplied) 
 

PART D 
Page 41 of 53 
 
50. The observations of the Constitution Bench are analysed below:  
a. Tariff-fixation, like price fixation is generally of a legislative character;  
b. Tariff-fixation is of an adjudicatory or quasi-judicial character if it is 
made so by the statute which confers the Authority with the power to 
determine tariff;  
c. The Electricity Act confers the Appropriate Commission with both 
regulatory and adjudicatory/decision-making powers, even with 
respect to tariff. Section 61 which confers the Appropriate 
Commission with the power to specify terms and conditions for the 
determination of tariff, is of legislative character while the power to 
determine tariff in terms of Sections 62 and 64 is an adjudicatory 
function; 
d. Though the decision does not expressly make a distinction between 
powers that are general in nature and powers that are 
specific/individual in nature, such an inference can be drawn from 
paragraph 50 which specifically applies the tests formulated in 
Sitaram Sugar (supra); and  
e. The fact that the order of the Appropriate Commission determining 
tariff was subject to appeal was also one of the factors that weighed 
with this Court.  
51. The respondents have relied on PTC (supra) to contend that tariff 
determination by an Authority constituted under any statute is an adjudicatory 

PART D 
Page 42 of 53 
 
function. Such an interpretation of the judgment in PTC (supra), in our opinion 
is erroneous. This Court in PTC (supra) expressly noted that tariff fixation, like 
price fixation is generally of a legislative character. The judgment in PTC 
(supra) is an authority only for the proposition that the question of whether 
determination of tariff is a legislative or an adjudicatory function must be 
determined upon an analysis of the provisions of the statute conferring the 
power. That was the test that was propounded in Sitaram Sugar (supra) as 
well.  
52. In GRIDCO (supra), this Court was hearing appeals arising out of the 
decisions of the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity constituted under Section 
110 of the Electricity Act 2003 which arose from orders issued by the Orissa 
Electricity Regulatory Commission determining tariff. Relying on the judgment 
in PTC (supra), a two-Judge Bench of this Court held that tariff determination 
being a quasi-judicial function,  the Commission could not have preferred an 
appeal against the order of the Appellate Tribunal.90 The judgment of the two-
Judge Bench in GRIDCO (supra) also dealt with the nature of function of the 
Appropriate Commission under Section 62 of the Electricity Act which was 
already settled by the judgment of the Constitution Bench in PTC (supra) that 
it was adjudicatory.  
 
90 “31. There is one more aspect of the matter. As held by the Constitution Bench [PTC (India) Ltd. v. CERC, 
(2010) 4 SCC 603] , under Section 62, the Commission exercises quasi-judicial powers. There are appeals 
preferred by the Commission against the orders of the Appellate Tribunal in appeals under Section 111 of the 
Electricity Act. The Appellate Tribunal in appeals has dealt with the legality and validity of the decisions of the 
Commission rendered in the exercise of quasi-judicial power. In short, the Appellate Tribunal has tested the 
correctness of the orders of the Commission. The Commission is bound by the orders of the Appellate 
Tribunal. Therefore, we have serious doubt about the propriety and legality of the act of the Commission of 
preferring appeals against the orders of the Appellate Tribunal in appeal by which its own orders have been 
corrected. The Commission cannot be the aggrieved party except possibly in one appeal where the issue 
was about the non-compliance by the Commission of the orders of the Appellate Tribunal. If the Commission 
was exercising legislative functions, the position would have been different.” 

PART D 
Page 43 of 53 
 
vi. 
Tariff determination for aeronautical services by AERA is a regulatory 
function  
53. The question that falls for our consideration is whether AERA in exercise of 
its power under Section 13(1)(a) of the AERA Act is discharging an 
adjudicatory function. The issue of whether AERA is a necessary or a proper 
party must be determined based on whether the AERA is an 
aggrieved/interested party or merely an expert body whose views would be 
necessary for the effective adjudication of the appeal. 
54. A simplistic conclusion that AERA regulates tariff and does not adjudicate it 
cannot be arrived at merely because the long title to the AERA Act states that 
AERA is established to, inter alia, “regulate tariff”. An analysis of the statutory 
provisions must indicate the regulatory character of tariff determination by 
AERA. 
55. Before we proceed to analyse the statutory provisions of the AERA Act, we 
deem it appropriate to refer to the reasons for creating an independent Airport 
Economic Regulatory Authority. On 30 November 2003, the Committee on a 
Road Map for the Civil Aviation Section published a report which highlighted 
the underlying economic rationale for establishing an Airport Economic 
Authority. The Report noted that an independent economic regulator must be 
established to prevent the abuse of monopoly power in airport activities. The 
Report further notes that the Airport Authority of India acts both as an operator 
and regulator of airports and thus, there is an inherent conflict of interest. It is 

PART D 
Page 44 of 53 
 
to ensure that there was no such conflict of interest that an Independent 
Authority was sought to be established.  
56. On 22 December 2009, AERA issued a White Paper to ensure transparency 
in the process leading up to the framing of appropriate procedures/systems 
for economic regulation. The White Paper dealt with various issues relating to 
economic regulation of airports and air navigation services. On 16 February 
2010, AERA issued a consultation paper after considering the responses 
received on the White Paper. On 2 August 201091, AERA laid down “its 
philosophy and approach for economic regulation of services” at major 
airports. In exercise of its powers under Section 15 of the AERA Act, AERA 
issued the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India (Terms and 
Conditions for Determination of Tariff for Services Provided for Cargo Facility, 
Ground Handling and Supply of Fuel to the Aircraft) Guidelines 201192. Clause 
3 of the 2011 Guidelines lays down a three-stage procedure to regulate 
services by assessing (a) materiality; (b) competition; and (c) the 
reasonableness of the existing user agreement.93  
57. It may be argued by relying on the judgment in PTC (supra) that the 2011 
Guidelines issued in exercise of the power under Section 15 is a regulatory 
function while the determination of tariff under Section 13(1)(a) is adjudicatory 
by relying on the distinction between ‘general’ and ‘specific’ as highlighted 
above. In PTC (supra), this Court drew a distinction between Section 61 of 
 
91 Order No.05/2010-11 dated 1 August 2010 
92 “2011 Guidelines” 
93 2011 Guidelines; Clause 3  

PART D 
Page 45 of 53 
 
the Electricity Act which grants the Appropriate Commission the power to 
issue specific terms and conditions for determination of tariff and Section 62 
which grants the power to determine tariff. The crucial test that has been 
consistently applied by this Court in drawing the distinction is to determine if 
the function is discharged in the capacity of a regulator or an adjudicator. Now, 
it may be possible that certain statutes create a clear distinction between the 
regulatory and adjudicatory roles with respect to the same function. When 
such a distinction is created, the Authority does not put on the hat of a 
regulator while undertaking the adjudicatory function. On the other hand, 
certain other statutes may require the Authority to ‘determine’ something in its 
capacity as a regulator. In such cases, a clear distinction between the 
adjudication and regulatory functions cannot be drawn.  
58. On an analysis of the statutory provisions, it can be reasonably concluded 
that AERA is performing a regulatory function while determining tariff under 
Section 13(1)(a) of the AERA Act. The reasons for this conclusion are 
summarised below:  
a. It cannot be concluded that AERA is performing an adjudicatory 
function merely because Section 13(1)(a) uses the phrase 
“determine” with respect to tariff. This would amount to a formalistic 
interpretation. The Court ought to make an assessment by 
undertaking a holistic analysis;  
b. Section 13(1)(a) lays down seven factors which must be considered 
by AERA for determining the tariff of aeronautical services. To recall, 

PART D 
Page 46 of 53 
 
the Constitution Bench in Sitaram Sugar (supra) has held that the 
function can be regarded as legislative even if objective guidelines 
are prescribed for the exercise of the function. Further, the provision 
only prescribes broad guidelines that AERA must “take into 
consideration”. AERA still has sufficient discretion to adapt to 
circumstances and various concerns while determining tariff. The Act 
does not prescribe the weightage that must be provided to each of 
the factors. That is well within the discretion of AERA. This is also 
evident from Section 13(1)(a)(viii) which provides that AERA may 
consider “any other factor which may be relevant for the purposes of 
the Act”;  
c. The factors which are required to be considered by AERA indicate the 
underlying policy considerations of the assessment.94 The factors, 
inter alia, include the cost of efficiency and economic and viable 
operation of major airports; 
d. Section 13(1A) requires that AERA be consulted regarding tariff and 
tariff structures which are proposed to be incorporated in bidding 
documents. This provision elucidates that even if AERA does not in a 
strict sense, “determine” tariff in terms of Section 13(1)(a), it will 
always be interested in the economic viability of airports and in that 
sense is a regulator of tariff. Thus, the considerations of AERA while 
determining tariff will be those of a regulator concerned with public 
 
94 See Express Newspaper (Private) Ltd. v. Union of India, 1958 SCC OnLine SC 23 [111] 

PART D 
Page 47 of 53 
 
and economic interests, which are purely non-adjudicatory 
considerations; 
e. Section 13(2) by enabling AERA to amend the tariff structure even 
before the completion of the prescribed five year period in “public 
interest” is clearly indicative of its regulatory role in the regulatory 
sphere entrusted to it; and 
f. The “overarching” limitations placed on AERA’s functions by Section 
13(3) resemble the grounds for reasonable restrictions prescribed by 
Article 19 of the Constitution. These grounds are limitations on the 
broad policy considerations that AERA undertakes while determining 
tariffs. 
59. The respondents have relied on two clauses of Section 13 to argue that tariff 
determination is an adjudicatory function. The first is the proviso to Section 
13(1)(a) which provides that different tariff structures may be determined for 
different airports. This, it is argued, is a specific/individualistic component 
which is an indicator of the adjudicatory function. It is true that this Court in 
Sitaram Sugar (supra) held that one of the factors to assess if a function is 
adjudicatory is by determining if it has a specific or a general application. 
However, the observations cannot be interpreted to mean that it is an 
overarching consideration in the determination of whether the function is 
adjudicatory. Neither can it be interpreted to mean that the factor must be 
considered de hors the context. The consideration of the factors while 
exercising the function is equally and if not more important as a factor. As the 

PART D 
Page 48 of 53 
 
judgment in Sitaram Sugar (supra) notes, “judicial decisions are made 
according to law while administrative decisions emanate from administrative 
policy.”95  As held above, the factors to be considered by AERA in terms of 
Section 13(1)(a) are purely ‘policy’ factors. Further, the function of AERA to 
determine tariff must be read in the context of the role of the Authority as a 
‘regulator’ as has been highlighted above. Modern constitutional governance 
requires that legislation is not general but context specific. Over-emphasising 
the distinction between general and specific provisions to determine if a 
function is regulatory or adjudicatory would be to completely ignore the 
jurisprudential developments governing both the regulatory domain and 
Article 14.  
60. The second provision that the respondents relied on was Section 13(4) of the 
AERA Act which requires AERA to follow certain principles of natural justice 
to ensure transparency in discharging its functions. There is no doubt that 
Section 13(4) incorporates some of the principles of natural justice. It requires 
holding consultations and allowing stakeholders to make submissions, and 
reasoned decisions to obviate the influence of bias in them. However, as 
explained above, that in itself is not sufficient to conclude that the AERA’s 
determination of tariffs for aeronautical services is an adjudicatory function. In 
the previous section, we have in detail explained that principles of natural 
justice are not just a requirement for ‘judicial’ actions. They are required to be 
complied with even in the exercise of administrative actions. Thus, the 
 
95 (1990) 3 SCC 223 [32] 

PART D 
Page 49 of 53 
 
requirement of the principles of natural justice does not render the 
determination, an adjudication.  
vii. 
Interpretation of Sections 18 and 31 of the AERA Act 
61. The respondents made the following submissions based on Section 18 to 
argue that AERA cannot be impleaded as a party to the proceedings before 
TDSAT:  
a. Section 18 of the AERA Act does not expressly provide that TDSAT 
must hear AERA before passing any order. Clause (4) of Section 18 
provides that TDSAT may pass an order “after giving the parties to 
the dispute or appeal” an opportunity of being heard; and  
b. Section 18(5) expressly excludes AERA as a party in the appeal 
before TDSAT because it provides that a copy of every order of 
TDSAT must be provided “to the parties to the dispute or appeal and 
to the Authority, as the case may be”. There is disagreement over 
whether the expression “as the case may be” takes after “dispute or 
appeal” or “Authority”. If the expression takes after the former, it 
means that Authority is not subsumed within “parties to dispute or 
appeal”. If the expression takes after the latter, it could mean that a 
copy of the order must be given to AERA if it is not a party to the 
dispute or the appeal.   
 

PART D 
Page 50 of 53 
 
62. We have already, in the previous section of this judgment after an analysis of 
the precedent, concluded that the Authority can be impleaded as a 
respondent in an appeal against its order even if the provisions of the statute 
do not provide for it. This power can be read by necessary implication based 
on the role conferred on the Authority by the statute. To recall, Section 
17(1)(a) grants TDSAT the jurisdiction to adjudicate any dispute between two 
parties, either between two service providers or a service provider or a 
consumer. There is clearly a lis before TDSAT in such cases. However, the 
proviso to the section recognises the expertise of AERA in the economic 
regulation of airports by providing TDSAT with the discretion to “obtain the 
opinion of the Authority on any matter relating to the dispute”. This is referable 
to the role of AERA as a proper party in the proceedings, where its expertise 
may be required for the effective adjudication of the dispute.  
63. However, when it comes to appeals against the tariff orders issued by AERA, 
it is not just acting as an ‘expert body’ but as a regulator interested in the 
outcome of the proceedings. AERA has a statutory duty to regulate tariff upon 
a consideration of multiple factors to ensure that airports are run in an 
economically viable manner without compromising on the interests of the 
public. This statutory role is evident, inter alia, from the factors that AERA 
must consider while determining tariff and the power to amend tariff from time 
to time in public interest as discussed above. When AERA determines the 
tariff for aeronautical services in terms of Section 13(1)(a) of the AERA Act, it 
is acting as a regulator and an interested party. It is interested not in a 
personal capacity. Its interest lies in ensuring that the concerns of public 

PART D 
Page 51 of 53 
 
interest which animate the statute and the performance of its functions by 
AERA are duly preserved. Thus, AERA is a necessary party in the appeal 
against its tariff order before TDSAT and it must be impleaded as a 
respondent. 
64. Section 18(5) refers to parties in a dispute or appeal. AERA is not a party to 
the lis when TDSAT adjudicates a dispute between two or more service 
providers, or a service provider and a consumer in terms of Section 17(1)(a). 
For disputes adjudicated by TDSAT under Section 17(a), AERA may be 
included as a party in terms of the proviso to the provision. If the expression 
“as the case may be” is interpreted to refer to “dispute or appeal”, thereby 
excluding AERA as a party to either the dispute or the appeal, it would amount 
to reading down the proviso to Section 17(1)(a).  
65. It may be recalled that determination of tariff for aeronautical services is 
merely one of the functions discharged by AERA. Section 17(1)(b) grants 
TDSAT the jurisdiction to “hear and dispose of appeal against any direction, 
decision or order of the Authority under this Act.”  Section 18(5) by using the 
expression “as the case may be” accounts for such a situation and requires 
that a copy of the order to be provided to AERA even if it is not a party to the 
appeal. Thus, the expression “as the case may be” in Section 18(5) must be 
read to mean that a copy of the order of TDSAT must be given to AERA even 
if it is not a party to the appeal or the dispute. The expression cannot be 
interpreted to impliedly exclude AERA as a respondent in the appeals against 
its orders before TDSAT.  

PART D 
Page 52 of 53 
 
66. Section 31 does not expressly confer AERA with the right to file an appeal 
against the order of TDSAT before this Court. In fact, it does not confer that 
power to any party expressly. As Mr Datar put it, there are three ways in which 
provisions dealing with statutory appeal are drafted. First, the provision may 
not prescribe who can file an appeal such as Section 31 of the AERA Act. 
Second, the provision may provide that an appeal may be preferred by a 
‘person aggrieved’ such as under the Electricity Act96, the Major Port 
Authorities Act 202197, the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act 199298 
and the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Act 201299. The 
third category is where the statute confers ‘any party’ with the right to file an 
appeal as under the Companies Act 2013.100  With respect to the first of the 
three categories, at a minimum the parties to the appeal before first appellate 
body (in this case TDSAT) will have a right to file an appeal before this Court. 
AERA can file an appeal under Section 31 in view of our conclusion that it is 
a necessary party in the appeals against the tariff orders issued by it.   
 
 
 
96 “Section 125. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal, may, file an appeal 
to the Supreme Court…” 
97 “Section 60(2). Any party aggrieved by any decision or order of the Adjudicating Board, may file an appeal 
…” 
98 “Section 15Z. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Securities Appellate Tribunal may file 
an appeal…” 
99 “Section 38. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Securities Appellate Tribunal…” 
100 See Companies Act 2013; Section 242 

PART E 
Page 53 of 53 
 
E. Conclusion 
67. In view of the discussion above, the appeals filed by AERA against orders of 
TDSAT under Section 31 of the AERA Act are maintainable. The Registry shall 
list the matters before the Regular Bench for adjudication of the appeals on 
merits. 
 
 
…….……………………………………CJI 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 
 
 
 
 
 
….….………………………………………J 
[J B Pardiwala] 
 
 
 
 
 
..….…………………………………………J 
[Manoj Misra] 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
October 18, 2024.