2024 INSC 792
   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 1 of 25 
 
Reportable  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE/ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5932 OF 2023 
 
Union of India  
 
 
                      … Appellant 
 
 
versus 
 
 
Pranav Srinivasan          
 
 
 
  … Respondent 
 
with 
 
WRIT PETITION (C) NO.123 OF 2024 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
1. 
The issue involved in these cases concerns the grant 
of Indian citizenship to Pranav Srinivasan, the respondent 
in the civil appeal and petitioner in the writ petition. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
2. 
A few factual aspects must be set out to appreciate 
the factual and legal controversy.  The paternal 
grandparents of Pranav were born in India before 
independence.  Pranav’s father and mother were born in 
India in 1963 and 1972, respectively.  On 19th December 
1998, Pranav’s parents adopted citizenship of Singapore.  
On 1st March 1999, Pranav was born in Singapore as a 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.10.18
16:47:35 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 2 of 25 
 
citizen of Singapore. According to the case of Pranav, on 
20th April 2012, his parents renounced their Indian 
citizenship.  On 5th May 2017, when Pranav was eighteen 
years, two months and four days old, he submitted an 
application in Form XXV specified under Rule 24 of the 
Citizenship Rules, 2009, read with sub-section (2) of 
Section 8 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (for short, ‘the 1955 
Act’) for resumption of his Indian citizenship.   
3. 
Earlier, Pranav filed a writ petition before the High 
Court of Judicature at Madras as his application in Form 
XXV was not considered.  Ultimately, it was revealed that 
Pranav had not paid the necessary fees.  Therefore, the 
High Court permitted Pranav to pay the required fees by 
the order dated 30th November 2017.  The said order was 
modified by a further order dated 29th November 2018 in 
the writ petition filed by Pranav, and the High Court 
directed 
the 
concerned 
authorities 
to 
decide 
the 
application made by Pranav.  By the order dated 30th April 
2019, the Ministry of Home Affairs held that Pranav was 
not eligible for resumption of citizenship under Section 
8(2) of the 1955 Act.  Pranav was advised to reapply either 
under clause (f) or clause (g) of sub-section (1) of Section 5 
of the 1955 Act.  Pranav challenged the said order by filing 
a writ petition before the learned Single Judge of the High 
Court.  Pranav succeeded before the learned Single Judge 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 3 of 25 
 
as it was held that he was entitled to resume his 
citizenship in accordance with Section 8(2) of the 1955 Act.  
Being aggrieved, the Union of India preferred an appeal 
before the Division Bench of the High Court.  The appeal 
was dismissed. Therefore, Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023 
was preferred by the Union of India before this Court. 
4. 
In the civil appeal, an order was passed by this Court 
on 7th December 2023, directing that the form filled up by 
Pranav on 5th May 2017 shall be treated as an application 
filed in Form L of the Citizens (Registration at Indian 
Consulates) Rules, 1956.  A direction was issued to decide 
the application accordingly.  An order was passed on 30th 
January 2024 by the Ministry of Home Affairs, holding that 
Pranav was not a person of Indian origin in terms of 
Section 5 of the 1955 Act.  Therefore, he was not eligible 
for a grant of Indian citizenship under clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of Section 5 of the 1955 Act.  Being aggrieved, 
Pranav has filed Writ Petition (C) No.123 of 2024 under 
Article 32 of the Constitution of India.   
SUBMISSIONS  
5. 
Mr C S Vaidyanathan, the learned senior counsel 
appearing for Pranav, submitted that within three months 
of attaining majority, on 5th May 2017, Pranav declared his 
intention to resume Indian citizenship by filing the 
application in Form XXV with the Consulate Office 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 4 of 25 
 
(Consulate General of India, New York, USA).  He was 
administered the oath of allegiance to the Constitution of 
India on the date of filing the application.  The submission 
of the learned senior counsel, in short, is that apart from 
the fact that Pranav was entitled to resume his Indian 
citizenship by invoking Section 8(2) of the 1955 Act, he is 
deemed to be an Indian citizen under Article 8 of the 
Constitution of India by virtue of his grandparents’ birth 
in undivided India.  Moreover, he was entitled to seek 
Indian citizenship under Section 5(1)(b) of the 1955 Act.   
6. 
The learned senior counsel invited our attention to 
Articles 5 and 6 of the Constitution, which specifically use 
the 
expression 
“at 
the 
commencement 
of 
this 
Constitution.” In contrast, Article 8 uses the expression 
“whether 
before 
or 
after 
commencement 
of 
the 
Constitution of India”.  Therefore, Article 8, as opposed to 
Articles 5 and 6, applies even after the commencement of 
the Constitution.  He submitted that by the language used 
in Section 5 of the 1955 Act, it is crystal clear that a person 
can acquire Indian citizenship either by virtue of 
constitutional provisions or by taking recourse to the 1955 
Act.  Article 8 is an independent and distinct source of 
citizenship. 
7. 
It was submitted that Pranav’s grandparents were 
born in the State of Tamil Nadu, which was part of 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 5 of 25 
 
undivided India before 15th August 1947.  His maternal 
grandparents were also born in the undivided India before 
independence.  Therefore, under Article 8, Pranav qualified 
to become an Indian citizen.  It is submitted that the 
failure of the Union of India to recognise and enforce a 
constitutional provision is an arbitrary exercise of power.  
The learned senior counsel relied upon a decision of this 
Court in the case of Anoop Baranwal v. Union of India 
[Election Commission Appointments]1 in the context of 
the right to vote.  He also relied upon another decision in 
the case of Central Board of 
Dawoodi Bohra 
Community & Another. v. State of Maharashtra & 
Anr.2, wherein this Court held that the role of the 
constitutional Courts is to interpret the Constitution, 
considering the changing needs of the society. 
8. 
The 
learned 
senior 
counsel 
submitted 
that, 
independently of the constitutional provisions, Pranav is 
entitled to be registered as an Indian citizen under clause 
(b) of sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the 1955 Act.  He 
submitted that Pranav is a person of Indian origin as his 
parents were born within the territory of India after 
independence.  He submitted that a common sense of 
interpretation would have to be given to the phrase “in 
such other territory which became part of India after the 
 
1  (2023) 6 SCC 161 
2  (2023) 4 SCC 541 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 6 of 25 
 
15th day of August 1947,” occurring in Explanation-2 to 
Section 5 of the 1955 Act.  Therefore, it includes all those 
territories which were part of the undivided India and 
continued to be a part of the independent India.  He 
submitted that if the interpretation put to the said 
provision by the Union of India is accepted, persons whose 
parents were born in the States like Goa and Sikkim would 
be the persons of Indian origin but who are born in the 
territories which continued to be a part of India after 
independence, would be denied the same benefit.  
Therefore, a person of Indian origin can acquire Indian 
citizenship if it is shown that the grandparents were born 
in the undivided India and the parents were born in India 
after its independence. 
9. 
He submitted that the words “minor child”, occurring 
in Section 8(2) of the 1955 Act, will include an unborn 
child or a child in the womb.  He submitted that Section 3 
of the 1955 Act talks about the acquisition of citizenship 
by birth, whereas Section 8(2) of the 1955 Act talks about 
a minor child.  Therefore, a child need not have been born 
in India to be entitled to the benefit of seeking resumption 
of Indian citizenship under Section 8(2) of the 1955 Act. 
10. Mr K M Nataraj, the learned Additional Solicitor 
General (ASG) appearing for the Union of India, submitted 
that Articles 5 to 9 of the Constitution of India determine 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 7 of 25 
 
who the Indian citizens were at the commencement of the 
Constitution.  These Articles provide for the acquisition of 
citizenship by the persons eligible therein at the 
commencement of the Constitution.  Article 9 disqualifies 
a person from acquiring citizenship under Articles 5, 6 or 
8 if such person has voluntarily acquired citizenship of any 
foreign State.  He also invited our attention to Articles 10 
and 11.  He submitted that Article 10 provides that every 
person who is or is deemed to be a citizen of India under 
the provisions of Part II of the Constitution of India shall, 
subject to the provisions of any law that the Parliament 
may make, continue to be such citizen.  Article 11 protects 
the Parliament's power to make provisions concerning the 
acquisition and termination of citizenship. 
11. The learned ASG relied upon the speech of the late 
Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar in the Constituent Assembly, 
which indicated that the provisions in the Constitution 
deal with citizenship on the date of commencement of the 
Constitution.  Therefore, his submission is that Articles 5 
to 9 
determine who are Indian citizens at the 
commencement of the Constitution of India.  After 
the enactment of the 1955 Act, India's citizenship can be 
acquired, terminated, or otherwise regulated under the 
provisions thereof.  He submitted that Pranav is not a 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 8 of 25 
 
person of Indian origin.  Therefore, Section 5(1)(b) of the 
1955 Act will not apply. 
12. He submitted that Section 8(2) of the 1955 Act will 
have no application. He submitted that Pranav’s parents 
lost their citizenship the moment they acquired the 
citizenship of Singapore. When Pranav was born, his 
parents were no longer Indian citizens.  They lost Indian 
citizenship upon the acquisition of Singapore citizenship.  
He would, therefore, submit that Pranav is not entitled to 
Indian citizenship. 
13. The learned senior counsel appearing for Pranav 
submitted that Article 8 will apply in the present case.  He 
submitted that it was never the stand of the Union of India 
before the High Court that the Indian citizenship of 
Pranav’s parents came to an end by termination.  This 
stand is taken for the first time before this Court by the 
Union of India. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 
14.   Part II of the Constitution deals with ‘Citizenship’. It 
consists of Articles 5 to 11, which read thus: 
“5. 
Citizenship 
at 
the 
commencement 
of 
the 
Constitution.—At 
the 
commencement of this Constitution 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 9 of 25 
 
every person who has his domicile in 
the territory of India and— 
(a) who was born in the territory 
of India; or 
(b) either of whose parents was 
born in the territory of India; or 
(c) who has been ordinarily 
resident in the territory of India 
for not less than five years 
immediately 
preceding 
such 
commencement, 
shall be a citizen of India. 
6. Rights of citizenship of certain 
persons who have migrated to India 
from 
Pakistan.—Notwithstanding 
anything in Article 5, a person who 
has migrated to the territory of India 
from the territory now included in 
Pakistan shall be deemed to be a 
citizen of India at the commencement 
of this Constitution if— 
(a) he or either of his parents or 
any of his grand-parents was 
born in India as defined in 
the Government of India Act, 
1935 (as originally enacted); and 
(b) (i) in the case where such 
person has so migrated before the 
nineteenth day of July, 1948, he 
has been ordinarily resident in 
the territory of India since the 
date of his migration, or 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 10 of 25 
 
(ii) in the case where such person 
has so migrated on or after the 
nineteenth day of July, 1948, he 
has been registered as a citizen of 
India by an officer appointed in 
that behalf by the Government of 
the Dominion of India on an 
application made by him therefor 
to 
such 
officer 
before 
the 
commencement 
of 
this 
Constitution in the form and 
manner 
prescribed 
by 
that 
Government: 
Provided that no person shall be so 
registered 
unless 
he 
has 
been 
resident in the territory of India for at 
least 
six 
months 
immediately 
preceding the date of his application. 
7. Rights of citizenship of certain 
migrants 
to 
Pakistan.—
Notwithstanding anything in Articles 
5 and 6, a person who has after the 
first day of March, 1947, migrated 
from the territory of India to the 
territory now included in Pakistan 
shall not be deemed to be a citizen of 
India: 
Provided that nothing in this article 
shall apply to a person who, after 
having so migrated to the territory 
now 
included 
in 
Pakistan, 
has 
returned to the territory of India 
under a permit for resettlement or 
permanent return issued by or under 
the authority of any law and every 
such person shall for the purposes of 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 11 of 25 
 
clause (b) of Article 6 be deemed to 
have migrated to the territory of India 
after the nineteenth day of July, 1948. 
8. Rights of citizenship of certain 
persons of Indian origin residing 
outside 
India.—Notwithstanding 
anything in Article 5, any person who 
or either of whose parents or any of 
whose grand-parents was born in 
India as defined in the Government of 
India 
Act, 
1935 (as 
originally 
enacted), 
and 
who 
is 
ordinarily 
residing in any country outside India 
as so defined shall be deemed to be a 
citizen of India if he has been 
registered as a citizen of India by the 
diplomatic or consular representative 
of India in the country where he is for 
the 
time 
being 
residing 
on 
an 
application made by him therefor to 
such 
diplomatic 
or 
consular 
representative, whether before or after 
the 
commencement 
of 
this 
Constitution, in the form and manner 
prescribed by the Government of the 
Dominion of India or the Government 
of India. 
9. Persons voluntarily acquiring 
citizenship of a foreign State not to 
be citizens.—No person shall be a 
citizen of India by virtue of Article 5, 
or be deemed to be a citizen of India 
by virtue of Article 6 or Article 8, if he 
has 
voluntarily 
acquired 
the 
citizenship of any foreign State. 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 12 of 25 
 
10. Continuance of the rights of 
citizenship.—Every person who is or 
is deemed to be a citizen of India 
under any of the foregoing provisions 
of this Part shall, subject to the 
provisions of any law that may be 
made by Parliament, continue to be 
such citizen. 
11. Parliament to regulate the right 
of citizenship by law.—Nothing in 
the foregoing provisions of this Part 
shall derogate from the power of 
Parliament to make any provision 
with respect to the acquisition and 
termination of citizenship and all 
other matters relating to citizenship.” 
On the face of it, Article 5 will apply to a person who is 
domiciled in the territory of India on 26th January 1950.  
Therefore, this provision will not apply in the present case.  
Article 6 will have no application as it applies to persons 
who have migrated to India from Pakistan.  Article 7 deals 
with the rights of the citizenship of certain migrants to 
Pakistan. 
15. Now, let us analyse Article 8. It applies to a person:-  
(i) 
who was born in India as defined in the 
Government of India Act, 1935 (for short, ‘the 
1935 Act’) as originally enacted; or  

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 13 of 25 
 
(ii) either of whose parents were born in India as 
defined in the 1935 Act as originally enacted; 
or  
(iii) any of whose grandparents were born in India 
as defined in the 1935 Act as originally 
enacted. 
                          and 
who is ordinarily residing in any country 
outside India so defined.  
Such a person shall be deemed to be a citizen of India if he 
has been registered as a citizen of India by the diplomatic 
or consular representative of India in the country where he 
is for the time being residing, on an application made by 
him in prescribed form before such diplomatic or consular 
representative, before or after the commencement of the 
Constitution. 
The 
words 
“before 
or 
after 
the 
commencement of this Constitution” qualify the words 
“the diplomatic or consular representative of India in the 
country where he is for the time being residing”. Therefore, 
a person who is qualified in terms of the first part of Article 
8 can apply to the diplomatic or consular representative of 
India in any country where he is residing before or after 
the commencement of the Constitution. He need not apply 
to the diplomatic or consular representative of India in the 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 14 of 25 
 
country where he was residing at the commencement of 
the Constitution.   
16. If Article 8 was intended to apply to a foreign national 
born after the commencement of the Constitution, the 
provision would not be referring to “who is ordinarily 
residing in any country outside India so defined”. So 
defined means India as defined in the 1935 Act, as 
originally enacted. Moreover, Article 8 uses the expression 
“who is ordinarily residing”. Therefore, the provision will 
only apply to someone ordinarily residing on the date of 
commencement of the Constitution in any country outside 
India as defined in the 1935 Act, as originally enacted.  If 
the interpretation sought to be given on behalf of Pranav 
to article 8 is accepted, someone born, say in the year 
2000, who is ordinarily residing in any country outside 
India as defined in the 1935 Act, as originally enacted, 
would be entitled to claim citizenship of India on the 
ground that any of his parents or grandparents were born 
in that part of Pakistan or Bangladesh which was part of 
India as defined in the 1935 Act,  as originally enacted. We 
are giving this illustration to show that the interpretation 
of Article 8 sought to be made on behalf of Pranav would 
produce absurd results which the framers of the 
Constitution never intended.  Therefore, Article 8 will have 
no application to Pranav’s case. 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 15 of 25 
 
17. Article 10 provides that every citizen deemed to be a 
citizen of India by virtue of the provisions of Articles 5 to 8 
shall continue to be such citizen subject to the provisions 
of any law made by Parliament.  Article 11 protects the 
power of the Parliament to make any provision with respect 
to the acquisition and termination of citizenship or all the 
matters relating to citizenship.    
CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE 1955 ACT 
18. Now, we turn to the provisions of the 1955 Act.  
Pranav has not claimed citizenship by birth (Section 3) or 
citizenship by descent (Section 4). He has claimed 
citizenship under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 5 
of the 1955 Act.  Section 5 of the 1955 Act reads thus: 
“5. Citizenship by registration.― (1) 
Subject to the provisions of this 
section and such other conditions 
and restrictions as may be prescribed, 
the Central Government may, on an 
application made in this behalf, 
register as a citizen of India any 
person not being an illegal migrant 
who is not already such citizen by 
virtue of the Constitution or of any 
other provision of this Act if he 
belongs to any of the following 
categories, namely:― 
(a) a person of Indian origin who is 
ordinarily resident in India for 
seven years before making an 
application for registration;  

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 16 of 25 
 
(b) a person of Indian origin who 
is ordinarily resident in any 
country 
or 
place 
outside 
undivided India;  
(c) a person who is married to a 
citizen of India and is ordinarily 
resident in India for seven years 
before making an application for 
registration;  
(d) minor children of persons who 
are citizens of India;  
(e) a person of full age and capacity 
whose parents are registered as 
citizens of India under clause (a) of 
this sub-section or sub-section (1) 
of section 6;  
(f) a person of full age and capacity 
who, or either of his parents, was 
earlier citizen of independent India, 
and is ordinarily resident in India 
for twelve months immediately 
before making an application for 
registration;  
(g) a person of full age and capacity 
who has been registered as an 
Overseas 
Citizen 
of 
India 
Cardholder for five years, and who 
is ordinarily resident in India for 
twelve months before making an 
application for registration. 
Explanation 1.―For the purposes of 
clauses (a) and (c), an applicant shall 
be deemed to be ordinarily resident in 
India if― 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 17 of 25 
 
(i) 
he 
has 
resided 
in 
India 
throughout the period of twelve 
months 
immediately 
before 
making 
an 
application 
for 
registration; and  
(ii) he has resided in India during 
the 
eight 
years 
immediately 
preceding the said period of twelve 
months for a period of not less 
than six years. 
Explanation 2.―For the purposes of 
this sub-section, a person shall be 
deemed to be of Indian origin if he, 
or either of his parents, was born in 
undivided India or in such other 
territory which became part of 
India after the 15th day of August, 
1947. 
(1A) The Central Government, if it is 
satisfied that special circumstances 
exist, 
may 
after 
recording 
the 
circumstances in writing, relax the 
period of twelve months, specified in 
clauses (f) and (g) and clause (i) of 
Explanation 1 of sub-section (1), up to 
a maximum of thirty days which may 
be in different breaks. 
(2) No person being of full age shall be 
registered as a citizen of India under 
sub-section (1) until he has taken the 
oath of allegiance in the form specified 
in the Second Schedule.  
(3) No person who has renounced, or 
has been deprived of, his Indian 
citizenship 
or 
whose 
Indian 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 18 of 25 
 
citizenship has terminated, under 
this Act shall be registered as a citizen 
of India under sub-section (1) except 
by order of the Central Government. 
(4) The Central Government may, if 
satisfied 
that 
there 
are 
special 
circumstances 
justifying 
such 
registration, cause any minor to be 
registered as a citizen of India. 
(5) A person registered under this 
section shall be a citizen of India by 
registration as from the date on which 
he is so registered; and a person 
registered under the provisions of 
clause (b)(ii) of article 6 or article 8 of 
the Constitution shall be deemed to 
be a citizen of India by registration as 
from the commencement of the 
Constitution or the date on which he 
was so registered, whichever may be 
later.  
(6) If the Central Government is 
satisfied that circumstances exist 
which render it necessary to grant 
exemption 
from 
the 
residential 
requirement under clause (c) of sub-
section (1) to any person or a class of 
persons, it may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, grant such 
exemption.” 
                            (emphasis added) 
For applicability of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 
5 of the 1955 Act, Pranav will have to establish that he is 
a person of Indian origin who is an ordinary resident in 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 19 of 25 
 
any country or place outside undivided India.  In view of 
explanation 2 to Section 5, a person shall be deemed to be 
of Indian origin if (i) he or either of his parents were born 
in undivided India or (ii) in any such other territory which 
was not part of undivided India, but became part of India 
after 15th August 1947. There is no third category 
mentioned in the explanation.  If undivided India were to 
include India after independence, the legislature would not 
have included the category of the person or either of his 
parents being born in such other territory which became 
part of India after the 15th August 1947.  Section 2(h) of 
the 1955 Act provides that “undivided India” means India 
as defined in the 1935 Act. If we read “undivided India” as 
India as on or after 15th August 1947, we would be doing 
violence to the plain language of the Explanation. We 
cannot read something that is not in the provision, 
especially when there is no ambiguity in the provision. 
Therefore, we cannot read Explanation 2 the way the 
learned senior counsel of Pranav wants us to read. Pranav 
and both his parents were not born in the undivided India.  
His parents were born after independence in independent 
India.  They were not born in any part of undivided India 
or any territory that became part of India after 15th August 
1947. Therefore, Section 5(1)(b) of the 1955 Act has no 
application. 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 20 of 25 
 
19. At this stage, it is necessary to refer to Sections 8 and 
9 of the 1955 Act, which read thus: 
“8. Renunciation of citizenship.― (1) If 
any citizen of India of full age and 
capacity, makes in the prescribed manner 
a declaration renouncing his Indian 
Citizenship, the declaration shall be 
registered by the prescribed authority; 
and, upon such registration, that person 
shall cease to be a citizen of India:  
Provided that if any such declaration is 
made during any war in which India may 
be engaged, registration thereof shall be 
withheld until the Central Government 
otherwise directs.  
(2) Where a person ceases to be a citizen 
of India under sub-section (1), every minor 
child of that person shall thereupon cease 
to be a citizen of India:  
Provided that any such child may, within 
one year after attaining full age, make a 
declaration in the prescribed form and 
manner that he wishes to resume Indian 
citizenship and shall thereupon again 
become a citizen of India. 
9. Termination of citizenship.—(1) Any 
citizen of India who by naturalisation, 
registration or otherwise voluntarily 
acquires, or has at any time between 
the 26th January, 1950 and the 
commencement of this Act voluntarily 
acquired, the citizenship of another 
country shall, upon such acquisition 
or, 
as 
the 
case 
may 
be, 
such 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 21 of 25 
 
commencement, cease to be a citizen 
of India: 
 
Provided that nothing in this sub-
section shall apply to a citizen of India 
who, during any war in which India may 
be engaged, voluntarily acquires the 
citizenship of another country, until 
the Central Government otherwise 
directs. 
 
(2) If any question arises as to whether, 
when or how any citizen of India has 
acquired 
the 
citizenship 
of 
another 
country, it shall be determined by such 
authority, in such manner, and having 
regard to such rules of evidence, as may 
be prescribed in this behalf.” 
                              
 (emphasis added) 
In view of Section 9(1), those citizens of India who 
voluntarily acquire citizenship of another Country after the 
commencement of the 1955 Act, or between 26th January 
1950 and the date of the commencement of the 1955 Act, 
upon acquisition of such citizenship, automatically cease 
to be citizens of India. It is not in dispute that Pranav's 
parents acquired Singapore citizenship on 19th December 
1998, before his birth when he was in the womb. 
Therefore, immediately after the voluntary acquisition of 
Singapore citizenship, Pranav’s parents ceased to be 
citizens of India by the operation of Section 9(1). 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 22 of 25 
 
20. Section 8(1) will apply if any citizen of India of full age 
and capacity makes, in the prescribed manner, a 
declaration renouncing his Indian Citizenship.  Section 
8(1) will not apply to the involuntary cessation of 
citizenship by the operation of law as provided in Section 
9(1). Section 8(2) will apply only if the minor child's parents 
had voluntarily renounced citizenship by making a 
declaration. In the facts of the case, on 19th December 
1998, when Pranav’s parents voluntarily acquired citizens 
of Singapore, they immediately ceased to be citizens of 
India by operation of Section 9(1). Therefore, there was no 
occasion for Pranav’s parents to renounce their citizenship 
on 20th April 2012 by the mode provided under Section 8(1) 
as they had already ceased to be citizens of India on 19th 
December 1998 when they voluntarily acquired the 
citizenship of Singapore.  As Pranav’s parents ceased to be 
citizens of India, not voluntarily but by the operation of 
Section 9(1), Section 8(2) does not apply to Pranav.   
Therefore, Section 8(2) will not assist Pranav.   
21. In the case of State of U.P. v. Dr. Vijay Anand 
Maharaj3, this Court held thus: 
“8. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . … .. .. . …..  
The fundamental and elementary 
rule of construction is that the 
words and phrases used by the 
 
3 (1962) 45 ITR 414 : 1962 SCC OnLine SC 12 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 23 of 25 
 
legislature shall be given their 
ordinary meaning and shall be 
construed according to the rules of 
grammar. When a language is plain 
and unambiguous and admits of 
only one meaning, no question of 
construction of a statute arises, for 
the Act speaks for itself. It is a well-
recognized rule of construction that 
the meaning must be collected from 
the 
expressed 
intention 
of 
the 
legislature.” 
(emphasis added) 
The language used in the provisions of the 1955 Act is 
plain and simple. Hence, the same should be given 
ordinary and natural meaning. Moreover, we are dealing 
with a law which provides for the grant of citizenship of 
India to foreign nationals. There is no scope to bring 
equitable considerations while interpreting such a statute. 
As the language of Sections 5, 8 and 9 is plain and simple, 
there is no scope for its liberal interpretation. Citizenship 
of India cannot be conferred on foreign citizens by doing 
violence to the plain language of the 1955 Act. 
22. Now, only clause (f) of sub-section (1) of Section 5 of 
the 1955 Act survives for consideration.  However, under 
the said provision, Pranav can apply for Indian citizenship 
provided he is an ordinary resident of India for twelve 
months immediately preceding the date of application.  
There is a power to relax the period of twelve months 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 24 of 25 
 
vested in the Central Government if it is satisfied that 
special circumstances exist.  That is the provision in sub-
section (1A) of Section 5 of the 1955 Act. We may note here 
that it is not the case made out that Pranav fulfils 
the criteria in clause (g) of Section 5(1) of the 1955 Act. 
23. Therefore, the view taken by the High Court was 
completely erroneous as the High Court held that Pranav 
had resumed Indian citizenship under sub-section (2) of 
Section 8 of the 1955 Act.  
24. Some arguments were made that this Court should 
exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 142 of 
the Constitution of India.  The power under Article 142 is 
an extraordinary power which should be exercised to deal 
with exceptional circumstances.  We do not think that this 
case warrants the exercise of power under Article 142 of 
the Constitution of India. This Court will have to be very 
circumspect when it comes to the exercise of power under 
Article 142 for the grant of citizenship of India to a foreign 
national. 
25. Therefore, the impugned orders in Civil Appeal 
No.5932 of 2023 are set aside.  Appeal is allowed. Writ 
Petition (C) No.123 of 2024 is dismissed.  However, this 
judgment will not preclude Pranav from applying for 
citizenship by invoking clause (f) of sub-section (1) of 

   Civil Appeal No.5932 of 2023, etc. 
 
 
Page 25 of 25 
 
Section 5 of the 1955 Act.  It will also be open for him to 
apply to the Central Government for the exercise of power 
under sub-section (1A) of Section 5 of the 1955 Act of 
relaxation of the period of twelve months provided in 
clause (f) of sub-section (1) Section 5 of the 1955 Act. 
 
...…………………………….J. 
 
 
 
       (Abhay S Oka) 
 
 
 
...…………………………….J. 
                                                   (Augustine George Masih) 
 
New Delhi; 
October 18, 2024.