2024 INSC 70
 
 
             Criminal Appeal No. 1368 of 2023 
 
Page 1 of 9 
 
NON REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1368 OF 2023 
 
 
SHEIKH ARIF                                                       …APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA  
& ANR  
 
 
 
 
              …RESPONDENTS 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
 
1) 
A First Information Report (the impugned FIR) was 
registered against the appellant at the instance of the second 
respondent for the offences punishable under Sections 376(2), 
377, 504, 506 of the Indian Penal Code (for short, ‘IPC’) and 
various clauses of Section 3 of the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities Act), 1989.  
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
2) 
The impugned FIR was registered based on the second 
respondent's complaint dated 23rd February 2018 filed with 
Sadar Police Station, Nagpur. The said complaint disclosed 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.01.30
16:30:04 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
             Criminal Appeal No. 1368 of 2023 
 
Page 2 of 9 
 
that the appellant and second respondent got acquainted with 
each other in the year 2011. The second respondent was, at the 
relevant time, employed in a beauty parlour. The appellant 
used to visit the same parlour to undergo a hair-cutting course. 
The second respondent’s case is that in June 2011, the 
appellant proposed her. She agreed, and after that, they started 
meeting. The allegation made by the second respondent is that 
an effort was made in the year 2011 by the appellant to 
maintain a physical relationship with her, but she prevented 
him from doing so. However, she stated that in the year 2012, 
by giving a false promise of marriage, the appellant had sexual 
intercourse with her on a number of occasions. In February 
2013, the second respondent realised that she was pregnant. 
Therefore, in March 2013, the appellant took the second 
respondent to a hospital where abortion was done. Even 
thereafter, the appellant continued his physical relationship 
with the second respondent. It is stated by the second 
respondent that in July 2017, there was an engagement 
between her and the appellant. Even after the engagement, the 
appellant continued to maintain a physical relationship with 
the second respondent. 
 
3) 
In December 2017, when the second respondent realised 
that she was pregnant, the appellant told her that they would 
get married very soon. In view of the said assurance, the second 
respondent did not undergo an abortion. She was treated for 
pregnancy in a hospital at the instance of the appellant. The 
allegation of the second respondent is that on 18th January 
2018, she saw photographs of the engagement ceremony of the 

 
 
             Criminal Appeal No. 1368 of 2023 
 
Page 3 of 9 
 
appellant with another woman in his cell phone. The second 
respondent stated that a day before the date on which the 
complaint was filed, she was informed that the appellant had 
married another girl on 22nd February 2018. 
 
4) 
The case of the appellant is that there was a Nikah 
between him and the second respondent on 20th January 2017 
at Junglee Peer Baba Dargah. The case of the appellant is that 
he could not produce the original Nikahnama, but a copy 
thereof was seized by the police. The case of the appellant is 
that in the passport issued to the appellant on 17th August 
2017, the name of the second respondent appears as the wife 
of the appellant.  
SUBMISSIONS 
5) 
The learned counsel for the appellant urged that the long 
relationship between the appellant and the second respondent 
was always consensual. He submitted that the appellant had 
married the second respondent on 20th January 2017. He 
urged that the prosecution of the appellant is an abuse of 
process of law. The contention of the learned counsel appearing 
for the State of Maharashtra is that whether the appellant 
maintained a relationship on the basis of the false promise of 
marriage or not is a question to be decided at the time of trial 
as it is a matter of evidence. He invited our attention to the 
counter filed by the State in which it was stated that the report 
of a handwriting expert has been called for as regards the 
genuineness of the signatures on the Nikahnama. The learned 
counsel appearing for the State as well as the second 

 
 
             Criminal Appeal No. 1368 of 2023 
 
Page 4 of 9 
 
respondent relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of 
Anurag Soni v. State of Chhattisgarh1. The learned counsel 
for the second respondent submitted that even if it is assumed 
that the second respondent gave consent for maintaining a 
physical relationship, the same was vitiated by fraud and 
misconception. She submitted that though the Investigating 
Officer repeatedly called upon the appellant to produce the 
original Nikahnama, he did not submit the same, and 
therefore, an adverse inference will have to be drawn against 
the appellant. She urged that, in any case, the issues raised 
can be gone into only in the trial.  
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
6) 
We may note here that the appellant had volunteered to 
deposit a sum of Rs. 10 lakhs with the High Court during the 
pendency of the petition before the High Court. This Court tried 
to explore the possibility of a settlement between the appellant 
and the second respondent. However, the settlement could not 
materialise.  
 
7) 
Now, the question is whether a case for quashing the 
criminal proceeding is made out. For that purpose, we are 
referring to the material which forms a part of the charge sheet. 
In view of the provisions of Section 375 of the IPC, if the victim 
of the alleged offence of rape is not under 18 years of age, 
maintaining a sexual relationship with her consent, is not an 
offence. As held by this Court in the case of Anurag Soni1, if 
 
1 (2019) 13 SCC 1 

 
 
             Criminal Appeal No. 1368 of 2023 
 
Page 5 of 9 
 
the consent of the victim is based on misconception, such 
consent is immaterial as it is not a voluntary consent. If it is 
established that from the inception, the consent by the victim 
is a result of a false promise to marry, there will be no consent, 
and in such a case, the offence of rape will be made out.  
 
8) 
The second respondent was admittedly more than 18 
years old when the relationship commenced. We have carefully 
gone through the complaint dated 23rd February 2018 made by 
the second respondent based on which the impugned FIR was 
registered. Acquaintance between the appellant and the second 
respondent started in the year 2011. In June 2011, the 
appellant proposed her, and she accepted the said proposal. In 
fact, according to the version of the second respondent, their 
physical relationship commenced in 2012 and continued till 
2017. In February 2013, the second respondent underwent an 
abortion. In July 2017, according to the case of the second 
respondent, there was an engagement ceremony. In December 
2017, the second respondent was pregnant. According to her, 
as the appellant had assured to marry, she did not agree for 
abortion. The complaint was filed by the second respondent on 
23rd February 2018 as she allegedly learned that on 22nd 
February 2018, the appellant was married to another woman.  
 
9) 
When the complaint was filed, the age of the second 
respondent was 24 years. Her year of birth is recorded as 1994. 
The averments made in her complaint go to show that their 
physical relationship started in 2012. Though she claimed that 
it was a forced relationship, she did not make any grievance 

 
 
             Criminal Appeal No. 1368 of 2023 
 
Page 6 of 9 
 
about it till February 2018. In February 2013 and in December 
2017, the second respondent was pregnant. It is not the case 
of the second respondent that from February 2013 to December 
2017, the appellant forced the second respondent to maintain 
the physical relationship. In 2013, the relationship resulted in 
pregnancy. Still, it continued till 2017. In fact, according to the 
second respondent, in July 2017, there was an engagement 
ceremony between the appellant and the second respondent. 
Therefore, in the facts of the case, it is impossible to accept that 
the second respondent allowed the physical relationship to be 
maintained with her from 2013 to 2017 on the basis of a false 
promise to marry. 
 
10) 
Now, coming to the Nikahnama dated 20th January 2017, 
it is true that the original Nikahnama could not be produced. 
However, the seizure panchnama dated 21st September 2018 
(Annexure: P-14) records that a carbon copy of the Nikahnama 
was seized. The statement of one Burhanuddin was recorded 
by the police who was present at the time of Nikah. He 
confirmed the fact of performance of Nikah between the 
appellant and the second respondent.  
 
11) 
On 8th May 2018, the police recorded a statement of Dr. 
Sarita Rai Vidyarthi, who stated that the appellant and second 
respondent used to come to her from November 2017 for advice 
and treatment as the second respondent was pregnant. She 
stated that the appellant did not tell her that they were married 
or that they were living as husband and wife. However, the 
second respondent told her that the appellant was her 

 
 
             Criminal Appeal No. 1368 of 2023 
 
Page 7 of 9 
 
husband. She stated that apart from the fact that the appellant 
used to accompany the second respondent to her clinic, even 
relatives of the second respondent used to visit her clinic.  
 
12) 
If this material, which is a part of the investigation 
papers, is perused carefully, it is obvious that the physical 
relationship between the appellant and the second respondent 
was consensual, at least from 2013 to 2017. The fact that they 
were engaged was admitted by the second respondent. The fact 
that in 2011, the appellant proposed her and in 2017, there 
was engagement is accepted by the second respondent. In fact, 
she participated in the engagement ceremony without any 
protest. However, she has denied that her marriage was 
solemnised with the appellant. Taking the prosecution case as 
correct, it is not possible to accept that the second respondent 
maintained a physical relationship only because the appellant 
had given a promise of marriage.  
 
13) 
Thus, in our view, the continuation of the prosecution in 
the present case will be a gross abuse of the process of law. 
Therefore, no purpose will be served by continuing the 
prosecution.  
 
14) 
The appellant has accepted that the second respondent 
is his legally wedded wife and the child born to the second 
respondent is his child. We, therefore, propose to direct the 
appellant to pay a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs to the second respondent. 
This will be without prejudice to the right of the second 
respondent to claim maintenance for herself and for her 
daughter from the appellant in accordance with law. We 

 
 
             Criminal Appeal No. 1368 of 2023 
 
Page 8 of 9 
 
propose to direct that the amount of Rs.10,00,000/- already 
deposited by the appellant with the High Court shall be 
invested appropriately till the child attains majority.   
 
15) 
Hence, the impugned judgment and order dated 26th 
February 2021 is hereby quashed and set aside. Crime No. 78 
of 2018 registered with Sadar Police Station at Nagpur, as well 
as the charge sheet filed on the basis of the same, and further 
proceedings of the case stand quashed.  
 
16) 
The appellant shall deposit a further sum of Rs. 5 lakhs 
with the Sessions Court at Nagpur within a period of six weeks 
from today. The appellant shall file a compliance affidavit 
alongwith documents in this Court within a period of 7 weeks 
from today.  
 
17) 
The amount of Rs. 10 lakhs already deposited by the 
appellant with the High Court, together with interest, if any, 
accrued thereon, shall be immediately transferred to the 
Sessions Court at Nagpur. The said Court shall invest the said 
amount in a fixed deposit with any nationalized bank by 
incorporating the name of the minor child of the appellant as 
the depositor and the second respondent as the guardian of the 
minor. The fixed deposit shall be renewed from time to time till 
the child attains majority. The fixed deposit receipt shall 
remain deposited with the Sessions Court till the child attains 
majority. However, the Sessions Court shall direct the bank in 
which the fixed deposit is made to pay quarterly interest on the 
fixed deposit to the second respondent. The principal amount 
shall be paid to the child after attaining majority. 

 
 
             Criminal Appeal No. 1368 of 2023 
 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
18) 
On the failure of the appellant to comply with the 
direction to deposit a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs, the Registry shall list 
the appeal before the Court. As and when the appellant 
deposits a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs, the Sessions Court will permit 
the second respondent to withdraw the same. We clarify that 
notwithstanding the above directions, it will always be open for 
the second respondent to file appropriate proceedings against 
the appellant for enforcing her as well as the child’s rights in 
accordance with law.  
 
19) 
The appeal is allowed on above terms. 
 
……………………..J. 
(Abhay S. Oka) 
 
……………………..J. 
(Pankaj Mithal) 
New Delhi; 
January 30, 2024