2024 INSC 801
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11000 OF 2024 
 
 
RATILAL JHAVERBHAI PARMAR AND ORS. 
… APPELLANTS 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF GUJARAT AND ORS.         
       …RESPONDENTS  
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J. 
 
1. In recent times, on more occasions than one, this Court has suo 
motu initiated proceedings having noticed attitudinal and 
thought patterns of learned Judges of various high courts across 
the country which tended to lower the image of the judiciary in 
general and the high courts in particular. While some of the 
proceedings are still pending, one such proceeding has been 
Digitally signed by
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2024.10.23
17:38:30 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
disposed of recently emphasising the need for learned Judges 
to exercise restraint while expressing one’s views in open court.  
2. Yet again, a fortnight back, this Court set aside a judgment of a 
high court on the ground that such judgment had been signed 
by the learned Judge after demitting office. 
3. These are distressing trends indeed.  
4. As if there is no end to it, the present case unfolds facts which 
are equally disturbing and meets with our disapproval. 
5. However, before we refer to the factual matrix giving rise to this 
civil appeal, noticing a decision of fairly recent origin of this 
Court in Balaji Baliram Mupade vs State of Maharashtra1 is 
considered imperative. Relevant excerpts from such decision 
read as follows:  
“1. … Judicial discipline requires promptness in delivery of 
judgments—an aspect repeatedly emphasised by this 
Court. The problem is compounded where the result is 
known but not the reasons. This deprives any aggrieved 
party of the opportunity to seek further judicial redressal 
in the next tier of judicial scrutiny. 
* * * * * 
10. We must note with regret that the counsel extended 
through various judicial pronouncements including the one 
referred to aforesaid appear to have been ignored, more 
importantly where oral orders are pronounced. In case of 
such orders, it is expected that they are either dictated in 
the court or at least must follow immediately thereafter, 
to facilitate any aggrieved party to seek redressal from the 
higher court. The delay in delivery of judgments has been 
observed to be a violation of Article 21 of the Constitution 
 
1 (2021) 12 SCC 603 

3 
 
of India in Anil Rai case [(2001) 7 SCC 318] and as stated 
aforesaid, the problem gets aggravated when the 
operative portion is made available early and the reasons 
follow much later. 
 
11. It cannot be countenanced that between the date of 
the operative portion of the order and the reasons 
disclosed, there is a hiatus period of nine months! This is 
much more than what has been observed to be the 
maximum time period for even pronouncement of 
reserved judgment as per Anil Rai case. 
 
12. The appellant undoubtedly being the aggrieved party 
and prejudiced by the impugned order is unable to avail of 
the legal remedy of approaching this Court where reasons 
can be scrutinised. It really amounts to defeating the 
rights of the appellant to challenge the impugned order on 
merits and even the succeeding party is unable to obtain 
the fruits of success of the litigation. 
 
13. We are constrained to pen down a more detailed order 
and refer to the earlier view on account of the fact that 
recently a number of such orders have come to our notice 
and we thought it is time to send a reminder to the High 
Courts.” 
 
6. We are surprised, not a little, that the strong reminders issued 
by this Court from time to time have had little effect on the high 
courts in the country and that decisions, binding under Article 
141 of the Constitution, are being persistently ignored. It has 
been stressed time and again over the years and we feel pained 
to observe, once more, that neglect/omission/refusal to abide 
by binding precedents augurs ill for the health of the system. 
Not only does it tantamount to disservice to the institution of 
the judiciary but also affects the administration of justice. For a 

4 
 
learned Judge to deviate from the laid down standards would be 
to betray the trust reposed in him by the nation. We sincerely 
hope that learned Judges of the high courts while being careful 
and cautious will remain committed to the service of the 
litigants, for whom only they exist, as well as the oath of office 
that they have taken so that, in future, we are not presented 
with another case of similar nature to deal with.  
7. In this case, which is a civil appeal arising from a judgment and 
order bearing the date 1st March, 2023, we find the High Court 
of Gujarat at Ahmedabad2 to have egregiously breached the law.  
8. The bare facts necessary for decision, without any reference to 
the facts and law involved in the case before the High Court, 
culled out from the pleadings before us are these.  
9. R/Special Civil Application No. 10912 of 20153, being a petition 
under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, was filed by the 
appellant before the High Court challenging an order dated 16th 
June, 2015 passed by the Deputy Collector, Kamrej Prant, 
District Surat. The Deputy Collector, by such order, had 
confirmed the order dated 23rd February, 2015 of the Mamlatdar, 
Kamrej. The petition came up for consideration on 1st March, 
 
2 High Court, hereafter 
3 petition, hereafter 

5 
 
2023 before a learned Judge, having been listed in the cause-
list as Item No.17. According to the appellant, he was 
represented before the learned Judge by his counsel. Hearing 
having concluded on 1st March, 2023, “he was under the belief 
that the detailed order is reserved in the proceeding. However, 
even an order recording the reserving of orders has not been 
passed or made available on the official website of the Hon’ble 
High Court till date”. Since the detailed order was not 
pronounced, the appellant’s counsel did not also apply for the 
certified copy. In the process, more than a year passed by. On 
30th April, 2024, the appellant’s counsel received from the IT 
Cell of the High Court soft copy of a reasoned order dated 1st 
March, 2023 containing the reasons for dismissal of the petition. 
10. The impugned order is part of the records. At the beginning of 
the said order, “ORAL ORDER” is printed in bold font, i.e., it is 
supposed to be an order which has been dictated in open court. 
However, the appellant has alleged something rather serious : 
that the learned Judge had passed the reasoned order more 
than a year after 1st March, 2023 and ante-dated the same to 
project that the reasoned order was passed on 1st March, 2023.  

6 
 
11. Such allegation prompted us to seek, by an order dated 12th 
August, 2024, a report4 from the Registrar General of the High 
Court as to whether the allegation of the appellant that the 
reasoned order bearing the date 1st March, 2023 was 
communicated to him for the first time on 30th April, 2024 is 
correct or not. A report has since been filed by the Registrar 
General and on perusal thereof, we have found the allegation of 
the appellant to be substantially correct. It is revealed that the 
learned Judge dictated the reasoned order on 12th April, 2024 
to His Lordship’s personal secretary, whereafter such order was 
uploaded on the website of the High Court on 30th April, 2024 
as well as communicated to the appellant’s counsel by the IT 
Cell. 
12. Having regard to the nature of controversy raised by the 
appellant, we also had the occasion to witness (on the virtual 
platform) the recorded version of the proceedings dated 1st 
March, 2023 before the learned Judge of the High Court. After 
briefly hearing counsel for the appellant and his adversary, the 
learned Judge was heard to say, “I will dismiss” and a few 
seconds thereafter, pronounced the outcome of the petition as 
“dismissed”. Counsel representing the appellant before the High 
 
4 the report, hereafter 

7 
 
Court being present could hear what the learned Judge said 
while his adversary acknowledged that he was “grateful”. 
Immediately thereafter, the next item on the board was called. 
This is precisely what happened on 1st March, 2023, while 
dealing with the petition. 
13. There can be no two opinions that if not the appellant, but his 
counsel certainly did have knowledge of dismissal of the petition 
by the learned Judge; also, we have no doubt that the appellant 
feigned complete ignorance and deliberately did not plead that 
his counsel was well and truly aware of the outcome of the 
petition moments after hearing stood concluded before the 
learned Judge.  
14. At the same time, from the proceedings of the court of the 
learned Judge available on the virtual platform, it is patently 
clear that His Lordship did not even express that the ‘reasons 
would follow’ for the dismissal of the petition. Not having so 
expressed, His Lordship practically rendered the court functus 
officio. We say so because it is not too clear as to whether any 
order of dismissal was signed by His Lordship on 1st March, 
2023, or at any point of time immediately thereafter, although 
we have noted from the report that the Disposal Log Report of 
1st March, 2023 of His Lordship’s court duly recorded that the 

8 
 
petition stood disposed of. In Vinod Kumar Singh v. Banaras 
Hindu University5, this Court held that when a judgment is 
pronounced in open court, parties act on the basis that it is the 
operative judgment and that signing is a mere formality; 
however, in exceptional circumstances, an order pronounced in 
open court can be amended or even altered before the same 
has been authenticated by the Judge by signing the order but 
such a course ought to be adopted judicially, sparingly and for 
adequate reasons and upon putting the parties to notice. Such 
is not the case here. We are inclined to the view that the learned 
Judge not having expressed that reasons for the dismissal would 
follow, His Lordship ceased to retain jurisdiction over the 
petition and foreclosed assignment of reasons for the dismissal. 
15. Assuming that His Lordship were to express that reasons for the 
dismissal would follow, still there could be no valid reason to 
write a detailed reasoned order after lapse of a year having 
expressed “dismissed” and upload such order on the website. 
No doubt, as per the good practice prevailing in the High Court, 
the order was communicated to the appellant’s counsel by the 
IT Cell but that is little consolation in a case of the present 
nature. 
 
5 (1988) 1 SCC 80 

9 
 
16. Having 
said 
thus, 
and 
bearing 
in 
mind 
the 
onerous 
responsibilities that learned Judges of the high courts across the 
country have to shoulder on a daily basis, we are persuaded to 
think that the duty and responsibility of assigning reasons for 
dismissal of the petition completely escaped the mind of the 
learned Judge. Perhaps, there is hardly any individual including 
any Judge who can truly claim to have committed no mistake in 
his life. It is a feature of human fallibility that people are prone 
to commit mistakes. It is how lessons that individuals learn from 
mistakes which facilitate in putting the past behind for moving 
forward. 
17. Nonetheless, we regret to observe that the learned Judge 
having realised in April, 2024 of having omitted to assign 
reasons for dismissal of the petition although His Lordship had 
pronounced “dismissed” in open court proceedings on 1st March, 
2023, could have avoided committing an act of indiscretion, by 
breaching all norms of ethics, in proceeding to assign reasons 
more than a year later. In accordance with the highest standards 
of fairness, propriety and discipline, the need of the hour 
required the learned Judge to bring the matter back on board 
once again, recall the verbal order of dismissal and place it 

10 
 
before the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the High Court for 
assigning it to some other Bench for fresh consideration.  
18. It cannot be gainsaid that in today’s world, particularly when 
more and more people are showing interest in court proceedings 
and there is wide coverage thereof on social media platforms, 
the presiding officers of courts are equally at the centre of 
attention as the controversy that is involved and the manner of 
its resolution. The society expects every Judge of a high court, 
so to say, to be a model of rectitude, an epitome of 
unimpeachable integrity and unwavering principles, a champion 
of moral excellence, and an embodiment of professionalism, 
who can consistently deliver work of high-quality guaranteeing 
justice. Although, on the whole, the weight of work on learned 
Judges of the high courts across the country is immense and the 
Judges have also been performing commendably despite various 
odds, instances such as the one under consideration, which we 
view as nothing more than an aberration, bring disrepute to the 
judicial system of the country and show the entire judiciary in 
poor light. This, in our opinion, could have well been avoided 
with a little bit of care and caution, and deference to the 
decisions on the point by this Court. 

11 
 
19. The situation presents us with an opportunity where we feel it 
expedient to share our thoughts only for the purpose of future 
guidance to overcome adversity. Having regard to the demands 
of changing times, one of the significant aspects of judging that 
has 
been 
at 
the 
forefront 
of 
discussion 
in 
many 
a 
conference/conclave or legal circle is the need for prompt 
‘pronouncement of judgments’. Order XX of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 ordains that a judgment can be pronounced, in 
an open court, either at once or as soon thereafter as may be 
practicable on a future day. Guided by the principles enshrined 
in Order XX, number of learned Judges scrupulously follow the 
same. Learned Judges do come across cases requiring short 
orders which, in their assessment, may not consume more than 
15/20 minutes. These orders are generally dictated in open 
court immediately after a hearing is over. On the other hand, if 
in any given case the judgment could justifiably be reserved 
after hearing of extensive arguments, it would not be proper to 
criticize a learned Judge if he dictates the judgment in open 
court notwithstanding the length of time to be taken therefor. 
As per the ordainment of Order XX, the learned Judge would be 
perfectly justified in doing so. In such cases, it could roughly 
take any time between 20 minutes to a couple of/few hours or 

12 
 
even more spilling over to the next day (in rare cases) to 
accomplish the task. This approach could result in the board (if 
it is heavy) getting choked and the remaining cases on the board 
having slim chances of being considered. As the saying goes, 
necessity is the mother of invention. The necessity to strike a 
balance, in turn, has led to an innovative approach (many a 
times followed even by this Court) which, though not strictly in 
tune with Order XX, has transitioned into a regular practice by 
passage of time. This contemplates a rough assessment made 
by a learned Judge of the time to be taken for dictating a 
judgment after hearing in a matter is concluded and if, in such 
assessment, it is likely to take more than 20/25 minutes, the 
learned Judge proceeds to pronounce the operative part 
together with the outcome while expressing “reasons to/would 
follow” and then concludes the exercise of pronouncing the final 
judgment by providing the reasons as soon as possible 
thereafter. Having regard to the exploding docket of a majority 
of the high courts, learned Judges consider it wise and prudent 
to make optimum use of judicial time by not dictating lengthy 
judgments in court. This practice, no doubt, seeks to serve a 
salutary purpose. People unversed with the functioning of the 
judicial system are perhaps unaware as to how development of 

13 
 
this practice has contributed to saving of precious judicial time, 
which the learned Judges invariably devote and utilize for 
hearing more cases that are on board in the anxiety to consider 
and decide as many cases as are possible during the scheduled 
working orders. Burdened though with immense pressure of 
work and brushing aside fatigue, which is quite likely to develop, 
the learned Judges after retiring for the day dictate the 
judgment in their court chambers or in their residential offices 
either on the same day or within a few days thereafter. The 
hearing having concluded not too long back, the arguments 
remain fresh in the mind of the learned Judges and it becomes 
all the more easy to dictate the judgment. While this approach 
without a doubt has its own benefits, recent happenings leave 
us to lament that reasons for the conclusion reached are being 
placed in the public domain much too late, as in the case of 
Balaji Baliram Mupade (supra) as well as this case. In an 
attempt to save time to attend to as many cases as possible, 
certain learned Judges unwittingly are contributing to justice 
being delayed in given cases which, concomitantly, have been 
giving rise to criticism of unpleasant flavours. Critics of such 
practice (to pronounce the operative part with the outcome and 
to provide the reasons later in detailed final judgments) could 

14 
 
and do legitimately argue in favour of reserving judgments as 
required by the procedural laws if the particular case so 
demands but as Judges, we know, reserving too many 
judgments has its own pitfalls. Once the files pile up, it becomes 
increasingly difficult to remember the minute details of the case 
and the arguments advanced by the parties in support of their 
respective cases which leads to a shift to rely on the written 
notes of arguments. However, if only written notes were 
enough, there would be no need of oral hearing in court. 
Additionally, drawing from our experience on the bench, we can 
safely say that inclination of learned Judges to reserve 
judgments is invariably the course adopted where cases 
involving complex and intricate points of law do call upon 
learned Judges to craft well-researched and well-reasoned 
judgments. That apart, there are cases arising from recent 
enactments involving questions of law not having arisen hitherto 
and consequently such questions have never been answered. 
Such categories of cases demand the high courts to lay down 
the law in clear terms for comprehension of all concerned. 
Obviously, this process is time consuming and the time limit for 
delivering judgments by the high courts as laid down in Anil Rai 

15 
 
vs State of Bihar6, at times, is breached. We have full trust 
and confidence in the learned Judges of the high courts since 
they are well-equipped to tackle any kind of pressure situation. 
However, while it would be prudent to leave it to the learned 
Judges to pick any one of the three options [(i) dictation of the 
judgment in open court, (ii) reserving the judgment and 
pronouncing it on a future day, or (iii) pronouncing the operative 
part and the outcome, i.e., “dismissed” or  “allowed” or 
“disposed of”, while simultaneously expressing that reasons 
would follow in a detailed final judgment supporting such 
outcome], it would be in the interest of justice if any learned 
Judge, who prefers the third option (supra), makes the reasons 
available in the public domain, preferably within 2 (two) days 
thereof but, in any case, not beyond 5 (five) days to eliminate 
any kind of suspicion in the mind of the party losing the legal 
battle. If the pressure of work is such that in the assessment of 
the learned Judge the reasons in support of the final judgment 
cannot be made available, without fail, in 5 (five) days, it would 
be a better option to reserve the judgment. Also, if the ultimate 
order would have the effect of changing the status of the parties 
or the subject matter of the lis, it would always be advisable to 
 
6 (2001) 7 SCC 318 

16 
 
stick to the course envisaged in Order XX. Since, the fraternity 
of learned Judges of all the courts are interested to preserve the 
dignity of the respective judicial institutions with which they are 
associated, all learned Judges must be mindful of the impact of 
their actions on the society at large. Dealing with lakhs of 
litigation is no mean task, but at the same time we must realize 
that instances do emerge leaving absolutely no margin for error. 
It is our duty as Judges to stand tall and rise to the challenge.   
20. While concluding, we are reminded of the universal truth “to err 
is human, to forgive is divine” emphasizing the human tendency 
of committing mistakes and the importance of forgiving a 
human error. 
21. Conscious that we are of learned Judges of the high courts 
working overtime to render justice to the litigants by conducting 
judicial proceedings, at times, by sitting in excess of normal 
working hours, discharging administrative duties in addition to 
judicial work, etc, and in the process overlooking health issues 
and sacrificing all pleasures of social life, we need to look at the 
issue wearing glasses of grace and compassion. As has been 
held by this Court in Tirupati Balaji Developers (P) Ltd. vs 
State of Bihar7, in the unified hierarchical judicial structure 
 
7 (2004) 5 SCC 1 

17 
 
that we have under the Constitution, vertically the Supreme 
Court is placed over the high courts; but if the Supreme Court 
and the high courts were thought of as brothers, we as Judges 
of the apex court in the country remain as the elder brother only 
to the extent of exercise of appellate jurisdiction. Promoting 
empathy and understanding by encouraging forgiveness, which 
is a divine quality transcending human limitation, should be 
preferred to anything else in the given circumstances, 
particularly when the learned Judge has not been put on notice 
and is unable to place His Lordship’s version. This approach is 
considered to be a better option rather than remarking 
adversely or giving unsolicited advice. 
22. We, thus, allow the controversy to rest here.  
23. It is now time for us to give our decision. Notwithstanding that 
the appellant has not been entirely clean in his approach but 
having regard to the famous words of Lord Hewart, the Lord 
Chief Justice of England in R. vs Sussex JJ., ex p McCarthy8 
that “justice must not only be done, but must also be seen to 
be done”, meaning thereby that the outcome of proceedings 
should be visibly just, the impugned order bearing the date 1st 
March, 2023 has to be set aside which we do hereby order. This 
 
8  (1924) 1 KB 256 

18 
 
would result in revival of the petition of the appellant and it shall 
stand restored on the file of the High Court. The Hon’ble the 
Chief Justice of the High Court is requested to place the petition 
before the learned Judge currently having the assignment to 
hear the same. 
24. Needless to observe, the petition shall be considered and 
decided by the High Court uninfluenced by any observation 
made in the order bearing the date 1st March, 2023. 
25. The appeal stands allowed on the aforesaid terms. 
26. We make it clear that we have not examined the rival claims on 
merits. 
 
                 
………………………………………, J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(DIPANKAR DATTA) 
 
                 
………………………………………, J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
 
NEW DELHI 
21st October, 2024