2024 INSC 804
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL No. 6186 of 2018 
 
S. P. PANDEY                                          
    …APPELLANT(S) 
  VERSUS 
 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.  
 
 
 
    …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
O R D E R 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
The appellant is not satisfied that the Armed Forces Tribunal, 
Jaipur has allowed his OA and quashed the order of Admonition passed 
against him on 18.01.2011. He demands compensation for the 
wrongful order by filing the present appeal. We agreed with him and for 
reasons to follow, allowed the appeal and granted compensation. 
2. 
Facts of the case are that the appellant was enrolled in the Indian 
Air Force in 1997 as Airman in the trade of Radar Fitter. At the relevant 
time, he was posted on the strength of 333 TRU C/o 5 FBSU, Air Force 
where he commenced work from 16.11.2009.  
2.1  The incident in question occurred on 17.05.2010, at about 14.20 
hrs when he was returning home from duty. On his way back, he had 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.10.21
18:19:16 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
to stop at a railway crossing in a civil area which was closed. The gate 
was closed due to transit of a train. The allegation against the appellant 
is that, instead of waiting behind the vehicles already in line at the 
railway crossing, he overtook all the vehicles, went straight ahead and 
parked his motorcycle in front of the railway gate.  
2.2  Respondent No. 7 a Sqn Ldr (Squadron Leader) who was also 
waiting for the railway barrier to open, approached the appellant and 
in ‘exercise of the responsibility’ conferred on officers of the Air Forces 
under Para 565 of the Regulations questioned the appellant for 
overtaking all vehicles, pulled out the motorcycle keys and directed the 
him to park his motorcycle in Guard Room. The respondent no. 7 
handed over the keys to Duty NCO and informed the appellant that his 
motorcycle is being confiscated for not following good order and Air 
Force discipline. This led to an argument between the appellant and 
respondent No. 7 wherein the appellant allegedly used insubordinate 
language (yah kaya gundagardi hai) contrary to Air Force discipline. 
Respondent No. 7 ordered closed arrest of the appellant and informed 
the Commanding Officer and the Adjutant of the Unit. Charge sheet for 
two offences, i.e. “Violation of good order and Air Force Discipline” and 
“Use of insubordinate language to a superior officer” was drawn against 
the appellant.  

3 
 
2.3 The charge was tried by Officiating Commanding Officer on 
18.05.2010 and an order of Admonition was passed on the same day. 
However, respondent No. 4 the Station Cdr. 5 FBSU sought sanction 
for expunction of punishment entry from the documents of the 
appellant and to proceed with de novo trial of the appellant for the 
above alleged misconduct on the technical ground that sanction under 
Section 83 of the Air Force Act, 1950 was not obtained.  
2.4 The appellant preferred a statutory complaint dated 24.05.2010. 
This led to a formal investigation as ordered by respondent No. 4 to 
bring out the fact of allegation made by the appellant against 
respondent No. 7 and it was reported that the allegations made by the 
appellant were false. However, by letter dated 23.06.2010 the appellant 
was assured that punishment dated 18.05.2010 would be cancelled 
and the Admonition entry will be expunged from the record. Relevant 
portion of letter of Sqn Ldr. Fit Cdr. HRM Ft dated 23.06.2010 is as 
under:- 
“REPLY TO ROG APPLICATION 
1. Reference is made to your application dated 24 May 10.  
2. You, are interviewed by the Station Commander in two 
sessions on 18 and 21 June 10 and all the issues brought out by 
you were addressed. Formal Investigation was ordered to bring 
out the fact of the allegations made by you against Sqn Ldr HV 
Pandey (27441) F (P). From the FI, it is clear that allegation made 
against Sqn officer were false. You were told by the Stn Cdr that 
punishment given to you dated 18 May 10 by CO 333 TRU will 
be cancelled and entry will be expunged from the documents.  
3. Application being devoid of merit, is disposed, herewith.  

4 
 
4. You are requested to give written acknowledgement regarding 
receipt of disposal of your application.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
3. 
Consequently, by order dated 24.06.2010 the appellant was 
intimated that charges raised against him have been expunged under 
33(1) of the Regulation and punishment entry has been deleted from 
his service documents. The order reads as follows: 
 
“Tel: AFNET/7742                             
 
 
      333TRU, AF 
C/0 56 APO 
PIN-937333  
333 TRU/C 951/2/P1                     
 
 
 
         24 Jun 10  
742490-K Cpl SP Pandey Rad Fit  
EXPUNGEMENTT OF PUNISHMENT 
1. Reference is made to 5 FBSU, AF letter No 5FBSU/C 102/1/P1 dated 23 
Jun 10. 
2.  It is intimated that the punishment awarded to you by the undersigned 
on 18 May 10 in connection with the charge sheet raised by Sqn Ldr HV 
Pandey ((27441) F (P) of 4 Sqn has been expunged under rule 33 (1) of 
the Regulation of the Air Force. The punishment entry has been deleted 
from the conduct sheet of your service documents.  
3. This is for your information. 
Sd/- zz  
(R Putatunda)  
Fit Lt  
CO”  
 
4.  
This litigation would not have survived if the above referred letter 
had been given effect to. That didn’t happen. Wg Cdr V.K. Mohan 
proceeded de novo against the same charge and ordered for recording 
of Summary of Evidence on 30.06.2010. The appellant preferred a 
representation to the Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief with the prayer 

5 
 
to stay operation of order dated 30.06.2010 for recording of Summary 
of Evidence and prohibit the Commanding Officer to conduct the 
second trial for the same charges. The representation preferred by the 
appellant was rejected by Chief of Air Staff vide order dated 06.01.2011.  
5. 
In the circumstances, a second Admonition order was passed 
against the appellant dated 18.01.2011. He appealed to respondent No. 
2 and even this was rejected on 28.04.2011. The representation to the 
Chief of Air Staff for reconsideration of order dated 06.01.2011 which 
was also rejected on the ground of it being repetitive in nature. 
6.  
Being aggrieved, the appellant approached the Armed Forces 
Tribunal by filing an Original Application. After hearing the appellant 
and the respondents and having gone through the materials and 
records before it, the Tribunal set aside the punishment of ‘Admonition’ 
passed against the appellant vide order dated 18.01.2011. It is 
important to extract the conclusion of the Tribunal, the relevant part 
of the order is extracted as follows: 
“11. Before proceeding further we may recall that the 
punishment awarded to the petitioner is of 'admonition'. Learned 
counsel for the respondents submitted that on date, the petitioner 
has retired from service and any further indulgence would gain 
no fruitful result even if the punishment of 'admonition' is set 
aside and now the issue involved remains only of academic 
interest.  
12.    Be that as it may, we feel it worth mentioning that from the 
sequence of events on record, it is evident that the entire episode 
got triggered by the fact that in a civil area, i.e. at a railway 
crossing, the petitioner, like many other service/civil motor 

6 
 
cyclists had overtaken the long queue of cars to position 
themselves in front row, close to the railway crossing barrier. No 
doubt, it is expected of every Air Warrior/Airman to uphold 
highest degree of discipline inside and outside his service place. 
But at the same time, from the events noticed hereinbefore, it is 
borne out that the petitioner had overtaken the parked four 
wheelers and motorcycles on a public road near the railway 
crossing barrier and had parked his motorcycle in the front row, 
may be to avoid rush of traffic when the barrier opened. It 
appears that this gesture of the petitioner was taken as an 
affront by the Sqn Ldr H.V. Pandey and he approached the 
petitioner from the rear and forcefully took away the keys of the 
motorcycle; confiscated the motorcycle on the ground that the 
petitioner violated traffic rules and general road discipline, 
ordered the petitioner to report to the guard room and took the 
applicant in custody. It was on his orders the petitioner was 
locked in a cell. The strict action taken by Sqn Ldr H.V. Pandey 
in a public place over a trivial issue cannot at the same time be 
appreciated. Even if in the opinion of Sqn Ldr H.V. Pandey the 
petitioner had committed some wrong in public place, the 
circumstances of the case required him to have advised the 
petitioner to mend his ways in future keeping in view the high 
discipline and dignity of the Air Force. But the manner in which 
the whole incident was highlighted in full public gaze, and 
consequent action taken by him, permitting a trivial happening to 
escalate out of proportion, cannot be appreciated. An offence is 
an officer and his behaviour should also be officer-like. His 
behaviour has to set up an example. The incident could have 
been handled by the officer more appropriately.  
13.  From the record, it is revealed that the petitioner was 
assured in writing on two occasions that the punishment entry 
will be expunged. Despite that, the respondent chose to proceed 
afresh. It gives an indication of vindictiveness and perhaps it 
was instigated by the officer.  
14. For reasons mentioned hereinabove, we are of the 
considered view that the Summary of Evidence and punishment 
of 'admonition" awarded to the applicant deserve to be set aside. 
 15.   Accordingly, punishment of 'admonition' dated 18.01.2011 
awarded to the petitioner is set aside. Impugned order dated 
28.04.2011 (Annexure-27 to the petition), and order dated 
06.01.2010 (Annexure-25 to the petition) are also set side. 
Consequences to follow. So far as prayer of the petitioner for 
directing Sqn Ldr H.V. Pandey, respondent no.7 to pay 
compensation to the petitioner is concerned, we find that the 
petitioner has not been able to make out a case, hence rejected. 
16.   T.A is  disposed of accordingly.”  
 

7 
 
6.1  It is apparent from the findings of the Tribunal that the 
respondent No. 7, took the incident personally and forcefully 
confiscated the keys of the motorcycle and ordered the appellant to 
report to the Guard room. The Tribunal also notices that he was taken 
into custody. The Tribunal also recorded that at the instance of 
respondent No. 7 the appellant was locked in the Cell. While 
deprecating the conduct of respondent No. 7 for adopting such a severe 
action over a trivial issue, the Tribunal opined that the officer of a rank 
of Sq. Ldr. could have given a proper advice to the appellant, to rectify 
his actions, keeping in view the high discipline and dignity of Airforce. 
However, the manner in which respondent No. 7 conducted himself was 
not appreciated. While deprecating the conduct of respondent No. 7 the 
Tribunal also came to the conclusion that the appellant was subjected 
to harassment and humiliation giving an impression of vindictiveness 
at the instance of the concerned officers. It is for this reason the 
Tribunal had no hesitation in setting aside the punishment. The 
Tribunal set aside the order of Admonition dt. 18.01.2011. It also set 
aside the order dated 28.04.2011, whereby the appellant’s statutory 
appeal had been dismissed. Lastly, the Tribunal also set aside the order 
dated 06.01.2010, wherein the Air Force Commander had rejected the 
appellant’s representation. Thus, the decision and the findings of the 
Tribunal have attained finality. 

8 
 
6.2 However, for reason that the Tribunal rejected the prayer for 
compensation, the present appeal filed by the appellant. We have gone 
through the material on record, findings of the Tribunal and noted the 
submissions of Ms. Vanshaja Shukla, counsel for the appellant and by 
Mr. R. Bala, senior counsel for the respondents.  
7.  
The initial service of the appellant for 14 long years, from its 
commencement in 1997 to 2011 was unblemished. This is an admitted 
fact. From the unfortunate incident on 17.05.2010, the appellant’s life 
was embroiled in defending in the disciplinary proceedings and 
contesting the case before the Tribunal.  The disproportionate measure 
adopted by the respondents, the assurance of expunging the 
admonition, withdrawal of the same and then the retrial, leading to 
imposition of the punishment caused great amount of distress. 
8. 
The findings of the Tribunal are categorical. It found that the 
matter was escalated beyond proportion and there is also an element 
of vindictiveness in the action taken against the appellant. More than 
anything, the lone battle of the appellant against the unfair and 
arbitrary treatment meted out to him, we think is the cause and reason 
for the indignation. The institution did not protect him, instead it put 
its full force behind respondent No. 7.  Fortunately, the Tribunal set 
the record straight. 

9 
 
9. 
Ms. Vanshaja Shukla, counsel appearing on behalf of the 
appellant has submitted the financial loss that has occurred to the 
appellant and prayed for appropriate compensation.  
10. Small excesses like overtaking the vehicle of one’s senior at a 
railway crossing may be an incident of indiscipline in defense services, 
but the balance and proportion that needs to be maintained between 
such an infraction and its punishment will always be at the core of 
good governance. If the balance is not maintained, the distinction 
between bad governance, impropriety, unfairness and inhuman 
treatment is not much. The Tribunal is right in holding that a small 
incident has unnecessarily grown beyond proportion.  
11. When the institutions that we build grow beyond proportion, 
officers act mechanically and many a times helplessly, ignore the 
simple and readily available remedies that are available in our normal 
lives. We would have thought that an incident like this would have 
ended if a senior officer had at the right time intervened and resolved 
the issue by taking into account the emotional aspect of the dispute.  
Perhaps a simple apology by respondent No. 7 would have gone a long 
way, but that did not happen, and we are now called upon to assess 
the economic value of the indignity and proceed to grant monetary 
compensation to him. We are aware of how insignificant the monetary 

10 
 
value of loss of dignity could be, but legal remedies that they are, enable 
us to settle it only as a measure, a token of our concern and in 
recognition of a citizen’s identity and dignity. 
12. Having considered the facts and circumstances of the case and 
having noted the specific and clear findings of the Tribunal, we direct 
the respondents to pay an amount of Rs. 1 lakh to the appellant 
towards compensation for having suffered an unnecessary and a long-
drawn litigation that was foisted on him. The amount may be paid 
within a period of 30 days from the date of this order.  
13.  The Civil Appeal is disposed of in the above-mentioned terms.  
 
………………………………....J. 
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 
………………………………....J. 
[SANDEEP MEHTA] 
NEW DELHI; 
October 21, 2024.