2024 INSC 809
 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 1 of 16 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 757 OF 2015 
 
UMA & ANR. 
            
 
        …APPELLANT(S) 
  
VERSUS 
 
 
THE STATE REP. BY THE DEPUTY  
SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE      …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
WITH 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 67 OF 2016 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J.  
 
Introduction 
 
1. 
These appeal(s) assail the correctness of the Final 
Judgment/Order dated 04.03.2015 passed by the Hon’ble High 
Court of Madras at Madurai (the “High Court”) in Criminal 
Appeal (MD) No. 161 of 2011 titled State Vs Uma & Ors. 
whereby the judgement of acquittal dated 19.10.2010 passed by 
the Additional Sessions Judge, Fast Track Court No.1, 
Digitally signed by
Nisha Khulbey
Date: 2024.10.22
17:56:37 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 2 of 16 
 
Thoothukudi (the “Trial Court”) in Sessions Case No.300 of 
2009, has been reversed and consequently, Appellant 
No.1/Accused No.1 has been convicted and sentenced to undergo 
imprisonment for life under Section 120B and 302 of the IPC 
together with a fine of Rs.10,000/- (Indian Rupees Ten 
Thousand); and Appellant No.2/Accused No.3 has been 
convicted and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life under 
Section 120B read with 302 of the IPC together with a fine of 
Rs.10,000/- (Indian Rupees Ten Thousand). Pertinently, Ravi i.e., 
Accused No.2 was convicted and sentenced to undergo 
imprisonment for life under Section 120B and 302 of the IPC 
together with a fine of Rs.10,000/- (Indian Rupees Ten Thousand) 
(the “Impugned Order”). Ravi i.e., Accused No.2 has assailed 
the correctness of the Impugned Order before this Hon’ble Court 
by way of a separate criminal appeal i.e., Criminal Appeal No. 67 
of 2016. As the appeal(s) arise out of a common judgement, they 
have been heard together; are being disposed of by this 
Judgement. 
 
Case of the Prosecution 
 
2. 
It is the case of the prosecution that on 23.08.2008, Ms. 
Rajalakshmi (the “Deceased”) was murdered by her husband, 
Mr. Ravi (Accused No.2) and her aunt & uncle i.e. Ms. Uma 
(Accused No.1) and Mr. Balasubramanian (Accused No.3).  

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 3 of 16 
 
3. 
The factual matrix reveals that the marriage between the 
deceased Rajalaksmi and the Accused No.2 had been solemnized 
at Arthi Thirumana Mandapam, Vilathikulam on 10.02.2008. At 
the time of marriage, 50 sovereign of gold jewels; and vessels 
and other items worth Rs.50,000/- (Indian Rupees Fifty 
Thousand) were given to the Husband and his family. As revealed 
by P.W.-1, Mr. Chandrakasan (PW-1), the adoptive father of the 
deceased in his examination, one week after the marriage, the 
Deceased had informed him, that Accused No.2 continuously 
harasses her & treated her like a servant. It was further stated that 
Accused No.2 used to consume alcohol, play cards, and also had 
an illegal illicit relationship with his aunt, i.e., Accused No.1. 
P.W.-1 in the Complaint (Exhibit P-1) and his examination as 
P.W.-1, stated that on one occasion Accused Nos. 1 and 2 along 
with Deceased came to his house, and Accused Nos. 1 and 2 slept 
together in a single bedsheet in the hall while the Deceased slept 
in the bedroom. It later came to his knowledge through the 
Deceased that this was not an usual practice at the Appellants’ 
home.  
4. 
On 23.08.2008, one Arunachalam had informed P.W.-1 
that the Deceased has consumed paint and had been taken to the 
local hospital. It was upon receiving the said information, P.W.-1 
and his wife (P.W.-2) had come down to Government Hospital, 
Kovilpatti and found the dead body of the deceased in the 

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 4 of 16 
 
mortuary. Subsequent thereto, P.W.-1 gave a written Complaint 
to the Sub Inspector of Police (P.W.-15) exhibited as Exhibit P-1, 
which was registered as Crime No. 183 of 2008 under Section 
174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. It is highlighted 
that none of the accused persons i.e., the Appellants, informed the 
P.W. 1 or the family of the deceased of her death.  
5. 
The contents of the Complaint, reveal glaring details of the 
disturbing circumstances & troubles that the Deceased was being 
subjected to, by the Appellants at the time of her marriage and 
the said details, have been substantiated & corroborated by     
P.W.-1 in his cross-examination.  The wife of P.W.-1 i.e., Ms. 
Sooriya Kalavathi has also adduced identical circumstances in 
her evidence, which affirm the allegations of the de-facto 
complainant. Notwithstanding thereto, such evidence needs to be 
tested on the anvil of consistency with the circumstances. 
6. 
Since the Deceased had passed away within a period of 6 
(six) months from the date of her marriage, the Investigating 
Officer (the “IO”) (P.W.-20) had also made arrangements to 
conduct enquiry by Revenue Divisional Officer (P.W.-l7). 
Although the Inquest Report marked as Exhibit P.14, stated that 
the death had not occurred due to demand of dowry, it is the case 
of the Prosecution, that Accused No.1 and Accused No.2 
strangulated the neck of the Deceased with a saree. It is further 
alleged that Accused No.3 poured kerosene into the mouth of the 

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 5 of 16 
 
Deceased. It is the case of the prosecution that with the intention 
to camouflage the incident, the accused persons i.e., the 
Appellants poured paint and kerosene into the mouth of 
Rajalakshmi to make the death appear like suicide. 
7. 
The said assertion of the prosecution is substantiated with 
medical evidence which reveal ante-mortem injuries sustained by 
the deceased. The Postmortem Report i.e., Exhibit P-3 prepared 
by Dr. Venkatesh, P.W.-10 reveals that 3 external injuries over the 
left upper arm, left shoulder, right shoulder and neck & the hyoid 
bone was found to be broken. The relevant extract of Postmortem 
Report is reproduced as under: 
“1. Multiple contusions over left arm upper 1/3rd 
and left shoulder (anterior aspect) each of size 2 x 
2 cms (3 Nos) 
 
2. Multiple contusions right shoulder (anterior 
aspect) 
 
3. Contusion in front of neck 6 x 2 cm extending from 
right 
sternocleidomastoid 
to 
left 
sternocleidomastoid.” 
 
 
 
8. 
P.W.-10, Dr. Venkatesh, in his examination-in-chief further 
makes it clear that the fracture on the hyoid bone was found 
broken before the demise of the Deceased. He disclosed that the 
death of the Deceased occurred from suffocation in breathing. 
There was no chance of consuming liquid for a person whose 
hyoid/Navaldi bone had been fractured and the person could have 
died due to pressure on the neck & problem in breathing. The 

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 6 of 16 
 
relevant extract of his examination-in-chief is reproduced as 
under:  
“I started the Postmortem at 4.15 p.m. Rigor Mortis 
present in hands and legs. The dead body was kept 
lying on its back. There are external injuries. 
 
It was broken on the inner side. Food pipe was 
found callus. At 5.15 p.m., the Postmortem was 
completed. Internal organs of the dead body were 
sent to Chemical analysis. Navaldi bone was sent to 
the professor. In the Navaldi bone investigation, it 
was found broken before the death. Based on the 
report, Chemical Analysis Department, there is no 
poison found on the internal ~ organs, I have stated 
the said information in the Postmortem Report. I 
opined the aforesaid person would have died due to 
the pressure given to aforesaid person on his neck 
and I issued the Postmortem Report Ex.P.3. Visera 
Report is Ex.P.4.” 
……. 
 
The wounds 1 and 2 noted in the Post Mortem 
Report would have caused due to the pressure made 
on his neck. Blood clots in the neck and the 
congestion in the food pipe due to pressing of the 
neck. The fracture of Navaldi bone found on the 
internal side is caused due to the pressure made on 
the neck. There is no chance of liquid consumption 
to a person whose Navaldi bone was fractured. 
There is no chance for demise of a person whose 
Navaldi bone was fractured. Breathing problem 
may be caused and then the death may occur.” 
 
9. 
P.W.-11, Muppidathi, Scientific Assistant, who prepared 
the Viscera Report, also deposed on 18.09.2008 that there was no 

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 7 of 16 
 
poison found in the internal organs of the deceased and it was her 
ultimate opinion that the Deceased appeared to have died of 
compression over neck. The Postmortem Report prepared by    
Dr. Venkatesh, Assistant Doctor (P.W.-10) as well as Exhibit P-4 
(Visera Report) prepared by the Muppidathi, Scientific Assistant, 
clearly establish that the Deceased had sustained external as well 
as internal ante-mortem injuries, which could not have been a 
natural consequence of consuming paint, as alleged by the 
Appellants.   
10. 
A cumulative reading of the medical record along with 
deposition of P.W.-1 to P.W.-4 create a chain of circumstances, 
that establish that the death of the deceased is homicidal. It has 
been submitted by the Prosecution that the injuries sustained by 
the Deceased are ante-mortem in nature, and in view of the fact 
that the Deceased and the Appellants were related and more 
importantly, resided together at the time of occurrence it was 
incumbent upon the Appellants to prove as to how the death of 
the Deceased occurred in view of the burden contemplated under 
Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 (the “Evidence 
Act”). In this context, it is the Prosecution’ case that the 
Appellants have not only failed to offer any alternative 
explanation so as to the cause of death of the Deceased, but also 
failed to dent to Prosecutions’ version vis-à-vis their sole 
presence at the scene of the alleged offence, thereby being unable 

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 8 of 16 
 
to negate the contention that no one else could have inflicted the 
said injuries on the body of the Deceased.  
11. 
It is the case of the Prosecution that the Appellants had a 
clear motive to eliminate the Deceased i.e., the illicit/incestuous 
relationship between Accused no. 1, Ms. Uma and Accused No.2, 
Mr. Ravi, which has subsequently become a stumbling block 
between the Deceased i.e., Rajalakshmi and the aforenoted 
Appellants. This naturally, swelled the common intention of the 
accused persons to murder the Deceased. This factum coupled 
with the narrative of P.W.-1 and P.W.-2 read together with the 
medical evidence as well as the deposition of the doctors 
substantiates the culpability of the accused persons to murder the 
Deceased. It is urged that the case of the Prosecution does not rest 
on circumstantial 
evidence 
alone 
and 
corresponds 
to 
circumstances so complete, that they point towards the guilt of 
the Accused Persons/Appellants. 
 
 
Findings of the Trial Court and the Appellate/High Court  
 
12. 
The Trial Court has concluded that the case of the 
Prosecution is not proved beyond reasonable doubt and hence, 
the Appellant are entitled to an acquittal. It was observed despite 
the medical evidence on record, Courts can prefer to accept the 
eyewitness testimony(ies) in preference to the opinion of a 
medical expert. In the absence of any direct ocular evidence, the 
Trial Court did not consider it appropriate to award due to the 

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 9 of 16 
 
medical evidence. The Trial Court, came to the conclusion that 
the motive alluded to the Appellants i.e., of being embroiled in 
an illegal/illicit relationship was held to be highly artificial and 
unbelievable. In these circumstances together, the Trial Court 
held that the Appellants were not guilty of the offences under 
sections 120B, 302, 201 IPC and Section 4A of the Tamil Nadu 
Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act. 
13. 
Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision of the Trial Court, an 
appeal came to be preferred before the High Court. The High 
Court has reversed the findings of the Trial Court; and convicted 
the Appellant(s) for inter alia the murder of the Deceased i.e, 
Rajalakshmi. In its considered opinion, the High Court after a 
thorough re-appreciation of the entire evidence on record, held 
that the Postmortem Report supported the case of the Prosecution 
that the death of Rajalakshmi was homicidal on account of the 
clear motive ascribed to the Appellants, and the presence of the 
Appellants at the time of occurrences of incident. The aforenoted 
conclusion was substantiated on the basis of evidence of P.W-1 
to P.W.-4.  
 
Submissions of the Parties 
 
14. 
It is the case of the Appellant that it is settled law that a 
judgment by the Trial Court could have only been reversed by the 
High Court if the view taken was not a plausible view on the 
evidence on record or there is an error apparent/perversity. The 

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 10 of 16 
 
High Court in the present case has not given any reason why the 
view taken by the Trial Court was not a sustainable or plausible 
view as it not commented on any findings of the Trial Court nor 
has marshaled all evidence before itself before coming to the 
conclusion of guilt of the Appellants. It was submitted that, in 
cases where another view is possible, the more liberal outlook 
ought to be preferred and must not ordinarily be displaced. 
15. 
It was further stressed that the case of the Prosecution is 
entirely based on a presumption, insofar as there was no material 
to establish the alleged story of P.W.-1; and there is no evidence 
on record to establish the motive of the Appellants to murder the 
Deceased. It was contended that there was nothing on record to 
establish that the Appellants were residing together and were 
present at the time of occurrence of the said incident. 
16. 
The Ld. Counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellant(s) 
submitted that that the presence of the tin of paint is demonstrable 
from the Observation Mahazar (Ex P.8), however there is also 
nothing to show that the Appellants had inflicted the injuries on 
the Deceased. In this respect, it is also stated the observation 
made by the Hon’ble High Court vis-à-vis the shift of burden of 
proof under Section 106 CrPC to prove a certain fact, strictly 
within the knowledge of the Appellants is wholly erroneous.    
17. 
It is further submitted that the entire case of the 
Prosecution rests upon a confession of the Appellant No.1, 

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 11 of 16 
 
however the same is struck by Section 27 of the Evidence Act 
and hence cannot be admissible in the court of law in order to 
bring home the guilt of the present Appellants.   
18. 
Per contra, the Ld. Counsel appearing on behalf of the 
Respondent State defended the Impugned Order, it was submitted 
that that the Trial Court did not appreciate the evidence in a 
proper manner; and consequently, this glaring error led to the 
acquittal of the accused persons i.e., the Appellants. It was further 
submitted that the testimonies of P.W.-3 and P.W.-4 were 
incorrectly rejected by the Trial Court as purely circumstantial, 
whereas the entire set of facts read together with the medical 
evidence, strictly point towards the guilt of the Appellants. It was 
further submitted that once a grave error is found in the decision 
of the Trial Court, the High Court was fully empowered to re-
appreciate the entire evidence and reach a different conclusion. 
 
 
Analysis & Conclusions 
 
19. 
The case of the Prosecution rests on circumstantial 
evidence, the testimonies of P.W.-1 to P.W.-4 read with the 
reports of medical examination (Exhibit P.3), Postmortem Report 
(Exhibit P.4.) and the evidence of the doctors. Admittedly there 
are no direct eyewitness to the said incident. In such cases, an 
inference of guilt must be sought to be drawn from a cogently 
and firmly established chain of circumstances.  

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 12 of 16 
 
20. 
This Court in its decision in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. 
State of Maharashtra, (1984) 4 SCC 116, has laid down 
following five golden principles, which constitutes the 
panchsheel of proof, for a case based on circumstantial evidence: 
insofar as the facts so established should be consistent only with 
the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, and the circumstances 
should be of a conclusive nature and tendency; they should 
exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved; 
there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any 
reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the 
innocence of the accused and must show that in all human 
probability the act must have been done by the accused. 
21. 
The prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable 
doubt, established the complete chain of circumstances including 
the; (i) motive (ii) presence of the Appellants at the time of 
incident (iii) false explanation in the statement under Section 313 
of the CrPC (iv) the conduct of the Appellants before and after 
the incident & most pertinently (v) the medical evidence; which 
in all human probability only correspond to the guilt of the 
Appellants.  
22. 
At the outset, the medical evidence in the present case, 
clearly shows that the Deceased i.e., Rajalakshmi had sustained 
multiple ante-mortem injuries, including external injuries over 
the left upper arm, left shoulder, right shoulder and neck. 

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 13 of 16 
 
Pertinently, the Deceased’s hyoid bone was also found to be 
broken. P.W.-10. in his deposition discloses that the death of the 
Deceased occurred from suffocation in breathing & there was no 
chance of consuming liquid for a person whose hyoid/Navaldi 
bone had been fractured. It was deposed that Deceased could 
have died due to pressure on the neck & problem in breathing. 
P.W.-11 also noted that no poison found in the internal organs of 
the Deceased and it was her ultimate opinion that the deceased 
appeared to have died of compression over neck. The medical 
record clearly establishes that the Deceased had died due to 
external injuries, which could not have been a natural 
consequence of consuming paint, as alleged by the Appellants.   
23. 
The presence of the Appellants at the time and place of 
incident is demonstrable from their conduct before and after the 
incident. In their defence under section 313 CrPC, the Appellants 
have stated that all 3 of them had went to Keela Earal to attend a 
function in the Tractor Company. They returned home only at 6 
P.M. and found the deceased in an unconscious stage and they 
took her to the hospital. Admittedly, the Appellants had taken the 
deceased to the local hospital, however, none of the Appellants 
have been able to establish an alibi at the time of the incident. 
The silence of the Appellants in informing P.W.-1 or the family 
of the deceased of her death, also speaks volume of their conduct. 
Undisputedly, the Appellants and the Deceased resided together 

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 14 of 16 
 
since the marriage of the Deceased to Accused No.2, which 
substantiates their presence at the time of occurrence of the 
incident; and consequently the invocation of Section 106 of the 
Evidence Act cannot be faulted. 
24. 
In the case of Trimukh Maroti Kirkan v. State of 
Maharashtra, [2006] Supp. (7) S.C.R. 156, this Court has 
pointed out that there are two important consequences that play 
out when an offence is said to have taken place in the privacy of 
a house, where the accused is said to have been present. Firstly, 
the standard of proof expected to prove such a case based on 
circumstantial evidence is lesser than other cases of 
circumstantial evidence. Secondly, the appellant would be under 
a duty to explain as to the circumstances that led to the death of 
the deceased. In that sense, there is a limited shifting of the onus 
of proof. If he remains quiet or offers a false explanation, then 
such a response would become an additional link in the chain of 
circumstances. In terms of Section 106 of the Evidence Act, the 
Appellants have not discharged their burden that the injuries 
sustained by the deceased were not homicidal and not inflicted 
by them.  
25. 
There is also enough evidence adduced by the Prosecution 
to hold that the Appellants had the clear motive to eliminate the 
Deceased. An illicit/incestuous relationship between Accused 
No.-1 i.e., Ms. Uma and Accused No.-2 i.e., Mr. Ravi had become 

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 15 of 16 
 
known to the Deceased Rajalakshmi & her family, and she had 
become a stumbling block in the relationship, which swelled the 
common intention of the Appellants to murder her. The factum 
that the Deceased has passed away within six months of her 
marriage also becomes a relevant consideration to attribute 
culpable intent of the Appellants. Although, the motive of Mr. 
Balasubramanian remains unclear, his aid & assistance in the 
commission of the crime cannot be ruled out. 
26. 
We are hence of the opinion that the Prosecution has been 
able to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt that the Accused 
Nos. 1 and 2, with the aid & support of the Accused No.3 have 
murdered the deceased Rajalakshmi and strangulated her to 
death.  
27. 
The collusion & motive of the accused person certainly 
synthesizes with the medical evidence on record, false 
explanation by the Appellants and the entire chain of 
circumstances, not leaving any link missing for the Appellants to 
escape from the clutches of justice. In our considered opinion, the 
observation of the Trial Court that in absence of a direct 
occurrence witness, motive to commit the crime and the evidence 
being purely circumstantial in nature, the medical evidence 
becomes of less consequences, thus cannot be a fairly plausible 
view. The Trial Court has simply discarded the consistent 
testimonies of prosecution witnesses P.W.-1 & P.W.-2 as being 

 
Crl. A. No.757 of 2015 
 
Page 16 of 16 
 
simply based on presumption; whereas the High Court in appeal 
has extensively dealt with each charge framed against the 
Appellants, the grounds on which the acquittal had been based 
and has dispelled those grounds with reasons.  
28. 
Although, this Court is conscious of the fact that an 
Appellate Court must not ordinarily reverse the finding of 
acquittal, the High Court has been able to demonstrate perversity 
and non-appreciation of the materials on record. On a fresh 
appreciation of evidence, we also find ourselves unable to agree 
with the findings of the Trial Court and are of the considered view 
that the circumstances in this case are conclusive and a 
conclusion of guilt can be drawn.  
29. 
For the reasons mentioned hereinabove, the Appeals stand 
dismissed. Interim applications, if any, shall also stand disposed 
of. 
 
 
 
 
……………………………………J. 
   
 
 
 
                      [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 
 
 
 
 
……………………………………J. 
                                            [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
NEW DELHI 
OCTOBER 22, 2024