2024 INSC 89
1
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL No(s). 1865-1866/2022
VEENA GUPTA & ANR.                               Appellant(s)
                                VERSUS
CENTRAL POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD & ORS.           Respondent(s)
J U D G M E N T
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.
1.
These  appeals  arise  out  of  two  orders  passed  by  the
National Green Tribunal (“Tribunal” for short). The main order
arises  out  of  an  ex  parte  order  in  suo  motu  proceedings
holding the appellants to be guilty and directing payment of
compensation. The second order is the dismissal of the review
petition filed by the appellant No.2 alleging that he had not
been given an opportunity before an adverse order was passed
against  him.  For  the  reasons  to  follow,  we  set  aside  the
orders and remand the matter back to the Tribunal to issue
notice  to  all  the  affected  parties,  hear  them  and  pass
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.02.06
18:04:18 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
appropriate orders.  
2.
The relevant portion of the order impugned1 is as under:
“7.Even though no notice was issued by the Tribunal
to  the  PP  in  absence  of  particulars,  the  Joint
Committee has visited the site.  Notice has been
issued to the PP under the Employees Compensation
Act for death of a person.  Remedial measures have
been suggested for future. The PP has been found to
be  operating  without  statutory  consents  in  non-
conforming  area  without  safety  precautions,
endangering life and health of others.  In these
circumstances,  reserving liberty to the PP to move
this Tribunal,  we do not consider it necessary to
defer the matter and to proceed by notice to the PP
in view of established facts,  duly verified by the
statutory authorities who are themselves competent
to take the recommended measures.
8.
In view of the above, further action may be
taken by the Statutory Authorities, following due
process. The compensation assessed may be recovered
and if not paid within one month, coercive measures
be taken against the concerned persons as well as
against  the  property  involved.   We  request  the
Member  Secretary,  Delhi  State  Legal  Services
Authority to ensure legal aid to the heirs of the
deceased to enable due compensation to be paid to
them. If the owners/tenant or other persons against
whom  action is  taken are  aggrieved, they  are at
liberty  to take  their remedies,  including moving
this Tribunal.  The Authorities may also maintain
vigil and take measures to prevent such incidents
in future.  We have noted the constitution of zone
wise STF to check the illegal industrial activities
and godowns in residential/non-conforming areas and
are of the view that the same should be manned by
officers of higher rank than the constitution now
proposed.  The Chief Secretary, Delhi may review
the constitution accordingly.”
1 Original Application No. 65/2021, dated 31.08.2021

3
3.
It is evident from the above that the Tribunal itself has
noted that notices were not issued to the Project Proponents.
The Tribunal, in fact, considers it unnecessary to hear the
Project Proponent to verify the facts in issue. The Tribunal
thought it appropriate to adopt this method in view of a Joint
Inspection  Report  that  had  been  submitted.  The  persons  who
were prejudiced by the order of the Tribunal naturally filed
Review Petitions before the Tribunal. Appellant No. 2 is one
amongst them. The Review Petition was taken up and dismissed
by the Tribunal on 26.11.2021.
4.
The  National  Green  Tribunal's  recurrent  engagement  in
unilateral decision making, provisioning ex post facto review
hearing and routinely dismissing it has regrettably become a
prevailing  norm.  In  its  zealous  quest  for  justice,  the
Tribunal  must  tread  carefully  to  avoid  the  oversight  of
propriety. The practice of ex parte orders and the imposition
of damages amounting to crores of rupees, have proven to be a
counterproductive  force  in  the  broader  mission  of
environmental safeguarding.
5.
Significantly, these orders have consistently faced stays
from  this  Court,  resulting  in  the  unraveling  of  the
commendable efforts put forth by the learned Members, lawyers,

4
and other stakeholders2. It is imperative for the Tribunal to
infuse a renewed sense of procedural integrity, ensuring that
its actions resonate with a harmonious balance between justice
and due process. Only then can it reclaim its standing as a
beacon  of  environmental  protection,  where  well-intentioned
endeavors are not simply washed away.
6.
It  appears  that  the  appellants  did  not  have  a  full
opportunity to contest the matter and place all their defenses
before the Tribunal. They filed this appeal and by order dated
04.03.2022, this Court stayed the judgment and order passed by
the Tribunal. This was inevitable. Two years have passed by
and the stay is still operating. We have no other alternative
except to set aside the orders dated 31.08.2021 and 26.11.2021
and remand the matter back to the Tribunal. The Tribunal issue
notices to all the necessary parties, hear them in detail, and
pass  appropriate  orders.  Needless  to  say  that  the  Tribunal
shall  hear  the  case,  uninfluenced  by  the  observations  and
conclusions  drawn  in  the  orders  dated  31.08.2021  and
26.11.2021.
2 Singrauli Super Thermal Power Station v. Ashwani Kumar Dubey & Ors.,(2023)8 SCC
35. This Court has already noticed the practice of the Tribunal in not providing
an opportunity of hearing to the affected party and consequently set aside its
orders  and  remanded  the  matter  to  the  Tribunal  for  reconsideration  after
following principles of natural justice.

5
7.
We make it clear that this order does not deal with the
merits  of  the  matter  and  the  actions  of  those  guilty  of
statutory and environmental violation will have to be subject
to strict scrutiny and legal consequences.
8.
The Civil Appeals are allowed with these directions.
9.
Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
..……………………J.
    [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]
        
..……………………J.
[ARAVIND KUMAR]
New Delhi
January 30, 2024.