2024 INSC 810
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL No. 1031 of 2022 
 
 
VIDYASAGAR PRASAD                       
 
… APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
UCO BANK & ANR.  
 
 
 
     …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
  
1. 
By the present appeal, the suspended director of the 
Corporate Debtor assails the order of the NCLAT1 affirming the 
order of the Adjudicating Authority2 admitting the application 
under Section 7 of IBC3 for initiating CIRP4 proceedings against 
the Corporate Debtor. 
2. 
The undisputed facts before us are that the Corporate Debtor 
(respondent No. 2 herein), now represented by its Insolvency 
Resolution Professional (IRP), availed loan and credit facilities from 
 
1 National Company Law Appellate Tribunal in Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 238 of 
2020, dated 04.10.2021. 
2 Adjudicating Authority/National Company Law Tribunal, Kolkata Bench, Kolkata order 
dated 13.12.2019 in CP No. 254/KB/2019. 
3 Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. 
4 Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process. 
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.10.22
19:15:09 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
UCO Bank (respondent No. 1 herein) and other consortium of 
banks 
under 
agreements 
dated 
21.06.2010, 
30.08.2012, 
19.07.2012 and 31.12.2012. The said loan and other credit 
facilities were availed for funding of Corporate Debtor’s Thermal 
Power Plant. 
2.1 Having defaulted on repayment of principal as well as interest 
levied thereupon, Corporate Debtor’s account was declared as 
Non-Performing Asset (NPA) on 05.11.2014. Further, proceedings 
under SARFAESI5 Act and DRT6 for recovery of dues were also 
initiated. However, we are not concerned with these proceedings 
for disposal of the present appeal.  
3. 
The root of the present controversy arose on 13.02.2019 
when UCO Bank filed an application under Section 7 of the Code 
to initiate CIRP proceeding against the Corporate Debtor before the 
Adjudicating Authority (NCLT, Kolkata Bench). These proceedings 
were resisted by the Corporate Debtor, primarily on the grounds of 
limitation. Additionally, the Section 7 application was also 
challenged on the grounds that it was not signed by a competent 
person and also that there is no liability to pay as per the terms of 
the agreement and as such there is no debt. 
 
5 Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest.  
6 Debts Recovery Tribunal. 

3 
 
4.  
On the issue of competency of the Bank to file the petition 
under Section 7, the Adjudicating Authority held that the General 
Manager of Bank was legally authorized as attorney to do all acts 
and also act on behalf of the Bank and he had the authority to sign 
the application. On the issue relating to the existence of debt, the 
Adjudicating Authority, examined the contract, the terms and 
conditions of sanction letter as well as the relevant credit 
agreements in detail and came to the conclusion that the amount 
was disbursed as a loan and the Corporate Debtor had in-fact 
defaulted in repayment of principal as well as interest levied 
thereupon. Thus, the contention that there was no debt was also 
rejected. 
4.1   The main objection to the initiation of CIRP proceedings on 
the ground of limitation was rejected by the Adjudicating Authority 
on the ground that there is an acknowledgement of debt in the 
financial statements as well as auditor’s report of the Corporate 
Debtor for the year ending on 31.03.2017. On the basis of Section 
238A of the Code, incorporating the Limitation Act, the 
Adjudicating Authority relied on Section 18 of the Limitation Act 
to 
reckon 
the 
period 
of 
limitation 
from 
the 
date 
of 
acknowledgement of the debt and concluded that the institution of 

4 
 
CIRP on 13.02.2019 is within the period of limitation. The further 
contention of the Corporate Debtor that name of UCO Bank, the 
financial creditor, is not specifically mentioned in the relied upon 
entry in the balance sheet was rejected by NCLT by referring to the 
Explanation to Section 7(1) of the Code providing that the 
proceedings thereunder get triggered even in the case of a default 
by debtor in respect of any financial creditor other than the 
applicant.  
5. 
Aggrieved by the admission of Section 7 application, initiation 
of CIRP and appointment of IRP, the appellant preferred an appeal 
to the NCLAT, Principal Bench. The same arguments were 
advanced before the NCLAT and having considered the same in 
detail, the NCLAT dismissed the appeal with the following 
reasoning: 
 “11.5 Therefore, in the instant case, the balance sheet that 
has been brought on record in the instant case before the 
Adjudicating Authority shall be taken into consideration 
while deciding the question of limitation and default on the 
part of the Corporate Debtor. The said documents cannot be 
ignored simply on the premise that it is not pleaded in the 
Application filed in Form-1 for initiation of the Corporate 
Insolvency Process.  
 
11.6 We find that the balance sheet for the financial year 
ending on March 31 2017, was part of the record before the 
learned Adjudicating Authority and was annexed with 
Section 7 Application, which was also duly admitted by the 
Appellant during the hearing. Subsequently, the balance 
sheet for the financial year ending will March 31 2019, was 
annexed with the reply filed by Respondent No. 1 before this 

5 
 
Hon'ble Tribunal on March 02, 2020. However, as the 
practice and procedure of this Hon'ble Tribunal, the same 
was not accepted at the filing counter without the specific 
mention of this Hon'ble Tribunal. Accordingly, a copy of the 
Application for the additional document is also annexed as 
Annexure A. Subsequently; this Hon'ble Tribunal permitted 
such additional documents to be taken on record vide its 
Order dated July 15 2020. 
 
11.7 The Company's balance sheet is prepared in the 
statutory format as per Schedule 3rd of the Companies Act 
2013, which does not provide for giving the specific name of 
every secured or unsecured creditor. 
  
11.8 It is further observed that the Corporate Debtor has 
not denied that there are no outstanding dues to the UCO 
Bank. A perusal of extract of register of charges submitted 
with ROC, at Sr. No. 3, shows that a charge of rupees one 
hundred and seventy-five crores created by the Corporate 
Debtor has not been satisfied and remains outstanding. 
  
11.9 After the judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in case 
Asset Reconstruction Company (India) Limited v. Bishal 
Jaiswal (supra), it is settled that entries in books of accounts 
and/or balance sheets of a Corporate Debtor would amount 
to an acknowledgement under Section 18. 
 
11.10 In the instant case, we also find that the Corporate 
Debtor issued a letter dated June 07 2016 (Annexure A 
Page 11 of their reply affidavit of R-1) wherein it has given 
OTS proposal. Based on the ratio of the judgement of 
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Lakshmirattan Cotton 
Mills Co Ltd and further reiterated in Dena Bank's case 
(supra) that there is an acknowledgement of subsisting 
liability of the Corporate Debtor. However, it may not 
necessarily specify the exact nature of the liability. But it 
indicates the jural relation between the parties, and in any 
event, the same can also be derived by implication. Further, 
the said Letter is not "without prejudice" basis and, 
therefore, amounts to an unequivocal acknowledgement of 
liability of the Corporate Debtor. A reading of the documents 
above 
reveals 
that 
the 
Corporate 
Debtor 
has 
acknowledged/subsisting liability to attract the provisions 
of Section 18 of the Limitation Act, 1963.  
 
11.11 Based on the discussion as above, we think that the 
present Appeal is liable to be dismissed, and the interim 
Order dated April 07, 2020, is exposed to vacated.” 
 

6 
 
6. 
Mr. Balbir Singh, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the 
appellant has emphatically argued only one point before us. It is 
that there is no clear and unequivocal acknowledgement of debt of 
the Corporate Debtor in the entries of the balance sheets. If this is 
true, it is submitted, then the financial creditor cannot have the 
benefit of Section 18 of the Limitation Act to extend the period of 
limitation which commenced on 05.11.2014. 
7. 
The commencement of a fresh period of limitation from the 
time of acknowledgement of the debt is part of the statutory 
scheme. Section 238A of the Code extends the applicability of the 
provisions of the Limitation Act to the proceedings under the Code. 
With the extension of Limitation Act to the provisions of the Code, 
the benefit of Section 18 of the Limitation Act dealing with the 
effect of acknowledgement of a debt in writing applies. Considering 
the same issue in Laxmi Pat Surana v. Union Bank of India7, the 
Court observed: 
“42. Notably, the provisions of the Limitation Act have been 
made applicable to the proceedings under the Code, as far 
as may be applicable. For, Section 238-A predicates that the 
provisions of the Limitation Act shall, as far as may be, 
apply to the proceedings or appeals before the adjudicating 
authority, NCLAT, the DRT or the Debt Recovery Appellate 
Tribunal, as the case may be. After enactment of Section 
238-A IBC on 6-6-2018, validity whereof has been upheld 
by this Court, it is not open to contend that the limitation for 
filing application under Section 7 IBC would be limited to 
 
7 (2021) 8 SCC 481. 

7 
 
Article 137 of the Limitation Act and extension of prescribed 
period in certain cases could be only under Section 5 of the 
Limitation Act. There is no reason to exclude the effect of 
Section 18 of the Limitation Act to the proceedings initiated 
under the Code. 
 
43. Ordinarily, upon declaration of the loan account/debt 
as NPA that date can be reckoned as the date of default to 
enable the financial creditor to initiate action under Section 
7 IBC. However, Section 7 comes into play when the 
corporate debtor commits “default”. Section 7, consciously 
uses the expression “default” — not the date of notifying the 
loan account of the corporate person as NPA. Further, the 
expression “default” has been defined in Section 3(12) to 
mean non-payment of “debt” when whole or any part or 
instalment of the amount of debt has become due and 
payable and is not paid by the debtor or the corporate 
debtor, as the case may be. In cases where the corporate 
person had offered guarantee in respect of loan transaction, 
the right of the financial creditor to initiate action against 
such entity being a corporate debtor (corporate guarantor), 
would get triggered the moment the principal borrower 
commits default due to non-payment of debt. Thus, when 
the principal borrower and/or the (corporate) guarantor 
admit and acknowledge their liability after declaration of 
NPA but before the expiration of three years therefrom 
including the fresh period of limitation due to (successive) 
acknowledgments, it is not possible to extricate them from 
the renewed limitation accruing due to the effect of Section 
18 of the Limitation Act. Section 18 of the Limitation Act gets 
attracted the moment acknowledgment in writing signed by 
the party against whom such right to initiate resolution 
process under Section 7 IBC enures. Section 18 of the 
Limitation Act would come into play every time when the 
principal 
borrower 
and/or 
the 
corporate 
guarantor 
(corporate debtor), as the case may be, acknowledge their 
liability to pay the debt. Such acknowledgment, however, 
must be before the expiration of the prescribed period of 
limitation including the fresh period of limitation due to 
acknowledgment of the debt, from time to time, for 
institution of the proceedings under Section 7 IBC. Further, 
the acknowledgment must be of a liability in respect of 
which the financial creditor can initiate action under Section 
7 IBC.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 

8 
 
7.1 In Dena Bank v. C. Shivakumar Reddy8 after reviewing the 
case law on the subject, this Court held; 
“138. While it is true that default in payment of a debt 
triggers the right to initiate the corporate resolution process, 
and a petition under Section 7 or 9 IBC is required to be filed 
within the period of limitation prescribed by law, which in 
this case would be three years from the date of default by 
virtue of Section 238-A IBC read with Article 137 of the 
Schedule to the Limitation Act, the delay in filing a petition 
in the NCLT is condonable under Section 5 of the Limitation 
Act unlike delay in filing a suit. Furthermore, as observed 
above Sections 14 and 18 of the Limitation Act are also 
applicable to proceedings under the IBC. 
………… 
140. To sum up, in our considered opinion an application 
under Section 7 IBC would not be barred by limitation, on 
the ground that it had been filed beyond a period of three 
years from the date of declaration of the loan account of the 
corporate debtor as NPA, if there were an acknowledgment 
of the debt by the corporate debtor before expiry of the 
period of limitation of three years, in which case the period 
of limitation would get extended by a further period of three 
years.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
7.2  A reference must also be made to a three Judge Bench 
decision in Rajendra Narottamdas Sheth v. Chandra Prakash Jain9 
which succinctly observed; 
“27. It is no more res integra that Section 18 of the 
Limitation Act is applicable to applications filed under 
Section 7 of the Code. In case the application under Section 
7 is filed beyond the period of three years from the date of 
default and the financial creditor furnishes the required 
information relating to the acknowledgment of debt, in 
writing by the corporate debtor, before the adjudicating 
authority, with such acknowledgment having taken place 
within the initial period of three years from the date of 
default, a fresh period of limitation commences and the 
 
8 (2021) 10 SCC 330 
9 (2022) 5 SCC 600 

9 
 
application can be entertained, if filed within this extended 
period.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
8.  
In view of the above referred principles, we will now consider 
the nuanced arguments advanced by Mr. Balbir Singh that there 
is no unequivocal, unambiguous and specific acknowledgement of 
debt owed to UCO Bank in the balance sheet entries of Corporate 
Debtor for the years 2017 and 2019. In the absence of clear 
demarcation as to what the Corporate Debtor owes to the UCO 
Bank, the said entries cannot be relied on for the purpose of 
extending the period of limitation in terms of Section 18 of the 
Limitation Act. Mr. Balbir Singh further argues that even if said 
entry is taken to be an acknowledgment of debt, the same cannot 
aid respondent No.1’s case since it fails to mention the name of 
financial creditor. 
8.1 Mr. Partha Sil, counsel on behalf of respondent No. 1-Bank 
submitted that the Balance Sheets of a company are prepared in 
the prescribed statutory format as per Section 129, read with 
Schedule III of the Companies Act 2013, which does not provide 
for giving specific names of each and every Secured and Unsecured 
creditor. In support of his submission, Mr. Partha Sil referred to 
the judgment in Asset Reconstruction Company (India) Ltd. v. 

10 
 
Bishal Jaiswal10 where it was observed that there was no 
compulsion for Companies to make any particular admissions in 
the balance sheet, except for what is prescribed. 
9. 
A three Judge Bench of this Court in Bishal Jaiswal (Supra) 
has addressed and clarified this issue by holding that; 
“35. A perusal of the aforesaid sections would show that 
there is no doubt that the filing of a balance sheet in 
accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act is 
mandatory, 
any 
transgression 
of 
the 
same 
being 
punishable by law. However, what is of importance is that 
notes that are annexed to or forming part of such financial 
statements are expressly recognised by Section 134(7). 
Equally, the auditor's report may also enter caveats with 
regard to acknowledgments made in the books of accounts 
including the balance sheet. A perusal of the aforesaid 
would show that the statement of law contained in Bengal 
Silk Mills  Co. v. Ismail Golam Hossain Ariff , that there is a 
compulsion in law to prepare a balance sheet but no 
compulsion to make any particular admission, is correct in 
law as it would depend on the facts of each case as to 
whether an entry made in a balance sheet qua any 
particular creditor is unequivocal or has been entered into 
with caveats, which then has to be examined on a case by 
case basis to establish whether an acknowledgment of 
liability has, in fact, been made, thereby extending 
limitation under Section 18 of the Limitation Act.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
10. Having considered the specific facts and circumstances of 
this case, the Adjudicating Authority as well as the NCLAT have 
concurrently held that the entries in the balance sheets amount to 
clear acknowledgment of debt. We agree with the findings. Further, 
Note 3.4 appended to said balance sheet entry dated 31.03.2017 
 
10 (2021) 6 SCC 366. 

11 
 
mentions that “company has made certain defaults in the 
repayment of term loans and interest.” It further mentions of a 
continuing default. The entry also mentions long-term borrowings. 
The conclusions of NCLT and NCLAT that there is acknowledgment 
of debt are unimpeachable.  
10.1   Following the principles as expounded in the case of Bishal 
Jaiswal (Supra), the Adjudicating Authority as well as the NCLAT 
have examined the case in detail and have come to the conclusion 
that the entry made in the balance sheet coupled with the note of 
the auditor of the appellant clearly amounts to acknowledgement 
of the liability. We see no reason whatsoever to take a different view 
of the matter. Their findings are fortified when we examine the 
matter from another perspective. 
11. Adjudicating Authority and NCLAT have also considered the 
Corporate Debtor’s proposal of One Time Settlement (OTS) to UCO 
Bank. 
The 
proposal 
made 
by 
letter 
dated 
07.06.2016 
acknowledges that there were prior debts owed to UCO Bank. To 
substantiate 
the 
argument 
that 
such 
OTS 
constituted 
acknowledgment of debt since it relates to present and subsisting 
liability and indicates existence of a jural relationship between the 
parties, UCO Bank relied on judgment of this Court in 

12 
 
Lakshmirattan Cotton Mills Co. Ltd. and Messrs Behari Lal Ram 
Charan v. Aluminium Corporation of India Limited11. The 
implication of a statement about a present and subsisting debt of 
a Corporate Debtor is articulated by this Court in the following 
manner; 
“9. It is clear that the statement on which the plea of 
acknowledgment is founded must relate to a subsisting 
liability as the section requires that it must be made before 
the expiration of the period prescribed under the Act. It need 
not, however, amount to a promise to pay, for, an 
acknowledgment does not create a new right of action but 
merely extends the period of limitation. The statement need 
not indicate the exact nature or the specific character of the 
liability. The words used in the statement in question, 
however, must relate to a present subsisting liability and 
indicate the existence of jural relationship between the 
parties, such as, for instance, that of a debtor and a creditor 
and the intention to admit such jural relationship. Such an 
intention need not be in express terms and can be inferred 
by implication from the nature of the admission and the 
surrounding circumstances. Generally speaking, a liberal 
construction of the statement in question should be given. 
That of course does not mean that where a statement is 
made without intending to admit the existence of jural 
relationship, such intention should be fastened on the 
person making the statement by an involved and far-
fetched reasoning…”  
(emphasis supplied)  
 
11.1   It is also relevant to refer to judgment in Dena Bank (Supra) 
which held as follows: 
“139. Section 18 of the Limitation Act cannot also be 
construed with pedantic rigidity in relation to proceedings 
under the IBC. This Court sees no reason why an offer of one-
time settlement of a live claim, made within the period of 
limitation, 
should 
not 
also 
be 
construed 
as 
an 
acknowledgment to attract Section 18 of the Limitation Act…” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
11 (1971) 1 SCC 67. 

13 
 
12.  Both these factors, acknowledgment of debt in the balance 
sheet as well as in the OTS proposal, have been considered by 
NCLAT while dismissing the appeal. The relevant portion of the 
NCLAT findings, after considering balance sheet entries and OTS 
letter are as follows: 
“11.7 The Company's balance sheet is prepared in the 
statutory format as per Schedule 3rd of the Companies Act 
2013, which does not provide for giving the specific name of 
every secured or unsecured creditor.  
 
11.8 It is further observed that the Corporate Debtor has 
not denied that there are no outstanding dues to the UCO 
Bank. A perusal of extract of register of charges submitted 
with ROC, at Sr. No. 3, shows that a charge of rupees one 
hundred and seventy-five crores created by the Corporate 
Debtor has not been satisfied and remains outstanding.  
 
11.10 In the instant case, we also find that the Corporate 
Debtor issued a letter dated June 07 2016 (Annexure A 
Page 11 of their reply affidavit of R-1) wherein it has given 
OTS proposal. Based on the ratio of the judgement of 
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Lakshmirattan Cotton 
Mills Co Ltd and further reiterated in Dena Bank's case 
(supra) that there is an acknowledgement of subsisting 
liability of the Corporate Debtor. However, it may not 
necessarily specify the exact nature of the liability. But it 
indicates the jural relation between the parties, and in any 
event, the same can also be derived by implication. Further, 
the said Letter is not "without prejudice" basis and, 
therefore, amounts to an unequivocal acknowledgement of 
liability of the Corporate Debtor. A reading of the documents 
above 
reveals 
that 
the 
Corporate 
Debtor 
has 
acknowledged/subsisting liability to attract the provisions 
of Section 18 of the Limitation Act, 1963.”  
 
13.  Having examined the matter in detail, we are of the opinion 
that the findings arrived at by the Adjudicating Authority and 
NCLAT are correct in law and fact. We find no merit in the appeal. 

14 
 
The Civil Appeal No. 1031 of 2022 arising out of the NCLAT order 
dated 04.10.2021 (Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 238 of 
2020) is dismissed accordingly.  
14. No order as to costs. 
 
………………………………....J. 
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 
………………………………....J. 
[SANDEEP MEHTA] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
October 22, 2024.