2024 INSC 815
 
 
Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011    
                   Page 1 of 9 
 
Non- Reportable 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6886-6887 OF 2011 
 
Manish Kumar Rai 
 
                   
      … Appellant 
 
versus 
 
 
Union of India & Ors.  
 
       
… Respondents 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
These appeals take exception to the judgment and order 
dated 27th October 2010 of the Armed Forces Tribunal, 
Principal Bench at New Delhi on a writ petition filed by the 
appellant before the Bombay High Court, which was 
transferred to the Armed Forces Tribunal (for short, ‘the 
Tribunal’).  
2. 
The appellant was working in the post of Artificer III in 
the Indian Navy.  The sailors employed in the Indian Navy are 
divided into two categories: (a) non-technical and (b) technical.  
Both categories have different branches.  One of the technical 
branches is of Artificers.  Artificers are of various types such as 
Aircraft Artificers, Electrical Artificers etc. The appellant 
contended that the Artificers are highly skilled technical 
personnel.  The sailors in the Artificer branch are graded 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.10.23
18:03:43 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011    
                   Page 2 of 9 
 
according to their level of technical competence, experience, 
and responsibilities.  The ranks of sailors in the Artificer 
branch start from Artificer V, Artificer IV, Artificer III, Artificer 
II, Artificer I, Chief Artificer, Master Chief Artificer IInd Class 
and Master Chief Artificer Ist Class. Artificer cadre is 
categorised as “X group” sailors.  On the other hand, non-
Artificers from the non-technical branch are categorised in “Y 
group” and “Z group”.   
3. 
On 30th August 2008, the Government of India accepted 
the 
6th 
Central 
Pay 
Commission 
recommendations.  
Accordingly, a Gazette Notification of 30th August 2008 was 
issued, which was brought into force with retrospective effect 
from 1st January 2006. According to the appellant's case, all 
personnel from the armed forces with a pay scale of S-9 
category were placed in pay band-2 with grade pay of Rs.4200 
in the revised pay structure of the 6th Pay Commission.  
However, Artificers in classes I, II and III, whose pay scale was 
in the S-9 category, were granted grade pay of Rs.3400, though 
they were placed in pay band-2.  As the anomaly of grade pay 
regarding Artificers in classes I, II and III was not resolved, the 
appellant filed a writ petition under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India before the Bombay High Court.  By order 
dated 27th January 2009, the Bombay High Court directed the 
respondents to examine the appellant's grievance regarding 
the grade pay of Artificers in ranks I, II and III and to pass 
appropriate orders after hearing the appellant, if necessary. 
Accordingly, 
the 
appellant’s 
advocate 
submitted 
a 
representation to the first respondent-Union of India. On 20th 

 
 
Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011    
                   Page 3 of 9 
 
April 2009, the Naval Headquarters, Ministry of Defence passed 
a speaking order dated 20th April 2009.  By the said order, the 
representation was rejected.  The appellant challenged the said 
order by filing a writ petition before the Bombay High Court.  
After the establishment of the Tribunal, the writ petition was 
transferred to the Tribunal and numbered as a Transfer 
Appeal.  The Tribunal dismissed the Transfer Appeal by the 
first impugned order dated 27th October 2010.  The appellant 
applied for a review of the said judgment.  However, the Review 
Petition was rejected by the second impugned order dated 2nd 
February 2011.  
SUBMISSIONS 
4. 
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant referred 
to the Gazette Notification dated 30th August 2008 issued by 
the Union of India.  It is provided that the pay bands and grade 
pay for the same ranks in both groups will be the same.  The 
learned counsel pointed out that the Chief Petty Officer, who 
was granted grade pay of Rs.4200, belongs to a non-technical 
branch.  He pointed out that the sailors from non-technical 
branches are given the ranks of Seaman II, Seaman I, Leading 
Seaman, Petty Officer, Chief Petty Officer, Master Chief Petty 
Officer II and Master Chief Petty Officer I. He relied upon Navy 
instructions No. 2/S/96, which provided that Artificers III and 
Chief Artificers have relative ranks of Chief Petty Officer.  He 
also pointed out that, upon promotion to the rank of Artificer 
III, the Artificer sailors are appointed as Chief Petty Officers by 
a warrant issued by the President of India.  He, therefore, 
submitted that though Artificers of III, II and I class are also 

 
 
Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011    
                   Page 4 of 9 
 
ranked as Chief Petty Officers, the grade pay of Rs.4200 
granted to Chief Petty Officers has been denied to Artificers of 
III, II and I class, which is highly discriminatory. He submitted 
that in the counter affidavit filed by the first respondent, it was 
accepted that Artificers of class I, II and III hold a relative rank 
of Chief Petty Officer.  Still, they are denied grade pay of 
Rs.4200 on par with the grade pay of the Chief Petty Officer. 
He also relied upon Navy instructions No. 2/S/96, annexed as 
Annexure R-2 of the counter affidavit.  He also relied upon 
clarification issued by the Chief of the Naval Staff by a letter 
dated 5th September 1977 clarifying that Artificers of class III 
and above are Chief Petty Officers.  The learned counsel 
submitted that the fact that only the Chief Artificer and Chief 
Petty Officer are eligible for promotion to Master Chief Petty 
Officer cannot be a reason to deny the grade pay of Rs.4200 to 
Artificers of Class III, who are Chief Petty Officers. 
5. 
The learned counsel relied upon a decision of this Court 
dated 9th November 2023 in Civil Appeal No.1663 of 2016 in 
the case of Union of India & Ors. vs. D.G.O.F. Employees 
Association and Anr.1.  He also relied upon what is held by 
this Court in the case of Haryana State Minor Irrigation 
Tubewells Corporation Ltd. & others vs. G.S. Uppal & 
Ors.2. Inviting our attention to the findings recorded by the 
Tribunal, he submitted that the same are completely 
erroneous. 
 
1 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1471   
2 (2008) 7 SCC 375 

 
 
Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011    
                   Page 5 of 9 
 
6. 
Learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the 
respondents pointed out that only when Artificers of grade III 
are promoted to the post of Chief Artificer, they can be 
considered to be equivalent to Chief Petty Officer (non-
technical).  As the Artificers of ranks III to I are below the rank 
of the Chief Artificer, their grade pay has to be lower than that 
of the Chief Artificer.  However, the grade pay given to Artificers 
of rank I to III is higher than Petty Officers' grade pay but lower 
than that of the Chief Artificer/Chief Petty Officer (non-
technical).  In short, the submission of the learned ASG is that 
the same grade pay cannot be granted to Artificer III and Chief 
Artificer as the Chief Artificer is a promotional post for Artificers 
of Class III.  She stated that Artificers work under the command 
of the Chief Artificer.  Learned ASG pointed out the grade pay 
granted to various sailors in the X group and sailors in the Y 
group (non-technical). 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
7. 
The appellant placed reliance on a communication issued 
by the Director of Personnel in Naval Headquarters dated 16th 
November 2000 (Annexure P-I).  In the said communication, 
which deals with the seniority of Artificers viz-a-viz non-
Artificers, it is stated thus: - 
“The contention that seniority status of 
Artificers 
vis-a-vis 
non-artificers 
is 
ambiguous and unresolved is incorrect. The 
Regulation 247 of Reg Navy Part III and Navy 
Instruction 2/96 clearly lays down that the 
relative rank of Artificers 3rd/2nd/1st Class 
and Chief Artificers is that of a Chief Petty 
Officer.” 
 

 
 
Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011    
                   Page 6 of 9 
 
8. 
This is the primary document on which the appellant is 
relying upon.  The communication dated 16th November 2000 
refers to the seniority status of Artificers vis-a-vis non-
Artificers. It refers to Regulation 247.  We have, therefore, 
perused Regulation 247.  We may note here that Regulation 
247 does not deal with equivalence.  Clause (1) of Regulation 
247 provides that the crews of Indian Naval Ships shall rank 
and command after Naval Cadets according to Regulation 247.  
Clauses (1) to (3) of Regulation 247 are relevant, which read 
thus:  
“247. (1) The crews of Indian Naval Ships 
shall rank and command after Naval Cadets 
according to this Regulation. 
(2) Any sailor of any one of following ranks 
shall rank and command before any sailor of 
a rank below it in the following list, except 
that sailors exercising Military Command 
rank and command before all sailors placed 
under their command:- 
Chief Petty Officer Petty Officer Leading 
Seaman Able Seaman Ordinary Seaman Boy 
Seaman 
(3) Sailors belonging to any one of the ranks 
mentioned in sub-regulation (2) shall rank 
and command among themselves according 
to their seniority in that rank provided that: 
(a) Chief Engine-Room Artificers, Chief 
Ordnance 
Artificers, 
Chief 
Electrical 
Artificers, Chief Shipwright Artificers, 
Chief 
Aircraft 
Artificers. 
Chief 
Mechanicians, 
Chief 
Aircraft 
Mechanicians 
and 
Chief 
Electrical 
Mechanicians shall rank and command 
over all other ratings of these eight 

 
 
Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011    
                   Page 7 of 9 
 
branches. "Chief" ratings within one of 
these branches shall rank and command 
between themselves according to seniority 
in "Chief" rating. "Chief " ratings of two or 
more of these branches shall rank and 
command between themselves by seniority 
as Chief Petty Officer. Where "Chief" 
ratings of any of these eight branches are 
together with Chief Petty Officers of other 
branches they will rank and command 
according to seniority as Chief Petty 
Officer. 
(b) Engine-Room Artificers, Ordnance 
Artificers Electrical Artificers, Shipwright 
Artificers and Aircraft Artificers of a 
particular class shall rank and command 
over all Engine- Room Artificers Ordnance 
Artificers Electrical Artificers Shipwright 
Artificers and Aircraft Artificers of a lower 
class. Within one of these branches sailors 
of the same class shall rank and command 
according to their seniority in that class  
(c) For purposes of departmental work 
only, in the absence of the departmental 
officer, 
the 
seniormost 
artificer 
or 
mechanician sailor of the department 
concerned may be directed to take Charge 
of the department and deputise for the 
departmental officer.” 
9. 
Therefore, it is apparent that the Chief Artificer’s rank 
has command over Artificers of classes I to III.  Even assuming 
that Artificers of grades III, II, and I are equivalent to Chief Petty 
Officers, the Chief Artificers have command over them. 
10. 
At this stage, we may refer to Navy Order 100/67 which 
deals with the seniority of Artificers vis-a-vis non-Artificers. It 
records that Artificers of Class III and above are Chief Petty 

 
 
Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011    
                   Page 8 of 9 
 
Officers and will rank and command with Chief Petty Officers 
of the other branches depending upon their seniority as Chief 
Petty Officers.  Thus, this rank has been given only for the 
purposes of seniority vis-a-vis non-Artificers.  Hence, for the 
purposes of seniority, Chief Artificers and Artificers of rank III 
to I may be equivalent to Chief Petty Officer. But, the Chief 
Artificer has command over Artificers of III, II and I grade.  
Moreover, the Chief Artificer is the promotional post for 
Artificers of Class III. 
11. 
The impugned judgment refers to a table incorporated in 
paragraph 13. We may note here that the Artificers of Grade IV 
are equivalent to Petty Officers. Only the Chief Artificer is 
entitled to promotion to the post of Master Chief Artificer.  
Artificers of grades I, II and III are not entitled to seek 
promotion to the post of Master Chief Artificer. The Artificers of 
class III are entitled to be promoted to the posts of Chief 
Artificers.  Therefore, for the purposes of the pay band, the 
Chief Artificers in ‘X Group’ and Chief Petty Officer in ‘Y Group’ 
are treated as equivalent.  We may note here that the 
promotional avenue available to Chief Artificer is of Master 
Chief Artificer-II.  The Chief Petty Officer has a promotional 
avenue to the post of Master Chief (PO) – II.  Master Chief 
Artificer -II and Master Chief (PO) -II have been given the same 
grade pay of Rs.4600.  For the purposes of grade pay, Artificers 
of grades I, II and III are placed between Artificers of grade IV 
and Chief Artificer.  Though for the purposes of seniority, 
Artificers in grades III may be Chief Petty officers, they cannot 
seek promotion directly to the post of Master Chief Artificers.  

 
 
Civil Appeal Nos. 6886-6887 of 2011    
                   Page 9 of 9 
 
They can seek promotion to the post of Chief Artificer.  
Therefore, the grade pay of the Artificer III to I category is 
between the grade pay of Artificer IV and the grade pay of Chief 
Artificer.  The grade pay of Artificer IV is Rs.2800 and the grade 
pay of Artificers III to I is Rs.3400.  The grade pay of Chief 
Artificer is Rs.4200/-. 
12. 
Therefore, there is neither any illegality nor arbitrariness 
in giving grade pay to Artificers III to I which is more than the 
grade pay of Artificer IV but less than the grade pay of Chief 
Artificers.  The Speaking Order dated 20th April 2009 refers to 
the fact that under Regulation 247, the “Chief” rating is given 
only to Chief Artificer and not to Artificers of grades III to I.  It 
also notes that Artificers of grades III to I cannot be directly 
promoted to the post of Master Chief Artificer.  
13. 
In the circumstances, the Tribunal committed no error in 
rejecting the petition filed by the petitioner.  
14. 
Accordingly, we see no merit in the Civil Appeals and the 
same are dismissed. 
 
…………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
       (Abhay S Oka) 
 
 
…………………………….J. 
                                         (Ujjal Bhuyan) 
New Delhi; 
October 23, 2024.