2024 INSC 819
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 4277 OF 2024
CENTRAL BUREAU OF 
INVESTIGATION  
     …APPELLANT
VERSUS
ASHOK SIRPAL                                   …RESPONDENT
J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECT
1.
The factual controversy which arises in this appeal
is   very   limited.   The   respondent   ­   accused   no.2,   by
judgment and order dated 27th January 2016 passed by
the Special Judge, CBI (PC Act), Karkardooma Courts,
              Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024
Page 1 of 13
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2024.10.24
18:27:07 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

East   District,   Delhi,   was   convicted   for   the   offences
punishable   under   Section   120B   read   with   Sections
420/419 of the Indian Penal Code (for short, ‘the IPC’)
and   Sections   13(1)(d)   and   13(2)   of   the   Prevention   of
Corruption Act, 1988 (for short, ‘the PC Act’). He was
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven
years for each offence. He was sentenced to pay a fine of
Rs.95,00,000/­. In default of the payment of the fine, he
was ordered to undergo simple imprisonment for a period
of 21 months. The substantive sentences were ordered to
run   concurrently.   The   respondent   preferred   an   appeal
against   conviction   before   the   Delhi   High   Court.   The
appeal was admitted. By the impugned order dated 29th
September   2016,   the   sentence   was   suspended   by   the
learned   Single   Judge   of   Delhi   High   Court   on
the respondent furnishing personal bond in the sum of
Rs.50,000/­ with one surety of the like amount subject to
the   satisfaction   of   the   learned   Trial   Judge.   A   further
condition was imposed on the respondent of not leaving
the country without prior permission of the Trial Court.
2.
On   19th  March   2018,   while   issuing   notice,   this
Court passed the following order:
“ Delay condoned.
The   learned   Additional   Solicitor
General   appearing   for   the   petitioner   –
              Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024
Page 2 of 13

CBI submits that the respondent has not
deposited   the   fine.   The   submission   is
recorded.
Issue notice.”
On 8th August 2023, the following order was passed:
“
The   learned   Senior   Counsel
appearing   for   the   respondent,   on
instructions, states that the respondent
will deposit in this Court a sum of Rs.15
lakhs within three months from today. 
Only in view of this statement, we
adjourn this petition till 21.11.2023 to
be listed on the top of the Board. 
We   make   it   clear   that   on   the
failure of the respondent to deposit the
said amount, the order granting bail to
the respondent is liable to be set aside. 
As and when the said amount is
deposited, the Registry will invest it in
the   interest  bearing   deposit  with  auto
renewal facility.”
In terms of the said order, the respondent has deposited
a sum of Rs.15,00,000/­, which has been invested in a
fixed deposit under the orders of this Court. 
SUBMISSIONS
3.
Shri   K   M   Nataraj,   learned   Additional   Solicitor
General of India, pointed out that the finding against the
              Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024
Page 3 of 13

respondent and co­accused by the Special Court is that
there was an embezzlement of approximately a sum of
Rs.46,00,000/­. He pointed out that what is suspended
under the impugned order is the substantive sentence of
7   years.   As   the   respondent   has   paid   only   a   sum   of
Rs.15,00,000/­   out   of   the   total   fine   amount   of
Rs.95,00,000/­ and as the direction to pay a fine has not
been   suspended   under   the   impugned   order,   the
respondent   will   have   to   be   taken   into   custody   for
undergoing sentence imposed in default of payment of
a fine. Learned ASG relied upon the decision of this Court
in the case of  Satyendra Kumar Mehra v. State of
Jharkhand1. He pointed out the interpretation put by
this   Court   to   Section   357   of   the   Code   of   Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘the CrPC’). He relied upon
what is held in paragraph 36 of the said decision. He
urged that there is a power to suspend the fine conferred
by Section 389 of the CrPC with or without condition. He
submitted that the impugned order does not record that
the   order   of   fine   has   been   suspended.   He,   therefore,
submitted that the impugned order would not help the
respondent   to   avoid   enforcement   of   the sentence   in
default of payment of the fine. He submitted that, in any
case,   the   High   Court   could   not   have   granted   an
1 (2018) 15 SCC 139
              Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024
Page 4 of 13

unconditional   stay   of   the   order   directing   payment   of
a fine   of   Rs.95,00,000/­.   He   submitted   that   until   the
impugned  order  was  passed,  the   respondent  had   only
been incarcerated for about 8 months. 
4.
Shri Naidu, learner senior counsel representing the
respondent, submitted that the entire sentence, including
the   sentence   of   fine,   has   been   suspended   by   the
impugned   order.   He   submitted   that   the   substantive
sentence and the sentence in default of fine are limited
period sentences. As the appeal against conviction is not
likely to be heard in the near future, the High Court has
rightly suspended the sentence.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
5.
Section 389 of the CrPC reads thus:
“389.   Suspension   of   sentence   pending
the appeal; release of appellant on bail.—
(1)   Pending   any   appeal   by   a   convicted
person,   the   Appellate   Court   may,   for
reasons to be recorded by it in writing,
order that the execution of the sentence
or order appealed against be suspended
and, also, if he is in confinement, that he
be released on bail, or on his own bond:
  Provided   that   the   Appellate   Court
shall, before releasing on bail or on his
own   bond   a   convicted   person   who   is
              Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024
Page 5 of 13

convicted of an offence punishable with
death   or   imprisonment   for   life   or
imprisonment for a term of not less than
ten years, shall give opportunity to the
Public Prosecutor for showing cause in
writing against such release:
Provided further that in cases where a
convicted   person   is   released   on   bail   it
shall be open to the Public Prosecutor to
file an application for the cancellation of
the bail.
(2) The power conferred by this section
on an Appellate Court may be exercised
also by the High Court in the case of an
appeal by a convicted person to a Court
subordinate thereto.
(3) Where the convicted person satisfies
the Court by which he is convicted that
he   intends   to   present   an   appeal,   the
Court shall, —
(i) where such person, being on bail,
is sentenced to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years, or
(ii) where the offence of which such
person has been convicted is a bailable
one, and he is on bail,
order   that   the   convicted   person   be
released on bail, unless there are special
reasons for refusing bail, for such period
as will afford sufficient time to present
the appeal and obtain the orders of the
Appellate   Court   under   sub­section   (1);
and the sentence of imprisonment shall,
              Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024
Page 6 of 13

so long as he is so released on bail, be
deemed to be suspended.
(4)   When   the   appellant   is   ultimately
sentenced to imprisonment for a term or
to imprisonment for life, the time during
which he is so released shall be excluded
in computing the term for which he is so
sentenced.”
The power of suspension of sentence under Section 389
of   the   CrPC   (Corresponding   to   Section   430   of   the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023) is vested in
the   Appellate   Court   dealing   with   an   appeal   against
the order of conviction. On a plain reading of sub­section
(1), the Appellate Court has the power to suspend the
execution of a sentence or order appealed against. If the
appellant/accused is in confinement, there is a power
vesting   in   the   Appellate   Court   to   release   him   on   bail
pending   the   final   disposal   of   the   appeal.   In   case   of
offences covered by the first proviso to sub­section (1) of
Section 389, there is a mandate to give an opportunity to
the Public Prosecutor to show cause in writing against
such release before releasing a convicted person on bail.
As stated earlier, the substantive sentence imposed on
the respondent is rigorous imprisonment for seven years.
In   addition,   there   is   a   direction   to   pay   a fine   of
Rs.95,00,000/­.   There   are   five   kinds   of   punishment
              Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024
Page 7 of 13

provided in Section 53 in Chapter III of the IPC, which
reads thus:
“53.   “Punishments”.—The   punishments
to which offenders are liable under the
provisions of this Code are—
First—Death;
Secondly—Imprisonment for life;
Thirdly— [* * *];
Fourthly—Imprisonment, which is of two
descriptions, namely: —
(1)   Rigorous,   that   is,   with   hard
labour;
(2) Simple;
Fifthly—Forfeiture of property;
Sixthly—Fine.”
Section 64, which is a part of the same chapter III, reads
thus:
“64.   Sentence   of   imprisonment   for
non­payment of fine­ In every case, of
an offence punishable with imprisonment
as well as fine, in which the offender is
sentenced   to   a   fine,   whether   with   or
without imprisonment,
and   in   every   case   of   an   offence
punishable with imprisonment or fine, or
with fine only, in which the offender is
sentenced to a fine, 
It   shall   be   competent   to   the   Court
which sentences such offender to direct
by   the   sentence   that,   in   default   of
payment  of   the   fine,   the   offender   shall
              Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024
Page 8 of 13

suffer imprisonment for a certain term,
which imprisonment shall be in excess of
any other imprisonment to which he may
have been sentenced or to which he may
be   liable   under   a   commutation   of   a
sentence.” 
                                     (emphasis added)
Sections   4   and   8(2)   of   the   Bharatiya   Nyaya   Sanhita,
2023, are the corresponding Sections. Section 64 of IPC
uses   the   expression   ‘offender   is   sentenced   to   a   fine’.
Moreover,   the fine   is   one   of   the   five   punishments
provided   in   Section   53.   Thus,   it   is   evident   that   the
direction   to   pay   a fine   issued   against   the   convicted
accused is also a sentence. Under Section 64, the Court
is empowered to direct that in default of payment of the
fine, the offender shall suffer imprisonment for a specific
term   as   directed   therein.   Therefore,   there   can   be   a
sentence   of   fine   and   a   further   sentence   in   default   of
compliance with the sentence of fine. 
6.
In paragraph no.36 of the decision of this Court in
the case of  Satyendra Kumar Mehra1,  this Court held
thus:
“36. We, however, make it clear that the
appellate   court   while   exercising   power
under Section 389 CrPC can suspend the
sentence of imprisonment as well as of
              Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024
Page 9 of 13

fine   without   any   condition   or   with
conditions. There are no fetters on the
power   of   the   appellate   court   while
exercising jurisdiction under Section 389
CrPC.   The   appellate   court   could   have
suspended the sentence and fine both or
could have directed for deposit of fine or
part of fine.”
Thus, while convicting an accused, if a direction is issued
against   him   to   pay   a   fine,   such   a   direction   can   be
suspended in the exercise of power under sub­section (1)
of Section 389 of the CrPC.
7.
Coming back to the impugned order, it is clearly
mentioned therein that the respondent's sentence stands
suspended pending the hearing of the appeal subject to
compliance of furnishing personal bond in the sum of
Rs.50,000/­. Perusal of the impugned order shows that
the High Court was conscious of the  fact that as the
embezzlement alleged against the respondent and other
accused persons was to the tune of Rs.46,00,000/­, the
Special Court had sentenced the respondent to pay a fine
of   Rs.95,00,000/­.   The   order   notes   that   the   sentence
imposed on the respondent was of both imprisonment
and payment of fine. Therefore, on a plain reading of the
impugned order, the argument of learned ASG that the
sentence   of   the   fine   was   not   suspended   cannot   be
accepted. 
              Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024
Page 10 of 13

8.
While   suspending   the   sentence,   especially   the
sentence   of   fine,   the   Appellate   Court   can   impose
conditions.   Whether   the   order   of   suspension   of   the
sentence of fine should be conditional or unconditional
depends   on   the   facts   of   each   case   and   especially   the
nature   of   the offence.   For   example,   when   there   is   a
sentence of fine imposed while convicting an accused for
the   offence   punishable   under   Section   138   of   the
Negotiable   Instrument   Act,   1881,   depending   upon   the
facts   of   the   case,   the   Appellate   Court   may   impose   a
condition of depositing the fine amount or part thereof
while suspending the sentence. However, the approach of
the Court may be different in case of offences punishable
under   the   IPC   and   cognate   legislations.   Whenever   a
prayer   is   for   suspension   of   the   sentence   of   fine,   the
Appellate Court must consider whether the sentence of
fine   can   be   suspended   unconditionally   or   subject   to
conditions. However, the Court has to keep in mind that
if a condition of the deposit of an amount is imposed
while suspending the sentence of fine, the same should
not  be  such that it is  impossible  for  the   appellant  to
comply   with   it.   Such   a   condition   may   amount   to
defeating   his   right   of   appeal   against   the order   of
              Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024
Page 11 of 13

conviction, which may also violate his rights under Article
21 of the Constitution. 
9.
In the facts of the case, the total sentence, including
substantive sentence and sentence in default of fine, will
be imprisonment   for   eight   years   and   nine   months.
Considering   the   huge   pendency   of   criminal   appeals
triable   by   a   Single   Judge   and   considering   the   limited
period sentence, it is not possible to find fault with the
impugned   order   passed   way   back   on   29th  September
2016. 
10.
Hence,   there   is   no   reason   to   interfere   with   the
impugned   order,   especially   when   the   respondent   has
deposited a sum of Rs.15,00,000/­ in this Court.   The
deposit of Rs.15,00,000/­ shall be treated as a condition
for   suspending   the   sentence   of   fine.   Accordingly,   the
appeal is disposed of with the above modification. The
amount of Rs.15,00,000/­ deposited by the respondent
has   been   invested   by   the   Registry   in   fixed   deposit.
Immediately after maturity of the existing fixed deposit,
the Registry shall transfer the amount of Rs.15,00,000/­
with interest accrued thereon to the Delhi High Court.
The   High   Court   shall   invest   the   said   amount   in   an
appropriate fixed deposit with any nationalised bank till
the disposal   of   the   criminal   appeal.   Order   regarding
              Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024
Page 12 of 13

disbursal/withdrawal of the amount and interest accrued
thereon shall be passed at the time of final disposal of the
appeal.  
……………………..J.
(Abhay S. Oka)
……………………..J.
(Augustine George Masih)
New Delhi;
October 24, 2024
              Criminal Appeal No. 4277 of 2024
Page 13 of 13