2024 INSC 836
Page 1 of 45 
 
Reportable  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Civil Appeal No. 12110 of 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) 21942 of 2024) 
 
 
Om Rathod   
 
 
 
 
 
 
         …Appellant 
Versus 
 
The Director General of Health Services & Ors.   
       …Respondents 
 
 
Digitally signed by
Chetan Kumar
Date: 2024.11.05
14:33:58 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 45 
 
J U D G M E N T 
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 
Table of Contents 
A. Background ................................................................................................... 3 
B. Pillar to post: scaling the ramparts of courts and hospitals .................... 5 
C. The maze to inclusion: RPWD Act and guidelines .................................. 15 
D. Principle of fair assessment of competence: reasonable 
accommodation and the functional competence model ................................ 19 
E. Building bridges for the nation: principle to practice ............................. 31 
F. 
Conclusions ................................................................................................ 42 
 
 

PART A  
Page 3 of 45 
 
The Stage 
We didn’t go up to the stage 
no one asked us, actually 
only by pointing fingers 
they showed us our place 
and we sat there; 
‘great’, they exclaimed. 
And they went up on the stage 
started narrating us our own sorrows 
but, ‘our sorrows remained ours 
never became theirs…’ 
– Waharu Sonavane1 
A. 
Background 
1. Legal principles and their application often stand at opposite banks of the river. 
The distance between them is manifest before us. The appellant has undergone 
a crash course in navigating the Indian legal system - from statutory 
prescriptions, regulatory stipulations, High Court adjudication, regulatory and 
court ordered disability assessments to the race to justice before this Court. 
Four assessments later - the appellant’s fate now hangs in the balance and this 
Court is asked to interfere to ensure that the balance does not tilt unfavourably 
and fall into disarray. Vital foundational questions have been thrown open for 
debate before this Court. What is expected of an Indian medical graduate? Can 
a person with disability aspire to meet these expectations? Or is their only 
option to resign their fate to a society that places a premium on disabled bodies 
- every step of the way? Academic and practical rigour of the medical profession 
notwithstanding, should the journey of an Indian to navigate their way into the 
 
1 Poem translated from its original version in Marathi – written in the context of the tribal movement 
being co-opted by persons who claim to speak on their behalf while simultaneously othering them. 

PART A  
Page 4 of 45 
 
medical profession be this arduous? Is our collective obsession with disability 
too strong to focus on a person’s ability? Is our nation ready to benefit from the 
talent and experiences of persons with disabilities? Or should we continue to 
sacrifice them at the altar of technicalities? 
2. We answer these questions by rooting them in the web of Constitutional law 
principles, statute, regulatory framework and guidelines which are germane for 
this case. The bone of contention before us turns on the manner in which the 
Disability Assessment Boards must function while certifying the eligibility of a 
candidate for the MBBS course. The appellant has lower limb myopathy - a 
locomotor disability. The appellant has been an academic success. He secured 
an A1 grade in his matriculate (Class X) and intermediary (Class XII) 
examination held by the Central Board of Secondary Education. He aspires, 
now, to enter the medical profession. With this resolve, the appellant appeared 
for the NEET UG Examination 2024 on 5 May 2024 under the unreserved/EWS-
PwD category and secured 601 marks (out of a total marks of 720). This placed 
the appellant at an all India PwD rank of 84 and a State PwD rank of 4. Despite 
having a Disability Certificate dated 24 January 2021 which was to be valid until 
2025 – the appellant submitted himself to the mandatory assessment to get his 
eligibility certified by a designated medical board at AIIMS, Nagpur. Appendix 
"H-1" of the Guidelines regarding admission of students with ‘Specified 
Disabilities’ under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 with respect 
to admission in MBBS Course prescribes that persons having over eighty 
percent disability may be admitted to a medical course on a case by case basis 

PART B 
Page 5 of 45 
 
after assessing their functional competence to navigate academic and practical 
requirements. 
3. The medical board at AIIMS, Nagpur comprised of an Associate Professor in 
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation; an Assistant Professor of Orthopaedics; 
and a Professor who was the Chairman of the Disability Board at AIIMS, 
Nagpur. The Board, by a NEET Disability Certificate dated 13 August 2024, 
opined that the appellant is 88% disabled and is therefore ineligible to pursue 
an MBBS/Dental course.  
B. 
Pillar to post: scaling the ramparts of courts and hospitals 
4. Aggrieved by this, the appellant filed a writ petition under Article 226 of the 
Constitution before the Nagpur bench of the High Court of Judicature at 
Bombay, challenging the NEET Disability Certificate issued by AIIMS, Nagpur. 
The High Court by the impugned judgment dated 3 September 2024 dismissed 
the writ petition and held that the certification of the degree of disability was in 
accordance with prescribed procedures. The appellant challenged the 
impugned judgment by a petition for special leave before this Court under 
Article 136 of the Constitution. 
5. On 3 October 2024, this Court directed the appellant to appear before a  medical 
board at AIIMS, Delhi to reassess him keeping in mind the circular issued by 
the first respondent on 24 March 2022. The circular inter alia made mandatory 
directions to include a doctor or health professional with disability in every 
Disability Assessment Board. The appellant accordingly reported to AIIMS, 
Delhi at 11 AM on 5 October 2024. The five member board submitted its report 

PART B 
Page 6 of 45 
 
dated 9 October 2024 inter alia finding that there were no changes in most 
disability components despite assistive devices. The report also stated that 
there are no clear guidelines available to assess the disability with assistive 
devices. The report states as follows: 
“The candidate was re-assessed with the 
assistive device (single hand crutch & motorised 
scooty). There was minimal to no change in most 
of the components for disability evaluation as per 
the GOI gazette (March 2024) with these 
assistive devices. The possibility of wheelchair 
usage was also explored which might be required 
for better efficiency in ambulation component in 
near future. However, there are no clear 
guidelines available to assess the disability with 
assistive devices as per the Govt. of India gazette 
guideline. Further it is to be noted that safety, 
efficiency and agility of movements are needed to 
independently use the devices and many times 
some manual support is also required which may 
not be available to the candidate at all times and 
may affect the safety of the candidate and the 
patients during the skills based training provided 
in the various setups in the labs and hospitals 
during the MBBS course training. The Board after 
careful evaluations of all possibilities concurs with 
the opinion of the previous medical board held at 
AIIMS Nagpur dated 13.08.2024 that the 
disability is above 80% even with consideration of 
assistive devices and also both upper limbs have 
significant involvement and hence the candidate 
is ineligible to pursue MBBS course.” 
 
 
 
6. The appellant in his affidavit countering the AIIMS, Delhi report has elucidated 
his experience. He submits that he was made to wait for long hours on each 
date when he was asked to appear. He was not given clear directions or 
information about the steps to follow in his assessment. The first stage of the 
examination was conducted by an able bodied doctor from the PMR department 
who was unduly focused on the medical condition of the appellant. He 

PART B 
Page 7 of 45 
 
underwent a large number of tests including climbing stairs and power 
assessment. When the appellant informed the Board that he used (i) a 
wheelchair, (ii) crutches, and (iii) an electric scooter for mobility, he was asked 
why he did not bring his wheelchair. To this, the appellant stated that bringing 
a wheelchair was not logistically possible given that he had travelled from his 
place of residence at Washim in Maharashtra to Delhi by air, on short notice.  
7. The Board did not ask him any questions which would allow the appellant to 
counter the basis for the Board's findings. He was only asked (i) if he would be 
able to undertake his professional duties and (ii) if he could conduct his daily 
activities. He responded positively to both and stated that he had already 
completed his secondary education with the same disability and had managed 
to navigate adequately thus far. Eventually, the AIIMS, Delhi report dated 9 
October 2024 fell into the error of being a mere benchmark evaluation report. 
The report adjudged the disability of the appellant to be 80% - down from 88% 
which was reported by AIIMS, Nagpur on 13 August 2024. While the AIIMS, 
Nagpur report did not evaluate the appellant with assistive devices to assess 
his functional ability, the AIIMS Delhi report did use these devices but ultimately 
opined that there were no government guidelines on the use of such devices.  
8. By an order dated 18 October 2024, this Court noted the statement of AIIMS, 
Delhi on the lack of clear guidelines and observed that the AIIMS report failed 
to evaluate the (i) extent of functional disability of the appellant; and (ii) the 
extent to which the use of assistive devices would have the potential to bring 
the functional disability within the permissible limits in terms of the government 
notification.  

PART B 
Page 8 of 45 
 
9. Relying on the judgment of this Court in Omkar Ramchandra Gond v. Union 
of India,2 we requested Dr Satendra Singh of Infinity Ability to assist the Court 
on whether notwithstanding the quantified disability, the appellant can pursue 
the MBBS degree course. In arriving at his evaluation, Dr Satendra Singh was 
requested to examine the appellant and to have due regard to such assistive 
devises and their potential to assist the appellant to fulfil the requirements of 
the degree course in medicine. 
10. The appellant made himself available at the University College of Medical 
Sciences and Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital, University of Delhi at 10 AM on 19 
October 2024. He was made to undergo functional assessment and was asked 
to demonstrate his competence at the Medical Simulation Centre at the 
Physiology and Pathology central lab. Dr Satendra Singh gauged the 
accommodations necessary for the appellant by interacting with him to 
understand his limitations and barriers. Accordingly, the following premises 
were established in assessing the appellant: 
“Disability: Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy (mobility-
related physical disability) 
Potential Functional limitations: Inability to stand for 
long hours; difficulty in standing suddenly from sitting 
position 
Potential Barriers to learning: Lack of accessible 
spaces 
What is being assessed: Cognitive, psychomotor and 
affective skills and ability to arrive at a diagnosis using 
patient history and examination in line with NMC’s five 
roles of an Indian Medical Graduate in CBME 
Appropriate 
and 
reasonable 
accommodation: 
Given the tight space of clinical environments, 
smaller/compact scooters are a good choice which Om 
is already using. This will allow him to continue with the 
pace and demands of a busy ward/OPD/OT 
independently and is much superior than a manual 
 
2 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2860. 

PART B 
Page 9 of 45 
 
wheelchair which is often dependent on human 
assistance.” 
11. Dr Satendra Singh submitted his report on 20 October 2024. This Court duly 
furnished the report to the second respondent, National Medical Council, on 21 
October 2024 to enable them to formulate their response. The report by Dr 
Satendra Singh outlined the functional disability of the appellant to be an 
inability to stand independently which may prove limiting in clinical rotations in 
surgical settings. The report suggested solutions to enable the appellant in such 
cases. The report further suggested clinical accommodations for the appellant 
to reduce the barriers he may encounter. The report determined the 
accommodations necessary for the appellant to be reasonable and in 
compliance with existing norms. The report formulated four questions and 
answered them as follows: 
“a) Would the proposed accommodation result in a 
failure 
to 
meet 
the 
NMC 
CBME’s 
inherent 
requirements? Not in my opinion 
b) Would the accommodation legitimately jeopardize 
patient safety? Not in my opinion 
c) Would the proposed accommodation result in the 
improper waiver of a core requirement of the CBME? 
Not in my opinion 
d) Would the proposed accommodation pose an undue 
hardship on the medical college (budgets wise)? Not in 
my opinion” 
12. In stark contrast to the approach of the two AIIMS reports, when Dr Satendra 
Singh assessed the appellant on the request of this Court, he carried out a 
functional assessment. The process to determine the clinical accommodation 
for the appellant involved having a frank conversation with him about the 
barriers he faces - physical, educational and attitudinal. The approach adopted 
was not whether the appellant would succeed in a medical college but was 

PART B 
Page 10 of 45 
 
rather to ensure that the appellant has equal opportunity and can start at the 
same level playing field as his classmates. After determining the 
accommodations needed by the appellant through an interview process, some 
questions were posed to him. These questions were as follows: 
"i. How does muscular dystrophy impact you in daily 
life? 
ii. How have you mitigated this impact in an educational 
setting (Class X,XII)? 
iii. What, if anything, exacerbates or worsens your 
disability? 
iv. Do you anticipate needing to receive treatment such 
that you may need to “step out” of the curriculum at 
some point to attend to disability-related needs? 
v. Have you ever seen a clinical setting, or do you 
anticipate additional barriers during the clinical portion 
of your MBBS? (prompted with example competencies) 
vi. Have you reviewed the MBBS curriculum? If not, we 
can do this together to identify any potential barriers. 
vii. Have you ever used assistive technology to mitigate 
the impact of your disability? 
viii. Are you aware of adaptive equipment used to 
navigate the clinical environment. 
ix. What are your biggest concerns about entering the 
MBBS program? 
x. What is your understanding of reasonable 
accommodation which you repeatedly mentioned in 
your affidavit."  
13. Based on the preliminary conversation, the report noted that the appellant is 
concerned about the differential treatment which was meted out to him by 
previous Disability Assessment Boards despite him having successfully 
navigated with the disability for his entire life. The appellant was surprised that 
he was being doubted and his accomplishments questioned without being 
afforded an opportunity with simulation labs and reasonable accommodations.  
14. The appellant was then made to undergo a functional assessment which 
included being given various instruments which he would be required to use in 
his course and profession. The nature of the tasks given to the appellant shows 

PART B 
Page 11 of 45 
 
that they were done in progression, with basic instruments being given first, 
followed by the use of assistive devices to examine his abilities and then being 
tested in other, more complex tasks. The report states as follows: 
"1.4 Functional assessment: Om was first shown how 
to 
record 
blood 
pressure 
using 
a 
mercury 
sphygmomanometer, how to elicit reflexes, and how to 
use a tuning fork to check for deafness. He was then 
asked to demonstrate these skills, which he 
successfully did, showing his eagerness to learn after 
just one demonstration. Next, he was given a foldable 
crutch to test whether it could assist him in standing 
from a seated position, but I observed that he has 
developed his own coping mechanisms to navigate 
physical barriers. This is often an innovative strategy 
used by people with disabilities in environments that 
are not fully accessible. 
 
He was then taken to the laboratory and asked to reach 
examination tables of three different heights. He was 
able to access two of them, demonstrating that an 
adjustable examination table would be a suitable 
clinical accommodation for him. 
 
Afterward, he was taken to our Medical Simulation 
Centre, where he was shown how to perform 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) in a simulated 
real-life scenario of a person lying on the floor after a 
heart attack. After the demonstration, Om sat down on 
the floor to perform CPR. Considering it was his first 
experience in such a lab (his previous two 
assessments did not involve simulation), and to make 
the situation less intimidating, he was first guided on a 
baby mannequin, which he successfully managed. He 
also succeeded in giving an intravenous and 
intramuscular deltoid injection, as well as inserting a 
cannula after a demonstration. Please find some 
pictures below. 
 
For Om, who uses a mobility scooter, the functional 
limitation lies in his inability to stand independently. 
This may pose a challenge during clinical rotations in 
surgical settings, where he would need to be at 
standing height to observe procedures. Potential 
solutions could include using a standing or hydraulic 
wheelchair, providing remote visual access to the 
surgery via a monitor, or arranging for all parties to sit 
during minor surgeries. These accommodations can 
help mitigate barriers without imposing undue burden. 
The disability access appointee or Coordinator of the 
Enabling Unit or Equal Opportunity Cell (as mandated 
by the UGC) at Om's future medical college should 
interact with him to propose these accommodations on 

PART B 
Page 12 of 45 
 
an individual basis before the preclinical, paraclinical, 
and clinical rotations begin." 
15. The report thereafter gave detailed (but not exhaustive) suggestions for clinical 
accommodations for the appellant during his course - for each of the years of 
his education and the mandatory internship. The report finally outlined the 
overall assessment of the appellant and declared him to be suitable, with 
appropriate clinical accommodations, to pursue MBBS. The section of the 
report on overall assessment reads as follows: 
"4. Overall assessment 
4.1 Throughout the assessment, Om’s diagnosed 
muscular dystrophy has not interfered with his learning 
or self-care. He quickly adapted to new situations and 
found interesting and unique ways to complete tasks in 
unfamiliar settings. For example, while initially 
unfamiliar with the full extent of the physical skills 
required in the MBBS program during the simulation lab 
experience, Om expressed confidence that these 
barriers could be easily mitigated using his existing 
compensatory skills and creative approaches to 
procedures. 
 
As an 18-year-old who flew on an airplane for the first 
time while traveling for reassessment in Delhi, Om 
showed remarkable zeal and passion for becoming a 
doctor and is suitable with appropriate clinical 
accommodations to pursue MBBS. 
 
Om should be given opportunities to demonstrate how 
he can successfully navigate clinical environments. 
Students with disabilities should be “Welcomed and 
Valued,” as demonstrated by the General Medical 
Council 
UK's 
guidelines 
on 
reasonable 
accommodation (GMC, UK). The NMC should consider 
implementing similar regulations to guide faculty and 
minimize attitudinal barriers rooted in the medical 
model of disability. In the post-RPDA (Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities Act) era, with the advent of 
technology, we must welcome and recognize the 
competence of students with disabilities. 
 
4.2 Progressive Disability – Is It a Concern? 
Such concerns fall into the realm of ableism. It is “a 
system of assigning value to people’s bodies and 
minds based on societally constructed ideas of 
normalcy, 
productivity, 
desirability, 
intelligence, 
excellence, and fitness. These constructed ideas are 

PART B 
Page 13 of 45 
 
deeply rooted in eugenics, anti-Blackness, misogyny, 
colonialism, imperialism, and capitalism. This systemic 
oppression 
that leads 
to 
people 
and 
society 
determining people’s value based on their culture, age, 
language, appearance, religion, birth or living place, 
“health/wellness”, and/or their ability to satisfactorily 
re/produce, “excel” and “behave.” You do not have to 
be disabled to experience ableism” (Lewis, 2022).  
 
In Iyer Seetharaman Venugopalan vs. Union of India, 
the Bombay High Court initially denied an MD in 
Psychiatry to a blind doctor who had retinitis 
pigmentosa and progressively lost his vision. However, 
thanks to the intervention of the Supreme Court 
under Hon’ble CJI, he was allowed to pursue 
Psychiatry and is now in his final year, doing 
successfully. Similarly, Dr. Sharad Philip, who also 
experienced progressive vision loss, successfully 
completed his MD in Psychiatry from NIMHANS 
Bangalore and is now a faculty member at AIIMS 
Guwahati. 
 
Om can similarly choose to either remain a general 
MBBS doctor or pursue a specialty that is less 
physically demanding. Only he is best placed to take 
this decision after completing MBBS. We should not 
restrict a bright student on the basis of 
assumptions and ableist beliefs." 
16. Accordingly, the appellant was assessed to be eligible for pursuing the MBBS 
course with assistive devices. The second respondent has fairly accepted the 
eligibility of the appellant and has only joined issue with the fact that the 
assessment of candidate by a doctor must comply with the rules formulated 
under the statutory framework. These rules require the assessing doctor to be 
a domain expert in disabilities. In the present case this Court requested Dr 
Satendra Singh to assess the appellant which shall not be a precedent. To that 
extent the submission of the second respondent is accepted. We may note that 
this Court was constrained to order a functional competency test due to the 
failure of the previous two Boards to apply the legally permissible standard. The 
appellant shall not be made to undergo any further assessments as part of his 
admission to the MBBS course. On 25 October 2024 this Court granted leave 

PART B 
Page 14 of 45 
 
and directed that the appellant be permitted to participate in the ongoing 
counselling process arising out of NEET UG 2024.  
17. Unfortunately, this run hardly obviates further labour. The appellant finds 
himself re-entering the NEET counselling process after a lapse of valuable time. 
He was allocated a seat at the Dr Shankarrao Chavan Government Medical 
College, Nanded in the first and second rounds of All India Level counselling. 
Now, stray vacancies for the category of persons with disabilities at the All India 
Level are available in only nine colleges, none of which are in the home State 
of the appellant – Maharashtra. The appellant submits that none of the nine 
colleges are compliant with accessibility norms and adequate support systems 
necessary for him to enjoy a level playing field. The appellant now prays that 
this Court create a seat for him at the college which he was allocated in the 
initial rounds of counselling or for that matter at any college in Maharashtra. The 
run of the appellant from Washim to Nagpur and Delhi accompanied by several 
assessments now stands the chance of being fruitless. The appellant prays that 
this Court exercises its power to do complete justice under Article 142 of the 
Constitution. Additionally, the appellant prays that this Court may issue 
directives on the manner in which the grievances of exclusion of disabled 
candidates is to be considered inter alia by courts.  
 
 
 

PART C 
Page 15 of 45 
 
C. 
The maze to inclusion: RPWD Act and guidelines 
18.  Section 323 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 20164 stipulates that 
all Government and Government aided institutions of higher learning shall 
reserve not less than five percent of seats for persons with benchmark disability. 
The enactment of the RPWD Act in 2016 marked a paradigm shift in disability 
law in India from charity based to a rights based approach. Accordingly, the 
erstwhile Medical Council of India5 formulated guidelines on admission of 
persons with specific disability in MBBS courses. The Government of India 
approved the proposal of the committee on 28 January 2019 and issued a 
notification in the gazette on 5 February 2019.  
19. The report stipulated the guidelines in Appendix “H” which laid down six 
categories of locomotor disabilities including muscular dystrophy. All persons 
with a locomotor disability above eighty percent were rendered ineligible for 
medical courses. Appendix “H” was substituted by Appendix “H-1” on 13 May 
2019. The amendment allowed persons with more than eighty percent 
locomotor disabilities to pursue medical courses on a case to case basis. The 
new appendix states as follows: 
 
“Persons with more than 80% disability may also be 
allowed on case to case basis and their functional 
competency will be determined with the aid of 
assistive devices, if it is being used, to see if it is 
brought below 80% and whether they possess 
 
3 “32. Reservation in higher educational institutions.—(1) All Government institutions of higher 
education and other higher education institutions receiving aid from the Government shall reserve not 
less than five per cent. seats for persons with benchmark disabilities. 
(2) The persons with benchmark disabilities shall be given an upper age relaxation of five years for 
admission in institutions of higher education.” 
4 "RPWD Act" 
5 "MCI" 

PART C 
Page 16 of 45 
 
sufficient motor ability as required to pursue and 
complete the course satisfactorily.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
 
20. The amended guidelines brought about a welcome change by eschewing from 
a purely benchmark model to a functional ability model. For candidates with 
more than eighty percent locomotor disability, the guidelines allow their 
functional competency to be determined using assistive devices to see if it can 
be brought below 80%. The second respondent has submitted that a new 
committee will be constituted to recommend new guidelines for admission of 
persons with disabilities into medical courses.  
21. The report of the MCI (the erstwhile version of the second respondent) which 
was the basis of the existing guidelines evidently found itself working in the 
remnants of the pre-RPWD Act legal regime. Besides making archaic 
observations requiring persons with disabilities to ‘introspect and assess 
themselves whether they are likely to meet MCI standards and outcomes’ the 
guidelines also noted the definition of reasonable accommodation in Section 
2(y)6 of the RPWD Act.  The reference was only to further state that the standard 
of competence cannot be lowered in the name of accommodation. The 
observations, made without specific context on the standard or the 
accommodation in question, states as follows: 
“MCI is aware of this provision and respects it. 
However, MCI cannot agree to enforce reasonable 
accommodation that would alter or lower the standard 
of competence – which exists to protect patients – that 
is required. Such an accommodation, if granted would 
be ‘unreasonable’, and not reasonable. Moreover, in 
some cases, even with reasonable accommodation, it 
 
6 “(y) “reasonable accommodation” means necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments, 
without imposing a disproportionate or undue burden in a particular case, to ensure to persons with 
disabilities the enjoyment or exercise of rights equally with others;” 

PART C 
Page 17 of 45 
 
may not be possible for every disabled medical student 
to successfully and safely undertake all stages of 
medical education and training ” 
 
 
22. From promoting self-rejection of disabled medical aspirants to assuming that 
their accommodations would lower the standard of competence and would 
regardless be fruitless – the guidelines have charted their way into disrepute. 
Vitally, the resistance to alter the standard in a framework that has historically 
effaced a marginalised group – namely disabled persons other than in the 
capacity of a patient – is antithetical to any rights based approach to disability 
law. Many other issues of critical importance arise from these guidelines which 
are not germane to evaluate the case before us but may be open for an 
appropriate proceeding.7 The current guidelines allow persons with more than 
eight percent locomotor disability to be admitted to MBBS course on a case by 
case basis after a functional competency to see whether their disability can be 
'brought below 80%.' Before proceeding to analyse this guideline, it is essential 
that we clarify the phrase ‘brought below 80%’.  
23. The intention of the guideline in using the term 'brought below 80%' is ostensibly 
to mean that the functional assessment shall evaluate if the person with 
disability can perform the tasks which they are expected to perform as a student 
and a practitioner. The assumption in using the phrase 'below 80%' defeats the 
purpose of the guideline which is to allow candidates into the MBBS course on 
a case by case basis. Bodies are not biological parts put together – each to 
serve a pre-determined role. They are alive – with thoughts, feelings, dreams 
 
7 See Singh S, Medical Council of India’s new guidelines on admission of persons with specified 
disabilities: Unfair, discriminatory and unlawful. Indian J Med Ethics. 2019 Jan-Mar; 4(1) NS: 29-34. 
DOI: 10.20529/IJME.2018.064. 
 

PART C 
Page 18 of 45 
 
and aspirations. All bodies – abled and disabled – are guaranteed dignity under 
the Constitution. A person with disability has to navigate the rigours of a society 
which was modelled on the premise of their absence. The disability of a person 
is a reflection on the inaccessibility of the society and not a comment upon the 
individual. A person does not overcome disability but learns to navigate life with 
it. Disability is not a thing to be overcome or brought down, but an attribute to 
be acknowledged and accommodated. The use of the term ‘brought below 
80%,’ as well intentioned as it may be, fails at this foundational premise. One 
cannot assume that all persons with more than 80% locomotor disability are 
incompetent to pursue medicine when their functional abilities have not been 
assessed. The medical model of disability apparent in the phrase must give way 
to a social model of disability which takes into account the variety of 
experiences and outcomes which persons with disabilities have when they 
interact with different kinds of societies and accommodations. 
24. In Nipun Malhotra v. Sony Pictures,8 this Court opined that words cultivate 
institutional discrimination and that the language of our discourse ought to be 
inclusive rather than alienating. When it comes to rights – language matters. 
Words may not always adequately reflect the intention of the drafter. Some 
words may be used unwittingly, without knowledge of their harmful 
consequences. Nevertheless, these words influence the thinking of others who 
hear them. Words are the tools one deploys to formulate thoughts. An 
expansive vocabulary allows people to think and articulate their thoughts better. 
When we use appropriate and sensitive language, we aspire for the quality of 
 
8 2024 INSC 465, para 74. 

PART D 
Page 19 of 45 
 
our thought to be broadened and evolve towards being emancipatory and 
inclusive.  
D. 
Principle 
of 
fair 
assessment 
of 
competence: 
reasonable 
accommodation and the functional competence model 
25. The guidelines (Appendix “H-1”) stipulate that the functional competence of an 
aspirant with a locomotor disability above eighty percent may be assessed with 
the help of assistive devices. A purposive interpretation of this guideline requires 
us to interpret it in light of the legislative intent of the governing statute, namely, 
the RPWD Act. The RPWD Act is a watershed legislation for disability rights in 
India. It honours India’s commitment at the international level under the 
Convention on Rights of Persons with Disability. The preamble to the RPWD Act 
states that: 
“…AND WHEREAS the aforesaid Convention lays 
down the following principles for the empowerment of 
persons with disabilities,–  
(a) respect for inherent dignity, individual autonomy 
including the freedom to make one’s own choices, 
and independence of persons; 
(b) non-discrimination; 
(c) full and effective participation and inclusion in 
society; 
(d) respect for difference and acceptance of persons 
with disabilities as part of human diversity and 
humanity; 
(e) equality of opportunity; 
(f) accessibility; 
(g) equality between men and women; 
(h) respect for the evolving capacities of children with 
disabilities and respect for the right of children with 
disabilities to preserve their identities;..." 
 

PART D 
Page 20 of 45 
 
26. The Act harmonises the Constitutional promise of full citizenship with action - 
by creating a framework in which persons with disabilities may translate their 
rights into remedies. To establish a bed of rights, Section 2 of the Act defines 
and acknowledges barriers,9 discrimination,10 inclusive education11 and 
reasonable accommodation.12 Section 3 of the Act affords the right to equality 
and non-discrimination for persons with disabilities. The requirement of 
assessing the functional competence of a medical aspirant with over eighty 
percent locomotor disability recognises that assessment must be done on a 
case to case basis. The method of assessment by designated Disability 
Assessment Boards must therefore reflect the approach and intent of the legal 
framework within which the Boards operate. An assessment for functional 
competency entails an analysis of the skill set which a person with disability 
must learn in order to compete and pursue the medical course. This is a marked 
difference from requiring a specific manner which a candidate must use to 
achieve the outcome. For example, a functional competency model would 
require a candidate to effectively communicate with patients but would not 
require them to have speech or intact hands. By focusing on the end points, the 
 
9 "(c) “barrier” means any factor including communicational, cultural, economic, environmental, 
institutional, political, social, attitudinal or structural factors which hampers the full and effective 
participation of persons with disabilities in society;" 
10 "(h) “discrimination” in relation to disability, means any distinction, exclusion, restriction on the basis 
of disability which is the purpose or effect of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise 
on an equal basis with others of all human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, 
social, cultural, civil or any other field and includes all forms of discrimination and denial of reasonable 
accommodation;" 
11 "(m) “inclusive education” means a system of education wherein students with and without disability 
learn together and the system of teaching and learning is suitably adapted to meet the learning needs 
of different types of students with disabilities;" 
12 "(y) “reasonable accommodation” means necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments, 
without imposing a disproportionate or undue burden in a particular case, to ensure to persons with 
disabilities the enjoyment or exercise of rights equally with others;" 

PART D 
Page 21 of 45 
 
approach avoids any ableism to seep into the assessment and avoids reifying 
that there is one and only one manner to achieve desired outcomes.  
27. A failure to create a conducive environment is a failure to provide reasonable 
accommodation.13 Section 2(h) of the RPWD Act defines discrimination in the 
context of disability as "any distinction, exclusion, restriction on the basis of 
disability which has the purpose or effect of impairing or nullifying the 
recognition, enjoyment or exercise on an equal basis with others of all human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil 
or any other field and includes all forms of discrimination and denial of 
reasonable accommodation." The denial of reasonable accommodation is 
expressly recognised as discrimination under the RPWD Act. For the proper 
realisation of reasonable accommodation, a person with disability must be 
identified using correct parameters and thereafter the accommodations 
necessary have to be determined on a case by case basis.  
28. Justice KV Viswanathan speaking for this Court in Omkar Gond (supra) has 
applied a purposive interpretation to the guidelines (Appendix "H-1") in the 
context of a medical aspirant with dialectic incapacity. This Court held that the 
principle of reasonable accommodation in Section 2(y) of the RPWD Act read 
with Article 41 of the Constitution necessarily means that (i) a person cannot be 
disqualified merely on the basis of a benchmark quantification. Such a criteria 
would be unconstitutional for being overbroad; (ii) the Disability Assessment 
Board must not act as monotonous automations looking at the quantified 
disability and disqualifying candidates. The Board must examine if the 
 
13 Ravinder Kumar Dhariwal v. Union of India, (2023) 2 SCC 209. 

PART D 
Page 22 of 45 
 
candidate can pursue the course with their disability; and (iii) in doing so, the 
Board is not merely obliged to provide assistive devices and other substances 
which will help the candidate. The true role of the Board is to assess the 
competence of a candidate. 
29. The principle of reasonable accommodation is not only statutorily prescribed 
but also rooted in the fundamental rights guaranteed to persons with disabilities 
under Part III of the Constitution. Reasonable accommodation is a fundamental 
right. It is a gateway right for persons with disabilities to enjoy all the other rights 
enshrined in the Constitution and the law. Without the gateway right of 
reasonable accommodation, a person with disability is forced to navigate in a 
world which excludes them by design. It strikes a fatal blow to their ability to 
make life choices and pursue opportunities. From mundane tasks of daily life to 
actions undertaken to realise personal and professional aspirations - all are 
throttled when reasonable accommodations are denied. Reasonable 
accommodation is a facet of substantive equality and its failure constitutes 
discrimination. In Vikash Kumar v. UPSC,14 this Court adjudicated on whether 
a person with a writer's cramp is entitled to a scribe for writing the examination. 
Allowing the use of a scribe, this Court held that the benchmark standard can 
only be applied where expressly stipulated. Section 2(s) of the RPWD Act 
defines a person with disability as a person with long term physical, mental, 
intellectual or sensory impairment which, in interaction with barriers, hinders 
their full and effective participation in society equally with others. Therefore, a 
person - to be considered as a person with disability - does not have to qualify 
 
14 (2021) 5 SCC 370.  

PART D 
Page 23 of 45 
 
any benchmark. The principle that the rights and entitlements cannot be 
constricted by adopting a benchmark as a condition precedent was also upheld 
by this Court in Avni Prakash v. NTA.15 
30. Section 3 of the RPWD Act affords persons with disabilities a right to equality 
and non-discrimination. In Vikash Kumar (supra) this Court held that Section 
3 casts an affirmative obligation on the Government and private entities to take 
steps to ensure reasonable accommodation and utilize the capacity of persons 
with disabilities by providing an appropriate environment. There is a positive 
obligation to realise the inclusive premise in the concept of reasonable 
accommodation. This includes the duty to create an environment conducive for 
the development of persons with disabilities. This Court has held that: 
"... The accommodation which the law mandates is 
‘reasonable’ because it has to be tailored to the 
requirements of each condition of disability. The 
expectations which every disabled person has are 
unique to the nature of the disability and the character 
of the impediments which are encountered as its 
consequence. 
... 
48. Failure to meet the individual needs of every 
disabled person will breach the norm of reasonable 
accommodation. Flexibility in answering individual 
needs and requirements is essential to reasonable 
accommodation. 
The 
principle 
of 
reasonable 
accommodation must also account for the fact that 
disability based discrimination is intersectional in 
nature. The intersectional features arise in particular 
contexts due to the presence of multiple disabilities and 
multiple consequences arising from disability. Disability 
therefore cannot be truly understood by regarding it as 
unidimensional." 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
15 (2023) 2 SCC 286. 

PART D 
Page 24 of 45 
 
31. In Ravinder Kumar Dhariwal v. Union of India,16 while dealing with a case of 
a CRPF officer with a mental health condition, this Court had the opportunity to 
opine that disability is a social construct. Its manifestation is contingent on the 
manner in which it interacts with inter alia social, economic and historical 
factors. A one-size-fits-all approach cannot be adopted in assessing disability. 
Disability is not a universal but an individualistic conception based on the 
impairments that a person has along with the barriers they face. Since the 
barriers that every person faces are personal to their interpersonal and 
structural surroundings - a general observation of permissible behaviour cannot 
be made.  
32. Central to the principles of reasonable accommodation and the individualized 
experience of disability is the right to access legal protections without undue 
mental hardship. If persons with disabilities must repeatedly turn to the courts 
to correct the missteps of authorities, then the rights recognized by this Court 
and the RPWD Act risk becoming hollow assurances. For every person who 
has the awareness or ability to move this Court there are numerous others who 
suffer in silence. In the present case, the appellant was subjected to protracted 
and mentally exhausting assessments that failed to apply the correct standards, 
leading to a declaration of ineligibility. His first journey by air was not for leisure 
or education but to undergo a medical assessment in Delhi by an order of this 
Court. In this process, valuable time was lost, and the appellant faced intrusive 
and irrelevant questioning. Persons with disabilities often confront systemic 
failures that engender a deep sense of disappointment - a disappointment that 
 
16 (2023) 2 SCC 209. 

PART D 
Page 25 of 45 
 
reflects the frequency and predictability with which the system fails them. Those 
with disabilities who aspire to succeed must not only plan meticulously but also 
brace themselves for the barriers they will inevitably face due to their 
disabilities. 
33. For many persons with disabilities, the stress of medical visits - the frequent 
trips to hospitals, the constant readiness to attend appointments, the long waits, 
the uncertainty of a doctor's availability, and the anxiety over the results - forms 
part of their lived reality. At the very least, they deserve a process and an 
outcome that is fair and reasoned. The mental toll which processes before a 
medical board has on people is recognised by this Court. In A (Mother of X) v. 
State of Maharashtra,17 this Court had the opportunity to opine on the shifting 
stances of medical boards which are often observed in cases relating to medical 
termination of pregnancy. This Court held that the lack of application of proper 
standards, simpliciter recantation of statutory provision and changes in opinions 
cause undue mental trauma to the pregnant person. In the backdrop of the fear 
of prosecution which many registered medical practitioners (RMP) have, this 
Court emphasised on the role of medical experts to ensure that the fundamental 
rights of persons before them is not compromised. The Court held as follows: 
"...The opinion of the RMP is decisive in matters of 
termination of pregnancy under the MTP Act. The 
purpose of the opinion of the RMP borrows from the 
legislative intent of the MTP Act which is to protect the 
health of a pregnant person and facilitate safe, 
hygienic, and legal abortion. The right to abortion is a 
concomitant 
right 
of 
dignity, 
autonomy 
and 
reproductive choice. This right is guaranteed under 
Article 21 of the Constitution. The decision to terminate 
pregnancy is deeply personal for any person. The 
choice exercised by a pregnant person is not merely 
 
17 2024 INSC 371. 

PART D 
Page 26 of 45 
 
about their reproductive freedom but also about their 
agency as recognised by this court in X v. State (NCT 
of Delhi). It is therefore imperative that the 
fundamental right of a pregnant person is not 
compromised for reasons other than to protect the 
physical and mental health of the pregnant person.  
 
... 
 
23. The opinion of the RMP or the medical board, as 
the case may be, is indispensable under the scheme of 
the MTP Act. This inadvertently gives the power to 
the RMP or the medical board to stand in the way 
of a pregnant person exercising their choice to 
terminate the pregnancy. When there is fear or 
apprehension in the mind of the RMP or the medical 
board it directly jeopardises the fundamental freedoms 
of 
pregnant 
persons 
guaranteed 
under 
the 
Constitution...." 
(emphasis supplied) 
34. Therefore, this Court has in the past opined on the pattern of conduct in medical 
boards and sought to align it with legal and Constitutional guarantees so as not 
to render the fundamental rights of persons before these boards nugatory. In 
Bambhaniya Sagar Vashrambhai v. Union of India,18 this Court has held that 
Disability Assessment Boards must not adopt the approach of a recluse by 
confining themselves to only quantifying the disability of a candidate. In that 
case, the medical board had reported an unreasoned opinion that the candidate 
was ineligible to continue his MBBS course on account of being more than 80% 
disabled. Like in A (Mother of X) (supra), the Court in Bambhaniya (supra) 
also emphasised the need for elaborate reasons by the medical board while 
reporting their opinions.  
35. In Purswani Ashutosh v. Union of India,19 this Court was deciding if a medical 
aspirant who had appeared for the NEET UG Exam 2018 was eligible for the 
 
18 WP (C) 856 of 2023. 
19 (2019) 14 SCC 422. 

PART D 
Page 27 of 45 
 
reservation earmarked for persons with disabilities. Despite having low vision 
impairment - the Medical Board had opined that the petitioner in that case was 
ineligible for reservation. While rejecting the opinion of the committee, this Court 
held that a medical board cannot be allowed to override the statutory mandate 
of providing reservation to persons with disabilities. No committee has primacy 
over the law. We must emphasize that the opinions of medical boards and 
committees are not only required to adhere to legal standards but must also 
embody core principles of the rule of law within their processes. This Court, 
following a consistent line of precedent, has underscored the need for reasoned 
and transparent decisions by such boards, given the profound impact these 
opinions have on the life trajectory of individuals before them.  
36. At its core, the rule of law demands predictable rules, equitable application, 
unbiased adjudication and fair, transparent treatment of individuals. In cases of 
assessment, this entails informing individuals about the procedures, standards, 
tools, and all pertinent aspects of the assessment in advance. Such 
transparency is essential to avoid any arbitrary uncertainty arising from obscure 
or inconsistent procedures. The procedures must be inherently fair and bear a 
rational and cogent nexus with the purpose which is sought to be achieved. A 
committee’s role goes beyond mere quantification of disability; disability is a 
factual condition. The key question for a Disability Assessment Board is 
whether an individual with a disability, aided by modern scientific tools and 
devices, can enter the MBBS program. Put differently, the board must assess 
whether it is infeasible for the candidate to pursue a medical career with their 
disability. 

PART D 
Page 28 of 45 
 
37. Appendix "H-1" stipulates that assessments, particularly for individuals with 
locomotor disabilities exceeding 80%, should focus on evaluating functional 
competence. This functional competency test serves two critical purposes. 
First, it emphasizes the abilities of the person with a disability, assessing their 
capability rather than their limitations. Second, it mandates an evaluation rooted 
in practical relevance, aligning the candidate’s abilities with the functional 
requirements of the MBBS curriculum. Mere quantification of disability is 
insufficient and fails to address the necessary criteria, a position this Court has 
consistently upheld as unsatisfactory in such cases.20 
38. At this point, it is imperative to deal with the holding of this Court in Vidhi 
Himmat Katariya v. Union of India.21 In that case, persons with disabilities 
who had appeared for the NEET UG Exam 2019 had moved this Court against 
their disqualification by the Medical Board. Appendix "H" had been issued 
midway through the process for admitting candidates from the NEET UG 2019. 
The primary contention of the petitioners was that since the new guidelines 
were issued in the middle of the admission process, they must not apply to the 
ongoing process. The petitioners prayed to be tested against the rules as they 
existed at the time of the application process for the examination, namely, the 
MCI guidelines of 2017. On this count, the Court ruled against the petitioners. 
The demurrer argument of the petitioners was that they have not been tested 
on relevant parameters. This Court while rejecting the argument noted that the 
petitioners were disqualified for not meeting the eligibility criteria of having "both 
 
20 Omkar Gond v. Union of India, (2024) SCC OnLine SC 2401; Vikash Kumar v. UPSC, (2021) 5 SCC 
370; Bambhaniya Sagar Vasharambhai v. Union of India, WP (C) 856 of 2023. 
21 (2019) 10 SCC 20. 

PART D 
Page 29 of 45 
 
hands intact, with intact sensation, sufficient strength and range of motion." 
Accordingly, the Court refused to sit in appeal over the expert body's opinion. 
The judgment of the Court in Vidhi Himmat Katariya (supra) was specific to 
the facts of that case and did not involve any question of interpretation or 
Constitutional analysis. The Court was not examining any criteria and did not 
scrutinise the guidelines to inspect their validity. The Court did not have the 
benefit of looking at the firm roots which reasonable accommodation has grown 
within the fold of the Constitution. Further, the judgments of this Court in Vikash 
Kumar (supra), Avni Prakash (supra), Ravinder Dhariwal (supra) and Omkar 
Gond (supra) were not available to the Court while dealing with the case of 
Vidhi Himmat Katariya (supra). Therefore, the opinion in Vidhi Himmat 
Katariya (supra) is inapplicable.  
39. Courts are not expert bodies in matters of medicine. The competent authority 
to adjudge the eligibility of a person to pursue a medical course is the Disability 
Assessment Board. However, courts have the jurisdiction to ensure that the 
manner in which the Board proceeds and functions is in compliance with 
established principles of law. Ultimately, the Court will have to rely on the 
opinion of the Board to adjudicate the legal remedies of a person with disability. 
The interference of Courts is not to supplant its opinion for that of the experts 
but to ensure that a holistic evaluation of competence is conducted and that no 
person’s career is set at naught with the stroke of a pen. 
40. The Courts cannot be stupefied into inaction by the lack of adequate framework 
or expertise when questions of fundamental rights emerge. No person forfeits 
their claim to education or other pursuits of life on account of their disability. The 

PART D 
Page 30 of 45 
 
flurry of cases concerning medical aspirants with disability which has come 
before this Court shows that the overarching issue is a sense of over 
medicalization of disabled bodies by the Assessment Boards. The approach 
often taken, due to inertia or unwittingly, is to assume that a person with 
disability may not be eligible for pursuing the course and then to put the 
candidates under tests to prove the assumption. The approach focuses more 
on the disability of a person than their ability. This turns the principle of 
reasonable accommodation on its head. The question instead that the Board 
ought to ask itself is this - what measures can be taken to ensure that the 
candidate with disability can start their MBBS course on an equal footing with 
their prospective classmates? The change in question brings a change in 
perspective. The only negative answer to the question would be that - in line 
with contemporary scientific advancements, no devices or accommodations 
can enable the person with disability before them to compete at a level playing 
field. Courts must ensure that the sanctity of the principles in the RPWD Act 
and in the Constitution are not violated by the conduct or the outcome of the 
assessment.  
 
 
 
 

PART E 
Page 31 of 45 
 
E. 
Building bridges for the nation: principle to practice 
“But it taught me, at a very early age, that most things are possible when you 
assume problems can be solved.” 
― Judith Heumann22 
(regarded as the mother of the disability rights movement) 
41. We started by noting that the principle and application of law have stood at 
opposite banks of the river. The true mandate of the law is to be an agent of 
inclusion and an abettor and executor of justice. Law reflects the outlook of its 
wielder. A parochial legal system will create laws which result in maldistribution 
of life chances and opportunities. In India, we have adopted an emancipatory 
Constitution premised on the fundamental virtues of equal dignity and access. 
The wielder of the law, therefore, is rooted in a progressive grundnorm which 
seeks to eschew from societal prejudices and biases. 
42. The window to these progressive virtues is envisioned in the preamble to the 
Constitution. The preamble, along with justice, liberty and equality, seeks to 
secure to all citizens - "FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and 
the unity and integrity of the Nation." The fundamental postulate of dignity which 
inheres in all people is intrinsic to the idea of fraternity and national integration. 
Fraternity, far from being mere collegiality among citizens, imagines a holistic 
sharing of goals and aspirations. It recognizes that to progress together we 
must join forces in our mutual advancement and emancipation. The framing of 
 
22 Judith Heumann & Kristen Joiner (2020). Being Heumann: An Unrepentant Memoir of a Disability 
Rights Activist. Beacon Press : Boston, Massachusetts. 

PART E 
Page 32 of 45 
 
the preambular virtue of fraternity identifies the dignity of all individuals as a pre-
condition. Dignity of the individual is assured when they are given equal 
opportunity and the freedom to contribute to the society - shoulder to shoulder 
with fellow citizens.  
43. No nation can truly progress until all her people realize a stake in their collective 
outcome. In one sense discrimination excludes the aggrieved from the 
collective imagination of the nation. In another sense the nation is deprived of 
the expertise and brilliance of those who are discriminated. We aspire to have 
institutions and systems which reflect the rich diversity of our country. The 
aspiration is one rooted in our commitment to the nation. Diverse institutions 
are vital to ensure the governance of a diverse nation. When persons with 
disabilities are discriminated against, it not only affects their individual 
aspirations and dignity - it strikes a blow to the entire nation and the collective 
goal of integration and fraternity. 
44. Justice PB Sawant concurring with the decision of the nine-Judge bench of this 
Court in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India,23 has opined that inequality ill-
favours fraternity. Without equality of opportunity there can be no fraternity. 
Justice Sawant has articulated his holding as follows: 
"411. The aim of any civilised society should be to 
secure dignity to every individual. There cannot be 
dignity without equality of status and opportunity. 
The absence of equal opportunities in any walk of 
social life is a denial of equal status and equal 
participation in the affairs of the society and, therefore, 
of its equal membership. The dignity of the individual is 
dented in direct proportion to his deprivation of the 
equal access to social means. The democratic 
foundations are missing when equal opportunity to 
grow, govern, and give one's best to the society is 
 
23 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217. 

PART E 
Page 33 of 45 
 
denied to a sizeable section of the society. The 
deprivation of the opportunities may be direct or indirect 
as when the wherewithals to avail of them are denied. 
Nevertheless, the consequences are as potent. 
 
412. Inequality ill-favours fraternity, and unity 
remains a dream without fraternity. The goal 
enumerated in the Preamble of the Constitution, of 
fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual and 
the unity and integrity of the nation must, therefore, 
remain unattainable so long as the equality of 
opportunity is not ensured to all. 
 
413. Likewise, the social and political justice pledged 
by the Preamble of the Constitution to be secured to all 
citizens, will remain a myth unless first economic justice 
is guaranteed to all. The liberty of thought and 
expression also will remain on paper in the face of 
economic deprivations. A remunerative occupation 
is a means not only of economic upliftment but also 
of instilling in the individual self-assurance, self-
esteem and self-worthiness. It also accords him a 
status and a dignity as an independent and useful 
member of the society. It enables him to participate 
in the affairs of the society without dependence on, 
or domination by, others, and on an equal plane 
depending 
upon 
the 
nature, 
security 
and 
remuneration of the occupation. Employment is an 
important and by far the dominant remunerative 
occupation, and when it is with the Government, semi-
Government or Government-controlled organisation, it 
has an added edge. It is coupled with power and 
prestige of varying degrees and nature, depending 
upon the establishment and the post. The employment 
under the State, by itself, may, many times help 
achieve the triple goal of social, economic and political 
justice. 
(emphasis supplied) 
45. Dr Martin Luther King Jr has famously remarked that "injustice anywhere is a 
threat to justice everywhere." When we allow injustice to occur, we normalize 
the idea that fundamental rights and freedoms are violable. The inviolability of 
our collective commitment is weakened. Discrimination cracks open a wedge in 
the fabric of the society - it violates the Constitution and erodes the humanity of 
the person discriminated against. The discrimination can manifest directly or 
indirectly. Its manifestation eats into our commitment to each other and of the 

PART E 
Page 34 of 45 
 
State to the people. In Prathvi Raj Chauhan v. Union of India,24 a three-Judge 
Bench of this Court while dealing with the validity of the Scheduled Castes and 
the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act 1989 has opined that the 
Constitution is also a pact between the people of India. It is a promise of 
oneness and equality. The Court opined as follows: 
"15. The Constitution of India is … a pact between 
people, about the relationships that they guarantee to 
each other (apart from the guarantee of liberties vis-à-
vis the State) in what was a society riven along caste 
and sectarian divisions. That is why the preambular 
assurance that the republic would be one which 
guarantees to its people liberties, dignity, equality 
of status and opportunity and fraternity. 
 
16. It is this idea of India, — a promise of oneness of 
and for, all people, regardless of caste, gender, place 
of birth, religion and other divisions that Part III 
articulates in four salient provisions : Article 15, Article 
17, Article 23 and Article 24. The idea of fraternity 
occupying as crucial a place in the scheme of our 
nation's consciousness and polity, is one of the lesser 
explored areas in the constitutional discourse of this 
Court. The fraternity assured by the Preamble is not 
merely a declaration of a ritual handshake or cordiality 
between communities that are diverse and have 
occupied different spaces : it is far more. …" 
46. What the movement for disability justice shares with other social justice 
movements - such as the anti-caste movement, feminism and queer and trans 
justice - is that they call into question the fundamental arrangement of a society 
which has created prejudicial structures. Inaccessibility and non-inclusion are 
taken as suspect categories to question the prevalent social order. In doing so 
these movements invite us to contribute to the national goal of fraternity and 
integration. Far from being interruptive in the national journey - calls for equal 
access and equal justice postulate a disruption in the order of discrimination 
 
24 (2020) 4 SCC 727. 

PART E 
Page 35 of 45 
 
and prejudices so that we may carry on the journey of national progress. They 
do not only champion the group interest of a certain class of citizens but instead 
advocate for a larger vision of a justice oriented society. A society where 
discrimination and exclusion are addressed and eliminated will create a just and 
equitable system for all persons regardless of their identities. To be 
intersectional is to see the common goals across vectors of identities by 
eliminating systems of discrimination. It is a call to eschew from simplistic 
identity reductionism and to imagine meaningful remedies for marginalised 
groups and persons. It calls for a world with equity and justice where our 
uniqueness forms part of benign differences among people and lends vibrance 
to our diversity. The Constitution enables this project of fraternity by 
guaranteeing rights to life, dignity, freedom, equality and non-discrimination 
inter alia under Articles 21, 19, 14, and 15. 
47. When reasonable accommodation is denied to a person with disability, it 
amounts to discrimination and violates the fundamental rights of the aggrieved 
person and the preambular virtue of fraternity along with justice, liberty and 
equality. Persons with disability are not objects of pity or charity but an integral 
part of our society and nation. The advancement of rights for persons with 
disabilities is a national project along with eradication of all forms of 
discrimination. A component of this project is the inclusion of persons with 
disabilities in all pursuits of life.  
48. In Vikash Kumar (supra) this Court opined that the most significant loser of a 
rigid inaccessible system is the system itself. The Court resonated the idea of 

PART E 
Page 36 of 45 
 
a generation of persons with disabilities who take it as their birthright to access 
the full panoply of entitlements. This Court has held as follows: 
"81. When competent persons with disabilities are 
unable to realise their full potential due to the barriers 
posed in their path, our society suffers, as much, if not 
more, as do the disabled people involved. In their 
blooming and blossoming, we all bloom and blossom. 
The most significant loser as a consequence of UPSC's 
rigid approach in this case (of refusing to provide 
scribes to those not having benchmark disabilities) is 
UPSC itself. For it is denying to the nation the 
opportunity to be served by highly competent people 
who claim nothing but access to equal opportunity and 
a barrier-free environment. 
 
... 
 
98. Cases such as the present offer us an opportunity 
to make a meaningful contribution in the project of 
creating the RPwD generation in India. A generation of 
disabled people in India which regards as its birthright 
access to the full panoply of constitutional entitlements, 
robust statutory rights geared to meet their unique 
needs and conducive societal conditions needed for 
them to flourish and to truly become co-equal 
participants in all facets of life." 
49.  When we create avenues for inclusion, we work towards improving systems 
and institutions. In the context of healthcare, the inclusion of persons with 
disabilities is a vital component of quality healthcare. The guidelines and 
recommendations which express concern about "lowering the standard of 
medical practice" on account of persons with disabilities miss the fact that these 
standards may not be adequate to begin with. The quality of a system is 
informed by its ability to empathise with and relate to the recipients. A system 
without adequate number of practitioners who have lived experiences will not 
be able to fully imagine the obstacles and grievances faced by a diverse 
population. Diversity of workforce is crucial for a diverse society, so that 

PART E 
Page 37 of 45 
 
everyone may have a stake in the system and the system can effectively 
discharge its duties toward everyone. 
50. Section 2525 of the RPWD Act outlines the positive obligation of Government 
and local authorities to provide healthcare to persons with disabilities. An  
affirmative obligation is placed to ensure that persons with disabilities receive a 
barrier free access to all public and private healthcare institutions. Removal of 
barriers can only be achieved if persons with disabilities feel comfortable while 
accessing healthcare. The barriers faced by a person may be physical, 
psychological and attitudinal. The inclusion of persons with disabilities within 
medical practice is vital to ensure that the approach of the medical community 
and of hospitals and other healthcare institutes is humane, sensitive and 
informed by lived experiences. It strengthens our fraternity. Therefore, the 
process through which medical aspirants with disability enter the profession 
 
25 "25. Healthcare.—(1) The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall take necessary 
measures for the persons with disabilities to provide,—  
(a) free healthcare in the vicinity specially in rural area subject to such family income as may  be 
notified;  
(b) barrier-free access in all parts of Government and private hospitals and other healthcare 
institutions and centres;  
(c) priority in attendance and treatment.  
(2) The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall take measures and make schemes or 
programmes to promote healthcare and prevent the occurrence of disabilities and for the said purpose 
shall—  
(a) undertake or cause to be undertaken surveys, investigations and research concerning the cause 
of occurrence of disabilities;  
(b) promote various methods for preventing disabilities;  
(c) screen all the children at least once in a year for the purpose of identifying “at-risk” cases;  
(d) provide facilities for training to the staff at the primary health centres;  
(e) sponsor or cause to be sponsored awareness campaigns and disseminate or cause to be 
disseminated information for general hygiene, health and sanitation;  
(f) take measures for pre-natal, perinatal and post-natal care of mother and child;  
(g) educate the public through the pre-schools, schools, primary health centres, village level workers 
and anganwadi workers;  
(h) create awareness amongst the masses through television, radio and other mass media on the 
causes of disabilities and the preventive measures to be adopted;  
(i) healthcare during the time of natural disasters and other situations of risk;  
(j) essential medical facilities for life saving emergency treatment and procedures; and  
(k) sexual and reproductive healthcare especially for women with disability." 

PART E 
Page 38 of 45 
 
must be compatible with constitutional and statutory entitlements and 
guarantees. 
51. The United Nations Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in its 
concluding observations on the initial report of India26 has inter alia identified 
the medical model of disability as a prominent concern. It has stated as follows: 
"(a) The prevalence of the medical model of disability 
in legislation, public policies and attitudes concerning 
persons with disabilities, particularly in the multiple 
assessments and certification of disability and the 
requirement for different assessments to access 
services 
in 
the 
community, 
and 
in 
the 
misunderstanding of disability, including leprosy, as 
solely a biological condition requiring prevention and 
rehabilitation;" 
(emphasis supplied) 
52. The committee has recommended that the concern be remedied with inter alia 
reforming guidelines assessing persons with disabilities by adopting a human 
rights model. The recommendation has also opined against the multiplicity of 
assessments which we have echoed above. The recommendation states as 
follows: 
"(b) Reform the guidelines for assessing and certifying 
disability to bring them into line with the human rights 
model of disability, ensuring that organizations of 
persons with disabilities are involved in the reform, 
that multiple assessments do not create an undue 
burden for applicants, and that policies and 
programmes shift 
from 
care, 
treatment 
and 
protection towards the removal of environmental 
and attitudinal barriers, which prevent equality and 
inclusion;" 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
26 UN. Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (22nd sess). CRPD/C/IND/CO/1. 
Concluding observations on the initial report of India : Committee on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities. Geneva : UN, 29 Oct. 2019. 

PART E 
Page 39 of 45 
 
53. We have noted above that Disability Assessment Boards must comply with rule 
of law principles by injecting transparency, fairness and consistency in their 
approach. The Boards must further elaborate on the reasons for the outcome 
of their assessment, in particular when they opine that the candidate is 
ineligible. The Disability Assessment Boards must focus on the functional 
competence of persons with disabilities and not merely quantify the disability. 
The quantification of disability is a task in need of a purpose within the human 
rights based model of disability. The functional competency approach to 
assessment for a medical course is globally recognised. To enable members of 
the Assessment Boards in effectively applying the functional competency test, 
they must be adequately trained by professionals and persons with disabilities 
or persons who have worked on disability justice. These trainings must be with 
a view to enhance the understanding of the Board members in assessing 
persons with disabilities and must not pathologize or problematize them.  
54. The disability of a person is quantified at the time of availing a Unique Disability 
ID Card.27 The quantification of disability is moot at the point of admission to 
educational courses since the eligibility for a person to benefit from reservation 
may be evaluated using the quantification in the UDID Card. If a person with 
disability wants to have themself re-assessed so as to verify whether their 
disability falls within the prescribed parameters for reservation - they may 
choose to do so by updating their UDID Cards. The role of the Disability 
Assessment Boards must be tailored (with a functional competency approach) 
only for the course which the candidate seeks to pursue. 
 
27 "UDID Card" 

PART E 
Page 40 of 45 
 
55. Further, the journey of a person with disability to apply for the NEET 
Examination and thereafter pursue medicine at the college must also comply 
with accessibility norms. The application portal for NEET Examination must 
outline the accessibility compliances of different colleges to enable prospective 
students with disabilities in making an informed decision. Once admitted, the 
Enabling Units established under the directions of the University Grants 
Commission must act as a point of contact for persons with disabilities to access 
clinical accommodations. Students must be informed about the Enabling Units 
and Equal Opportunity Cells through the information booklet circulated for new 
MBBS students, the college website and the Equal Opportunity Policy under 
Section 21 of RPWD Act. The second respondent must make appropriate 
directions in this regard.   
56. In the UK, the General Medical Council, which regulates medical education, has 
issued an advisory guidance titled Welcome and valued. The guidance outlines 
how institutions can comply with their duties to afford reasonable 
accommodation to disabled medical students. The guidance inter alia lists the 
steps for supporting medical students. After addressing student requirements 
and agreeing on a support action plan, the guidance outlines the following 
steps, which are indicative and may not be appropriate for all: 
a. Forming a support group or a lead to deal with support arrangements of 
incoming students with disabilities; 
b. Identifying key persons of contact with students with disabilities and for each 
of the services involved in exploring the support arrangements; 

PART E 
Page 41 of 45 
 
c. Informing students on how their information will be used in compliance with 
confidentiality. Colleges are further recommended to: 
i. Keep a clear audit trail of decision making for supporting disabled 
learners as this is likely to help schools make sure they have taken 
appropriate steps to provide reasonable adjustments; 
ii. Keep a record of all conversations between the support group and 
student. Agree on the method of recording such conversations and 
allow the student to see a draft record of any discussions; 
iii. Create a separate file with different access arrangements for 
confidential information related to health outside of the general 
student record. 
d. The lead must thereafter organise a meeting between the student and the 
support group. The group may also arrange meetings to evaluate cases and 
discuss progress; and  
e. Lastly, a decision may be made on whether the student with disability can be 
provided adequate support to enable them in meeting the outcomes 
desirable in a medical graduate.  
57. The provision of an audit trail to assess whether a given accommodation 
required by a student with disability places an undue burden on the institution 
is a vital safeguard for transparency and fairness. Dr Satendra Singh in his 
report dated 20 October 2024 has made suggestions to (i) rename the Disability 
Assessment Boards as Ability Assessment Boards to align them better with 
their intended purpose; (ii) include a doctor with disability or who is well 
conversant with disability rights in such Boards; (iii) use a human rights model 

PART F 
Page 42 of 45 
 
of disability for assessment; (iv) issue guidance on clinical accommodations; (v) 
train the Boards in carrying out the disability competency assessment; and (vi) 
use the Enabling Units to serve as a contact point for clinical accommodations. 
As far as the inclusion of doctors with disabilities in the Disability Assessment 
Boards is concerned - the first respondent has issued a circular on 24 March 
2022 mandating such inclusion. This direction shall be complied with by all 
Boards. 
58. The second respondent has submitted that in light of the judgment of this Court 
in Omkar Gond (supra), it will be constituting a new committee of domain 
experts to comply with the directions in that judgment. We note the assurance 
of the second respondent and direct that this committee shall include persons 
with disability or one or more experts who are well conversant with disability 
rights. The committee shall recommend fresh guidelines to replace the existing 
guidelines. The above suggestions shall be duly considered by the government 
on its own merits. The recommendations so formulated shall comply with this 
judgment. 
F. 
Conclusions 
59. Our conclusions in light of this case are formulated in the following terms: 
a. The impugned judgment of the Nagpur bench of the High Court of Judicature 
at Bombay is set aside and the report of the Disability Assessment Board of 
AIIMS, Nagpur dated 13 August 2024 is quashed for failing to apply the 
statutory and regulatory standards applicable to the assessment of a person 
with disability; 

PART F 
Page 43 of 45 
 
b. A supernumerary seat shall be created at the AIIMS, Nagpur and the seat 
shall be allocated to the appellant, provided that he has not already secured 
a seat at a college of his choosing;  
c. The college shall be given the report dated 20 October 2024 which makes 
suggestions as to the accommodations which may be extended to the 
appellant to successfully pursue the MBBS course; 
d. The appellant shall be protected from victimisation; 
e. The judgement shall apply in rem. 
 
60. We further conclude as follows: 
 
a. The second respondent shall issue fresh guidelines for admitting persons 
with disabilities into medical courses. The committee formulating the 
guidelines must include experts with disability or persons who have worked 
on disability justice. The guidelines shall comply with the judgments of this 
Court and contemporary advancements in disability justice; 
 
b. The Disability Assessment Boards shall eschew from a benchmark model to 
test the functional competence of medical aspirants with disability. The 
second respondent shall issue appropriate guidelines in this regard; 
 
a. The Disability Assessment Boards shall include a doctor or health 
professional with disability as per the directions of the first respondent dated 
24 March 2022; 

PART F 
Page 44 of 45 
 
b. The conduct of the Disability Assessment Boards shall be fair, transparent 
and in compliance with principles of the rule of law. Attention must be paid to 
ensure that candidates appearing before the Board do not feel uncomfortable 
on account of physical or attitudinal barriers; 
 
c. Reasonable accommodation is a gateway right to avail all other fundamental, 
human and legal rights for persons with disabilities. Non-availability of 
reasonable accommodation amounts to discrimination and violates 
substantive equality of persons with disabilities; 
 
d. The inclusion of persons with disability in the medical profession would 
enhance the quality of healthcare and meet the preambular virtue of fraternity 
and the guarantees in Articles 21, 19, 14 and 15 of the Constitution; 
 
e. Applicants to the NEET examination must be informed about the compliance 
of accessibility norms and provisions of reasonable accommodation 
available at colleges. The respondents shall issue appropriate directions to 
create a database with relevant information on accessibility and reasonable 
accommodation; and 
 
f. Enabling Units at medical colleges shall act as points of contact for persons 
with disability desirous of accessing clinical accommodations. 
 
61. A copy of this Judgment will be transmitted to the Secretaries of all concerned 
Ministries of the Government of India.  
 

PART F 
Page 45 of 45 
 
62. The appeal is allowed in the above terms.  
 
63. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
..………..…....…........……………….…........CJI. 
                                                                           [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 
 
 
 
 
……….…..…....…........……………….…........J. 
                             [J B Pardiwala] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
……….…..…....…........……………….…........J. 
                             [Manoj Misra] 
 
 
New Delhi;  
October 25, 2024