2024 INSC 823
Page 1 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
Reportable 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
 
 
The State of Madhya Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
 …Appellant(s) 
Versus 
 
Ramjan Khan & Ors.  
 
 
 
 
 
…Respondent(s) 
  
J U D G M E N T 
 
C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. 
 
1. 
This appeal is against the judgment of acquittal 
dated 31.01.2013 passed by the High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh at Gwalior in Criminal Appeal No. 602 of 1998 in 
reversal of the judgment of conviction recorded against 
the appellants therein viz., the respondents herein, by 
the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Sironj in Sessions 
Trial No. 320 of 1996 dated 28.10.1998. 
2. 
Heard learned counsel for the appellant State and 
learned counsel for the respondents, the convicts who 
were acquitted by the High Court vide the impugned 
judgment. 
Digitally signed by
VARSHA MENDIRATTA
Date: 2024.10.25
14:46:59 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
3. 
The case of the prosecution, in succinct, was as 
under: - 
‘On 01.10.1996, at about 1.00 pm, the respondents 
herein viz., Ramjan Khan, Musaf Khan @ Musab Khan and 
Habib Khan, by cutting/beating with sickle, axe and stick 
caused death of Naseem Khan, near the village well of 
Karaikheda 
and 
thereby 
committed 
the 
crime 
punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34, of the 
Indian Penal Code (for short the ‘IPC’).’ 
4. 
As mentioned above, the respondents herein were 
tried by the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Sironj.  
The prosecution had examined 19 witnesses including 
Haseen Khan (PW-5) and Farid Khan (PW-9), who are the 
real brothers of deceased Naseem Khan and eye 
witnesses.  Documentary evidence including the 
postmortem report prepared by Dr. S.S. Thakur (PW-1) 
were tendered by the prosecution.  On the side of the 
defence two witnesses were examined.  
5. 
The trial Court relied on the oral testimonies of PW-
5 and PW-9, the minor brothers of the deceased besides 
the testimony of PW-8, the mother of the deceased who 
happened to be the informant and the further found that 
the ocular evidence got corroboration from the medical 
evidence, to enter conviction on the appellants for 

Page 3 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
having 
committed 
murder 
of 
Naseem 
Khan.  
Consequently, the respondents herein were sentenced 
to undergo imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs. 
35,000/-. The respondents herein, the convicts preferred 
appeal jointly, against the judgment of conviction for the 
offence punishable under Section 302, IPC read with 
Section 34, IPC and the life sentence imposed therefor, 
the High Court acquitted them of the offences with which 
they were charged and allowed the appeal in the 
impugned judgment of acquittal. 
6. 
Before dealing with the rival contentions raised 
before us, we think it only appropriate to refer to some 
of the relevant decisions of this Court laying law in 
regard to appeal against acquittal.  It is true that the 
judgment of acquittal was passed after setting aside the 
judgment of conviction passed against the respondents 
herein by the trial Court. 
7. 
In the decision in Jai Karan & Ors. v. State of U.P.1 
this Court held that where the trial Court and the High 
Court had concurrently found the accused guilty, the 
Supreme Court would not scrutinize the evidence once 
again, unless there has been a total miscarriage of 
 
1 (2003) 12 SCC 655 

Page 4 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
justice.  We may hasten to add here that this Court may 
have to re-appreciate evidence in cases where a prima 
facie perverse appreciation of evidence is brought out, 
even in such cases.  We shall also not be understood to 
have held that merely because the trial Court and the 
High Court have rendered divergent findings, this Court 
should invariably scrutinize the evidence once again and 
in that regard this Court should entertain an appeal.  In 
an appeal, against conviction in murder case under 
Section 374 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for short 
the ‘Cr.P.C.’), a proper analysis of the evidence and 
accepting or rejecting, the appreciation of evidence by 
the trial Court must reflect in the judgment of the High 
Court.  In other words, the disposal of the appeal under 
Section 374, Cr.P.C., shall not be by cryptic or non-
reasoned order.  In the decision in Govindaraju v. State 
by Sivaramapuram PS2, this Court held that a very vital 
distinction has to be kept in mind while dealing with 
appeal under Section 374, Cr.P.C., that interference 
would be justifiable only when distinction is kept 
between perversity in appreciation of evidence and 
mere possibility of another view.  Furthermore, it was 
 
2 (2012) 4 SCC 722 

Page 5 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
held therein that it would not be appropriate for the High 
Court to merely record that the judgment of the trial 
Court was perverse without specifically dealing with the 
facets of perversity relating to the issues of law and/or 
appreciation of evidence, as otherwise such observation 
of the High Court would not be sustainable in law. 
8. 
Having taken note of the position settled thus we 
may add that when the High Court acquitted the 
convict(s) in the appeal filed under Section 374, Cr.P.C., 
in reversal of conviction, by granting the benefit of doubt 
after a proper appreciation of evidence interference is 
permissible and justifiable only if it is infected with 
perversity in troth, the prosecution was not successful in 
establishing the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable 
doubt.  In the decision in State of U.P. v. Dharmaraj and 
Anr.3, which involved a challenge against a judgment of 
acquittal in a murder case by the High Court, this Court 
held that when on facts the view taken by the High Court 
was a reasonably possible view, though not the only 
view that could be taken, interference with acquittal 
would be uncalled for.  
 
3 (2003) 9 SCC 39 

Page 6 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
9. 
Bearing in mind the aforesaid decisions and the 
fact that the trial Court and the High Court are at issue on 
the question whether the respondents are guilty in the 
case on hand, we will proceed to consider the captioned 
appeal.  Obviously, the trial Court relied on the oral 
testimonies of PWs 5, 8 and 9 whereas in the appeal the 
High Court found the oral evidence of PWs 5, 8 and 9 as 
unreliable. 
10. 
Before dealing with the oral testimonies of the 
minor brothers of the deceased (PWs 5 and 9), we will 
deal with the oral evidence of PW-8, the mother of the 
deceased.  She is the informant at whose instance FIR 
No.78/96 was registered against the respondents herein.  
Though she was believed by the trial Court, on re-
appreciation the High Court found her unreliable owing 
to the material improvements and omissions made while 
being examined as PW-8.  It was brought out while being 
cross-examined that she had not deposed at all about a 
dying declaration made to her by the deceased son.  
Before analysing her evidence further, it is not 
inappropriate to refer to a few decisions having bearing 
on her testimony.   
11. 
 FIR is not an encyclopedia disclosing all facts and 
details relating the entire prosecution case.  (See the 

Page 7 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
decisions in Superintendent of Police, CBI & Ors. v. 
Tapan Kumar Singh4; State of UP v. Naresh & Ors.5; 
Lalitha Kumari v. Government of UP & Ors.6, and 
Amish Devgan v. UOI & Ors.7). 
12. 
It is true that the aforementioned decisions would 
undoubtedly reveal the position that an FIR is not meant 
to be a detailed document containing chronicle of all 
intricate and minute details. 
13. 
Even after, referring to the decisions mentioned 
above, we think it equally relevant to refer to the 
decision of this Court in Dharma Rama Bhagare v. State 
of Maharashtra8. It was held therein thus: - 
“The first information report, it may be pointed 
out, is never treated as a substantive piece of 
evidence.  It can only be used for corroborating 
or contradicting its maker when he appears in 
court as a witness.” 
 
14. 
There can be no doubt with respect to the position 
that the prime object of FIR, from the point of view of the 
informant is to set the criminal law in motion and from the 
point of the investigating authorities is to obtain 
 
4 (2003) 6 SCC 175 
5 (2011) 4 SCC 324 
6 (2014) 2 SCC 1 
7 (2021) 1 SCC 1 
8 (1973) 1 SCC 537 

Page 8 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
information about the alleged activity so as to enable to 
take suitable steps to trace and book the guilty.  Thus, it 
can be said that FIR is an important document, though not 
a substantial piece of evidence, and may be put in 
evidence to support or contradict the evidence of its 
maker viz., the informant.  Whether the omission(s) is 
one which seriously impeaches the credibility of the 
witness and is sufficient to reject the testimony of the 
informant would depend upon the question whether it is 
of an important fact and whether that fact was within the 
knowledge of the informant, going by the case of 
prosecution unraveled through the witness concerned. 
15. 
Thus, the position with respect to FIR is clear from 
the decisions referred supra that even though it is not 
meant to be an encyclopedia containing chronicle of all 
intricate and minute details, it could be used to 
corroborate its maker under Section 157 of the Evidence 
Act or to contradict its maker viz., the informant under 
Section 145 of the Evidence Act to establish whether he 
is a trustworthy witness or not.   
16. 
Realising and recognizing the aforesaid position 
with respect to FIR we will proceed to consider whether 
the disinclination on the part of the High Court to rely on, 

Page 9 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
rather, treating the evidence of the informant – PW8 as 
unreliable is justifiable and sustainable in law. 
17. 
Through the evidence of PW8, the mother of the 
deceased, who is also the informant, the prosecution has 
attempted to establish the existence of an oral dying 
declaration.  It is to be noted that dying declaration itself 
is not a strong piece of evidence and therefore, when it 
is verbal and that too, allegedly made to a close relative 
(in this case allegedly to the mother), evidence of mother 
about the oral dying declaration was to be treated with 
care and caution.  To show that the trial Court dealt with 
the same without due care and caution self- evident from 
paragraph 32 of the judgment of the Trial Court, which 
reads thus: -  
“32.  During the arguments, ld. Counsel for the 
accused argued that complainant Sitara Bi has 
stated in her court statement that when she 
reached at well, at that time, her son Naseem 
Khan told her that all the three accused Ramjan 
Khan, Musab Khan and Habib Khan have caused 
his murder after beating him with sickle, axe 
and lathi.  Though, this fact is not written in the 
police statement Exh. D-3 of Sitara Bi that when 
he reached, at that time, accused Naseem had 
told her to be beaten by accused persons, even 
thereafter, I don’t find it proper to give it’s 
benefit to the accused persons because I don’t 

Page 10 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
find any reason to disbelieve the statement, 
which has been given by her before the court.” 
 
18. 
Paragraph 42 of the judgment of the Trial Court 
carries the further recital with respect to the aforesaid 
aspect and it, in so far as relevant, reads thus: -  
“42… Sitara Bi (PW-8) has stated in para-5 of her 
cross-examination that if the police has not 
written the fact of going of Farid Khan and 
Haseen Khan alongwith Naseem Khan for 
bathing is not written in the police statement of 
Exh. D-3, then, she cannot tell its reason.  
Similarly, when complainant Sitara Bi reached 
on the spot, at that time, Naseem Khan was lying 
on the ground and Naseem Khan told her that 
accused have beaten him.  If, this fact is also not 
written in her police statement, then she cannot 
tell its reason...” 
 
19. 
The Judgment of the Trial Court would reveal that 
after considering the aforesaid aspect in such a light 
manner, believing the oral evidence of PW8 as well, the 
Trial Court arrived at the finding that accused Ramjan 
Khan had beaten Naseem Khan with sickle, accused 
Musab had beaten him with bamboo lathi (equipped 
with Farsa) and accused Habib inflicted axe blow on 
Naseem Khan and thereby caused his murder. 

Page 11 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
20. 
The undisputed and indisputable position obtained 
from the evidence on record is that the defence had 
brought out that neither in Ext. P12 FIR nor in Ext. D3 
statement of PW8 recorded under Section 161, Cr.P.C., 
PW8 stated about the oral dying declaration made to her 
by the deceased.  That apart, the prosecution had failed 
to establish that when PW8 reached the place of 
occurrence the deceased was in a fit state of mind to 
speak or talk relevantly.  Except the statement of PW8 in 
the Court there is no scrap of evidence in that regard in 
the case on hand.  As a matter of fact, on this aspect 
nothing was brought out from PW5 and PW9 or from any 
other witnesses.  There can be no doubt that oral dying 
declaration should be of such a nature as to inspire full 
confidence of the court in its correctness.  In the 
contextual situation revealed as above, we have no 
hesitation to hold that the High Court was perfectly 
justified in considering the oral testimony of PW8 and 
taking serious note of the serious omission brought out 
from her, on being confronted with Ext. P12 FIR and Ext. 
D3, which is her previous statement made to police, that 
she had not stated anything about such an oral dying 
declaration made by her deceased son.  The High Court 
also took note of the fact that neither PW5 nor PW9 had 

Page 12 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
spoken about any such oral dying declaration made by 
the deceased brother to their mother- PW8.  Add to it, 
the oral testimony of PW8 would reveal that while being 
examined-in-chief she deposed what Haseen Khan 
(PW5) and Fareed Khan (PW9) divulged to her.  She 
would depose: “When my sons Fareed Khan and Haseen 
Khan told me at home that accused persons have killed 
Naseem Khan then I reached the place of incident.”  
(underline supplied) 
21. 
In this context, it is also relevant to refer to her oral 
evidence while being cross-examined.  She deposed 
thus on being cross-examined: -  
“It is incorrect to say that Fareed and Haseen did 
not tell me that accused persons have killed 
Naseem.” 
 
22. 
The oral testimony of PW-8 would further go to 
show that with respect to the attack allegedly done by the 
three accused persons viz., the respondents herein on 
her deceased son Naseem Khan, her evidence is nothing 
but ‘hearsay evidence’ as according to her she was told 
about their attack on Naseem Khan only by her sons, PW-
5 and PW-9 and there is no case for the prosecution that 
she had witnessed the respondents herein attacking 
Naseem Khan. 

Page 13 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
23. 
A scanning of the oral testimony of PW-8 would 
show that on many other materials points the defence 
could brought out, upon confronting her with Ext.P12-
FIR, 
Ext.D3-previous 
statement, 
various 
serious 
omissions.  About her statement in Court that PW-5 and 
PW-9 went along with deceased Naseem Khan on 
01.10.1996 for taking bath nothing was seen recorded in 
Ext.D3.  As noted earlier, as to the alleged oral dying 
declaration made to her by the deceased from the place 
of occurrence after sustaining injuries nothing was 
recorded in Ext.P12-FIR as also in Ext.D3.  Though she 
deposed that upon seeing her Ramjan, Musaf Khan and 
Habib Khan ran away from the place of occurrence this 
fact was not recorded in Ext.D3.  So also, about the attack 
by the accused persons on deceased Naseem Khan 
though she deposed that PW-5 and PW-9 told her and in 
turn she told such facts to police they were not recorded 
in Ext.D3.  She would depose that she got no enmity with 
the family of accused persons and got no dispute in 
respect of land.  In view of the aforementioned aspects 
revealed from the testimony of PW-8 which were not 
given due weight by the trial Court while considering 
whether PW-8 is reliable or not, we are of the considered 
view that the High Court had rightly given due 

Page 14 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
consideration to all such aspects and ultimately 
discredited her testimony.  
24. 
Before considering the oral testimonies of the 
witnesses claimed by the prosecution as eye witnesses, 
it is to be noted that with respect to the nature of death of 
Naseem Khan there is actually no cleavage in the findings 
of the trial Court and the High Court.  The concurrent 
finding is that it is culpable homicide amounting to 
murder.  The necroscopical evidence consists of the oral 
testimony of PW-1, Dr. S.S. Thakur, and the postmortem 
report prepared and proved by him as Ext.P1.  Going by 
the 
said 
necroscopical 
evidence 
the 
following 
antemortem injuries were present on the body of the 
Naseem Khan: - 
“1. A punctured wound measuring ½ inch x ½ 
inch on the left side of face, clotted blood was 
present. 
 
2. An incised wound measuring 1 inch x ½ inch 
on the ½, 1/3 portion back side of left wrist, 
which was having the clotted blood.  
 
3. An incised wound measuring 3 inch x ½ inch 
x deep to bone, margin on the occipital region 
of head having clotted blood.  
 

Page 15 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
4. An incised wound measuring 3 inch x. ½ inch 
x deep bone, on the frontal region of head, 
having clotted blood.  
 
5. An incised wound measuring 3 x ½ inch x dee 
on the temporal region of left side of head, in 
which the clotted blood was present.” 
 
25. 
PW-1 opined that all the aforesaid injuries except 
injury Nos.1 and 2 were sufficient in the ordinary course 
of nature to cause death and that the cause of death was 
comma as a result of head injuries.  In short, in view of the 
necroscopical evidence as above the Courts were 
perfectly right in holding that the death of Naseem Khan 
is culpable homicide amounting to murder. 
26. 
Now, the surviving question is only whether the 
prosecution had succeeded in establishing conclusively 
beyond any reasonable doubt that the culprits for the 
murder of Naseem Khan, are the respondents herein as 
held by the trial Court or whether they are entitled to the 
benefit of doubt and consequential acquittal as held by 
the High Court.  In the decision in Anil Phukan v. State 
of Assam9, this Court held that conviction could be 
based on testimony of a single witness provided his 
testimony is found reliable and inspires confidence.  In 
 
9 (1993) 3 SCC 282 

Page 16 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
the decision in Chandu Bhai Shana Bhai Parmar v. State 
of Gujarat10, this Court held that when the ocular 
evidence in a murder case is unreliable benefit of doubt 
to be given to all accused.  
27. 
We have already held, for the reasons given 
earlier, that the High Court had rightly held the oral 
testimony of PW-8 as unreliable.  As a matter of fact, the 
case of the prosecution is that Isab Khan (PW-2), Haseen 
Khan (PW-5), Fareed Khan (PW-9), and Anees Khan (PW-
17) had witnessed the incident that led to the death of 
Naseem Khan.  In the light of the decisions in Anil 
Phukan’s case and Chandu Bhai’s case (supra) the oral 
testimonies of PWs 2, 5, 9 & 17 are to be appreciated to 
answer the aforementioned surviving question.  PW-2 
was 
declared 
hostile 
by 
the 
prosecution 
and 
concurrently his evidence was held unreliable.  Though 
PW-17 also turned hostile, the trial Court held that on that 
account the accused / the respondents herein are not 
entitled to any benefit as PW-5 and PW-9 proved the fact 
that accused/the respondents herein had caused murder 
of Naseem Khan using sickle, danda affixed with farsa, 
and axe. However, the High Court held the evidence of 
 
10 AIR 1982 SC 1022 

Page 17 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
PW-17 as unreliable.  The High Court found that though 
PW-17 was declared hostile prior to such declaration he 
deposed that the accused Ramjan/the first respondent 
herein had thrown the deceased on a stone boulder.  He 
had not deposed anything against the other accused / the 
other respondents herein.  The High Court found his 
testimony unreliable as according to him the first 
respondent Ramjan threw the deceased on a stone 
boulder which caused head injuries, but that is not the 
case of the prosecution at all and that apart he had stated 
so, for the first time only in the Court.  In that regard he 
was confronted with his previous statement - Ext.P22.  
Besides the same, there is nothing in the opinion of PW-
1, the Doctor who conducted autopsy on the body of 
Naseem Khan, which would indicate that the head injury 
was caused on account of the deceased being thrown on 
the stone boulder.  When that be the nature of evidence 
of PW-17, it can only be held that the finding of the trial 
Court that the evidence of PW-17 would not fetch any 
benefit for the accused cannot be sustained.  Hence, 
according to us, the High Court held his evidence 
unreliable correctly. 
28. 
In the aforesaid circumstances the question is with 
respect to the reliability on the oral testimonies of PW-5 

Page 18 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
and PW-9 who are the younger brothers of deceased 
Naseem Khan.  As noticed hereinbefore, their oral 
testimonies were held as reliable by the trial Court and 
at the same time the High Court found their testimonies 
as unreliable.  At the outset, it is to be noted that as in the 
case of PW-8, the defence had succeeded in bringing out 
the fact that both PW-5 and PW-9 had omitted to mention 
certain material facts to police while their statements 
were recorded.  The question is whether they were 
omissions tantamounting to discredit the said witnesses.  
PW-5, while being examined in chief, deposed to have 
seen Ramjan causing injury by parena (sickle), Musaf 
Khan causing injury by stick and Habib causing injury by 
axe on his brother Naseem Khan.  However, during cross-
examination he would depose that regarding the 
infliction of injuries by the respondents using the 
aforementioned weapons on Naseem Khan, he did not 
make any statement before the police and stated so for 
the first time before the Court. PW-2, Isab Khan, and PW-
17, Anees Khan, are respectively the sons of Yaseem 
Khan and Mohar Khan, who are the cousin brothers of 
Munne Khan, the father of PWs 5 and 9.  As noticed 
hereinbefore, both PW-2 and PW-17 did not support the 
case of the prosecution.  High Court also took note of the 

Page 19 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
fact that PW-5 did not depose that when he along with his 
mother (PW-8) reached the place of occurrence the 
deceased was alive and gave oral dying declaration to 
PW-8. 
29. 
While being cross-examined PW-9 deposed that he 
did not tell the police that Ramjan with parena, Musaf 
Khan with farsa and, Habib Khan with axe assaulted his 
brother Naseem Khan.  While being examined in chief he 
would depose that his mother was also beaten by the 
accused persons.  It is to be noted that there is absolutely 
no such case even for PW-8, the mother of PW-9.  As can 
be seen from paragraph 6 of his oral testimony the 
defence had brought out some other omissions and 
contradictions.  The aforementioned omissions on the 
part of PWs 5 and 9 cannot be said to be minor 
contradictions to be taken lightly as according to them 
they did not name the accused persons in their previous 
statements made to the police.  Hence, omissions thus 
brought amount to material contradiction which will go 
into the core of the prosecution case.  Their oral 
testimonies would reveal that they stated about the 
infliction of injuries on Naseem Khan, their elder brother 
by the respondents with the weapons mentioned above 
for the first time only before the Court while being 

Page 20 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
examined. That apart, it is to be noted that though the 
case of the prosecution is that both PWs 5 and 9 had gone 
with deceased Naseem Khan for taking bath on the fateful 
day the evidence of PW-8 would reveal that in her 
previous statement to the police she had not disclosed 
the said fact to the police.  In this context, it is relevant to 
note that the prosecution had not revealed, rather 
established, the genesis of the incident that led to the 
death of Naseem Khan.  In other words, none of the 
witnesses including PWs 5 and 9 had deposed as to the 
genesis of the incident.  This assumes relevance as PW-8 
herself deposed that she got no enmity with the families 
of the accused and got no land dispute with them.  When 
this be the nature of the evidence of PWs 5 and 9 as also 
the evidence of PWs 2, 8 and 17, we are of the considered 
view that there can be no good reason to hold that the 
prosecution had succeeded in conclusively proving the 
guilt of the accused/respondents herein beyond 
reasonable doubt warranting displacement of the finding 
of the High Court that in view of the omissions and 
contradictions, the oral testimonies of the aforesaid 
witnesses are not reliable and the respondents herein 
are entitled to the benefit of doubt.  We have already 
taken note of the decision in Dharmaraj’s case (supra) 

Page 21 of 21 
Criminal Appeal No. 2129 of 2014 
involving a challenge against judgment of acquittal in a 
murder case in reversal of conviction entered against the 
accused by the trial Court holding that if on facts the view 
taken by the High Court is a reasonable possible view, 
though not the only view that could be taken, 
interference with acquittal would be uncalled for.  In view 
of the nature of the evidence discussed above and the 
finding of the High Court that the respondents/accused 
are entitled to benefit of doubt and consequently for 
acquittal, we do not find any reason to hold that it is not a 
reasonably possible view though not the only view that 
could be taken.  
30. 
The long and short of the above discussion is that 
we are not inclined to interfere with the judgment of 
acquittal passed by the High Court in Criminal Appeal 
No. 602 of 1998.  Hence the appeal stands dismissed. 
 
……………………, J. 
                 (C.T. Ravikumar) 
 
 
…….……….………, J. 
(Sudhanshu Dhulia) 
New Delhi; 
October 25, 2024