2024 INSC 829
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1095 OF 2013 
 
THE MADHYA PRADESH MADHYA KSHETRA 
VIDYUT VITRAN COMPANY LIMITED  
& ORS. 
                                                                        … APPELLANTS 
VS. 
BAPUNA ALCOBREW PRIVATE LIMITED  
& ANR.                  
 
 
 
 
                … RESPONDENTS 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J. 
 
THE CHALLENGE 
 
1. The final judgment and order dated 13th October, 20111 of the High Court 
of Madhya Pradesh2, allowing the writ appeal3 presented by the first 
respondent, is under assail in the present appeal by special leave.  
 
 
1 impugned judgment, hereafter 
2 High Court, hereafter 
3 Writ Appeal No. 550/2009 
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant
Date: 2024.11.14
17:24:32 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
BRIEF RESUME OF FACTS 
 
2. 
The factual matrix of the case, insofar as is relevant for the purpose of 
deciding the present appeal, is noted hereinbelow: 
I. 
The first appellant is the state electricity distribution utility for the 
State of Madhya Pradesh, while the second and the third appellants 
are its officers. The first respondent is a company registered under 
the Companies Act, 1956. It is engaged in the business of 
manufacturing rectified spirit, extra neutral alcohol and bottling of 
Indian made foreign liquor. The second respondent is the Madhya 
Pradesh Pollution Control Board, which had asked the first 
respondent to submit a proposal with respect to its plans for a bio-
gas electricity generation unit. The first respondent did not pursue 
any communication with the second respondent thereafter and, 
thus, no relief has been sought in this appeal against the latter.   
II. 
The appellants and the first respondent entered into an agreement 
dated 18th November, 1991, for supply of electrical energy to the 
first respondent’s unit at Gwalior, with the first respondent 
guaranteeing a minimum consumption that would yield an annual 
revenue of Rs. 34,747/- (Rupees thirty four thousand seven 
hundred and forty seven rupees only). 
III. 
Thereafter, supplementary agreements were executed between the 
appellants and the first respondent, increasing the consumption of 
electrical energy. Vide agreement dated 17th November, 1992, the 
quantum was initially increased from 136 kVA to 169 kVA and vide 

3 
 
agreement dated 30th March, 1995, there was a further increase to 
305 kVA.  
IV. 
The first respondent sought permission from the appellants to install 
and run an 807 kVA biogas turbo generating set4 for captive use. 
On 30th May, 1996, the second appellant granted permission to the 
first respondent on the condition that the TG set does not run 
parallel with the appellants’ supply system, and that the TG set 
would be used only as a stand-by measure upon the failure of the 
appellants to supply power. Most importantly, in what would give 
birth to the dispute, the first respondent was bound to a monthly 
minimum consumption of units, with 35% load factor in case of no 
power cut, and 39% load factor in cases of power cut.  
V. 
A third supplementary agreement was executed by and between the 
appellants and the first respondent on 01st June, 1996, which 
provided for supply of an additional 560 kVA to the first respondent 
thereby increasing the total contract demand to 1170 kVA.  
VI. 
Alleging that the first respondent was running the TG set as a 
parallel source of power notwithstanding the supply of power 
provided by the first appellant, a notice dated 28th March, 20005 
was served by the appellants upon the first respondent cancelling 
the permission accorded to the first respondent to run the TG set.  
VII. 
Challenging the cancellation notice, the first respondent knocked 
the doors of the High Court by invoking its writ jurisdiction. On the 
 
4 TG set, hereafter 
5 cancellation notice, hereafter 

4 
 
writ petition6, the High Court passed an interim order dated 04th 
May, 2000 staying operation of the cancellation notice, subject to 
the condition, inter alia, that the first respondent would deposit the 
‘minimum guarantee charges’ payable as against the load of 807 
kVA to be assessed by the appellants.  
VIII. 
Consequently, the appellants issued a show cause notice7 dated 14th 
July, 2000 to the first respondent quantifying its liability in a sum of 
Rs 70,50,000/- (Rupees seventy lakh fifty thousand only). The first 
show cause notice provided a time of fifteen (15) days to the first 
respondent to submit a representation with respect to the notice.  
IX. 
The first respondent promptly challenged the first show cause notice 
by filing a miscellaneous petition8 in the first writ petition. The High 
Court, vide order dated 14th February, 2001, disposed of the 
miscellaneous petition by holding the first respondent liable to pay 
the ‘minimum guarantee charges’, irrespective of whether the 
corresponding amount of electricity had been consumed or not. 
X. 
On 21st October, 2006, the first respondent withdrew the first writ 
petition, seeking to represent the matter before the appellants 
themselves on account of a change in the policy of the State 
Government, which no longer required a party to seek permission 
to install a T.G. set. 
 
6 W.P. No. 677/2000; first writ petition, hereafter 
7 first show cause notice, hereafter 
8 M(W)P No. 230 of 2000; miscellaneous petition, hereafter 

5 
 
XI. 
After a long interlude of two years, new life was breathed into the 
dispute by the appellants vide issuance of a show cause notice dated 
07th January, 20099 through Rs 70,50,000/- (Rupees seventy lakh 
fifty thousand only) was once again quantified as the first 
respondent’s liability for not having utilised the minimum 
guaranteed consumption for the period between June 1996 and May 
2000. The second show cause notice provided a time of thirty (30) 
days to the first respondent to submit a representation in regard 
thereto, failing which demand would be raised without further 
communication.  
XII. 
Thereafter, demand was raised in the form of an energy bill dated 
04th March, 2009, wherein the pre-existing liability of Rs 
70,50,478/- (Rupees seventy lakhs fifty thousand four hundred and 
seventy eight only) was mentioned as “Other Chars. (sic, charges)”.  
XIII. 
Subsequently, the appellants issued a demand-cum-disconnection 
notice dated 18th March, 200910 threatening that if the amount of 
Rs 70,50,478/- (Rupees seventy lakhs fifty thousand four hundred 
and seventy eight only) was not paid within 15 days, the supply 
would be disconnected without prior notice.  
XIV. 
Aggrieved by the issuance of the second show cause notice, the first 
respondent invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court yet again vide 
a writ petition11, seeking quashing of the second show cause notice.  
 
9  second show cause notice, hereafter 
10 disconnection notice, hereafter 
11 Writ Petition No. 1382/2009; second writ petition, hereafter 

6 
 
XV. 
A learned Single Judge of the High Court, vide interim order dated 
06th April, 2009, stayed operation of the second show cause notice, 
conditional upon the first respondent furnishing a bank guarantee 
of the equivalent amount. It is a matter of record that bank 
guarantee was furnished by the first respondent on 20th April, 2009.  
XVI. 
The learned Single Judge of the High Court, vide order dated 16th 
July, 200912, partly allowed the writ petition. His Lordship held that 
the first respondent was obligated to consume the monthly 
minimum units on the load factor since it had agreed to the terms 
and conditions laid down in the letter dated 30th May, 1996. 
However, the retrospective application of the enhanced contract 
demand13 was struck down and the appellants were directed to re-
calculate the demand, with the enhanced demand being applicable 
only from 14th October, 1996.  
XVII. 
Consequently, vide communication dated 13th November, 2009, the 
appellants informed the first respondent that a revised demand of 
Rs 56,81,977.58P (Rupees fifty six lakh eighty one thousand nine 
hundred seventy seven and fifty eight paise only) had been raised, 
which would be recovered against the bank guarantee furnished by 
the first respondent. On 16th November, 2009, the appellants 
promptly encashed the bank guarantee and issued a cheque 
refunding the excess amount. Against such encashment, the first 
 
12 writ court’s ’s order, hereafter 
13 560 kVA enhanced to 1170 kVA w.e.f. 14th October, 1996 

7 
 
respondent had initiated proceedings for contempt by filing a 
petition14 on 18th November, 2009.  
XVIII. 
Also, aggrieved by the writ court’s order, the first respondent carried 
the same to the Division Bench of the High Court by presenting the 
relevant intra-court appeal. It is the judgment and order of disposal 
of such appeal that has given rise to the present civil appeal.  
IMPUGNED JUDGMENT 
 
3. 
As noted at the beginning, the Division Bench allowed the writ appeal. The 
second show cause notice was quashed upon application of section 56(2) 
of the Electricity Act, 200315. 
3.1 
On the question of whether the first respondent was liable to pay the 
charges for minimum guaranteed consumption, the High Court relied upon 
the decision in Raymond Limited v. State of M.P.16 to observe that the 
first appellant was within its right to demand minimum guarantee charges 
but there also existed a corresponding duty upon such appellant to supply 
electrical energy to such an extent, fulfilment of which duty had not been 
proved in the present case.  
3.2 
The High Court then embarked upon the issue of limitation, i.e., whether 
the appellants could recover dues for the period between June, 1996 and 
May, 2000, vide the second show cause notice. The question before the 
High Court was whether the liability which accrued to the first respondent 
 
14 Contempt Petition No. 559/2009 
15 2003 Act, hereafter 
16 (2001) 1 SCC 534 

8 
 
under the Electricity (Supply) Act, 194817, i.e., when the first show cause 
notice was issued, could be enforced after coming into effect of the 2003 
Act, i.e., when the second show cause notice was issued. The pivotal 
difference between the two legislations is that while the former did not 
prescribe a limitation period for the recovery of dues, the 2003 Act 
specifically prescribed such a period in the form of section 56(2), providing 
as follows: 
Section 56. Disconnection of supply in default of payment – 
(1) *** 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, no sum due from any consumer, under this section shall 
be recoverable after the period of two years from the date when such 
sum became first due unless such sum has been shown continuously as 
recoverable as arrear of charges for electricity supplied and the licensee 
shall not cut off the supply of the electricity. 
 
3.3 
The High Court observed that since the 2003 Act had not been enforced 
retrospectively, the liability would continue to accrue to the first respondent 
well after the 2003 Act came into force. However, this liability, w.e.f. 10th 
June, 2003 could not have been enforced beyond a period of two (2) years, 
keeping in mind section 56(2) read with section 174 of the 2003 Act.  
3.4 
Consequently, the High Court observed that the first respondent’s writ 
petition having been disposed on 21st June, 2006, a period of two (2) years 
therefrom would be 09th June, 2008 whereas the appellants had only issued 
the second show cause notice on 07th January, 2009, which was evidently 
beyond the period of limitation.  
 
17 1948 Act, hereafter 

9 
 
3.5 
In the result, the Division Bench reversed the judgment and order dated 
16th July, 2009 passed by the writ court and quashed the second show 
cause notice issued by the appellants.  
CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES 
4. 
Ms. Liz Mathew, learned senior counsel for the appellants, in assailing the 
impugned judgment, advanced the following submissions: 
A. The Division Bench erred in interpreting section 174 of the 2003 Act 
to extend the applicability of such Act and its limitation clause to the 
existing proceedings.  
B. The Division Bench erred in applying section 174 of the 2003 Act to 
the present case since this was not a case of inconsistency with any 
other law, rather, it concerned the liabilities incurred under the 1910 
Act in view of section 185(5) of the 2003 Act.  
C. K.C. Ninan v. Kerala SEB18 was relied on to argue that section 
56(2) of the 2003 Act would not apply to a liability which was incurred 
prior to the enforcement of the 2003 Act.  
D. The High Court erred in not appreciating the purport of section 185 
of the 2003 Act which saved the application of section 6 of the 
General Clauses Act, 189719.  
5. 
Mr. Jayant Mehta, learned senior counsel for the first respondent, while 
supporting the impugned judgment submitted as under:  
 
18 2023 SCC OnLine SC 663 
19 1897 Act, hereafter 

10 
 
A. The first and the second show cause notices were not ‘demands’ but 
merely notices for the purposes of quantification and raising of 
demand in the future.  
B. There was nothing which prevented the appellants from raising a 
demand during the pendency of the first writ petition since the High 
Court had not passed any order of stay.  
C. Assuming that the 2003 Act had no application to dues arising during 
a period of time prior to its enforcement w.e.f. 10th June, 2003 and 
even though section 24 of the Indian Electricity Act, 191020 did not 
prescribe a period of limitation, the process of recovery of dues, if 
any, had to be initiated within the period for institution of a suit, i.e., 
three (3) years from the date of the appellant’s awareness of the sum 
due, and, at any rate, must be initiated within a reasonable period, 
which cannot be nine (9) years.  
D. Allowing the appellants to raise a demand nine (9) years later would 
lead to injustice and arbitrariness, more so when in the absence of 
any demand the question of the first respondent neglecting to pay 
charges did not arise.  
E. Encashment of bank guarantee by the appellants immediately after 
the revised demand was raised on the first respondent without giving 
any opportunity to the first respondent to pursue legal remedies, in 
the circumstances, must be held to be arbitrary. 
 
 
20 1910 Act, hereafter 

11 
 
ISSUES 
 
6. 
Not too many issues arise for decision on the facts of the present appeal. 
The task before us is limited to determining whether section 56(2) of the 
2003 Act has any application to a demand raised by the appellants on the 
first respondent for recovery of sums payable under the 1910 Act and, 
hence, the impugned judgment is sustainable on this score; if not, whether 
the demand, if it be treated as one under the 1910 Act, is sustainable 
having regard to the long delay.  
 
ANALYSIS 
 
7. 
We have heard learned senior counsel for the parties and perused the 
impugned judgment as well as the other materials on record. 
8. 
An analysis of the enactments governing the dispute would be of profit.  
9. 
The 1910 Act came into force w.e.f. 01st January, 1911, with the objective 
of amending the law relating to supply and use of electrical energy. The 
1948 Act, however, was enacted with the purpose of facilitating the 
establishment of regional co-ordination in the development of electricity, 
or as the long title of the said Act states, “to provide for the rationalisation 
of the production and supply of electricity, and generally for taking 
measures conducive to electrical development”. Thus, both these 
enactments had their own spheres of application, and existed concurrently. 
However, w.e.f. 10th June, 2003, the 2003 Act came into force to 
“consolidate the laws relating to generation, transmission, distribution, 

12 
 
trading and use of electricity and generally for taking measures conducive 
to development of electricity industry, promoting competition therein, 
protecting interest of consumers and supply of electricity to all areas, 
rationalisation of electricity tariff, ensuring transparent policies regarding 
subsidies, promotion of efficient and environmentally benign policies, 
constitution of Central Electricity Authority, Regulatory Commissions and 
establishment of Appellate Tribunal and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto21”. The 2003 Act, by virtue of section 185(1), 
repealed, inter alia, the 1910 Act and the 1948 Act. The 1948 Act, since it 
related primarily to the statutory powers of the central electricity authority, 
state electricity authorities and generating companies, would be of minimal 
relevance while deciding the present dispute.  
10. 
We shall first answer the issue of applicability of section 56(2) of the 2003 
Act raised by the appellants, which was the turning point of the decision of 
the Division Bench, i.e., whether the limitation period of two (2) years 
prescribed by section 56(2) of the 2003 Act bars the appellants from raising 
demand for the period between June 1996 and May 2000. Though the 
Division Bench answered this question in the affirmative, in light of two 
subsequent contrary decisions rendered by this Court precisely on the 
point, this finding is rendered indefensible and would necessarily have to 
be set aside.  
11. 
In Kusumam Hotels (P) Ltd. v. Kerala SEB22, this Court, while 
examining the issue of retrospective discontinuance of tariff concessions 
 
21 Long title of 2003 Act 
22 (2008) 13 SCC 213 

13 
 
for the tourism industry, held that the liability accruing to the licensee being 
statutory in nature would continue to survive even after the enforcement 
of the 2003 Act in the following terms: 
“43. Whereas the bills are issued only in respect of the dues arising 
in terms of the law as was applicable prior to the coming into force 
of the 2003 Act, sub-section (2) of Section 56 shall apply after the 
said Act came into force. The Board could have even framed a tariff 
in terms of the provisions appended to Section 61 of the Act. The 
appellants incurred liability to pay the bill. The liability to pay 
electricity charges is a statutory liability. The Act provides for its 
consequences. Unless therefore, the 2003 Act specifically introduced 
the bar of limitation as regards the liability of the consumer incurred 
prior to coming into force of the said Act; in our opinion, having 
regard to Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, the liability continues. 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
12. 
This decision has been affirmed by a decision of three (3) Judges in K.C. 
Ninan (supra) and is the sheet-anchor of the argument of Ms Mathew. 
There, this Court affirmed the principle that liabilities which arose prior to 
the 2003 Act coming into force would escape the limitation period 
prescribed by section 56(2) of the 2003 Act: 
“130. Before we deal with the implication of Section 56(2) on the 
civil remedies available to a licensee, it is important to clarify that 
when the liability incurred by a consumer is prior to the period 
when the 2003 Act came into force, then the bar of limitation 
under Section 56(2) is not applicable. In Kusumam Hotels Pvt Ltd. 
v. Kerala State Electricity Board, this Court has held that Section 
56(2) applies after the 2003 Act came into force and the bar of 
limitation under Section 56(2) would not apply to a liability 
incurred by the consumer prior to the enforcement of the Act. In 
terms of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, the liability 
incurred under the previous enactment would continue and the 
claim of the licensee to recover electricity would be governed by 
the regulatory framework which was in existence prior to the 
enforcement of the 2003 Act. 
134. The period of limitation under Section 56(2) is relatable to 
the sum due under Section 56. The sum due under Section 56 
relates to the sum due on account of the negligence of a person 
to pay for electricity. Section 56(2) provides that such sum due 
would not be recoverable after the period of two years from when 

14 
 
such sum became first due. The means of recovery provided under 
Section 56 relate to the remedy of disconnection of electric supply. 
The right to recover still subsists.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
13. 
As settled by this Court, section 185(5) of the 2003 Act read with section 
6 of the 1897 Act would lead to the inescapable conclusion that the 
limitation period of two (2) years prescribed for recovery of dues under 
section 56 of the 2003 Act would apply to liabilities arising under the 2003 
Act, and not prior to the enforcement thereof. Thus, we hold that the 
Division Bench manifestly erred in holding that the liability incurred by the 
first respondent prior to the enforcement of the 2003 Act would still be 
barred by the provisions of section 56(2) thereof. 
14. 
The first question is, thus, answered against the first respondent. 
15. 
We now endeavour to examine, whether the demand raised by the 
appellants ought to fail on the ground of delay and/or whether the amount 
due is still recoverable in the manner ordained by section 24 of the 1910 
Act. Imperative for us to complete this exercise of analysing the legal 
position is to read the section itself. To the extent relevant, it reads:  
24. Discontinuance of supply to consumer neglecting to pay 
charge.  
(1) Where any person neglects to pay any charge for energy or any 
sum, other than a charge for energy, due from him to a licensee in 
respect of the supply of energy to him, the licensee may, after giving 
not less than seven clear days’ notice in writing to such person and 
without prejudice to his right to recover such charge or other sum by 
suit, cut off the supply and for that purpose cut or disconnect any 
electric supply-line or other works being the property of the licensee, 
through which energy may be supplied, and may discontinue the 
supply until such charger or other sum, together with ally expenses 
incurred by him in cutting off and reconnecting the supply, are paid, 
but no longer. 
(2) *** 
 

15 
 
16. 
Section 24 in clear terms authorised a licensee to disconnect supply of 
energy to any person, if he neglected to pay any charge for energy or sum, 
other than a charge for energy, due from him. The condition precedent for 
such disconnection was issuance of a clear seven days’ prior notice. This, 
in our opinion, is an in terrorem measure which is apart from the right of 
the licensee to recover the sum due by instituting a suit. Noticeably, section 
24 did not refer to any period of limitation as in section 56(2) of the 2003 
Act. If the licensee were to opt for institution of a suit, it cannot be 
contended with any degree of conviction that since section 24 does not 
prescribe a period of limitation or does not refer to the Limitation Act, 
196323, a suit can be instituted at any time as per the convenience of the 
licensee. Electrical energy is a saleable commodity or goods, which we find 
usually to be sold on credit. That is, the licensee first supplies the energy 
and a bill is raised by the licensee specifying the date by which the charges 
are to be paid, whereafter it is the liability of the consumer to pay it. On 
neglect to pay, the consequences in section 24(1) are attracted. Having 
regard to such state of affairs, a suit for recovery of the price of electrical 
energy supplied, or sold, by the licensee and consumed by the consumer 
would be governed by Article 15 of the 1963 Act, reading as follows: 
                        Part II – Suits relating to Contracts 
Description of suit                      Period of          Time from which period                 
                                                Limitation              begins to run 
 
15. For the price of goods        Three years  
When the period of  
sold and delivered to be                                      credit expires. 
paid for after the expiry of  
 
23 1963 Act 

16 
 
a fixed period of credit. 
         
 
17. 
The position in law would have been otherwise, if section 24(1) itself had 
prescribed a period of limitation different from the one in Article 15 (supra). 
Since section 24 does not prescribe any period of limitation than that 
prescribed by the 1963 Act, as is done by the new avatar thereof in the 
2003 Act, limitation would set in immediately upon the consumer’s neglect 
to pay the amount mentioned in the bill raised by the licensee. This Court, 
in Ajmer Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd. v. Rahamatullah Khan24, followed 
by Prem Cottex v. Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd.25, has held 
that a consumer can be said to have neglected to pay any sum due to the 
licensee only after a demand is raised by the licensee and if no demand is 
raised by the licensee, the question of a consumer neglecting to pay any 
sum due to the licensee does not and cannot arise. Thus, a licensee 
acquires the right of action to institute a suit immediately after the 
consumer neglects to pay the amount mentioned in the bill raised by it. 
18. 
There could be situations like the one in Rahamatullah Khan (supra) 
where the licensee might have committed a mistake. In such a case, the 
period of limitation would begin only from the point of discovery of the 
mistake and not earlier; and, such a case could be covered by section 17 
of 1963 Act.  
19. 
It cannot be overemphasized that section 17 of the 1963 Act is meant to 
save suits from being dismissed as time-barred, which could not be filed 
 
24 (2020) 4 SCC 650 
25 (2021) 20 SCC 200 

17 
 
due to bona fide mistakes or errors. If a suitor alleges that the suit could 
not be instituted by him within the prescribed period of limitation because 
of some mistake, which came to be discovered beyond the period 
prescribed for institution of a suit, it is open to such suitor to claim 
exemption from limitation in terms of Order VII Rule 6 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 and such exemption can be granted in an appropriate 
case. However, if a suitor alleges to have discovered a mistake later but it 
is proved on evidence being led that exercise of reasonable diligence could 
have resulted in the mistake being discovered on an earlier date, limitation 
would begin to count from that earlier date; and, in case, the count from 
the said earlier date takes the date of institution of the suit beyond the 
prescribed period of limitation, the bar of limitation would get attracted. 
Mistake is, thus, not a circumstance which can be used as a shield to save 
negligence in all cases. Absence of due diligence or lack of bona fides would 
not clothe a suitor to take undue advantage of a beneficent provision like 
section 17; it is for the relevant court to separate the grain from the chaff.  
20. 
The upshot of the aforesaid discussion is that although section 24 of the 
1910 Act prescribes no period of limitation, it does allow the licensee to 
discontinue supply of energy upon a consumer neglecting to pay charges 
that are demanded by raising a bill, irrespective of the fact that a suit for 
recovery of unpaid charges would be barred if not instituted within three 
(3) years of the liability accruing. There appears to be no limitation as 
regards the period within which notice under section 24(1) has to be 
issued, evincing the intention of the licensee to disconnect supply for non-
payment of claimed dues. However, if in case, despite the consumer not 

18 
 
paying the charges demanded and the notice thereunder is not issued 
within a reasonable period or at any time within which a suit for recovery 
could be instituted, whether the right of the licensee to claim the unpaid 
charges would lapse will have to be decided by the court before whom the 
lis is brought upon consideration of the defence that is raised and the 
explanation for the delay. We only say that it must depend on the facts of 
each particular case whether the demand by reason of mere delay should 
be interdicted or not.   
21. 
Be that as it may, in this case, no suit was instituted within the period of 
limitation or beyond. We need not examine here whether the remedy by 
way of a suit for the appellants stood foreclosed, because of the contention 
of the first respondent that no demand had been raised and the show cause 
notices cannot be construed as demands. However, did issuance of the 
second show cause notice (on 07th January, 2009) afford a fresh cause of 
action for the first respondent to invoke the writ jurisdiction of the High 
Court and did it turn out to be fatal for the appellants? We shall endeavour 
to find an answer to this question by first reading the show cause notices 
issued by the appellants. 
22. 
The operative portion of the first show cause notice (dated 14th July, 2000) 
is extracted hereinbelow: 
“On going through the past consumption, i.e. w.e.f. June 1996 
to till date it is observed that units consumed by you are not up 
to the mark as units worked out on 35% or 39% load factor as 
and when applicable.  
It shows that you fails (sic, failed) to fulfil the condition no.5 of 
the said permission letter dt. 30.5.96 by not consuming units 
equivalent to units worked out on load factor as above. The 
consumption found is on The consumption found is on lower side 

19 
 
in various months. The liability accrued on this account comes 
to Rs. 70.50.lacs. Statement of liability is enclosed.  
Therefore, please take this as Notice of Show Cause as to why 
not the supplementary demand towards less consumption, as 
per statement enclosed, be raised against your HT connection.  
Your representation in this regard, may be please be submitted 
within 15 days from the date of receipt of this letter” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
23. 
Thereafter, the second show cause notice was issued on 07th January, 2009, 
the operative portion whereof is extracted hereinbelow:  
“It shows that you fails (sic, failed) to fulfil the condition no.5 of 
the said permission letter dt. 30.5.96 by not consuming units 
equivalent to units worked out on load factor as above. The 
consumption found is on lower side in various months. The 
liability accrued on this account comes to Rs. 70.50.lacs. 
Statement of liability is enclosed.  
Therefore, please take this as Notice of Show Cause as to why 
not the supplementary demand towards less consumption, as 
per statement enclosed, be raised against your HT connection.  
You had earlier filed W.P. No. 677/2000 before Hon’ble High 
Court in connection with some other dispute relating to TG set 
permission. You had withdrawn aforesaid writ petition with 
liberty to represent the matter before the respondent (Board) 
and in case further grievances are left liberty to assail the same 
in accordance with law. Accordingly Hon’ble High Court had 
disposed off (sic, of) the same on 21.2.2006 with the aforesaid 
liberty to you.  
Your reply / representation, if any, in this regard, may be please 
be submitted within 30 days from the date of issue of this letter, 
failing which the demand shall be raised without any further 
communication.”  
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
24. 
Ironing out the creases of when the amount first became due for the first 
respondent to pay, upon a demand being raised by the appellants, need 
not detain us for long having regard to certain admitted facts, to which we 
turn at this juncture. Perusal of two orders passed by the High Court, which 
intervened in course of the longstanding litigation between the parties, is 
essential. These orders passed on the first writ petition and an interlocutory 

20 
 
petition filed therein, seemingly innocuous, have a decisive influence in the 
present appeal.  
25. 
The first of these is the interim order dated 04th May, 2000 of the High 
Court on the first writ petition, reading as follows:  
“Heard. 
Admit. 
Issue notice returnable at an early date. 
Requisite steps in this regard be taken within 3 days. 
The question in regard to the grant of interim relief will be considered 
after notices are served.  
In the meanwhile, considering the facts and circumstances as brought 
on record, it is directed that the operation of the impugned order dated 
28.3.2000 a true copy of which has been filed as annexure P/1 to the 
writ petition shall remain stayed till the next date of listing subject to the 
following conditions: 
The petitioner shall deposit the minimum guarantee charges payable as 
against the load of 807kVA which shall be assessed by the respondent 
Board and intimated to the petitioner within a week. 
***” 
(emphasis supplied) 
26. 
The position that emerges from the above extract is that the order dated 
28th March, 2000 cancelling permission to run the T.G. set was stayed, 
subject to the first respondent depositing the minimum guarantee charges. 
It was open to the first respondent not to pay but that would have involved 
the risk of not operating the T.G. set. If, indeed, the first respondent was 
not interested in running the T.G. set, it could have withdrawn the writ 
petition then and there; or, it could have subjected such order to an appeal. 
The first respondent did not carry the order in appeal and, thus, the order 
attained finality.   
27. 
That the first respondent was duly interested in the outcome of the first 
writ petition and to obtain an order for running the T.G. set is clear from 
what happened thereafter. The first show cause notice was issued 

21 
 
demanding Rs 70,50,478/- (Rupees seventy lakhs fifty thousand four 
hundred and seventy eight only). This was the trigger for the miscellaneous 
petition which the first respondent filed, subjecting the first show cause 
notice to challenge. Although the miscellaneous petition is not on record, 
the first respondent in its ‘List of Dates’ handed over to us at the time of 
hearing conceded that the “Respondent Company challenged the First 
Show Cause Notice by way of M(W)P 230/2000 in WP 677/2000, which was 
disposed of vide Order dated 14 February 2001 ...”. While disposing of the 
miscellaneous petition in favour of the appellants and against the first 
respondent, the High Court vide its order dated 14th February, 2001 held 
as follows:  
“Earlier on 4.5.2000 this court has categorically ordered that petitioner 
shall pay the respondents minimum guarantee charge as per agreement 
with respondents. The petitioner is bound to pay the minimum guarantee 
amount whether electricity is consumed or not. This order is subject to 
modification if some rules for generating sets are framed by the 
respondents electricity board. The question of recovery of bill on T.G. set 
is not warranted unless the rules for recovery are produced. 
Petition is disposed of.”  
(emphasis supplied) 
 
28. 
This order too went unchallenged by the first respondent and was allowed 
to attain finality with the effect that the first show cause notice stood 
upheld by the High Court, though by an interim order. 
29. 
There is, also, no record of the first respondent having made payment 
pursuant to the aforementioned orders, despite acceptance thereof (the 
orders) by conduct. In fact, it is an undisputed position as would appear 
from the aforesaid factual narrative that the first respondent did not obey 
the orders foisting liability on it for payment of the minimum guarantee 
charges; on the contrary, on 21st February, 2006, the first respondent 

22 
 
withdrew the first writ petition, with liberty to represent the matter before 
the respondents owing to some change in policy with regard to running of 
T.G. sets. In effect, despite the orders dated 04th May, 2000 and 14th 
February, 2001 staring at its face, the first respondent avoided a decision 
on the merits of the writ petition and effectively foreclosed its right to have 
the demand towards minimum guarantee charges nullified. As per the 
counter affidavit, which the appellants as respondents filed in the second 
writ petition, no representation was also filed by the first respondent for 
which leave was obtained as recorded in the order passed on 21st February, 
2006. Thus, the orders having become final, leave no room for the first 
respondent to escape its statutory liability by arguing a bar of limitation, 
when the statute itself did not prescribe such a bar.  
30. 
There cannot be any doubt that once an interim order is passed in a suit 
or a proceeding, the interim relief granted to the party seeking interim 
relief could either be confirmed or vacated at the time of final disposal of 
the suit or proceedings, as the case may be. If the disposal is by way of an 
order of dismissal, interim relief which is granted as an aid of or ancillary 
to the final relief cannot continue beyond termination of such suit or 
proceedings. This is the position of law flowing from the decision in State 
of Orissa v. Madan Gopal Rungta26.  
31. 
However, if in a particular suit or proceeding, interim relief is sought in 
respect of a development subsequent to institution of the suit/proceedings, 
as in the present case (where the first show cause notice came into 
 
261951 SCC 1024 

23 
 
existence after the first writ petition was filed), and the challenge to such 
subsequent development is spurned, the party who has approached the 
court cannot be heard to say that the effect of spurning of the challenge 
would come to an end with the disposal of the suit/proceedings. The effect 
of the challenge being spurned would continue till such time it is reversed 
in appeal or reviewed in a manner known to law.  
32. 
The situation in such a case, adversely affecting the party whose challenge 
has been spurned, cannot be sought to be overcome by contending that 
the suit or proceedings has/have not been dismissed on merits but 
was/were merely withdrawn. By seeking a withdrawal, the Court before 
whom the lis was brought is requested not to decide the lis and if the Court 
while granting the prayer for withdrawal does not grant leave for institution 
of a fresh suit on the same cause of action, or even if leave is granted and 
a fresh suit/proceeding is instituted, that would not have the effect of 
negating the order spurning challenge passed in the earlier suit/ 
proceedings. The same would remain operative till set aside or varied. 
33. 
It was, therefore, incumbent upon the first respondent to challenge the 
order dated 14th February, 2001; and having failed to do so, it would not 
be of any merit for the first respondent to contend that until the 
disconnection notice had been issued on 18th March, 2009, the liability had 
not crystallised so as to render the first respondent liable to pay the same. 
The challenge to the first show cause notice having failed, as noticed above, 
the principle of issue estoppel operated as a bar for the first respondent to 
raise a challenge to the second show cause notice, which had been issued 

24 
 
for precisely the same due amount of Rs 70,50,478/- (Rupees seventy 
lakhs fifty thousand four hundred and seventy eight only).  
34. 
We consider it apposite to refer to a three-Judge Bench decision of this 
Court in Hope Plantations Ltd. v. Taluk Land Board27, where the 
principle of issue estoppel was expounded thus: 
“26. It is settled law that the principles of estoppel and res judicata are 
based on public policy and justice. Doctrine of res judicata is often 
treated as a branch of the law of estoppel though these two doctrines 
differ in some essential particulars. Rule of res judicata prevents the 
parties to a judicial determination from litigating the same question over 
again even though the determination may even be demonstratedly 
wrong. When the proceedings have attained finality, parties are bound 
by the judgment and are estopped from questioning it. They cannot 
litigate again on the same cause of action nor can they litigate any issue 
which was necessary for decision in the earlier litigation. These two 
aspects are ‘cause of action estoppel’ and ‘issue estoppel’. These two 
terms are of common law origin. Again, once an issue has been finally 
determined, parties cannot subsequently in the same suit advance 
arguments or adduce further evidence directed to showing that the issue 
was wrongly determined. Their only remedy is to approach the higher 
forum if available. The determination of the issue between the parties 
gives rise to, as noted above, an issue estoppel. It operates in any 
subsequent proceedings in the same suit in which the issue had been 
determined. It also operates in subsequent suits between the same 
parties in which the same issue arises. Section 11 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure contains provisions of res judicata but these are not 
exhaustive of the general doctrine of res judicata. Legal principles of 
estoppel and res judicata are equally applicable in proceedings before 
administrative authorities as they are based on public policy and justice.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
35. 
Another bench of three Judges of this Court in Bhanu Kumar Jain v. 
Archana Kumar28 had the occasion to survey several decisions of English 
courts and explained that there was a distinction between res judicata and 
issue estoppel in the following words: 
“30. Res judicata debars a court from exercising its jurisdiction to 
determine the lis if it has attained finality between the parties 
 
27 (1999) 5 SCC 590 
28 (2005) 1 SCC 787 

25 
 
whereas the doctrine issue estoppel is invoked against the party. 
If such an issue is decided against him, he would be estopped from 
raising the same in the latter proceeding. ***”  
(emphasis supplied) 
36. 
To recount, the order of the High Court dated 14th February, 2001, though 
interim in the sense that it disposed of an interlocutory application, was a 
conclusive determination of the issue raised by the first respondent itself 
and which went against it. The first and second show cause notices were 
similarly worded and identical in the demands that they raised on the first 
respondent. Challenge to the first show cause notice having failed and 
notwithstanding that the appellants did not require payment by threatening 
the first respondent with disconnection of supply, which the appellants were 
authorised as per section 24(1), the first respondent was certainly 
estopped from agitating the same issue of demand vide its second writ 
petition.  
 
37. 
The issue of demand arising from the first respondent’s failure to consume 
the monthly minimum units may have been decided vide the order dated 
04th May, 2000 without assigning sufficient reasons or, for that matter, even 
wrongly. The learned Single Judge simply went by the terms of the contract 
between the parties without examining whether there was any substantial 
ground for the first respondent to urge that the jurisdictional fact for 
demanding payment of minimum guarantee charges did not exist and, 
hence, it was not liable to pay. Such order had also been reiterated by the 
subsequent order dated 14th February, 2001 of another learned Single 
Judge, again without due examination of what the case was on behalf of 

26 
 
the first respondent and without assignment of any reason. However, does 
anything turn on it? The answer is an emphatic ‘NO’. As has been held in 
Hope Plantations (supra) and Bhanu Kumar Jain (supra), a point even 
if wrongly decided binds the party against whom it is decided and the same 
point cannot be urged in a subsequent suit or proceeding at the same level. 
The crux of the matter is that the issue of liability accruing to the first 
respondent for non-payment of minimum guarantee charges had been 
decided previously and such decision, not being subjected to any appeal, 
had attained finality in the eyes of law estopping the first respondent from 
reagitating the issue. In our considered opinion, the second writ petition at 
the instance of the first respondent was not maintainable and, accordingly, 
ought not to have been entertained at all.  
38. 
However, since the appellants accepted the order of the learned Single 
Judge dated 16th July, 2009 and issued a fresh demand for a reduced 
amount and which has since been recovered by encashing the bank 
guarantee, we make no order for changing the position flowing from the 
said order.   
 
CONCLUSION 
 
39. 
The inevitable result, on conjoint reading of all the judicial orders on/in 
connection with the first writ petition together with the conduct of the first 
respondent, is that the orders dated 04th May, 2000 and 14th February, 
2001, so to say, judicially crystallised the liability of the first respondent to 
pay the minimum guarantee charges and such orders having attained 

27 
 
finality, bound the first respondent; and no amount of argument by the 
first respondent, either on the point of delay in raising the demand or a 
merit-based review of the action of the appellants, in the second writ 
petition was open to persuade the High Court hold in its (first respondent) 
favour by allowing the intra-court appeal.  
40. 
The impugned judgment and order of the High Court allowing the intra-
court appeal being unsustainable in law has to be and is, accordingly, set 
aside with the result that the civil appeal stands allowed. Parties are, 
however, left to bear their own costs.  
 
 
……………………………J   
(DIPANKAR DATTA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
……………………………J   
(PANKAJ MITHAL) 
New Delhi; 
4th November, 2024.