2024 INSC 831
Page 1 of 70 
 
Reportable  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE/ ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
 
Special Leave Petition (C) No.8541 of 2024  
 
 
 
Anjum Kadari & Anr. 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 …Appellants 
 
 
 
Versus 
 
 
Union of India & Ors.   
 
 
 
 
 
…Respondents  
 
 
 
With  
Special Leave Petition (C) No.7857 of 2024 
 
With  
Special Leave Petition (C) No.7821 of 2024  
 
With  
Special Leave Petition (C) No.7878 of 2024 
 
With  
Special Leave Petition (C) No.7890 of 2024  
 
With 
Special Leave Petition (C) No.13038 of 2024  
 
With  
Contempt Petition (C) No.591 of 2024 
In SLP (C) No.7878 of 2024 
 
And with  
Transfer Petition (C) No.2697 of 2024  
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2024.11.05
12:39:29 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 70 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
 
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 
 
Table of Contents 
A. 
Introduction .......................................................................................................... 4 
B. 
Background .......................................................................................................... 4 
a. 
History of Madarsas ......................................................................................... 4 
b. 
Teaching in Madarsas ...................................................................................... 6 
c. 
Madarsa Act ...................................................................................................... 9 
d. 
Steps taken by the State Government and the Board pursuant to the 
Madarsa Act .................................................................................................... 18 
e. 
Proceedings before the High Court and Impugned Judgment .................. 20 
f. 
Steps taken by the State Government and the proceedings before this 
Court ................................................................................................................ 23 
C. 
Submissions ...................................................................................................... 24 
D. 
Secularism and regulation of minority educational institutions ................... 29 
a. 
Secularism in the constitutional context ..................................................... 29 
b. 
Testing the validity of a statute for violation of the basic structure of the 
Constitution .................................................................................................... 34 
c. 
Regulation of minority educational institutions .......................................... 41 
d. 
The Madarsa Act is a regulatory legislation ................................................ 45 

Page 3 of 70 
 
e. 
Interplay of Article 21-A and Article 30 ......................................................... 51 
E. 
Legislative Competence .................................................................................... 54 
a. 
The Madarsa Act is within the legislative competence of the State under 
Entry 25, List III ............................................................................................... 54 
b. 
Certain provisions of the Madarsa Act conflict with the UGC Act enacted 
under Entry 66, List I ...................................................................................... 59 
c. 
The entire Madarsa Act need not be struck down on the above ground .. 65 
F. 
Conclusion ......................................................................................................... 69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PART A & B  
Page 4 of 70 
 
A. 
Introduction 
1. The High Court of Judicature at Allahabad1 has held the Uttar Pradesh Board 
of Madarsa Education Act, 20042 to be unconstitutional on the ground that it 
violates the principle of secularism and Articles 14 and 21A of the Constitution. 
The Madarsa Act established the Uttar Pradesh Board of Madarsa Education,3 
to regulate, among other things, the standards of education, qualifications for 
teachers, and conduct of examinations in Madarsas in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh. The entirety of the Act has been struck down by the High Court. 
B. 
Background 
a. 
History of Madarsas 
2. The term ‘madarsa’ refers to any school or college where any sort of education 
is imparted.4 The history of the establishment of Madarsas in the Indian 
subcontinent may be traced to the rule of the Tughlaqs.5 The pre-colonial 
Madarsas were of two types: (i) the Maktabs which were attached to mosques 
and imparted elementary education; and (ii) the Madarsas which were centres 
of higher learning and contributed to the administrative, religious, and cultural 
needs of the prevalent society.6 During colonial rule, the relative importance of 
Madarsas diminished with the introduction of English as the language of the 
colonial administration.7 
 
1 “High Court” 
2 “Madarsa Act” 
3 “Board” 
4 Yoginder Sikand, Bastions of the Believers: Madrasas and Islamic Education in India (Penguin Books, 2005)  
5 ibid 
6 Arshad Alam, ‘Understanding Madrasas’ (2003) 38(22) Economic and Political Weekly 2123  
7 Padmaja Nair, The State and madrasas in India (Working Paper 15, University of Birmingham 2009) 11 

PART B  
Page 5 of 70 
 
3. The colonial government formulated the Education Code of 1908 to recognize 
Madarsas in Uttar Pradesh for conducting Arabi-Pharsi examinations. The 
Arabic institutions preparing candidates for Maulvi, Alim, and Fazil 
examinations and the Persian institutions preparing candidates for Munshi and 
Kamil examinations were required to make an application to the Registrar of 
Arabic and Persian Examinations. 
4. After Independence, the Department of Education of the UP government issued 
the Madrasa Education Rules 1969 to bring Madarsas under the domain of the 
Education Department. Subsequently, the State government framed the UP 
Non-Government Arabic and Persian Madrasa Recognition Rules 19878 to 
govern the procedure for recognition and the terms and conditions of service of 
teachers in the Madarsas. According to the 1987 Rules, recognition to 
Madarsas was granted by the Recognition Committee and confirmed by the 
Registrar of Arabic and Persian Exams. The 1987 Rules also prescribed 
requirements for the quality of buildings and eligibility qualifications for teaching 
staff as a precondition to the grant of recognition. In 1996, the management of 
Madarsas was transferred to the Minority Welfare and Waqf Department of the 
UP government.  
5. The Central government has also framed schemes to modernize education 
imparted in Madarsas. In 1993-1994, the Central Government implemented the 
Area Intensive and Madrasa Modernization Programme9 to encourage 
 
8 “1987 Rules” 
9 “Madrasa Modernization Programme” (Under the Madrasa Modernization Programme, the government 
covered the salary of two madrasa teachers who taught modern subjects. It also provided one-time grants 
for purchase of science and math kits and book-banks for the madrasa libraries. See PIB, Ministry of Human 

PART B  
Page 6 of 70 
 
Madarsas and Maktabs to teach modern subjects such as Science, 
Mathematics, English, Hindi, and Social Studies alongside the traditional 
curriculum. The Madrasa Modernization Programme subsequently became a 
part of the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan. During the 11th Five Year Plan (2007 to 
2011), the Ministry of Human Resource Development implemented the Scheme 
for Providing Quality Education in Madrasas to encourage and incentivize 
Madarsas and Maktabs to impart education in modern subjects by providing 
them financial assistance.10 Only Madarsas which have been in existence for 
at least three years and registered under central or state legislation, Madarsa 
boards, or waqf boards are eligible to apply for assistance under this scheme.11  
b. 
Teaching in Madarsas 
6. According to the data placed on record in the affidavit filed by the State of Uttar 
Pradesh, there are presently around thirteen thousand Madarsas catering to 
more than twelve lakh students in the state. The following table is instructive: 
Type of Madarsas 
Number of Madarsas 
Number of students 
State funded 
560 
1,92,317 
Permanently recognized 
(non-state funded) 
3,834 
4,37,237 
Temporarily recognized 
(non-state funded) 
8,970 
6,04,834 
Total 
13,364 
12,34,388 
 
Resource Development, Centre Releases Rs. 5.9 crore for madrasa modernization (12 December 2003) 
https://archive.pib.gov.in/archive/releases98/lyr2003/rdec2003/12122003/r1212200330.html) 
10 Department of School Education and Literacy, https://dsel.education.gov.in/spemm 
11 
Central 
Sponsored 
Scheme 
for 
Providing 
Quality 
Education 
in 
Madrasa, 
https://www.education.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/upload_document/SPQEM-scheme.pdf 

PART B  
Page 7 of 70 
 
7. The state government has an annual budget of Rupees one thousand and 
ninety-six crores for the salaries of teaching and non-teaching staff working in 
the state-aided Madarsas. The state government also provides books and 
midday meals to students of state-funded Madarsas. Moreover, it also operates 
Industrial Training Institutes in recognised Madarsas to teach trades such as 
welding, mechanics, and stenography.  
8. Academic education in Madarsas is broadly divided into four levels: (i) Tathania 
(equivalent of elementary classes I to V); (ii) Fauquania (equivalent to upper 
elementary classes VI to VIII); (iii) Maulvi or munshi (equivalent to a certificate 
of secondary school or Xth standard); and (iv) Alim (certificate of senior 
secondary level examination or XIIth standard).  
9. The syllabus until the Alim classes is in accordance with the syllabus of the 
Uttar Pradesh State Council of Educational Research and Training.12 For the 
Munshi/Maulvi and Alim levels, the Madarsas teach subjects such as theology 
(Sunni and Shia), Arabic literature, Persian literature, Urdu literature, General 
English, General Hindi, and optional subjects such as Mathematics, Home 
Sciences, Logic and Philosophy, Social Sciences, Science, Tibb (medical 
science), and Typing. The Munshi/Maulvi and Alim certificates are treated 
equivalent to High School and Intermediate levels respectively by the Uttar 
Pradesh government and the Government of India. The Sachar Committee 
 
12 “SCERT” 

PART B  
Page 8 of 70 
 
Report suggests that most students study in Madarsas only till primary and 
middle classes.13 
10. A few Madarsas also award certificates of Kamil (undergraduate degree) and 
Fazil (post-graduate degree). The State of Uttar Pradesh has stated in its 
affidavit that Kamil and Fazil degrees awarded by Madarsas are not recognised 
as alternatives to graduate and post-graduate degrees respectively. The 
government further states: 
“At the undergraduate and post graduate level, the 
U.P Madrasa Board grants the Qamil and Fazil 
degrees respectively, specialized courses for the 
education of Arabic-Persian and Deenyat subjects, 
which are the minimum educational qualifications 
required for imparting education of Arabic-Persian 
and Deenyat subjects in Madrasas. These courses 
have not been given equivalence by the Government 
of Uttar Pradesh/Government of India/any university 
established by law, nor has the education of these 
courses been recognized as an alternative to the 
graduation/post-graduation degree of a university 
established by law for employment at the level of 
Uttar Pradesh Government or Government of India.”   
11. Consequently, students educated in Madarsas are only eligible for occupations 
that have High School or Intermediate as qualification requirements. While 
Kamil and Fazil are not considered to be alternatives to the regular 
undergraduate and post-graduate degrees, a notification issued by the 
University Grants Commission14 in March 2014 which lists the degrees 
governed by the University Grants Commission Act 195615 includes both Fazil 
 
13 Social, Economic and Educational Status of the Muslim Community of India: A Report (Prime Minister’s 
High Level Committee, Cabinet Secretariat, Government of India) Appendix Table 4.4 (293) 
14 “UGC” 
15 “UGC Act” 

PART B  
Page 9 of 70 
 
and Kamil under the title of ‘Specification of Degrees with Urdu/Persian/Arabic 
nomenclature’. The effect of the notification shall be considered in the course 
of the judgment. 
c. 
Madarsa Act  
12. The State legislature of Uttar Pradesh enacted the Madarsa Act which was 
deemed to come into force on 3 September 2004. The long title of the Madarsa 
Act states that it is “an Act to provide for the establishment of a Board of 
Madarsa Education in the State and for the matters connected therewith and 
incidental thereto”. The Statement of Objects and Reasons indicates the reason 
for the enactment:  
“In para 55 of the Education Code the Registrar, 
Arabi-Pharasi 
Examinations, 
Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Allahabad had been authorised to recognise the 
Arabi-Pharasi Madarsas in the State and for 
conducting the examinations of such Madarsas. 
These Madarsas were managed by the Education 
Department. But with the creation of the Minority 
Welfare and Wakfs Department in 1995 all the works 
relating to such Madarsas were transferred from 
Education Department to the Minority Welfare 
Departments by virtue of which all the works relating 
to Madarsas are being performed under the control 
of the Director, Minority Welfare, Uttar Pradesh and 
the Registrar/Inspector Arabi-Pharasi Madarsas, 
Uttar Pradesh. The Arabi-Pharasi Madarsas were 
being 
administered 
under 
the 
Arabi-Pharasi 
Madarsas Rules, 1987 but since the said rules have 
not been made under an Act, many complication 
[sic] arose in running the Madarsas under the said 
rules. Therefore, with a view to removing the 
difficulties arisen in running the Madarsas, 
improving the merit therein and making available 
the best facility of study to the students studying 
in Madarsas it was decided to make a law to 
provide for the establishment of a Board of 
Madarsa Education in the state and for the 

PART B  
Page 10 of 70 
 
matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.   
 
…” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
13. Section 2 provides definitions. The expressions “institution”, “Madarsa 
Education” and “recognition” have been defined as follows:  
“2. Definitions. — In this Act unless the context 
otherwise requires: —  
… 
(j) “institution” means the Government Oriental 
College, Rampur and includes a Madarsa or an 
Oriental College established and administered by 
Muslim Minorites and recognized by the Board for 
imparting Madarsa-Education; 
 
(h) “Madarsa-Education” means education in Arabic, 
Urdu, Parsian, Islamic studies, Tibb Logic, Philosophy 
and includes such other branches of learning as 
may be specified by the Board from time to time; 
 
… 
(j) “recognition” means, recognition for the purpose of 
preparing candidates for admission to the Board's 
Examination; 
…” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
14. Section 3 provides the constitution of the Board. Sub-section (1) of Section 3 
provides that the Board shall be established at Lucknow on the date declared 
by the State government by a notification. Sub-section (2) states that the Board 
shall be a body corporate, while Sub-section (3) details the composition of the 
Board. The majority of the members of the Board are either part of the State 

PART B  
Page 11 of 70 
 
Government (or the legislature) or nominated by the State Government. The 
Board consists of the following members:  
a. a renowned Muslim educationist in the field of Madarsa Education, 
nominated by the State Government, who is the Chairperson; 
b. the Director, Minority Welfare, Uttar Pradesh, who is the Vice 
Chairperson; 
c. principal, Government Oriental College, Rampur; 
d. one Sunni-Muslim Legislator to be elected by both houses of the State 
Legislature;  
e. one Shia-Muslim Legislator to be elected by both houses of the State 
Legislature; 
f. one representative of the National Council for Educational Research and 
Training (NCERT); 
g. two heads of institutions established and administered by Sunni Muslims, 
nominated by the State Government; 
h. one head of institution established and administered by Shia Muslims, 
nominated by the State Government; 
i. two teachers of institutions established and administered by Sunni 
Muslims nominated by the State Government;  
j. one teacher of an institution established and administered by Shia 
Muslims, nominated by the State Government; 
k. one Science or Tibb teacher of an institution nominated by the State 
Government; 

PART B  
Page 12 of 70 
 
l. the Account and Finance Officer in the Directorate of Minority Welfare, 
Uttar Pradesh; 
m. the Inspector16; and  
n. an officer not below the rank of Deputy Director nominated by the State 
Government, who is the Registrar. 
15. Sub-section (4) of Section 3 deals with the issuance of a notification by the 
State Government that the Board has been duly constituted, after the election 
and nomination of the members. Sub-section (5) pertains to the procedure to 
nominate or elect members who are Sunni-Muslim or Shia-Muslim legislators 
in certain special circumstances. Sub-section (6) stipulates that from the date 
of the establishment of the Board, the erstwhile Arbi and Farsi Education Board 
shall stand dissolved.  
16. Section 4 pertains to the power of the State Government to remove members, 
other than ex-officio members, from the Board. This removal may be ordered, 
if in the opinion of the State Government, the member has “so flagrantly abused 
his position … as to render his continuance on the Board detrimental to the 
public interest”. Section 5 specifies the term of office of the members and 
Section 6 mandates that the State Government take steps to reconstitute the 
Board before the expiry of the terms of office of the members. Section 7 governs 
the procedural specificities of the meetings of the Board, while Section 8 
 
16 “Inspector” has been defined in S.2(e) of the Act as: “(e) ‘‘Inspector’’ means the inspector, Arabic Madarsas, 
Uttar Pradesh and includes an officer authorised by the State Government to perform all or any of the 
functions of the inspector under this Act” 

PART B  
Page 13 of 70 
 
clarifies that no acts of the Board or its committees may be invalidated on the 
ground of a vacancy or defect in its constitution.  
17. Section 9 which enunciates the functions of the Board, is relevant to the 
constitutional challenge before us. The functions of the Board are wide-ranging 
and relate to inter alia prescribing the course material, granting degrees or 
diplomas, conducting examinations, recognizing institutions to conduct 
exams, conducting research and training, and other incidental functions. These 
functions are exercised at various levels of education detailed above – Tahtania, 
Fauquania, Munshi, Maulvi, Alim, Kamil, Fazil, and other courses. The provision 
reads thus:  
“9. Functions of the Board. — Subject to the other 
provisions of this Act the Board shall have the following 
functions, namely: — 
(a) to prescribe course of instructions, textbooks, other 
books and instructional material, if any, for Tahtania, 
Fauquania, Munshi, Maulavi, Alim, Kamil, Fazil and 
other courses; 
(b) prescribe the course books, other books and 
instruction material of courses of Arbi, Urdu and Pharsi 
for classes up to High School and Intermediate 
standard in accordance with the course determined 
there for by the Board of High School and Intermediate 
Education; 
(c) to prepare manuscript of the course books, other 
books and instruction material referred to in clause (b) 
by excluding the matters therein wholly or partially or 
otherwise and to publish them; 
(d) prescribe standard for the appointment of Urdu 
translators in the various offices of the State and 
ensure through the appointing authority necessary 
action with respect to filling up of the vacant posts; 
(e) to grant Degrees, Diplomas, Certificates or other 
academic distinctions to persons, who— 
(i) have pursued a course of study in an institution 
admitted to the privileges or recognition by the Board; 

PART B  
Page 14 of 70 
 
(ii) have studied privately under conditions laid down in 
the regulations and have passed an examination of the 
Board under like conditions; 
(f) to conduct examinations of the Munshi, Maulavi, 
Alim and of Kamil and Fazil courses; 
(g) to recognize institutions for the purposes of its 
examination; 
(h) to admit candidates to its examination; 
(i) to demand and receive such fee as may be 
prescribed in the regulations; 
(j) to publish or withhold publication of the result of its 
examinations wholly or in part; 
(k) to co-operate with other authorities in such a 
manner and for such purposes as the Board may 
determine; 
(l) to call for reports from the Director on the condition 
of recognised institutions or of institutions applying for 
recognition; 
(m) to submit to the State Government its views on any 
matter with which it is concerned; 
(n) to see the schedules of new demands proposed to 
be included in the budget relating to institutions 
recognised by it and to submit if it thinks fit its views 
thereon for the consideration of the State Government; 
(o) to do all such other acts and things as may be 
requisite in order to further the objects of the Board as 
a body constituted for regulating and supervising 
Madarsa-Education up to Fazil; 
(p) to provide for research or training in any branch of 
Madarsa-Education viz, Darul Uloom Nav Uloom, 
Lucknow, Madarsa Babul lim, Mubarakpur, Azamgarh, 
Darul Uloom Devband, Saharanpur, Oriental College 
Rampur and any other institution which the State 
Government may notify time to time. 
(q) to constitute a committee at district level consisting 
of not less than three members for education up to 
Tahtania or Faukania standard, to delegate such 
committee the power of giving recognition to the 
educational institutions under its control. 
(r) to take all such steps as may be necessary or 
convenient for or as may be incidental to the exercise 
of any power, or the performance or discharge of any 
function or duty, conferred or imposed on it by this Act.” 
 

PART B  
Page 15 of 70 
 
18. Section 10 pertains to the ‘Powers of the Board’. Sub-section (1) defines these 
powers in general terms and stipulates that the Board shall have all such 
powers as may be necessary for the performance of its functions and the 
discharge of its duties under the Madarsa Act or the allied rules and regulations. 
Sub-section (2) details specific powers of the Board, without prejudice to the 
generality of the powers of the Board detailed in sub-section (1). These powers 
inter alia include the power to cancel or withhold the result of an examination, 
prescribe fees for the examinations conducted, refuse recognition of an 
institution, call for reports from and inspect institutions to ensure compliance 
with the prescribed rules and regulations and fix the maximum number of 
students to be admitted to a course. Sub-section (3) clarifies that the decision 
of the Board with regard to the matters dealt with in this provision shall be final. 
Section 11 allows the Board, to recognize an institution “in any new subject or 
group of subjects for a higher class”, with the prior approval of the State 
government. Section 12 deals with the proper utilization of donations by the 
institutions.  
19. Section 13 details the ‘Power of the State Government’ to inter alia issue 
directions and orders which are binding on the Board. Sub-section (1) states 
that the State Government shall have the right to address and to communicate 
its views to the Board on any matter with which it is concerned. Sub-section (2) 
requires the Board to report to the State Government if any action has been 
taken pursuant to the communications or proposals made by the State 
Government. Sub-section (3) stipulates that in circumstances where the Board 
does not act within a reasonable time to the satisfaction of the State 

PART B  
Page 16 of 70 
 
Government, after considering the explanation or representation by the Board, 
the State Government may issue necessary directions with which the Board 
shall comply. Sub-section (4) states that in cases, where the State Government 
is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient to take immediate action, it 
may, without making any reference to the Board, pass an order or take other 
action consistent with the Act, including modifying, rescinding or making any 
regulation. Sub-section (5) stipulates that such actions by the State 
Government shall not be called into question in any court. 
20. Section 14 deals with officers and other employees of the Board and provides 
that they are appointed by the Board, with the prior approval of the State 
Government. Sections 15 and 16 pertain to the powers and duties of the 
Chairperson and Registrar of the Board, respectively, while Section 17 deals 
with the appointment and constitution of committees and sub-committees.  
21. Section 20 stipulates the power of the Board to make regulations.17 Sub-section 
(1) provides this power in general terms and empowers the Board to make 
regulations “for carrying out the purposes of the Act”. Sub-section (2) details 
 
17 Section 20 reads: “20. (1) The Board may make regulations for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, the Board may make 
regulations providing for all or any of the following matters, namely:–  
(a) constitution, power and duties of committees and sub-committees;  
(b) the conferment of Degrees, Diplomas and Certificates;  
(c) the conditions of recognition of institutions;  
(d) the courses of study to be laid down for all Degrees, Diplomas and Certificates;  
(e) the conditions under which candidates shall be admitted to the examinations and research programme of 
the Board and shall be eligible for Degrees, Diplomas and Certificates;  
(f) the fees for admission to the examination of the Board;  
(g) the conduct of examination;  
(h) the appointment of examiners, moderators, collators, scrutinisers, tabulators, Centre inspectors, 
Superintendents of Centres and invigilators and their duties and powers in relation to the Board’s 
examinations and the rates of their remuneration;  
(i) the admission of institutions to the privilege of recognition and the withdrawal of recognition;  
(j) all matters which are to be, or may, provided for by regulations.” 

PART B  
Page 17 of 70 
 
particular matters for which the Board may make regulations, without prejudice 
to the generality of its powers. This includes subjects such as inter alia the 
conferment of degrees, diplomas and certificates, conditions for recognition of 
institutions, the course of study, and the conduct of examinations. Section 21 
mandates that these regulations shall be made with the prior approval of the 
State Government and published in the Gazette. The State Government may 
approve the regulations with or without modifications. Pursuant to these 
provisions, the Board has framed the Uttar Pradesh Non-Governmental Arabic 
and Persian Madarsa Recognition, Administration and Services Regulations, 
2016, with the approval of the State Government.18 
22. Sections 22 to 26 deal with subjects such as the requirement of a ‘scheme of 
administration’ for every institution; the procedure for appointment and 
conditions of service of heads of institutions, teachers, and other employees; 
casual vacancies; and the power of the Board and Committees to make by-
laws, respectively. Section 27 states that no suit, prosecution or legal 
proceedings shall lie against the State Government, the Board or any of its 
committees/sub-committees in respect of anything which is done in good faith 
or under the Madarsa Act and its allied rules, regulations, by-laws, orders or 
directions. Section 28 bars the jurisdiction of Courts and states that no order or 
decision of the Board or its committees/sub-committees shall be called into 
question in any court.  
 
18 “2016 Regulations” 

PART B  
Page 18 of 70 
 
23.  Section 32 confers on the State Government the power to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Madarsa Act.19 
d. 
Steps taken by the State Government and the Board pursuant to the 
Madarsa Act 
24. The provisions of the Madarsa Act grant the Board and the State Government 
wide-ranging powers to frame regulations, directions and rules and to regulate 
education in the Madarsas. After the enactment of the Madarsa Act, both the 
Board and the State Government have in fact taken various steps. Some of the 
steps detailed below indicate that there is a marked shift by the State 
Government and the Board towards including modern subjects in the curriculum 
and adopting the established curriculum (such as the NCERT curriculum). 
These steps are:  
a. On 15 May 2018, the Board issued a circular with the stated aim of 
“bringing educational upgradation in standardization and uniformity” in 
the Madarsas. The circular states that it has been decided that for 
education in the Madarsas in Mathematics, Science, English, Hindi, 
Computer Science and Social Science, the curriculum will be based on 
the available textbooks of NCERT. Subsequently, by a letter dated 30 
May 2018, the State Government sent a copy of the Circular and directed 
all the District Minority Welfare Officers to include the books prescribed 
by the NCERT in the syllabus of Madarsa Education from the Academic 
 
19 Section 32 reads: “32. The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act.” 

PART B  
Page 19 of 70 
 
Session of 2018-19. The District Minority Welfare Officers were directed 
to take steps to ensure that there are sufficient NCERT Books and to 
apprise the Board if training is required for the teachers in the Madarsas 
in the district; 
 
b.  Pursuant to Section 20, the Board has framed the 2016 Regulations with 
the approval of the State Government. Two amendments were made to 
the 2016 Regulations in 2017 and 2018, respectively. The latter amended 
the provision which dealt with the medium of instruction in the Madarsas. 
Originally, the Regulations provided that while all subjects could be 
taught, the medium of education should be Urdu, Arabic and Persian. 
However, the provision was amended to stipulate that while the medium 
of instruction in “Deenayat and other Arabic, Persian subjects” shall 
remain in Urdu, Arabic and Persian, the medium of instruction for “Maths, 
Science, Social Science, Computer etc.” may be Urdu, Hindi or English, 
as the case may be;20 and 
 
c. The functions of the Board under the Madarsa Act include prescribing the 
course of instruction, textbooks and instructional material for courses at 
various educational levels and classes. For this purpose, the Board has 
held several meetings from time to time. The Minutes of one such 
meeting dated 12 October 2021 have been placed on record before this 
Court, which contains a discussion on the curriculum to be implemented 
in Madarsas. It is noted in the Minutes of the Meeting that the Board has 
 
20 Uttar Pradesh Non-governmental Arabic and Persian Madarsa Recognition, Administration and Services 
(Second Amendment) Regulations, 2018 

PART B  
Page 20 of 70 
 
approved the inclusion of Elementary Math and Elementary Science, 
History and Civics as compulsory subjects from Class 1 to secondary 
level in accordance with the NCERT curriculum. 
 
e. 
Proceedings before the High Court and Impugned Judgment 
25. In 2019, a Writ Petition was instituted before the High Court by an individual 
appointed as a part-time assistant teacher in one of the Madarsas. 21 He sought 
regularization of his services and salary at par with regular teachers, relying on 
several provisions of the Madarsa Act and the allied Regulations. By an Order 
dated 23 October 2019, a Single Judge of the High Court issued notice on the 
Writ Petition and observed that certain questions related to the vires of the 
Madarsa Act arose for consideration, which warranted consideration by a larger 
bench. The Single Judge observed as follows:  
“… 
 
7. From perusal of the same, following questions arise 
for consideration: - 
 
(i) Since the Madarsa Board is constituted for 
education in ‘Arabic, Urdu, Parsian, Islamic-studies, 
Tibb Logic, Philosophy and includes such other 
branches of learning as may be specified by the Board 
from time to time’, how come persons of a particular 
religion are provided to be member of the same? It 
does not talks about exponence (sic) in the aforesaid 
fields, for the purposes of which the Board is 
constituted, but persons of specific religion. It was put 
to learned Additional Chief Standing Counsel as to 
whether the purpose of the Board is to impart religious 
education only, to which he submits that a perusal of 
the Madarsa Education Act, 2004 does not indicate so. 
 
 
21 Writ A No. 29324 of 2019.  

PART B  
Page 21 of 70 
 
(ii) With a secular constitution in India can persons of a 
particular religion be appointed/nominated in a Board 
for education purposes or it should be persons 
belonging to any religion, who are exponent in the 
fields for the purposes of which the Board is constituted 
or such persons should be appointed, without any 
regard to religion, who are exponent in the field for the 
purposes of which the Board is constituted? 
 
(iii) The Act further provides the Board to function under 
the Minority Welfare Ministry of State of U.P., hence, a 
question arises as to whether it is arbitrary for providing 
the Madarsa education to be run under the Minority 
Welfare Department while all the other education 
institutions 
including 
those 
belonging 
to 
other 
minorities communities like Jains, Sikhs, Christians etc 
being run under the Education Ministry and whether it 
arbitrarily denies the benefit of experts of education 
and their policies to the children studying in Madarsa? 
 
8. All these questions impacts the vires of the 
Madarsa Act, 2004 and are important questions to 
be decided before looking into the application of 
the Madarsa Act, 2004 and the regulations framed 
thereunder. Thus, I find it appropriate that the 
matter may be placed before the Larger Bench for 
decision on the aforesaid issue. 
 
...” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
26. Other similar Writ Petitions were also referred to a larger bench and the Chief 
Justice of the High Court constituted a bench to hear the reference. During the 
pendency of the reference, another Writ Petition was filed challenging the vires 
of the Madarsa Act on the ground that it violates the principle of secularism and 
Articles 14, 15 and 21-A of the Constitution.22 A challenge was also mounted on 
the constitutionality of Section 1(5) of the  Right of Children to Free and 
Compulsory Education Act, 200923, which inter alia states that the Act does not 
 
22 Writ (C) No. 6049 of 2023 - Anshuman Singh Rathore versus Union of India and others. 
23 “RTE Act” 

PART B  
Page 22 of 70 
 
apply to Madarsas.24 This petition was filed by an advocate practicing before 
the High Court. 
27. All these petitions were tagged together and placed before the Division Bench 
of the High Court. By an Order dated 14 July 2023, the High Court appointed 
three amici curiae to assist the Court. Several organizations, some of whom are 
before this Court in the present proceedings, moved intervention applications 
before the High Court. In the Impugned Judgement, the Division Bench 
recorded the position of the State of Uttar Pradesh and the Madarsa Board, to 
the effect that the Madarsas impart not only religious education but also 
“religious instruction and teachings.” Accordingly, the reference was re-framed 
by the High Court in the following terms:  
“Whether the provisions of the Madarsa Act stand the 
test of Secularism, which forms a part of the basic 
structure of the Constitution of India.”25 
 
28. By a judgment dated 22 March 2024, the High Court rejected the preliminary 
objections raised by some of the parties with respect to the locus standi of the 
petitioner and the purported absence of adequate pleadings on the subject. On 
the merits, the High Court held that the Madarsa Act violates the principle of 
secularism and Articles 14, 21 and 21-A of the Constitution of India and is ultra 
vires Section 22 of the UGC Act. According to the High Court, the object and 
 
24 Section 1(5) reads: “(5) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to Madrasas, Vedic Pathsalas and 
educational institutions primarily imparting religious instruction.” 
25 Para 9, Impugned Judgment.  

PART B  
Page 23 of 70 
 
purpose of the Madarsa Act itself violated the principle of secularism, and thus, 
it is not possible to segregate or save any portion of the legislation.   
29. The High Court held that the Madarsa Act in its entirety was unconstitutional 
and directed that the State Government take steps to accommodate all students 
studying in the Madarsas in regular schools recognized under the Primary 
Education Board and the High School and Intermediate Education Board of the 
State of Uttar Pradesh. The State Government was directed to establish a 
sufficient number of additional seats and new schools, if required for this 
purpose and to ensure that no child between the ages of six and fourteen is left 
without admission in a duly recognized institution.  
f. 
Steps taken by the State Government and the proceedings before this 
Court  
30. In view of the Impugned Judgement, the Government of Uttar Pradesh took 
steps to implement the directions. On 4 April 2024, a Government Order was 
issued by the Chief Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh, with the following 
directions: 
a. Madarsas eligible to get recognition from the education boards, at the 
state or central level, based on various parameters, can run primary or 
secondary schools after getting recognized by the concerned education 
boards; and 
b. Madarsas which cannot get formal recognition because of “sub-
standard” facilities will be closed. Committees are to be set up at the 

PART C 
Page 24 of 70 
 
district level to ensure that the students studying in such Madarsas are 
admitted to the schools run by the education department.26 
 
31. Special leave petitions were instituted by the appellant(s) before this Court 
assailing the correctness of the Impugned Judgement. On 5 April 2024, this 
Court heard the counsel for the various parties and issued notice on the lead 
petition. While staying the implementation of the Impugned Judgement, this 
Court recorded the brief reasons for issuing the interim direction. Accordingly, 
on 12 April 2024, in view of the stay on the Impugned Judgement, the above 
Government Order issuing directions for implementation were withdrawn by the 
State Government. 
C. 
Submissions 
32. Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Mr Salman Khurshid, and Dr Menaka Guruswamy, 
senior counsel assailed the Impugned Judgment and advanced the following 
submissions:  
a. The State legislature is empowered under Article 246 read with Entry 25 of 
List III of the Seventh Schedule to enact legislation to regulate Madarsa 
education. The Madarsa Act principally deals with the regulation of 
Madarsas concerning curriculum, instruction, standard of education, 
conduct of examination, and qualifications for teaching. The enactment of 
laws for regulating secular activities of minority institutions or prescribing 
standards of education is consistent with Articles 25 to 30; 
 
26 G.O. No. 43/52-3-3034-2099/4/2024. 

PART C 
Page 25 of 70 
 
b. In S R Bommai v. Union of India,27 it was held that secularism is a positive 
concept of equal treatment of all religions. Articles 25 to 30 secure the rights 
of religious and linguistic minorities, including their right to establish and 
administer educational institutions. By recognizing and regulating the 
Madarsa education, the State legislature is taking positive action to 
safeguard the educational rights of the minorities; 
c. Article 28 prohibits religious instructions in educational institutions wholly 
maintained out of state funds. Madarsas impart education based on modern 
curriculum such as Mathematics, Social Sciences, and Science. 
Additionally, Madarsas impart education about religion and not “religious 
instructions.” Article 28 does not bar the State from funding schools 
providing religious education; 
d. Article 21-A recognizes the fundamental right of children between the ages 
of six to fourteen to free and compulsory education. Section 1(5) of the RTE 
Act excludes Madarsas from the purview of the legislation. The law enacted 
by the State in pursuance of Article 21-A cannot violate the fundamental 
rights of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions; and 
e. Striking down the Madarsa Act will create a legislative vacuum and result in 
the deregulation of Madarsas. This will affect the future of more than twelve 
lakh students studying across the Madarsas in UP. Further, the direction of 
the High Court to relocate students studying in Madarsas to regular schools 
will effectively shut down all Madarsas in the state and result in violation of 
Article 30. 
 
27 (1994) 2 SCR 644  

PART C 
Page 26 of 70 
 
33. Mr KM Natraj, Learned Additional Solicitor General, appeared for the State of 
Uttar Pradesh. In its Counter Affidavit, the State of Uttar Pradesh states that it 
had accepted the decision in the Impugned Judgement and taken steps to 
implement it. However, it would comply with the final decision of this Court and 
has accordingly, withdrawn the government order which sought to implement 
the Impugned Judgement. Mr Nataraj contended that while some provisions of 
the Madarsa Act may be unconstitutional, the High Court erred in striking down 
the entire Madarsa Act without severing the invalid provisions from the rest of 
the Madarsa Act.  
34. Mr Guru Krishna Kumar, learned Senior Counsel made the following 
submissions:  
a. The Act does not make any provisions to impart secular subjects as part of 
the curriculum and is a measure undertaken by the state to recognize and 
regulate “religious instruction” traceable to a particular community;  
b. Article 28 inter alia prohibits institutions which receive funds from the state 
from imparting ‘religious instruction’. Thus, as a corollary, the state cannot 
seek to regulate and thereby, recognize religious instruction;  
c. The preamble which specifies that India is a “secular” republic, Article 21-
A, Article 25, Article 28, Article 30 and Article 41 all point to the “pervasive 
principle” of secularism underlying the Constitution. This principle militates 
against the state regulating religious instruction;  
d. The striking down of the Act would only discontinue the functioning of the 
Board and the consequent state recognition of religious instruction. The 

PART C 
Page 27 of 70 
 
education provided in the Madarsas and their existence would continue to 
be protected by Article 30;  
e. The word “education” in Entry 25, List III of the Seventh Schedule must be 
construed to mean “secular education” and cannot include “religious 
instruction”. Thus, the state legislature only has the competence to enact a 
law that regulates educational institutions, but no power to recognize and 
regulate religious instruction; and 
f. Entry 25, List III is subject to Entry 66 List I, which pertains to higher 
education and standards. The Parliament has enacted the UGC Act under 
Entry 66, List I. Section 22 of the UGC Act provides that no degrees can be 
conferred by any institution other than the institutions defined under the 
UGC Act. Thus, the provisions of the Madarsa Act which regulate higher 
education, at the undergraduate, graduate and grant the Board power to 
grant equivalent degrees are beyond the legislative competence of the state 
legislature. 
 
35. Ms Madhavi Divan, learned Senior Counsel, advanced the following 
submissions:  
a. The Madarsa Act deprives students enrolled in such institutions of the 
benefits of mainstream, holistic, secular education, thereby violating Articles 
21 and 21A;  
b. The Madarsa Act divests students of equal opportunity in relation to future 
employment opportunities (Articles 14, 15, 16) and the right to practice any 
profession, occupation, trade or business of their choice (Article 19(1)(g). It 

PART C 
Page 28 of 70 
 
creates two classes of children — the first, who receive secular, mainstream 
education, and the second, who receive religious instruction, which 
prohibits them from even attempting to adopt professions which are easily 
available for the former class. This deprivation of choice also violates the 
constitutional value of dignity and deprives students of the liberty of thought 
and expression protected under Article 19;   
c. The Madarsa Act violates the constitutional value of ‘fraternity’ as the 
dissemination of Madarsa education creates intellectual and outlook 
barriers, which prevent students from integrating into a pluralistic society; 
d. The definition of “Madarsa Education” in Section 2(h) indicates that the 
focus on “other branches of learning” is only tertiary. The focus of the statute 
and the competence of the Board is restricted to religious instruction;  
e. The Board is disproportionately populated by persons whose competence 
is in the field of religious instruction. As decisions of the Board are taken by 
a majority of members, present and voting, the views of the “non-secular” 
members would prevail and the curriculum is likely to be skewed in favour 
of religious education. The functions of the Board delineated in Section 9 
also indicate disproportionate weightage to religious instruction; and  
f. The qualifications for teachers in the Madarsas laid down in the regulations 
are not adequate to ensure quality education. The qualifications are rooted 
in the “same Madarsa echo chamber”, and the minimum requirements for 
teaching in regular educational institutions are not prescribed. 
 
 

PART D 
Page 29 of 70 
 
36. The National Commission for the Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) 
supported the arguments of the respondents and assailed the constitutional 
validity of the Madarsa Act.  
D. 
Secularism and regulation of minority educational institutions 
37. The preamble to the Constitution enshrines the declaration to constitute India 
into a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic, republic. The 42nd Amendment 
to the Constitution incorporated the expression ‘secular’ in the preamble. 
However, the constitutional amendment merely made explicit what is implicit 
according to the scheme of the Constitution.28  
a. Secularism in the constitutional context 
38. Articles 14, 15, and 16 mandate the State to treat all people equally irrespective 
of their religion, faith, or belief.29 Article 14 provides that the State shall not deny 
to any person equality before the law or equal protection of laws within the 
territory of India. Article 15 provides that the State shall not discriminate against 
any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any 
of them. Article 16 mandates that there shall be equality of opportunity for all 
citizens in matters relating to public employment or appointment to any office 
under the State. Article 16(2) further provides that no citizen shall be 
discriminated against in respect of any employment or office under the State on 
 
28 S R Bommai, [304] Justice BP Jeevan Reddy (for himself and Justice Agrawal)  
29 S R Bommai (supra) [304] (Justice BP Jeevan Reddy)  

PART D 
Page 30 of 70 
 
the grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence, or 
any of them.  
39. Secularism is one of the facets of the right to equality.30 The equality code 
outlined in Articles 14, 15, and 16 is based on the principle that all persons, 
irrespective of their religion, should have equal access to participate in society. 
The State cannot give preference to persons belonging to a particular religion 
in matters of public employment. As a corollary, the equality code prohibits the 
State from mixing religion with any secular activity of the State.31 However, the 
Constitution recognizes that equal treatment of persons is illusionary unless the 
State takes active steps in that regard. Therefore, the equality code imposes 
certain positive obligations on the State to provide equal treatment to all 
persons irrespective of their religion, faith, or beliefs.32  
 
 
30 Dr M Ismail Faruqui v. Union of India, (1994) 6 SCC 360 [37] 
31 S R Bommai (supra) [148] Justice Sawant [“148. One thing which prominently emerges from the above 
discussion on secularism under our Constitution is that whatever the attitude of the State towards the 
religions, religious sects and denominations, religion cannot be mixed with any secular activity of the State. 
In fact, the encroachment of religion into secular activities is strictly prohibited.”] 
32 S R Bommai (supra) [304] (Justice B P Jeevan Reddy) [“148. […] Articles 14, 15 and 16 enjoin upon the 
State to treat all its people equally irrespective of their religion, caste, faith or belief. While the citizens of this 
country are free to profess, practice and propagate such religion, faith or belief as they choose, so far as the 
State is concerned, i.e., from the point of view of the State, the religion, faith or belief of a person is immaterial. 
To it, all are equal and all are entitled to be treated equally. How is this equal treatment possible, if the State 
were to prefer or promote a particular religion, race or caste, which necessarily means a less favourable 
treatment of all other religions, races and castes. How are the constitutional promises of social justice, liberty 
of belief, faith or worship and equality of status and of opportunity to be attained unless the State eschews 
the religion, faith or belief of a person from its consideration altogether while dealing with him, his rights, his 
duties and his entitlements? Secularism is thus more than a passive attitude of religious tolerance. It is a 
positive concept of equal treatment of all religions. This attitude is described by some as one of neutrality 
towards religion or as one of benevolent neutrality. This may be a concept evolved by western liberal thought 
or it may be, as some say, an abiding faith with the Indian people at all points of time.”] 

PART D 
Page 31 of 70 
 
40. Articles 25 to 30 contain the other facet of secularism, that is, the practice of 
religious tolerance by the State.33 Article 25 provides that all persons are equally 
entitled to freedom of conscience and the right to freely profess, practise, and 
propagate religion subject to public order, morality, health, and other provisions 
of Part III. The provision allows the State to make any law to regulate or restrict 
any economic, financial, political or other secular activity associated with 
religious practice. The Constitution distinguishes between religious and secular 
activities, permitting the State to regulate the latter.34 
41. Article 26 guarantees every religious denomination the right to establish and 
maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes. It further guarantees 
religious and charitable institutions the right to manage their own affairs in 
matters of religion; own and acquire movable and immovable property; and 
administer the property in accordance with law. The right of management given 
to a religious body is a fundamental right that cannot be abridged by any 
legislation. On the other hand, the State can regulate the administration of 
property owned or acquired by a religious denomination through validly enacted 
laws.35 
 
33 S R Bommai (supra) [183] Justice K Ramaswamy [“183. […] Constitution made demarcation between 
religious part personal to the individual and secular part thereof. The State does not extend patronage to any 
particular religion, State is neither pro particular religion nor anti particular religion. It stands aloof, in other 
words maintains neutrality in matters of religion and provides equal protection to all religions subject to 
regulation and actively acts on secular part.”] 
34 Seshammal v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1972) 2 SCC 11 [19]; Bijoe Emmanuel v. State of Kerala, (1986) 3 
SCC 615 [19] 
35 Ratilal Panachand Gandhi v. State of Bombay, (1954) 1 SCC 487 [16] [“16. […] The language of the two 
clauses (b) and (d) of Article 26 would at once bring out the difference between the two. In regard to affairs 
in matters of religion, the right of management given to a religious body is a guaranteed fundamental right 
which no legislation can take away. On the other hand, as regards administration of property which a religious 
denomination is entitled to own and acquire, it has undoubtedly the right to administer such property but only 
in accordance with law. This means that the State can regulate the administration of trust properties by means 
of laws validly enacted; but here again it should be remembered that under Article 26(d), it is the religious 
denomination itself which has been given the right to administer its property in accordance with any law which 

PART D 
Page 32 of 70 
 
42. Article 27 provides that no person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the 
proceeds of which are specifically appropriated in payment of expenses for the 
promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination. 
The rationale underlying Article 27 is that public funds should not be utilized for 
the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious 
denomination.36 
43.  Article 28 prohibits the imparting of “religious instruction” in any educational 
institutions wholly maintained out of State funds. The provision further provides 
that no person attending any educational institution recognised by the State or 
receiving aid from the State funds should be compelled to take part in any 
religious instruction without their consent. Religious instruction is the inculcation 
of tenets, rituals, observances, ceremonies, and modes of worship of a 
particular sect or denomination.37 Article 28 does not prohibit educational 
institutions maintained out of State funds from imparting religious education. 
Religious education is imparted to children “to make them aware of thoughts 
and philosophies in religions without indoctrinating them and without curbing 
their free-thinking, right to make choices for conducting their own life and 
deciding upon their course of action according to their individual inclinations.”38 
Article 28 does not prohibit educational institutions from teaching about the 
philosophy and culture of a particular religion or a saint associated with that 
 
the State may validly impose. A law, which takes away the right of administration altogether from the religious 
denomination and vests it in any other or secular authority, would amount to violation of the right which is 
guaranteed by Article 26(d) of the Constitution.”] 
36 S R Bommai [304] (Justice BP Jeevan Reddy) 
37 D A V College v. State of Punjab, (1971) 2 SCC 269 [26] 
38 Aruna Roy v. Union of India, (2002) 7 SCC 368 [78] (Justice D M Dharmadhikari) 

PART D 
Page 33 of 70 
 
religion.39  Article 28 does not prohibit the State from granting recognition to 
educational institutions imparting religious instruction in addition to secular 
education.40 
44. Articles 29 and 30 deal with the cultural and educational rights of minorities. 
Article 29(1) provides that Indian citizens have a right to conserve their distinct 
language, script, or culture. Article 29(2) guarantees that no citizen shall be 
denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or 
receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, 
language or any of them. A citizen who has requisite academic qualifications 
cannot be denied admission into any educational institution funded by the State 
on grounds of religion.41  
45. Article 30 pertains to the right of minorities to establish and administer 
educational institutions. It provides that all minorities, whether based on religion 
or language, have the right to establish and administer educational institutions 
of their choice. Article 30(2) enjoins the State not to discriminate against any 
educational institution in granting aid on the ground that it is under the 
management of a minority, whether based on religion or language. Article 30 
confers a special right on religious and linguistic minorities to instill in them a 
 
39 D A V College (supra) [26] [26. […] To provide for academic study of life and teaching or the philosophy 
and culture of any great saint of India in relation to or the impact on the Indian and world civilizations cannot 
be considered as making provision for religious instructions.”] 
40 Ahmedabad St Xavier’s College Society v. State of Gujarat, (1974) 1 SCC 717 [139] (Justice K K Mathew 
and Justice Y V Chandrachud) [“139. We fail to see how affiliation of an educational institution imparting 
religious instruction in addition to secular education to pupils as visualized in Article 28(3) would derogate 
from the secular character of the state. Our Constitution has not erected a rigid wall of separation between 
church and state. We have grave doubts whether the expression “secular state” as it denotes a definite 
pattern of church and state relationship can with propriety be applied to India. It is only in a qualified sense 
that India can be said to be a secular state. There are provisions in the Constitution which make one hesitate 
to characterize our state as secular.”] 
41 See In re Kerala Education Bill 1957, 1958 SCC OnLine SC 8 [22] 

PART D 
Page 34 of 70 
 
sense of security and confidence.42 It secures equal treatment of majority and 
minority institutions and preserves secularism43 by allaying all apprehensions 
of interference by the executive and legislature in matters of religion.44 The 
constitutional scheme under Articles 25 to 30 distinguishes between the right of 
an individual to practice religion and the secular part of religion, which is 
amenable to State regulation.45 
b. 
Testing the validity of a statute for violation of the basic structure of the 
Constitution 
46. The provisions discussed in the above segment indicate that secularism is 
embodied in the constitutional scheme, particularly Part III. In Kesavananda 
Bharati v. State of Kerala, this Court held that Article 368 does not enable 
Parliament to alter the basic structure or framework of the Constitution.46 It was 
held that the power of Parliament to amend the Constitution cannot have the 
effect of destroying or abrogating the basic structure or framework of the 
Constitution.47 Further, the judges constituting the majority enumerated certain 
 
42 T M A Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka, (2002) 8 SCC 481 [157] 
43 Ahmedabad St Xavier’s College Society (supra) [9]; T M A Pai Foundation (supra) [138] [“138. As we look 
at it, Article 30(1) is a sort of guarantee or assurance to the linguistic and religious minority institutions of their 
right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. Secularism and equality being two of 
the basic features of the Constitution, Article 30(1) ensures protection to the linguistic and religious minorities, 
thereby preserving the secularism of the country. Furthermore, the principles of equality must necessarily 
apply to the enjoyment of such rights. No law can be framed that will discriminate against such minorities 
with regard to the establishment and administration of educational institutions vis-à-vis other educational 
institutions. Any law or rule or regulation that would put the educational institutions run by the minorities at a 
disadvantage when compared to the institutions run by the others will have to be struck down.”] 
44 Ahmedabad St Xavier’s College Society (supra) [75] (Justice H R Khanna) 
45 S R Bommai (supra) [183] 
46 (1973) 4 SCC 225  
47 Kesavananda Bharati (supra) [1426] (Justice H R Khanna) [“1426. […] The word “amendment” postulates 
that the old Constitution survives without loss of its identity despite the change and continues even though it 
has been subjected to alterations. As a result of the amendment, the old Constitution cannot be destroyed 
and done away with; it is regained though in the amended form. What then is meant by the retention of the 
old Constitution? It means the retention of the basic structure or framework of the old Constitution. A mere 
retention of some provisions of the old Constitution even though the basic structure or framework of the 
Constitution has been destroyed would not amount to the retention of the old Constitution. Although it is 

PART D 
Page 35 of 70 
 
basic features of our Constitution, including the secular character of the 
Constitution.48 In S R Bommai v. Union of India,49 a nine-Judge Bench held 
that secularism is a basic feature of the Constitution. The issue that arises for 
our consideration is whether the basic structure doctrine can be applied to 
invalidate ordinary legislation. 
47.  The Constitution imposes certain limitations on the legislative powers of 
Parliament and the State legislatures. Article 13(2) provides that the State shall 
not make any law that takes away or abridges the rights conferred by Part III. 
Statutes enacted by the State legislatures must be consistent with the 
fundamental rights enumerated under Part III of the Constitution. Further, Article 
246 defines the scope and limitations of the legislative competence of 
Parliament and State legislatures.  A statute can be declared ultra vires on two 
grounds alone: (i) it is beyond the ambit of the legislative competence of the 
legislature; or (ii) it violates Part III or any other provision of the Constitution.50  
48. In Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Raj Narain,51 the Allahabad High Court disqualified 
the then Prime Minister for indulging in corrupt practices according to the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951. To nullify the decision of the High 
 
permissible under the power of amendment to effect changes, howsoever important, and to adapt the system 
to the requirements of changing conditions, it is not permissible to touch the foundation or to alter the basic 
institutional pattern. The words “amendment of the Constitution” with all their wide sweep and amplitude 
cannot have the effect of destroying or abrogating the basic structure or framework of the Constitution.”] 
48 Kesavananda Bharati (supra) [292] (Chief Justice Sikri); [487] (Justice Shelat and Grover); [1426] (Justice 
H R Khanna). 
49 (1994) 3 SCC 1; [29] (Justice AM Ahmadi); [151] (Justice P B Sawant (for himself and Justice Kuldip 
Singh)); [182] (Justice K Ramaswamy); [304] (Justice B P Jeevan Reddy (for himself and Justice S C 
Agrawal)) 
50 State of A P v. McDowell & Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709 [43] [“43. […] The power of Parliament or for that matter, 
the State Legislatures is restricted in two ways. A law made by Parliament or the legislature can be struck 
down by courts on two grounds and two grounds alone, viz., (1) lack of legislative competence and (2) 
violation of any of the fundamental rights guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution or of any other 
constitutional provision.”]; State of Kerala v. Peoples Union for Civil Liberties, (2009) 8 SCC 46 [45] 
51 1975 Supp SCC 1 

PART D 
Page 36 of 70 
 
Court, Parliament enacted the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act 
1974 and Election Laws (Amendment) Act 1975 and placed them under the 
Ninth Schedule of the Constitution. The issue before this Court was whether the 
amendments violated the basic structure of the Constitution. 
49. Chief Justice A N Ray held that the constitutional validity of a statute depends 
entirely on the existence of the legislative power and the express provision in 
Article 13. Since the legislation is not subject to any other constitutional 
limitation, applying the basic structure doctrine to test the validity of a statute 
will amount to “rewriting the Constitution.”52 The learned Judge further observed 
that application of the undefinable theory of basic structure to test the validity of 
a statute would denude legislatures of the power of legislation and deprive them 
of laying down legislative policies.53 Justice K K Mathew similarly observed that 
the concept of a basic structure is “too vague and indefinite to provide a 
yardstick to determine the validity of an ordinary law.”54 Justice Y V 
Chandrachud (as the learned Chief Justice then was) observed that 
constitutional amendment and ordinary laws operate in different fields and are 
subject to different limitations.55  
 
52 Indira Nehru Gandhi (supra) [134] and [137] 
53 Indira Nehru Gandhi (supra) [136] [“136. The theory of basic structures or basic features is an exercise in 
imponderables. Basic structures or basic features are indefinable. The legislative entries are the fields of 
legislation. The pith and substance doctrine has been applied in order to find out legislative competency, and 
eliminate encroachment on legislative entries. If the theory of basic structures or basic features will be applied 
to legislative measures it will denude Parliament and State Legislatures of the power of legislation and 
deprive them of laying down legislative policies. This will be encroachment on the separation of powers.”] 
54 Indira Nehru Gandhi (supra) [357] 
55 Indira Nehru Gandhi (supra) [691] and [692]. [“691 […] The constitutional amendments may, on the ratio 
of the Fundamental Rights case, be tested on the anvil of basic structure. But apart from the principle that a 
case is only an authority for what it decides, it does not logically follow from the majority judgment in 
the Fundamental Rights case that ordinary legislation must also answer the same test as a constitutional 
amendment. Ordinary laws have to answer two tests for their validity: (1) The law must be within the 
legislative competence of the legislature as defined and specified in Chapter I, Part XI of the Constitution, 
and (2) it must not offend against the provisions of Article 13(1) and (2) of the Constitution. “Basic structure”, 

PART D 
Page 37 of 70 
 
50. The majority in Indira Nehru Gandhi (supra) held that the constitutional validity 
of a statute cannot be challenged for the violation of the basic structure doctrine. 
However, Justice M H Beg (as the learned Chief Justice then was) dissented 
with the majority view by observing that the basic structure test can be used to 
test the validity of statutes because statutes cannot go beyond the range of 
constituent power.56 
51. In State of Karnataka v. Union of India,57 Justice N L Untwalia (writing for 
himself, Justice P N Shingal, and Justice Jaswant Singh) reiterated that the 
validity of a statute cannot be tested for violation of the basic structure of the 
Constitution. Justice Y V Chandrachud (as the learned Chief Justice then was) 
also observed that a statute cannot be invalidated on supposed grounds so 
long as it is within the legislative competence of the legislature and consistent 
with Part III of the Constitution.58 However, Chief Justice M H Beg observed 
that testing a statute for violation of basic structure does not “add to the contents 
of the Constitution.”59 He held that any inference about a limitation based on 
the basic structure doctrine upon legislative power must co-relate to the express 
provisions of the Constitution.60  
 
by the majority judgment, is not a part of the fundamental rights nor indeed a provision of the Constitution. 
The theory of basic structure is woven out of the conspectus of the Constitution and the amending power is 
subjected to it because it is a constituent power. “The power to amend the fundamental instrument cannot 
carry with it the power to destroy its essential features — this, in brief, is the arch of the theory of basic 
structure. It is wholly out of place in matters relating to the validity of ordinary laws made under the 
Constitution.] 
56 Indira Nehru Gandhi (supra) [622] 
57 (1977) 4 SCC 608 [238] 
58 State of Karnataka (supra) [197] 
59 State of Karnataka (supra) [128] 
60 State of Karnataka (supra) [123] 

PART D 
Page 38 of 70 
 
52. In Kuldip Nayar v. Union of India,61 a Constitution Bench held that ordinary 
legislation cannot be challenged for the violation of the basic structure of the 
Constitution. Statutes, including State legislation, can only be challenged for 
violating the provisions of the Constitution.62 However, in Madras Bar 
Association v. Union of India,63 a Constitution Bench applied the basic 
structure doctrine to test the validity of Parliamentary legislation seeking to 
transfer judicial power from High Courts to tribunals. Justice J S Khehar (as the 
learned Chief Justice then was), writing for the Constitution Bench, held that 
the basic structure of the Constitution will stand violated if Parliament does not 
ensure that the newly created tribunals do not “conform with the salient 
characteristics and standards of the court sought to be substituted.”64 
53. In Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association v. Union of India,65 
this Court had to decide the constitutional validity of the Constitution (Ninety-
ninth Amendment) Act 2014 and the National Judicial Appointments 
Commission Act 2014. Justice J S Khehar (as the learned Chief Justice then 
was) built upon his reasoning in Madras Bar Association (supra) by observing 
 
61 (2006) 7 SCC 1 [“107. The basic structure theory imposes limitation on the power of Parliament to amend 
the Constitution. An amendment to the Constitution under Article 368 could be challenged on the ground of 
violation of the basic structure of the Constitution. An ordinary legislation cannot be so challenged. The 
challenge to a law made, within its legislative competence, by Parliament on the ground of violation of the 
basic structure of the Constitution is thus not available to the petitioners.”] 
62 Ashok Kumar Thakur v. Union of India, (2008) 6 SCC 1 [116] 
63 Madras Bar Association v. Union of India, (2014) 10 SCC 1 [109] [“This Court has repeatedly held that an 
amendment to the provisions of the Constitution would not be sustainable if it violated the “basic structure” 
of the Constitution, even though the amendment had been carried out by following the procedure 
contemplated under “Part XI” of the Constitution. This leads to the determination that the “basic structure” is 
inviolable. In our view, the same would apply to all other legislations (other than amendments to the 
Constitution) as well, even though the legislation had been enacted by following the prescribed procedure, 
and was within the domain of the enacting legislature, any infringement to the “basic structure” would be 
unacceptable.”]  
64 Madras Bar Association (supra) [136]. [“136. (iii) The “basic structure” of the Constitution will stand violated 
if while enacting legislation pertaining to transfer of judicial power, Parliament does not ensure that the newly 
created court/tribunal conforms with the salient characteristics and standards of the court sought to be 
substituted.”] 
65 (2016) 5 SCC 1  

PART D 
Page 39 of 70 
 
that a challenge to ordinary legislation for violation of the basic structure would 
only be a “technical flaw” and “cannot be treated to suffer from a legal 
infirmity.”66 He observed that the determination of the basic structure of the 
Constitution is made exclusively from the provisions of the Constitution. The 
observations of the learned Judge are instructive and extracted below: 
“381. […] when a challenge is raised to a legislative 
enactment based on the cumulative effect of a 
number of articles of the Constitution, it is not always 
necessary to refer to each of the articles concerned 
when a cumulative effect of the said articles has 
already been determined as constituting one of the 
“basic features” of the Constitution. Reference to the 
“basic structure” while dealing with an ordinary 
legislation would obviate the necessity of recording 
the same conclusion which has already been 
scripted while interpreting the article(s) under 
reference 
harmoniously. 
We 
would 
therefore 
reiterate that the “basic structure” of the Constitution 
is inviolable and as such the Constitution cannot be 
amended so as to negate any “basic features” 
thereof, and so also, if a challenge is raised to an 
ordinary legislation based on one of the “basic 
features” of the Constitution, it would be valid to do 
so. If such a challenge is accepted on the ground of 
violation of the “basic structure”, it would mean that 
the bunch of articles of the Constitution (including 
the Preamble thereof, wherever relevant), which 
constitute the particular “basic feature”, had been 
violated. We must however credit the contention of 
the learned Attorney General by accepting that it 
would be technically sound to refer to the articles 
which are violated, when an ordinary legislation is 
sought to be struck down as being ultra vires the 
provisions of the Constitution.” 
 
 
66 Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association (supra) [381] 

PART D 
Page 40 of 70 
 
54. However, Justice Lokur differed with Justice Khehar on the issue of testing the 
validity of a statute for violation of the basic structure doctrine. Justice Lokur 
followed the view of the majority in the State of Karnataka (supra)67 that a 
statute cannot be challenged for violating the basic structure doctrine. 
55. From the above discussion, it can be concluded that a statute can be struck 
down only for the violation of Part III or any other provision of the Constitution 
or for being without legislative competence. The constitutional validity of a 
statute cannot be challenged for the violation of the basic structure of the 
Constitution. The reason is that concepts such as democracy, federalism, and 
secularism are undefined concepts. Allowing courts to strike down legislation 
for violation of such concepts will introduce an element of uncertainty in our 
constitutional adjudication. Recently, this Court has accepted that a challenge 
to the constitutional validity of a statute for violation of the basic structure is a 
technical aspect because the infraction has to be traced to the express 
provisions of the Constitution. Hence, in a challenge to the validity of a statute 
for violation of the principle of secularism, it must be shown that the statute 
violates provisions of the Constitution pertaining to secularism. 
 
 
 
67 Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association (supra) [795] [“795. For the purposes of the present 
discussion, I would prefer to follow the view expressed by a Bench of seven learned Judges in State of 
Karnataka v. Union of India [State of Karnataka v. Union of India, (1977) 4 SCC 608 (Seven-Judge Bench)] 
that it is only an amendment of the Constitution that can be challenged on the ground that it violates the basic 
structure of the Constitution—a statute cannot be challenged on the ground that it violates the basic structure 
of the Constitution. [The only exception to this perhaps could be a statute placed in the Ninth Schedule of 
the Constitution.] The principles for challenging the constitutionality of a statute are quite different.”] 

PART D 
Page 41 of 70 
 
c. 
Regulation of minority educational institutions  
56. The right of minorities to administer educational institutions includes the right to 
manage the affairs of the institution in accordance with the ideas and interests 
of the community in general and the institution in particular.68 The right to 
administer minority educational institutions encompasses: (i) the right to 
constitute the managing or governing body; (ii) the right to appoint teachers; (iii) 
the right to admit students subject to reasonable regulations; and (iv) the right 
to use property and assets for the benefit of the institution.69 However, the right 
to administer minority educational institutions is not absolute. The right to 
administer educational institutions implies an obligation and duty of minority 
institutions to provide a standard of education to the students.70 The right to 
administer is, it is trite law, not the right to maladminister.  
57. In re Kerala Education Bill 1957,71 this Court classified minority educational 
institutions into three categories: (i) those which do not seek either aid or 
recognition from the State; (ii) those which want aid; and (iii) those which want 
only recognition but not aid. The first category of institutions is protected by 
 
68 State of Kerala v. Very Rev. Mother Provincial, (1970) 2 SCC 417 [9]. 
69 Ahmedabad St Xavier’s College Society (supra) [19] (Chief Justice A N Ray) [“19. […] The right to 
administer is said to consist of four principal matters. First is the right to choose its managing or governing 
body. It is said that the founders of the minority institution have faith and confidence in their own committee 
or body consisting of persons elected by them. Second is the right to choose its teachers. It is said that 
minority institutions want teachers to have compatibility with the ideals, aims and aspirations of the institution. 
Third is the right not to be compelled to refuse admission to students. In other words, the minority institutions 
want to have the right to admit students of their choice subject to reasonable regulations about academic 
qualifications. Fourth is the right to use its properties and assets for the benefit of its own institution.”] 
70 Ahmedabad St Xavier’s College Society (supra) [30] [“30. […] The minority institutions have the right to 
administer institutions. This right implies the obligation and duty of the minority institutions to render the very 
best to the students. In the right of administration, checks and balances in the shape of regulatory measures 
are required to ensure the appointment of good teachers and their conditions of service. The right to 
administer is to be tempered with regulatory measures to facilitate smooth administration.”] 
71 1958 SCC OnLine SC 8 [23] 

PART D 
Page 42 of 70 
 
Article 30(1).72 As regards the second and third categories, Chief Justice S R 
Das observed that the “minority cannot surely ask for aid or recognition for an 
educational institution run by them in unhealthy surroundings, without any 
competent teachers, possessing any semblance of qualification, and which 
does not maintain even a fair standard of teaching or which teaches matters 
subversive of the welfare of the scholars.”73 
58. The State has an interest in ensuring that minority educational institutions 
provide standards of education similar to other educational institutions.74 The 
State can enact regulatory measures to promote efficiency and excellence of 
educational standards.75 Regulations about standards of education do not 
directly bear upon the management of minority institutions.76 The State can 
regulate aspects of the standards of education such as the course of study, the 
qualification and appointment of teachers, the health and hygiene of students, 
and facilities for libraries.77  
59. The State may impose regulation as a condition for grant of aid or recognition. 
Such regulation must satisfy the following three tests: (i) it must be reasonable 
and rational; (ii) it must be conducive to making the institution an effective 
vehicle of education for the minority community or other persons who resort to 
it; and (iii) it must be directed towards maintaining the excellence of education 
 
72 In re Kerala Education Bill (supra) [24] 
73 In re Kerala Education Bill (supra) [31] 
74 Very Rev Mother Provincial (supra) [10] 
75 All Saints High School v. Government of AP, (1980) 2 SCC 478 [63]; Dayanand Anglo Vedic (DAV) College 
Trust and Management Society v. State of Maharashtra, (2013) 4 SCC 14 [32] 
76 Ahmedabad St Xavier’s College Society (supra) [90] 
77 Very Rev Mother Provincial (supra) [10]; St Xavier’s College (supra) [18] 

PART D 
Page 43 of 70 
 
and efficiency of administration to prevent it from falling standards.78 To 
determine the issue of the reasonableness of a regulation, the court has to 
determine whether the regulation is calculated to subserve or will in effect 
subserve the purpose of recognition or affiliation.79 
60. In P A Inamdar v. State of Maharashtra, this Court held that the considerations 
for granting recognition to a minority educational institution are subject to two 
overriding conditions: (i) the recognition is not denied solely on the ground of 
the educational institution being one belonging to minority; and (ii) the 
regulation is neither aimed at nor has the effect of depriving the institution of its 
minority status.80 
61. In Ahmedabad St Xavier’s College Society v. State of Gujarat,81 the issue 
before a Bench of nine Judges was whether religious and linguistic minorities 
who have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their 
choice have a fundamental right to affiliation or recognition. Chief Justice A N 
Ray held that minority educational institutions have no fundamental right to 
recognition. The learned Chief Justice observed that the primary purpose of 
recognition is to ensure that students reading in minority educational institutions 
have “qualifications in the shape of degrees necessary for a useful career in 
life.”82 He further observed that a minority educational institution seeking 
affiliation must follow the statutory educational standards and efficiency, the 
 
78 Sidhrajbhai Sabbai v. State of Gujarat, 1962 SCC OnLine SC 150 [15]; P A Inamdar v. State of Maharashtra, 
(2005) 6 SCC 537 [94], [122] 
79 Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society (supra) [176] (Justice KK Mathew and Justice Y V Chandrachud) 
80 P A Inamdar (supra) [103] 
81 (1974) 1 SCC 717 
82 Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society (supra) [14] 

PART D 
Page 44 of 70 
 
prescribed courses of study, courses of instruction, qualification of teachers, 
and educational qualifications for entry of students.83 However, the learned 
Chief Justice held that a law providing for recognition should not result in 
abridgement of the right of linguistic and religious minorities to administer and 
establish educational institutions of their choice under Article 30(1).84 
62. Justice K K Mathew (writing for himself and Justice Y V Chandrachud), in his 
concurring opinion stated that the principle of juridical equality ensures the “co-
existence of several types of schools and colleges including affiliated colleges” 
with proportionate equal encouragement and support from the State.85 The 
learned judge further held that the State’s interest in the education of religious 
minorities would be served if minority educational institutions impart secular 
education accompanied by religious education. He also observed: 
“145. The State's interest in secular education may 
be defined broadly as an interest in ensuring that 
children within its boundaries acquire a minimum 
level of competency in skills, as well as a minimum 
amount of information and knowledge in certain 
subjects. Without such skill and knowledge, an 
individual will be at a severe disadvantage both in 
participating in democratic self-Government and in 
earning a living. No one can question the 
constitutional right of parents to satisfy their State-
imposed obligation to educate their children by 
sending them to schools or colleges established and 
administered by their own religious minority so long 
as these schools and colleges meet the standards 
established for secular education.” 
 
83 Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society (supra) [16]  
84 Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society (supra) [14] 
85 Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society (supra) [144] 

PART D 
Page 45 of 70 
 
The State has an interest in maintaining the standards of education in minority 
educational institutions. Affiliation or recognition of minority educational 
institutions by the Government secures the academic interests of students 
studying in such institutions to pursue higher education.86 
d. 
The Madarsa Act is a regulatory legislation 
63. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Madarsa Act indicates that it is 
enacted to remove difficulties in running Madarsas and improve the merit of 
students studying in Madarsas by making available to them facilities of study of 
the requisite standard. Section 3 provides for the constitution of the Board. The 
Board comprises persons who are related to or know about education in 
Madarsas. The Board has been statutorily empowered to: (i) prescribe courses 
of instruction and text-books for courses; (ii) grant degrees, diplomas, 
certificates and other academic distinctions; (iii) conduct examinations; (iv) 
recognise institutions for examination; (v) admit candidates for examinations; 
 
86 In re Kerala Education Bill 1957 (supra) [32] [“32. […] The minorities evidently desire that education should 
be imparted to the children of their community in an atmosphere congenial to the growth of their culture. Our 
Constitution makers recognised the validity of their claim and to allay their fears conferred on them the 
fundamental rights referred to above. But the conservation of the distinct language, script or culture is not 
the only object of choice of the minority communities. They also desire that scholars of their educational 
institutions should go out in the world well and sufficiently equipped with the qualifications necessary for a 
useful career in life. But according to the Education Code now in operation to which it is permissible to refer 
for ascertaining the effect of the impugned provisions on existing state of affairs, the scholars of unrecognised 
schools are not permitted to avail themselves of the opportunities for higher education in the university and 
are not eligible for entering the public services. Without recognition, therefore, the educational institutions 
established or to be established by the minority communities cannot fulfil the real objects of their choice and 
the rights under Article 30(1) cannot be effectively exercised. The right to establish educational institutions of 
their choice must, therefore, mean the right to establish real institutions which will effectively serve the needs 
of their community and the scholars who resort to their educational institutions. There is, no doubt, no such 
thing as fundamental right to recognition by the State but to deny recognition to the educational institutions 
except upon terms tantamount to the surrender of their constitutional right of administration of the educational 
institutions of their choice is in truth and in effect to deprive them of their rights under Article 30(1).”]; Milli 
Talimi Mission v. State of Bihar, (1984) 4 SCC 500 [4] 

PART D 
Page 46 of 70 
 
(vi) publish the results of the examination; and (vii) to provide for research and 
training in any branch of Madarsa education. 
64. Section 10 empowers the Board to: (i) cancel an examination or withhold the 
result of an examination; (ii) prescribe fees for conducting examinations; (iii) 
refuse recognition to institutions that do not fulfil the standards of staff, 
instructions, equipment, or buildings laid down by the Board; (iv) withdraw 
recognition to an institution not able to adhere to the standards of staff, 
instructions, equipment, or buildings laid down by the Board; and (v) inspect an 
institution to ensure due observance of the prescribed courses of study and 
facilities for instruction.  
65. The legislative scheme of the Madarsa Act suggests that it has been enacted 
to regulate the standard of education in Madarsas recognized by the Board for 
imparting Madarsa education. The Madarsa Act grants recognition to Madarsas 
to enable students to sit for an examination and obtain a degree, diploma, or 
certificate conferred by the Board. The statute envisages granting recognition 
to Madarsas which fulfil the prescribed standards for staff, instructions, 
equipment and buildings. The grant of recognition imposes a responsibility on 
the Madarsas to attain certain standards of education laid down by the Board. 
Access to quality teachers, course materials, and equipment will allow Madarsa 
students to achieve stipulated educational and professional standards.87 
 
87 Frank Anthony Public School Employees’ Association v. Union of India, (1986) 4 SCC 707 [16] [“16. The 
excellence of the instruction provided by an institution would depend directly on the excellence of the teaching 
staff, and in turn, that would depend on the quality and the contentment of the teachers. Conditions of service 
pertaining to minimum qualifications of teachers, their salaries, allowances and other conditions of service 
which ensure security, contentment and decent living standards to teachers and which will consequently 
enable them to render better service to the institution and the pupils cannot surely be said to be violative of 
the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 30(1) of the Constitution."]  

PART D 
Page 47 of 70 
 
Failure of the Madarsas to maintain the standards of education will result in the 
withdrawal of their recognition. 
66. In Bihar State Madarasa Education Board v. Madarasa Hanfia Arabic 
College,88 the State legislature enacted the Bihar State Madarasa Education 
Board Act 1982 to constitute an autonomous State Madarasa Education Board 
to grant recognition, aid, and to supervise and control the academic efficiency 
in the Madarsas aided and recognized by it. Section 7(2)(n) of the legislation 
empowered the Board to dissolve the managing committee of a Madarsa for 
non-compliance with its directions. The issue before this Court was whether the 
provision was violative of Article 30(1) of the Constitution. This Court observed 
that the State has the power to regulate the administration of minority 
educational institutions in the interests of educational needs and discipline of 
the institution. However, it was observed that the State has no power to frame 
rules to completely take over the management of such institutions by 
superseding or dissolving their management. Hence, Section 7(2)(n) was 
declared invalid for violating Article 30(1).  
67.  The other issue before this Court was whether a statutory Board established 
for recognition of minority educational institutions must only comprise of 
persons belonging to the minority community. It was held that there is no 
constitutional obligation that such a Board must exclusively consist of members 
belonging to the minority community. It was observed: 
“7. […] Article 30(1) does not contemplate that an 
autonomous Educational Board entrusted with the 
 
88 (1990) 1 SCC 428 

PART D 
Page 48 of 70 
 
duty of regulating the aided and recognised 
minorities institution, should be constituted only by 
persons belonging to minority community. Article 
30(1) protects the minorities' right to manage and 
administer 
institutions 
established 
by 
them 
according to their choice, but while seeking aid and 
recognition for their institutions there is no 
constitutional obligation that the Board granting aid 
or recognition or regulating efficiency in minority 
institution should consist of members exclusively 
belonging to minority communities. In the instant 
case the constitution of the Board under Section 3 of 
the Act ensures that its members are only those who 
are interested in teaching and research of Persian, 
Arabic and Islamic studies. This provision fully 
safeguards the interest of Madarasa of the Muslim 
community.” 
68. The Madarsa Act allows the Board to prescribe curriculum and textbooks, 
conduct examinations, qualifications of teachers, and standards of equipment 
and buildings geared to ensure the maintenance of standards of education in 
Madarsas. The provisions of the Madarsa Act are reasonable because they 
subserve the object of recognition, that is, improving the academic excellence 
of students in the recognised Madarsas and making them capable to sit for 
examinations conducted by the Board. The statute also enables the students 
studying in the recognised Madarsas to pursue fields of higher education and 
seek employment.  
69. Regulations pertaining to standards of education or qualification of teachers do 
not directly interfere with the administration of the recognized Madarsas. Such 
regulations are “designed to prevent maladministration of an educational 
institution”.89 The Madarsa Act does not directly interfere with the day-to-day 
 
89 Ahmedabad St Xavier’s College Society (supra) [92] 

PART D 
Page 49 of 70 
 
administration of the recognized Madarsas.90 Further, the provisions of the 
Madarsa Act are “conducive to making the institution an effective vehicle of 
education for minority community” without depriving the educational institutions 
of their minority character.  
70. Fundamental rights consist of both negative and positive postulates. They 
require the State to restrain its exercise of power and create conducive 
conditions for the exercise of rights.91 The essence of Article 30(1) is the 
recognition and preservation of different types of people, with diverse 
languages and different beliefs, while maintaining the basic principle of equality 
and secularism.92 In the spirit of positive secularism, Article 30 confers special 
rights on religious and linguistic minorities “because of their numerical handicap 
and to instil in them a sense of security and confidence”.93 The positive concept 
of secularism requires the State to take active steps to treat minority institutions 
on par with secular institutions while allowing them to retain their minority 
character. Positive secularism allows the State to treat some persons differently 
to treat all persons equally.94 The concept of positive secularism finds 
consonance in the principle of substantive equality.  
 
90 P A Inamdar (supra) [121] [“121. […] the urge or need for affiliation or recognition brings in the concept of 
regulation by way of laying down conditions consistent with the requirement of ensuring merit, excellence of 
education and preventing maladministration. For example, provisions can be made indicating the quality of 
the teachers by prescribing the minimum qualifications that they must possess and the courses of studies 
and curricula. The existence of infrastructure sufficient for its growth can be stipulated as a prerequisite to 
the grant of recognition or affiliation. However, there cannot be interference in the day-to-day administration. 
The essential ingredients of the management, including admission of students, recruiting of staff and the 
quantum of fee to be charged, cannot be regulated.”]  
91 Supriyo v. Union of India, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1348 [158] 
92 T M A Pai Foundation (supra) [160-161] 
93 T M A Pai Foundation (supra) [157] 
94 St Stephens College v. University of Delhi, (1992) 1 SCC 558 [97] [“97. The Constitution establishes 
secular democracy. The animating principle of any democracy is the equality of the people. But the idea that 
all people are equal is profoundly speculative. It is well said that in order to treat some persons equally, we 
must treat them differently. We have to recognise a fair degree of discrimination in favour of minorities. But it 

PART D 
Page 50 of 70 
 
71. In Joseph Shine v. Union of India,95 one of us (Justice D Y Chandrachud) held 
that the notion of formal equality is contrary to the constitutional vision of a just 
social order. On the contrary, substantive equality is aimed at producing equality 
of outcomes through different modes of affirmative actions or state support.96 
Substantive equality is directed at eliminating individual, institutional and 
systemic discrimination against disadvantaged groups which effectively 
undermines their full and equal social, economic, political, and cultural 
participation in society.97 Enactment of special provisions or giving preferential 
treatment by the State allows the disadvantaged individual or community to 
overcome social and economic barriers and participate in society on equal 
terms.98 
72. The Madarsa Act secures the interests of the minority community in Uttar 
Pradesh because: (i) it regulates the standard of education imparted by the 
recognised Madarsas; and (ii) it conducts examinations and confers certificates 
to students, allowing them the opportunity to pursue higher education. The 
Madarsa Act is consistent with the positive obligation of the State to ensure that 
students studying in the recognised Madarsas attain a minimum level of 
competency which will allow them to effectively participate in society and earn 
 
is impossible to have an affirmative action for religious minorities in religious neutral way. In order to get 
beyond religion, we cannot ignore religion. We must first take account of religion. It is exactly in the spirit of 
these considerations that this Court in its advisory opinion in Kerala Education Bill case [1959 SCR 995 : AIR 
1958 SC 956] recognised a fair degree of discrimination in favour of religious minorities. In this respect the 
Court seems to have acted on the same principle which is applied to socially and educationally backward 
classes, that is the principle of protective discrimination.”] 
95 (2019) 3 SCC 39  
96 Ravinder Kumar Dhariwal v. Union of India, (2023) 2 SCC 209 [37] 
97 Joseph Shine (supra) [171] 
98 Neil Aurelio Nunes v. Union of India, (2022) 4 SCC 1 [33]  

PART D 
Page 51 of 70 
 
a living.99 Therefore, the Madarsa Act furthers substantive equality for the 
minority community. 
73. The High Court erred in holding that a statute is bound to be struck down if it is 
violative of the basic structure. Invalidation of a statute on the grounds of 
violation of secularism has to be traced to express provisions of the 
Constitution. Further, the fact that the State legislature has established a Board 
to recognise and regulate Madarsa education is not violative of Article 14. The 
Madarsa Act furthers substantive equality.  
e. 
Interplay of Article 21-A and Article 30 
74. Article 21-A provides that the State shall provide free and compulsory education 
to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State 
may, by law, determine. It imposes a constitutional obligation on the State to 
impart elementary and basic education. Parliament enacted the RTE Act to 
provide full-time elementary education of satisfactory and equitable quality to 
every child in pursuance of Article 21-A. The RTE Act seeks to provide a “quality 
education without any discrimination on economic, social, and cultural 
grounds.”100 Section 3 makes the right of children to free and compulsory 
education justiciable.101  
 
 
99 Ahmedabad St Xavier’s College Society (supra) [145] (Justice K K Mathew and Justice Y V Chandrachud) 
100 State of Tamil Nadu v. K Shyam Sunder, (2011) 8 SCC 737 [21]; Bharatiya Seva Samaj Trust v. Yogeshbhai 
Ambalal Patel, (2012) 9 SCC 310 [26] 
101 Section 3, RTE Act 

PART D 
Page 52 of 70 
 
75. In Society for Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan v. Union of India,102 a 
three-Judge Bench of this Court upheld the constitutional validity of the RTE 
Act. It further held that the statute applies to an aided school including a minority 
school receiving aid or grant to meet whole or part of its expenses from the 
appropriate Government or local authority. Subsequently, Parliament amended 
the RTE Act to exempt its application to Madarsas, vedic pathsalas and 
educational institutions primarily imparting religious instruction.103 
76. In Pramati Educational and Cultural Trust v. Union of India,104 a Constitution 
Bench had to determine the constitutional validity of Article 21-A. One of the 
issues before this Court was whether Article 21-A conflicts with Article 30. This 
Court held that the law enacted by Parliament under Article 21-A cannot 
abrogate the right of minorities to establish and administer schools of their 
choice. It held that application of the RTE Act to minority educational institutions, 
whether aided or unaided, “may destroy the minority character of the school.”105 
 
102 (2012) 6 SCC 1 [64] 
103 Section 1(4) and (5), RTE Act. [It reads: 
“[(4) Subject to the provisions of Articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution, the provisions of this Act shall apply 
to conferment of rights on children to free and compulsory education. 
(5) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to Madrasas, Vedic Pathsalas and educational institutions 
primarily imparting religious instruction.”] 
104 (2014) 8 SCC 1  
105 Pramati Educational and Cultural Trust (supra) [55] [“55. When we look at the 2009 Act, we find that 
Section 12(1)(b) read with Section 2(n)(ii) provides that an aided school receiving aid and grants, whole or 
part, of its expenses from the appropriate Government or the local authority has to provide free and 
compulsory education to such proportion of children admitted therein as its annual recurring aid or grants so 
received bears to its annual recurring expenses, subject to a minimum of twenty-five per cent. Thus, a 
minority aided school is put under a legal obligation to provide free and compulsory elementary education to 
children who need not be children of members of the minority community which has established the school. 
We also find that under Section 12(1)(c) read with Section 2(n)(iv), an unaided school has to admit into 
twenty-five per cent of the strength of Class I children belonging to weaker sections and disadvantaged 
groups in the neighbourhood. Hence, unaided minority schools will have a legal obligation to admit children 
belonging to weaker sections and disadvantaged groups in the neighbourhood who need not be children of 
the members of the minority community which has established the school. While discussing the validity of 
clause (5) of Article 15 of the Constitution, we have held that members of communities other than the minority 
community which has established the school cannot be forced upon a minority institution because that may 
destroy the minority character of the school. In our view, if the 2009 Act is made applicable to minority schools, 
aided or unaided, the right of the minorities under Article 30(1) of the Constitution will be abrogated. 
Therefore, the 2009 Act insofar it is made applicable to minority schools referred in clause (1) of Article 30 of 

PART D 
Page 53 of 70 
 
Therefore, it held that the RTE Act is ultra vires the Constitution to the extent it 
applied to minority educational institutions. 
77. The purpose of education is to provide for the intellectual, moral, and physical 
development of a child. A good education system is correlated to the social, 
economic, and political needs of our country.106  
78. Article 30(1) guarantees the right to establish and administer educational 
institutions of their choice to religious and linguistic minorities. However, the 
State has an interest in ensuring that the minority educational institutions impart 
secular education along with religious education or instruction.107 The 
constitutional scheme allows the State to strike a balance between two 
objectives: (i) ensuring the standard of excellence of minority educational 
institutions; and (ii) preserving the right of the minority to establish and 
administer its educational institution.108 The State generally strikes a balance 
by enacting regulations accompanying the recognition of minority educational 
institutions. 
79. The High Court erred in holding that education provided under the 2004 Act is 
violative of Article 21A because (i) The RTE Act which facilitates the fulfilment 
of the fundamental right under Article 21 – A  contains a specific provision by 
which it does not apply to minority  educational  institutions;  (ii) The right of a 
 
the Constitution is ultra vires the Constitution. We are thus of the view that the majority judgment of this Court 
in Society for Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan v. Union of India [(2012) 6 SCC 1] insofar as it holds that 
the 2009 Act is applicable to aided minority schools is not correct.”] 
106 Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education v. K S Gandhi, (1991) 2 SCC 
716 [13] 
107 Ahmedabad St Xavier’s College Society (supra) [138] (Justice K K Mathew and Justice Y V Chandrachud) 
108 P A Inamdar (supra) [122] 

PART E 
Page 54 of 70 
 
religious minority to establish and administer Madarsas to impart both religious 
and secular education is protected by Article 30; and (iii) the Board and the state 
government have sufficient regulatory powers to prescribe and regulate 
standards of education for the Madarsas.  
E. 
Legislative Competence  
a. The Madarsa Act is within the legislative competence of the State 
under Entry 25, List III 
80. The distribution of legislative powers is contained in Part XI of the Constitution. 
Article 246(2) confers exclusive power on Parliament to make laws “with respect 
to” any of the matters enumerated in List I (the Union List) of the Seventh 
Schedule. Clause (1) is prefaced with a non-obstante provision which gives it 
precedence over Clauses (2) and (3). Article 246(2) enunciates the legislative 
principles with regard to List III (the Concurrent List) and states that both 
Parliament and State legislatures have concurrent powers of legislation “with 
respect to” the matters enumerated in this list. This clause also begins with a 
non-obstante provision giving it precedence over clause (3). Finally, Article 
264(3) states that the State Legislature has exclusive power to make laws on 
the matters enumerated in List II (the State List).  
81. When the Constitution was enacted, the subject of “education” was part of List 
II (the State List) of the Seventh Schedule. This followed the scheme of 
distribution of powers in the Government of India Act 1935, whereby, the entry 
titled “Education” was placed in the Provincial List. At the time of the enactment 
of the Constitution, Entry 11 of List II read as follows:  

PART E 
Page 55 of 70 
 
“11. Education including universities, subject to the 
provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I and 
entry 25 of List III.” 
 
82. At this time, Entry 25 of List III read as follows:  
“25. Vocational and technical training of labour.” 
 
83. With effect from 3 January 1977, by the Constitution (Forty-Second Amendment 
Act)109, Entry 11 of List II was omitted, and Entry 25 of List III was amended to 
account for it. In other words, the legislative entry pertaining to “education” was 
moved from the State List to the Concurrent List. Entry 25, List III now reads as 
follows:  
“25. Education, including technical education, medical 
education and universities, subject to the provisions of 
entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; vocational and 
technical training of labour.” 
 
84. To address the contention raised by the respondents regarding the legislative 
competence of the state legislature, the following settled principles governing 
the interpretation of the entries in the Seventh Schedule are relevant110: 
a. The entries are legislative heads and not sources of legislative powers. The 
legislative entries use general words to define and delineate the legislative 
powers of Parliament and State legislatures, and the words should receive 
their ordinary, natural, and grammatical meaning; 
 
109 Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
110 Mineral Area Development Authority & Anr. vs Steel Authority of India & Anr, 2024 INSC 554 [40-42] 

PART E 
Page 56 of 70 
 
b. The legislative entries should not be read in a narrow or pedantic sense but 
must be given their “broadest meaning and the widest amplitude”. The 
ambit of the entries extends to all ancillary and subsidiary matters which 
can fairly and reasonably be said to be comprehended in them; 
c. There is a possibility of an overlap and conflict between two or more entries. 
In such cases, the doctrine of pith and substance comes into play to 
determine whether the legislature in question has the competence to enact 
a law;  
d. There may arise situations where a legislature may frame a law that in 
substance and reality transgresses its legislative competence. Such a piece 
of legislation is called “colourable legislation”. The substance of the 
legislation is material. If the subject matter is in substance beyond the 
legislative powers of the legislature, the form in which the law is clothed 
would not save it from being declared unconstitutional; and  
e. In certain entries, such as Entry 25 in List III, the Constitution uses specific 
expressions such as “subject to” in order to resolve potential overlaps 
between entries in the three lists. This is used in cases where the 
Constitution stipulates that the exercise of power traceable to certain 
legislative entries overrides the exercise of power traceable to another entry 
in a different list.  
 
85.  The provisions of the Madarsa Act seek to “regulate” Madarsas. These are 
educational institutions run by a religious minority. There is a distinction 
between “religious instruction” and “religious education”. While the Madarsas 

PART E 
Page 57 of 70 
 
do impart religious instruction, their primary aim is education. Legislative entries 
must be given their widest meaning, and their ambit also extends to ancillary 
subjects which may be comprehended within the entry. The mere fact that the 
education which is sought to be regulated includes some religious teachings or 
instruction, does not automatically push the legislation outside the legislative 
competence of the state.  
86. Article 28 is titled “Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious 
worship in certain educational institutions”. Article 28(1) states that no religious 
instruction shall be provided in any educational institution wholly maintained out 
of State funds. Article 28(3) provides that no person who is attending any 
educational institution recognised by the state or receiving aid out of state funds 
shall be compelled to take part in religious instruction or attend religious worship 
without their consent. The corollary to this provision is that religious instruction 
may be imparted in an educational institution which is recognized by the state, 
or which receives state aid but no student can be compelled to participate in 
religious instruction in such an institution. However, the dissemination of 
religious instruction does not change its fundamental character as an institution 
that imparts education. To read Entry 25, List III in the manner proposed by the 
respondent, would render it inapplicable to all legislation which deal with any 
institution “established and administered” by minorities, which may provide 
some religious instruction. This runs contrary to the constitutional scheme in 
Article 30, which recognizes the right of minorities to establish and administer 
educational institutions. Merely because an educational institution is run by a 
minority or even a majority community and professes some of its teachings, 

PART E 
Page 58 of 70 
 
does not mean that the teachings in such institutions fall outside the ambit of 
the term “education”.  
87. In fact, reference was made to an eleven-judge bench of this Court in T.M.A. 
Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka,111 on the “scope of the right of 
minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice 
under Article 30(1) read with Article 29(2)” in view of the inclusion of Entry 25 in 
List III of the seventh schedule.112 One of the questions before this Court was 
whether the “minority status” of an institution under Article 30(1) would be 
determined with the unit being the state or the entire country, since both the 
state and the union can legislate on the subject of “education”. Therefore, it is 
beyond the pale of doubt that the regulation of minority institutions was 
assumed to fall within the ambit of Entry 25, List III by an eleven-judge bench 
of this Court. 
88. Further, Entry 25, List III itself provides specific carve-outs. The entry is subject 
to entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I. None of these entries in the Union List 
seek to regulate ‘religious education’. Further, Mr Guru Krishna Kumar, Senior 
Counsel has not indicated any other entry in List I with which there is a conflict 
so as to indicate that the legislation is a “colourable legislation” within the 
competence of the Parliament and not within the competence of the state 
legislature.  
 
111 (2002) 8 SCC 481.  
112 Ibid [3-4]. 

PART E 
Page 59 of 70 
 
89. With respect to the concurrent exercise of power by the State Legislature and 
the Parliament with respect to matters in List III (the Concurrent List), the 
Constitution also provides for the doctrine of repugnancy to resolve 
inconsistencies between laws made by the Parliament and the state 
legislatures.113 In such cases, the law made by the State legislature gives way 
to the law made by the Parliament, subject to certain exceptions.114 In the 
present instance, the question of repugnancy does not even arise as there is 
no central law which purports to regulate the functioning of Madarsas. As noted 
above, the RTE Act, which is the legislation framed by Parliament pursuant to 
Entry 25, specifically states that it is inapplicable to Madarsas, and thus, there 
is no issue of a conflict or repugnancy between the two Acts.  
90. In view of the above, there is no jurisprudential basis to read Entry 25, List III to 
be limited to only education that is devoid of any religious teaching or instruction 
and to contend that the Madarsa Act (in its entirety) which seeks to regulate the 
functioning of Madarsas in Uttar Pradesh is outside the competence of the state 
legislature. The challenge on the ground of legislative competence fails. 
b. 
Certain provisions of the Madarsa Act conflict with the UGC Act 
enacted under Entry 66, List I 
 
 
113 Article 254, Constitution of India.  
114 Forum for People's Collective Efforts v. State of W.B., (2021) 8 SCC 599 [116] 
 

PART E 
Page 60 of 70 
 
91. As noted above, Entry 25 of List III has been made subject to certain entries in 
List I. One of these entries is Entry 66 of List I, which reads as follows:  
“66. Co-ordination and determination of standards in 
institutions for higher education or research and 
scientific and technical institutions.” 
 
92.  In Mineral Area Development Authority & Anr. vs. Steel Authority of India 
& Anr.115, a Constitution Bench of this Court had occasion to observe the 
purport of the legislative entries in List II using the phrase “subject to” in the 
following terms:  
“44. Where the entries have used the phrase “subject 
to”, the legislative power of the State is made 
subordinate to Parliament with respect to either the 
Union List or the Concurrent List. The expression 
“subject to” conveys the idea of a provision 
yielding place to another provision or other 
provisions to which it is made subject. Therefore, 
where the Constitution intends to displace or 
override the legislative powers of the States, it has 
used specific terminology – “subject to”. However, 
the Constitution has also indicated the extent to which 
a particular legislative entry under List II is 
subordinated. For instance, the subjection is either with 
respect to provisions of List I or List III, or it can also be 
to the extent of “any limitations” imposed by Parliament 
by law. Thus, it is imperative that the entries in List II 
must be read and interpreted in their proper context to 
understand the extent of their subordination to Union 
powers.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
115 2024 INSC 554. 

PART E 
Page 61 of 70 
 
93. The UGC Act has been enacted by Parliament pursuant to Entry 66 and seeks 
to make provisions for the “co-ordination and determination of standards in 
Universities and for that purpose, to establish a University Grants 
Commission.”116 The Madarsa Act has been enacted pursuant to Entry 25 of 
List III. This Court has held in a consistent line of precedent that the UGC Act 
occupies the field with regard to the coordination and determination of 
standards in higher education. Therefore, state legislation which seeks to 
regulate higher education, in conflict with the UGC Act, would be beyond the 
legislative competence of the State legislature.117  
94. In Prof. Yashpal & Anr vs.  State of Chhattisgarh,118 a three-Judge Bench of 
this Court adjudicated on the constitutionality of the provisions of a state 
legislation in Chhattisgarh, which inter alia, granted the state government the 
power to recognise and establish universities, which offered degrees that were 
not recognised by the UGC. The state relied on Entry 32 of List II which pertains 
to the incorporation of universities and Entry 25 of List III, to justify the legislative 
competence of the state legislature. This Court declared that the provisions of 
the state legislation which conflict with the provisions of the UGC Act are 
unconstitutional as the UGC Act was validly enacted by Parliament under Entry 
66 of List I. After considering the consistent line of precedent on this question, 
this Court observed thus:  
 
116 Long Title, UGC Act.  
117 Osmania University Teachers’ Association vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1987) 4 SCC 671; Dr Preeti 
Srivastava and another vs. State of M.P., (1999) 7 SCC 120; Prof. Yashpal & Anr vs.  State of Chhattisgarh, 
(2005) 5 SCC 420; Annamalai University, Represented by Registrar vs. Secretary to Government, 
Information and Tourism Department, (2009) 4 SCC 590; Kalyani Mathivanan versus K.V. Jeyaraj, (2015) 6 
SCC 363. 
118 (2005) 5 SCC 420 

PART E 
Page 62 of 70 
 
“45. The State Legislature can make an enactment 
providing for incorporation of universities under Entry 
32 of List II and also generally for universities under 
Entry 25 of List III. The subject “university” as a 
legislative head must be interpreted in the same 
manner as it is generally or commonly understood, 
namely, with proper facilities for teaching of higher level 
and continuing research activity. An enactment which 
simply clothes a proposal submitted by a sponsoring 
body or the sponsoring body itself with the juristic 
personality of a university so as to take advantage of 
Section 22 of the UGC Act and thereby acquires the 
right of conferring or granting academic degrees but 
without having any infrastructure or teaching facility for 
higher studies or facility for research is not 
contemplated by either of these entries. Sections 5 and 
6 of the impugned enactment are, therefore, 
wholly ultra vires, being a fraud on the Constitution. 
 
46. […] The impugned Act which enables a proposal 
on paper only to be notified as a university and thereby 
conferring the power upon such university under 
Section 22 of the UGC Act to confer degrees has the 
effect of completely stultifying the functioning of the 
University Grants Commission insofar as these 
universities are concerned. Such incorporation of a 
university makes it impossible for UGC to perform its 
duties and responsibilities of ensuring coordination and 
determination of standards. In the absence of any 
campus and other infrastructural facilities, UGC cannot 
take any measures whatsoever to ensure a proper 
syllabus, level of teaching, standard of examination 
and evaluation of academic achievement of the 
students or even to ensure that the students have 
undergone the course of study for the prescribed 
period before the degree is awarded to them.” 
 
95. Section 22 of the UGC Act pertains to the right to confer degrees and reads as 
follows:  
“22. Right to confer degrees – (1) The right of 
conferring or granting degrees shall be exercised only 
by a University established or incorporated by or under 
a Central Act, a Provincial Act or a State Act or an 
institution deemed to be a University under section 3 or 

PART E 
Page 63 of 70 
 
an institution specially empowered by an Act of 
Parliament to confer or grant degrees.  
 
(2)  Save as provided in sub-section (1), no person or 
authority shall confer, or grant, or hold himself or itself 
out as entitled to confer or grant, any degree.  
 
(3)  For the purposes of this section, “degree’ means 
any such degree as may, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, be specified in this behalf by 
the Commission by notification in the official Gazette.” 
 
96. Sub-section (1) expressly restricts the right to confer or grant degrees to (i) 
universities established or incorporated by a Central or State statute; or (ii) an 
institution deemed to be a university under Section 3;119 or (iii) an institution 
specially empowered by an Act of Parliament to confer degrees. Sub-section 
(2) provides the same in the negative and stipulates that no person or authority, 
except those stipulated in sub-section (1) is entitled to confer or grant a degree 
or present himself as entitled to confer or grant a degree. Sub-section (3) 
provides that, for the application of Section 22, “degree” includes those degrees 
which are specified in this regard by the UGC by a notification issued in the 
Official Gazette, after previous approval of the Central Government. 
97. During the course of the hearing, in response to queries posed by this Court, 
the Standing Counsel for the UGC clarified on instructions that the notification 
referred to in sub-section (3) of Section 22 has been issued. The latest 
notification in this regard, which currently holds the field, was issued by the UGC 
 
119 Section 3 reads: “Application of Act to institutions for higher studies other than Universities – The 
Central Government may, on the advice of the Commission, declare by notification in the Official Gazette, 
that any institution for higher education, other than a University, shall be deemed to be a University for the 
purposes of this Act, and on such a declaration being made, all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such 
institution as if it were a University within the meaning of clause (f) of section 2” 

PART E 
Page 64 of 70 
 
in March 2014.120 The notification lists the nomenclature of all the degrees 
which fall within the ambit of Section 22 of the UGC Act. Under the title of 
‘Specification of Degrees with Urdu/Persian/Arabic nomenclature’, the following 
degrees are specified:  
 
 
98.  Section 9 of the Madarsa Act specifies the functions of the Board under the 
Madarsa Act. Several of these functions pertain to the regulation of the Fazil 
and Kamil degrees, which correspond to a bachelor’s level and a post-graduate 
degree, respectively. In particular, the following provisions deal with regulating 
these higher education degrees: 
a. Sub-clause (a) empowers the Board to prescribe courses of instructions, 
textbooks and other material for inter alia the Kamil and Fazil courses;  
b. Sub-clause (e) empowers the Board to grant degrees, diplomas, certificates 
and academic distinctions to those who have either studied in institutions 
 
120 NO. F. 5-1/2013 (CPP-II). 

PART E 
Page 65 of 70 
 
recognized by the board or studied privately under the conditions mandated 
by regulations and passed an examination conducted by the Board;  
c. Sub-clause (f) empowers the Board to conduct the examinations of inter 
alia the Kamil and Fazil courses. Sub-clauses (g), (h) and (j) further 
empower the Board to recognize institutions for the purpose of 
examinations, admit candidates for the examinations, and publish or 
withhold the publication of the examination results; and 
d. Sub-clause (o) empowers the Board to carry out all acts which are required 
to further the object of the Board, which is a body constituted to regulate 
and supervise “Madrasa-Education up to Fazil”.  
Pursuant to the above provisions, several provisions in the Regulations framed 
by the Board also seek to regulate the Kamil and Fazil courses and degrees.  
99. The Madarsa Act to the extent to which it seeks to regulate higher education, 
including the ‘degrees’ of Fazil and Kamil, is beyond the legislative competence 
of the State Legislature since it conflicts with Section 22 of the UGC Act. Entry 
25 of List III, pursuant to which the Madarsa Act has been enacted, has been 
expressly made subject to Entry 66 of List I. The UGC Act governs the 
standards for higher education and a state legislation cannot seek to regulate 
higher education, in contravention of the provisions of the UGC Act.  
c. 
The entire Madarsa Act need not be struck down on the above ground 
100. In the foregoing sections of this Judgment, we have upheld the 
constitutionality of the Madarsa Act on various grounds, that were urged before 
the High Court and subsequently, before this Court. However, certain provisions 

PART E 
Page 66 of 70 
 
of the Madarsa Act which pertain to the regulation of higher education and the 
conferment of such degrees have been held to be unconstitutional on the 
ground of lack of legislative competence. Thus, the question that arises is 
whether the entire legislation must be struck down on this ground. In our view, 
it is in failing to adequately address this question of severability that the High 
Court falls into error and ends up throwing the baby out with the bathwater.  
101. The entire statute does not need to be struck down each time that certain 
provisions of the statute are held to not meet constitutional muster. The statute 
is only void to the extent that it contravenes the Constitution. This position may 
be derived from the text of Article 13(2) itself, which states: 
“(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away 
or abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any 
law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the 
extent of the contravention, be void.” 
 
102. Although Article 13(2) upholds this proposition in the context of laws which 
abridge the fundamental rights in Part III, the same doctrine is equally 
applicable to provisions of a statute which are set aside on the ground of lack 
of legislative competence. This position has also been affirmed by a steady line 
of precedent of this Court. We may helpfully refer to the observations in the 
locus classicus on the subject. In R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla v. Union of 
India121, a Constitution bench of this Court adjudicated on the constitutionality 
of certain provisions of the Prize Competitions Act, 1956 and its allied rules. 
This Court, speaking through Justice TL Venkatarama Ayyar, had occasion to 
 
121 1957 SCC OnLine SC 11. 

PART E 
Page 67 of 70 
 
lay down the contours of the doctrine of severability and held that when a statute 
is in part void, it will be enforced as regards the rest, if that part is severable 
from what is invalid. It was clarified that it is immaterial whether the invalidity of 
the statute arises by reason of its subject matter being outside the competence 
of the legislature or by reason of its provisions contravening other constitutional 
provisions. To determine whether the specific provisions or the portion of the 
statute which is invalid is severable from the rest of the statute, this Court 
adopted certain rules of construction, which are as follows:  
“22. […]  
1. In determining whether the valid parts of a statute 
are separable from the invalid parts thereof, it is the 
intention of the legislature that is the determining 
factor. The test to be applied is whether the 
legislature would have enacted the valid part if it 
had known that the rest of the statute was 
invalid. […] 
2. If the valid and invalid provisions are so 
inextricably mixed up that they cannot be separated 
from one another, then the invalidity of a portion 
must result in the invalidity of the Act in its entirety. 
On the other hand, if they are so distinct and 
separate that after striking out what is invalid, 
what remains is in itself a complete code 
independent of the rest, then it will be upheld 
notwithstanding that the rest has become 
unenforceable. […] 
3. Even when the provisions which are valid are 
distinct and separate from those which are invalid, if 
they all form part of a single scheme which is 
intended to be operative as a whole, then also the 
invalidity of a part will result in the failure of the 
whole. [...] 
4. Likewise, when the valid and invalid parts of a 
statute are independent and do not form part of a 
scheme but what is left after omitting the invalid 
portion is so thin and truncated as to be in substance 
different from what it was when it emerged out of the 
legislature, then also it will be rejected in its entirety. 
5. The separability of the valid and invalid provisions 
of a statute does not depend on whether the law is 

PART E 
Page 68 of 70 
 
enacted in the same section or different sections; 
[…] it is not the form, but the substance of the 
matter that is material, and that has to be 
ascertained on an examination of the Act as a 
whole and of the setting of the relevant provision 
therein. 
6. If after the invalid portion is expunged from the 
statute what remains cannot be enforced without 
making alterations and modifications therein, then 
the whole of it must be struck down as void, as 
otherwise it will amount to judicial legislation. […] 
7. In determining the legislative intent on the 
question of separability, it will be legitimate to take 
into account the history of the legislation, its object, 
the title and the preamble to it. […] 
 
           (emphasis supplied) 
 
103. Having already disagreed with the High Court on the question of whether 
the entire Madarsa Act suffers from an infirmity on the principle of secularism 
and other contentions, the only infirmity lies in those provisions which pertain to 
higher education, namely Fazil and Kamil. These provisions can be severed 
from the rest of the Madarsa Act. As noted earlier, the purpose behind the 
Madarsa Act was to remove the difficulties in running the Madarsas, improve 
their merit and provide adequate facilities to students studying in these 
institutions. The purpose was not limited to only regulating Fazil and Kamil, and 
the legislature would have still enacted the statute if it were aware that the 
portions pertaining to higher education were invalid. Further, if the provisions 
relating to higher education are separated from the rest of the statute, the Act 
can continue to be enforced in a real and substantial manner. On an 
examination of the Madarsa Act, it is clear that prescribing the instructional 
material, conducting exams and conferring degrees for Fazil and Kamil were 
only a part of the functions of the Board. The severance of these functions from 

PART F 
Page 69 of 70 
 
the Board does not impact its entire character. Thus, only the provisions which 
pertain to Fazil and Kamil are unconstitutional, and the Madarsa Act otherwise 
remains valid.  
F. 
Conclusion 
104. In view of the above discussion, we conclude that: 
a. 
The Madarsa Act regulates the standard of education in Madarsas 
recognized by the Board for imparting Madarsa education; 
b. 
The Madarsa Act is consistent with the positive obligation of the State to 
ensure that students studying in recognised Madarsas attain a level of 
competency which will allow them to effectively participate in society and 
earn a living; 
c. 
Article 21-A and the RTE Act have to be read consistently with the right of 
religious and linguistic minorities to establish and administer educational 
institutions of their choice. The Board with the approval of the State 
government can enact regulations to ensure that religious minority 
institutions impart secular education of a requisite standard without 
destroying their minority character; 
d. 
The Madarsa Act is within the legislative competence of the State 
legislature and traceable to Entry 25 of List III. However, the provisions of 
the Madarsa Act which seek to regulate higher-education degrees, such as 
Fazil and Kamil are unconstitutional as they are in conflict with the UGC 
Act, which has been enacted under Entry 66 of List I. 

PART F 
Page 70 of 70 
 
105. The judgment of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad dated 22 March 
2024 is accordingly set aside and the petitions shall stand disposed of in the 
above terms.  
106. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.  
 
 
…….……………………………………CJI 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 
 
 
 
 
….….………………………………………J 
  [J B Pardiwala] 
 
 
 
….….………………………………………J 
 
  
 
 
 
 
[Manoj Misra] 
 
New Delhi;  
November 05, 2024.