2024 INSC 832
1 
REPORTABLE  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO. ________ OF 2024 
[@ DIARY NO. 4407 OF 2023] 
IN 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9026 OF 2019 
 
 
 
MUKUL KUMAR TYAGI  
                   …APPLICANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH 
AND OTHERS  
 
 
 
  
…RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
 
MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO. ________ OF 2024 
[@ DIARY NO. 5682 OF 2023] 
IN 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9026 OF 2019 
 
MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO. ________ OF 2024 
[@ DIARY NO. 10291 OF 2023] 
IN 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9026 OF 2019 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.              OF 2024 
[Arising out of SLP(C) No. 23273 of 2023] 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. Gavai, J. 
 
 
1. 
Leave granted in appeal arising out of SLP(C) No. 23273 
of 2023. 
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2024.11.05
12:47:51 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
2. 
The present applications/appeal have been filed praying 
for a direction to the concerned authority to re-appoint the 
applicants on the post of Technical Grade-II (Electrical) in 
Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited (hereinafter 
referred to as “respondent-Corporation”) who were appointed 
pursuant to the advertisement dated 6th September 2014, by 
setting aside the termination letter dated 13th May 2018 
issued by the respondent-Corporation against the applicants 
herein.  
3. 
The 
facts, 
in 
brief, 
giving rise 
to 
the present 
applications/appeal are as given below: 
3.1 The erstwhile Uttar Pradesh State Electricity Board 
under the Uttar Pradesh Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, 
promulgated the U.P. State Power Parishad Operative 
Employees Cadre Service Regulations, 1995 (hereinafter 
referred to as “1995 Regulations”).  
3.2 With the enactment of Uttar Pradesh Electricity Reforms 
Act, 1999, the U.P. State Electricity Board ceased to exist 
and was replaced by the respondent-Corporation.  
3.3 The 
respondent-Corporation 
adopted 
the 
1995 
Regulations which prescribed the method of filling-up posts 

3 
of Technician Grade-II and set out the educational 
qualifications in relation thereto.  
3.4 By an office memorandum dated 29th January 2011, the 
Board of Directors of the respondent-Corporation amended 
the 
1995 
Regulations 
thereby 
prescribing 
that 
all 
incumbents seeking selection to the post of Technician 
Grade-II would be liable to hold a Certificate of 80 Hours 
Course on Computer Concepts (hereinafter referred to as 
“CCC certificate”) issued by Department of Electronics and 
Accreditation of Computer Courses (hereinafter referred to as 
“DOEACC”) and would need to produce the same certificate 
at the time of interview.  
3.5 By an office memorandum dated 25th November 2011, 
the respondent-Corporation provided that an equivalent 
computer eligibility qualification to CCC certificate issued by 
DOEACC would also be accepted. 
3.6 On 6th September 2014, the respondent-Corporation 
issued an advertisement, thereby inviting applications for 
appointments against 2,211 posts of Technician Grade-II 
(Electrical). Possession of CCC certificate or its equivalent 
computer qualification certificate was one of the mandatory 

4 
educational qualifications prescribed in paragraph 2 of the 
advertisement. In terms of paragraph 7 of the advertisement, 
the candidates were required to submit the CCC certificate at 
the time of interview.  
3.7 On 8th November 2014, a written examination was 
conducted and the applicants herein qualified the written 
examination. The applicants herein, thereafter, appeared in 
the interview conducted during the period from December 
2014 to July 2015.   
3.8 On 14th July 2015, the final selection list was prepared 
and 
published. 
The 
applicants 
herein 
were 
issued 
appointment letters.  
3.9 On 25th July 2015, the unsuccessful candidates 
preferred a Writ Petition before the Allahabad High Court 
being Writ-A No. 41750 of 2015 and other connected 
petitions seeking quashing of the select list dated 14th July 
2015, and revision of the select list by excluding those 
candidates who had obtained CCC certificate on dates 
subsequent to 30th September 2014 as also those candidates 
who did not possess CCC certificate as awarded by DOEACC, 

5 
since renamed as National Institute of Electronics and 
Information Technology (hereinafter referred to as “NIELIT”). 
3.10 Vide final judgment and order dated 7th October 2017, 
the Single Judge of the Allahabad High Court quashed the 
select list in question insofar as it includes candidates who 
do not hold a CCC certificate conferred or recognized by 
NIELIT. Further, the Single Judge directed the respondents 
therein to re-draw the select list restricting it to the 
candidates who hold a recognized CCC certificate or a 
qualification recognized in law as being equivalent thereto. 
3.11 Accordingly, on 13th October 2017, the Electricity 
Service Commission, UPPCL, directed the Chief Engineer(s) 
and Superintending Engineer(s) to send the attested 
photocopies of CCC certificates of selected candidates on the 
2,211 posts of Technician Grade-II (Electrical) and to check 
at their own level, whether the CCC certificate attached is 
issued by an institution recognized by NIELIT (formerly 
DOEACC) or its equivalent or not. 
3.12 Thereafter, on 13th May 2018, the Electricity Service 
Commission, UPPCL, published the list of candidates whose 
selection was not found to be in accordance with the 

6 
eligibility as per the direction of the learned Single Judge of 
the 
Allahabad 
High 
Court 
contained 
in 
Writ-A 
No. 
41750/2015 and other connected petitions. The aforesaid list 
contained the names of the applicants herein.  
3.13 Aggrieved thereby, the applicants herein filed a Writ 
Appeal before the Allahabad High Court being Special Appeal 
No. 585 of 2018 and connected petitions.  
3.14 Vide final judgment and order dated 9th May 2019, a 
Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court allowed the 
Special Appeals filed inter-alia by the applicants herein and 
set aside the judgment and order passed by the learned 
Single Judge. The Writ Petitions were dismissed. Further, the 
respondents therein were directed to restore the position 
relating to the entire process of selection including the 
appointments of selected incumbents as that was prior to 
acceptance of the writ petitions.  
3.15 Aggrieved by the judgment and order passed by the 
Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court, a number of 
appeals were filed before this Court.  
3.16 Vide final judgment and order dated 16th December 
2019 in Civil Appeal No. 9026 of 2019 and other connected 

7 
appeals titled Mukul Kumar Tyagi v. The State of Uttar 
Pradesh and Others1, this Court allowed the appeals and 
set aside the judgment and order passed by the Division 
Bench of the Allahabad High Court. In paragraph 71, this 
Court observed that the direction of the Single Judge of the 
Allahabad High Court, indicates that select list insofar as the 
candidates, who had certificates from NIELIT/DOEACC was 
not quashed, their position in select list was not disturbed 
and select list was partly quashed only with regard to those 
candidates, who did not have CCC or NIELIT certificate. 
3.17 Thereafter, the applicants herein filed a Writ Petition 
under Article 32 of the Constitution being Writ Petition (C) 
No. 1144 of 2022 with a prayer for a direction to the 
respondents therein to restore/re-instate them in their 
respective positions in their services, as the termination was 
against the true letter and spirit of the judgment dated 16th 
December 2019 passed by this Court in the case of Mukul 
Kumar Tyagi (supra).  
3.18 This Court, vide order dated 30th January 2023, 
dismissed the Writ Petition filed by the applicants herein, 
 
1 (2020) 4 SCC 86 : 2019 INSC 1380 

8 
however, in the peculiar facts and circumstances, granted 
liberty to the applicants to file an appropriate application in 
the disposed of Civil Appeal (No. 9026 of 2019) with 
connected matters and directed the Registry to entertain the 
same. 
3.19 In such facts, the present applications/appeal have 
come up for hearing before this Court.  
4. 
We have heard Shri Dama Seshadri Naidu, Shri Amit 
Anand Tiwari and Shri Rana Mukherjee, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing on behalf of the applicants. We have also 
heard Shri S.K. Saxena, learned Senior Counsel appearing 
on behalf of the respondent-Corporation and Electricity 
Service Commission.  
5. 
The learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the 
applicants submitted that, as a matter of fact, vide Office 
Memorandum 
dated 
29th 
January 
2011, 
the 
1995 
Regulations were amended thereby prescribing that all 
incumbents seeking selection to the post of Technician 
Grade-II would be required to produce the CCC certificate 
issued by DOEACC/NIELIT at the time of interview. It is 
submitted that all such candidates who were selected in 

9 
pursuance to the said selection process and having the CCC 
certificate on the date of the interview were eligible to be 
continued. It is submitted that the interview process 
continued for a long period from December 2014 to July 
2015. It is submitted that the learned Single Judge of the 
High Court vide its judgment and order dated 7th October 
2017 had set aside the selection process only of such 
candidates who did not possess the CCC certificate. 
6. 
It is therefore submitted on behalf of the applicants that 
the approach of the respondent-Corporation in setting aside 
the selection process even of such candidates who possessed 
the CCC certificate at the time of interview on the ground 
that they did not possess the same on the last date of 
application i.e. 30th September 2014 is totally erroneous. 
7. 
Insofar as the plea of Shri Rana Mukherjee, learned 
Senior Counsel is concerned, he submitted that, as per the 
advertisement, even such of the candidates who did not 
possess the CCC certificate at the time of interview but had 
obtained the same prior to the last date of the interview i.e. 
4th July 2015 are entitled to be continued in service and their 
selection could not have been set aside. 

10 
8. 
Shri Saxena, learned Senior Counsel appearing on 
behalf of the respondent-Corporation, on the contrary, 
submitted that, it is a settled position of law that the 
requisite qualification has to be obtained prior to the last 
date of submission of application. It is submitted that, as 
such, the candidates who possessed CCC certificate on the 
date of interview but did not possess the same on the last 
date of submission of application are not entitled to be 
continued. It is therefore submitted that the respondent-
Corporation has rightly terminated the services of such of the 
candidates. 
9. 
The present applications arise out of peculiar facts and 
circumstances. The Board of Directors of the respondent-
Corporation, vide office memorandum dated 29th January 
2011, amended the 1995 Regulations which provided that all 
incumbents seeking selection to the post of Technician 
Grade-II would be required to hold the CCC certificate issued 
by DOEACC/ NIELIT. The amended resolution required CCC 
certificate to be mandatorily possessed by the candidates at 
the time of interview. 

11 
10. By another office memorandum dated 25th November 
2011, 
the 
respondent-Corporation 
provided 
that 
an 
equivalent computer eligibility qualification to CCC certificate 
issued by the DOEACC would also be accepted. 
11. On 6th September 2014, the respondent-Corporation 
issued an advertisement thereby inviting applications for 
appointments against 2,211 posts of Technician Grade-II 
(Electrical). The said advertisement provided two mandatory 
qualifications. The first one being the High School or its 
equivalent examination of Board of Higher Secondary 
Education, U.P. passed with Science & Mathematics subjects 
and All India/State Professional Certificate in Electrical 
Trade. The second qualification required a CCC certificate or 
its equivalent computer qualification certificate. As per 
clause 7 of the said advertisement, merely permitting a 
candidate to appear in the written test would not earn 
him/her a right to selection. It was also provided that the 
scrutiny of the certificates of the candidates would be carried 
out at different levels. 
12. In pursuance of the said advertisement, a written 
examination was conducted on 8th November 2014. The 

12 
interviews were held from December 2014 to July 2015. The 
final selection list was prepared and published on 14th July 
2015. 
13. Subsequent to the publication of the final selection list, 
the 
unsuccessful 
candidates 
challenged 
the 
selection 
process. The challenge was made on two grounds. Firstly, 
such of the candidates who had obtained CCC certificate 
after the last date of advertisement i.e. 30th September 2014 
could not have been selected. Secondly, the candidates who 
did not possess the CCC certificate as awarded by DOEACC/ 
NIELIT but submitted certificates from private institutions 
with the self-certification about their equivalence to CCC 
certificate issued by DOEACC/NELIT could also not be 
selected.  
14. It will be relevant to refer to the conclusions arrived at 
by the learned Single Judge of the High Court in its judgment 
and order dated 7th October 2017, which read thus:  
“CONCLUSIONS 
In the end, the Court records the following 
conclusions:- 
1. A recognised qualification is an essential facet 
of Article 16 of the Constitution. 

13 
2. No rights can be recognised in a candidate 
aspiring to enter public service on the strength 
of an unrecognized qualification or one granted 
by an institution which is not conferred the 
authority to grant the same in accordance with 
law. 
3. 
The 
qualification 
as 
prescribed 
by 
the 
respondents does not merit interference at the 
behest of the petitioners. 
4. The decision of the Board of Directors of the 
Corporation dated 23 November 2015 was an act of 
ratification 
and 
therefore 
does 
not 
merit 
interference. 
5. The Commission failed to undertalce any enquiry 
in respect of equivalence of qualifications. It 
undertook a wholly perfunctory exercise and that 
too prompted only by the interim directions of this 
Court. 
6. Even in this exercise no accepted or legally 
sustainable norms were applied to adjudge the 
equivalence of certificates. 
7. The equivalence of qualifications cannot be 
left to depend or rest upon a self certification of 
candidates. 
8. No certificate can possibly be accorded 
equivalence unless an enquiry is addressed 
towards its course content and syllabus. 
9. None of the candidates holding other than 
CCC 
certificates 
were 
shown 
to 
hold 
qualifications 
recognisable 
in 
law. 
Their 
inclusion in the select list has clearly tainted 
the recruitment exercise. It has resulted in the 
induction of candidates who were not entitled to 
be selected or offered appointment. 
10. Since their inclusion in the select list is 
invalid and would consequently merit the select 
list being redrawn, the petitioners are not liable 
to be non suited on the basis of the cut off 
marks prescribed by the Commission. 

14 
Accordingly 
and 
in 
light 
of 
the 
above 
discussion and the conclusions recorded above, the 
select list prepared by the respondents is rendered 
unsustainable and must in consequence be set 
aside. 
The writ petitions preferred by the non selected 
candidates are therefore allowed to the extent 
indicated below. The Court negatives the challenge 
to the decision of the Board of the Corporation 
dated 23 November 2015 and the condition of 
eligibility contained in the two advertisements. All 
interim orders operating on the writ petitions shall 
stand discharged in order to enable the Commission 
to proceed in the matter in light of the directions 
being issued herein after.  
 
Writ Petition No. 18129 of 2017 shall stand 
disposed of in light of the above and the directions 
issued herein. 
The select list drawn up pursuant to the 
advertisements in question insofar as it includes 
candidates who do not hold a CCC certificate 
conferred or recognised by NIELIT is quashed. 
The 
respondents 
shall 
in 
consequence 
redraw the select list restricting it to candidates 
who hold a recognised CCC certificate or a 
qualification 
recognised 
in 
'law 
as 
being 
equivalent thereto. The Commission shall as a 
result of the above, reframe the merit list and 
publish 
the 
results 
thereof 
afresh. 
All 
consequences to follow.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
15. It could thus be seen that the learned Single Judge held 
that a recognized qualification is an essential facet of Article 
16 of the Constitution of India. It was held that no rights can 
be recognized in a candidate aspiring to enter public service 

15 
on the strength of an unrecognized qualification or one 
granted by an institution which is not conferred the authority 
to grant the same in accordance with law. It was held that 
the equivalence of qualifications could not be left to depend 
or rest upon a self-certification of candidates. It was further 
held that no certificate could possibly be accorded with 
equivalence unless an enquiry is addressed towards its 
course content and syllabus. 
16. The learned Single Judge, in unequivocal terms, has 
held that inclusion of such of the candidates who did not 
possess CCC certificate had clearly tainted the recruitment 
exercise. It is also pertinent to note that the learned Single 
Judge had set aside the select list only insofar as those 
candidates who did not hold the CCC certificate conferred or 
recognized by DOEACC/NIELIT. The learned Single Judge 
directed 
that 
the 
respondent-Corporation 
shall 
in 
consequence redraw the select list restricting it to candidates 
who hold a recognized CCC certificate or a qualification 
recognized in law as being equivalent thereto. 
17. Subsequent to the judgment of the learned Single 
Judge, the Electricity Service Commission, on 13th October 

16 
2017, directed the Chief Engineer(s) and Superintending 
Engineer(s) to send the attested photocopies of CCC 
certificates of selected candidates and to check at their own 
level, whether the CCC certificate attached is issued by an 
institution recognized by DOEACC/NIELIT or its equivalent 
or not. Subsequently on 13th May 2018, the Electricity 
Service Commission published a list of candidates whose 
selection was not found in accordance with the eligibility as 
per the direction of the learned Single Judge of the Allahabad 
High Court. The said list also contained the names of the 
candidates who were possessing the CCC certificate on the 
date of their interview. Consequently, their services also 
came to be terminated.  
18. Various writ appeals came to be filed before the Division 
Bench of the High Court. The learned Division Bench, vide 
judgment and order dated 9th May 2019, held that the 
finding of the learned Single Judge that possession of CCC 
certificate from DOEACC/NIELIT was erroneous. It held that 
for computer literacy, self-certification was always acceptable 
and therefore, the CCC certificate having the self-certification 
could very well be accepted. The Division Bench thereby 

17 
allowed the appeals reversing the judgment and order of the 
learned Single Judge and dismissing the writ petitions. 
19. The judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court 
was carried to this Court in three appeals in the case of 
Mukul Kumar Tyagi (supra). It will be relevant to refer to 
the following observations of this Court:  
“53. The candidates who had CCC certificate 
from NIELIT/DOEACC and who were included in 
the merit list dated 14-7-2015 were not affected 
by the judgment of the learned Single Judge 
dated 
7-10-2017 
[Prashant 
Kumar 
Jaiswal v. State of U.P. Writ A No. 41750 of 
2015, order dated 7-10-2017 (All)] since the list 
was quashed only insofar as those candidates 
included in the merit list who did not have CCC 
certificate by NIELIT/DOEACC. The Division Bench 
in the impugned judgment [Deepak Sharma v. State 
of U.P. Special Appeal No. 585 of 2018, order dated 
9-5-2019 (All)] has erroneously held that employer 
after judgment dated 7-10-2017 [Prashant Kumar 
Jaiswal v. State of U.P. Writ A No. 41750 of 2015, 
order dated 7-10-2017 (All)] did not take into 
consideration 
the 
CCC 
certificate 
of DOEACC or NIELIT. 
The 
following 
are 
the 
observations made by the Division Bench in this 
regard: 
“… Heard the learned counsel appearing 
on behalf of the rival parties. At the 
threshold, it would be appropriate to 
state that the employer after accepting 
the judgment given by the learned Single 
Bench has prepared a fresh select list 
and, while doing so, the certificate issued 
by DOEACC relating to “CCC” has not been 
taken into consideration….” 

18 
54. The Division Bench was not correct in making 
the above observations since neither the learned 
Single Judge vide its judgment dated 7-10-2017 
[Prashant Kumar Jaiswal v. State of U.P. Writ A No. 
41750 of 2015, order dated 7-10-2017 (All)] directed 
for not taking into consideration CCC certificate 
by DOEACC nor 
Corporation 
or 
Commission 
deleted those names from the merit list who had 
CCC certificate from DOEACC.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
20. It can thus be seen that this Court has, in unequivocal 
terms, held that the candidates who had CCC certificate from 
DOEACC/NIELIT and who were included in the merit list 
dated 14th July 2015 were not affected by the judgment of 
the learned Single Judge dated 7th October 2017, since the 
list was quashed only insofar as those candidates included in 
the merit list who did not have CCC certificate by 
DOEACC/NIELIT. This Court has, in unequivocal terms, held 
that the learned Single Judge, vide its judgment and order 
dated 7th October 2017, had neither restrained the 
respondent-Corporation from taking into consideration the 
CCC certificate issued by DOEACC/NIELIT nor had it 
directed that the respondent-Corporation delete those names 
from 
the 
merit 
list 
who 
had 
CCC 
certificate 
from 
DOEACC/NIELIT. From paragraph 55 of the said judgment, 

19 
it would be clear that this Court was of the considered 
opinion that the CCC certificate as mentioned in the 
advertisement 
dated 
14th 
September 
2014 
was 
CCC 
certificate as granted by DOEACC/NIELIT. 
21. A perusal of the said judgment of this Court would 
reveal that this Court upheld the finding of the learned Single 
Judge that the advertisement dated 14th September 2014 did 
not envisage self-certification of the candidate of equivalence 
to CCC certificate. It further held that the self-certification by 
the candidates of their computer qualification was not 
sufficient to treat them having passed the required 
qualification. It will further be relevant to refer to the 
following observations of this Court in the said case:  
“71. The above direction indicates that select list 
insofar as the candidates, who had certificates 
from NIELIT/DOEACC was not quashed, their position 
in the select list was not disturbed and select list 
was partly quashed only with regard to those 
candidates, 
who 
did 
not 
have 
CCC 
or NIELIT certificate. The object or purpose of the 
direction was to scrutinise the qualifications of 
those candidates, who have claimed equivalent 
certificate. The above direction of the learned 
Single Judge was only for the purpose to 
scrutinise the qualification of those candidates, 
who are found possessing equivalent computer 
qualification so as to retain their names in the 
select list. After the judgment of the learned Single 

20 
Judge 
dated 
7-10-2017 
[Prashant 
Kumar 
Jaiswal v. State of U.P. Writ A No. 41750 of 2015, 
order dated 7-10-2017 (All)] , the Commission in 
revising the merit list accepted the guidelines given 
under the Government Order dated 3-5-2016. The 
guidelines prescribed under the Government Order 
dated 3-5-2016 are as follows: 
“(a) The qualification of High School or 
intermediate 
examination 
with 
an 
independent subject or Computer Science 
from Madhyamik Shiksha Parishad, Uttar 
Pradesh or from any Institution/Education 
Board/Council established by the Central 
or any State Government. 
(b) If any candidate has obtained diploma 
or degree in Computer Science then he 
shall also be eligible to be recruited as 
Junior Assistant/Stenographer.” 
72. Thus, in the revised select list apart from 
candidates, 
who 
had 
CCC 
certificates 
from DOEACC/NIELIT, the candidates who were 
covered under guidelines dated 3-5-2016 were 
also treated as equivalent to CCC and were given 
place in the merit list subject to marks secured 
by them in the written test and interview.” 
 
22. It can be seen that this Court held that the object and 
purpose of the direction was to scrutinize the qualifications 
of those candidates, who had claimed equivalent certificate. 
It was only for the purpose to scrutinize the qualification of 
those candidates, who were found possessing equivalent 
computer qualification so as to retain their names in the 
select list. It is further clear that the direction given by the 

21 
learned Single Judge was applicable, apart from the 
candidates 
who 
were 
having 
CCC 
certificate 
from 
DOEACC/NIELIT, to the candidates who were covered under 
the guidelines dated 3rd May 2016 and were also treated as 
equivalent to CCC certificate. Ultimately, this Court upheld 
the finding of the learned Single Judge and held that there 
was no reason to interfere with the finding of the learned 
Single Judge. 
23. It can be seen from the said judgment that an appeal 
was made to this Court that since number of vacancies were 
still available, the candidates who were initially in the select 
list dated 14th July 2015 and went out of the select list due to 
redrawing of the select list, they could be accommodated. 
However, this Court did not issue any direction in that regard 
and permitted such candidates to make representation which 
was to be considered by the respondent-Corporation. 
24. It is thus clear from the aforesaid that such of the 
candidates who were having CCC certificate issued by 
DOEACC/NIELIT on the date of interview and who were part 
of the select list dated 14th July 2015 could not have been 
terminated by the respondent-Corporation. 

22 
25. It also appears that the respondent-Corporation has 
been taking contradictory stands. Before the High Court, it 
took a stand that not only such candidates having CCC 
certificate issued by DOEACC/NIELIT but also such 
candidates who had submitted certificate by self-certification 
were also entitled to be considered. It is only now that the 
respondent-Corporation is taking a stand that such of the 
candidates who did not have CCC certificate on 30th 
September 2014 i.e., the last date of application could not be 
considered as eligible candidates. The stand is contrary not 
only to its advertisement dated 6th September 2014 but also 
to the office memorandum of the Board dated 29th January 
2011 vide which the 1995 Regulations were amended. 
26. We have therefore no hesitation in holding that services 
of such of the candidates who were selected in the select list 
dated 14th July 2015 and had produced the CCC certificate 
at the time of the interview could not have been terminated. 
We find that the respondent-Corporation has grossly erred in 
terminating their services. At the same time, we are not 
inclined to accept the contention of those candidates who did 
not have CCC certificate even on the date of their interview 

23 
but have obtained the same subsequently. When the 
advertisement as well as the 1995 Regulations required the 
CCC certificate to be produced at the time of interview, if it is 
permitted to produce the same subsequent to the date of 
interview, it would be contrary to the advertisement and the 
1995 Regulations. 
27. It was also sought to be urged on behalf of the 
respondent-Corporation that such a relief could not have 
been granted by the present applications. We clarify that, 
this Court itself vide order dated 30th January 2023, while 
disposing of the writ petition filed under Article 32 of the 
Constitution of India, granted a liberty to file an appropriate 
application in disposed of CA No. 9026 of 2019 with 
connected matters. This Court has subsequently observed 
that, in peculiar facts and circumstances, if such application 
was filed, the same would be entertained by the Registry of 
this Court.  
28. We therefore find that the present case is a fit case 
wherein this Court should exercise its extraordinary 
jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India. 
The 
respondent-Corporation 
has 
misinterpreted 
the 

24 
judgment of the learned Single Judge and terminated the 
services of the applicants who were otherwise entitled to be 
continued as per the judgment. It is further pertinent to note 
that the view taken by the learned Single Judge has been 
affirmed in unequivocal terms by this Court. We find that if 
we fail to exercise our jurisdiction under Article 142 of the 
Constitution of India in these cases, it will be permitting 
continuation of illegality committed by the respondent-
Corporation. 
29. In the result, we pass the following order: 
(i) 
The present applications/appeal are allowed; 
(ii) 
Such of the applicants who found place in the select 
list 
dated 
14th 
July 
2015 
and 
who 
possessed/produced the CCC certificate at the time 
of their interview are directed to be reinstated 
forthwith; 
(iii) Though they would not be entitled to back wages for 
the 
period 
during 
which 
they 
were 
out 
of 
employment, they would be entitled to placement in 
the seniority list as per their positions as in the select 
list dated 14th July 2015 with continuity in service 

25 
with all consequential benefits including pay fixation, 
terminal benefits etc.; and 
(iv) 
Application(s) 
of 
impleadment/intervention 
are 
allowed.  
30. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of in 
the above terms. No order as to costs. 
 
..............................J.                
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
................................J.   
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)   
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
NOVEMBER 05, 2024.