2024 INSC 841
1 
  
REPORTABLE    
    
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 328 OF 2015 
 
DEVENDRA KUMAR & ORS.                        …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF CHHATTISGARH   
 
     …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
1. 
This appeal challenges the judgment and order dated 4th 
October, 2010 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of 
Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in Criminal Appeal No. 15 of 2004 
whereby the High Court dismissed the Criminal Appeal preferred 
by the present appellants and upheld the order of conviction and 
sentence dated 17th October, 2003 passed by the Additional 
Sessions Judge (FTC), Kawardha (CG)1 in S.T. No. 50 of 2003. 
2. 
The facts leading to the present appeal are as follows:- 
2.1 On 20th December 2002, at about 11 a.m., a complaint was 
lodged by one Dhannu Das (PW-2), the shopkeeper of a betel 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘trial court’. 
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2024.11.06
15:16:40 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
shop at Village Chhirha who had witnessed an incident near his 
shop wherein the appellants had assaulted the deceased, namely 
Bahal, with lathis, a rod and an axe after making a threat that 
they would kill him. On the receipt of the complaint, the Police 
Station at Kawardha registered a First Information Report2 being 
Crime No. 262 of 2002 under Section 307 read with Section 34 
of the Indian Penal Code, 18603 against the appellants.  
2.2 Pertinently, prior to the occurrence of the incident which 
ultimately led to this criminal appeal, a land dispute relating to 
certain agricultural land and crops therein was pending between 
the families of the present appellants and the deceased. In the 
pending lis, the Sub-Divisional Magistrate had passed an order 
in Criminal Case No. 216 of 2003 titled Bahalram v. Devendra 
on 17th December 2002, thereby closing the proceedings under 
Section 145 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in view of 
the order passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur, 
directing the maintenance of status quo in respect of the 
agricultural fields which were in the possession of the present 
appellants.  
 
2 “FIR” for short 
3 “IPC” for short 

3 
2.3 According to the prosecution story, at about 9 a.m. on 20th 
December 2002, Rajni Bai (PW-1) and her son Bahal, the 
deceased, reached Village Chhirha, having walked their way from 
Kawardha. Upon reaching Village Chhirha, the deceased stopped 
near the betel shop of Dhannu Das (PW-2). The deceased was 
showing the order passed by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate dated 
17th December 2002 to Ghurwaram Patel (PW-4), the Sarpanch 
of Village Chhirha, when the present appellants arrived at the 
scene. Appellant No.1-Devendra and Appellant No. 2-Rohit were 
armed with lathis whereas Appellant No. 3-Banauram was 
carrying an axe and Appellant No.4-Kuleshwar was carrying a 
rod. After warning the deceased that they would kill him that day 
since he always quarreled in the land matter and created 
litigation, the appellants engaged in a mar-peet with the 
deceased, resulting in several injuries being caused to the 
deceased. On seeing this, Rajni Bai (PW-1) intervened which led 
the appellants to fight with her as well whereupon she sustained 
several injuries as well. On the same day, at about 1:15 p.m., 
during the course of the treatment, the deceased succumbed to 
his injuries.  
 

4 
2.4 Subsequently, the post-mortem was conducted wherein it 
was concluded that cause of death was coma caused by internal 
haemorrhage which was in turn caused by a fracture in the head 
leading to a brain injury. 
2.5 Upon the conclusion of the investigation, a chargesheet was 
filed before the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kawardha. 
Since the case was exclusively triable by the Sessions Court, the 
same came to be committed to the trial court. 
2.6 Charges came to be filed by the trial court under Section 
302 read with Section 34 of the IPC and in the alternate, Section 
307 read with Section 34 of the IPC. The appellants pleaded not 
guilty and claimed to be tried. 
2.7 The prosecution examined 15 witnesses to bring home the 
guilt of the appellants. In their defence, the appellants denied the 
charges and stated that they had been falsely implicated owing 
to the agricultural land dispute. 
2.8 At the conclusion of the trial, the trial court found that the 
prosecution had proved the case against the appellants and 
accordingly, convicted them under Section 302 and Section 307 
read with Section 34 of the IPC and sentenced them to undergo 
imprisonment for life.  

5 
2.9 Being aggrieved thereby, the appellants preferred a 
Criminal Appeal before the High Court. The High Court vide the 
impugned judgment and order dismissed the Criminal Appeal 
and confirmed the order of conviction and sentence awarded by 
the trial court. 
3. 
Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal. 
4. 
We have heard Mr. Vikrant Narayan Vasudeva, learned 
Amicus Curiae, and Mr. Ravi Kumar Sharma, learned Deputy 
Advocate General appearing on behalf of the respondent-State of 
Chhattisgarh. 
5. 
Learned Amicus Curiae submits that it is an admitted fact 
that there has been a previous enmity between the family of the 
appellants and the family of the deceased.  It is submitted that 
admittedly the appellants were in possession of the disputed 
land.  However, the deceased was making an attempt to 
dispossess the appellants from the said land. It is submitted that 
one month prior to the date of the incident, the wife of the 
appellant No.1-Devendra Kumar lodged an FIR against the 
deceased with regard to forcible dispossession.  It is, therefore, 
submitted that the appellants are entitled to be acquitted.   
 

6 
6. 
Learned Amicus Curiae, in the alternative, submitted that 
the possibility of the deceased trying to dispossess the appellants 
from the land in question and the appellants committing the 
crime without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of 
passion upon a sudden quarrel cannot be denied.  It is, therefore, 
submitted that the offence, at the most, would fall under Part I 
or Part II of Section 304 IPC.   
7. 
Learned counsel for the respondent-State, on the contrary, 
submits that both the learned trial court as well as the High 
Court, on correct appreciation of the evidence, have convicted the 
appellants for the offences punishable under Section 302 of the 
IPC.  It is, therefore, submitted that no interference would be 
warranted. 
8. 
It is further submitted that the present case is a case of 
direct evidence wherein a number of eyewitnesses have 
supported the prosecution version.   
9. 
With the assistance of the learned counsel for the parties, 
we have perused the evidence placed on record.   
10. From the evidence of the medical expert Dr. N.K. Yadu (PW-
6), we do not find that any interference is warranted with the 
finding that the death of the deceased Bahal was homicidal 

7 
death.  The only question would be as to whether the conviction 
would fall for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC or 
under a lesser offence.   
11. Rajni Bai (PW-1) is the mother of the deceased Bahal.  She 
has stated that on the date of the incident, when the deceased 
was showing the case related documents to Sarpanch, she saw 
the accused persons assaulting her son.  She has also stated that 
the accused Devendra Kumar (Appellant No.1 herein) had 
assaulted her with bamboo stick. 
12. The fact regarding the previous enmity and the ongoing 
dispute between the husband of Rajni Bai (PW-1) and the 
accused No. 1-Devendra Kumar and others has not been denied 
by her.  She has also admitted in her cross-examination that the 
fight took place between her son and the appellants herein near 
the cart. 
13. Rajni Bai’s (PW-1’s) evidence is corroborated by Dhannu 
Das (PW-2).  He has stated in his cross-examination that his shop 
and the field of Devendra Kumar and others are adjacent to it.  
He has also admitted the fact regarding Devendra Kumar and 
others were cultivating the land adjacent to his shop.   
 

8 
14. Pusau (PW-3)-mason has also supported the prosecution 
version. 
15. Ghurwaram (PW-4)-Sarpanch of the village has also 
supported the prosecution version.  He has admitted in his cross-
examination that when the deceased had come to him, he had 
read out the order of the SDO Rasandigoth and told him that he 
will harvest the crop of half the land.  
16. In view of the credible testimony of the eyewitnesses, we 
have no reason to interfere with the finding of the trial court as 
well as the High Court that it is on account of the injuries caused 
by the appellants that the deceased had died.  
17. The next question that requires to be considered is whether 
the case would fall under Section 302 IPC or not.   
18. It is not in dispute that there was previous enmity between 
the parties.  The accused persons were in possession of the land 
in question.  A month prior to the date of the incident, an FIR 
was lodged by the wife of the appellant No.1-Devendra Kumar 
against the deceased since he had tried to dispossess the 
appellants.  
19. From the evidence placed on record, specifically the 
evidence of Dhannu Das (PW-2) in the presence of whom the 

9 
incident has occurred, it is clear that the place of the incident is 
adjacent to the field in possession of the appellants.  From the 
evidence of Ghurwaram (PW4)- the Sarpanch of the village also it 
is clear that there was a quarrel between the appellants and the 
deceased.  The weapons used by the accused persons are axe 
and sticks, which are commonly used by the agriculturists.  
There is no material on record to show that there is any 
premeditation. 
20. Taking into consideration all these aspects, the possibility 
of offence being committed by the appellants without 
premeditation in a sudden fight in a heat of passion upon a 
sudden quarrel cannot be ruled out.  From the nature of the 
injuries sustained by the deceased, it cannot be said that the 
appellants have taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or 
unusual manner. 
21. In that view of the matter, we find that the appellants would 
be entitled to benefit of doubt and the conviction under Section 
302 IPC needs to be altered to the one under Part I of Section 304 
IPC.   
22. We are, therefore, inclined to partly allow the present 
appeal. 

10 
23. In the result, we pass the following order: 
(i) 
The appeal is partly allowed.  
(ii) 
The conviction of the appellants under Section 302 IPC 
is altered to the one under Part I of Section 304 IPC. 
(iii) The appellants have already undergone a sentence of 
more than 12 years prior to their release on bail by the 
order of this Court dated 17th February 2015.  We find 
that the said sentence would subserve the ends of 
justice.  Therefore, the appellants are sentenced to the 
period already undergone.   
(iv) 
The bail bonds, if any shall stand discharged.  
 
24. We place on record our deep appreciation to Mr. Vikrant 
Narayan Vasudeva, learned Amicus Curiae for the valuable 
assistance rendered.  
..............................J       
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
...........................................J   
(PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)   
 
 
...........................................J   
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)   
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
NOVEMBER 06, 2024.