2024 INSC 853
      REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 12234 OF 2024 
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 15562 OF 2024) 
 
   
GOQII TECHNOLOGIES PRIVATE LIMITED 
 
        …APPELLANT  
 
     
          VERSUS 
 
 
 
SOKRATI TECHNOLOGIES PRIVATE LIMITED                …RESPONDENT 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     J U D G M E N T 
 
 
 
 
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2024.11.07
17:17:28 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 1 of 12 
 
J. B. PARDIWALA, J.: 
 
1. Leave granted.  
2. This appeal arises from the final judgment and order dated 30.04.2024 
(“impugned judgment”) passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in 
Commercial Arbitration Application No. 6 of 2024. The High Court dismissed 
the application preferred by Goqii Technologies Private Limited (“the 
appellant”) under Section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (“the 
Act, 1996”) seeking appointment of an arbitrator to adjudicate disputes and 
claims in terms of Clause 18.12 of the Master Services Agreement (“MSA”) 
executed between the appellant and Sokrati Technologies Private Limited (“the 
respondent”).  
 
A. FACTUAL MATRIX  
3.  The appellant, a technology-based wellness venture inter alia providing life 
style consultancy services, executed the MSA with the respondent, an entity 
engaged in digital marketing services, and a subsidiary of Dentsu International 
Limited, to manage its digital advertising campaigns. The MSA was 
subsequently extended on 29.04.2022 for a period of three years, with certain 
amendments.  
4. Between August 2021 and April 2022, the appellant paid a sum of Rs 
5,53,26,690/- to the respondent for the services rendered by it. It is the case of 

Page 2 of 12 
 
the appellant that for the subsequent 10 invoices raised between 12.05.2022 and 
07.10.2022, the appellant was in the process of initiating and making payments 
when, in September 2022, certain media reports alleged malpractices in the 
advertising industry implicating major players. It was later discovered by the 
appellant that the Economic Offences Wing, Mumbai had lodged a complaint 
(EOW CR No. 08 of 2022) against Dentsu International Limited, the parent 
company of the respondent, and its senior officials alleging serious irregularities 
and malpractices in their service. 
5. In light of the aforesaid developments, the appellant engaged an independent 
auditor in November 2022 to prepare a report on the activities of the respondent 
from April 2021 to 31.12.2022. The auditor submitted its report in February 2023. 
The conclusion given by the auditor is extracted hereinbelow:   
“CONCLUSION  
 
The average ROI for the campaigns analyzed has been 
abysmally low at 0.35x compared to industry benchmark of 3x 
to 4x. We estimate an overcharge of ₹4,48,53,580.  
 
The audit identified significant areas of concern within the 
media plan, including but not limited to:  
• Media buying cost of inventory, from different publishers at 
various points during the engagements have been found to be 
significantly more than the industry benchmarks.  
• Traffic was poor and exposed to the wrong audience.  
• Number of times the ad was shown (Frequency) has been 
increased as the reach numbers were being achieved, this 
only shows that the targeting of the customer/audience has 
been poor.  
• The clicks generated were fraudulent.  

Page 3 of 12 
 
• The leads garnered were junk.  
• Cost of acquisition was higher than the category competition.  
 
We also recommend further detailed investigation across all 
the media campaigns by Sokrati.” 
 
 
6. On 22.02.2023, the respondent served a demand notice on the appellant under 
Section 8 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (“IBC”) seeking Rs 
6,25,67,060/- towards the outstanding invoices. In response, on 04.03.2023, the 
appellant rejected the demand, citing the audit findings, and invoked arbitration 
under Clause 18.12 of the MSA. The appellant also filed a counter claim, 
demanding a refund of Rs 5,53,26,690/- with 18% interest per annum and an 
additional Rs 6 crore by way of damages towards the alleged misrepresentations 
by the respondent. 
7. Subsequently, upon failure of the respondent to comply with the arbitration 
notice, the appellant filed Commercial Arbitration Application No. 06 of 2024 
before the High Court, seeking appointment of a sole arbitrator to adjudicate the 
disputes between the parties. However, on 05.10.2023, while the application was 
pending, the respondent filed Company Petition (IB) No. 27 of 2024 under 
Section 9 of the IBC before the National Company Law Tribunal, Mumbai 
(NCLT, Mumbai) for initiating the corporate insolvency resolution process of 
the appellant.  
8. The High Court vide the impugned judgment, dismissed the application seeking 
the appointment of an arbitrator, observing that it lacked in merit and substance. 

Page 4 of 12 
 
The High Court noted that the independent audit report revealed significant 
concerns regarding the performance of the digital marketing campaigns executed 
by the respondent. The High Court was of the view that although the report 
highlighted poor returns on investment and inconsistent metrics, yet it did not 
support the assertions made by the appellant regarding fraudulent practices of 
the respondent. Further, the High Court observed that the appellant failed to 
demonstrate any substantial discrepancies in the report that would justify 
withholding payment for the invoices raised. It observed that while further 
investigation was suggested in the report, the appellant’s attempt to invoke 
arbitration based on non-existent disputes constituted a manifestly dishonest 
claim and therefore dismissed the application. The relevant observations from 
the impugned judgment are extracted hereinbelow:  
“19. It can be well understood that upon the further 
investigation, being directed to be carried out as indicated in 
the report, if it is concluded that the services were not rendered 
at all or they were deficient and the invoices do not deserve to 
be cleared, the demand of the money due and payable could 
have been resisted, but without any justification, by projecting 
the report of the independent auditor to be its shield to avoid the 
payment, the attempt on part of the applicant can only be 
described as 'dishonest'. 
 
A manifestly dishonest claim or a contest, which is sought to be 
raised to a lawful demand of the money due and payable under 
the MSA, particularly, when, while availing the services, at no 
point of time, any deficiency in services is pointed out, but only 
by way of defence to the invoices raised, an independent 
agency's report is being projected, as a support to canvass the 
deficiency in service, by attributing fraudulent acts to the 

Page 5 of 12 
 
respondent which, in fact, is not the finding of the independent 
auditor. 
 
Nonetheless, it is open for the applicant to follow the pursuit of 
detail investigation across all the media campaigns by Sokrati, 
as suggested in the report, however, without doing so, in order 
to avoid its liability for the claims under the invoices, the 
assertion of an arbitrable dispute, is an attempt to defeat the 
proceedings, which may be instituted on behalf of Sokrati before 
the Company Law Tribunal under the IBC. 
 
Drawing guidance from the observations of the Apex Court in 
case of NTPC Ltd (supra) that the limited scrutiny through the 
eye of the needle is necessary and compelling, as it is the duty 
of the referral code to protect the parties from being forced to 
arbitrate, when the matter is demonstrably non- arbitrable. I am 
convinced that an attempt is made to create a dispute when there 
exist none at this stage. It is not just for the sake of invoking the 
arbitration clause, because the agreement between the parties 
provide so, the parties shall resort to arbitration, premised on 
the basis of a purported dispute, which infact, do not exist. 
 
For the aforesaid reason, I am not inclined to consider the 
request of appointing an Arbitrator in exercise of power 
conferred on this Court, merely because the arbitration has 
been invoked by the applicant and it intend to take a non-
existent dispute for arbitration. Being unconvinced with the 
submissions of Mr. Kanade, the application seeking 
appointment of Arbitrator is dismissed being found without any 
merit and substance.” 
 
9. Aggrieved by the aforesaid order refusing to appoint an arbitrator for 
adjudicating the disputes between the parties, the appellant has come up before 
this Court with the present appeal.  
 
 

Page 6 of 12 
 
B. SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT 
10. Mr. H.D. Thanvi, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant, submitted that 
the scope of interference by a referral court acting in exercise of its jurisdiction 
under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is limited. At this stage, the court is required 
to conduct a preliminary inquiry for the purpose of ascertaining whether a prima 
facie case exists for referring the dispute to arbitration. Contrary to this narrow 
scope, in the present case the High Court proceeded to erroneously undertake a 
full review of the contested facts, thereby exceeding in its jurisdiction at this 
stage. 
11. He further submitted that the High Court failed to take into account the nature 
of the services rendered by the respondent, along with the technical details 
contained in the Audit Report, which require subject-matter expertise for 
accurate determination of the disputes. Given the technical complexity of the 
issues involved, the High Court ought to have referred the parties to arbitration. 
12. He submitted that the finding of the High Court as regards the alleged dishonesty 
of the appellant rests on the erroneous assumption that the appellant had not 
raised any dispute prior to issuing the demand notice dated 22.02.2023. It was 
contended that this finding overlooks the sequence of events and also the 
undisputed fact that the Audit Report was provided to the appellant only in 
February 2023, i.e., the same month in which the Demand Notice was issued. 

Page 7 of 12 
 
Consequently, the appellant had no prior opportunity to raise the disputes, as 
they only came to light upon receiving the Audit Report in February 2023. The 
appellant argued that even otherwise, it had sent multiple emails to the 
respondent raising various objections regarding the invoices issued to the 
appellant prior to the issuance of the Audit Report. 
 
C. SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT 
13. Ms. Shweta Bharti, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent, on the 
other hand, submitted that it is settled law that before referring the parties to 
arbitration, the High Court must reach to a prima facie satisfaction that a genuine 
dispute exists between the parties. Furthermore, the mere inclusion of an 
arbitration clause in a contract or agreement does not render a matter 
automatically arbitrable and a prima facie case establishing the existence of a 
dispute must first be made. The Court must apply a prima facie test to weed out 
and dismiss claims that are ex facie meritless, frivolous, or dishonest. She 
submitted that seen thus the dispute raised in the present petition is nothing more 
than an afterthought.The counsel placed reliance on the decision of this Court in 
Indian Oil Corporation vs. NCC Ltd.1, B&T AG v. Ministry of Defence2, and 
 
1 (2023) 2 SCC 539 
2 2023 SCC OnLine SC 657 

Page 8 of 12 
 
Sushma Shiv Kumar Daga & Anr. vs. Madhur Kumar Ramkrishnaji Bajaj & 
Ors3 to fortify her submission.  
14. She further submitted that the appellant is not entitled to any damages or refund 
for the alleged overcharges on the services rendered by the respondent as the 
appellant had previously not raised any concerns or identified deficiencies while 
utilizing these services. Furthermore, the claim now raised by the appellant is 
unfounded, vague, and lacks supporting documentation. 
15. She submitted that the appellant has filed the present petition with a mala fide 
intent and has approached this Court with unclean hands, being fully aware of 
the ongoing legal proceedings before the NCLT, Mumbai. The petition of the 
appellant is an attempt to create duplicative legal proceedings aimed at evading 
liability for admitted dues and disrupting the CIRP process.  
 
D. ANALYSIS  
16. Having heard the learned counsels appearing for the parties and having gone 
through the materials on record, the short question that falls for our consideration 
is whether the High Court committed any error in dismissing the appellant’s 
application under Section 11 of the Act, 1996.   
 
 
3 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1683  

Page 9 of 12 
 
17. In a recent pronouncement, relying on the Constitution Bench judgment of this 
Court in In Re: Interplay between Arbitration Agreements under the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 and the Indian Stamp Act 1899,4 this 
Court in SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Krish Spinning reported in 2024 
INSC 532, summarised the law on the scope and standard of judicial scrutiny 
that an application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 can be subjected to. The 
relevant parts are produced herein below:  
“114. In view of the observations made by this Court in In Re: 
Interplay (supra), it is clear that the scope of enquiry at the 
stage of appointment of arbitrator is limited to the scrutiny of 
prima facie existence of the arbitration agreement, and nothing 
else. For this reason, we find it difficult to hold that the 
observations made in Vidya Drolia (supra) and adopted in 
NTPC v. SPML (supra) that the jurisdiction of the referral court 
when dealing with the issue of “accord and satisfaction” under 
Section 11 extends to weeding out ex-facie non-arbitrable and 
frivolous disputes would continue to apply despite the 
subsequent decision in In Re: Interplay (supra). 
 
xxx xxx xxx  
 
125. We are also of the view that ex-facie frivolity and 
dishonesty in litigation is an aspect which the arbitral tribunal 
is equally, if not more, capable to decide upon the appreciation 
of the evidence adduced by the parties. We say so because the 
arbitral tribunal has the benefit of going through all the relevant 
evidence and pleadings in much more detail than the referral 
court. If the referral court is able to see the frivolity in the 
litigation on the basis of bare minimum pleadings, then it would 
be incorrect to doubt that the arbitral tribunal would not be able 
to arrive at the same inference, most likely in the first few 
 
4 2023 INSC 1066. 

Page 10 of 12 
 
hearings itself, with the benefit of extensive pleadings and 
evidentiary material.” 
 
 
18. The scope of inquiry under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is limited to ascertaining 
the prima facie existence of an arbitration agreement. In the present case, the 
High Court exceeded this limited scope by undertaking a detailed examination 
of the factual matrix. The High Court erroneously proceeded to assess the 
auditor’s report in detail and dismissed the arbitration application. In our view, 
such an approach does not give effect to the legislative intent behind the 2015 
amendment to the Act, 1996 which limited the judicial scrutiny at the stage of 
Section 11 solely to the prima facie determination of the existence of an 
arbitration agreement.  
19. As observed in Krish Spinning (supra), frivolity in litigation too is an aspect 
which the referral court should not decide at the stage of Section 11 as the 
arbitrator is equally, if not more, competent to adjudicate the same. 
20.  Before we conclude, we must clarify that the limited jurisdiction of the referral 
Courts under Section 11 must not be misused by parties in order to force other 
parties to the arbitration agreement to participate in a time-consuming and costly 
arbitration process. This is possible in instances, including but not limited to, 
where the claimant canvasses the adjudication of non-existent and mala fide 
claims through arbitration. With a view to balance the limited scope of judicial 

Page 11 of 12 
 
interference of the referral Courts with the interests of the parties who might be 
constrained to participate in the arbitration proceedings, the Arbitral Tribunal 
may direct that the costs of the arbitration shall be borne by the party which the 
Tribunal ultimately finds to have abused the process of law and caused 
unnecessary harassment to the other party to the arbitration. Having said that, it 
is clarified that the aforesaid is not to be construed as a determination of the 
merits of the matter before us, which the Arbitral Tribunal will rightfully be 
equipped to determine.   
 
E. CONCLUSION  
21. The existence of the arbitration agreement in Clause 18.12 of the MSA has not 
been disputed by the respondent. The question whether there exists a valid 
dispute to be referred to arbitration can be addressed by the Arbitral Tribunal as 
a preliminary issue. 
22. As a result, the appeal filed by the appellant is allowed and the impugned order 
passed by the High Court of Bombay is hereby set aside.  
23. We appoint Mr. S.J. Vazifdar, former Chief Justice of the Punjab & Haryana 
High Court, as the sole arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes between the parties.  
24. All legal contentions, including objections, if any, available to the respondent, 
are kept open to be taken up before the learned Arbitrator.  

Page 12 of 12 
 
25. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
…...……..….………….……………CJI.       
     (Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud) 
 
 
    
…….…..….…….…..…………………J.          
(J.B. Pardiwala)     
 
 
 
    ………………………………………...J.  
(Manoj Misra) 
   
New Delhi; 
7th November, 2024.