2024 INSC 851
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 12233 OF 2024 
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 5589 OF 2024) 
 
 
 
   
M/S HPCL BIO-FUELS LTD.  
 
   
 
        …APPELLANT  
 
    VERSUS    
 
M/S SHAHAJI BHANUDAS BHAD 
 
 
     …RESPONDENT 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 J U D G M E N T 
 
 
 
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2024.11.07
17:00:12 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 1 of 79 
 
J. B. PARDIWALA, J.: 
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following 
parts:  
 
A. 
FACTUAL MATRIX ............................................................................ 2 
I. 
PROCEEDINGS UNDER THE IBC .................................................................... 5 
II. PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE HIGH COURT .................................................... 10 
B. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT ................. 14 
C. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT .............. 17 
D. 
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION ................................................... 19 
E. 
ANALYSIS .......................................................................................... 20 
I. 
ISSUE NO. 1 ................................................................................................ 23 
a. Scope and applicability of Order 23 Rule 1 of the CPC to proceedings 
other than suits ................................................................................... 23 
II. ISSUE NO. 2 ................................................................................................ 44 
a. Application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 is not for the same 
relief as an application under Section 9 of the IBC ........................... 57 
III. ISSUE NO. 3 ................................................................................................ 67 
F. 
CONCLUSION ................................................................................... 78 
 
 
 

Page 2 of 79 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
This appeal arises from the final judgment and order dated 31.01.2024 
(“impugned order”) passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in 
Commercial Arbitration Petition No. 1 of 2023, wherein the High Court allowed 
the petition filed under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 (for short, “the Act, 1996”) at the instance of the M/s Shahaji Bhanudas 
Bhad (“the respondent”) and appointed Justice (Retd.) Dilip Bhosale as the sole 
arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes and differences between HPCL Biofuels Ltd. 
(“the appellant”) and the respondent.  
 
A. FACTUAL MATRIX  
 
3. 
The appellant is a Government company within the meaning of Section 
4(35) of the Companies Act, 2013 and is engaged inter alia in the business of 
manufacturing bio-fuels. The appellant is a wholly-owned subsidiary of 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.  
4. 
The respondent is engaged in the business of manufacture, supply and 
erection of the equipment and machinery required for the setting up of sugar 
factories and allied products in the name of M/s S.S. Engineer, as a sole 
proprietor.  

Page 3 of 79 
 
5. 
Between 27.06.2012 and 30.08.2012, the appellant floated tenders for 
enhancing the capacity of various process stations and Boiling House at Lauriya 
(West Champaran) and Sugauli (East Champaran). The respondent participated 
in the bidding process and was declared as the successful bidder. Subsequently, 
in accordance with the terms and conditions of the tender, the appellant in October 
and November of 2012 issued purchase orders in favour of the respondent for 
enhancing the capacity of the concerned Boiling House on a turn-key basis. 
Between 21.11.2012 and 25.03.2014, the respondent supplied various equipment 
under the purchase orders and raised invoices for the same. 
6. 
While the work was in progress, the appellant expressed its concerns about 
the slow progress of work, quality of materials supplied and non-adherence to 
timelines by the respondent and attempts were made to resolve the same through 
mutual discussions between the parties.  
7. 
On 13.06.2013, the appellant floated two more tenders for the purpose of 
completion of certain work and supplies at the Sugauli and Lauriya plants 
respectively. In August 2013, the appellant issued purchase orders in favour of 
the respondent, for completing various works including supplies on a lump-sum 
turnkey basis. The respondent raised invoices between 29.03.2013 & 25.03.2014 
for the service portion of the turn-key contract. Accordingly, as per the 
respondent, the total sum payable to it under the various purchase orders 
aggregated to Rs. 38,18,71,026/-.   

Page 4 of 79 
 
8. 
Between 18.12.2012 and 07.11.2013, the appellant made an aggregate 
payment of Rs. 19.02 crore to the respondent, with the last payment being made 
on 07.11.2013. As per the case of the respondent, the balance amount of Rs. 
18,12,21,452/- remained outstanding. The discussions between the parties 
undertaken between October 2013 and January 2014 did not yield any fruits as 
the issues relating to payment and deficiency in services rendered could not be 
resolved. In this regard, the respondent vide an e-mail dated 02.02.2014 made a 
request to release the balance amount at the earliest, so as to enable it to complete 
the balance work. The appellant vide an e-mail dated 04.02.2014 responded to the 
said email and reiterated that the performance of the respondent was 
unsatisfactory and it had failed in fulfilling its obligations in accordance with the 
terms of the purchase orders. In such circumstances, the appellant refused to clear 
the outstanding dues of the respondent.  
9. 
On 09.07.2016, the respondent issued a legal notice to the appellant, 
seeking release of the alleged outstanding payment amounting to Rs. 
18,12,21,452/- along with interest. The respondent also specified in the said 
notice that in the event of failure of the appellant to settle the outstanding amount, 
the notice shall be construed as the notice for invocation of arbitration in terms of 
Clause 14 of the tender. The appellant, however, did not respond to the aforesaid 
notice.  

Page 5 of 79 
 
10. 
On 16.02.2018, the respondent filed Arbitration Petition (ST) No. 5095 of 
2018 before the High Court of Judicature at Bombay seeking appointment of an 
arbitrator in terms of Section 11 of the Act, 1996. However, prior to filing the 
Section 11 application, the respondent also sent a demand notice dated 
30.08.2017 under Section 8 of the Insolvency & Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (for 
short “the IBC”) to the appellant, claiming the alleged outstanding amount along 
with interest.  
11. 
On 01.10.2018, upon the request made by the respondent, the Arbitration 
Petition (ST) No. 5095 of 2018 was disposed of as withdrawn. The relevant 
portions of the order dated 01.10.2018 are reproduced below: - 
“1. Not on board. Upon mentioning, taken on board.  
2. The Learned Advocate appearing for the Petitioner on 
instructions seeks to withdraw the above Arbitration Petition. In 
view thereof, the above Arbitration Petition is disposed of as 
withdrawn.” 
 
i. 
Proceedings under the IBC 
 
12. 
After withdrawing the Section 11(6) application from the High Court, the 
respondent, on 15.10.2018, filed CP(IB) No. 1422/KB/2018 under Section 9 of 
the IBC before the National Company Law Tribunal, Kolkata (“NCLT, 
Kolkata”) seeking initiation of the corporate insolvency resolution process of the 
appellant. The appellant opposed the application, inter alia, on the ground that 
there were disputes between the parties even prior to the issuance of demand 

Page 6 of 79 
 
notice under Section 8 of IBC. The appellant also relied on the notice invoking 
the arbitration clause in support of its contention.   
13. 
The NCLT, Kolkata vide order dated 12.02.2020, admitted the application 
of the respondent and appointed an Interim Resolution Professional (IRP). On 
the aspect of existence of disputes between the parties, the following observations 
were made:  
“17. As regards the pre-existing dispute, we have gone through 
all the facts stated by the Corporate Debtor but having regard to 
the quantum of claim in respect of supplies order, in our 
considered view, the amount of disputed claim due and payable 
will be more than Rs. One lakh in any case. Hence, such claims 
do not help the case of Corporate Debtor in substantial manner. 
Having said so, we would further refer to the provisional 
statement attached with the letter of the Corporate Debtor dated 
June 25, 2014 copy of which has been placed at Page 1779 of 
Vol. 10 of the paper book to find as to what is the factual position 
as per the stand of Corporate Debtor on various issues. As per 
this provisional statement, the total purchase order value has 
been shown as Rs. 3818.72 lakhs. There have been several 
deductions including for services provided by Corporate Debtor 
to the Operational Creditor in the execution of the contract, entry 
tax, TDS, WCD, payment to parties/ payment to Operational 
Creditor by the Corporate Debtor / sub-vendors and sub-
contractors/vendors of the Operational Creditor. These are 
normal deductions as per business practice and terms of 
contract. However, it is noteworthy that Liquidated Damage @ 
5% amounting to Rs. 190.94 lakhs, Performance Bank Guarantee 
to the tune of 673.6 lakhs, work claim of Rs. 352.00 lakhs for 
boiler house extension P.O. finalisation and additional work 71 
lakh have also been considered. The net effect has been worked 
out by Corporate Debtor as Rs. 500 lakhs receivable from the 
Operational Creditor. If the boiler house extension and 
additional work are ignored, the amount recoverable from the 
Operational Creditor gets reduced to 63.13 lakhs. Further, if the 
amount retained for Performance Bank Guarantee is taken into 
consideration, then the amount payable to Operational Creditor 

Page 7 of 79 
 
works out at Rs. 610.23 lakhs (i.e., 673-63.13). As noted earlier, 
L.D. is applicable @ 5% amounting to Rs. 190.94 lakhs has 
already been deducted. Further, amount of Rs. 400.55 lakhs in 
respect of Purchase Orders issued at the risk and cost of the 
vendor have also been deducted. Thus, all recoveries for non-
performance / default has been considered and therefore, amount 
of Performance Bank Guarantee minus recovery i.e., 610.23 
lakhs at least becomes payable by Corporate Debtor to the 
Operational Creditor. As an adjudicating authority in the 
proceedings, we are not supposed to do this kind of working, but 
to find out the genuineness of the claim of pre-existing dispute, 
and amount of outstanding debt, it was necessary in the facts and 
circumstances of the case, hence, it has been so analysed on the 
basis of the provisional statement prepared and filed by the 
Corporate Debtor itself. At the cost of repetition, we again state 
that this statement takes into consideration all these disputes 
raised by the Corporate Debtor, hence, the amount payable by 
the Corporate Debtor remains in positive which is more than one 
lakh ultimately that too when we have considered the project as 
a whole against the claim of Operational Creditor of undisputed 
dues of supply portion only. We have also gone through the emails 
which have been taken into consideration while preparing this 
provisional statement. Hence, on the basis of material on record, 
it cannot be said that any other dispute remains to be considered. 
Apart from this, the fact which is crucial to note is that the 
Corporate Debtor has awarded new work orders to the 
Operational Creditor subsequently which means that all the 
disputes relating to this contract had been considered / resolved 
and this fact has remained undisputed. Further, Form "C"s have 
been issued as late as up to March 2018. We further make it clear 
that we have analysed the provisional statement with limited 
objective of admissibility of this application and this analysis 
cannot be considered as expression of opinion on the amount of 
claim in any manner which may be actually due and payable.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
14. 
The order of the NCLT, Kolkata was subsequently set aside by the NCLAT, 
New Delhi vide order dated 10.01.2022. The NCLAT, on the aspect of pre-
existing disputes between the parties, observed thus:  

Page 8 of 79 
 
“18. It is clear from Section 8(2)(a) that ‘Existence of a Dispute', 
(if any, or) record of the pendency of the Suit or Arbitration 
Proceeding filed before the receipt of such Notice or invoice in 
relation to such dispute should be brought to the notice of the 
'Operational Creditor' within 10 days of receipt of the Demand 
Notice. In this case, the Demand Notice under Section 8 of the 
Code claiming a sum of Rs.13.69 Crores was issued on 
25.07.2018. On 07.08.2018, the 'Corporate Debtor' responded to 
the Demand Notice referring to various communications, 
Minutes of the Meeting and submitted that there was a 'Pre-
Existing Dispute'. Though we are conscious of the fact that the 
'Corporate Debtor' responded to the Demand Notice belatedly, 
the fact remains that the Appellant raised the issue of Existence 
of a Dispute' in their Reply filed before the Adjudicating 
Authority with all the supporting documents.  
 
19. It is pertinent to note that on 09.07.2016, 'prior to the 
issuance of the Demand Notice under Section 8 of the Code', the 
'Operational Creditor' invoked Arbitration pursuant to the 8 
project orders issued by the 'Corporate Debtor', which itself 
substantiates the 'Existence of a Dispute'. In the 'Notice' invoking 
Arbitration, the 'Operational Creditor' has stated that there is an 
outstanding of Rs. 18,12,21,452/- and has further stated that they 
are ready to settle the disputes through Arbitration. A brief 
perusal of the documents on record evidence that the 
'Operational Creditor' admitted that the contract was on 
lumpsum turnkey basis and stated in the Arbitration 'Notice' that 
the 'Corporate Debtor' had raised issues relating to non-
adherence of the terms of the contract. 
 
xxx xxx xxx 
 
21. The facts of the present case are being examined in the light 
of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, though the 
Learned Counsel for the 'Operational Creditor' has strenuously 
contended that the issuance of further work orders and the Notice 
issued by the Operational Creditor invoking Arbitration does not 
amount to Existence of a Dispute', the nature of communication 
on record with rival contentions clarify the 'Existence of a 
Dispute' between the parties prior to issuance of the Demand 
Notice. It has been time and again held that it is enough that a 
'dispute exists' between the parties.  
 

Page 9 of 79 
 
22. The communication between the parties as noted in para 10 
read together with the Arbitration invoked by the 'Operational 
Creditor', we are of the considered view that there is an Existence 
of a Dispute between the parties which is a genuine dispute and 
not a spurious, patently feeble legal argument or an assertion of 
fact unsupported by evidence. Therefore, we are of the opinion 
that the ratio laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the 
aforenoted 'Mobilox Innovations (P) Ltd.' (Supra) and 'K. 
Kishan' (Supra) is squarely applicable to the facts of this case.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
15. 
The respondent challenged the aforesaid order of the NCLAT before this 
Court by filing the Civil Appeal No. 4583 of 2022. The appeal ultimately came 
to be dismissed by a two-Judge Bench vide judgment dated 15.07.2022 wherein 
the order of the NCLAT was upheld. The relevant observations made by this 
Court are reproduced below: 
“30. This Court finds that there was a pre-existing dispute with 
regard to the alleged claim of the appellant against HPCL or its 
subsidiary HBL. The NCLAT rightly allowed the appeal filed on 
behalf of HBL. It is not for this Court to adjudicate the disputes 
between the parties and determine whether, in fact, any amount 
was due from the appellant to the HPCL/HBL or vice-versa. The 
question is, whether the application of the Operational Creditor 
under Section 9 of the IBC, should have been admitted by the 
Adjudicating Authority. The answer to the aforesaid question has 
to be in the negative. The Adjudicating Authority (NCLT) clearly 
fell in error in admitting the application.  
 
31. The NCLT, exercising powers under Section 7 or Section 9 of 
IBC, is not a debt collection forum. The IBC tackles and/or deals 
with insolvency and bankruptcy. It is not the object of the IBC 
that CIRP should be initiated to penalize solvent companies for 
non-payment of disputed dues claimed by an operational creditor.  
 
32. There are noticeable differences in the IBC between the 
procedure of initiation of CIRP by a financial creditor and 

Page 10 of 79 
 
initiation of CIRP by an operational creditor. On a reading of 
Sections 8 and 9 of the IBC, it is patently clear that an 
Operational Creditor can only trigger the CIRP process, when 
there is an undisputed debt and a default in payment thereof. If 
the claim of an operational creditor is undisputed and the 
operational debt remains unpaid, CIRP must commence, for IBC 
does not countenance dishonesty or deliberate failure to repay 
the dues of an Operational Creditor. However, if the debt is 
disputed, the application of the Operational Creditor for 
initiation of CIRP must be dismissed.  
 
33. We find no grounds to interfere with the judgment and order 
of the NCLAT impugned in this appeal. 
  
34. The appeal is dismissed.  
 
35. Needles to mention that the appellant may avail such other 
remedies as may be available in accordance with law including 
arbitration to realise its dues, if any.” 
 
ii. 
Proceedings before the High Court  
 
16. 
Consequent to the dismissal of the insolvency proceedings, the respondent, 
on 09.12.2022, filed a fresh petition under the Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 
before the High Court of Bombay seeking appointment of an arbitrator in terms 
of clause 14 of the tender. The appellant opposed the petition, inter-alia on the 
ground that the same was barred by limitation and that the claim sought to be 
referred to arbitration was also a deadwood.  
17. 
The High Court vide the impugned order allowed the application of the 
respondent and proceeded to appoint an arbitrator. The High Court took the view 
that the fresh Section 11 petition filed by the respondent, after withdrawal of the 

Page 11 of 79 
 
first, was not time-barred and neither the claim was a deadwood. The relevant 
observations of the High Court are reproduced below:  
“8. As regards the first submission of Mr. Paranjape, that once 
the Section 11 Petition is withdrawn no second Petition shall lie, 
I do not find any provision in the Act imposing such a restrain.  
 
It is not the case, where the appointment of Arbitrator was prayed 
before the Court and the Application was turned down on merits, 
holding that no arbitrator deserves to be appointed in absence 
on an Arbitration Agreement. The Petitioner chose to withdraw 
the Petition and as it is categorically stated in the Petition that 
he was under advise to do so and pursuant thereto he approached 
NCLT under the IBC but did not succeed in the endeavour as the 
NCLT did not find such proceedings to be maintainable and even 
the Apex Court upheld the said order by recording that an 
Operational Creditor can only trigger the CIRP process when 
there is an undisputed debt and default in payment thereof, but if 
the debt is disputed, then the Application of the Operational 
Creditor for initiation of CIRP must be declined.  
 
Be that as it may be, while dismissing the Appeal, being 
conscious of the position that the dues of the Petitioner/Appellant 
are yet to be realized, liberty was conferred to avail such 
remedies in accordance with law which shall include the remedy 
of arbitration.  
 
With this clear indication, by the Highest Court of the country, I 
am not persuaded to accept the submission of Mr. Paranjape that 
an Application under Section 11 of the Act seeking appointment 
of an Arbitrator is not maintainable.  
 
9. The Petitioner by his invocation notice had triggered the 
arbitration and accordingly approached the Court seeking 
appointment of an Arbitrator as the Respondent failed to agree 
to the appointment of Arbitrator within the period stipulated 
under Section 11, but instead of prosecuting the said remedy, he 
chose to adopt the path of initiating the proceedings under the 
IBC, but unfortunately, remained unsuccessful. 
  

Page 12 of 79 
 
It is, thus, imperatively clear that the Petitioner was prosecuting 
the IBC proceedings before the NCLT or NCLAT, which was a 
completely wrong forum for him for redressal of his grievance, 
he was ultimately turned away by the Apex Court on 15.07.2022 
by declaring that since the debt which he claims is disputed, he 
cannot initiate the CIRP.  
 
10. Since he was availing a wrong remedy, he was turned down 
on 15.07.2022, by availing the liberty conferred, he has filed the 
Arbitration Petition.  
 
Worth it to note that initially when he approached the NCLT, 
Kolkata, under Section 8 and 9 of the IBC for institution of CIRP 
process against the Respondent, his claim was entertained and it 
is only the Respondents, who approached the Appellate Tribunal, 
the order passed by the NCLT in favour of the Applicant came to 
be reversed. Therefore, it cannot be said that the Petitioner was 
sitting idle and not taking any steps for recovery of his dues, but 
it is a case where he was availing remedy for recovery of his dues 
before a wrong forum and he is entitled to take benefit of Section 
14 of the Limitation Act, 1963.  
 
In fact, the NCLT by its order dated 28.02.2020, admitted the 
Application under Section 8 and 9 of the IBC and even declared 
the said moratorium public announcement and in accordance 
with Section 13 and 14 of the IBC and Moratorium under Section 
14 of the IBC was also imposed.  
 
11. Another point raised by Mr. Paranjape in respect of time 
barred claim being prosecuted by the Petitioner must also meet 
the same fate.  
 
The learned counsel would place reliance upon the decision in 
case of Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited and Another vs. Nortel 
Networks India Private Limited (2021) 5 SCC 738, where it is 
held that since there is no provision in the 1996 Act specifying 
the period of limitation for filing an application under Section 11, 
recourse must be held to the Limitation Act as per Section 43 of 
the 1996 Act and since none of the Articles in the schedule to 
Limitation Act provide time for filing such Application, it would 
be governed by residual provision in Article 137.  
 

Page 13 of 79 
 
A reading of the said decision would also disclose that, it has 
been held that limitation is normally mixed question of fact and 
law and would lie within the domain of Arbitral Tribunal, but 
claim is hopelessly barred or a deadwood, in that case, the Court 
exercising the power under Section 11 may not deem it expedient 
to refer an exfacie time barred and dead claim to the Arbitrator. 
[…] 
 
xxx xxx xxx  
 
13. I do not agree with the learned counsel that the claim of 
Petitioner is ex facie time-barred as a deadwood, as all the while 
the claim was kept alive, though it was being agitated before a 
wrong forum, but ultimately when the Petition was turned down 
by the Apex Court, he was granted liberty to stake his claim by 
availing such remedies as may be available to him, in accordance 
with law, including the remedy of Arbitration. Since the remedy 
of Arbitration cannot be denied to him, merely on the ground that 
he had at earlier point of time, before knocking the doors of NCLT 
withdrew the Petition filed for appointment of Arbitrator, on 
validly invoking arbitration. Since I do not find that the claim is 
ex facie time-barred for it was being prosecuted though before a 
wrong forum, the objection cannot be sustained. 
 
14. In the wake of existence of an arbitration agreement between 
the parties, the dispute must be referred to an Arbitrator, though 
I leave it open to the Respondent to agitate the point of limitation 
before the Arbitrator.  
 
15. In the wake of the above, Mr. Justice Dilip Bhosale (retired 
Chief Justice of Allahabad High Court) is appointed as Sole 
Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes and differences that have 
arisen between the applicant and the respondent in the two 
applications.  
 
The Arbitrator shall, within a period of 15 days before entering 
the arbitration reference forward a statement of disclosure as 
contemplated u/s.11(8) r/w Section 12 of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996, to the Prothonotary and Senior Master of 
this Court to be placed on record. […]” 
 

Page 14 of 79 
 
18. 
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order appointing an arbitrator for adjudicating 
the disputes between the parties, the appellant has come up before this Court with 
the present appeal.  
 
B.  SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT 
 
19. 
 Mr. Tushar Mehta, the learned Solicitor General of India, appearing for the 
appellant submitted that the Section 11(6) petition filed by the respondent before 
the High Court as well as the claims sought to be referred to arbitration were time-
barred.  
20. 
He submitted that the cause of action in the present case arose on 
04.02.2014, i.e., on the date when the claim of the respondent was denied by the 
appellant. The respondent invoked arbitration vide the notice dated 09.07.2016 
and filed a Section 11 petition on 16.02.2018 before unconditionally withdrawing 
the same. The period of limitation as per Article 137 of the First Schedule to the 
Limitation Act, 1963 (“the Limitation Act”) for filing a Section 11 petition is 
three years. In the present case, the limitation period for filing an application 
under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 came to an end on 07.08.2019. Therefore, 
the subsequent Section 11 application filed before the High Court on 09.12.2022 
was clearly time-barred.  

Page 15 of 79 
 
21. 
He further submitted that in addition to the limitation period for filing the 
Section 11 application having expired, the underlying claim sought to be referred 
to arbitration also became time barred on 04.02.2017, that is, after the expiry of 
three years from the date when the cause of action first arose. To buttress his 
submissions on the aspect of limitation, he placed reliance on the decisions of this 
Court in Arif Azim Co. Ltd. v. Aptech Ltd. reported in 2024 SCC OnLine SC 
215 and BSNL v. Nortel Networks (India) (P) Ltd. reported in (2021) 5 SCC 
738. 
22. 
By placing reliance on the decision of this Court in Sarguja Transport 
Service v. S.T.A.T reported in (1987) 1 SCC 5, he argued that although the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short “CPC”) may not apply stricto sensu to the 
arbitration proceedings, yet the principle underlying Order 23 Rule 1(3) which 
imposes a bar on the institution of subsequent proceedings against the same 
defendant for the same cause of action where liberty to institute fresh proceedings 
is not granted by the court, can be extended to it in view of the expeditious and 
time-bound nature of arbitration proceedings. 
23. 
He submitted that the respondent is not entitled to avail the benefit 
available under Section 14 of the Limitation Act, 1963 (for short “the Limitation 
Act”) as the said provision would not be applicable to the present case. He argued 
that Section 14 of the Limitation Act provides for exclusion of time spent in 
prosecuting proceedings in a non-jurisdictional court, where the earlier and later 

Page 16 of 79 
 
proceedings relate to the same matter in issue or are for seeking the same relief. 
However, he submitted, that the insolvency and arbitral proceedings are distinct 
proceedings and are not for seeking the same relief. The remedy in arbitral 
proceedings is in personam whereas the remedy in insolvency proceedings is in 
rem. He submitted that the High Court failed to appreciate this distinction and 
erroneously allowed the arbitration petition filed by the respondent by extending 
to it the benefit under Section 14 of the Limitation Act.  
24. 
He further submitted that the IBC was enacted to consolidate and amend 
the laws relating to the reorganisation and insolvency resolution of corporate 
persons in a time-bound manner for maximising the value of assets and balance 
the interests of all the stakeholders. On the other hand, arbitration proceedings 
are for the purpose of adjudication of disputes. Therefore, the objective, relief that 
may be granted and the procedure governing IBC and arbitration proceedings are 
widely divergent.  
25. 
He argued that the period spent by the respondent pursuing insolvency 
proceedings instead of arbitration does not entitle them to the benefit of Section 
14 of the Limitation Act, more particularly having unconditionally withdrawn the 
first Section 11 petition. In this regard reliance was placed by him on the decisions 
of this Court in Yeswant Deorao Deshmukh v. Walchand Ramchand Kothari 
reported in 1950 SCR 852 and Natesan Agencies (Plantations) v. State reported 
in (2019) 15 SCC 70. 

Page 17 of 79 
 
26. 
In the last, he submitted that this Court while dismissing the appeal filed 
by the respondent against the order of the NCLAT, had only granted conditional 
liberty to the respondent to pursue arbitration, which would be permitted only if 
it is available in law. However, in the present case, since the Section 11 
application as well as the claims are time-barred, the remedy of pursuing 
arbitration cannot be available to the respondent in law.  
 
C.  SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT 
 
27. 
Mr. Jay Savla, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent submitted that the High Court rightly excluded the time taken by the 
respondent in pursuing the IBC proceedings, that is, the period between the date 
of filing of the Section 9 application before the NCLT and the date of the order of 
this Court concluding the IBC proceedings by disposing of the appeal filed by the 
respondent against the order of the NCLAT, while calculating the limitation 
period for the purpose of filing a fresh application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 
1996.   
28. 
He submitted that the aforesaid period is liable to be excluded under 
Section 14 of the Limitation Act as the respondent was pursuing the IBC 
proceedings diligently and in a bonafide manner. He relied on the following 
decisions of this Court to submit that the phrase “other cause of like nature” used 

Page 18 of 79 
 
in Section 14 of the Limitation Act should be given a wide and liberal 
interpretation:  
i. 
Consolidated Engg. Enterprises & Ors. v. Principal Secy. Irrigation 
Department & Ors. reported in (2008) 7 SCC 169 
ii. 
J. Kumaradasan Nair v. Iric Sohan reported in 2009 (12) SCC 175 
iii. 
Union of India v. West Coast Paper Mills Ltd. reported in 2004 (3) 
SCC 458 
iv. 
Maharashtra State Farming Corporation Ltd. v. Belapur Sugar & 
Allied Industries Ltd. reported in 2004 (3) MHLF 414  
29. 
He submitted that the second application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 
1996 was maintainable as the first application was withdrawn without any 
adjudication on merits and even before any formal notice could be issued by the 
High Court. By placing reliance on the decision of this Court in Sarva Shramik 
Sanghatana v. State of Maharashtra reported in 2008 1 SCC 494, he argued that 
the withdrawal of an application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 is not the 
same as withdrawal of a suit or a claim, and thus the principles enshrined under 
Order 23 Rule 1 of the CPC will have no application to the present case.  
30. 
It was submitted that Section 32 of the Act, 1996 provides for termination 
of arbitration proceedings and is the only provision that relates to termination of 
arbitration proceedings upon their commencement under Section 21. In the 

Page 19 of 79 
 
present case, arbitration was invoked by the respondent vide notice dated 
09.07.2016, and there has been no termination of such arbitration proceedings as 
per Section 32 of the Act, 1996. Hence, in the absence of any express bar on filing 
of more than one 11(6) application under the provisions of the Act, 1996, the 
second 11(6) application filed by the respondent cannot be said to be not 
maintainable.   
 
D.  ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION  
 
31. 
 Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having 
gone through the materials on record, the following questions fall for our 
consideration:  
i. 
WHETHER A FRESH APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 11(6) OF THE ACT, 
1996 FILED BY THE RESPONDENT COULD BE SAID TO BE MAINTAINABLE 
MORE PARTICULARLY WHEN NO LIBERTY TO FILE A FRESH APPLICATION 
WAS GRANTED BY THE HIGH COURT AT THE TIME OF WITHDRAWAL OF 
THE FIRST APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 11(6) OF THE ACT, 1996?  
 
ii. 
WHETHER THE FRESH APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 11(6) OF THE ACT, 
1996 FILED BY THE RESPONDENT ON 09.12.2022 COULD BE SAID TO BE 
TIME-BARRED? IF YES, WHETHER THE RESPONDENT IS ENTITLED TO 

Page 20 of 79 
 
THE BENEFIT OF SECTION 14 OF THE LIMITATION ACT? IN OTHER 
WORDS, WHETHER THE PERIOD SPENT BY THE RESPONDENT IN 
PURSUING PROCEEDINGS UNDER THE IBC IS LIABLE TO BE EXCLUDED 
WHILE COMPUTING THE LIMITATION PERIOD FOR FILING THE 
APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 11(6)? 
 
iii. 
WHETHER THE DELAY CAUSED BY THE RESPONDENT IN FILING THE 
FRESH ARBITRATION APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 11(6) OF THE ACT, 
1996 CAN BE CONDONED UNDER SECTION 5 OF THE LIMITATION ACT?  
 
E. 
ANALYSIS  
 
32. 
Clause 14 of the General Terms and Conditions of the tender document 
contained the arbitration clause and is reproduced hereinbelow: 
                “14. ARBITRATION  
                14.1 
All disputes and differences of whatsoever nature, 
whether existing or which shall at any time arise between the 
parties hereto touching or concerning the agreement, 
meaning, operation or effect thereof or to the rights and 
liabilities of the parties or arising out of or in relation thereto 
whether during or after completion of the contract or whether 
before after determination, foreclosure, termination or 
breach of the agreement (other than those in respect of which 
the decision of any person is, by the contract, expressed to be 
final and binding) shall, after written notice by either party 
to the agreement to the other of them and to the Appointing 
Authority hereinafter mentioned, be referred for adjudication 
to the Sole Arbitrator to be appointed as hereinafter provided. 

Page 21 of 79 
 
14.2 
The appointing authority shall either himself act as 
the Sole Arbitrator or nominate some officer/retired officer of 
HBL/Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (referred to 
as owner or HBL) or any other Government Company, or any 
retired officer of the Central Government not below the rank 
of a Director, to act as the Sole Arbitrator to adjudicate the 
disputes and differences between the parties. The 
contractor/vendor shall not be entitled to raise any objection 
to the appointment of such person as the Sole Arbitrator on 
the ground that the said person is/was an officer and/or 
shareholder of the owner, another Govt. Company or the 
Central Government or that he/she has to deal or had dealt 
with the matter to which the contract relates or that in the 
course of his/her duties, he/she has/had expressed views on 
all or any of the matters in dispute or difference.  
14.3 
In the event of the Arbitrator to whom the matter is 
referred to, does not accept the appointment, or is unable or 
unwilling to act or resigns or vacates his office for any 
reasons whatsoever, the Appointing Authority aforesaid, shall 
nominate another person as aforesaid, to act as the Sole 
Arbitrator.  
14.4 
Such another person nominated as the Sole 
Arbitrator shall be entitled to proceed with the arbitration 
from the stage at which it was left by his predecessor. It is 
expressly agreed between the parties that no person other 
than the Appointing Authority or a person nominated by the 
Appointing Authority as aforesaid, shall act as an Arbitrator. 
The failure on the part of the Appointing Authority to make 
an appointment on time shall only give rise to a right to a 
Contractor to get such an appointment made and not to have 
any other person appointed as the Sole Arbitrator.  
14.5 
The Award of the Sole Arbitrator shall be final and 
binding on the parties to the Agreement.  
14.6 
The work under the Contract shall, however, 
continue during the Arbitration proceedings and no payment 
due or payable to the concerned party shall be withheld 
(except to the extent disputed) on account of initiation, 
commencement or pendency of such proceedings.  

Page 22 of 79 
 
14.7 
The Arbitrator may give a composite or separate 
Award(s) in respect of each dispute or difference referred to 
him and may also make interim award(s) if necessary.  
14.8 
The fees of the Arbitrator and expenses of 
arbitration, if any, shall be borne equally by the parties 
unless the Sole Arbitrator otherwise directs in his award with 
reasons. The lumpsum fees of the Arbitrator shall be Rs 
60,000/- per case and if the sole Arbitrator completes the 
arbitration including his award within 5 months of accepting 
his appointment, he shall be paid Rs.10,000/- additionally as 
bonus. Reasonable actual expenses for stenographer, etc. will 
be reimbursed. Fees shall be paid stage wise i.e. 25% on 
acceptance, 25% on completion of pleadings/ documentation, 
25% on completion of arguments and balance on receipt of 
award by the parties.  
14.9 
Subject to the aforesaid, the provisions of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 or any statutory 
modification or re-enactment thereof and the rules made 
thereunder, shall apply to the Arbitration proceedings under 
this Clause.  
14.10 
The Contract shall be governed by and constructed 
according to the laws in force in India. The parties hereby 
submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Courts situated at 
Mumbai for all purposes. The Arbitration shall be held at 
Mumbai and conducted in English language.  
14.11 
The Appointing Authority is the Functional Director 
of Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited.” 
 
33. 
 Neither the existence nor the validity of the arbitration agreement has been 
disputed by the appellant. However, the appellant has challenged the allowing of 
the application for appointment of arbitrator by the High Court on two grounds – 
(i) the application before the High Court was not maintainable as it was filed for 
the second time having been withdrawn previously without seeking any liberty to 
file afresh; and (ii) the application is time-barred for being beyond the time period 

Page 23 of 79 
 
of three years prescribed under Article 137 of the Limitation Act. We shall address 
both these contentions in seriatim as they are pivotal to the fate of the present 
appeal.  
i. 
Issue No. 1   
 
34. 
Section 11 of the Act, 1996 lays down the procedure for appointment of 
arbitrators through the intervention of the High Court or the Supreme Court, as 
the case may be. A reading of the said provision indicates that there is nothing 
therein which prevents a party from filing more than one application seeking the 
appointment of arbitrator for adjudicating disputes arising from the same contract.  
35. 
However, the appellant has contended that in lieu of the principles 
contained in Order 23 Rule 1 of the CPC, the respondent could not have filed a 
subsequent application under Section 11(6) for adjudication of the same disputes, 
having previously withdrawn unconditionally an application filed for the same 
purpose. To address the contention of the appellant, we need to determine whether 
the principles contained in Order 23 Rule 1 of the CPC will apply to an 
application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996. 
a. 
Scope and applicability of Order 23 Rule 1 of the CPC to proceedings 
other than suits 
 
36. 
Prior to its amendment by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 
1976, Order 23 Rule 1 of the CPC provided for two kinds of withdrawal of a suit, 

Page 24 of 79 
 
namely absolute withdrawal and withdrawal with the permission of the court to 
institute a fresh suit on the same cause of action. The first category of withdrawal 
was governed by sub-rule (1) thereof, as it stood then, which provided that at any 
time after the institution of a suit, the plaintiff may, as against all or any of the 
defendants withdraw his suit or abandon a part of his claim. The second category 
was governed by sub-rule (2) thereof which provided that where the court was 
satisfied (a) that a suit must fail by reason of some formal defect, or (b) that there 
were sufficient grounds for allowing the plaintiff to institute a fresh suit for the 
subject-matter of a suit or part of a claim, it may, on such terms as it thought fit, 
grant the plaintiff permission to withdraw from such suit or abandon a part of a 
claim with liberty to institute a fresh suit in respect of the subject-matter of such 
suit or such part of the claim. Sub-rule (3) of the former Order 23 Rule 1 of the 
CPC provided that where the plaintiff withdrew from a suit or abandoned a part 
of a claim without the permission referred to in sub-rule (2), he would be liable 
to such costs as the court may award and would also be precluded from instituting 
any fresh suit in respect of such subject-matter or such part of the claim. The 
legislature felt that the use of the word “withdrawal” in relation to both the 
aforesaid categories had led to confusion and thus amended the rule to avoid such 
confusion. 
37. 
Order 23 Rule 1 of the CPC as it stands now post the amendment is 
reproduced hereinbelow:  

Page 25 of 79 
 
“Withdrawal of suit or abandonment of part of claim.— 
 
(1) At any time after the institution of a suit, the plaintiff may as 
against all or any of the defendants abandon his suit or abandon 
a part of his claim:  
Provided that where the plaintiff is a minor or other person to 
whom the provisions contained in rules 1 to 14 of Order XXXII 
extend, neither the suit nor any part of the claim shall be 
abandoned without the leave of the Court. 
 
(2) An application for leave under the proviso to sub-rule (1) 
shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the next friend and also, 
if the minor or such other person is represented by a pleader, by 
a certificate of the pleader to the effect that the abandonment 
proposed is, in his opinion, for the benefit of the minor or such 
other person.  
 
(3) Where the Court is satisfied,—  
(a) that a suit must fail by reason of some formal defect, or  
(b) that there are sufficient grounds for allowing the plaintiff 
to institute a fresh suit for the subject matter of suit or part of 
a claim,  
It may, on such terms as it thinks fit grant the plaintiff permission 
to withdraw from such suit or such part of the claim with liberty 
to institute a fresh suit in respect of the subject-matter of such suit 
or such part of the claim.  
 
(4) Where the plaintiff—  
 
(a) abandons any suit or part of claim under sub-rule (1), or 
  
(b) withdraws from a suit or part of a claim without the 
permission referred to in sub-rule (3),  
 
he shall be liable for such costs as the Court may award and shall 
be precluded from instituting any fresh suit in respect of such 
subject-matter or such part of the claim.  
 
(5) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to authorise the Court to 
permit one of several plaintiffs to abandon a suit or part of a 

Page 26 of 79 
 
claim under sub-rule (1), or to withdraw, under sub-rule (3), any 
suit or part of a claim, without the consent of the other plaintiff” 
 
38. 
The key difference between Order 23 Rule 1 as it stood prior to the 
amendment and as it stands now is that while in sub-rule (1) of the former Order 
23 Rule 1, the expression “withdraw his suit” had been used, whereas in sub-rule 
(1) of the amended Order 23 Rule 1, the expression “abandon his suit” has been 
used. The new sub-rule (1) is applicable to a case where the court declines to 
accord permission to withdraw from a suit or such part of the claim with liberty 
to institute a fresh suit in respect of the subject-matter of such suit or such part of 
the claim. In the new sub-rule (3) which corresponds to the former sub-rule (2), 
practically no change is made. Under sub-rule (3), the court is empowered to 
grant, subject to the conditions mentioned therein, permission to withdraw from 
a suit with liberty to institute a fresh suit in respect of the subject-matter of such 
suit. Sub-rule (4) of the amended Order 23 Rule 1 provides that where the plaintiff 
abandons any suit or part of claim under sub-rule (1) or withdraws from a suit or 
part of a claim without the permission referred to in sub-rule (3), he would be 
liable for such costs as the court may award and would also be precluded from 
instituting any fresh suit in respect of such subject-matter or such part of the 
claim. 
39. 
Order 23 Rule 1, as it now stands post the amendment, makes a distinction 
between “abandonment” of a suit and “withdrawal” from a suit with permission 

Page 27 of 79 
 
to file a fresh suit and provides for – first, abandonment of suit or a part of claim; 
and secondly, withdrawal from suit or part of claim with the leave of the court. 
Abandonment of suit or a part of claim against all or any of the defendants is an 
absolute and unqualified right of a plaintiff and the court has no power to preclude 
the plaintiff from abandoning the suit or direct him to proceed with it. Sub-rule 
(1) of Order 23 Rule 1 embodies this principle. However, if the plaintiff abandons 
the suit or part of claim, then he is precluded from instituting a fresh suit in respect 
of such subject-matter or such part of claim. Upon abandoning the suit or part of 
claim, the plaintiff also becomes liable to pay such costs as may be imposed by 
the Court. This is specified under sub-rule (4) of Order 23 Rule 1.  
40. 
However, if the plaintiff desires to withdraw from a suit or part of a claim 
with liberty to file a fresh suit on the same subject matter or part of the claim, 
then he must obtain the permission of the court under sub-rule (3) of Order 23 
Rule 1. The failure to obtain such permission would preclude the plaintiff from 
instituting any fresh suit in respect of such subject-matter or such part of the 
claim, and also to any costs that may be imposed by the court.   
41. 
The court granting liberty under sub-rule (3) of Order 23 Rule 1 may do so 
only upon being satisfied of one of the following two conditions– first, that the 
suit suffers from some formal defect and would fail by reason of such defect; and 
second, that there are sufficient grounds for allowing the plaintiff to institute a 
fresh suit for the same subject-matter or part of the claim. The court may grant 

Page 28 of 79 
 
liberty on such terms as it deems fit. It is also apparent from the text of the 
provision that the liberty under sub-rule (3) can only be granted by the court trying 
the earlier suit and not by the court before which the subsequent suit is instituted.  
42. 
On meaning of the phrase ‘subject-matter’ appearing in Order 23 Rule 1, 
this Court in Vallabh Das v. Madan Lal (Dr) reported in (1970) 1 SCC 761 held 
thus:  
“5. Rule 1 of the Order 23, Code of Civil Procedure empowers 
the courts to permit a plaintiff to withdraw from the suit brought 
by him with liberty to institute a fresh suit in respect of the 
subject-matter of that suit on such terms as it thinks fit. The term 
imposed on the plaintiff in the previous suit was that before 
bringing a fresh suit on the same cause of action, he must pay the 
costs of the defendants. Therefore we have to see whether that 
condition governs the institution of the present suit. For deciding 
that question we have to see whether the suit from which this 
appeal arises is in respect of the same subject-matter that was in 
litigation in the previous suit. The expression “subject-matter” is 
not defined in the Civil Procedure Code. It does not mean 
property. That expression has a reference to a right in the 
property which the plaintiff seeks to enforce. That expression 
includes the cause of action and the relief claimed. Unless the 
cause of action and the relief claimed in the second suit are the 
same as in the first suit, it cannot be said, that the subject-matter 
of the second suit is the same as that in the previous suit. Now 
coming to the case before us in the first suit Dr Madan Lal was 
seeking to enforce his right to partition and separate possession. 
In the present suit he seeks to get possession of the suit properties 
from a trespasser on the basis of his title. In the first suit the cause 
of action was the division of status between Dr Madan Lal and 
his adoptive father and the relief claimed was the conversion of 
joint possession into separate possession. In the present suit the 
plaintiff is seeking possession of the suit properties from a 
trespasser. In the first case his cause of action arose on the day 
he got separated from his family. In the present suit the cause of 
action, namely, the series of transactions which formed the basis 
of his title to the suit properties, arose on the death of his adoptive 

Page 29 of 79 
 
father and mother. It is true that both in the previous suit as well 
as in the present suit the factum and validity of adoption of Dr 
Madan Lal came up for decision. But that adoption was not the 
cause of action in the first nor is it the cause of action in the 
present suit. It was merely an antecedent event which conferred 
certain rights on him. Mere identity of some of the issues in the 
two suits do not bring about an identity of the subject-matter in 
the two suits. As observed in Rukhma Bai v. Mahadeo Narayan, 
[ILR 42 Bom 155] the expression “subject-matter” in Order 23 
of the Rule 1, Code of Civil Procedure means the series of acts or 
transactions alleged to exist giving rise to the relief claimed. In 
other words “subject-matter” means the bundle of facts which 
have to be proved in order to entile the plaintiff to the relief 
claimed by him. We accept as correct the observations of Wallis, 
C.J., in Singa Reddi v. Subba Reddi [ILR 39 Mad 987] that where 
the cause of action and the relief claimed in the second suit are 
not the same as the cause of action and the relief claimed in the 
first suit, the second suit cannot be considered to have been 
brought in respect of the same subject-matter as the first suit.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
43. 
Discussing on the meaning of the phrases ‘formal defect’ and ‘sufficient 
grounds’, a two-Judge Bench of this Court in V. Rajendran v. Annasamy 
Pandian reported in (2017) 5 SCC 63 observed thus:  
“9. […] As per Order 23 Rule 1(3) CPC, suit may only be 
withdrawn with permission to bring a fresh suit when the Court 
is satisfied that the suit must fail for reason of some formal defect 
or that there are other sufficient grounds for allowing the plaintiff 
to institute a fresh suit. The power to allow withdrawal of a suit 
is discretionary. In the application, the plaintiff must make out a 
case in terms of Order 23 Rules 1(3)(a) or (b) CPC and must ask 
for leave. The Court can allow the application filed under Order 
23 Rule 1(3) CPC for withdrawal of the suit with liberty to bring 
a fresh suit only if the condition in either of the clauses (a) or (b), 
that is, existence of a “formal defect” or “sufficient grounds”. 
The principle under Order 23 Rule 1(3) CPC is founded on public 
policy to prevent institution of suit again and again on the same 
cause of action. 

Page 30 of 79 
 
10. In K.S. Bhoopathy v. Kokila [(2000) 5 SCC 458], it has been 
held that it is the duty of the Court to be satisfied about the 
existence of “formal defect” or “sufficient grounds” before 
granting permission to withdraw the suit with liberty to file a 
fresh suit under the same cause of action. Though, liberty may lie 
with the plaintiff in a suit to withdraw the suit at any time after 
the institution of suit on establishing the “formal defect” or 
“sufficient grounds”, such right cannot be considered to be so 
absolute as to permit or encourage abuse of process of court. The 
fact that the plaintiff is entitled to abandon or withdraw the suit 
or part of the claim by itself, is no licence to the plaintiff to claim 
or to do so to the detriment of legitimate right of the defendant. 
When an application is filed under Order 23 Rule 1(3) CPC, the 
Court must be satisfied about the “formal defect” or “sufficient 
grounds”. “Formal defect” is a defect of form prescribed by the 
rules of procedure such as, want of notice under Section 80 CPC, 
improper valuation of the suit, insufficient court fee, confusion 
regarding identification of the suit property, misjoinder of 
parties, failure to disclose a cause of action, etc. “Formal defect” 
must be given a liberal meaning which connotes various kinds of 
defects not affecting the merits of the plea raised by either of the 
parties. 
11. In terms of Order 23 Rule 1(3)(b) where the court is satisfied 
that there are sufficient grounds for allowing the plaintiff to 
institute a fresh suit, the Court may permit the plaintiff to 
withdraw the suit. In interpretation of the words “sufficient 
grounds”, there are two views : one view is that these grounds in 
clause (b) must be “ejusdem generis” with those in clause (a), 
that is, it must be of the same nature as the ground in clause (a), 
that is, formal defect or at least analogous to them; and the other 
view was that the words “other sufficient grounds” in clause (b) 
should be read independent of the words a “formal defect” and 
clause (a). Court has been given a wider discretion to allow 
withdrawal from suit in the interest of justice in cases where such 
a prayer is not covered by clause (a). Since in the present case, 
we are only concerned with “formal defect” envisaged under 
clause (a) of Rule 1 sub-rule (3), we choose not to elaborate any 
further on the ground contemplated under clause (b), that is, 
“sufficient grounds”.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 

Page 31 of 79 
 
44. 
The main purpose of permitting the withdrawal of a suit and its re-filing is 
to ensure that justice is not thwarted due to technicalities. Where permission 
under Order 23 Rule 1 is granted, the principle of estoppel does not operate and 
the principle of res judicate would also not apply. However, Order 23 Rule 1 is 
not intended to enable the plaintiff to get a chance to commence litigation afresh 
in order to avoid the results of his previous suit, or to engage in multiple 
proceedings with the motive of bench-hunting.  
45. 
Order 23 Rule 2 stipulates that any fresh suit instituted on permission 
granted under Order 23 Rule 1 shall be governed by the law of limitation in the 
same manner as if the first suit had not been instituted. The object underlying this 
Rule is to prevent a party from misusing the liberty of filing a fresh suit for 
evading the limitation period governing the said suit. The said rule is reproduced 
hereinbelow:  
“2. Limitation law not affected by first suit.—In any fresh suit 
instituted on permission granted under the last preceding rule, 
the plaintiff shall be bound by the law of limitation in the same 
manner as if the first suit had not been instituted.”  
 
46. 
Undoubtedly, an application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 is not a 
suit and hence will not be governed stricto-sensu by Order 23 Rule 1 of the CPC. 
However, in a number of decisions, this Court has extended the principle 
underlying Order 23 Rule 1 to proceedings other than suits on the ground of 
public policy underlying the said rule. The appellant has submitted that in view 

Page 32 of 79 
 
of the aforesaid decisions, there is no reason why the principles of Order 23 Rule 
1 should not be extended to an application for appointment of arbitrator under 
Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996.  
47. 
A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Sarguja Transport Service v. State 
Transport Appellate Tribunal, M.P., Gwalior and Others reported in (1987) 1 
SCC 5 while elaborating upon the principle underlying Order 23 Rule 1 of CPC, 
extended them to writ petitions under Articles 226 and 227. Relevant observations 
from the said decision are as follows:  
“7. […] The principle underlying Rule 1 of Order XXIII of the 
Code is that when a plaintiff once institutes a suit in a court and 
thereby avails of a remedy given to him under law, he cannot be 
permitted to institute a fresh suit in respect of the same subject-
matter again after abandoning the earlier suit or by withdrawing 
it without the permission of the court to file fresh suit. Invito 
beneficium non datur — the law confers upon a man no rights or 
benefits which he does not desire. Whoever waives, abandons or 
disclaims a right will loose it. In order to prevent a litigant from 
abusing the process of the court by instituting suits again and 
again on the same cause of action without any good reason the 
Code insists that he should obtain the permission of the court to 
file a fresh suit after establishing either of the two grounds 
mentioned in sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of Order XXIII. The principle 
underlying the above rule is founded on public policy, but it is not 
the same as the rule of res judicata contained in Section 11 of the 
Code which provides that no court shall try any suit or issue in 
which the matter directly or substantially in issue has been 
directly or substantially in issue in a former suit between the 
same parties, or between parties under whom they or any of them 
claim, litigating under the same title, in a court competent to try 
such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue has been 
subsequently raised, and has been heard and finally decided by 
such court. The rule of res judicata applies to a case where the 
suit or an issue has already been heard and finally decided by a 
court. In the case of abandonment or withdrawal of a suit without 

Page 33 of 79 
 
the permission of the court to file a fresh suit, there is no prior 
adjudication of a suit or an issue is involved, yet the Code 
provides, as stated earlier, that a second suit will not lie in sub-
rule (4) of Rule 1 of Order XXIII of the Code when the first suit 
is withdrawn without the permission referred to in sub-rule (3) in 
order to prevent the abuse of the process of the court. 
8. The question for our consideration is whether it would or 
would not advance the cause of justice if the principle underlying 
Rule 1 of Order XXIII of the Code is adopted in respect of writ 
petitions filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India 
also. It is common knowledge that very often after a writ petition 
is heard for some time when the petitioner or his counsel finds 
that the court is not likely to pass an order admitting the petition, 
request is made by the petitioner or by his counsel to permit the 
petitioner to withdraw from the writ petition without seeking 
permission to institute a fresh writ petition. A court which is 
unwilling to admit the petition would not ordinarily grant liberty 
to file a fresh petition while it may just agree to permit the 
withdrawal of the petition. It is plain that when once a writ 
petition filed in a High Court is withdrawn by the petitioner 
himself he is precluded from filing an appeal against the order 
passed in the writ petition because he cannot be considered as a 
party aggrieved by the order passed by the High Court.” 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
48. 
The principles enunciated in Sarguja Transport (supra) were extended to 
Special Leave Petitions filed before this Court by a two-Judge Bench of this Court 
in Upadhyay & Co. v. State of U.P. and Others reported in (1999) 1 SCC 81. It 
was observed by the bench thus:  
11. […] It is not a permissible practice to challenge the same 
order over again after withdrawing the special leave petition 
without obtaining permission of the court for withdrawing it with 
liberty to move for special leave again subsequently. 
xxx xxx xxx  

Page 34 of 79 
 
13. The aforesaid ban for filing a fresh suit is based on public 
policy. This Court has made the said rule of public policy 
applicable to jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution 
(Sarguja Transport Service v. STAT [(1987) 1 SCC 5). The 
reasoning for adopting it in writ jurisdiction is that very often it 
happens, when the petitioner or his counsel finds that the court 
is not likely to pass an order admitting the writ petition after it is 
heard for some time, that a request is made by the petitioner or 
his counsel to permit him to withdraw it without seeking 
permission to institute a fresh writ petition. A court which is 
unwilling to admit the petition would not ordinarily grant liberty 
to file a fresh petition while it may just agree to permit 
withdrawal of the petition. When once a writ petition filed in a 
High Court is withdrawn by the party concerned, he is precluded 
from filing an appeal against the order passed in the writ petition 
because he cannot be considered as a party aggrieved by the 
order passed by the High Court. If so, he cannot file a fresh 
petition for the same cause once again. […] 
 xxx xxx xxx  
15. We have no doubt that the above rule of public policy, for the 
very same reasoning, should apply to special leave petitions filed 
under Article 136 of the Constitution also. […]” 
 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
49. 
The respondent has relied upon the decision of this Court in Sarva Shramik 
Sanghatana (supra) to contend that the principles underlying Order 23 Rule 1 of 
the CPC cannot be applied as a matter of fact in every legal proceeding. In the 
said case, an application seeking permission for closure under Section 25-O(1) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 had been filed by the respondent Company 
therein. However, before the application could be decided, the Company received 
a letter from the Deputy Commissioner of Labour, Mumbai inviting it to a 
meeting for exploring the possibility of an amicable settlement. The Company 

Page 35 of 79 
 
withdrew its application in lieu of the invite and Section 25-O(3) which provides 
that an application made under Section 25-O(1) will be deemed to have been 
allowed if it is not decided within a period of 60 days from the date of filing. 
However, after the attempts for an amicable settlement failed, the Company 
moved a fresh application under Section 25-O(1). The application was opposed 
by the appellant therein, inter-alia, on the ground that since the first application 
was withdrawn by the Company without obtaining liberty to file a fresh 
application, the same would not be maintainable as per the principles underlying 
Order 23 Rule 1 of the CPC. In this regard, reliance was placed by the appellant 
therein upon the decision of this Court in Sarguja Transport (supra). However, 
this Court distinguished the decision in Sarguja Transport (supra) on the ground 
that the objective in the said decision was to prevent such situations where the 
petitioner withdraws a case to file it before a more convenient Bench or for some 
other mala fide purpose. The relevant observations from the said decision are 
reproduced hereinbelow:  
“19. In the present case, we are satisfied that the application for 
withdrawal of the first petition under Section 25-O(1) was made 
bona fide because the respondent Company had received a letter 
from the Deputy Labour Commissioner on 5-4-2007 calling for a 
meeting of the parties so that an effort could be made for an 
amicable settlement. In fact, the respondent Company could have 
waited for the expiry of 60 days from the date of filing of its 
application under Section 25-O(1), on the expiry of which the 
application would have deemed to have been allowed under 
Section 25-O(3). The fact that it did not do so, and instead 
applied for withdrawal of its application under Section 25-O(1), 
shows its bona fide. The respondent Company was trying for an 

Page 36 of 79 
 
amicable settlement, and this was clearly bona fide, and it was 
not a case of Bench-hunting when it found that an adverse order 
was likely to be passed against it. Hence, Sarguja Transport 
case [(1987) 1 SCC 5 : 1987 SCC (Cri) 19 : AIR 1987 SC 88] is 
clearly distinguishable, and will only apply where the first 
petition was withdrawn in order to do Bench-hunting or for some 
other mala fide purpose. 
20. We agree with the learned counsel for the appellant that 
although the Code of Civil Procedure does not strictly apply to 
proceedings under Section 25-O(1) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, or other judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings under any 
other Act, some of the general principles in CPC may be 
applicable. For instance, even if Section 11 CPC does not in 
terms strictly apply because both the proceedings may not be 
suits, the general principle of res judicata may apply 
vide Pondicherry Khadi & Village Industries Board v. P. 
Kulothangan [(2004) 1 SCC 68 : 2004 SCC (L&S) 32] . However, 
this does not mean that all provisions in CPC will strictly apply 
to proceedings which are not suits. 
22. No doubt, Order 23 Rule 1(4) CPC states that where the 
plaintiff withdraws a suit without permission of the court, he is 
precluded from instituting any fresh suit in respect of the same 
subject-matter. However, in our opinion, this provision will apply 
only to suits. An application under Section 25-O(1) is not a suit, 
and hence, the said provision will not apply to such an 
application.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
50. 
While we agree with the decision in the aforesaid case to the extent that it 
declined to apply the principles of Order 23 Rule 1 and refused to dismiss a 
bonafide subsequent application filed after the earlier one was withdrawn in good 
faith to attempt conciliation, we are of the view that it cannot be declared as a 
general rule that merely because a legal proceeding is not a ‘suit’, it would be 
completely exempted from the application of principles underlying Order 23 Rule 

Page 37 of 79 
 
1. These principles, being in the nature of public policy, bring efficiency and 
certainty to the administration of justice by any court and should be invoked and 
enforced unless they are expressly prohibited by statute or appear to counter serve 
the interest of justice, rather than advancing it.     
51. 
One important policy consideration which permeates the scheme of Order 
23 Rule 1 is the legislative intent that legal proceedings in respect of a subject-
matter are not stretched for unduly long periods by allowing a party to reagitate 
the same issue over and over again, which also leads to uncertainty for the 
responding parties. Arbitration as a dispute resolution method, too, seeks to 
curtail the time spent by disputing parties in pursuing legal proceedings. This is 
evident from the various provisions of the Act, 1996 which provide a timeline for 
compliance with various procedural requirements under the said Act. An 
application for appointment of arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 is 
required to be filed when there is failure on the part of the parties or their 
nominated arbitrators to commence the arbitration proceedings as per the agreed 
upon procedure. This Court, being conscious of the temporally sensitive nature 
of proceedings under Section 11(6), has issued various directions from time to 
time to ensure that applications for appointment of arbitrators are decided in an 
expeditious manner. Keeping in view the approach of this Court and the nature of 
applications under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996, we find no reason to not extend 
the principles of Order 23 Rule 1 to such proceedings, when the very same 

Page 38 of 79 
 
principles have been extended to writ proceedings before High Courts under 
Articles 226 & 227 and SLPs before this Court under Article 136.  
52. 
One important aspect that needs to be kept in mind while applying the 
principles of Order 23 Rule 1 to applications under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 
is that it will act as a bar to only those applications which are filed subsequent to 
the withdrawal of a previous Section 11(6) application filed on the basis of the 
same cause of action. The extension of the aforesaid principle cannot be construed 
to mean that it bars invocation of the same arbitration clause on more than one 
occasion. It is possible that certain claims or disputes may arise between the 
parties after a tribunal has already been appointed in furtherance of an application 
under Section 11(6). In such a scenario, a party cannot be precluded from 
invoking the arbitration clause only on the ground that it had previously invoked 
the same arbitration clause. If the cause of action for invoking subsequent 
arbitration has arisen after the invocation of the first arbitration, then the 
application for appointment of arbitrator cannot be rejected on the ground of 
multiplicity alone. 
53. 
The principles of Order 23 Rule 1 are extended to proceedings other than 
suits with a view to bring in certainty, expediency and efficiency in legal 
proceedings. However, at the same time, it must also be kept in mind while 
extending the principles to legal proceedings other than suits that the principles 
are not applied in a rigid or hyper-technical manner. While the nature of the 

Page 39 of 79 
 
proceedings, that is, whether such proceeding is a suit or otherwise, should not 
be a consideration in deciding whether the principles of Order 23 Rule 1 should 
be extended to such proceedings or not, the bonafide conduct of a party in the 
unique facts of a case must be considered before precluding such a party from 
moving ahead with the proceedings.  
54. 
In the case of Vanna Claire Kaura v. Gauri Anil Indulkar & Ors. reported 
in (2009) 7 SCC 541 the applicant filed a Section 11(6) application before the 
High Court of Bombay. A dispute was raised that the application was not 
maintainable as the agreements were in the nature of international commercial 
arbitration agreement under the Act, 1996 and the application for appointment 
would only lie before the Chief Justice of India. Accordingly, the applicant 
withdrew the Section 11 application and filed a Section 11(6) application before 
this Court. The subsequent application was opposed inter alia on the ground that 
arbitration was invoked by notice dated 14.03.2006 and was thereafter abandoned 
with the withdrawal of the petition from the High Court. Hence, the second 
application without the leave of the High Court would not be maintainable. 
However, this Court, negatived the objections against the application and 
proceeded to appoint the arbitrator. 
55. 
Coming to the facts of the case at hand, both the applications under Section 
11(6) of the Act, 1996 were filed seeking adjudication of the dispute which arose 
on 02.02.2014 upon refusal of the appellant to pay the dues of the respondent. 

Page 40 of 79 
 
The first application under Section 11(6) was filed on 16.02.2018 and was 
subsequently withdrawn unconditionally on 01.10.2018. After a gap of more than 
four years, the respondent filed a subsequent application under Section 11(6) 
before the High Court on 09.12.2022 which came to be allowed by the impugned 
order.  
56. 
The High Court was of the view that the respondent chose to withdraw the 
petition under legal advice and thereafter approached NCLT under the IBC but 
did not succeed in its endeavor. Further, the High Court observed that while 
dismissing the appeal, this Court vide Order dated 15.07.2022 granted liberty to 
the respondent to avail such remedies in accordance with law, which shall include 
the remedy of arbitration. Accepting the explanation given by the respondent as 
bonafide and relying on the order dated 15.07.2022 of this Court, the High Court 
held the fresh petition under Section 11(6) to be maintainable.  
57. 
A perusal of paragraph 18 of the order dated 10.01.2022 passed by the 
NCLAT setting aside the order of the NCLT reveals that after invoking the 
arbitration clause by the notice dated 09.07.2016, the respondent issued a 
statutory demand notice to the appellant under Section 8 of the IBC on 
30.08.2017. When no reply was sent by the appellant to the said demand notice, 
the respondent, rather than filing an application under Section 9 of the IBC, filed 
an application for the appointment of arbitrator on 16.02.2018. During the 
pendency of the application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 before the High 

Page 41 of 79 
 
Court, the respondent issued a second statutory demand notice under Section 8 of 
the IBC to the appellant on 25.07.2018. The appellant filed a reply to the said 
demand notice on 07.08.2018, wherein, inter alia, it took the defence that there 
was a pre-existing dispute between the parties, which was evidenced by the 
existence of the pending arbitration proceedings. Subsequently, the respondent 
withdrew the arbitration application on 01.10.2018 and thereafter proceeded to 
file an application before the NCLT, Kolkata on 05.10.2018.  
58. 
   The chronology of events as discussed above clearly indicates that the 
respondent did not withdraw the first arbitration application because of some 
defect which would have led to its dismissal. It is also clear from the order dated 
01.10.2018 of the High Court permitting the respondent to withdraw the 
application that neither any liberty was sought by the respondent nor the court 
had granted any liberty to file a fresh arbitration application. It appears to us that 
the only reason the respondent withdrew the arbitration application was to get his 
application under Section 9 of the IBC any how admitted by the NCLT. It is also 
evident that the existence of a pre-existing dispute was brought to the notice of 
the respondent by the appellant much prior to the withdrawal of the arbitration 
application in reply to the demand notice issued by the respondent under Section 
8 of the IBC. Thus, it can be said without any doubt that the respondent took a 
calculated risk of abandoning the arbitration proceedings to maximise the chances 
of succeeding in the IBC proceedings.  

Page 42 of 79 
 
59. 
The respondent was within its right to abandon the arbitration proceedings 
in favour of IBC proceedings. However, having done so, it would no longer be 
open to it to file a fresh application for appointment of arbitrator without having 
obtained the liberty of the court to file a fresh application at the time of the 
withdrawal. We say so particularly because the withdrawal of the first arbitration 
application was not with a view to cure some formal defect or any other sufficient 
ground. The application was withdrawn with the hope that the application filed 
by the respondent under Section 9 of the IBC may succeed, as the pendency of 
the arbitration application would have proven to be an indicator of existence of a 
pre-existing dispute between the parties, and thus fatal to the IBC proceedings.  
60. 
As we are of the view that the principles underlying Order 23 Rule 1 can 
be extended to applications for appointment of arbitrator, the only recourse to the 
respondent to defend the second application as maintainable despite it having 
been withdrawn earlier without liberty was to show bona fides on its part. From 
the conduct of the respondent, it is evident that it thought fit to initiate insolvency 
proceedings perhaps thinking that the issues existing between the parties may not 
get resolved through arbitration. Further, no document has been placed on record 
to substantiate the so called incorrect legal advice the respondent claims to have 
received. Therefore, the failure on the part of the respondent to withdraw the first 
Section 11 application without seeking any liberty cannot be condoned in the facts 
of the present case.   

Page 43 of 79 
 
61. 
In light of the aforesaid discussion, we are of the view that in the absence 
of any liberty sought by the respondents from the High Court at the time of 
withdrawal of the first arbitration application, the fresh Section 11 petition arising 
out of the same cause of action cannot be said to be maintainable.  
62. 
Another way of looking at the abandonment of Section 11(6) application is 
by understanding the importance of such an application in view of Sections 21 
and 43(2) of the Act, 1996 respectively. By virtue of Section 21, the arbitral 
proceedings commence on the date on which the respondent receives the 
petitioner’s notice invoking arbitration. The said provision is reproduced below: 
“21. 
Commencement 
of 
arbitral 
proceedings.—Unless 
otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral proceedings in 
respect of a particular dispute commence on the date on which a 
request for that dispute to be referred to arbitration is received 
by the respondent.” 
 
63. 
Section 43(2) of the Act, 1996 provides that for the purposes of limitation, 
an arbitration shall be ‘deemed’ to have commenced on the date referred to in 
Section 21. Section 43(2) is reproduced below: 
“(2) For the purposes of this section and the Limitation Act, 1963 
(36 of 1963), an arbitration shall be deemed to have commenced 
on the date referred to in section 21.” 
 
64. 
As is clear from the word “deemed” used in Section 43(2), the 
commencement of arbitration proceedings, as contemplated in Section 21, is in 
the nature of a legal or deeming fiction. It is a notional commencement and not a 

Page 44 of 79 
 
factual or actual commencement of arbitration. However, the factual or actual 
arbitration proceeding commences only once an arbitrator is appointed either by 
the High Court under Section 11 or by consent of parties. 
 
65. 
Hence, a petition under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 is not a proceeding 
merely seeking the appointment of an arbitrator. It is in reality a proceeding for 
appointing an arbitrator and for commencing the actual or real arbitration 
proceedings. 
 
66. 
If that is so, the unconditional withdrawal of a Section 11(6) petition 
amounts to abandoning not only the formal prayer for appointing an arbitrator but 
also the substantive prayer for commencing the actual arbitration proceedings. It 
amounts to abandoning the arbitration itself. It results in abandonment of the 
notional ‘arbitration proceeding’ that had commenced by virtue of Section 21 and 
thus amounts to an abandonment of a significant nature. Therefore, it is all the 
more important to import and apply the principles underlying Order 23 Rule 1 of 
the CPC to abandonment of applications under Section 11(6).  
 
ii. 
Issue No. 2 
 
67. 
It was submitted by the appellant that the fresh application filed by the 
respondent under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 before the High Court was 

Page 45 of 79 
 
beyond the period of limitation prescribed for filing of such an application and 
was not maintainable. The appellant also contended that the substantive claims 
raised by the respondent are also ex-facie time-barred and thus the High Court 
ought to have dismissed the fresh arbitration application filed by the respondent 
on this ground as well.  
68. 
The basic premise behind the statutes providing for a limitation period is 
encapsulated by the maxim “Vigilantibus non dormientibus jura subveniunt” 
which means that the law assists those who are vigilant and not those who sleep 
over their rights. The object behind having a prescribed limitation period is to 
ensure that there is certainty and finality to the litigation and assurance to the 
opposite party that it will not be subject to an indefinite period of liability. Another 
object achieved by a fixed limitation period is that only those claims which are 
initiated before the deterioration of evidence takes place are allowed to be 
litigated. The law of limitation does not act to extinguish the right but only bars 
the remedy.  
69. 
The limitation period governing applications under Section 11(6) of the 
Act, 1996 has recently been explained by a three-Judge Bench of this Court, to 
which My Lord, the Chief Justice of India and myself were a part, in M/s Arif 
Azim Co. Ltd. v. M/s Aptech Ltd. reported in 2024 INSC 155. The said decision 
has referred to Article 137 of the Limitation Act, 1963 to hold that the limitation 

Page 46 of 79 
 
period for making an application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 is three 
years from the date when the right to apply accrues.  
70. 
On the aspect of when the limitation period for filing an application seeking 
appointment of arbitrator would commence, the aforesaid decision has held that 
it is only after a valid notice invoking arbitration has been issued by one of the 
parties to the other party and there has been either a failure or refusal on part of 
the other party to make an appointment as per the appointment procedure agreed 
upon between the parties, that the clock would start ticking for the purpose of the 
limitation of three years.  
71. 
In the case at hand, the respondent invoked the arbitration clause vide a 
notice dated 09.07.2016. Since there was no response to the said notice by the 
appellant, the respondent filed an application for appointment of arbitrator before 
the High Court under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 on 16.02.2018. Subsequently, 
it abandoned the application to pursue proceedings under the IBC.  
72. 
On 15.10.2018, the respondent filed an application under Section 9 of the 
IBC for initiation of Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process against the 
appellant. The IBC proceedings initiated by the respondent under Section 9 were 
ultimately dismissed by this Court vide order dated 15.07.2022 by way of which 
the order of the NCLAT was upheld and the order of the NCLT was set-aside. 
This Court took the view that the NCLT had committed a grave error of law by 
admitting the application of the respondent even though there was a pre-existing 

Page 47 of 79 
 
dispute between the parties. Placing reliance on the decision of this Court in 
Mobilox Innovations Private Limited v. Kirusa Software Private Limited 
reported in (2018) 1 SCC 353, this Court held that upon the occurrence of a pre-
existing dispute regarding the alleged claims of the respondent against the 
appellant, the Section 9 application of the respondent as an ‘Operational Creditor’ 
could not have been entertained.  
73. 
Upon rejection of the Section 9 application by this Court, the respondent 
filed a fresh application under Section 11(6) on 09.12.2022 before the High Court. 
The High Court allowed the application and proceeded to appoint the arbitrator 
vide the impugned order. 
74. 
An overview of the facts as discussed above indicates that the first 
application under Section 11(6) filed on 16.02.2018 was well within the 
prescribed limitation period of three years for filing such applications. However, 
even assuming that the second application under Section 11(6) is not barred by 
the principles underlying Order 23 Rule 1, the same was required to be filed 
within a period of three years from the expiry of one month from the date of 
receipt of the notice invoking arbitration by the appellant. This period of three 
years came to an end in August, 2019. The second application under Section 11(6) 
came to be filed by the respondent much later on 12.12.2022 and is clearly time-
barred.  

Page 48 of 79 
 
75. 
However, to save the second Section 11(6) application from being 
dismissed on account of being time-barred, the respondent has contended that it 
is entitled to invoke the benefit under Section 14 of the Limitation Act, 1963 to 
seek exclusion of the period spent by it in pursuing the proceedings under Section 
9 of the IBC. The respondent has further submitted that even otherwise, this Court 
in exercise of its discretion available under Section 5 of the Limitation Act may 
condone the delay in filing the second 11(6) application before the High Court, 
as it was pursuing the insolvency proceedings in a bona fide manner and would 
be left remediless if the appointment of arbitrator by the High Court is set aside 
by this Court.  
76. 
 Section 14 of the Limitation Act provides for exclusion of time of 
proceeding bona fide in court without jurisdiction and is reproduced below: - 
“14. Exclusion of time of proceeding bona fide in court without 
jurisdiction.— 
 
(1) In computing the period of limitation for any suit the time 
during which the plaintiff has been prosecuting with due 
diligence another civil proceeding, whether in a court of first 
instance or of appeal or revision, against the defendant shall be 
excluded, where the proceeding relates to the same matter in 
issue and is prosecuted in good faith in a court which, from defect 
of jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature, is unable to 
entertain it.  
 
(2) In computing the period of limitation for any application, the 
time during which the applicant has been prosecuting with due 
diligence another civil proceeding, whether in a court of first 

Page 49 of 79 
 
instance or of appeal or revision, against the same party for the 
same relief shall be excluded, where such proceeding is 
prosecuted in good faith in a court which, from defect of 
jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature, is unable to entertain 
it.  
 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 2 of Order XXIII 
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), the provisions 
of sub-section (1) shall apply in relation to a fresh suit instituted 
on permission granted by the court under rule 1 of that Order, 
where such permission is granted on the ground that the first suit 
must fail by reason of a defect in the jurisdiction of the court or 
other cause of a like nature.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—  
(a) in excluding the time during which a former civil proceeding 
was pending, the day on which that proceeding was instituted and 
the day on which it ended shall both be counted; 
(b) a plaintiff or an applicant resisting an appeal shall be deemed 
to be prosecuting a proceeding;  
(c) misjoinder of parties or of causes of action shall be deemed 
to be a cause of a like nature with defect of jurisdiction.” 
 
77. 
There is a body of decisions of this Court taking the view that by virtue of 
Section 43 of the Act, 1996, the Limitation Act is applicable to applications for 
appointment of arbitrator filed under Section 11(6) of the said Act. It thus follows 
that the benefit under Section 14 of the Limitation Act can be availed by an 
applicant subject to the fulfilment of the conditions specified therein. However, a 
bare perusal of the aforesaid provision indicates that sub-sections (1) and (2) 
respectively of Section 14 are materially different from each other. Thus, it is 
important to ascertain as to which provision would be applicable to an application 
for appointment of arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996.  

Page 50 of 79 
 
78. 
Under Section 14(1), in computing the period of limitation for any suit, the 
time during which the plaintiff has been prosecuting with due diligence another 
civil proceeding, whether in a court of first instance or of appeal or revision, 
against the defendant shall be excluded, where the proceeding relates to the same 
matter in issue and is prosecuted in good faith in a court which, from defect of 
jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature, is unable to entertain it. Thus, the 
following ingredients need to be fulfilled for the applicability of Section 14(1):  
i. 
The subsequent proceeding must be a suit; 
ii. 
Both the earlier and the subsequent proceeding must be civil 
proceedings; 
iii. 
Both the earlier and subsequent proceedings must be between the same 
parties; 
iv. 
The earlier and subsequent proceeding must have the same matter in 
issue; 
v. 
The earlier proceeding must have failed owing to a defect of jurisdiction 
of the earlier court or any other cause of a like nature;  
vi. 
The earlier proceedings must have been prosecuted in good faith and 
with due-diligence; and 
vii. 
Both the earlier and the subsequent proceedings must be before a court.    

Page 51 of 79 
 
79. 
A three-Judge Bench of this Court in Consolidated Engg. Enterprises v. 
Irrigation Deptt. reported in (2008) 7 SCC 169, dealt with the question as to 
whether Section 14 of the Limitation Act would be applicable to an application 
submitted under Section 34 of the Act, 1996 for setting aside the award made by 
the arbitrator. The Court enumerated the conditions for the applicability of 
Section 14(1) as follows: 
“21. Section 14 of the Limitation Act deals with exclusion of time 
of proceeding bona fide in a court without jurisdiction. On 
analysis of the said section, it becomes evident that the following 
conditions must be satisfied before Section 14 can be pressed into 
service: 
(1) Both the prior and subsequent proceedings are civil 
proceedings prosecuted by the same party; 
(2) The prior proceeding had been prosecuted with due diligence 
and in good faith; 
(3) The failure of the prior proceeding was due to defect of 
jurisdiction or other cause of like nature; 
(4) The earlier proceeding and the latter proceeding must relate 
to the same matter in issue and; 
(5) Both the proceedings are in a court.” 
 
80. 
Section 2 of the Limitation Act provides certain definitions. Some of them 
which are pertinent to the present discussion are reproduced hereinbelow:  
“In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-- 
(a) “applicant” includes— 
(i) a petitioner; 
(ii) any person from or through whom an applicant derives his 
right to apply; 
(iii) any person whose estate is represented by the applicant as 
executor, administrator or other representative; 

Page 52 of 79 
 
 
xxx xxx xxx  
 
(b) "application” includes a petition; 
 
xxx xxx xxx 
 
(h) “good faith” - nothing shall be deemed to be done in good 
faith which is not done with due care and attention; 
 
xxx xxx xxx 
 
(j) “period of limitation” means the period of limitation 
prescribed for any suit, appeal or application by the Schedule, 
and "prescribed period" means the period of limitation computed 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 
 
xxx xxx xxx 
 
(l) “suit” does not include an appeal or an application; 
 
81. 
Section 2(l) as reproduced above clearly provides for a distinction between 
a ‘suit’ and an ‘application’ under the Limitation Act. Thus, the clear intention of 
the legislature was that they are not to be considered as the same for the purpose 
of Limitation Act.  
82. 
In Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996, the words ‘the appointment shall be 
made, on an application of the party’ are used, thereby signifying that a Section 
11 petition is in the nature of an ‘application’ and cannot be considered to be a 
‘suit’ for the purposes of the Limitation Act. Even otherwise, ‘application’ under 

Page 53 of 79 
 
the Limitation Act includes a ‘petition’, thereby leaving no room for any doubt 
that a Section 11(6) petition is to be treated as an application.  
83. 
As a petition under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 is not a suit, hence it 
would not be governed by sub-section (1) of Section 14 of the Limitation Act. 
Instead, it would be governed by sub-section (2) of Section 14 of the Limitation 
Act.  Some of the conditions required to be fulfilled for seeking the benefit of 
exclusion under Section 14(2) are materially different from those required under 
Section 14(1) and are as follows: 
i. 
Both the earlier and the subsequent proceeding must be civil 
proceedings; 
ii. 
Both the earlier and subsequent proceedings must be between the same 
parties; 
iii. 
The earlier and subsequent proceeding must be for the same relief; 
iv. 
The earlier proceeding must have failed owing to a defect of jurisdiction 
of the earlier court or any other cause of a like nature;  
v. 
The earlier proceedings must have been prosecuted in good faith and 
with due-diligence; and 
vi. 
Both the earlier and the subsequent proceedings are before a court.    
 

Page 54 of 79 
 
84. 
With every other ingredient remaining the same, the key difference 
between sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 14 respectively is two-fold:  
i. 
First, the benefit of Section 14(1) can be availed of where the 
subsequent proceeding is a suit, whereas the benefit of Section 14(2) 
can be availed of where the subsequent proceeding is an application.  
ii. 
Secondly, Section 14(1) applies if both the earlier and the subsequent 
proceedings have the same matter in issue, whereas Section 14(2) 
applies when both the earlier and the subsequent proceedings are filed 
for seeking the same relief.   
85. 
Clearly, the scope of the expression “same matter in issue” appearing in 
Section 14(1) is much wider than that of the expression “for the same relief” 
appearing in Section 14(2) of the Limitation Act. This is evident on account of 
the difference between the nature of a suit vis-à-vis an application. In a suit, a 
party generally seeks relief in the nature of the cause of action which is 
established on the basis of oral and documentary evidence and arguments. 
Whereas, an application is made under a particular provision of a statute and if it 
appears to the court that such provision of the statute is not applicable, then the 
application as a whole cannot be sustained. Thus, an application is made for a 
specific purpose as provided by the statutory provision under which it is made 
unlike a suit which is instituted based on a cause of action and is for seeking 
remedies falling in a wider conspectus.  

Page 55 of 79 
 
86. 
Sub-section (3) of Section 14 stipulates that where liberty to withdraw any 
suit is granted under sub-rule (3) of Order 23 Rule 1 on the ground of defect of 
jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature, then, the exclusion of limitation period 
as provided by Section 14(1) will be available to the plaintiff to institute any fresh 
suit on the same subject-matter.  
87. 
The respondent has contended that the expression “other cause of a like 
nature” used in Section 14 of the Limitation Act should be given a wide 
interpretation as Section 14 is meant to advance the cause of the justice and not 
thwart it by procedural impediments. In view of liberal interpretation of Section 
14, the respondent submitted that the case at hand is one fit for the grant of relief 
under Section 14 of the Limitation Act.  
88. 
This Court in M.P. Housing Board v. Mohanlal & Co. reported in (2016) 
14 SCC 199 observed thus on the liberal interpretation of Section 14 of the 
Limitation Act:  
“16. From the aforesaid passage, it is clear as noonday that there 
has to be a liberal interpretation to advance the cause of justice. 
However, it has also been laid down that it would be applicable 
in cases of mistaken remedy or selection of a wrong forum. As per 
the conditions enumerated, the earlier proceeding and the latter 
proceeding must relate to the same matter in issue. It is worthy to 
mention here that the words “matter in issue” are used under 
Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. As has been held 
in Ramadhar Shrivas v. Bhagwandas [(2005) 13 SCC 1], the said 
expression connotes the matter which is directly and substantially 
in issue. We have only referred to the said authority to highlight 

Page 56 of 79 
 
that despite liberal interpretation placed under Section 14 of the 
Act, the matter in issue in the earlier proceeding and the latter 
proceeding has to be conferred requisite importance. That apart, 
the prosecution of the prior proceeding should also show due 
diligence and good faith. 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
89. 
Undoubtedly, this Court over a period of time has taken a consistent view 
that the expression “other cause of a like nature” appearing in Section 14 should 
be given a wide interpretation. However, while considering the applicability of 
Section 14 of the Limitation Act, one must not lose sight of the fact that the 
applicability of the provision is contingent upon not just the reason for the failure 
of the earlier proceedings, but is also dependent on several other factors as 
explained in the preceding paragraphs. It is only when all the ingredients required 
for the applicability of Section 14 are fulfilled that the benefit would become 
available. In this context the appellant has submitted that as the proceedings 
undertaken by the respondent before the IBC and the proceedings for the 
appointment of arbitrator before the High Court are not for the “same relief”, 
hence the benefit of Section 14 of the Limitation Act will not be available to the 
respondent. To address this contention of the appellant, it is important to 
understand the purpose of IBC proceedings vis-à-vis proceedings under Section 
11(6) of the Act, 1996.  
 

Page 57 of 79 
 
a. 
Application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 is not for the same 
relief as an application under Section 9 of the IBC 
 
90. 
In the introduction to the Treatise on the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 
2016 by Dr. Dilip K. Sheth, the author has opined that IBC was enacted on the 
basis of recommendations of various committees and suggestions received from 
various stakeholders to address the infirmities of the erstwhile insolvency regime 
and fulfil the following objectives: 
i. 
To balance the interest of stakeholders and creditors by reviewing and 
restructuring insolvent businesses having potential for a turn-around. 
ii. 
To provide robust mechanism for earlier resolution of insolvency in 
time-bound manner.  
91. 
A reading of the Preamble to the IBC reveals the following avowed objects 
behind its enactment: 
i. 
To consolidate and amend the laws relating to reorganisation and 
insolvency resolution of corporate persons, partnership firms and 
individuals in a timebound manner for maximization of value of assets 
of such persons;  
ii. 
To promote entrepreneurship and availability of credit;  
iii. 
To balance the interests of all the stakeholders including alteration in 
the order of priority of payment of Government dues; and 
iv. 
To establish the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India.  

Page 58 of 79 
 
 
92. 
One of the cardinal objectives of the IBC is to protect and preserve the 
life of the corporate debtor “as a going concern” by providing for the 
resolution of its insolvency through restructuring and keeping liquidation only as 
a measure of last resort.  
93. 
One of the essential ingredients of an application filed under Section 9 of 
the IBC is that there is an existence of a default. The term ‘default’ is defined 
under Section 3(12) of the IBC to mean non-payment of debt when whole or any 
part or instalment of the amount of debt has become due and payable and is not 
paid by the debtor.  
94. 
‘Debt’ is defined under Section 3(11) of the IBC to mean a liability or 
obligation in respect of a claim which is due from any person and includes a 
financial debt and operational debt.  
95. 
On the other hand, arbitration is a consent-based private dispute resolution 
method for the expeditious adjudication of disputes. Arbitration is initiated when 
one or both parties are not able to resolve their disputes amicably and seek to have 
the matter resolved by an independent arbitrator.  
96. 
The High Court in the impugned order thought fit to exclude the time-
period spent by the respondent before the NCLT, Kolkata under the IBC since it 
was of the view that the respondent was availing remedy for recovery of dues 
before a wrong forum and was thus squarely covered by Section 14(2) of the 

Page 59 of 79 
 
Limitation Act. The High Court took the view that since the proceedings for 
initiating corporate insolvency resolution process (“CIRP”) under IBC as well as 
the proceeding sought to be initiated by way of arbitration were ultimately for the 
recovery of debts, both proceedings could be said to be for the same relief, and 
thus entitled the respondent for the benefit under Section 14(2) of the Limitation 
Act. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“10. [...] Worth it to note that initially when he approached the 
NCLT, Kolkata, under Section 8 and 9 of the IBC for institution 
of CIRP process against the Respondent, his claim was 
entertained and it is only the Respondents, who approached the 
Appellate Tribunal, the order passed by the NCLT in favour of 
the Applicant came to be reversed. Therefore, it cannot be said 
that the Petitioner was sitting idle and not taking any steps for 
recovery of his dues, but it is a case where he was availing remedy 
for recovery of his dues before a wrong forum and he is entitled 
to take benefit of Section 14 of the Limitation Act, 1963.” 
 
97. 
We are of the view that the High Court fell in error in holding that an 
application under Section 9 of the IBC and an application under Section 11(6) of 
the Act, 1996 are filed for seeking the same relief. While the relief sought in the 
former is the initiation of the CIRP of the corporate debtor, the relief sought in 
the latter is the appointment of an arbitrator for the adjudication of disputes 
arising out of a contract.  
98. 
The object of initiation of insolvency proceedings under the IBC is to seek 
rehabilitation of the corporate debtor by appointment of a new management, 
whereas the objective behind the appointment of an arbitrator is to resolve the 

Page 60 of 79 
 
disputes arising between the parties out of a private contract. As soon as the CIRP 
of a corporate debtor is initiated, it becomes a proceeding in rem. On the contrary, 
arbitration being concerned with private disputes is not an in-rem proceeding.  
99. 
In Swiss Ribbons Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors. reported in 
(2019) 4 SCC 17 this Court, speaking through R.F Nariman J., held that IBC was 
not a mere recovery legislation for the creditors but rather a beneficial legislation 
intended to revive and rehabilitate the corporate debtor. The relevant observations 
read as under: 
“28. It can thus be seen that the primary focus of the legislation 
is to ensure revival and continuation of the corporate debtor by 
protecting the corporate debtor from its own management and 
from a corporate death by liquidation. The Code is thus a 
beneficial legislation which puts the corporate debtor back on its 
feet, not being a mere recovery legislation for creditors. The 
interests of the corporate debtor have, therefore, been bifurcated 
and separated from that of its promoters/those who are in 
management. Thus, the resolution process is not adversarial to 
the corporate debtor but, in fact, protective of its interests. The 
moratorium imposed by Section 14 is in the interest of the 
corporate debtor itself, thereby preserving the assets of the 
corporate debtor during the resolution process. The timelines 
within which the resolution process is to take place again protects 
the corporate debtor's assets from further dilution, and also 
protects all its creditors and workers by seeing that the resolution 
process goes through as fast as possible so that another 
management can, through its entrepreneurial skills, resuscitate 
the corporate debtor to achieve all these ends.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 

Page 61 of 79 
 
100. Similarly, in Pioneer Urban Land & Infrastructure Ltd. & Anr. v. Union 
of India & Ors. reported in (2019) 8 SCC 416, this Court reiterated that IBC is 
not a debt recovery mechanism. It observed that when CIRP is initiated the aspect 
of recovery of debt is completely outside the control of the creditor and there is 
no guarantee of recovery or refund of the entire amount in default. A creditor 
initiates insolvency under the Code not for the relief of recovery of debt but rather 
for rehabilitating the corporate debtor and for a new management to take over. 
The relevant observations read as under: 
“It is also important to remember that the Code is not meant to 
be a debt recovery mechanism (see para 28 of Swiss Ribbons). It 
is a proceeding in rem which, after being triggered, goes 
completely outside the control of the allottee who triggers it. 
Thus, any allottee/home buyer who prefers an application under 
Section 7 of the Code takes the risk of his flat/apartment not being 
completed in the near future, in the event of there being a breach 
on the part of the developer. Under the Code, he may never get a 
refund of the entire principal, let alone interest. […]” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
101. In yet another decision of this Court in Hindustan Construction Company 
Ltd. & Anr. v. Union of India reported in (2020) 17 SCC 324 it was held that 
IBC is not meant to be a recovery mechanism as it is an economic legislation 
meant for the resolution of stressed assets. The relevant observations read as 
under: - 
“79. Dr Singhvi then argued that under Section 5(9) of the 
Insolvency Code, “financial position” is defined, which is only 

Page 62 of 79 
 
taken into account after a resolution professional is appointed, 
and is not taken into account when adjudicating “default” under 
Section 3(12) of the Insolvency Code. This does not in any 
manner lead to the position that such provision is manifestly 
arbitrary. As has been held by our judgment in Pioneer Urban 
Land & Infrastructure Ltd. v. Union of India, IBC is not meant to 
be a recovery mechanism (see para 41 thereof)—the idea of the 
Insolvency Code being a mechanism which is triggered in order 
that resolution of stressed assets then takes place. For this 
purpose, the definitions of “dispute” under Section 5(6), “claim” 
under Section 3(6), “debt” under Section 3(11), and “default” 
under Section 3(12), have all to be read together. Also, IBC, 
belonging to the realm of economic legislation, raises a higher 
threshold of challenge, leaving Parliament a free play in the 
joints, as has been held in Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. v. Union of 
India [...]” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
102. Similarly, in Jaypee Kensington Boulevard Apartments Welfare Assn. v. 
NBCC (India) Ltd., reported in (2022) 1 SCC 401 this Court held that the focus 
of IBC was more on ensuring the revival and continuation of the corporate debtor 
rather than mere recovery of the debt owed by the corporate debtor to its creditors. 
The relevant observations read as under: - 
“88.2. In the judgment delivered on 25-1-2019 in Swiss Ribbons 
(P) Ltd. v. Union of India82 (hereinafter also referred to as the 
case of “Swiss Ribbons”), this Court traversed through the 
historical background and scheme of the Code in the wake of 
challenge to the constitutional validity of various provisions 
therein. One part of such challenge had been founded on the 
ground that the classification between “financial creditor” and 
“operational creditor” was discriminatory and violative of 
Article 14 of the Constitution of India. This ground as also 

Page 63 of 79 
 
several other grounds pertaining to various provisions of the 
Code were rejected by this Court after elaborate dilation on the 
vast variety of rival contentions. In the course, this Court took 
note, inter alia, of the pre-existing state of law as also the objects 
and reasons for enactment of the Code. While observing that 
focus of the Code was to ensure revival and continuation of the 
corporate debtor, where liquidation would be the last resort, this 
Court pointed out that on its scheme and framework, the Code 
was a beneficial legislation to put the corporate debtor on its feet, 
and not a mere recovery legislation for the creditors.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
103. What can be discerned from aforesaid decisions is that insolvency 
proceedings are fundamentally different from proceedings for recovery of debt 
such as a suit for recovery of money, execution of decree or claims for amount 
due under arbitration, etc. The first distinguishing feature that sets apart ordinary 
recovery proceedings from insolvency proceedings is that under the former the 
primary relief is the recovery of dues whereas under the latter the primary concern 
is the revival and rehabilitation of the corporate debtor. No doubt both 
proceedings contemplate an aspect of recovery of debt, however in insolvency 
proceedings, the recovery is only a consequence of the rehabilitation/resolution 
of the corporate debtor and not the main relief. 
104. The second distinguishing feature is that although both proceedings entail 
recovery of debt to a certain extent, however they are different inasmuch as when 
it comes to recovery proceedings it is the individual creditor’s debt which is 
sought to be recovered, whereas in insolvency proceedings it is the entire debt of 

Page 64 of 79 
 
the company which is sought to be resolved. The former is only for the benefit of 
the individual creditor who initiates the recovery proceedings whereas the latter 
is for the benefit of all creditors irrespective of who initiates insolvency. 
105. The last distinguishing feature is that, a recovery proceeding be it a suit or 
arbitration is initiated by a creditor where an amount is due and is unpaid by a 
debtor, in other words the intention behind initiating a recovery proceeding is 
simpliciter for the full recovery of amount which is unpaid to it. However, in an 
insolvency proceeding there is no guarantee of recovery of the entire debt. A 
creditor opts for insolvency where an amount of such threshold is unpaid, that the 
creditor has an apprehension that the debtor in its current state and under the 
existing management in all likelihood will be unable to repay that debt in the 
future i.e., there is no likely prospect of any recovery, and thus it would be 
beneficial to take the risk of initiating insolvency which even though does not 
guarantee full recovery, in order for a new management to take over the corporate 
debtor and to recover at least some amount of debt before it is too late. Thus, the 
underlying intention behind initiating insolvency is not with the intention of 
recovering the amount owed to it, but rather with the intention that the corporate 
debtor is resolved / rehabilitated through a new management as soon as possible 
before it becomes unviable with no prospect of any meaningful recovery of its 
dues in the near future. 

Page 65 of 79 
 
106. Thus, by no stretch of imagination can insolvency proceedings be 
construed as being for the same relief as any ordinary recovery proceedings, and 
therefore no case is made out for exclusion of time under Section 14(2) of the 
Limitation Act, 1963.  
107. As the relief sought in an application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 
is not the same as the relief sought in an application under Section 9 of the IBC, 
the benefit of Section 14(2) cannot be given to the respondent in the present case.  
108. In Yeshwant Deorao Deshmukh v. Walchand Ramchand Kothari reported 
in (1950) 1 SCR 852 this Court held that the relief sought under insolvency is 
completely different from the relief sought under an execution application for a 
decree for recovery of money. In the former, the estate of the insolvent is 
apportioned or realised for the benefit of all creditors whereas in the latter the 
money due is sought to be realised only for the benefit of the decree-holder alone. 
Although both proceedings envisage an aspect of recovery of debt, yet in 
insolvency, the recovery is a mere consequence and not the ultimate relief. Thus, 
insolvency proceedings are not one for recovery of debt and cannot be equated 
with execution proceedings as both proceedings are different in nature and for 
different reliefs and as such no benefit can be given under Section 14(2) of the 
Limitation Act which stipulates the requirement of “same relief”. The relevant 
observations read as under: - 

Page 66 of 79 
 
“5. [...] There could be no exclusion for the time occupied by the 
insolvency proceedings which clearly was not for the purpose of 
obtaining the same relief. The relief sought in insolvency is 
obviously different from the relief sought in the execution of 
application. In the former, an adjudication of the debtors as 
insolvency is sought as preliminary to the vesting of all his estate 
and the administration of it by the Official Receive or the Official 
Assignee, as the case may be, for the benefit of all the creditors; 
but in the latter the money due is sought to be realised for the 
benefit of the decree-holder alone, by processes like attachment 
of property and arrest of person. It may that ultimately in the 
insolvency proceedings the decree-holder may be able to realise 
his debt wholly or in part, but this is a mere consequence or 
result. Not only is the relief of a different nature in the two 
proceedings but the procedure is also widely divergent.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
109. This Court in Commissioner, Madhya Pradesh Housing Board & Ors. v. 
Mohanlal and Company reported in (2016) 14 SCC 199 considered whether 
benefit of Section 14 of the Limitation Act would be available when a party 
instead of challenging an arbitral award under Section 34, filed a Section 11 
application for appointment of arbitrator. This Court while setting aside the 
appointment, observed that the proceedings for appointment of an arbitrator are 
entirely different from the proceedings for challenging an award. Therefore, even 
after adopting a liberal interpretation, it would not be appropriate to grant benefit 
of exclusion of time-period under Section 14. 
110. Even otherwise, the respondent couldn’t be said to have had been 
prosecuting the IBC proceedings in good faith and in a bonafide manner. It was 
observed by this Court in Consolidated Engg. Enterprises (supra) and M.P. 

Page 67 of 79 
 
Housing Board (supra) that an element of mistake is inherent in the relief 
envisaged under Section 14 of the Limitation Act. However, in the present case, 
the respondent had initially approached the High Court with an application under 
Section 11(6). However, for reasons best known to it, the respondent abandoned 
the said proceedings for appointment of arbitrator and approached the NCLT, 
Kolkata with an application under Section 9 of the IBC. The respondent was fully 
aware of the objection of a pre-existing dispute raised by the appellant in response 
to its second statutory demand notice issued under Section 8 of the IBC. Despite 
having preferred an application under 11(6) of the Act, 1996 before the 
jurisdictional court, and also being fully aware of the infirmities in the Section 9 
application filed under the IBC, the respondent took a conscious decision to 
abandon the right course of proceedings. The conduct of the respondent cannot 
be termed to be a mistake in any manner. Having taken a conscious decision to 
opt for specific remedy under the IBC which is not for the same relief as an 
application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996, the respondent cannot be now 
allowed to take the plea of ignorance or mistake and must bear the consequences 
of its decisions.  
iii. 
Issue No. 3  
 
111. It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that in the event the benefit 
under Section 14(2) of the Limitation Act is not extended to it, then in such 
circumstance, this Court may consider to condone the delay in filing the second 

Page 68 of 79 
 
arbitration petition by exercising its discretion under Section 5 of the Limitation 
Act. In response to the said submission, the appellant contended that the benefit 
of condonation of delay under Section 5 of the Limitation Act cannot be extended 
to a petition for the appointment of an arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act, 
1996. The appellant also submitted that assuming without conceding that delay 
can be condoned in exercise of powers under Section 5 of the Limitation Act, the 
facts do not warrant exercise of discretionary powers as no application for the 
condonation of delay has been filed by the respondent. It was further contended 
that the nature of relief sought for under Section 5 of the Limitation Act being 
discretionary in nature, the conduct of the respondent disentitles him to grant of 
such relief.   
 
112. The following three questions fall for our consideration on the basis of the 
aforesaid submissions –  
i. 
Whether the benefit of condonation of delay under Section 5 of the 
Limitation Act is available in respect of an application for appointment 
of arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996?  
ii. 
Whether it is permissible for the courts to condone delay under Section 
5 of the Limitation Act in the absence of any application seeking such 
condonation? 

Page 69 of 79 
 
iii. 
Whether the facts of the present case warrant the exercise of discretion 
in favour of the respondent to condone the delay in filing the second 
arbitration application?  
 
113. Section 5 of the Limitation Act provides that any appeal or application 
other than an application under the provisions of Order 21 of the CPC may be 
admitted after the prescribed period of limitation if the appellant or the applicant 
satisfies the court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or 
making the application within the prescribed period. The provision is extracted 
hereinbelow: 
“5. Extension of prescribed period in certain cases.—Any appeal or any 
application, other than an application under any of the provisions of Order 
XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), may be admitted 
after the prescribed period if the appellant or the applicant satisfies the 
court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or making 
the application within such period.  
 
Explanation.—The fact that the appellant or the applicant was misled by 
any order, practice or judgment of the High Court in ascertaining or 
computing the prescribed period may be sufficient cause within the 
meaning of this section.” 
 
114. The use of the expression “may be admitted” in the aforesaid provision 
indicates that the nature of relief that can be granted under Section 5 is 
discretionary and not mandatory in nature. The applicant or the appellant, even 
upon showing sufficient cause, cannot assert as a matter of right that the delay be 
condoned. Thus, unlike Section 14 of the Limitation Act, where the applicant can 

Page 70 of 79 
 
seek the exclusion of time period as a matter of right upon fulfilment of the 
mandatory conditions, Section 5 of the Limitation Act leaves the ultimate 
decision of extending the benefit of condonation of delay to the court before 
which the application for such condonation is made.  
 
115. In a recent pronouncement in Pathapati Subba Reddy (Died) by LRs and 
Others v. The Special Deputy Collector (LA) reported in (2024) 4 SCR 241 this 
Court observed thus:  
“12. In view of the above provision, the appeal which is preferred after the 
expiry of the limitation is liable to be dismissed. The use of the word ‘shall’ 
in the aforesaid provision connotes that the dismissal is mandatory subject 
to the exceptions. Section 3 of the Act is peremptory and had to be given 
effect to even though no objection regarding limitation is taken by the other 
side or referred to in the pleadings. In other words, it casts an obligation 
upon the court to dismiss an appeal which is presented beyond limitation. 
This is the general law of limitation. The exceptions are carved out under 
Sections 4 to 24 (inclusive) of the Limitation Act but we are concerned only 
with the exception contained in Section 5 which empowers the courts to 
admit an appeal even if it is preferred after the prescribed period provided 
the proposed appellant gives ‘sufficient cause’ for not preferring the appeal 
within the period prescribed. In other words, the courts are conferred with 
discretionary powers to admit an appeal even after the expiry of the 
prescribed period provided the proposed appellant is able to establish 
‘sufficient cause’ for not filing it within time. The said power to condone 
the delay or to admit the appeal preferred after the expiry of time is 
discretionary in nature and may not be exercised even if sufficient cause is 
shown based upon host of other factors such as negligence, failure to 
exercise due diligence etc.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
116. This Court in Ramlal v. Rewa Coalfields Ltd., 1961 SCC OnLine SC 39 
observed as follows:  

Page 71 of 79 
 
“12. It is, however, necessary to emphasise that even after sufficient cause 
has been shown a party is not entitled to the condonation of delay in 
question as a matter of right. The proof of a sufficient cause is a condition 
precedent for the exercise of the discretionary jurisdiction vested in the 
court by Section 5. If sufficient cause is not proved nothing further has to 
be done; the application for condoning delay has to be dismissed on that 
ground alone. If sufficient cause is shown then the court has to enquire 
whether in its discretion it should condone the delay. This aspect of the 
matter naturally introduces the consideration of all relevant facts and it is 
at this stage that diligence of the party or its bona fides may fall for 
consideration; but the scope of the enquiry while exercising the 
discretionary power after sufficient cause is shown would naturally be 
limited only to such facts as the court may regard as relevant. It cannot 
justify an enquiry as to why the party was sitting idle during all the time 
available to it. In this connection we may point out that considerations of 
bona fides or due diligence are always material and relevant when the 
court is dealing with applications made under Section 14 of the Limitation 
Act. In dealing with such applications the court is called upon to consider 
the effect of the combined provisions of Sections 5 and 14. Therefore, in 
our opinion, considerations which have been expressly made material and 
relevant by the provisions of Section 14 cannot to the same extent and in 
the same manner be invoked in dealing with applications which fall to be 
decided only under Section 5 without reference to Section 14.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
 
117. As discussed in the foregoing parts of this judgment, the period of 
limitation to file an application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 is governed 
as provided in Article 137 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act, that is, three 
years. We have observed that the benefit available under Section 14 of the 
Limitation Act will also be available in respect of applications made under 
Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996.  Thus, in the absence of any specific statutory 
exclusion, there is no good reason to hold that the benefit under Section 5 of the 
Limitation Act cannot be availed for the purpose of condonation of delay caused 
in filing a Section 11(6) application. 

Page 72 of 79 
 
 
118. In Deepdharshan Builders Pvt. Ltd. v. Saroj, Widow of Satish Sunderrao 
Trasikar reported in 2018 SCC OnLine Bom 4885, the Bombay High Court held 
that Section 5 of the Limitation Act would apply to an application filed under 
Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996. The relevant observations from the said decision 
are extracted hereinbelow:  
 
“42. In my view, since the proceedings under Section 11(6) of the 
Arbitration Act are required to be filed before the High Court, Article 137 
of the Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963 would apply to such application 
filed under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration Act. In my view, since Article 
137 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963 would apply to the 
arbitration application under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration Act, Section 
5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 would also apply to the arbitration 
application filed under Section 11(6) of Arbitration Act.” 
 
 
119. Similarly, the Delhi High Court in Yogesh Kumar Gupta v. Anuradha 
Rangarajan reported in 2007 SCC OnLine Del 287 had observed that in view 
of Section 43 of the Act, 1996, Section 5 of the Limitation Act would be 
applicable to applications filed under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996. Relevant 
observations from the said decision are extracted hereinbelow:  
“30. There is yet another alternative route which leads to some conclusion. 
Section 21 of the Act states that unless otherwise agreed by the parties 
(there is no agreement of the parties on this aspect), the arbitral 
proceedings in respect of a particular dispute commence on the date on 
which a request for that dispute to be referred to arbitration is received by 
the respondent. Consequently, when the petitioner issued the notice dated 
10.4.2002 raising the dispute regarding rendition of accounts of the 
partnership business, the arbitral proceedings commenced as soon as the 
communication dated 10.4.2002 was received by the respondent. It is not 
the respondent's case that he did not receive the communication dated 

Page 73 of 79 
 
10.4.2002 sent by the petitioner and since it was sent by registered post (as 
appears from the postal receipt filed on record along with the said 
communication), it can be safely presumed that the communication was 
received by the respondent within a matter of few days. Consequently, the 
arbitral proceedings stood commenced sometime in middle of April, 2002. 
The application under Section 11(5) of the Act is an application or a 
petition in relation to arbitral proceedings which have commenced with the 
issuance of a request for the reference of disputes to arbitration (Section 
2(b) of the Limitation Act). Since Limitation Act, 1963 specifically applies 
to arbitrations, Section 5 of the Limitation Act would also apply to an 
application/petition under Section 11 (5) of the Limitation Act. Any 
application (other than under the provisions of Order 21 of CPC) may be 
admitted after the prescribed period, if the applicant satisfies the Court 
that he had sufficient cause for not preferring or making the application 
within such period. In my view, therefore, Section 5 of the Limitation Act 
would apply to, and be available to the petitioner filing an 
application/petition under Section 11 (5) of the Act.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
120.  The necessary pre-condition for availing the remedy under Section 5 of 
the Limitation Act is that the applicant must satisfy the court that there was a 
sufficient cause which prevented him from instituting the application within the 
prescribed time period. Although it is a general practice that a formal application 
under Section 5 of the Limitation Act has to be filed by the applicant, yet no such 
requirement can be gathered from a bare reading of the statute. Thus, even in the 
absence of a formal application, a court or tribunal may consider exercising its 
discretion under Section 5 of the Limitation Act subject to the applicant assigning 
sufficient cause for condoning the delay.  A similar view was taken by this Court 
in Sesh Nath Singh v. Baidyabati Sheoraphuli Coop. Bank Ltd. reported in 
(2021) 7 SCC 313 wherein it was observed thus:  

Page 74 of 79 
 
“63. Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 does not speak of any 
application. The Section enables the Court to admit an application or 
appeal if the applicant or the appellant, as the case may be, satisfies the 
Court that he had sufficient cause for not making the application and/or 
preferring the appeal, within the time prescribed. Although, it is the 
general practice to make a formal application under Section 5 of the 
Limitation Act, 1963, in order to enable the Court or Tribunal to weigh the 
sufficiency of the cause for the inability of the appellant/applicant to 
approach the Court/Tribunal within the time prescribed by limitation, there 
is no bar to exercise by the Court/Tribunal of its discretion to condone 
delay, in the absence of a formal application.  
 
64. A plain reading of Section 5 of the Limitation Act makes it amply clear 
that, it is not mandatory to file an application in writing before relief can 
be granted under the said section. Had such an application been 
mandatory, Section 5 of the Limitation Act would have expressly provided 
so. Section 5 would then have read that the Court might condone delay 
beyond the time prescribed by limitation for filing an application or appeal, 
if on consideration of the application of the appellant or the applicant, as 
the case may be, for condonation of delay, the Court is satisfied that the 
appellant/applicant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or 
making the application within such period.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
121.  The position of law that emerges from the aforesaid discussion is that the 
benefit under Section 5 of the Limitation Act is available in respect of the 
applications filed for appointment of arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act, 
1996. Further, the requirement of filing an application under Section 5 of the 
Limitation Act is not a mandatory prerequisite for a court to exercise its discretion 
under the said provision and condone the delay in institution of an application or 
appeal. Thus, the only question that remains to be considered is whether in the 
facts of the present case, the respondent could be said to have made out a case for 
condonation of delay in instituting the fresh Section 11(6) application.  

Page 75 of 79 
 
 
122.  As discussed, the respondent took a conscious decision to abandon its first 
Section 11(6) application with a view to pursue proceedings under Section 9 of 
the IBC. The respondent made such choice despite a specific objection raised by 
the appellant in its reply to the statutory demand notice that there were pre-
existing disputes between the parties. In view of this, maximisation of the chances 
of getting the application under Section 9 of the IBC admitted by the NCLT seems 
to have been the only reason for the abandonment of the first Section 11(6) 
application by the respondent. In light of such conduct on the part of the 
respondent, we are of the view that the present case does not warrant the exercise 
of our discretion under Section 5 of the Limitation Act. 
 
123. The primary intent behind Section 5 of the Limitation Act is not to permit 
litigants to exploit procedural loopholes and continue with the legal proceedings 
in multiple forums. Rather, it aims to provide a safeguard for genuinely deserving 
applicants who might have missed a deadline due to unavoidable circumstances. 
This provision reflects the intent of the legislature to balance the principles of 
justice and fairness, ensuring that procedural delays do not hinder the pursuit of 
substantive justice. Section 5 of the Limitation Act embodies the principle that 
genuine delay should not be a bar access to justice, thus allowing flexibility in the 
interest of equity, while simultaneously deterring abuse of this leniency to 
prolong litigation unnecessarily. 

Page 76 of 79 
 
 
124. The legislative intent of expeditious dispute resolution under the Act, 1996 
must also be kept in mind by the courts while considering an application for 
condonation of delay in the filing of an application for appointment of arbitrator 
under Section 11(6). Thus, the court should exercise its discretion under Section 
5 of the Limitation Act only in exceptional cases where a very strong case is made 
by the applicant for the condonation of delay in filing a Section 11(6) application.      
 
125. Before we part with the matter, we would like to address the submission of 
the respondent that this Court, while dismissing its appeal against the order of the 
NCLAT, had granted it liberty to avail such remedies, including arbitration, as 
may be available to it in law, to realise its dues from the appellant. The relevant 
paragraph is reproduced hereinbelow: 
“35. Needless to mention that the appellant may avail such other 
remedies as may be available in accordance with law including 
arbitration to realise its dues, if any.” 
 
126. The liberty granted by this Court to the respondent has been prefixed by 
the words “Needless to mention…”. Hence, it is amply clear that the observations 
were merely clarificatory and not intended to confer upon the respondent a special 
right or privilege to file a proceeding which is not otherwise permissible under 
law. The intention cannot be said to have been to help the respondent come out 
of its action of unconditionally withdrawing the first Arbitration Petition or to 
deprive the appellant of defences available to it under law. Such intention cannot 

Page 77 of 79 
 
be attributed to this Court, particularly in the absence of any discussion on this 
point. 
127. Further, the said paragraph only gives liberty to the respondent to avail 
such other remedies “as may be available” “in accordance with law”. Hence, it 
cannot be construed as giving the respondent the liberty to file a proceeding that 
is not available or that is not in accordance with law. 
128. The reliance placed by the petitioner upon the paragraph 35 referred to 
above is nothing but a completely incorrect reading of the said paragraph. In 
BSNL v. Telephone Cables Limited reported in 2010 5 SCC 213, this Court 
observed thus:  
“41. Instances abound where observations of the court reserving 
liberty to a litigant to further litigate have been misused by 
litigants to pursue remedies which were wholly barred by time or 
to revive stale claims or create rights or remedies where there 
were none. It is needless to say that courts should take care to 
ensure that reservation of liberty is made only where it is 
necessary, such reservation should always be subject to a remedy 
being available in law, and subject to remedy being sought in 
accordance with law.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
129. The liberty to avail remedies available in law does not confer a right to 
avail such remedies. Seen from the perspective of Hohfeld's analysis of jural 
relations, liberties (or privileges) do not entail corresponding duties on others. 
Thus, having the freedom to seek a remedy does not imply an enforceable claim 

Page 78 of 79 
 
to it. This distinction underscores the fine difference between what one is free to 
do and what one is entitled to demand. 
130. Hence, we are of the view that paragraph 35 as extracted above does not 
help the respondent as the fresh Section 11 petition could be said to be hit by the 
principles analogous to Order 23 Rule 1 and is also barred by limitation for being 
beyond the prescribed period of 3 years. 
F.  CONCLUSION  
 
131. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we have reached to the following 
conclusion: 
(i) 
In the absence of any liberty being granted at the time of withdrawal 
of the first application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996, the fresh 
application filed by the respondent under the same provision was not 
maintainable; 
(ii) 
The fresh application filed by the respondent under Section 11(6) of 
the Act, 1996 was time-barred;  
(iii) 
The respondent is not entitled to the benefit of Section 14(2) of the 
Limitation Act; and 
(iv) 
The respondent is also not entitled to the benefit of condonation of 
delay under Section 5 of the Limitation Act.  

Page 79 of 79 
 
132. As a result, the appeal filed by the appellant is allowed and the impugned 
order passed by the High Court of Bombay is hereby set aside. 
133. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.  
134. The parties shall bear their own costs.  
 
…...……..….………….……………CJI.       
(Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud)  
 
    
 
…….…..….…….…..…………………J.          
(J.B. Pardiwala)     
 
New Delhi; 
 
7th November, 2024.