2024 INSC 846
 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 1 of 40 
 
Reportable 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 3403 of 2023 
(@ SLP (Crl.) No. 12912 of 2022) 
 
 
Ramji Lal Bairwa & Anr.                     …Appellant(s) 
 
Versus 
 
State of Rajasthan & Ors.    
         …Respondent(s) 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. 
 
1. 
The renowned American poet H. W. Longfellow 
penned to the effect that a torn jacket might soon be 
mended, but a bruised heart of a child would be beyond 
reviviscence.  Certainly, it contains the gospel truth as 
relates a child subjected to sexual assault, be it 
aggravated or penetrative; or any kind of sexual abuse 
or exploitation.  It is more so, in the case of a female child 
as it may hound her and hack her family life. 
 
On pedagogy Marcus Tullins Cicero (106-43 BC) in 
‘De Officiis’ (on duties) said: “What nobler employment, 
Digitally signed by
VARSHA MENDIRATTA
Date: 2024.11.07
15:47:52 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 2 of 40 
 
or more valuable to the State, than that of the man who 
instructs the rising generation?” 
2. 
May be a jinx on pedagogy unfortunate, 
unconscionable and unpardonable things happen, 
though not often-times.   The following factual narration 
will unravel the raison d'etre for the above prelude: -  
FIR No.6/2022 dated 08.01.2022 was registered at 
Sardar Gangapur City Police Station, District Sawai 
Madhopur, Rajasthan at the instance of the 4th 
respondent, the father of the victim involved in the case, 
against the 3rd respondent herein under Sections 354A, 
342, 509 and 504 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for 
short, ‘the IPC’) and Sections 7 and 8 of the Protection of 
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (for short, ‘the 
POCSO Act’) and Sections 3(1)(r), 3(1)(s), 3( 1)(b) & 3(2) 
(vii) of the Schedule Cast and Schedule Tribe 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (for short, ‘the SC/ST 
Act’). The allegations thereunder are to the effect that on 
06.01.2022 when the victim child, then a student of Class 
XI in Higher Secondary School was alone in the 
classroom, the 3rd respondent, who is a teacher, came 
there.  After gazing through the window to ensure that 
nobody is there near to the classroom, he reached 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 3 of 40 
 
behind her and started patting her cheeks and soon put 
his hand inside bodice and rubbed her breast.   In 
anguish and anger, she got up and ran away.  The 
accused followed to stop her and hurled abuses with 
ugly words like ‘dedh Chamar’ etc.   Thereupon, she sat 
down near the gate and beseeched the teachers for help, 
but it was of no avail.  They persuaded her to be tight-
lipped about the incident.  Though, the Principal came to 
know about it, he only took her signature on a blank 
paper.  Meanwhile, one teacher came to the residence of 
the 4th respondent and took his wife to the school telling 
that her daughter was not feeling well. On reaching there 
his wife found the daughter in a deadly terrified and 
numbed state and she could say nothing to the mother.  
But, on reaching home, she divulged the incident, to the 
mother viz., the wife of the 4th respondent and she, in 
turn, informed him on his mobile phone as he was away 
in another village for employment purpose.  On the next 
day, the 4th respondent came back home and the victim 
narrated the whole incident to him and then, he lodged 
the aforesaid FIR.  
 
3. 
Obviously, the subject FIR was filed on 08.01.2022.  
The third respondent herein compromised the matter 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 4 of 40 
 
with the fourth respondent, who is the father of the victim, 
on 31.01.2022 and thereupon, moved S.B (Crl.) Misc. 
Petition No.1348/2022 before the High Court of Rajasthan 
at Jaipur under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (for short the ‘Cr.P.C.’), seeking 
quashment of the said FIR and all further proceedings 
thereon.  As per the impugned order dated 04.02.2022 
the High Court, despite the opposition by the learned 
public prosecutor, allowed the said petition and quashed 
the subject FIR and all further proceedings in pursuance 
thereof.  The impugned order would reveal that based 
on the fact that the 3rd respondent has settled the dispute 
amicably with the 4th respondent and relying on the 
decision of this Court in Gian Singh v. State of Punjab1, 
the High Court quashed the FIR and all further 
proceedings therefrom.  The High Court held thus:- 
“…The offence alleged in this matter is non 
compoundable, however Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
the case of Gian Singh Vs. State of Punjab [(2012) 
10 SCC 303] has propounded that if it is convinced 
that offences are entirely personal in nature and do 
not affect the public peace or tranquillity and where 
it feels that quashing of such proceedings on 
account of compromise would bring about peace 
and would secure ends of justice, the High Court 
 
1 (2012) 10 SCC 303 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 5 of 40 
 
should not hesitate to quash the same by exercising 
the inherent powers vested in it. It is observed that 
in such cases, the prosecution becomes the lame 
prosecution and pursuing such a lame prosecution 
would be a waste of time and energy. That will also 
unsettle the compromise and obstruct restoration of 
peace. This court is aptly guided by the principles 
propounded by Hon'ble the Supreme Court and 
feels that whether dispute is essentially inter se 
between the parties, either they are relatives, 
neighbours or having business relationship and 
which does not affect the society at large, then in 
such cases, with a view to maintain harmonious 
relationships between the two sides & for restitution 
of relationship. and with a view to end-up the 
dispute in between them permanently, the High 
Court should exercise its inherent power to quash 
the FIR and all other subsequent proceedings 
initiated thereto.” 
 
4. 
The appellants state that they are ordinary men 
residing in the very same Tehsil and District to which the 
4th respondent belongs.  They moved this Court 
challenging the order quashing the subject FIR and all 
further proceedings therefrom under Article 32 of the 
Constitution of India contending that the FIR registered 
against the 3rd respondent carried serious allegation of 
commission of acts involving offence(s) under various 
sections of the IPC, and POCSO Act; that they are not 
purely private in nature; that they are offences against 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 6 of 40 
 
the society, that the quashment of the subject FIR was 
solely based on compromise between the third 
respondent accused and the fourth respondent, the 
father of the minor victim and that the first respondent 
State did not choose to challenge the said order dated 
04.02.2022 though it was so quashed ignoring the 
opposition of the public prosecutor.  They would further 
contend that the offences alleged against the 3rd 
respondent were serious offences having impact on the 
society and letting off the third respondent untried might 
result in recurrence of such instances besides it being 
injustice to the victim and society as a whole.  On 
30.09.2022, this Court issued notice and taking note of 
the involvement of important issues in the matter, 
requested Mr. R. Basant, learned Sr. advocate to assist 
the Court as amicus curiae, which request was graciously 
accepted by the learned counsel.  On 13.10.2022, Mr. 
Aviral Saxena, learned advocate, agreed to assist the 
learned Senior Counsel.  On 02.12.2022, upon hearing 
the learned counsel appearing for the parties and the 
learned amicus curiae and taking note of difficulty to 
continue the writ petition filed under Article 32 of the 
Constitution of India this Court converted the writ 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 7 of 40 
 
petition into Special Leave Petition under Article 136 of 
the Constitution of India and further ordered thus:- 
“Let the parties address the Court on merits on the 
next date of hearing.  List on 20.01.2023” 
 
5. 
The learned counsel appearing respectively for 
the third and fourth respondents vehemently challenged 
the locus standi of the appellants to challenge the order 
dated 04.02.2022 passed thereon as they were not 
parties to the abovementioned Crl. Misc. Petition.  
Besides challenging the locus standi of the appellants 
they would contend that the quashment of the subject FIR 
and all further proceedings therefrom is legally 
permissible in view of the law laid down by this Court in 
Gian Singh’s case (supra) and the reason for such 
interference 
and 
consequential 
quashment 
are 
specifically 
mentioned 
in 
the 
impugned 
order.  
According to the said respondents the appellants 
besides being total strangers to the Misc. Petition and 
are not at all affected by the impugned order.  
Meanwhile Delhi Commission for Protection of Child 
Rights (DCPCR) have filed an intervention application 
seeking permission to assist the Court for proper 
adjudication of the issues raised in the Special Leave 
Petition.  Considering the nature of the issues involved 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 8 of 40 
 
and the fact that intervention is sought for by the 
Commission for Protection for Child Rights we have 
heard learned counsel for the intervenor, besides the 
learned amicus curae Sri R. Basant, with the able 
assistance of Mr. Avival Saxena and the learned counsel 
for the parties.  
 
6. 
Considering the conspectus of facts and taking 
note of the rival contentions, the following twin questions 
of relevance arise for consideration in this appeal: - 
(I.) 
Whether a third party to a criminal 
proceeding got locus standi to challenge the 
order quashing the FIR concerned and all 
further proceedings pursuant thereto based 
on a compromise arrived at by the parties, in 
a Special Leave Petition under Article 136 of 
the Constitution of India? 
(II.) Whether the power to quash criminal 
proceedings or complaint or FIR in regard to 
heinous and serious offences having serious 
impact on society, is exercisable merely 
because the offender and victim or parent(s) 
of the victim arrived at a compromise, relying 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 9 of 40 
 
on the dictum laid down by this Court in Gian 
Singh’s case (supra)? 
 
7. 
Needless to say, that answers to the above 
questions would decide the fate of this appeal.  For 
answering the first question, various factors have to be 
looked into.  Necessarily the questions as to whether the 
offender is accused of commission of offence(s) 
involving moral turpitude or against the society or 
whether they are purely of private nature have to be 
taken note of.  As some of the offence(s) alleged fall 
under special statute relating children, the very object 
and purpose of the said enactment may also require 
consideration in the above regard.  The learned amicus 
curiae relied on various decisions of this Court to drive 
home the point that when criminal proceedings are 
abruptly terminated based on compromise between the 
offender and the victim or on behalf of the victim by the 
parent(s), despite the alleged offence being one having 
impact on the society and of heinous and serious in 
nature and still, the State did not take up the matter 
further in accordance with law, ignoring the fact that such 
quashment of the proceedings was done disregarding 
the opposition of the public prosecutor, a public spirited 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 10 of 40 
 
person should be having the locus standi to challenge 
such an order in the interest of justice.   It is furthermore 
submitted that in such circumstances if a public-spirited 
person is non-suited on the ground of locus standi it 
would only help the offender to escape even without 
facing the trial.  Such situations may result in recurrence 
of commission of such offences detrimental to the 
interests of the society.  To buttress the point that a 
spirited citizen has the locus standi to petition under 
Article 136 of the Constitution of India to ensure that 
justice is done, the learned amicus curiae relied on the 
decisions of this Court in P.S.R. Sadhanantham 
v. Arunachalam2,  Sheonandan Paswan v. State of 
Bihar and Ors.3, Amanullah and Anr. v. State of Bihar4 
and  V.S Achuthanandan v. R. Balakrishna Pillai5.  The 
learned counsel for the intervenor also endorsed the 
said submissions and contentions made by the learned 
amicus curiae on the question of locus standi. 
 
8. 
Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the 
third respondent, who is the accused on whose instance 
 
2 (1980) 3 SCC 141 
3 (1987) 1 SCC 288 
4 (2016) 6 SCC 699 
5 (2011) 3 SCC 317   

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 11 of 40 
 
the subject FIR was quashed, contended that it is 
impermissible for a third party/strangers to interfere in 
criminal proceedings.   In support of the said contention, 
he relied on various decisions such as Rajiv Ranjan 
Singh ‘Lalan’ v. Union of India6, Simranjit Singh Mann 
v. Union of India7 and Bar Council of Maharashtra v. 
M.V. Dabholkar8. 
 
9. 
It is disheartening to note that with tooth and nail, 
the learned counsel appearing for the fourth respondent, 
the father of the victim, challenged the appellants’ locus 
standi to maintain the Special Leave Petition against the 
impugned order whereunder the FIR registered against 
the third respondent, the accused was quashed based on 
the 
compromise 
between 
third 
and 
the 
fourth 
respondents.  It is contended that since none of the 
fundamental rights under part III of the appellants are 
infringed, they could not maintain a petition under 
Article 32 of the Constitution of India and merely 
because the petition filed by them under Article 32 was 
converted to one under Article 136, of the Constitution of 
India, the appellants would not acquire locus standi to 
 
6 (2006) 6 SCC 613 
7 (1992) 4 SCC 653 
8 (1975) 2 SCC 702 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 12 of 40 
 
challenge the order dated 04.02.2022 passed by the 
High Court in exercise of its power under Section 482, 
Cr. P.C.  The learned counsel relied on the decision of 
this Court in S.P. Gupta v. Union of India9 in support his 
contentions.   
 
10. 
Before dealing with the contentions on behalf of the 
respondents and also the submissions of the learned 
amicus curiae and the counsel for the intervenor, we 
think it only appropriate to refer to certain relevant 
aspects of the POCSO Act.   As introduction to the POCSO 
Act, what actually actuated the Parliament to enact 
‘POCSO Act’ has been stated thus:- 
“Sexual 
offences 
against 
children 
are 
not 
adequately addressed by the existing laws.  A large 
number of such offences are neither specifically 
provided with nor are they adequately penalised.  
Such offences against children need to be defined 
explicitly 
and 
countered 
through 
adequate 
penalties as an effective deterrence.  This Act 
provides for protection of children from offences of 
sexual assault, sexual harassment and pornography 
with due regard for safeguarding the interest and 
well-being of children.” 
  
 
9 1981 Supp. SCC 87 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 13 of 40 
 
11. 
Contextually, it is worthy to refer to the statement 
of objects and reasons for the enactment of the POCSO 
Act.   It reads as follows: - 
 
“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 15 of the Constitution, inter alia, confers 
upon the State powers to make special provision for 
children. Further, article 39, inter alia, provides that 
the State shall in particular direct its policy towards 
securing that the tender age of children are not 
abused and their childhood and youth are protected 
against exploitation and they are given facilities to 
develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of 
freedom and dignity. 
 
2. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
Children, ratified by India on 11th December, 1992, 
requires the State Parties to undertake all 
appropriate national, bilateral and multilateral 
measures to prevent (a) the inducement or coercion 
of a child to engage in any unlawful sexual activity; 
(b) the exploitative use of children in prostitution or 
other unlawful sexual practices; and (c) the 
exploitative use of children in pornographic 
performances and materials. 
 
3. The data collected by the National Crime Records 
Bureau shows that there has been increase in cases 
of sexual offences against children. This is 
corroborated by the 'Study on Child Abuse: India 
2007' conducted by the Ministry of Women and 
Child Development. Moreover, sexual offences 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 14 of 40 
 
against children are not adequately addressed by 
the existing laws. A large number of such offences 
are neither specifically provided for nor are they 
adequately penalised. The interests of the child, 
both as a victim as well as a witness, need to be 
protected. It is felt that offences against children 
need to be defined explicitly and countered through 
commensurate penalties as an effective deterrence. 
 
4. It is, therefore, proposed to enact a self contained 
comprehensive legislation inter alia to provide for 
protection of children from the offences of sexual 
assault, sexual harassment and pornography with 
due regard for safeguarding the interest and well 
being of the child at every stage of the judicial 
process, incorporating child-friendly procedures 
for reporting, recording of evidence, investigation 
and trial of offences and provision for establishment 
of Special Courts for speedy trial of such offences. 
 
5. The Bill would contribute to enforcement of the 
right of all children to safety, security and protection 
from sexual abuse and exploitation. 
 
6. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various 
provisions contained in the Bill. 
 
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.” 
 
12. 
The objects and reasons for the enactment of the 
POCSO Act, as extracted above, would undoubtedly 
show that quashment of proceeding initiated under 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 15 of 40 
 
POCSO Act abruptly by invoking the power under 
Section 482, Cr. PC without permitting it to mature into a 
trial, except on extremely compelling reasons ex facie 
malafidely initiated or initiated solely to settle the score 
etc., would go against the very intention of the 
legislature behind the enactment.  As noted earlier, it is 
the inadequacy of the existing laws to address certain 
issues relating sexual offences against the children that 
made the legislature to come up with the aforesaid 
legislation with a view to protect and respect the privacy 
and confidentiality of children and to ensure their 
physical, 
emotional, 
intellectual 
and 
social 
development.  The POCSO Act also addressed the lack 
of provisions defining various offences against the 
children and also adequate penal provisions therefor.  A 
careful scanning of the various provisions under the 
POCSO Act would reveal that with a view to achieve the 
aforesaid objects and purposes various offences against 
the children are specifically defined and provisions for 
adequate penalisation are also inserted in the Act.  
Obviously, rubbing the breast of a child would constitute 
an offence of ‘sexual assault’ under Section 7 of POCSO 
Act, punishable with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which shall not be less than three years and 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 16 of 40 
 
may extend to five years and also fine.  They would 
reveal that the commission of such offences against the 
children should be viewed as heinous and serious.   
Needless to say, that commission of such offences cannot 
be taken lightly as offences of private nature and in fact, 
such offences are bound to be taken as offences against 
the society.   In the decision in Attorney General for 
India v. Satish and Anr.10 at paragraph 38, this Court 
held thus:- 
“The act of touching any sexual part of the body of a 
child with sexual intent or any other act involving 
physical contact with sexual intent, could not be 
trivialised or held insignificant or peripheral so as to 
exclude such act from the purview of “sexual 
assault” under Section 7.  As held by this Court in 
Balram Kumawat v. Union of India, the law would 
have to be interpreted having regard to the subject-
matter of the offence and to the object of the law it 
seeks to achieve.  The purpose of the law cannot be 
to allow the offender to sneak out of the meshes of 
law.” 
 
13. 
This Court went on to hold that the legislature had 
incorporated certain statutory presumptions having 
regard to the seriousness of the offences under the 
POCSO Act. 
 
10 (2022) 5 SCC 545 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 17 of 40 
 
14. 
Bearing in mind the aforesaid aspects we will 
consider the submissions and contentions made relying 
on the aforementioned decisions. 
 
15. 
With respect to the decisions relied on by the 
learned counsel for the third respondent, it can be seen 
that they deal with the locus standi of a third party to 
petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India.  But 
then, this Court has already passed an order on 
02.12.2022 converting the petition filed under Article 32 
of the Constitution of India as a Special Leave Petition 
under Article 136 of the Constitution of India and further 
ordered to list the matter for hearing the parties on 
merits.  Hence, the fact is that the present matter has 
already shed its character as a petition under Article 32 
of the Constitution of India pursuant to the order of this 
Court on 02.12.2022.  The power of this Court to pass 
such an order cannot be disputed in view of the inherent 
power in this Court or in view of the power under Article 
142 of the Constitution of India.  In this context, it is also 
relevant to refer to Article 136 of Constitution of India and 
the following decisions of this Court describing the 
nature of power of this Court under Article 136 of the 
Constitution of India. 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 18 of 40 
 
“Article 136 (1) Notwithstanding anything in this 
Chapter, the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, 
grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, 
decree, determination, sentence or order in any 
cause or matter passed or made by any court or 
tribunal in the territory of India. 
 
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any 
judgment, determination, sentence or order passed 
or made by any court or tribunal constituted by or 
under any law relating to the Armed Forces.” 
 
16. 
In the decision in Kunhayammed and Ors. v. State 
of Kerala and Anr.11, this Court held:- 
“.…Article 136 of the Constitution of India is a 
special jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court 
which is sweeping in its nature.  It is a residuary 
power in the sense that confers an appellate 
jurisdiction on the Supreme Court subject to the 
special leave being granted in such matters as may 
not be covered by the preceding articles.  It is an 
overriding 
provision 
conferring 
a 
special 
jurisdiction providing for invoking of the appellate 
jurisdiction of Supreme Court not fettered by the 
sweep of preceding articles.  Article 136 opens with 
a non obstante clause and conveys that even in the 
field covered by the preceding articles, jurisdiction 
conferred by Article 136 is available to be exercised 
in an appropriate case.  It is untrammelled  reservoir 
of power incapable of being confined to definitional 
bounds; the discretion being subjected only to one 
 
11 (2000) 6 SCC 359 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 19 of 40 
 
limitation i.e., wisdom and good sense of justice of 
the judges.  No right of appeal is conferred upon any 
party; only a discretion is vested in the Supreme 
Court to interfere by granting leave to an applicant 
to enter in its appellate jurisdiction not open 
otherwise and as of right.”     
 
17. 
In the decision in Durga Shankar Mehta v. Thakur 
Raghuraj Singh and others12, this Court in paragraph 5 
observed and held thus:- 
“5. …… The powers given by Article 136 of the 
Constitution however are in the nature of special or 
residuary powers which are exercisable outside the 
purview of ordinary law, in cases where the needs 
of justice demand interference by the Supreme 
Court of the land. The article itself is worded in the 
widest terms possible.  It vests in the Supreme Court 
a plenary jurisdiction in the matter of entertaining 
and hearing appeals, by granting of special leave, 
against any kind of judgment or order made by a 
court or tribunal in any cause or matter and the 
powers could be exercised in spite of the specific 
provisions for the best of reasons did not choose to 
fetter or circumscribe the powers exercisable under 
this article in any way. ……” 
 
18. 
In the said circumstances, the question whether 
there is any violation of fundamental right(s) under part 
III of the Constitution of India of the appellants herein 
 
12 (1954) 2 SCC 20 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 20 of 40 
 
need no consideration as it pales into insignificance.  
According to us, in the said circumstances,  while 
considering the locus standi of the appellants herein to 
challenge the order dated 04.02.2022 in S.B. CR. M.P. 
No.1348/2022, what is to be looked into is whether the 
parameters laid down in P.S.R. Sadhanantham’s case 
(supra) and such other relevant decisions are satisfied or 
not.  
 
19. 
Now, we will refer to the decisions referred to by 
the learned amicus curiae, in regard to the locus standi of 
the appellants to challenge the order dated 04.02.2022.   
We have already noted that this Court converted the 
petition filed under Article 32 by the appellants herein as 
Special Leave Petition under Article 136 of the 
Constitution of India and specifically listed to hear the 
parties on merits.  In the aforesaid circumstances, the 
decision in Ramakant Rai v. Madan Rai and Ors.13 
assumes relevance.    That was a case where the acquittal 
of the convicts, who originally stood convicted by the 
Trial Court, in an appeal by the High Court was 
challenged before this Court by a third party to the 
criminal proceedings (father of the deceased) in a 
 
13 (2003) 12 SCC 395 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 21 of 40 
 
Special Leave Petition.   Leave was granted, though he 
was not a party to the original criminal proceedings 
under Article 136 of the Constitution of India overruling 
the objection that a third party to a criminal proceeding 
could not invoke the power of this Court under Article 
136 of the Constitution of India to appeal against an 
acquittal.   This Court considered the power available to 
this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution of India 
and held that such a Special Leave Petition is 
maintainable.   It was held that Article 136 of the 
Constitution of India neither confers on anyone the right 
to invoke jurisdiction of the Supreme Court nor inhibits 
anyone from invoking its jurisdiction and that the said 
power is actually vested in the Supreme Court.  It was 
also held that the exercise of the power under Article 136 
by the Supreme Court is circumscribed by any limitation 
as to ‘who may invoke it’.  Paragraph 12 of the decision 
in Ramakant Rai’s case is relevant in the contextual 
situation and it read thus:- 
“12. A doubt has been raised about the competence 
of a private party as distinguished from the State, to 
invoke the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 
136 of the Constitution of India (in short “the 
Constitution”) against a judgment of acquittal by the 
High Court. We do not see any substance in the 
doubt. The appellate power vested in this Court 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 22 of 40 
 
under Article 136 of the Constitution is not to be 
confused with the ordinary appellate power 
exercised by appellate courts and Appellate 
Tribunals under specific statutes. It is a plenary 
power, “exercisable outside the purview of ordinary 
law” to meet the pressing demands of justice 
(See Durga Shankar Mehta v. Raghuraj Singh [AIR 
1954 SC 520]). Article 136 of the Constitution neither 
confers on anyone the right to invoke the jurisdiction 
of this Court nor inhibits anyone from invoking the 
Court's jurisdiction. The power is vested in this 
Court but the right to invoke the Court's jurisdiction 
is vested in no one. The exercise of the power of this 
Court is not circumscribed by any limitation as to 
who may invoke it. Where a judgment of acquittal 
by the High Court has led to a serious miscarriage 
of justice, this Court cannot refrain from doing its 
duty and abstain from interfering on the ground that 
a private party and not the State has invoked the 
Court's jurisdiction. We do not have slightest doubt 
that we can entertain appeals against judgments of 
acquittal by the High Court at the instance of 
interested private parties also. The circumstance 
that the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (in short 
“the Code”) does not provide for an appeal to the 
High Court against an order of acquittal by a 
subordinate court, at the instance of a private party, 
has no relevance to the question of the power of this 
Court under Article 136. We may mention that 
in Mohan Lal v. Ajit Singh [(1978) 3 SCC 279 this 
Court interfered with a judgment of acquittal by the 
High Court at the instance of a private party. An 
apprehension was expressed that if appeals against 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 23 of 40 
 
judgments of acquittal at the instance of private 
parties are permitted there may be a flood of 
appeals. We do not share the apprehension. 
Appeals under Article 136 of the Constitution are 
entertained by special leave granted by this Court, 
whether it is the State or a private party that invokes 
the jurisdiction of this Court, and special leave is not 
granted as a matter of course but only for good and 
sufficient reasons, on well-established practice of 
this Court. 
(Underline supplied) 
   
20. 
The view expressed in paragraph 13 was virtually 
the view expressed by this Court in Arunachalam v. 
P.S.R. Sadhanantham14,  as held in Ramakant Rai’s case 
itself.   In Arunachalam’s case (supra), the acquittal of 
P.S.R. Sadhanantham and four others by the High Court 
upon reversing the judgment of their conviction was 
challenged by the brother of the deceased viz., 
Arunachalam by filing a Special Leave Petition.  
Virtually, leave was granted only against the first 
accused P.S.R. Sadhanantham. Though the locus standi of 
the private party in the sense, one who was not a party to 
the original criminal proceedings to maintain a Special 
Leave Petition under Article 136 was raised, this Court, 
 
14 (1979) 2 SCC 297 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 24 of 40 
 
relying on the decision in Mohan Lal v. Ajit Singh15, held 
that this Court could entertain appeal against a judgment 
of acquittal at the instance of private parties also.  
Furthermore, it was held that Article 136 of the 
Constitution of India neither confers on anyone the right 
to invoke the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court nor 
inhibits anyone from invoking the Court’s jurisdiction 
and where a judgment of acquittal by the High Court led 
to a miscarriage of justice, the Supreme Court would not 
refrain from doing its duty and abstain from interfering 
on the ground that a private party and not the State has 
invoked the Court’s jurisdiction.    We may hasten to add 
here that the said decisions were rendered prior to the 
amendment brought to Section 372, Cr. P.C., conferring 
the victim a right to prefer an appeal against an order 
passed by a Court acquitting the accused and expanding 
the scope of the expression “victim” under Section 2 
(wa), Cr. P.C. by including his or her guardian or legal 
heir, vide Act No.5 of 2009 with effect from 31.12.2009 to 
prefer an appeal against acquittal in the Cr. P.C.  That 
apart, this Court in those decisions specifically held that 
a private party could prefer an appeal against acquittal 
 
15  (1978) 3 SCC 279 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 25 of 40 
 
invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 136 
of the Constitution if the judgment of acquittal led to 
serious miscarriage of justice.  According to us, such 
right to a third party to prefer a petition under Article 136 
of the Constitution is certainly to be recognised and 
respected in a case where seemingly miscarriage of 
justice had occurred and still, neither State nor the victim 
or any relative falling under the term ‘victim’ 
approached this Court. 
 
21. 
According to us, the case on hand stands on a much 
firmer footing than those cases.  When leave is sought to 
challenge a judgment of acquittal would undoubtedly 
reveal the fact that the acquitter was made to face the trial 
before a Court and acquittal is the outcome of 
appreciation of evidence by the trial Court concerned. 
 
22. 
The case on hand is not one where the third party 
sought leave to challenge a judgment of acquittal. In the 
case on hand, the very FIR registered against the third 
respondent for the serious offences, as mentioned 
above, was quashed by the High Court invoking the 
power under Section 482, Cr. P.C. solely based on the 
fact that a compromise was arrived at between the third 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 26 of 40 
 
and the fourth respondents, as mentioned above.   It is a 
fact that the compromise was acted upon despite the 
opposition of the public prosecutor and even then, the 
State has not chosen to file petition seeking leave to 
challenge the order passed by the High Court.  Though, 
the fourth respondent is the father of the victim, who 
suffered sexual assault and such other offences under the 
POCSO Act and IPC offences in view of the fact that he 
had compromised the offences with the third respondent 
accused, and in view of the manner in which he supports 
the impugned order, it is evident that he would not 
invoke the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 136 of 
the Constitution of India.   While considering the locus 
standi of the appellants to challenge the order dated 
04.02.2022 the aforesaid aspects are also to be borne in 
mind.   The appellants are ordinary men residing in the 
very same village to which the fourth respondent 
belong. There is absolutely no case for the third and 
fourth respondents that they filed the Special Leave 
Petition due to any private revenge or personal vendetta.  
No ill motive has been attributed on them.  We have 
already taken note of the fact that the very object and 
purpose of enactment of the POCSO Act and also taken 
note of the offences alleged against the third respondent 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 27 of 40 
 
which are heinous and serious in nature. The definition 
to crimes by Blackstone was taken note of in P.S.R. 
Sadhanantham’s case (supra) by this Court as “the 
breach and violation of public rights and duties which 
affect the whole community” to observe that in such 
circumstances a crime is an act deemed by law to be 
harmful to society in general, even though its immediate 
victim is an individual.   In view of the nature of the 
offences alleged against the third respondent,  one can 
only say that if they are proved they could be treated 
only as offences against the society and at any rate, it 
cannot be said that prosecuting an offender against 
whom such allegations are made is not in the interest of 
the society.   In fact, it would only be in the interest of the 
society.   In that view of the matter, when by quashing the 
FIR by invoking the power under Section 482, Cr. P.C., 
the accused was relieved of the liability to face the trial 
coupled with the aforesaid circumstances and the 
position of law qua locus standi of third party to maintain 
a petition under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, 
as revealed from the decisions referred above, we have 
no hesitation to hold that the challenge based on the 
appellants’ locus standi got no merit at all.  We do not 
think it necessary to deal with the other decisions cited 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 28 of 40 
 
before us on the aforesaid question. In short, we find no 
ground or reason to revoke the grant of leave to the 
appellants to assail the order dated 04.02.2024. 
 
23. 
We will now, consider the second question as to 
whether the power to quash criminal proceedings 
invoking the power under Section 482, Cr. PC be 
exercisable solely by relying on the fact that the parties 
have arrived at a compromise and the decision of this 
Court in Gian Singh’s case (supra).   
 
24. 
The learned amicus curiae submitted that a 
scanning of the decision of this Court in Gian Singh’s 
case (supra) itself would reveal the legal position in 
regard to the said question.  The learned amicus curiae 
drew our attention to paragraphs 48, 57, 58 and 61 of the 
said decision.  Paragraph 57 and the relevant portions of 
paragraphs 48, 58 and 61 read thus: - 
“48.……….While parting with this part, it appears 
necessary to add that the settlement or compromise 
must satisfy the conscience of the court. The 
settlement must be just and fair besides being free 
from the undue pressure, the court must examine 
the cases of weaker and vulnerable victims with 
necessary caution…...” 
 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 29 of 40 
 
57. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on 
the ground of settlement between an offender and 
victim is not the same thing as compounding of 
offence. They are different and not interchangeable. 
Strictly speaking, the power of compounding of 
offences given to a court under Section 320 is 
materially different from the quashing of criminal 
proceedings by the High Court in exercise of its 
inherent jurisdiction. In compounding of offences, 
power of a criminal court is circumscribed by the 
provisions contained in Section 320 and the court is 
guided solely and squarely thereby while, on the 
other hand, the formation of opinion by the High 
Court for quashing a criminal offence or criminal 
proceeding or criminal complaint is guided by the 
material on record as to whether the ends of justice 
would justify such exercise of power although the 
ultimate consequence may be acquittal or dismissal 
of indictment. 
 
58. Where the High Court quashes a criminal 
proceeding having regard to the fact that the 
dispute between the offender and the victim has 
been settled although the offences are not 
compoundable, it does so as in its opinion, 
continuation of criminal proceedings will be an 
exercise in futility and justice in the case demands 
that the dispute between the parties is put to an end 
and peace is restored; securing the ends of justice 
being the ultimate guiding factor. No doubt, crimes 
are acts which have harmful effect on the public and 
consist in wrongdoing that seriously endangers and 
threatens the well-being of the society and it is not 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 30 of 40 
 
safe to leave the crime-doer only because he and 
the victim have settled the dispute amicably or that 
the victim has been paid compensation, yet certain 
crimes have been made compoundable in law, with 
or without the permission of the court. In respect of 
serious offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc., or 
other offences of mental depravity under IPC or 
offences of moral turpitude under special statutes, 
like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences 
committed by public servants while working in that 
capacity, the settlement between the offender and 
the victim can have no legal sanction at all. 
However, certain offences which overwhelmingly 
and predominantly bear civil flavour having arisen 
out of civil, mercantile, commercial, financial, 
partnership or such like transactions or the offences 
arising out of matrimony, particularly relating to 
dowry, etc. or the family dispute, where the wrong 
is basically to the victim and the offender and the 
victim have settled all disputes between them 
amicably, irrespective of the fact that such offences 
have not been made compoundable, the High Court 
may within the framework of its inherent power, 
quash 
the 
criminal 
proceeding 
or 
criminal 
complaint or FIR if it is satisfied that on the face of 
such settlement, there is hardly any likelihood of the 
offender being convicted and by not quashing the 
criminal proceedings, justice shall be casualty and 
ends of justice shall be defeated. The above list is 
illustrative and not exhaustive. Each case will 
depend on its own facts and no hard-and-fast 
category can be prescribed. 
 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 31 of 40 
 
61. The position that emerges from the above 
discussion can be summarised thus : the power of 
the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or 
FIR or complaint in exercise of its inherent 
jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power 
given to a criminal court for compounding the 
offences under Section 320 of the Code. Inherent 
power is of wide plenitude with no statutory 
limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with 
the guideline engrafted in such power viz. : (i) to 
secure the ends of justice, or (ii) to prevent abuse of 
the process of any court. In what cases power to 
quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or FIR 
may be exercised where the offender and the victim 
have settled their dispute would depend on the facts 
and circumstances of each case and no category can 
be prescribed. However, before exercise of such 
power, the High Court must have due regard to the 
nature and gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious 
offences of mental depravity or offences like 
murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly 
quashed even though the victim or victim's family 
and the offender have settled the dispute. Such 
offences are not private in nature and have a serious 
impact on society. Similarly, any compromise 
between the victim and the offender in relation to 
the offences under special statutes like the 
Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences 
committed by public servants while working in that 
capacity, etc.; cannot provide for any basis for 
quashing criminal proceedings involving such 
offences. 
But 
the 
criminal 
cases 
having 
overwhelmingly and predominatingly civil flavour 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 32 of 40 
 
stand on a different footing for the purposes of 
quashing, particularly the offences arising from 
commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership 
or such like transactions or the offences arising out 
of matrimony relating to dowry, etc. or the family 
disputes where the wrong is basically private or 
personal in nature and the parties have resolved 
their entire dispute. In this category of cases, the 
High Court may quash the criminal proceedings if in 
its view, because of the compromise between the 
offender and the victim, the possibility of conviction 
is remote and bleak and continuation of the criminal 
case would put the accused to great oppression and 
prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to 
him by not quashing the criminal case despite full 
and complete settlement and compromise with the 
victim. In other words, the High Court must consider 
whether it would be unfair or contrary to the interest 
of justice to continue with the criminal proceeding 
or continuation of the criminal proceeding would 
tantamount to abuse of process of law despite 
settlement and compromise between the victim and 
the wrongdoer and whether to secure the ends of 
justice, it is appropriate that the criminal case is put 
to an end and if the answer to the above question(s) 
is in the affirmative, the High Court shall be well 
within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal 
proceeding.” 
(Underline supplied) 
   
25. 
Thus, in unambiguous terms this Court held that 
before exercising the power under Section 482, Cr. PC 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 33 of 40 
 
the High Court must have due regard to the nature and 
gravity of the crime besides observing and holding that 
heinous and serious offences could not be quashed even 
though a victim or victim’s family and the offender had 
settled the dispute.   This Court held that such offences 
are not private in nature and have a serious impact on the 
society.  Having understood the position of law on the 
second question that it is the bounden duty of the court 
concerned to consider whether the compromise is just 
and fair besides being free from undue pressure we will 
proceed to consider the matter further. A bare perusal of 
the impugned order dated 04.02.2022 would reveal that 
the High Court has erred in not bestowing proper 
consideration the law laid down in Gian Singh’s case 
(supra) while rendering the same.    The impugned order 
would reveal that the allegations contained in the subject 
FIR was not at all even adverted to, before quashing the 
same.  We have referred to the allegations which are of 
serious nature revealed from the FIR.   The complaint in 
this case is annexed to the FIR produced in this 
proceeding as Annexure P-1.  In the said complaint 
which led to the registration of the FIR reads thus:- 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 34 of 40 
 
“Hence my report may be lodged and action may 
be taken against the offender Vimal Kumar Gupta as 
he is making pressure on me not to lodge report.”    
(underline supplied) 
26. 
In this context, it is to be noted that the complaint 
which led to the registration of the FIR was filed on 
08.01.2022 and the compromise was entered into 
between the third and fourth respondents within a few 
weeks thereafter viz., on 31.01.2022.   A perusal of the 
impugned order would reveal that without even 
referring to the alleged offence and thereby without 
looking into the nature and gravity of the offence, solely 
relying upon the compromise, the High Court observed 
thus: -  
“This Court is aptly guided by the principles 
propounded by Hon'ble the Supreme Court and 
feels that whether dispute is essentially inter se 
between the parties, either they are relatives, 
neighbours or having business relationship and 
which does not affect the society at large, then in 
such cases, with a view to maintain harmonious 
relationships between the two sides & for restitution 
of relationship and with a view to end-up the dispute 
in between them permanently, the High Court 
should exercise its inherent power to quash the FIR 
and all other subsequent proceedings initiated 
thereto. Here in this case, though the offences are 
not compoundable but the parties have settled the 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 35 of 40 
 
dispute amicably and that is essentially in between 
the parties which is not-affecting public peace and 
tranquillity therefore with a view to maintain the 
harmony and to resolve the dispute finally in 
between the parties, it is deemed appropriate to 
quash the FIR and all further proceedings 
undertaken in pursuance thereof.” 
(underline supplied) 
 
27. 
It is also to be noted that after quashing the FIR and 
further proceedings, the SHO of the Police Station 
concerned was directed to file a closure report with the 
concerned Judicial Magistrate within a period of one 
month from the date of receipt of a copy of the order.  
 
28. 
A bare perusal of the impugned order and in the 
light of the observations and binding conclusions in Gian 
Singh’s case (supra), bearing in mind the allegations in 
the subject FIR, it would reveal that the High Court has 
misread and misapplied the law laid down in Gian 
Singh’s case (supra)  to quash the subject FIR and all 
further proceedings based in pursuance thereof.   We 
are at a loss to understand how the High Court arrived at 
the conclusion that in the case on hand a dispute to be 
resolved exists between the parties and further that to 
maintain harmony the FIR and all further proceedings 
thereto should be quashed even without adverting to the 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 36 of 40 
 
allegations raised against the 3rd respondent in the 
subject FIR.  It is also a fact that though in terms of the 
decision in Gian Singh’s case (supra)  an irrecusable 
duty of the Court to consider whether the compromise 
could be acted upon or not in the interest of justice, the 
impugned order would reveal that the High Court has 
failed to bestow proper consideration in that regard as 
well.  
 
29. 
In the contextual situation, it is also relevant to refer 
to a Three Judge Bench decision of this Court in State of 
M.P. v. Laxmi Narayan16. This Court held that whether 
an FIR is quashable or not would depend upon the facts 
and circumstances of each case and while considering 
that question, the Court has to apply its mind to (i) 
whether the crime is one against the society or against 
an individual alone, nature of the dispute, (ii) 
seriousness and how the crime was committed (iii) 
whether offence(s) is one under a special statute (iv) 
stage of proceedings and how the accused manged to 
compromise with the complainant.   
 
 
16 (2019) 5 SCC 688     

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 37 of 40 
 
30. 
In this regard, it is relevant to note that in the case 
on hand the victim was then a student of Class 11th in the 
Higher Secondary aged 16 years.  The statement 
annexed to the FIR of the complainant viz., the 4th 
respondent itself would reveal that on 08.01.2022 he 
complained about the pressure from the 3rd respondent 
to restrain him from lodging report.  The compromise 
was entered immediately thereafter on 31.01.2022.   
Despite the said position, the Court has not chosen to 
consider whether the compromise entered into between 
the parents and the accused could be acted upon or not, 
in the interest of justice, taking note of the serious 
allegations levelled against the 3rd accused and in view 
of the law laid down in Gian Singh’s case (supra).  In that 
context, it is relevant to refer to a decision of a learned 
Single Judge of the Delhi High Court in Sunil Raikwar v. 
State and Another17.   Paragraph 12 therein, to the extent 
it is relevant reads thus:- 
“12. The father of the victim cannot be permitted to 
settle the dispute with the accused. He is not the 
victim and the courts have to safeguard and protect 
the interest of children against onslaught by bad 
forces. We cannot lose sight of the fact that the 
accused is being prosecuted for an offence that 
shocks the value system of a society and this is not a 
 
17 2021 SCC OnLine Del 258 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 38 of 40 
 
matter that can be permitted to be settled as a 
compoundable minor offence. Deterrence to others 
committing similar offence is a must and they cannot 
get a signal that anything and everything can be 
compromised……” 
   
31. 
In view of the very object and purpose of enacting 
the POCSO Act, we find no reason to disagree with the 
conclusions in paragraph 12 extracted above in the 
given case.  It is more so, when the extracted portion 
from the complaint that was annexed to the FIR and 
extracted hereinbefore would reveal that the accused 
was making pressure on him not to lodge any report.  
Despite giving such statement in the complaint, within a 
couple of weeks, the accused managed to compromise 
the case with the 4th respondent and his wife.   
 
32. 
In the decision relied on by the High Court to quash 
the proceedings viz., Gian Singh’s case (supra) and the 
decision 
in 
Laxmi 
Narayan’s 
case 
(supra) 
in 
unambiguous terms this Court held that the power under 
Section 482, Cr. P.C. could not be used to quash 
proceedings based on compromise if it is in respect of 
heinous offence which are not private in nature and have 
a serious impact on the society.   When an incident of the 
aforesaid nature and gravity allegedly occurred in a 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 39 of 40 
 
higher secondary school, that too from a teacher, it 
cannot be simply described as an offence which is 
purely private in nature and have no serious impact on 
the society.   
 
33. 
In view of the reasons as aforesaid and in the light 
of the decisions referred supra, the impugned order 
dated 04.02.2022 of the High Court in S.B.C.R.M.P. 
No.1348/2022, quashing the FIR No.6/2022 dated 
08.01.2022 and all further proceedings pursuant thereto 
solely on the ground that the accused and the 
complainant had settled the matter, invites interference.   
We have no hesitation to hold that in cases of this nature, 
the fact that in view of compromise entered into between 
the parties, the chance of a conviction is remote and 
bleak also cannot be a ground to abruptly terminate the 
investigation, 
by 
quashing 
FIR 
and 
all 
further 
proceedings pursuant thereto, by invoking the power 
under Section 482, Cr. P.C.   In the said circumstances, 
this appeal is allowed.   The impugned order dated 
04.02.2022 
of 
the 
High 
Court 
in 
S.B.C.R.M.P. 
No.1348/2022 is hereby quashed and set aside.  
Consequently, the FIR No.6/2022, investigation and 
criminal proceedings pursuant thereto subject to the 

 
Criminal Appeal No.3403 of 2023 
 
Page 40 of 40 
 
nature of the report to be filed under Section 173(2), Cr. 
P.C., be proceeded with against the accused, in 
accordance with law.    
 
34. 
We make it clear that we shall not be understood to 
have made any observations on the merits of the case.  
 
35. 
Before parting with this case, we would render our 
gratitude and appreciation for the invaluable assistance 
provided to the Court by Mr. R. Basant, learned Senior 
Counsel as amicus curiae, ably assisted by Mr. Aviral 
Saxena, Advocate on Record.   
 
 
……………………, J. 
                 (C.T. Ravikumar) 
 
 
 
……………………, J. 
                 (Sanjay Kumar) 
New Delhi; 
November 07, 2024