2024 INSC 845
1 
 
REPORTABLE  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL No. _________ of 2024 
(@ Special Leave Petition (C) No. 11785 of 2024) 
 
 
RAMKRISHNA MEDICAL COLLEGE  
HOSPITAL & RESEARCH CENTRE           APPELLANT(s) 
                          
 
 
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH  
& ORS. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
RESPONDENT(s) 
 
 
WITH 
 
CIVIL APPEAL No. _________ of 2024 
(@ Special Leave Petition (C) No. 20267 of 2024) 
 
 
RKDF HOMEOPATHY MEDICAL  
COLLEGE 
 
 
 
 
 
    APPELLANT(s) 
                          
 
 
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH  
& ORS. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
RESPONDENT(s) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
K.V. Viswanathan, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2024.11.07
13:22:24 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
2. 
 These cases highlight the complications that may arise if 
adequate caution and circumspection are not exercised, while 
passing interim orders in judicial proceedings. The two appellants 
are colleges to whom the Director, Medical Education (hereinafter 
referred to as the ‘Director’) issued orders dated 26.09.2023 
directing them to keep one MBBS seat vacant in the appellant-
colleges with a direction that the said seat will not be included in 
the College Level Counseling (CLC) Round for the academic year 
2023-24. The direction was issued pursuant to the interim order 
dated 22.09.2023 passed by the High Court in Writ Petitions filed 
by the respondent students.  
3. 
In the first matter, the Writ Petition was dismissed on 
04.03.2024 denying the relief to the Writ Petitioner-student (R-5 
herein). In the second matter also, the Writ Petition was dismissed 
on 22.12.2023 denying the relief to the student-writ petitioner (R-
4 herein). The appellant-colleges have been caught in the crossfire 
and their attempt to intervene having failed in the High Court, they 
are before us seeking a compensatory seat in the subsequent 

3 
 
academic year. Their case is that because the seat was kept on hold, 
they have been deprived of the opportunity to fill that seat. Their 
grievance is that the consequential loss has befallen solely on them 
due to an act of court.   
Facts in SLP (Civil) No. 11785 of 2024 : 
4.  In the year 2017, the first respondent-State Government 
introduced the ‘Mukhyamantri Medhavi Vidyarthi Yojana’ as per 
which eligible students who were covered under the scheme were 
entitled to payment of fees for certain courses. One of the 
conditions was that the income of the parent of the candidate 
should be less than Rupees six lacs per annum. The respondent no. 
5 (Mohammad Eaan Shaikh) herein, who had secured 86% marks 
in 12th standard, appeared for National Eligibility Cum Entrance 
Test, 2023 (in short ‘NEET’) and in the declaration of result of 
13.06.2023, he obtained 430 marks out of 750 with an All India 
Rank of 163660. In the results of the first round of counselling 
published on 07.08.2023, no college was allotted to him. Equally 
so, in the second round, results of which were declared on 

4 
 
28.08.2023, no college was allotted to him. Pending the last round 
of the counselling on 18.08.2023, the State Government notified 
an amendment to the Mukhyamantri Medhavi Vidyarthi Yojana 
whereunder the income ceiling of the parent/guardian was 
increased to Rupees eight lacs and the said amendment was to 
apply for the academic year 2023-24. Even in the results of MOP-
UP Round counselling, which were declared on 15.09.2023, R-5 
was not allotted the seat. 
5. 
Setting up a plea that because of the increase in the income 
ceiling, more students have participated and his chance of getting 
the college in the last round of counselling was jeopardized, the 
respondent no. 5 filed a Writ Petition.  
6. 
Reliefs were sought, in the nature of a direction to not apply 
the amendment notification dated 18.08.2023 to the Mukhyamantri 
Medhavi Vidyarthi Yojana for the academic year 2023-24 and to 
set aside the mop-up round allotment list dated 15.09.2023 and 
conduct fresh mop-up round without considering the amendment 

5 
 
notification. Interim relief staying the mop-up round allotment was 
sought.  
7. 
When the matter came up for hearing, interim order was 
passed stating that one seat in the mop-up round to be held on 
22.09.2023 be kept vacant (if available). This interim order passed 
on 22.09.2023 was continued on 12.10.2023, 07.11.2023 and 
29.11.2023.  
8. 
A reply affidavit by the State was filed clearly pleading as 
follows: 
“5. That, in reply to the paragraphs 5.8 and 5.9, it is submitted 
that it is significant to mention that as stated by the petitioner 
the allotment process in second round was closed at 454 marks 
whereas the petitioner secured 450 marks and therefore, he 
was not given the allotment being not placed suitably in the 
merit. However, it is also relevant to mention that in between 
from 454 marks to 450 marks (score of the petitioner), there 
remained as many as 37 candidates of OBC category 
including sub-categories of OBC, and more  specifically in the 
category of OBC - open as many as 33 candidates were over 
and above the petitioner in his category i.e. OBC - open in the 
second round of allotment. Copy of relevant pages of 
tabulation/chart drawn for second round counselling is 
annexed herewith as ANNEXURE R/3. However, so far as 
availability of vacant seat in OBC – open category is 
concerned then it is only 5 in number. So, in any eventually 

6 
 
(sic.),  the petitioner would not have been allotted a seat even 
in Mop-up-Round being placed below in merit. Thus, the 
grievance raised by the petitioner in present petition is 
misconceived and in no manner, it is affecting the merit of the 
petitioner even on account of introduction of amendment on 
18.08.2023 (Annexure P/8) implemented on 10.09.2023. 
Copy of chart demonstrating vacant seats in OBC – Open 
Category is annexed herewith as ANNEXURE R/4.” 
 
9.   Pursuant to the interim order, on 26.09.2023, the Director, 
Medical Education (R-4) issued a directive to the appellant-college 
to keep on hold one MBBS seat for the academic year 2023-24.  
10. The appellant college rushed to the High Court seeking 
intervention and the State filed interlocutory application for 
vacating the interim order.  
11.  The appellant pleaded the following in the intervention 
application: 
“That in the context of the above, it is submitted that the 
interests of the present-applicant institute are directly aligned 
with the outcome of this instant petition. While the institute 
does not contest the keeping of a seat on hold in the interim, 
as per the interim order passed by the Hon'ble High Court, it 
is also emphasised that any adverse consequences in the event 
of the petition being dismissed shall have a direct and adverse 
effect on the applicant-college, on the ground that the 1 seat 
being put on hold in the interim as per the Hon'ble Court's 

7 
 
order dated 22/9/2023, has been allotted to the instant 
applicant; and hence in case this petition is dismissed by this 
Hon'ble Court and if the cut-off date for admission elapses 
without a resolution of the controversy involved, the applicant 
shall be left with a vacant seat in MBBS Course, despite being 
sanctioned by the regulatory authority. Thus, the outcome of 
this petition shall have a bearing upon the legitimate interests 
of the applicant, especially in respect of its academic and 
logistical planning and resource utilization and the 
foundational 
infrastructural 
investments 
involved, 
encompassing faculty, infrastructure etc. It is humbly 
submitted that a vacant seat would result in the resources 
being underutilized and wastage of resources, which shall not 
only cause financial hardship upon the applicant, but also lead 
to loss to the meritorious and eligible candidates as well.” 
 
12. The High Court ultimately dismissed the Writ Petition on 
04.03.2024 stating that the amendment was the policy decision and 
that there were no grounds to hold it unconstitutional. Nothing was 
said of the intervention application filed by the appellant. 
Aggrieved, the appellant is before us seeking a compensatory seat 
for the subsequent academic year.  
Facts in SLP (Civil) No. 20267 of 2024 : 
13.  The respondent no. 4-Ms. Tasmiya Khan herein filed a Writ 
Petition in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Indore seeking a 

8 
 
mandamus to the official respondents therein to allot a seat to her 
as per the overall marks in NEET for the MBBS for the academic 
year 2023-24. Her prayer was to consider her against the 
unreserved category in the 5% Government School quota. 
According to R-4, candidates with lesser NEET score have been 
admitted under the Unreserved Government School Quota while 
she, though an OBC candidate had secured more marks than those 
general candidates. An interim order was passed on 22.09.2023 
modifying the earlier interim order stating that one seat be kept 
vacant till the next date of hearing (if not already filled). Based on 
the interim order of 22.09.2023, the Director of Medical Education 
on 26.09.2023 issued a direction to the appellant-college to keep 
on hold one seat in the MBBS course and directed that the said seat 
will not be included for the College Level Counselling Round.  
14. The official respondents opposed the Writ Petition. The State 
contended that the category of the writ petitioner was OBC-
Government School quota (OBC-GS), and in this category there 
were eight OBC GS candidates above the petitioner. In simple 

9 
 
terms, the State did not follow the principle that reserved 
candidates who qualified on merit ought to be first adjusted against 
the general seats. On 25.10.2023, the appellant intervened praying 
that keeping seats vacant will prejudice the college in case the cut-
off date expires before the disposal of the Writ Petition. 
15. By the judgment of 22.12.2023, the High Court rejected the 
petition of R-4 accepting the plea of the authorities and held that 
the appellant would be entitled only for consideration against the 
OBC GS quota. Coming to the intervention application of the 
appellant-college it was held that no relief can be granted since 
timeline for admission was complete. Aggrieved, the college has 
filed the present appeal by way of Special Leave. 
16. It should be pointed out that insofar as this matter is 
concerned, R-4 herein Ms. Tasmiya Khan filed SLP(C) No. 2311 
of 2024 and by the judgment of 20.08.2024, the judgment of the 
High Court dated 22.12.2023 in Writ Petition No. 23998 of 2023 
was set aside and a direction was given to admit R-4 in MBBS 
course for the academic year 2024-25. This Court, speaking 

10 
 
through one of us (B.R. Gavai, J.) held that the candidates who 
were meritorious and who could have been admitted against the 
Unreserved-Government Schools category could not have been 
denied admission on the ground that they belonged to OBC 
category. This Court held that meritorious candidates belonging to 
SC, ST and OBC who on their own merit are entitled to be selected 
against the Unreserved Government School Quota (UR GS) could 
not have been denied the seats in the open category. 
Contentions: 
17. We have heard the counsels for the appearing parties and 
perused the record.  
18. Learned counsel for the appellant-colleges contend that the 
seat which was directed to be kept vacant has gone waste since the 
Writ Petitions could not be disposed of before the cut-off date for 
admissions. They contend that the vacant seat would result in 
underutilization of resources, wastage of resources causing 
financial harm to them and resulting in meritorious candidates 

11 
 
being denied the admission to that seat. Their prayer is that a 
compensatory additional seat be ordered for the ensuing academic 
year. The authorities have contended that the authorities have no 
role in the matter and it was the order of the court which has been 
duly carried out and no liability can be fastened on them.  
Question for consideration: 
19.  In the above background, the question that arises for 
consideration is, have the appellant-colleges made out a case for a 
direction to the respondent authorities to create a compensatory 
seat in the ensuing academic year? 
Reasons and analysis: 
20. Firstly, the interim order directing one seat in the counselling 
to be kept vacant (if available) in both these matters is a cryptic 
order where neither the prima facie case nor the balance of 
convenience and irreparable loss aspects have been discussed. This 
Court had time and again reiterated that in cases where the court is 
inclined to grant interim relief, at least a brief prima-facie 

12 
 
assessment as to why the case warranted an interim protection 
needs to be discussed. Equally, the balance of convenience and the 
irreparable harm aspects are also to be briefly discussed in the 
order. These are well settled principles for adjudication of interim 
reliefs. The High Court, in both the matters before us, has wholly 
ignored these principles.  
21. Secondly, this Court has repeatedly held that a medical seat 
has life only in the year it falls due and that too only till the cut-off 
date fixed.  Even here, there are stringent regulations of the 
National Medical Commission providing that admission can only 
be made by the medical colleges within the sanctioned capacity for 
which permission/recognition has been granted. A seat falling 
vacant in a particular year cannot be carried forward or created in 
the succeeding year (See Faiza Choudhary v. State of J&K & 
Anr., (2012) 10 SCC 149).  No doubt, in rare and exceptional 
circumstances, courts can direct increase in seats for the same 
academic year not exceeding one or two seats, if it finds that for no 
fault attributable to the candidate and for the fault on the part of the 

13 
 
authorities, the candidate has suffered. This Court has also held that 
if in the same year, the candidate cannot be accommodated, the 
Court can mould the relief and direct the admission to be granted 
in the next academic year. In S. Krishna Sradha v. State of Andhra 
Pradesh & Ors., (2020) 17 SCC 465, it was held as under:-  
“13.2. Under exceptional circumstances, if the court finds that 
there is no fault attributable to the candidate and the candidate 
has pursued his/her legal right expeditiously without any 
delay and there is fault only on the part of the authorities 
and/or there is apparent breach of rules and regulations as well 
as related principles in the process of grant of admission 
which would violate the right of equality and equal treatment 
to the competing candidates and if the time schedule 
prescribed — 30th September, is over, to do the complete 
justice, the Court under exceptional circumstances and in 
rarest of rare cases direct the admission in the same year by 
directing to increase the seats, however, it should not be more 
than one or two seats and such admissions can be ordered 
within reasonable time i.e. within one month from 30th 
September i.e. cut-off date and under no circumstances, the 
Court shall order any admission in the same year beyond 30th 
October. However, it is observed that such relief can be 
granted only in exceptional circumstances and in the rarest of 
rare cases. In case of such an eventuality, the Court may also 
pass an order cancelling the admission given to a candidate 
who is at the bottom of the merit list of the category who, if 
the admission would have been given to a more meritorious 
candidate who has been denied admission illegally, would not 
have got the admission, if the Court deems it fit and proper, 

14 
 
however, after giving an opportunity of hearing to a student 
whose admission is sought to be cancelled. 
13.3. In case the Court is of the opinion that no relief of 
admission can be granted to such a candidate in the very 
academic year and wherever it finds that the action of the 
authorities has been arbitrary and in breach of the rules and 
regulations or the prospectus affecting the rights of the 
students and that a candidate is found to be meritorious and 
such candidate/student has approached the court at the earliest 
and without any delay, the court can mould the relief and 
direct the admission to be granted to such a candidate in the 
next academic year by issuing appropriate directions by 
directing to increase in the number of seats as may be 
considered appropriate in the case and in case of such an 
eventuality and if it is found that the management was at fault 
and wrongly denied the admission to the meritorious 
candidate, in that case, the Court may direct to reduce the 
number of seats in the management quota of that year, 
meaning thereby the student/students who was/were denied 
admission illegally to be accommodated in the next academic 
year out of the seats allotted in the management quota.” 
 
22. However, this is vastly different from directing the creation 
of an additional seat at the behest of a college.  
23. Thirdly, this Court has held repeatedly that keeping vacant 
seats results in huge financial loss to the college apart from being 
a national wastage of resources (See Index Medical College, 

15 
 
Hospital & Research Centre v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors., 
(2023) 11 SCC 570). 
24. Fourthly, this Court has also frowned upon the grant of 
provisional admission unless the court is fully satisfied that the 
petitioner has a cast iron case which is bound to succeed or the 
error is so gross or apparent that no other conclusion is possible. 
Even there, the court has opined that a short notice to the 
respondent ought to be given and after hearing the other side, in an 
exceptional case fulfilling the criteria prescribed necessary orders 
can be made (See Krishna Priya Ganguly & Ors. v. University of 
Lucknow & Ors., (1984) 1 SCC 307).  
25.   If provisional admission seats are not to be given casually, the 
said principle should also apply for directions to keep seats vacant. 
Only if there is a cast iron case for the petitioner and the petitioner 
is bound to succeed in cases where the error of the respondent 
authorities is so gross as to negate any other conclusion, interim 
orders keeping seats vacant could be made. Though courts have 
power to make orders directing seats to be kept vacant in such 

16 
 
cases, great caution and circumspection should be shown in 
exercising the power. In appropriate cases, even where the said 
exceptional criterion as set out above is met, the court will be 
justified in directing the petitioner to provide security, to the 
concerned college-institution where the seat is ultimately directed 
to be kept vacant or on whom ultimately the liability of the vacant 
seat would fall. The security is to guarantee that in the event of the 
Writ Petition/Appeal being dismissed and the seat going unfilled 
for the academic year the Petitioner/Appellant would make good 
the loss which the college may incur financially. Even in rare and 
exceptional cases where orders for keeping seats vacant are made, 
every endeavor must be made by the Court to dispose of the matter 
before the counselling for admissions are over.  
26. Additionally, even if the Writ Petition/Appeal succeeds, but 
if the matter could not be disposed off before the deadline the seat 
may still go vacant. It should not be forgotten that while the 
recurring and non-recurring expenditure for a college remains the 
same, a vacant seat will deprive the college of the fees to that 

17 
 
extent, not just for one year but for the whole course, which could 
be four, five or more years.  
27. Lastly, these safeguards are essential to restitute the colleges 
which may have suffered for no fault of theirs. It is well settled that 
if on account of an act of a party persuading the court to pass an 
order, which at the end has been held not sustainable and if in the 
process one party has gained an advantage which it would not have 
otherwise earned or the other party had suffered an 
impoverishment, restitution can be made. This Court had held that 
the principle of restitution is not excluded from its application to 
interim orders.  
28. This court has also held that the court should be mindful to 
neutralize the effect of wrong interim orders which they have been 
persuaded to pass. (See Indore Development Authority v. 
Manoharlal & Ors., (2020) 8 SCC 129 and Bhupinder Singh v. 
Unitech Ltd., 2023 SCC OnLine SC 321).  

18 
 
29. This Court has also held that the maxim actus curiae 
neminem gravabit will apply in such a scenario, and orders of 
restitution can be passed directing the party which obtained the 
advantage to compensate the party which suffered the 
disadvantage (See Kalabharati Advertising v. Hemant Vimalnath 
Narichania & Ors., (2010) 9 SCC 437). 
30. Applying these principles to the facts of the present case, we 
find the following. The vacant seat ordered could not be filled 
because by the time the Writ Petitions were disposed of, the 
counselling had concluded and the cut-off date for admissions were 
also over. The colleges will have to carry that vacant seat for the 
entire duration of the MBBS Course. In the first case, the Writ 
Petition was dismissed. Though, in the second case also, the Writ 
Petition was dismissed ultimately at the student’s behest, the High 
Court order was set aside and the student was accommodated for 
the succeeding academic year. The fact remains that even in the 
case of the second appellant herein (RKDF Homeopathy Medical 
College), the seat could not be filled and continued to remain 

19 
 
vacant. The colleges have been prejudiced for no fault of theirs. In 
both cases, the Writ Petitions were disposed of after the admissions 
deadlines were over.  
31. Ordering an additional seat in the succeeding academic year 
is not an option, in view of the pronouncement of this Court 
referred to hereinabove.  Even in the S. Krishna Sradha (supra), 
the exception carved out was to create an additional seat where the 
student was prejudiced. In this case, it is the college which has been 
prejudiced. The prejudice is because, with the seat remaining 
vacant for the entire duration of the course, to that extent they will 
be deprived of the fees, while their expenditure will remain same.  
32. In the special facts of the case and considering that it is a case 
of one seat in each college, we feel that ends of justice will be 
served if we grant liberty to the appellant colleges to make a 
representation to the Fee Fixation Committee/Fee Fixation 
Authority of the State highlighting the vacancy caused due to the 
interim order of the High Court. If such a representation is made, 
the Fee Fixation Committee/Fee Fixation Authority shall, while 

20 
 
fixing the fees for college (for future batches) reckon the deficit in 
fees that has resulted due to the single vacant seat and fix the fees 
by adding such amount to the total fees proposed to be fixed which 
will restitute the colleges monetarily. Considering that it is a single 
seat and since the fee will be spread over for a period of five years, 
the financial impact on whom the burden will fall will be marginal, 
in proportion to the total fee payable. On the current facts, we find 
that this is the best possible option, to neutralize the effect of the 
interim orders which have operated to the prejudice of the colleges.  
33. In view of what has been discussed hereinabove, we partly 
allow the appeals and direct that the appellant colleges will be at 
liberty to make a representation to the Fee Fixation Committee/Fee 
Fixation Authority pointing out their grievance, as set out above, 
and the Fee Fixation Committee/Fee Fixation Authority shall pass 
appropriate orders in terms of the holding rendered in this 
judgment.  
 

21 
 
34. The appeals are partly allowed in the above terms. No order 
as to costs. 
………........................J. 
    
 
 
 
           [B.R. GAVAI] 
 
……….........................J. 
    
 
 
 
           [K. V. VISWANATHAN] 
 
New Delhi; 
7th November, 2024.