2024 INSC 860
 
                 
  
Arbitration Petition No. 15/2018                                                        Page 1 of 5 
 
 
 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
Arbitration Petition No. 15/2018 
 
LIFEFORCE CRYOBANK SCIENCES INC 
…Petitioner 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
CRYOVIVA BIOTECH PVT. LTD. & ORS.  …Respondent(s) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
MANOJ MISRA, J. 
 
1. 
 The petitioner which is a company duly incorporated under 
the laws of the United States of America1 has invoked the 
jurisdiction of this Court under sub-sections (6) and (12) of 
Section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 19962 for 
appointment of a sole arbitrator in terms of arbitration clause 
stipulated in the agreements dated 27 December 2009 and 
11 February 2010 to adjudicate upon the disputes between 
the petitioner and the respondents. 
 
 
1 USA 
2 1996 Act 
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2024.11.08
17:04:37 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
                 
  
Arbitration Petition No. 15/2018                                                        Page 2 of 5 
 
 
2. 
The petitioner’s case inter alia is that it has purchased the 
assets of Cryobank International, Inc3 on 8 June 2010 at a 
public auction in pursuance of a decree dated 5 May 2010 
passed by the Circuit Court of Florida, USA. Following which, 
a certificate of title was issued in its favor certifying purchase 
of all assets, tangible and intangible, of Cryobank USA by it.  
On basis thereof, the petitioner claims to have stepped into 
the shoes of Cryobank USA.  
3. 
According to the petitioner, the dispute between the 
petitioner and the respondents stems from Exclusive and 
Perpetual License Agreement4 and Share Subscription and 
Shareholders Agreement.5  License agreement is between 
Cryobanks USA and Cryobanks India International Pvt. Ltd 
(now known as Cryoviva Biotech Pvt. Ltd. – Respondent No.1 
herein). The same contains an arbitration clause in Section 
7. Whereas Share Subscription Agreement is between RJ 
Corp (respondent no.2 herein) acting on behalf of itself and 
its shareholders, namely, Devyani Enterprises Pvt. Ltd.- 
respondent no.3, Devyani Overseas Private Ltd. – respondent 
no.4, RK Jaipuria & Sons (HUF) – respondent no.5, Dhara 
Jaipuria – respondent no.6; Cryobank USA; and Cryobanks 
India International Pvt Ltd (now Cryoviva Biotech Pvt. Ltd. – 
Respondent No.1). The same has an arbitration clause in 
clause XVII. Under both the arbitration agreements the 
 
3 Cryobank USA 
4 License Agreement 
5 Share Subscription Agreement 

 
                 
  
Arbitration Petition No. 15/2018                                                        Page 3 of 5 
 
 
disputes are referable to a sole arbitrator subject to the 
jurisdiction of courts at Delhi. 
4. 
 It is the case of the petitioner that under the license 
agreement, the respondents were entitled to use Cryobank’s 
intellectual property rights in lieu of consideration which 
included issue of shares in the respondent company. It is 
stated that the petitioner stepped into the shoes of Cryobank 
USA, and this fact was acknowledged by the respondent 
company in various correspondences. However, since 
petitioner’s demand was not met, arbitration clause had to 
be invoked vide notice dated 29.09.2017.  
5. 
 In response to the notice of these proceedings, the 
respondents’ case inter alia is that the license agreement was 
non-assignable, and the respondents have not accepted the 
petitioner as the assignee. There is, therefore, no privity of 
contract. Hence, the petition is liable to be dismissed. 
6. 
 We have heard learned counsel for the parties. 
7. 
 At the stage of considering an application for appointment of 
an arbitrator the Court is required to examine whether there 
exists an arbitration agreement between the parties. The 
existence of an arbitration agreement is not an issue.  The 
issue is that it is not between the petitioner and the 
respondent company but between Cryobank USA and the 
respondents. According to the respondents the petitioner has 
only bought assets of Cryobank USA but, in absence of 
respondents’ consent, has not stepped into the shoes of 
Cryobank USA.  

 
                 
  
Arbitration Petition No. 15/2018                                                        Page 4 of 5 
 
 
8. 
 On the other hand, the petitioner has referred to several 
documents/correspondences to canvass that the respondent 
has accepted the petitioner as having stepped into the shoes 
of Cryobank USA. Petitioner has also annexed certificate to 
indicate that rights under all existing contracts including 
intellectual property rights of Cryobank USA were purchased 
by the petitioner in auction sale.  
9. 
 In Khardah Company Ltd. v. Raymon & Co (India) Pvt. 
Ltd., AIR 1962 SC 1810 it was held that an assignment of 
a contract might result by transfer either of the rights or of 
the obligations thereunder. But there is a well-recognized 
distinction between these two classes of assignments. As a 
rule, obligations under a contract cannot be assigned except 
with the consent of the promisee, and when such consent is 
given, it is really a novation resulting in substitution of 
liabilities. On the other hand, the rights under a contract are 
assignable unless the contract is personal in its nature, or 
the rights are incapable of assignment either under the law 
or under an agreement between the parties. 
10. Following the decision in Khardah Company (supra) in DLF 
Power Ltd. v. Mangalore Refinery & Petrochemicals Ltd., 
2016 SCC OnLine Bom 5069 a single judge of the Bombay 
High Court held that the arbitration agreement in a contract 
is a benefit which can be assigned along with the main 
contract or even otherwise. 
11. Be that as it may, since at the stage of consideration of a 
prayer under Section 11(6) of the 1996 Act the Court has to 

 
                 
  
Arbitration Petition No. 15/2018                                                        Page 5 of 5 
 
 
confine itself to the examination of the existence of an 
arbitration agreement (vide sub-section (6-A) of Section 11), 
it would not be appropriate for us to delve deep into the issue 
as it could well be considered by the arbitrator on the basis 
of evidence led by the parties. More so, when existence of 
arbitration agreement in the license agreement and share 
subscription agreement is not in dispute.  
12. We, therefore, deem it appropriate to refer the matter to the 
Delhi International Arbitration Centre for appointment of a 
sole arbitrator to adjudicate upon the dispute between the 
parties.   
13. It is made clear that we have not expressed any opinion on 
the merits of the claim of either party including with regard 
to the arbitrability of the dispute. All contentions and pleas 
are kept open for the parties to raise before the arbitral 
tribunal. 
14. Subject to above, the petition including all pending 
applications, if any, stand disposed of. 
 
…………………………………..CJI. 
     
 
 
 
 
               (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud) 
 
..............................................J. 
                                                                       (Manoj Misra) 
New Delhi; 
November 8, 2024