2024 INSC 861
Page 1 of 38 
 
Reportable  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
INHERENT JURISDICTION 
 
 
Review Petition (C) No. 1565 of 2022 in C.A. No. 5822 of 2022  
 
 
 
M/s Siddamsetty Infra Projects Pvt. Ltd.   
 
 
…Petitioner  
 
 
 
Versus 
 
 
Katta Sujatha Reddy & Ors.   
 
 
 
 
…Respondents  
 
 
 
And With  
Review Petition (C) No. 1839 of 2024 in C.A. No. 5823 of 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2024.11.08
17:08:33 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 38 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
 
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 
 
Table of Contents 
A. Background ..................................................................................................... 3 
B. Judgments of the Trial Court, High Court and this Court ................................ 7 
C. Submissions .................................................................................................. 16 
D. Grounds for exercising review jurisdiction .................................................... 17 
E. Limitation ....................................................................................................... 19 
F. 
Specific performance .................................................................................... 25 
G. 
Lis pendens ............................................................................................... 32 
H. 
Relief ......................................................................................................... 36 
 
 
1. 
The petitioner has instituted proceedings under Article 137 of the 
Constitution read with Order XLVII Rule 1 of the Supreme Court Rules 2013 
seeking a review of the judgment of a three-Judge Bench of this Court dated 25 
August 2022. By the judgment, this Court allowed the appeal against the judgment 
of the High Court of Telangana dated 23 April 2021 by which the suit for specific 
performance was partially decreed by directing the registration of the suit property 
in favour of the petitioner proportionate to the extent of the consideration paid. The 
issue for the consideration of this Court is whether the judgment of this Court dated 
25 August 2022 suffers from an error apparent on the face of the record which 
warrants the exercise of the review jurisdiction. 

PART A  
Page 3 of 38 
 
A. 
Background 
2. 
On 19 March 1994, Shri Debbad Narayana, Shri Vishweswara Rao 
(represented by the tenth to twelfth respondents who are his legal representatives), 
the third respondent, fourth respondent and fifth respondent (“original owners”) 
entered into an agreement to sell a land admeasuring 127.29 acs to the first, 
second, sixth, seventh and eight respondents (“vendors”). On the date of the 
agreement, possession to the extent of 65.23 acs was delivered to the vendors. 
Upon the payment of the balance sale consideration, the possession of the entire 
property was delivered. A sale deed was not executed, though the full sale 
consideration was paid. However, on 28 March 1994, an irrevocable power of 
attorney was executed in favour of the vendors.  
3. 
On 26 March 1997, the vendors executed an agreement to sell in favour of 
the petitioner. This agreement will be referred to as the “first agreement to sell”. By 
the agreement, the first and the second respondents offered to alienate the 
scheduled property of 38.15 acs1 for a sale consideration of Rs 38,37,500. The 
agreement notes that the petitioner paid a sum of Rs 5,30,000 in cash and Rs 
6,00,000 in cheque as advance and earnest money. The relevant clauses of the 
agreement to sell are extracted below:  
“3. The purchaser shall pay a sum of Rs. 27,07,200/- 
(Rupees Twenty Seven Lakhs seven thousand five 
 
1 “All that the agriculture land bearing Sy. Nos. 301 part, 302, 303, 304 part totally admeasuring Ac. 38-
15 guntas situated at Budwel village, the then Hyderabad West Tq., now Rajendernagar Mandar, R.R. 
District, which is bounded by as under:- 
 
East: Sy. No. 381, 380 and 326 
 
West: Sy. No. 54 Village boundary of Irsalgandi  
 
North: Sy. No. 381, 380 and 326 
 
South: Sy. No. 300 and 306” 
 

PART A  
Page 4 of 38 
 
hundred 
only) 
towards 
the 
balance 
sale 
consideration within three months from this date to 
the parties of the second part herein and if the 
purchaser does not honour to pay the balance sale 
consideration of Rs. 27,07,500/- (Rupees Twenty 
Seven Lakhs Seven Thousand and Five Hundred 
Only) within a period of three months from the date 
of this date, the advance amount paid will be 
forfeited and this agreement of sale will be cancelled 
if the vendors fail to furnish the non-encumbrance 
certificate, 
income 
tax 
exemption 
certificate, 
agricultural certificates to the purchaser within three 
months. 
[…] 
6. The parties of the first part and the parties of the 
second part herein undertake that they will execute 
a registered sale deed or deeds or any other nature 
of documents as desired by the purchaser in favour 
of the purchaser or its nominee or nominees, after 
receiving the balance sale consideration. 
[…] 
20. The parties of the first part and the second part 
herein undertake to execute the documents either 
registered or un-registered as desired by the 
purchaser 
after 
receiving 
the 
balance 
sale 
consideration to the extent to the schedule property.  
[…] 
21. The parties of the first part are not at all 
concerned to the sale consideration agreed by the 
parties of the second part herein with the purchaser 
as 
already 
they 
received 
the 
agreed 
sale 
consideration from the parties of the second part 
herein as per the agreement dated 19th March 1994. 
[…] 
23. The parties of the second part herein undertake 
on any pretext they will not make any claim for 
enhancing the agreed sale consideration.” 
 
 
 
 
 
       
(emphasis supplied) 
 

PART A  
Page 5 of 38 
 
4. 
  The first agreement to sell refers to the “original owners” as the “parties of 
the first part”. The agreement refers to the “vendors” as the “parties to the second 
part”. The petitioner is referred to as the “purchaser”. It must also be noted that the 
recital to the first sale agreement states that the “parties of the first part and parties 
1,3,5 and 6 of the parties of the second part” have been made a party to the 
agreement only to ensure that there is no “cloud over the title”.  
5. 
On 27 March 1997, an agreement to sell was executed by the first and 
second respondents in favour of the petitioner to sell the scheduled property of 
1.33 Acs2 for a consideration of Rs 1,82,500.  This agreement will be referred to as 
the second agreement to sell. 
6. 
On 8 February 2000, the petitioner issued a legal notice (“first legal notice”) 
to the first and second respondents calling upon them to receive the balance sale 
consideration and execute the sale deed. On 14 April 2000, the second respondent 
responded to the legal notice claiming to not have received the part-payment and 
refusing to execute a sale deed in the petitioner’s favour. On 6 July 2002, the 
petitioner issued another legal notice (“second legal notice”) to all the 
respondents calling upon them to execute the sale deed upon the receipt of the 
balance consideration. The first and second respondents replied to the legal notice 
by a letter dated 22 July 2002 claiming that (a) the execution is barred by limitation; 
(b) they were ready with the documents required under Clause 3 of the first 
 
2 “All that the agricultural land bearing Sy. Nos. 304 part totally admeasuring Ac. 1.33 guntas situated 
at Budwel village, the then Hyderabad West Tq. Now Rajendernagar mandal, R.R. District, which is 
bounded by as under:- 
 
East: Sy. No. 308 
 
West: Sy. No. 3030 
 
North: Sy. No. 326 
 
South: Sy. No. 305”. 

PART A  
Page 6 of 38 
 
agreement to sell but the petitioner was not willing to pay the balance 
consideration; and (c) the first legal notice dated 8 February 2000 was ante-dated 
to overcome limitation. The first legal notice was posted on 30 March 2000 by 
registered post. 
7. 
On 9 August 2002, the petitioner instituted a suit seeking a decree for 
specific performance of the first and the second agreements to sell. The case of 
the petitioner in the suit was: 
a. 
Rs.34,70,000 towards the sale consideration for the first agreement and Rs 
10,850 as advance for the second agreement was paid. Thus, of the 
aggregate sale consideration of Rs. 40,20,000, Rs, 34,80,850 was paid and 
only a balance of Rs 5,39,150 remained outstanding; 
b. 
The possession of the suit land was delivered under the agreement; and 
c. 
The petitioner has always been ready and willing to perform his part of the 
agreements. Both the agreements required the respondents to furnish the 
petitioner with necessary permissions and certificates, which they failed to do. 
8. 
 The petitioner prayed for a decree for specific performance upon the receipt 
of the balance sale consideration of Rs 5,39,150. The petitioner sought alternative 
reliefs of (a) delivery of possession of the suit land; or (b) a direction to refund the 
consideration of Rs. 34,80,850 paid with interest of 36% per annum. 
 

PART B 
Page 7 of 38 
 
B. 
Judgments of the Trial Court, High Court and this Court  
9. 
By a judgment dated 12 December 2010, the Additional District Judge 
dismissed the suit instituted by the petitioner. The Trial Court held that the petitioner 
is not entitled to a decree or specific performance for the following reasons: 
a. 
The respondents did not dispute the execution of the two agreements to sell. 
There is also no dispute over the identity of the property. The petitioner is only 
required to prove that he was always willing to perform his part of the 
agreement; 
b. 
It can be inferred from the evidence on record that the petitioner does not 
have possession of the suit property and that a false plea that possession has 
been delivered has been made because: 
i. The alternative prayer of the petitioner in the suit was to put him in 
possession of the property if, for any reason, the Court concludes that 
the possession of the suit property was not delivered. The petitioner 
would not have sought the alternative prayer if he were confident about 
being in possession of the suit property; 
ii.The petitioner did not plead when he was put in possession of the 
property. PW-1 (the petitioner) was not able to respond to a question 
during cross-examination on when he was put in possession of property; 
iii.Though PW-2 (the owner of the land adjacent to the suit property) 
deposed that the petitioner developed the suit property by fencing it and 
constructing internal roads, these aspects did not find a mention in either 

PART B 
Page 8 of 38 
 
the deposition of PW-1 or the plaint. Further, the photographs of the suit 
property also did not reflect these developments; 
iv.The sale agreements also did not conclusively indicate that the petitioner 
was put in possession of the suit property; 
v.The first legal notice issued by the petitioner does not mention that 
possession was delivered. The claim is only made in the second legal 
notice; and 
vi.The draft sale deed that the petitioner allegedly prepared and sent to the 
respondents also does not mention that possession was delivered. 
c. 
A cheque of Rs 5,40,000 issued by the petitioner towards 
consideration was dishonoured. So, the petitioner paid Rs 29,30,000 towards 
the sale consideration and not Rs 34,70,000, as claimed by him. The 
petitioner made a false plea that he had paid Rs 34,70,000. The table 
indicating the payments made by the petitioner is below: 
26.3.1997 
Rs. 5,40,000 (cheque dated 
2.4.1997 
which 
was 
dishonoured) 
26.3.1997 
Rs. 11,30,000 (Rs. 5,30,00 by 
cash and Rs. 6,00,00 by cheque) 
26.3.1997 
Rs, 13,00,000 by cheque 
9.4.1997 
Rs. 5,00,000 by cheque 
 

PART B 
Page 9 of 38 
 
d. 
Clause 3 of the sale agreements states that the petitioner is required to pay 
the balance consideration and the respondents must furnish certificates within 
three months. The clause prescribes a consequence for non-payment, that 
the agreement would be cancelled. However, the clause does not prescribe 
any consequence if the respondents fail to furnish the necessary certificates 
within three months. It cannot be concluded that time is of the essence only 
because the agreement requires the petitioner to pay the balance 
consideration within three months. The respondents had not obtained the 
permissions and certifications required under Clause 3 and they did not inform 
the petitioner about any steps taken to obtain them. The cross-examination of 
DW-1 (first respondent) indicates this. Thus, time is not of essence in the 
agreement; 
e. 
The petitioner claims that he issued the first legal notice on 8 February 2000. 
However, the postal cover and postal certificate indicate that it was registered 
on 31 March 2000. Thus, the petitioner ante-dated the legal notice to 
overcome limitation ; 
f. 
The petitioner is not entitled to the discretionary relief of specific performance 
if a false plea is made. In this case, the petitioner made three false pleas; 
g. 
The petitioner has been unable to prove that he was willing to perform his part 
of the contract within three years from the sale agreements and  specifically, 
within three months according to the agreement. If the petitioner was able to 
perform his part, a notice would have been issued earlier or the balance would 
have been deposited in the bank; 

PART B 
Page 10 of 38 
 
h. 
The first part of Article 54 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act 1963 applies 
to the facts of the case. The petitioner was required to pay the balance 
consideration within three months from the date of the sale agreement. The 
suit should have been filed on or before 26 June 2000 (three years from the 
date fixed for the performance). However, the suit was filed on 9 August 2002, 
nearly two years after the limitation expired. Thus, the suit was time barred; 
and 
i. 
The suit was barred by time for recovery of the advance amount in terms of 
Article 47 of Schedule to the Limitation Act.  
10. 
The petitioner preferred an appeal before the High Court against the 
judgment of the Additional District Judge. By a judgment dated 23 April 2021, the 
High Court partly allowed the appeal for the following reasons: 
a. 
The Trial Court did not distinguish between the time fixed for payment of sale 
consideration and the time for the performance of the contract. The first part 
of Clause 3 of the agreements only fixes the time for the payment of sale 
consideration. The performance of the contract hinges on the respondents 
furnishing the documents. The agreements do not fix a time for the 
performance of the contract. Thus, the second part of Article 54 of the 
schedule to the Limitation Act applies. The limitation begins from the date of 
refusal of performance. The suit was filed on 30 July 2002, which is within 
three months of 14 April 2000 (the date when the respondents’ responded to 
the first legal notice). Even if the first legal notice issued by the petitioner was 
ante-dated, it would not affect the merits of the issue since limitation ought to 

PART B 
Page 11 of 38 
 
be calculated from the date of refusal. Further, the conclusion that the 
petitioner did not file a suit immediately after the issuance of the second legal 
notice is erroneous. The second legal notice was issued on 6 July 2002. The 
suit was filed on 30 July 2002. The suit was numbered on 9 August 2002; 
b. 
It cannot be concluded that possession was not delivered merely because 
there was no mention of it in the sale agreements or the first legal notice. The 
finding of the Trial Court on the aspect of possession and that the petitioner 
made a false plea in this regard is erroneous. Even otherwise, the issue of 
whether the petitioner has possession of the suit property is immaterial for the 
relief of specific performance. The delivery of possession is inherent and 
ancillary to the relief of specific performance under Section 55 of the Transfer 
of Property Act 1882. (Relied on Babulal v. Hajarilal Kishorilal3); 
c. 
The respondents received a substantial amount of the sale consideration of 
Rs. 38,80,850 out of the total sale consideration of Rs. 40,20,000. The 
respondents failed to provide the certificates. The first respondent admitted 
that she received the amount in her cross-examination though she had denied 
the same earlier in her written statement and chief examination.  The sale 
deed could not be executed because of the fault of the respondents. It cannot 
be concluded that the petitioner did not approach the respondents for the 
payment of the balance consideration merely because he could not depose 
the particulars of when he approached them. Further, though the first and the 
second respondents pleaded that they had obtained the necessary 
 
3 1982 (1) SCC 525 

PART B 
Page 12 of 38 
 
documentation as required by Clause 3 of the sale agreement in both the 
written statement and evidence, this version was denied during the cross-
examination of DW-1 and DW-2 (husband of DW-1). The Trial Court 
concluded that the respondents were not ready with the certifications. This 
finding was not assailed by the counsel for the respondents; 
d. 
The petitioner would not benefit from not performing the remainder of the 
contract when he already paid 90 percent of the sale consideration. The 
petitioner filed an Interlocutory Application to deposit the balance sale 
consideration of Rs. 5,39,150 which was allowed. The petitioner has shown 
bona fides by depositing the balance consideration. Thus, the oral evidence 
of the petitioner (PW-1) that he approached the respondents to fulfil the 
contract cannot be disbelieved. The petitioner has proven his readiness and 
willingness to perform the contract; 
e. 
The conclusion of the Trial Court that the petitioner made a false plea that he 
paid Rs. 34,70,000 when he has only paid Rs, 29,30,000 is erroneous. DW-1 
in her deposition admitted the payments of the petitioner and admitted that 
the balance amount of Rs.5,39,150 was deposited in the Court in her cross-
examination. Upon the dishonour of the cheque dated 2 April 1997, the 
plaintiff issued a Demand Draft of Rs. 5,00,000 on 9 April 1997; 
f. 
Merely because the plaintiff did not institute a suit immediately after the reply 
to the first legal notice in 2000, it cannot be inferred that he was not willing to 
perform his part of the contract. The suit was filed within limitation  (relied on 

PART B 
Page 13 of 38 
 
R Lakshmi Kantham v. Devaraji (2019) 8 SCC 62; Mademsetty 
Satyanarayana v. G. Yelloji Rao (AIR 1965 SC 1405)); 
g. 
Time is not of essence to the contract for the reasons recorded in the Trial 
Court’s judgment; and 
h. 
Section 10 of the Specific Relief Act 1963 was amended in 2018, by which 
the relief of specific performance is no longer a discretionary power. Section 
10 is a procedural provision. All procedural laws are retrospective. The 
amended provision applies to all pending proceedings. 
The High Court directed that since the petitioner had paid 90 percent of the sale 
consideration, the suit for specific performance can be decreed in favour of the 
petitioner to the extent proportionate to the consideration paid. The High Court 
further directed that the amount of Rs, 5,39,150 deposited by the petitioner 
pursuant to the Interlocutory Application must be refunded along with any interest 
that is accrued.  
11. 
Proceedings under Article 136 were instituted against the judgment of the 
High Court. By a judgment dated 25 August 2022, a three-Judge Bench consisting 
of Chief Justice NV Ramana, Justice Krishna Murari and Justice Hima Kohli 
allowed the appeal. This Court referred to the judgment in Chand Rani v. Kamal 
Rani4, in which it was held that there is no presumption that time is of essence in 
a contract for a sale of immovable property and the Court may infer if it was of 
essence based on (a) the express terms of the contract; (b) the nature of the 
 
4 (1993) 1 SCC 519 

PART B 
Page 14 of 38 
 
property; and (c) surrounding circumstances such as the object of the contract. 
Relying on the judgment, this Court held that in the facts of the present case, time 
is of essence for the following reasons: 
a. 
Both the vendors’ and the purchaser’s obligations in Clause 3 of the sale 
agreements were required to be completed within the stipulated time period 
of three months. The consequences of (in)actions are different. There are no 
consequences if the vendors do not produce the certificates and permissions. 
However, the clause spells out a consequence of forfeiture of the advance 
amount if the purchaser does not pay the balance consideration; and 
b. 
According to Clause 21 of the sale agreements, the parties had entered into 
an earlier agreement to sell dated 19 March 1994. This agreement did not 
materialize and the agreed price was no longer applicable. Fresh agreements 
were entered into “to provide a last opportunity to successfully enter into a 
sale-purchase agreement.” This intention of the parties is also clear from 
Clause 23 of the agreement. 
12. 
 This Court held that the suit was barred by limitation since the suit had to 
be instituted within three years of the time fixed for completing the performance 
(which was three months from the sale agreements). The three years ended in 
June 2000 and the suit ought to have been instituted within that period to not be 
barred by limitation.  
 
 

PART B 
Page 15 of 38 
 
13. 
This Court also held the following on merits: 
a. 
Section 10 of the Specific Relief Act is not procedural but substantive. Thus, 
the 2018 amendment to the provision does not apply retrospectively to 
pending proceedings; 
b. 
 Under the unamended provision, the Court’s power to grant specific 
performance was discretionary. This discretion ought not to be exercised 
arbitrarily5. The purchaser must be vigilant to enforce his right. Clause 3 of 
the agreements was drafted to provide “one last opportunity for the purchaser 
to make good their lapse which had happened on the earlier occasion.” The 
time for performance of the contract, including payment lasted till June 1997; 
c. 
The plaintiff was not ready and willing to perform the contract. The purchaser 
did not voluntarily adhere to the time stipulated under the contract. However, 
the vendors fulfilled their obligation to provide documentation. DW-1 averred 
that all documents were available and that the petitioner entered into an 
agreement only after he was satisfied with the title. Specific performance 
cannot be enforced in favour of a party who has not proven that he was always 
ready and willing to perform his part of the contract; 
d. 
The Trial Court’s reasoning on the question of whether the petitioner has 
possession of the suit property is correct; and
 
 
5 Saradamani kandappan v. S. Rajalakshmi (2011) 12 SCC 18 

PART C 
Page 16 of 38 
 
e. 
Section 12 of the Specific Relief Act does not apply to situations where the 
inability to perform the contract arises out of the party’s own conduct.6 In the 
instant case, there was no inability on the part of the parties to perform the 
contract. The petitioner was not willing to perform the contract after entering 
into a “time-sensitive agreement”. 
14. 
This Court directed the respondents/vendors to repay the sale consideration 
received with an interest of 7.5 percent from the date on which the payment was 
made till the time the entire amount is paid back. The payment was directed to be 
made within six months. 
15. 
The petitioner filed a review petition against the judgment of this Court.  
C. 
Submissions  
16. 
 Mr Neeraj Kishan Kaul, senior counsel submitted that the judgment of this 
Court suffers from the following apparent errors that warrants the exercise of the 
review jurisdiction: 
a. 
Clause 21 of the agreements to sell refers to the sale agreement executed by 
the original owners in favour of the vendors in 1994. Though petitioner was 
not a party to that agreement, this court has proceeded on the incorrect 
premise that the 1994 agreement was between the parties; 
b. 
The Trial Court, after analysing the evidence on record, concluded that the 
vendors did not produce certificates and permissions as required by Clause 
 
6 Jaswinder Kaur v. Gurmeet Singh, (2017) 12 SCC 810 

PART D 
Page 17 of 38 
 
3 of the sale agreements. This finding was not challenged before the High 
Court. This Court wrongly records that the vendors produced the certificates 
without referring to the direct evidence on record to the contrary; and 
c. 
Clause 3 does not state that the agreement will be cancelled if the petitioner 
does not pay the balance amount within three months. 
17. 
 Mr Rakesh Dwivedi and Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, senior counsel for the 
respondents argued that this is not a fit case for the exercise of review jurisdiction. 
It was submitted that the judgment of this Court was sound, independent of the 
(mis)reference to the 1994 agreement. The learned counsel further submitted that 
the suit property was alienated after the judgment of this Court and before the 
review petition was registered. It was argued that the doctrine of lis pendens does 
not apply when the petition was in the registry in a defective state.  
D. 
Grounds for exercising review jurisdiction 
18. 
Before proceeding with the analysis, we will refer to the grounds for 
exercising review jurisdiction. Order XLVII of the Supreme Court Rules 2013 states 
that an application for review must be filed on the grounds mentioned in Order 
XLVII Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 (“CPC”). Order XLVII Rule 1 of 
CPC lays down the following grounds for review: 
a. 
Discovery of new and important matter or evidence, which after the exercise 
of due diligence was not within their knowledge or could not be produced by 
them at the time the decree was passed; 
b. 
Mistake or error apparent on the face of the record; and 

PART D 
Page 18 of 38 
 
c. 
Any other sufficient reason.  
19. 
 This Court has laid down the following principles on the exercise of review 
jurisdiction7: 
a. 
Review proceedings are not by way of appeal and have to be strictly confined 
to the scope and ambit of Order 47 Rule 1 CPC; 
b. 
Error on the face of record must be an error which must strike one on a mere 
perusal and must not on a long drawn process; 
c. 
The power of review must not be exercised on the ground that the decision 
was erroneous on merits; 
d. 
The phrase “any other sufficient reason” means a reason that is analogous to 
the grounds specified in Order 47 Rule 1 CPC; and 
e. 
The mere possibility of two views on the subject cannot be a ground for 
review. 
20. 
 Let us proceed to analyse if the judgment of this Court satisfies the grounds 
for review. The issues which arose for the consideration of this Court were two-
fold: first, whether the suit instituted by the petitioner was barred by limitation; and 
second, whether the suit for specific performance must be decreed. The finding 
that time was of essence to the contract was central to the Court’s reasoning on 
both the issues. 
 
7 See Murali Sundaram v. Jothibai Kannan, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 185; Karnail Singh v. State of 
Haryana, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 961; Kamlesh Verma v. Mayawati, (2013) 8 SCC 320; Sanjay Kumar 
Agarwal v. State Tax Officer, (2024) 2 SCC 362 

PART E 
Page 19 of 38 
 
E. 
Limitation 
21. 
 The Schedule to the Limitation Act 1963 prescribes the period of limitation. 
Article 54 of the Schedule prescribes the period of limitation for a suit for specific 
performance of a contract:  
Description of suit 
Period of limitation 
Time from which period 
begins to run 
54. 
For 
specific 
performance of a contract 
Three years 
The date fixed for the 
performance, or, if no such 
date is fixed, when the 
plaintiff has notice that 
performance is refused.  
 
22. 
The provision has two parts. The first part deals with situations where the 
contract fixes a date for performance. The period of limitation of three years runs 
from the date fixed for completion of performance. The second part deals with 
situations where the contract does not fix a date for the performance of the contract. 
In such situations, the period of limitation runs from the date when the plaintiff has 
notice that the defendant has refused performance.  
23. 
The issue for consideration was whether the sale agreements fix a date for 
the performance of the agreement. This Court referred to Clauses 3, 21, and 23 to 
hold that the agreement fixes a date of three months for performance. This Court 
interpreted Clause 3 as follows:  
“31. At the outset, this Court has perused Clause 3 
of the agreements, which is in two parts. The first 
part provides for the purchaser’s obligations, while 
the second part details the obligation of the vendors 
to provide the requisite certificates. Although both 
the obligations were required to be completed within 

PART E 
Page 20 of 38 
 
the stipulated period of three months, there is a 
substantive difference between these two sets of 
obligations. The obligation upon the vendors 
concerned was production of certain certificates, 
such as income tax exemption certificate and 
agriculture certificate. No consequences were 
spelt 
out 
for 
non-performance 
of 
such 
obligations. Whereas the obligation on the 
purchaser, was to make the complete payment of the 
sale consideration within three months. The clause 
further mandates forfeiture of the advance 
amount if the payment obligation is not met 
within the time period stipulated therein.” 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
24. 
 This Court observed that Clause 3 casts two obligations: one on the 
petitioner/purchaser and the other on the respondents/vendors. To this extent, we 
find no error. However, the conclusion that the Clause only provides consequences 
for the non-payment of the balance consideration by the purchaser and not for the 
non-production of certificates by the vendors is an error apparent on the face of 
the record. The judgment correctly notes that Clause 3 prescribes that the advance 
amount paid will be forfeited if the balance is not paid by the petitioner in three 
months. However, this Court missed that the Clause also provides a consequence 
for not producing the documents within three months, which is the cancellation of 
the sale agreements. This Court seems to have missed the phrase “and this 
agreement of sale will be cancelled..”. If this Court had read “and this agreement 
of sale will be cancelled” as a consequence of the non-fulfilment of the obligation 
cast on the purchaser, it could still be argued that it was a probable (though in our 
opinion, erroneous) view and not an error apparent on the face of the record. 
However, the judgment completely disregards the phrase “and this agreement of 
sale will be cancelled” in Clause 3. In paragraph 32 of the judgement, this Court 

PART E 
Page 21 of 38 
 
further notes that non-payment of the balance consideration would lead to a severe 
consequence of “forfeiture”: 
“33. Coming to the aforesaid indicators, the 
language of the agreements makes it clear that 
severe consequences of forfeiture would ensue if the 
payment is not made within three months of the date 
of the agreements.” 
25. 
 Clause 3 has two parts. The first part casts an obligation on the 
purchaser/petitioner and prescribes consequences for it, that is, the forfeiture of 
the advance paid. The word “and” disjuncts this part from the second part which 
casts an obligation on the vendors. The second part prescribes the consequence 
if the vendors do not furnish the documents.  
26. 
This Court further noted that the “language of the agreements” ensures 
severe consequences of forfeiture if the balance consideration is not paid within 
three months. This Court further referred to Clauses 21 and 23 to substantiate this 
interpretation: 
“32. […] It may be noted that as per Clause 21, the 
parties had entered into an earlier agreement to sell 
dated 10.03.1994, which did not materialize and 
accordingly the agreed price therein was no longer 
applicable. It is in this context that the fresh 
agreements were entered into between the parties, 
so as to provide a last opportunity for them to 
successfully enter into a sale-purchase agreement. 
The aforesaid intention of the parties is also made 
clear through Clause 23 of the agreement to sell, 
which reads as under:  
[…] 
33. The aforesaid clause clearly freezes any 
enhancement of the agreed sale consideration, 
which cannot be independent of a fixed time period. 
A contrary interpretation would render the contract 
commercially unreasonable and unworkable. The 

PART E 
Page 22 of 38 
 
moratorium on the enhancement of rates prescribed 
under Clause 23 should be interpreted to be 
predicated on a fixed time and be executable within 
a reasonable period. The same should not be utilized 
to render the commercial wisdom between the 
parties otiose, which is inherent in drafting such 
clauses.” 
27. 
 To recall, Clause 21 stipulates that the parties of the “first part” are not 
concerned with the sale consideration as they have already received the agreed 
sale consideration from the parties of the “second part” by an agreement dated 19 
March 1994. This Court has interpreted the reference to the agreement dated 19 
March 1994 as the agreement between the petitioner and the respondents which 
did not materialise. This is an obvious and apparent error on the face of the record. 
The agreements refer to the original owners from whom the vendors purchased 
the suit property as parties of the “first part”. The vendors are referred to as parties 
to the “second part”. The agreement dated 19 March 1994 is the agreement to sell  
that was executed by the original owners in favour of the vendors. The petitioner 
was not a party to this agreement. The 1997 agreements in favour of the petitioner 
were executed by the original owners in addition to the vendors because though 
the vendors were put in possession of the suit property after the sale agreement, 
a sale deed was not executed. Instead, an irrevocable power of attorney was 
executed in favour of the vendors. Though only the first and the second 
respondents offered to alienate the suit property to the petitioner, the agreement is 
executed by the original owners and vendors other than the first and the second 
respondent as well to prevent any litigation in the future. The relevant clauses of 
the recital to the agreement dated 26 March 1997 are extracted below:  

PART E 
Page 23 of 38 
 
“4. 
Whereas parties of the Second part herein 
have entered into an agreement of sale with the 
parties of the first part herein dated 19 March 1994. 
5. 
Whereas the parties of the second part herein 
have purchased from the parties of the first part to 
an extent of Articles 127-129 guntas only in lad 
bearing Sy.No. 301 part 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 
307, 308 and 309 for a valuable consideration and 
on the date of the agreement possession was 
delivered to an extent of Articles 65-23 guntas and it 
was specifically agreed that an irrevocable general 
power of attorney will be executed through a 
registered document in the names nominated by the 
parties of the second part herein, as such parties of 
the first part herein have executed and irrevocable 
power of attorney on 28 March 1994 which was 
registered on 30th day of April 1994. 
6. 
Whereas parties of the second part herein 
have paid the full sale consideration to the parties of 
the first part and the parties of the first part herein 
have also delivered the possession of the remaining 
extent of Ac. 50-00 gts and to that effect admitting 
and acknowledging the same the parties of the first 
part herein have passed receipts and also got 
executed another regd. Irrevocable power of 
attorney in favour of the parties of the second part 
herein, as such the parties of the second part herein 
become the possessors of the total extent of Ac. 115-
29 guntas. 
7. 
Whereas parties 2 and 4 of the second part 
herein have offered to alienate and extent of Ac. 38-
15 guntas in land bearing Sy. No. 301 part, 302,303 
and 304 part out of the total extent of Ac. 127-29 
guntas @ Rs 1, 00, 000/- per acre which comes to a 
total sum of Rs. 38, 37, 500/- (Rupees Thirty Eight 
Lakhs Thirty Seven Thousand give hundred only) 
and infact, parties of the first part as well parties 
1,3,5 and 6 of the parties of the second part herein 
have no concern either for the agreed sale 
consideration or for the extent under alienation but 
they have been made as parties to this agreement 
not to have a cloud over the title and also to get 
convey the title in a better way along with the rights 
for not to give any scope for the litigation in future on 
any pretext and the parties 1,3,5, and 6 of the parties 
of the second part herein shall be at liberty either to 
enjoy or to alienate to their choice of the extent of 
their share of land situated at Budwel village, 
Rajendernagar mandal, Ranga Reddy District.” 

PART E 
Page 24 of 38 
 
28. 
 Thus, the conclusion that Clause 21 indicates that an agreement was 
executed in 1994 with the petitioner which did not materialise is an error apparent 
on the face of the record. The argument of the respondent that the Court concluded 
that time is of essence independent of the interpretation of Clause 21, in our 
opinion, does not hold merit. This Court placed considerable weightage on Clause 
21. This Court referred to Clauses 3, 21 and 23 to interpret if time was of essence 
in the backdrop of the principles laid down in Chand Rani (supra). To recall, in 
Chand Rani (supra), this Court held there is no presumption that time is of essence 
in a contract for a sale of immovable property and the Court may infer if it was of 
essence based on (a) express terms of the contract; (b) nature of the property; and 
(c) surrounding circumstances such as the object of the contract. Clause 21 was 
interpreted to cast light upon the surrounding circumstances/the object of the 
contract and was crucial to its decision.  
29. 
Having concluded that the interpretation of Clauses 3 and 21 of the Sale 
Agreements was erroneous, there is nothing in Clause 23 alone that could be 
interpreted to prescribe a time for the performance of the contract. Further, the 
judgment also does not take note of Clause 6 of the agreements to sell which 
provides that a sale deed will be executed after receiving the balance sale 
consideration. This clause does not prescribe any time period within which the sale 
deed must be executed. Another question is whether Clause 3 can be 
independently interpreted to prescribe a date for the performance of contract. The 
consequence of the non-payment of the balance consideration in terms of Clause 
3 is the forfeiture of the advance amount paid by the purchaser and not all the 

PART F 
Page 25 of 38 
 
consideration paid by the end of three months. The consequence is not that the 
sale deed shall not be executed.  
30. 
For the above reasons, Clauses 3, 21 and 23 cannot be interpreted to mean 
that a time is fixed for the execution of the sale agreements. Thus, the limitation is 
governed by the second part of Article 54. The limitation of three years prescribed 
by the second part of Article 54 runs from the date when the plaintiff has notice that 
performance has been refused. The petitioner/plaintiff had notice that performance 
is refused only by the reply dated 14 April 2000 to the first legal notice of the 
petitioner. A portion of the reply is extracted below:  
“That our client along with Smt. Kotta Sujatha Reddy 
have not received the alleged amount of Rs. 
34,80,850/- as part sale consideration of the alleged 
agreement.  
That our client has no any liability to execute the sale 
deed in your clients favour on any account under the 
alleged agreement of sale deed 26.3.1997 or 
27.3.1997. As such the execution of any sale deed 
in your client’s favour does not arise.” 
31. 
 Thus, the limitation prescribed by Article 54 sets in from the date when the 
petitioner received the above reply refusing performance. Irrespective of whether 
the suit was instituted on 9 August 2002 (as concluded by the Trial Court) or 30 
July 2002 (as concluded by the High Court), it was within limitation.  
F. 
Specific performance 
32. 
The next issue is whether the petitioner is entitled to a decree for specific 
performance. This Court held that the 2008 amendment to Section 10 of the 
Specific Relief Act does not apply retrospectively and decided the matter based on 

PART F 
Page 26 of 38 
 
Section 10 before the amendment. Section 10, before the amendment, conferred 
courts with the discretion to provide a decree for specific performance. In exercise 
of review jurisdiction, we must not disturb a finding unless there is an error apparent 
on the face of record.  Even assuming that the grant of relief of specific 
performance continued to be discretionary to a suit instituted before the date of the 
amendment, we are of the opinion that this Court committed a grave error in its 
analysis of whether the Court ought to use its discretionary power in this matter. 
Section 10 of the Specific Relief Act before the 2018 amendment read as follows:  
“10. Cases in which specific performance of contract 
enforceable.- Except as otherwise provided in this 
Chapter, the specific performance of any contract 
may, in the discretion of the court, be enforced-  
(a) when there exists no standard for ascertaining 
actual damage caused by the non-performance of 
the act agreed to be done; or  
(b) when the act agreed to be done is such that 
compensation in money for its non-performance 
would not afford adequate relief.  
Explanation.- Unless and until the contrary is proved, 
the court shall presume 
(i) that the breach of a contract to transfer immovable 
property 
cannot 
be 
adequately 
relieved 
by 
compensation in money; and  
(ii) that the breach of a contract to transfer movable 
property can be so relieved except in the following 
cases:  
(a) where the property is not an ordinary article of 
commerce, or is of special value of interest to the 
plaintiff, or consists of goods which are not easily 
obtainable in the market; 
(b) where the property is held by the defendant as 
the agent or trustee of the plaintiff.” 

PART F 
Page 27 of 38 
 
33. 
 This Court referred to the judgment in Saradamani Kandappan v. 
Rajalakshmi8, which laid down the factors that the Courts must consider while 
deciding whether to exercise the discretion of decreeing specific performance of a 
contract:  
“43. Till the issue is considered in an appropriate 
case, we can only reiterate what has been 
suggested in K.S. Vidyanadam [(1997) 3 SCC 1] : 
(i) The courts, while exercising discretion in suits for 
specific performance, should bear in mind that when 
the parties prescribe a time/period, for taking certain 
steps or for completion of the transaction, that must 
have 
some 
significance 
and 
therefore 
time/period prescribed cannot be ignored. 
(ii) The courts will apply greater scrutiny and 
strictness when considering whether the purchaser 
was “ready and willing” to perform his part of the 
contract. 
(iii) Every suit for specific performance need not be 
decreed merely because it is filed within the period 
of limitation by ignoring the time-limits stipulated in 
the agreement. The courts will also “frown” upon 
suits which are not filed immediately after the 
breach/refusal. The fact that limitation is three years 
does not mean that a purchaser can wait for 1 or 2 
years to file a suit and obtain specific performance. 
The three-year period is intended to assist the 
purchasers in special cases, as for example, where 
the major part of the consideration has been paid to 
the vendor and possession has been delivered in 
part-performance, where equity shifts in favour of the 
purchaser.” 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
34. 
 Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act states that specific performance of 
a contract cannot be enforced in favour of the person who fails to prove that he is 
ready and willing to perform the essential terms of the contract which are to be 
performed by him, other than the terms which are prevented or waived by the 
 
8 (2011) 12 SCC 18 

PART F 
Page 28 of 38 
 
defendant. The explanation to clause (c) states that it is not essential for the plaintiff 
to tender money to the defendant where the contract involves the payment of 
money, unless directed by court. Section 16(c) reads as follows:  
“16. Personal bars to relief.- Specific performance of 
a contract cannot be enforced in favour of a person- 
[…] 
(c) who fails to prove that he has performed or has 
always been ready and willing to perform the 
essential terms of the contract which are to be 
performed by him, other than terms the performance 
of which has been prevented or waived by the 
defendant. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of clause (c),- 
(i) where a contract involved the payment of money, 
it is not essential for the plaintiff to actually tender to 
the defendant or to deposit in court any money 
except when so directed by the court;” 
 
35. 
 This Court concluded that the petitioner was not ready and willing to perform 
his part (as required by Section 16(c)) because the balance sale consideration was 
not paid within three months as required by Clause 3: 
“58. From the aforesaid, it is clear that the purchaser 
ought to have been vigilant in the case at hand to enforce 
his right and could not have been lackadaisical in his 
approach. From the facts, it is clear that the purchaser 
had entered into an agreement way back on 
26/27/.03.1997, 
which 
had 
a 
clause 
mandating 
completion of the contract by payment of the remaining 
consideration within three months. The aforesaid clause 
was drafted, as alluded to earlier, for providing one 
last opportunity for the purchaser to make good their 
lapse which had happened on the earlier occasion. In 
this context, the time for performance of the contract 
including the payment lasted till the month of June 1997.” 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 

PART F 
Page 29 of 38 
 
36. 
It is clear from the above extract that this Court held that the petitioner was 
not ready and willing to perform the contract in which time was of essence. The 
conclusion that time was of essence was derived based on an interpretation of 
Clause 3 read with Clause 21. The reasoning based on which this Court held that 
the petitioner was not ready and willing to perform the contract falls in view of the 
conclusion that the interpretation of Clause 21 and Clause 3 by this Court is 
erroneous because of the factual misconception and omission, respectively.  
37. 
 In paragraph 67 of the judgment, this Court also held that the first and the 
second respondents were ready and willing to perform their obligation of providing 
the documents:  
“67. On the aspect of the vendor’s obligation to 
provide requisite and necessary documents, DW1 
(Smt. Katta Sujatha Reddy), has averred that all the 
documents were available. It is only after the 
purchaser was satisfied about the sound title that he 
entered into the agreement to sell.” 
38. 
 There is an error apparent on the face of the record in the factual finding 
recorded above. The Trial Court recorded that the respondents did not produce the 
records. The Trial Court expressly noted that DW-1 initially stated that they 
produced the certificates. However, during the cross-examination, DWs 1-3 
deposed that they had not obtained and produced these documents.  The 
observations of the Trial Court in this regard are extracted below: 
“70. […] It is in the written statement and as well as 
in the reply lawyers notice as if the defendants got 
secured these documents. But, the fact remains and 
undisputed is, the defendant have not obtained such 
certificates and they have not furnished them to the 
plaintiff and they have not even informed to the 
plaintiff what are the steps taken by them in obtaining 

PART F 
Page 30 of 38 
 
these documents and the proceedings taken by 
them in that context. But it is in the pleading and 
in the evidence of DW-1 at the earliest part of 
time that they have obtained these documents. 
But from the later part of evidence of DW-1 by 
filing further chief examination affidavit and from 
the cross-examination of DW-1 to 3 it is made out 
the defendants have not obtained and they are 
not informed to the plaintiff and that they have 
secured such certificates.” 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
39. 
 In the appeal, the High Court categorically noted that the above finding of 
the trial court was not challenged: 
“40. It is also pertinent to note about categorical 
admission by the defendants 6 & 8 that they have 
not obtained certificates and documents for 
completing the sale transaction. But the defendants 
6 & 8 pleaded that they have obtained necessary 
documents both in the written statements and also 
in the evidence. In the cross-examination that 
version of D.W.1 is dismantled and trial Court 
also 
comes 
to 
the 
conclusion 
that 
the 
defendants without obtaining documents and 
certificates simply pleaded that they are ready 
with the certificates. However, that finding is not 
attacked in this appeal, which goes to show that 
the defendants are at fault in not obtaining 
certificates for fulfilling their part of the contract, 
though, the plaintiff paid 90% of the sale 
consideration requesting the defendants 6 & 8 to 
receive balance sale consideration.” 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
40. 
 The judgment of this Court in paragraph 67 only refers to the deposition of 
DW-1 without referring to her cross-examination or the fact that the respondents 
did not challenge the finding of the Trial Court on this aspect. This is another error 
apparent on the face of the record. 

PART F 
Page 31 of 38 
 
41. 
Having held that the basis of the reasoning of this Court on whether the 
petitioner was willing to perform the contract has an error apparent on the face of 
the record, we are required to decide the issue of whether the petitioner was ready 
and willing to perform the contract.  We are of the considered opinion that the 
petitioner was ready and willing to perform the contract in terms of Section 16(c) of 
the Specific Relief Act. The first agreement to sell noted that the purchaser paid a 
sum of Rs.11,30,00 as earnest money. Subsequently, the petitioner paid Rs. 
13,00,000 on the same day by cheque and paid another Rs. 5,00,000 by Demand 
Draft on 9 April 1997. If the petitioner was unwilling to perform the contract, he 
would not have paid nearly 75 percent of the sale consideration. Thus, the 
petitioner with the payment of the additional sum above the earnest money, has 
proved his readiness and willingness to perform the contract. Further, this aspect 
must be analysed in the backdrop of the explanation to Section 16(c) of the Specific 
Relief Act which states that if the contract involves the payment of money, it is not 
necessary that the plaintiff actually tenders the money. It cannot be concluded that 
the petitioner was not ready or willing to perform his part of the contract merely 
because the balance sale consideration was due to be paid.  
42. 
 Section 10, before the amendment in 2018 stated that the Court can 
exercise its discretion to award specific performance of contract where (a) there 
exists no standard for ascertaining the actual damage caused by the non-
performance of the act agreed to be done; or (b) when the act agreed to be done 
is such that compensation in money for its non-performance would not afford 
adequate relief. The Explanation provided that unless there is anything to the 
contrary, the court shall presume  that   the   compensation   in money is   not an 

PART G 
Page 32 of 38 
 
adequate relief for the breach of a contract to transfer immovable property. There 
is nothing in the agreements to sell to rebut this statutory presumption. On an 
application of the facts to the principles in Sections 10 and 16 of the Specific Relief 
Act, we are of the considered opinion that this is a fit case for this Court to exercise 
its discretion to direct specific performance.  
G. 
Lis pendens  
43. 
The respondents submitted that a sale of the suit property was executed 
after the judgment of this Court (25 August 2022) and before the review petition 
was registered (13 December 2022). It was submitted that the third party is in 
possession and enjoyment of the suit property.   
44. 
On 23 September 2022, the petitioner filed a review petition against the 
judgment of this Court dated 25 August 2022. The review was filed within thirty 
days, the prescribed period of limitation in terms of Order XLVII Rule 2 of the 
Supreme Court Rules 2013. On 14 October 2022, the Registry sent a letter to the 
petitioner asking him to cure defects. On 11 November 2022, the petitioner cured 
the defects. On 13 December 2022, the review petition was registered. On 27 
January 2023, the counsel for the petitioner sought six weeks to bring some 
documents on record. On 1 March 2023, the matter was listed before a three-Judge 
Bench of Justice Krishna Murari, Justice Hima Kohli and one of us (Justice DY 
Chandrachud). The matter was not taken up. By an order dated 31 August 2023, 
Justice D Y Chandrachud allowed the application for listing the review petition in 
open court and issued notice, returnable in six weeks.  Justice Hima Kohli did not 
agree and was of the view that the review petition be dismissed. Justice Narasimha 

PART G 
Page 33 of 38 
 
who was the third member of the Bench recused from the matter for personal 
reasons. Subsequently, Justice Manoj Misra was nominated as the third member 
of the Bench. By an order dated 26 September 2024, notice was issued in the 
review petition.  
45. 
  Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act 1882 states that during the 
pendency in any court of any suit in which any right to immovable property is 
directly and specifically in question, the property cannot be transferred or otherwise 
dealt with by any party to the suit or proceedings. The explanation to the provision 
states that for the purposes of the Section, the pendency of a suit or proceedings 
shall be deemed to commence from the date of the presentation of the plaint or 
institution of the proceeding in a Court, and shall continue until the suit or 
proceeding is disposed by a “final decree or order” and complete satisfaction of the 
order is obtained, unless it has become unobtainable by reason of the expiry of 
any period of limitation. Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act reads as follows: 
“52. During the pendency in any Court having 
authority within the limits of India excluding the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir or established beyond such 
limits by the Central Government of any suit or 
proceeding which is not collusive and in which 
any right to immovable property is directly and 
specifically in question, the property cannot be 
transferred or otherwise dealt with by any party to 
the suit or proceeding so as to affect the rights of 
any other party thereto under any decree or order 
which may be made therein, except under the 
authority of the Court and on such terms as it 
may impose. 
 
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section, the 
pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be deemed to 
commence from the date of the presentation of the 
plaint or the institution of the proceeding in a Court 
of competent jurisdiction, and to continue until the 

PART G 
Page 34 of 38 
 
suit or proceeding has been disposed of by a 
final decree or order and complete satisfaction 
or discharge of such decree or order has been 
obtained, or has become unobtainable by reason of 
the expiration of any period of limitation prescribed 
for the execution thereof by any law for the time 
being in force.” 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
46. 
The following conditions ought to be fulfilled for the doctrine of lis pendens 
to apply: 
a. 
There must be a pending suit or proceeding; 
b. 
The suit or proceeding must be pending in a competent court; 
c. 
The suit or proceeding must not be collusive9; 
d. 
The right to immovable property must be directly and specifically in 
question in the suit or proceeding; 
e. 
The property must be transferred by a party to the litigation; and 
f. 
The alienation must affect the rights of any other party to the dispute.10 
47. 
In short, the doctrine of lis pendens that Section 52 of the Transfer of 
Property Act encapsulates, bars the transfer of a suit property during the pendency 
of litigation. The only exception to the principle is when it is transferred under the 
authority of the court and on terms imposed by it.  Where one of the parties to the 
suit transfers the suit property (or a part of it) to a third-party, the latter is bound by 
 
9 A collusive suit is not a real suit but a sham where the claim that is put forward if fictitious. See Nagubai 
Ammal v. B Shama Rao, 1956 SCC 321 
10 See Amit Kumar Shaw v. Farida Khatoon, (2005) 11 SCC 403  

PART G 
Page 35 of 38 
 
the result of the proceedings even if he did not have notice of the suit or proceeding. 
The principle on which this doctrine rests was explained by Lord Turner in Bellamy 
v. Sabine11 as follows: 
“It is, as I think, a doctrine common to the courts both 
of Law and Equity and rests, as I apprehend, upon 
this foundation that it would plainly be impossible 
that any action or suit could be brought to a 
successful termination, if alienations pendente lite 
were permitted to prevail. The plaintiff would be 
liable in every case to be defeated by the defendants 
alienating before the judgment or decree, and would 
be driven to commence his proceedings de novo, 
subject again to be defeated by the same course of 
proceedings.” 
 
48. 
Justice M H Beg in Jayaram Mudaliar v. Ayyaswami12 set out the content 
of the doctrine of lis pendens as follows: 
“14. The background of the provision set out above 
was indicated by one of us (Beg, J.,) in Jayaram 
Mudaliar v. Ayyaswami [(1972) 2 SCC 200, 217 : 
AIR 1973 SC 569] . There, the following definition of 
the lis pendens from Corpus Juris Secundum (Vol. 
LIV, p. 570) was cited: 
“Lis pendens literally means a pending suit, and the 
doctrine of lis pendens has been defined as the 
jurisdiction, power, or control which a court acquires 
over property involved in a suit pending the 
continuance of the action, and until final judgment 
therein.” 
It was observed there: 
“Expositions of the doctrine indicate that the need for 
it arises from the very nature of the jurisdiction of 
Courts and their control over the subject-matter of 
litigation so that parties litigating before it may not 
remove any part of the subject-matter outside the 
power of the Court to deal with it and thus make the 
proceedings infructuous.” 
 
 
11 (1857) 1 De G&J 566 
12 AIR 1973 SC 569 

PART H 
Page 36 of 38 
 
49. 
The purpose of lis pendens is to ensure that the process of the court is not 
subverted and rendered infructuous. In the absence of the doctrine of lis pendens, 
a defendant could defeat the purpose of the suit by alienating the suit property. 
This purpose of the provision is clearly elucidated in the explanation clause to 
Section 52 which defines “pendency”.  Amending Act 20 of 1929 substituted the 
word “pendency” in place of “active prosecution”. The Amending Act also included 
the Explanation defining the expression “pendency of suit or proceeding”. 
“Pendency” is defined to commence from the “date of institution” until the 
“disposal”. The argument of the respondents that the doctrine of lis pendens does 
not apply because the petition for review was lying in the registry in a defective 
state cannot be accepted. The review proceedings were “instituted” within the 
period of limitation of thirty days. The doctrine of lis pendens kicks in at the stage 
of “institution” and not at the stage when notice is issued by this Court. Thus, 
Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act would apply to the third-party purchaser 
once the sale was executed after the review petition was instituted before this 
Court. Any transfer that is made during the pendency is subject to the final result 
of the litigation.13  
H. 
Relief 
50. 
The High Court relied on Section 12 of the Specific Relief Act to decree 
specific performance only to the extent of the consideration paid by the petitioner. 
The directions of the High Court are extracted below: 
“89. […], this court is of the considered opinion that 
by exercising power under Section 12, in order to 
 
13 See GT Girish v. Y Subba Raju, 2022 8 SCR 991 

PART H 
Page 37 of 38 
 
meet the ends of justice, suit can be decreed for 
specific performance only to the extent of 90% of the 
amount paid by the plaintiff to the defendants 6 & 8 
towards sale consideration.  
90. In the result, Appeal Suit is allowed in part 
directing the defendants 6 & 8 to register the suit 
schedule property in favour of the plaintiff 
proportionate to the extent of amount paid by the 
plaintiff i.e., 90% of the total sale consideration[…]. 
91. It is needless to state that the Suit Schedule Land 
is required to be divided by metes and bounds in the 
execution proceedings by the Execution Court, as 
indicating above i.e., 90% and 10% with the 
assistance of an advocate commissioner and the 
90% of the part of the Suit Schedule Land, so 
determined, shall be registered in favour of the 
Appellant in accordance with the law.” 
51. 
 On appeal, this Court held that it was not a fit case to exercise discretion to 
grant relief in terms of Section 12 because the purchaser breached an essential 
condition of the agreements to sell and the suit was filed beyond limitation:  
“77. […] In this case, the petitioner breached the 
essential condition of the contract, which altogether 
disentitles him to claim specific performance. There 
is no doubt that the claim of purchaser is hit by delay 
and laches on their part as they did not take 
appropriate measures within the stipulated time and 
filing of the suit was delayed by almost five years […] 
78. Therefore, we do not think that it is an 
appropriate case for granting relief to the purchaser 
in terms of Section 12 of the Specific Relief Act 1963 
as the claim of the purchaser is barred by delay, 
laches and limitation.” 
52. 
Having concluded that the errors apparent on the face of the record 
identified above go to the root of the reasoning on both the issues of limitation and 
specific performance, we recall the judgment of this Court dated 25 August 2022. 
The judgment of the High Court dated 23 April 2021 is restored.  

PART H 
Page 38 of 38 
 
53. 
The review petitions are allowed in the above terms.  
54. 
Pending application(s), if any, is disposed of.  
 
 
…….……………………………………CJI 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
….….………………………………………J 
  [J. B. Pardiwala] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
….….………………………………………J 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Manoj Misra] 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
November 08, 2024