2024 INSC 871
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6591-6592 OF 2024
GANAPATI BHIKARAO NAIK                             APPELLANT(S)
                                VERSUS
NUCLEAR POWER CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED         RESPONDENT(S)
O R D E R
HRISHIKESH ROY, J. 
1.
Heard Mr. K. Parameshwar, learned senior counsel appearing for
the appellant.
2.  Ms.  Shrinkhla  Tiwari,  learned  counsel  appears  for  the
respondent  –  Nuclear  Power  Corporation  of  India  Limited
(Management). She submits that the present case should await the
decision in  Management of Bharat Fritz Werner Ltd., Bangalore  v.
Bharat  Fritz  Werner  Karmika  Sangha,  Bangalore,  which  is  pending
before this Court in SLP (Civil) Nos. 12658 of 2022 and 12702 of
2022.  The said case relates to whether a Writ Appeal before the
Division  Bench  is  maintainable  from  the  judgment  of  the  Single
Judge in the Writ Petition, challenging the Award of the Labour
Court, as in the present case.
3.
This  Court  is  called  upon  to  examine  the  legality  of  the
judgment  dated  16.12.2020  passed  by  the  learned  Single  Judge,
setting aside the Award dated 09.08.2012.  Therefore we feel that
this Court need not await the outcome of the decision in Management
1
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2024.11.18
11:38:37 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

of Bharat Fritz Werner Ltd., Bangalore, which pertains to intra-
court appeal before the Division Bench, challenging the order of
the learned Single Judge arising out of an Award passed by the
Labour Court.
4.  The core issue in the present case is whether the appellant, as
a family member of a land-loser, whose land was acquired for the
Kaiga Atomic Power Project, had legally secured the job as the son-
in-law, of the land-loser. Also if the findings recorded in the
impugned judgment valid and reasonable.
5.  On 07.05.1990, the appellant claims to have married one Smt.
Ganga, the daughter of  Bellanna Venkanna Gowda of Devkar Village,
who was the owner of land under Survey No.71/2.  A portion of the
said  land  was  acquired  for  the  Kaiga  Atomic  Power  Project.
Accordingly, the land-loser - Bellanna Venkanna Gowda applied for a
certificate  for  availing  a  job  for  his  son-in-law  –  Ganapati
Bhikarao Naik (the appellant), as part of rehabilitation package.
Such  a  Certificate  was  granted  in  favour  of  the  appellant  on
21.08.1990 (Annexure R/2) by the Special Land Acquisition Officer,
Kali River Project, Dandeli (Uttar Kannada). The appellant was then
interviewed for the job and was given appointment as a Helper in
the  Corporation.   In  the  Attestation  Form,  furnished  by  the
appellant to the Management, the name of Smt.  Ganga was shown as
the employee’s wife.  The said information was counter-signed by
the Chief Administrative Officer of the Management.  In the Ration
Card  issued  to  the  appellant,  Smt.  Ganga was  mentioned  as  the
appellant’s wife, along with other family members.  
2

6.
However,  matrimonial  differences  cropped  up  and  Smt.  Ganga
shifted to her father's house.  Even at that stage, on 24.05.1997,
the  land-loser  in  his  communication  to  the  Senior  Manager
(Administration  &  Labour  Relation)  (Annexure  R/6)  stated  that
although  his  daughter  Smt.  Ganga,  being  mentally  disturbed,  is
currently not staying with his son-in-law in recent times, neither
he nor his family members, have any objection for confirmation of
the job of the appellant, at the Kaiga Atomic Power Project.
7.
The appellant around that period, filed an application under
Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 seeking divorce from
Smt. Ganga.  The said proceeding concluded with a consent decree of
divorce granted on 16.06.2001.
8.
In the meantime, on account of the estrangement between the
appellant  and  his  wife  and  the  divorce  proceeding  initiated  by
appellant, his father-in-law made complaints, which led to issuance
of the charge memo dated 10.01.2000, with the allegation that the
appellant is not married to Smt. Ganga (the daughter of the land-
loser) and therefore he is disentitled to secure the job intended
for  a  land-loser’s  family  member.  The  resultant  inquiry  was
answered  against  appellant  and  the  said  decision  led  to  the
termination order dated 19.04.2002.  The appellate authority and
the  revisional  authority  upheld  the  termination  order,  which
prompted the appellant, to seek a Reference under the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947.
3

9.
The Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court in
the Reference i.e., CR No. 66 of 2007, from the evidence of the
witnesses concluded that the appellant had married Smt. Ganga (the
daughter of the land-loser - Bellanna Venkanna Gowda) but when the
matrimonial relationship became strained and divorce proceeding was
initiated, Smt.  Ganga applied for maintenance, claiming to be the
appellant’s wife.  The Labour Court accordingly concluded that this
itself would be enough to establish that the appellant had married
Smt.  Ganga (the  daughter  of  the  land-loser  -  Bellanna  Venkanna
Gowda) and at the instance of the said land-loser,  he was given
appointment  under  the  prevalent  Scheme  intended  for  the  land-
loser’s  family  member.   The  Reference  was  accordingly  answered
favouring the appellant and the following Award was passed:
“                       AWARD
The reference is allowed holding that the action of the
management of Nuclear Power Corporation Ltd., Kaiga in
imposing the penalty of removal from service on Shri
Ganapthi B Naik w.e.f. 19.04.2002 is illegal and not
justified and that he is entitle for reinstatement with
full back wages, continuity of service and all other
consequential benefits that he could have received in
the  absence  of  the  impugned  order  of  removal  from
service.”
10.
The aggrieved Management then filed the W.P. No. 71540 of 2012
(L-TER)  to  challenge  the  said  Award.   The  Writ  Court  had  no
occasion to stay the Award and instead on 06.06.2014, passed an
interim  order  to  ensure  remittance  of  wages  payable  to  the
appellant.   However  under  the  impugned  final  judgment  dated
16.12.2020  the  learned  Judge  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
appellant had misrepresented that he is the son-in-law of the land-
4

loser  (Bellanna  Venkanna  Gowda)  and  secured  the  job  by  playing
fraud with the Management.
  
11.
The above conclusion of the learned Single Judge was reached
without  appropriately  considering  the  divorce  proceeding  between
the appellant and his wife - Ganga.  The Court also overlooked the
family  details  recorded  by  the  employer  (Annexure  R/4)  which
indicates Smt. Ganga as the wife of the employee.  The Ration Card
also has the same family details of the appellant.
12.   The  relevant  materials  reflecting  the  marriage  of  the
appellant with Smt.  Ganga  was however ignored by the Writ Court.
The Court also failed to appreciate that the learned Labour Court
reached  the  factual  conclusion,  after  due  consideration  of  the
material evidence.  Such factual finding of the Labour Court should
not  normally  be  disturbed  by  a  Writ  Court  without  compelling
reason. Such reasons are absent. Therefore we feel that the Award
in  favour  of  the  appellant,  granted  by  the  Labour  Court,  was
erroneously disturbed by the learned Single Judge.
13.
The  above discussion persuades us to hold that the appellant
is entitled to relief, in terms of the Labour Court’s Award dated
09.08.2012  with  consequential  service  benefits.  But  allowing
backwages may not be justified. It is therefore made clear that the
reinstated employee, shall not be entitled to any back wages from
16.12.2020, when the learned Single Judge set aside the Award, till
he is reinstated.  However, the gap period i.e. 16.12.2020 till
reinstatement, should be taken into account for all other service
5

benefits.  The appellant is ordered to be reinstated in service,
within four weeks from today.
14.
With the above, the appeals stand allowed leaving the parties
to bear their own cost.
..........................J.
       (HRISHIKESH ROY)
       
          
 ..........................J.
       (S.V.N. BHATTI) 
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 13, 2024.
6