2024 INSC 901
1
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
 
CIVIL APPEAL No.12326  OF 2024
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 7279 OF 2024)
Sonam Lakra 
  
 
 
… Appellant
Versus
State of Chhattisgarh and Ors. 
    
         … Respondents
   
ORDER
Leave granted.
2.
The appellant in this case is a 27­year­old woman, with a seemingly strong
commitment towards improving democracy at the grassroots level. Motivated
by   this   vision,   she   contested   the  elections   in   2020  for   the   position   of
Sarpanch of the Sajbahar Gram Panchayat in District Jashpur, Chhattisgarh,
the village that she belongs to. She was subsequently declared elected with a
substantial margin.
3.
Having   assumed   the   office   of   Sarpanch,   the   appellant   undertook   several
measures towards development of the village, with the objective of bettering
the quality of lives of its inhabitants. Pursuantly, after significant effort by the
appellant, the Zila Panchayat, Jashpur sanctioned 10 construction projects
for   the   Sajbahar   village   under   the   aegis   of   the   Mahatma   Gandhi   Rural
Industrial   Park   Scheme   (RIPA).   These   construction   works   involved   the
development of industrial infrastructure, along with amenities such as roads
Digitally signed by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV
Date: 2024.11.26
18:38:10 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
and schools, which would not only improve the well­being of the villagers but
also aid in making the village economically self­sufficient. However, the Chief
Executive   Officer   of   the   Janpad   Panchayat,   despite   lacking   technical
expertise regarding the time required for such projects, issued a Work Order
on 16.12.2022, mandating completion of the development works within the
limited duration of three months. This order for reasons best known to the
Chief   Executive   Officer   was   belatedly   served   to   the   Gram   Panchayat   on
21.03.2023, which ironically marked the end of the stipulated three­month
period since the date of issuance of the work order.
4.
Subsequently,   the   delay   in   execution   was   unjustly   attributed   to   the
appellant, resulting in a Show­Cause Notice issued on 26.05.2023, followed
by a chargesheet. In her response, the appellant clarified that there was no
delay in the construction work. Despite her explanation, bureaucratic high­
handedness led to her removal from office on 18.01.2024.
5.
Aggrieved, the appellant sought relief from higher authorities and the High
Court but faced rejection at every turn. Undeterred, she initiated the present
proceedings.   On   05.04.2024,   this   Court   stayed   the   orders   of   the   Sub­
Divisional Officer (Revenue), Pharsabahar, and the High Court, reinstating
the appellant as Sarpanch and directing that she be allowed to perform her
duties without any obstruction.
6.
The respondent­State of Chhattisgarh has filed a counter­affidavit, containing
mechanical   contentions   that   “sufficient   opportunity   was   afforded   to   the
appellant   to   present   her   case”   and   that   an   inquiry   was   conducted   in
compliance   with   the   provisions   of   the   Chhattisgarh   Panchayat   Raj
Adhiniyam, 1993, and the Chhattisgarh Panchayats (Appeal and Revision)

3
Rules, 1995. The State further alleges that the appellant failed to submit the
Work Completion Reports on five occasions.
7.
Be that as it may, we have heard learned counsel for the parties and carefully
perused the material placed on record. 
8.
This appears to be a classic case of administrative imperiousness, resulting
in the removal of an elected Sarpanch—a young woman dedicated to serving
her remote village in Chhattisgarh. Rather than recognizing her commitment
and   supporting   her   vigor   for   the   village's   development,   the   authorities
unjustly penalized her for baseless and unwarranted reasons.
9.
A prima facie examination of the case trajectory reveals a calculated effort by
members   of   the   Gram   Panchayat,   hand   in   glove   with   administrative
authorities, to obstruct the appellant’s initiatives. These individuals sought to
undermine her credibility with unfounded accusations of misconduct and,
when these stratagems failed, resorted to sabotaging development projects.
This concerted campaign ultimately led to her unjust removal as the duly
elected Sarpanch. It is cause for concern that at every step, the appellant
faced relentless obstacles and received little to no support in her endeavors. 
10.
The first instance of hindrance in this appeal can be pinpointed to the Work
Order dated 16.12.2022, which required completion of the project within
three months but was served to the appellant only after the stipulated period
had elapsed. Subsequently, on 25.05.2023, once the construction work had
begun, the Sub­Divisional Officer, Rural Engineering Services, Pharsabahar—
who   also   bore   responsibility   for   overseeing   the   project—expressed   his
dissatisfaction over the alleged delay in completing the work under the RIPA
scheme, and even went so far as to request that action be taken against the

4
appellant. 
11.
When proceedings commenced at the District Administration level, not only
were the bald allegations against the appellant accepted without scrutiny, but
she was also denied the fundamental opportunity to be heard. It is deeply
troubling   to   witness   administrative   officials   misusing   their   authority   and
blatantly   disregarding   well­established   principles   of   natural   justice.   It   is
incomprehensible   how   the   Sub­Divisional   Officer   (Revenue),   Pharsabahar,
issued   the   order   dated   18.01.2024,   directing   the   removal   of   an   elected
representative in such a lackadaisical and hasty manner. It is even more so
intriguing   that   a   junior   official   like   a   Sub­Divisional   officer   has   been
empowered to determine the fate of an elected Sarpanch.
12.
The administrative authorities, with their colonial mindset, have regrettably
failed   yet   again   to   recognize   the   fundamental   distinction   between
an elected public   representative   and   a selected public   servant.   Invariably,
elected representatives like the appellant are often treated as subordinate to
bureaucrats compelled to comply with directives that serve to encroach upon
their autonomy and impinge their accountability. This misconceived and self­
styled   supervisory   power   is   asserted   with   an   intention   to   equate   elected
representatives   with   public   servants   holding   civil   posts,   completely
disregarding the democratic legitimacy conferred by election.
13.
What   further   muddies   these   already   murky   waters   is   the   selective
accountability imposed on the appellant for the alleged delay in completing
the development works. This is despite the fact that responsibility for these
projects   was   shared   among   multiple   stakeholders,   including   the   Sub­
Divisional   Officer,   Rural   Engineering   Services,   the   Deputy   Engineer,   the

5
Technical  Officer,  the  CEO  of   the  Janpad  Panchayat,   and   the  Executing
Agency. It is self­evident that construction projects require coordinated efforts
from engineers, contractors, timely supply of materials, and are subject to the
vagaries of weather etc. Holding the Sarpanch solely accountable for delays,
without evidence of her failing in allocating work or performing a duty specific
to her elected position, is totally atrocious.   We are convinced that these
proceedings were initiated on a flimsy pretext, so as to remove the appellant
from office under false and untenable grounds. 
14.
It deeply concerns us that there is a recurring pattern of similar cases, where
administrative authorities and village panchayat members collude to exact
vendettas against female Sarpanches. Such instances highlight a systemic
issue   of  prejudice  and   discrimination.  More  recently,  in  Civil  Appeal  No.
10913/2024,   titled   ‘Manisha   Ravindra   Panpatil   v.   The   State   of
Maharashtra’,   decided   on   27.09.2024,   we   observed   that   cases   involving
female Sarpanches often reveal a pervasive pattern of unfair treatment across
various levels of administrative functioning. Alarmingly, the removal of an
elected   female   representative,   especially   in   rural   and   remote   areas,   is
frequently   treated   as   a   casual   matter,   wherein   disregarding   principles   of
natural   justice   and   democratic   processes   is   treated   as   a   time­honored
tradition. This entrenched bias is particularly disheartening and demands
serious introspection and reform.
15.
In this context, we must emphasize that as a nation striving to become an
economic powerhouse, it is distressing to witness such incidents occurring
consistently  and   being   normalized,   so   much   so   that   they   bear   striking
similarities even in geographically distant regions. Administrative authorities,

6
being   custodians   of   actual   powers   and   affluent   enough,   should   lead   by
example,   making   efforts   to   promote   women’s   empowerment   and   support
female­led   initiatives   in   rural   and   remote   areas.   Instead   of   adopting
regressive attitudes that discourage women in elected positions, they must
foster an environment that encourages their participation and leadership in
governance.
16.
In this regard, we are also of the view that the High Court ought not to have
dismissed   the   appellant’s   appeal  vide  order   dated   29.02.2024,   on   mere
technical grounds, citing availability of alternative remedies. It is trite law
that the High Court, while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution   has   the   vast   discretion   to   entertain   a   writ   petition,   even   if
alternate remedies may exist, especially in cases where the Executive has
blatantly and brazenly misused its power to weaken democratic values at the
grass root level.
17.
The   impugned   orders   passed   by   the   Sub­Divisional   Officer   (Revenue),
Pharsabahar, District Jashpur, Chhattisgarh dated 18.01.2024, as well as
that of the High Court dated 29.02.2024 are, thus, quashed. The appellant
shall continue to hold the Office of Sarpanch of Gram Panchayat Jashpur,
Chhattisgarh till the completion of her term.
18.
Furthermore, considering the harassment faced by the appellant, compelling
her to engage in unavoidable litigation, we direct the respondent­State to pay
her costs amounting to ₹1,00,000 (Rupees One Lakh) within four weeks. The
Chief Secretary, State of Chhattisgarh, is directed to release the said amount
to the appellant within the stipulated time and thereafter conduct an inquiry
against the delinquent officers/officials responsible for her harassment. The

7
State is at liberty to recover the cost amount from such erring officials in
accordance with the principles of natural justice.
19.
The appeal stands disposed of accordingly.
20.
As a result, pending interlocutory applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
………………………J.
(SURYA KANT)
………………………J.
(UJJAL BHUYAN)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 14, 2024.

8