2024 INSC 873
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).           OF 2024  
                (Arising out of SLP(Civil) No(s). 29758 of 2018) 
 
 
SATYENDRA SINGH                                      .…APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.           ...RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The instant appeal arises from the judgment dated 30th July, 
2018 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, 
Lucknow Bench, allowing the Writ Petition preferred by the 
respondents and setting aside the judgment dated 5th June, 2015 
passed by the State Public Services Tribunal, Lucknow1, whereby, 
the Tribunal had allowed the Claim Petition2 preferred by the 
appellant. 
 
 
1 Hereinafter being referred to as ‘Tribunal’ 
2 Claim Petition No. 1931 of 2014 
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2024.11.18
16:43:51 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Brief facts:- 
3. 
The 
appellant, 
while 
being 
posted 
as 
Assistant 
Commissioner, Commercial Tax, Khand-13, Ghaziabad faced 
disciplinary proceedings in furtherance of a charge sheet dated 5th 
March, 2012. The Inquiry Officer conducted the inquiry and 
submitted an Inquiry Report dated 29th November, 2012.  The 
Disciplinary Authority being the Principal Secretary, Tax 
Registration Department, Lucknow, U.P., issued a Show Cause 
Notice accompanied with the Inquiry Report to the appellant.  The 
appellant submitted his reply/objections to the said Show Cause 
Notice.  The Disciplinary Authority, considered the reply of the 
appellant and issued the Order dated 5th November, 2014, whereby 
it awarded the punishment of Censure Entry as well as stoppage 
of two grade increments with cumulative effect to the appellant.  
4. 
The appellant challenged the order imposing penalty by filing 
the Claim Petition3 before the Tribunal which allowed the same 
vide order dated 5th June, 2015; thereby, quashing the order dated 
5th November, 2014 and directed that the appellant shall be 
entitled to all consequential benefits.  While allowing the Claim 
Petition, the Tribunal came to the following conclusions: - 
 
3 Supra note 2. 

3 
 
“ 
While going through the record available on the file it 
becomes clear that the Inquiry Officer proved the charges 
against the petitioner merely, on the basis of conclusion of 
the verification report prepared under Deputy Collector 
and the Additional Commissioner, Grade-1, Commercial 
Tax, Agra Zone, Agra. The delinquent officer was not involved 
in the inquiry. The petitioner submitted detailed explanation to 
the show cause notice but when we go through the punishment 
order and the explanation submitted by the petitioner against 
the show cause notice, we find that proper analysis and 
deliberation was not done by the opp.(sic) parties to assess 
the role of the petitioner in the episode.   
 
The finding recorded by the Inquiry Officer on the relevant 
charges can be safely termed as irrational. No reasons have 
been given for recording those findings. The Inquiry Officer 
has recorded cryptic findings and concluded that the 
charges are proved without rationalizing those conclusions. 
Hence it is a fit case where the Tribunal should interfere.  
 
We may also add here that this is not a case of procedural 
irregularity, and we do not propose to interfere with the order 
of the disciplinary authority on the ground of procedural 
irregularity.  
 
…. 
 
On the basis of the discussion attempted in the preceding 
para we are fully convinced that the Inquiry Officer and the 
Disciplinary have recorded irrational findings on relevant 
charges.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
5. 
The State/disciplinary authority assailed the order4 passed 
by the Tribunal by filing Writ Petition5 which was allowed vide 
judgment dated 30th July, 2018 and the order passed by the 
Tribunal was set aside thereby reaffirming the order issued by the 
disciplinary authority which had imposed penalty.  The appellant 
 
4 Dated 5th June, 2015. 
5 Writ Petition No. 6850(S/B) of 2015 

4 
 
herein has assailed the judgment dated 30th July, 2018 passed by 
the High Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction by preferring this 
appeal by special leave. 
Submission on behalf the appellant: - 
6. 
Learned counsel representing the appellant urged that the 
inquiry proceedings conducted against the appellant were in gross 
dereliction of Rule 7(3) of the Uttar Pradesh Government 
Servant(Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 19996. The disciplinary 
proceedings were initiated and allegations constituting major 
penalty were proposed by Inquiry Officer.  Since the appellant had 
emphatically denied the charges, it was incumbent upon the 
Inquiry Officer to have recorded evidence to establish the charges 
attributed to the appellant.  However, admittedly, not a single 
witness was examined by the Inquiry Officer to bring home the 
charges, and thus, the inquiry report is non est in the eyes of law.  
He, therefore, urged that the Tribunal was perfectly justified in 
quashing the inquiry proceedings and the order imposing penalty 
vide order dated 5th June, 2015 and that the High Court fell in 
grave error of law whilst allowing the writ petition and reversing 
the order passed by the Tribunal.  He, therefore, implored the 
 
6 Hereinafter being referred to as the ‘Rules of 1999’ 

5 
 
Court to accept the appeal, set aside the judgment passed by the 
High Court and restore the order passed by the Tribunal. 
Submissions on behalf of the respondent-State:- 
7. 
Per contra, learned standing counsel appearing for the State 
vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions advanced by 
learned counsel for the appellant.  He contended that the appellant 
did not seriously challenge the findings of the Inquiry Officer in the 
Inquiry Report.  The reply submitted by the appellant was 
considered by the Disciplinary Authority and after due application 
of mind, the Disciplinary Authority passed a well-reasoned Order 
dated 5th November, 2014 imposing the penalty afore-stated 
against the appellant.  He submitted that the High Court exercised 
the jurisdiction conferred upon it by virtue of Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India by proper consideration of the material 
available on record and hence, this Court should not interfere with 
the impugned judgment rendered by the High Court. 
8. 
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have carefully gone through the 
impugned judgments and the material available on record. 
 
 

6 
 
Discussion and Conclusion:- 
9. 
There is no dispute amongst the parties that penalty which 
has been imposed upon the appellant is a major penalty as defined 
in the Rules of 1999. In Rule 37 of the Rules of 1999, under the 
head of major penalty, the first Sub-Rule refers to withholding of 
increments with cumulative effect. 
10. Therefore, Rule 7 of the Rules of 1999 which prescribes the 
procedure for imposing major penalty would be applicable in the 
inquiry to be conducted against the appellant to bring home the 
charges imputed to him. 
11. Rule 7 (vii)8 of the Rules of 1999, clearly stipulates that where 
a Government servant denies the charge, the Inquiry Officer shall 
 
7 3. Penalties 
….  
     Major Penalties 
(i) 
Withholding of increments with cumulative effect; 
(ii) 
Reduction to a lower post or grade time scale or to a lower stage in a time scale; 
(iii) 
Removal from the service which does not disqualify form future employment; 
(iv) 
Dismissal from the service which disqualify from future employment. 
      Explanation- The following shall not amount to penalty within the meaning of this rule, 
namely: 
(i) 
Withholding of increment of a Government Servant for failure to pass a 
departmental examination or for failure to fulfil any other condition in accordance 
with the rules or orders governing the service; 
(ii) 
Stoppage at the efficiency bar in the time scale of pay on account of ones not being 
found fit to cross the efficiency bar; 
(iii) 
Reversion of a person appointed to probation to the service during or at the end of 
the period of probation in accordance with the terms of appointment or the rules 
and orders governing such probation. 
(iv) 
Termination of the service of a person appointed on probation during or at the end 
of period of probation in accordance with the term of the service or the rules and 
order governing such probation. 
 
8 7-Procedure for imposing major penalties- Before imposing any major penalty on a 
Government Servant, an inquiry shall be held in the following manner: 
… 

7 
 
proceed to call the witness proposed in the charge sheet and record 
their oral evidence in the presence of the charged Government 
servant who shall be given opportunity to cross-examine such 
witness. After recording the aforesaid evidence, the Inquiry Officer 
shall call and record the oral evidence which the charged 
Government servant desires in his written statement to be 
produced in his defence. Hence, recording of oral evidence in 
support of charges against Government servant is a mandate 
under of Sub-rule (vii) of Rule 7 of the Rules of 1999, when the 
inquiry being conducted proposes imposition of a major penalty.  
12. Learned counsel for the State was ad idem to the submissions 
of the appellant’s counsel that no witness whatsoever was 
examined during the course of the inquiry proceedings. On a 
minute appraisal of the Inquiry Report, it is evident that other than 
referring to the documents pursuant to the so-called irregular 
transactions constituting the basis of the inquiry, the Inquiry 
Officer failed to record the evidence of even a single witness in 
order to establish the charges against the appellant. 
 
(vii) Where the charged Government Servant denies the charge the Inquiry Officer 
shall proceed to call the witnesses proposed in the charge-sheet and record their oral 
evidence in presence of the charge Government Servant who shall be given 
opportunity to cross-examine such witnesses. After recording the aforesaid evidences, 
the Inquiry Officer shall call and record the oral evidence which the charged 
Government Servant desired in his written statement to be produced in his defence. 

8 
 
13. This Court in a catena of judgments has held that the 
recording of evidence in a disciplinary proceeding proposing 
charges of a major punishment is mandatory. Reference in this 
regard may be held to Roop Singh Negi v. Punjab National Bank 
and Others9 and Nirmala J. Jhala v. State of Gujarat and 
Another.10 
14. In the case of Roop Singh Negi11, this Court held that mere 
production of documents is not enough, contents of documentary 
evidence have to be proved by examining witnesses. Relevant 
extract thereof reads as under: - 
“14. Indisputably, a departmental proceeding is a quasi-
judicial proceeding. The enquiry officer performs a quasi-
judicial function. The charges levelled against the 
delinquent officer must be found to have been proved. The 
enquiry officer has a duty to arrive at a finding upon taking 
into consideration the materials brought on record by the 
parties. 
The 
purported 
evidence 
collected 
during 
investigation by the investigating officer against all the 
accused by itself could not be treated to be evidence in the 
disciplinary proceeding. No witness was examined to prove 
the said documents. The management witnesses merely 
tendered the documents and did not prove the contents thereof. 
Reliance, inter alia, was placed by the enquiry officer on the FIR 
which could not have been treated as evidence. 
 
15. We have noticed hereinbefore that the only basic evidence 
whereupon reliance has been placed by the enquiry officer was 
the purported confession made by the appellant before the 
police. According to the appellant, he was forced to sign on the 
said confession, as he was tortured in the police station. The 
appellant being an employee of the Bank, the said confession 
should have been proved. Some evidence should have been 
 
9 (2009) 2 SCC 570 
10 (2013) 4 SCC 301 
11 Supra note 9. 

9 
 
brought on record to show that he had indulged in stealing 
the bank draft book. Admittedly, there was no direct 
evidence. Even there was no indirect evidence. The tenor of 
the report demonstrates that the enquiry officer had made up 
his mind to find him guilty as otherwise he would not have 
proceeded on the basis that the offence was committed in such 
a manner that no evidence was left. 
… 
 
19. The judgment and decree passed against the respondent 
in Narinder Mohan Arya case [(2006) 4 SCC 713 : 2006 SCC 
(L&S) 840] had attained finality. In the said suit, the enquiry 
report in the disciplinary proceeding was considered, the same 
was held to have been based on no evidence. The appellant 
therein in the aforementioned situation filed a writ petition 
questioning the validity of the disciplinary proceeding, the same 
was dismissed. This Court held that when a crucial finding like 
forgery was arrived at on evidence which is non est in the eye of 
the law, the civil court would have jurisdiction to interfere in 
the matter. This Court emphasised that a finding can be 
arrived at by the enquiry officer if there is some evidence 
on record. …” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
       (emphasis supplied) 
 
15.   Same view was reiterated in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Saroj 
Kumar Sinha,12 wherein, this Court held that even in an ex-parte 
inquiry, it is the duty of the Inquiry Officer to examine the evidence 
presented by the Department to find out whether the unrebutted 
evidence is sufficient to hold that the charges are proved. The 
relevant observations made in Saroj Kumar Sinha13 are as 
follows: - 
“28. An inquiry officer acting in a quasi-judicial authority is in 
the position of an independent adjudicator. He is not supposed 
to be a representative of the department/disciplinary 
authority/Government. His function is to examine the 
 
12 (2010) 2 SCC 772 
13 Ibid. 

10 
 
evidence presented by the Department, even in the absence 
of the delinquent official to see as to whether the 
unrebutted evidence is sufficient to hold that the charges 
are proved. In the present case the aforesaid procedure has 
not been observed. Since no oral evidence has been 
examined the documents have not been proved, and could 
not have been taken into consideration to conclude that 
the charges have been proved against the respondents. 
…. 
33. As noticed earlier in the present case not only the 
respondent has been denied access to documents sought to be 
relied upon against him, but he has been condemned unheard 
as the inquiry officer failed to fix any date for conduct of the 
enquiry. In other words, not a single witness has been 
examined in support of the charges levelled against the 
respondent. The High Court, therefore, has rightly observed 
that the entire proceedings are vitiated having been 
conducted in complete violation of the principles of natural 
justice and total disregard of fair play. The respondent never 
had any opportunity at any stage of the proceedings to offer an 
explanation against the allegations made in the charge-sheet.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
16. In the case of Nirmala J. Jhala14, this Court held that 
evidence recorded in a preliminary inquiry cannot be used for a 
regular inquiry as the delinquent is not associated with it and the 
opportunity to cross-examine persons examined in preliminary 
inquiry is not given. Relevant extract thereof reads as under: - 
“42. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Amalendu 
Ghosh v. North Eastern Railway [AIR 1960 SC 992] , held that 
the purpose of holding a preliminary inquiry in respect of a 
particular alleged misconduct is only for the purpose of finding 
a particular fact and prima facie, to know as to whether the 
alleged misconduct has been committed and on the basis of the 
findings recorded in preliminary inquiry, no order of 
punishment can be passed. It may be used only to take a view 
as to whether a regular disciplinary proceeding against the 
delinquent is required to be held. 
 
14 Supra note 10. 

11 
 
 
43. Similarly 
in Champaklal 
Chimanlal 
Shah v. Union 
of 
India [AIR 1964 SC 1854] a Constitution Bench of this Court 
while taking a similar view held that preliminary inquiry should 
not be confused with regular inquiry. The preliminary inquiry 
is not governed by the provisions of Article 311(2) of the 
Constitution of India. Preliminary inquiry may be held ex parte, 
for it is merely for the satisfaction of the Government though 
usually for the sake of fairness, an explanation may be sought 
from the government servant even at such an inquiry. But at 
that stage, he has no right to be heard as the inquiry is merely 
for the satisfaction of the Government as to whether a regular 
inquiry must be held. The Court further held as under : (AIR p. 
1862, para 12) 
 
“12. … There must therefore be no confusion between 
the two enquiries and it is only when the government 
proceeds to hold a departmental enquiry for the 
purpose of inflicting on the government servant one 
of the three major punishments indicated in Article 
311 that the government servant is entitled to the 
protection of that article [, nor prior to that].” 
 
44. In Narayan 
Dattatraya 
Ramteerthakhar v. State 
of 
Maharashtra [(1997) 1 SCC 299 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 152 : AIR 
1997 SC 2148] this Court dealt with the issue and held as 
under: 
“… a preliminary inquiry has nothing to do with the 
enquiry conducted after issue of charge-sheet. The 
preliminary enquiry is only to find out whether 
disciplinary enquiry should be initiated against the 
delinquent. Once regular enquiry is held under the 
Rules, 
the preliminary 
enquiry 
loses 
its 
importance and, whether preliminary enquiry was 
held strictly in accordance with law or by observing 
principles of natural justice of (sic) nor, remains of no 
consequence.” 
 
45. In view of the above, it is evident that the evidence 
recorded in preliminary inquiry cannot be used in regular 
inquiry as the delinquent is not associated with it, and 
opportunity to cross-examine the persons examined in 
such inquiry is not given. Using such evidence would be 
violative of the principles of natural justice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
17. Thus, even in an ex-parte inquiry, it is sine qua non to record 
the evidence of the witnesses for proving the charges. Having 
tested the facts of the case at hand on the touchstone of the Rules 
of 1999, and the law as expounded by this Court in the cases of 
Roop Singh Negi15 and Nirmala J. Jhala16, we are of the firm 
view that the inquiry proceedings conducted against the appellant 
pertaining to charges punishable with major penalty, were totally 
vitiated and non-est in the eyes of law since no oral evidence 
whatsoever was recorded by the department in support of the 
charges.  
18. As a consequence, thereof, the High Court fell into grave error 
of law while interfering in the well-reasoned judgment rendered by 
the Tribunal whereby, the Tribunal had quashed the order 
imposing penalty upon the appellant. 
19. Resultantly, the impugned judgment dated 30th July, 2018 is 
hereby quashed and set aside and the order dated 5th June, 2015 
rendered by the Public Service Tribunal, Uttar Pradesh is restored. 
The appellant is entitled to all consequential benefits. 
 
15 Supra note 9. 
16 Supra note 10. 

13 
 
20. The monetary benefit flowing from this order shall be paid to 
the appellant within a period of two months from today, failing 
which, the said amount shall carry interest @ 6% per annum. 
21. The appeal is allowed accordingly. No order as to costs. 
22. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
         (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
 
New Delhi; 
November 18, 2024