2024 INSC 903
   NON-REPORTABLE    
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.4656 OF 2024
(Arising out of S.L.P.(Criminal) No.4253 of 2023)
HETRAM @ BABLI
... APPELLANT(S) 
                  VS.
STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ANR.
... RESPONDENT(S)
                                                              
          J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S.OKA, J.
Leave granted. 
2.
Heard  the  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the
appellant  and  the  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the
respondent-State.
3.
By the order dated 6th  February, 2015, the learned
Sessions  Judge  rejected  the  application  made  under
Section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for
short,  "the  CRPC")  for  issuing  summons  against  the
present appellant.  The application under Section 319 of
the CRPC was made by the second respondent.  The Trial
Court  rejected  the  application.   The  High  Court  has
interfered  by  the  impugned  judgment  in  a  Revision
Petition filed by the second respondent.  
1
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2024.11.26
18:57:47 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

4.
With  the  assistance  of  the  learned  counsel
appearing  for  the  appellant  and  the  learned  counsel
appearing for the respondent-State, we have perused the
material on record.  The application under Section 319 of
the CRPC was based on the depositions of two alleged eye
witnesses PW-2 Sona and PW-4 Seema.  Both of them, in the
examination-in-chief,  deposed  that  they  had  seen  the
present appellant hitting on the left side of the head of
the deceased by a spade.  
5.
The  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  appellant
submitted that there was no prima facie material against
the  appellant.  The submission  of  the  learned  counsel
appearing  for  the  respondent-State,  relying  upon  a
decision of this Court in the case of  Hardeep Singh v.
State of Punjab1, is that the Court while dealing with the
appliation under Section 319 of the CRPC has to only see
the examination-in-chief and decide whether if the same
goes uncontroverted, it will lead to the conviction of
the  persons  sought  to  be  implicated.   He  would,
therefore,  submit  that  the  High  Court  is  right  in
allowing the application.
6.
We have carefully perused the evidence of both PW-2
ad PW-4.  We have already referred to what they stated in
examination-in-chief.  Their cross-examination shows that
1. (2014) 3 SCC 92.
2

the allegation made by them against the appellant in the
examination-in-chief  is  an  omission.   PW-2  stated  that
apart from her and PW-4, there was no other eye witness.
The  omission is significant and relevant. Therefore, in
view of explanation to Section 162 of the CRPC, it will
amount to contradiction.
7.
This  Court  in  the  case  of  Hardeep  Singh1 has
observed that the test to be applied for dealing with the
application under Section 319 of the CRPC is of more than
a prima facie which is required to be considered  at the
time of framing of the charge. The test to be applied is
that if the evidence goes unrebutted, whether it would
lead to conviction.  The Court has to record satisfaction
in  such  terms  and  if  such  satisfaction  cannot  be
recorded, the Court should refrain from exercising power
under Section 319 of the CRPC.
8.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondent-
State relied upon the first sentence of paragraph 106 of
the aforesaid judgment.  In a given case, if power under
Section  319  is  sought  to  be  exercised  before  cross-
examination  of  material  witnesses,  the  Court  cannot
postpone  the  consideration  of  the  prayer  under  Section
319 of the CRPC on the ground that the cross-examination
of the witnesses is yet to be recorded.
3

9.
In  the  facts  of  the  case,  the  occasion  for
considering the application under Section 319 of the CRPC
arose  after  the  cross-examination  of  the  only  eye
witnesses  was  recorded.   Therefore,  while  deciding  an
application under Section 319 of the CRPC, the Court must
consider the cross-examination as well. If an application
under Section 319 of the CRPC is made after the cross-
examination of witnesses, it will be unjust to ignore the
same.  The power under Section 319 of the CRPC cannot be
exercised  when  there  is  no  case  made  out  against  the
persons  sought  to  be  implicated.   In  view  of  the
omissions  which  are  material  and  which  amount  to
contradiction, obviously no Court could have recorded a
satisfaction which is contemplated by Section 319 of the
CRPC.  It is impossible to record a finding that even a
prima facie case of involvement of the appellant has been
made out.
10.
Accordingly, we cannot sustain the impugned order
dated 8th February, 2023 of the High Court and the same is
set aside.  S.B.Criminal Revision Petition No.375 of 2015
stands dismissed.
11.
We make it clear that consideration by this Court
of the evidence of the two prosecution witnesses is only
for the limited purposes of considering the prayer under
Section 319 of the CRPC as against the appellant.
4

12.
The appeal is accordingly allowed.
..........................J.
       (ABHAY S.OKA)
         
                 
 ..........................J.
       (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH) 
NEW DELHI;
    November 20, 2024
5