Page 1 of 14 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1954 OF 2012 
 
 
HAALESH @ HALESHI 
 @ KURUBARA HALESHI  
 
 
             …APPELLANT(S) 
  
VERSUS 
 
 
STATE OF KARNATAKA  
 
 
 
     …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1955 OF 2012 and 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1303 OF 2014 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
Learned counsel for the parties were heard. 
2. 
In Sessions Case No. 25 of 2000 out of the nine accused, seven 
accused persons (A-1 to A-7) were convicted for various offences 
and were sentenced to undergo imprisonment for different 

Page 2 of 14 
 
period with a maximum of life imprisonment for an offence 
under Section 302 in aid with Section 149 IPC and remaining 
two accused persons i.e. (A-8 and A-9) were acquitted. 
3. 
Accused Nos. 1, 2 and 3 accepted the judgment of the Trial 
Court and did not file any appeal against it. Accused Nos. 4, 5 
and 6 together filed a Criminal Appeal No. 219 of 2007 before 
the High Court whereas accused No. 7 filed a separate Criminal 
Appeal No. 229 of 2007. The High Court by a common judgment 
passed in both the appeals upheld the conviction and sentence 
awarded to all of them i.e. A-4, A-5, A-6 and A-7 and dismissed 
the appeals. 
4. 
It is against the aforesaid conviction and sentence that the 
accused A-7 has preferred Criminal Appeal No. 1954 of 2012 
before this Court. Accused Nos. A-4 and A-5 together have 
preferred Criminal Appeal No. 1955 of 2012 whereas accused 
No. A-6 has preferred Criminal Appeal No. 1303 of 2014. All 
three appeals were clubbed and heard together. They are being 
disposed of by this common judgment. 

Page 3 of 14 
 
5. 
Brief facts giving rise to the above trial are that: that there was 
a bitter dispute between the deceased Shivanna and his real 
brother Ramanna (A-9) with regard to property in connection to 
which there was a civil suit between the parties which was 
decreed in favour of the deceased and the decree was under 
execution. 
6. 
It is alleged that all the accused persons on 25.09.1999 at 
around 9:15 am unlawfully assembled in front of the house of 
deceased with the common object to kill the deceased Shivanna 
and his family members. All of them armed with deadly weapons 
mainly choppers thereafter trespassed into the house of 
deceased Shivanna. Accused A-1 to A-3 caught hold of deceased 
Shivanna and assaulted him with choppers; accused A-4 and 
A-5 caught hold of his wife Savithramma and assaulted her with 
choppers; accused A-6 and A-7 assaulted Girija, the daughter 
of deceased Shivanna with choppers and whereas accused A-8 
and A-9 stood at the door of the house keeping a watch and 
instigating the other accused to kill the deceased Shivanna and 
his family members. The deceased Shivanna upon sustaining 

Page 4 of 14 
 
injuries died whereas his wife and daughter who had sustained 
grievous injuries survived. 
7. 
After the case was committed to the Sessions Court, the 
prosecution examined as many as 33 witnesses and produced 
Exhibits P-1 to P-63 and M.Os. 1 to 34. The defence got marked 
Exhibits D-1 and D-2 but chose not to lead any evidence in 
defence. On the basis of the evidence adduced, the Trial Court 
convicted A-1 to A-7 and sentenced them to undergo maximum 
imprisonment for life with fine. Accused Nos. 8 and 9 who were 
not assigned any role of assault and were alleged to be standing 
on the door of the house of the deceased were acquitted. The 
conviction, as stated earlier, was upheld by the High Court. 
8. 
Now, in these appeals before us we are concerned with the 
conviction and sentence of the appellants A-4, A-5, A-6 and       
A-7 only. 
9. 
It is not in dispute that the deceased Shivanna had instituted a 
civil suit against his brother Ramana (A-9) in the Court of 
Additional Munsif, Bhadravathi for partition and separate 
possession of his half share in all the properties described in 

Page 5 of 14 
 
the plaint and for cancellation of relinquishment deed dated 
7.6.1969 alleged to have been executed by him in favour of A-9. 
The said suit, on contest by A-9, was decreed vide judgment, 
order and decree dated 16.8.1995 (Exhibits P-45 and P-46). The 
said judgment and decree was affirmed in a regular appeal (as 
per Exhibit P-53) and was also upheld by the High Court in 
second appeal. The deceased Shivanna in the year 1999 
initiated proceedings for preparation of the final decree wherein 
the executing court directed the revenue authorities to effect 
partition in terms of Section 54 of CPC. The Revenue Officers 
initiated the work of survey and measurement. It was in 
annoyance with the above litigation that A-9 and his family 
members decided to do away with Shivanna and his family 
members for which they took help of their friends A-4, A-5 (who 
were known for their antisocial activities and were on Police 
record as “rowdies”) and A-7. Thus, there was a clear motive on 
the part of the accused especially A-9 to kill the deceased 
Shivanna and his family members. 
10. It is pertinent to note that A-9, Ramana himself had not 
participated in the assault and remained standing on the door 

Page 6 of 14 
 
of the house of the deceased along with A-8. He was acquitted 
along with A-8 by the Trial Court. A-1, A-2, A-3, A-6 and A-8 
are the sons of A-9 whereas A-4, A-5 and A-7 are not his family 
members but friends whose help was taken by A-9 to kill the 
deceased and his family members. 
11. The conviction was based primarily upon the ocular evidence of 
two injured eyewitnesses PW-3 and PW-4 who were none other 
than the wife and daughter of the deceased, present in the 
house. The other daughter of the deceased Shivanna, PW-7 
(Rukmini) corroborated the evidence of PW-3 and PW-4. The 
informant (PW-1) is the son in law (husband of one of the 
daughters) of the deceased Shivanna but his evidence is not 
very material. Dr. Umadevi, PW-18, who conducted the 
postmortem proved the report of the injuries found on the body 
of the deceased Shivanna. 
12. The first contention of the counsel appearing for the appellants 
is that according to the case of the prosecution itself, A-1 to             
A-3 alone assaulted the deceased Shivanna and, therefore, the 
other accused persons cannot be convicted for an offence under 

Page 7 of 14 
 
Section 302 IPC. It is further submitted that the appellants are 
not guilty of unlawful assembly and, therefore, Section 149 IPC 
could not have been invoked in the present case. The argument 
was opposed from the side of the defence on the ground that all 
the accused persons have unlawfully assembled with clear 
intention to eliminate the entire family of the deceased 
Shivanna. Therefore, even if any of them had not been assigned 
the specific role of assaulting the deceased Shivanna, they all 
would be guilty for an offence of murder and are liable to be 
convicted for life imprisonment.  
13. It is true that according to the prosecution and the evidence on 
record only A-1 to A-3 had caught hold of the deceased 
Shivanna and had assaulted him with choppers. No other 
accused person is alleged to have assaulted him, though, some 
of them had caught hold of the wife and daughter of the 
deceased and had assaulted them with choppers causing 
grievous injuries. Nonetheless, the evidence on record clearly 
proves that all the accused persons have initially assembled in 
front of the house of the deceased Shivanna; first two of them 
arrived and later the rest of them came in auto rikshaw. They 

Page 8 of 14 
 
armed themselves with weapons especially choppers and 
thereafter trespassed into the house of the deceased Shivanna. 
They all indulged in assaulting one or the other members of his 
family with the weapons in their hand except for A-8 and A-9 
who remained standing at the door of the house. 
14. PW-3, the wife of the deceased Shivanna who herself was 
grievously injured in the incident has categorically stated that 
there was a bitter feud between her husband and his elder 
brother (A-9) with regard to the family property as there was no 
partition and her husband had initiated proceedings in civil 
court for its partition. She is the second wife of the deceased 
Shivanna and that she was living with her husband and one of 
the daughters, Girija, who was unmarried, together in the house 
where the incident took place. The day before the incident i.e. 
on 24.09.1999 at about 10 p.m., A-6 had come and declared 
that each one of us would be chopped off and left after extending 
the said threat. The whole family was so afraid that on the said 
night they took shelter in the house of their son in law 
Chandrashekhar (PW-1). She and her daughter, Girija, returned 
to their house next day at about 6 a.m. and her husband came 

Page 9 of 14 
 
back around 7.30 a.m. It is stated that thereafter they had 
breakfast when at about 8.30 a.m., A-8 and A-9 came and stood 
nearby to their house. In the meantime, A-1 to A-7 came in an 
autorikshaw. One of them, A-2 was armed with chopper. The 
others went to the nearby tailoring shop and from behind the 
board of the shop took out weapons i.e. choppers to arm 
themselves. They all entered their house with the said weapons. 
A-1 to A-3 caught hold of the deceased Shivanna and assaulted 
him with choppers. A-4 and A-5 caught hold of her, assaulted 
her and dragged her. Similarly, A-6 and A-7 assaulted her 
daughter, Girija, with choppers and then dragged her. 
15. The daughter of the deceased (PW-4) who was present in the 
house and was also injured, in her statement repeated the same 
story and apparently there is no contradiction between the 
statements of PW-3 and PW-4. 
16. PW-3 and PW-4 are the eyewitnesses who were present at the 
scene of incident and were grievously injured. On being 
assaulted, they became unconscious and gained consciousness 
only on reaching hospital. Their testimony in the background of 

Page 10 of 14 
 
the case is the best evidence. No doubt, they are members of the 
family and may be interested persons but their testimony 
cannot be discarded simply for the reason that they are family 
members in the scenario of the case that the incident took place 
inside the house of the deceased Shivanna, where there could 
not have been any other eyewitnesses other than the family 
members. The evidence of the aforesaid two eyewitnesses could 
not be shaken in the cross-examination. Thus, we do not find 
any illegality on part of the courts below in holding the 
appellants guilty and to convict them. 
17. There is a clear evidence of PW-3 and PW-4 that, in the first 
instance, a day earlier, a threat was extended to them and then 
in a planned manner on the next morning initially A-8 and A-9 
had come and stood near their house. Thereafter, the other 
accused came in an autorikshaw and after alighting from it 
collected weapons from behind the board of a tailor shop and 
assembled in front of their house. They together armed with 
weapons (choppers), entered their house and A-8 and A-9 stood 
on the door of the house instigating others to kill. This evidence 
is sufficient in itself to establish that they had assembled in 

Page 11 of 14 
 
front of the house of the deceased Shivanna sharing a common 
intention of doing an unlawful act of eliminating the family of 
the deceased Shivanna. 
18. In the light of the above evidence and in the absence of any 
defence evidence, it is amply clear that all the accused persons 
unlawfully assembled in front of the house of the deceased 
Shivanna and armed themselves with deadly weapons 
attracting the provisions of Section 149 IPC.  
19. Section 149 IPC reads as under: 
 
“149.  Every member of unlawful assembly guilty 
of offence committed in prosecution of common 
object.-  If an offence is committed by any member 
of an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the 
common object of that assembly, or such as the 
members of that assembly knew to be likely to be 
committed in prosecution of that object, every person 
who, at the time of the committing of that offence, is 
a member of the same assembly, is guilty of that 
offence.” 
 
20. A plain reading of the above provision abundantly makes clear 
that an overt act of some of the accused persons of an unlawful 
assembly with the common object to kill the deceased Shivanna 
and to cause grievous hurt to the other family members is 

Page 12 of 14 
 
enough to rope in all of them for an offence under Section 302 
IPC in aid with Section 149 IPC. 
21. The second contention advanced on behalf of the appellants 
that the medical evidence or the medical report on record does 
not substantiate the stand taken by the prosecution has no 
merit at all for the simple reason that the doctor (PW-18) who 
conducted the postmortem had proved the injuries. However, 
she suggested the possibility of use of different weapons in 
causing those injuries. Undoubtedly, only one kind of weapon 
i.e. chopper was used in committing the crime and, therefore, 
the evidence of the doctor may not be matching with that of the 
prosecution, but again, the ocular evidence of PW-3 and PW-4 
is sufficient enough to prove that only chopper was used as a 
weapon of crime. In the light of the said evidence of the two 
eyewitnesses, the suggestion or opinion of the doctor cannot 
prevail as the opinion based upon probability is a weak evidence 
in comparison to the ocular evidence of eyewitnesses. Moreover, 
even the said doctor herself in the end had suggested that all 
the wounds could have been caused by the same kind of 
weapons. Therefore, this submission also lacks merit. 

Page 13 of 14 
 
 
22. It goes without saying that this Court in exercise of its appellate 
jurisdiction is always slow in interfering with the concurrent 
findings of the courts below recorded on the basis of the 
evidence until and unless such findings are shown to be 
perverse. In the case at hand, no perversity of any kind has been 
pointed out in the findings returned by the two courts below. 
We are ourself satisfied upon consideration of the entire 
material evidence on record that none of the findings are in any 
manner perverse, thus, leaving no scope for this Court to 
disturb the findings or the judgments and orders of the courts 
below.  
23. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we do not find 
any error or illegality in the judgments and orders of the two 
courts below. 
24. Accordingly, all three appeals are dismissed as without 
substance. 

Page 14 of 14 
 
25. The appellants are on bail, their bail bonds are cancelled and 
they are directed to surrender forthwith to serve the remaining 
sentence. 
 
……………………………….. J. 
(ABHAY S. OKA) 
 
 
 
……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
FEBRUARY 2, 2024.