2024 INSC 883
1|CA NO.5389/2012 
 
NON-REPORTABLE  
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.5389 OF 2012 
 
KALLAKURI PATTABHIRAMASWAMY  
(DEAD) THROUGH LRS. 
 
 
 
 
… APPELLANTS 
 
VERSUS 
 
KALLAKURI KAMARAJU & ORS. 
 
           …RESPONDENTS 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
SANJAY KAROL J., 
 
1. 
Under challenge in this appeal is a judgment dated 26th March 2009, 
rendered by the High Court of Judicature, Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad, in 
Appeal Suit No.1278 of 1990 filed under Section 96 of the Civil Procedure Code, 
19081 and Cross Objections filed under Order XLI Rule 22 respectively, which 
was directed against a judgment and decree dated 19th March 1990 passed in O.S. 
No.50 of 1984 on the file of the Subordinate Judge, Ramachandrapuram.  
 
1 Hereinafter “C.P.C.” 
Digitally signed by Dr.
Naveen Rawal
Date: 2024.11.21
12:46:13 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2|CA NO.5389/2012 
 
2. 
The Suit was filed by the respondents herein and was decreed in their 
favour. The appeal filed by the appellants herein before the High Court was 
dismissed, thereby the findings of the Trial Court were confirmed.  In other 
words, the present is a case of the concurrent conclusions.  
 
THE FACTUAL PRISM & LEGAL BACKGROUND  
 
3. 
In a nutshell, the dispute pertains to the succession of property between 
two branches of the same family.  At odds here are step-brothers. The appellant-
defendant (now represented through LRs.) was the son of one Kallakuri Swamy 
from his union with one Smt. Veerabhadraamma, his second wife, and the 
respondent-plaintiffs are his sons through his marriage to his first wife. 
3.1 
The scheduled property, of which the respondent-plaintiffs sought 
an equal share in Ac. 3.55 cents of land comprising Ac. 0.54 cents in S. 
No.304/2, Ac. 0.92 cents in S.No.143/3, Ac. 0.24 cents in S.No.143/6, Ac. 
1.80 cents in S.No.224/2 and Ac. 0.05 cents in S.No.244/6 situated in Teki, 
West Khandrika and Angara villages. 
3.2 
By way of partition deed dated 25th August 1933, Smt. 
Veerabhadramma was given the right to enjoy the above-said property, and 
it was stipulated therein that after her death, the respondent-plaintiffs and 
appellant-defendant would be entitled to half share each, i.e., 1.77½ Cents 
of land.  

3|CA NO.5389/2012 
 
3.3 
Smt. Veerabhadramma passed away on 6th February, 1973.  In 
accordance with the partition deed described above, the property was 
divided amongst the two branches of successors of Kallakuri Swamy.   A 
dispute, however, arose leading to Original Suit No.50 of 1984 being filed.   
3.4 
In the plaint, it has been alleged that the respondent-plaintiffs 
demanded partition. However,  the same was repeatedly put off and evaded 
by the appellant-defendants. The latter has contended that Smt. 
Veerabhadramma by registered Will dated 30th December, 1968 bequeathed 
the scheduled properties to one of them (2nd defendant in the Original Suit).  
Such contention was denied, stating that her rights did not augment into 
absolute rights and that she had the right to enjoy the scheduled properties 
for life, as given under the registered partition deed.   
3.5 
The prayers made in the plaint are to the following effect : 
a) For the partition of the Plaint A and B schedule properties 
after declaring the plaintiff's right to partition by passing 
a Preliminary Decree and for separation of the plaintiff's 
half share in the Plaint A schedule land and Plaint B 
schedule house property; and to pass a final decree 
accordingly and plaintiffs be put in separate possession of 
one such half share both in the plaint A schedule lands 
and B schedule house property; 
 
b) For costs of the Suit; and 
 
c) For all such other or further reliefs that his Honourable 
Court deems fit and proper under the circumstances of the 
case.  
     

4|CA NO.5389/2012 
 
3.6 In the written statement, it has been submitted that the properties were 
given to Smt. Veerabhadramma taking into consideration her right of 
maintenance.  She was in possession and enjoyment of the said 
property till her death in 1973.  The rights so vested in Smt. 
Veerabhadramma were enlarged into absolute rights by application of 
Section 14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act, 19562.  She then executed 
a Will granting enjoyment to the 2nd defendant, namely, Kallakuri 
Veera Raghavamma, for her life and vested the same in defendant 
Nos.3 to 7 and the husband of defendant No.8.   
3.7 In the above facts, it was submitted that the respondent-plaintiffs 
cannot claim any right according to the partition deed.   
3.8 The Trial Court in its judgment dated 19th March 1990, framed two 
primary issues for consideration, i.e., (i) whether Kallakuri Veera 
Raghavamma, upon her death, was the absolute owner of the plaint 
scheduled property; and (ii) whether the respondent-plaintiffs are 
entitled to claim partition?  Further issues, pertaining to the Suit being 
barred by limitation, sufficiency of court fees, and the relief to which 
the parties may be entitled, were also framed. 
3.9 The reasoning of the Trial Court can be summarised as follows : 
 
2 For short, ‘HSA, 1956’ 

5|CA NO.5389/2012 
 
a) When the partition deed was executed in 1933, there existed no 
legal right in favour of Smt. Veerabhadramma.  The Hindu 
Women’s Right to Property Act, 1937 and the Hindu Women’s 
Right to Maintenance and Separate Residence Act, 1947 are both 
subsequent legislations.  Prior thereto, it was only a moral and 
personal obligation of a husband or the male member of the family 
to maintain the females.   
b) The principles laid down in V. Tulsamma v. V. Sesha Reddy3were 
referred to, and it was concluded that if a Hindu female acquires 
property at the first instance without a pre-existing right under the 
partition deed, then only Section 14(2) would be attracted.  But if 
the same was given to her as a restricted estate in recognition of 
her pre-existing right in joint family property, then 14(1) will be 
attracted.   
c) The property was not given to her in recognition of any pre-
existing right.  The recitals of the deed show that the property 
given in Schedules D and E was only enjoyed by her in 
her lifetime.   Schedules D and E were also included in the 
Schedules A and B.     
 
3 (1977) 3 SCC 99 

6|CA NO.5389/2012 
 
d) It was thus concluded that Smt. Veerabhadramma had no right to 
execute a Will in favour of her daughter-in-law (2nd defendant in 
the Original Suit).  She did not acquire absolute rights under the 
Hindu Succession Act, 1956, and as such the property would still 
vest with the respondent-plaintiffs as per the partition deed of 
1933. 
4. 
The appellant-defendants, aggrieved by the findings of the learned Civil 
Court, carried the matter in an appeal under Section 96 C.P.C.  The findings of 
the High Court can be summarised as follows:- 
a. Two principles laid down with regards to Sections 14(1) and 14(2) of the 
Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (hereinafter HSA, 1956) and property given 
to female Hindus in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance:  
b. If the property is given to a widow under a deed/instrument/partition 
deed/settlement deed/Will or Award in recognition of her Sastric right to 
maintenance or arrears of maintenance then that would be her absolute 
property after HSA, 1956 came into force because that is in recognition 
of her right to maintenance. [This right to maintenance was held to be a 
pre-existing right and a personal obligation of the husband in V. 
Tulasamma (supra)] 
c. If the deed (or any of the instruments mentioned before) creates an 
independent or new right or claim in favour of a female for the first time 

7|CA NO.5389/2012 
 
in addition to her pre-existing right under Shastric law and Section 14(1) 
has no application and Section 14(2) would apply. 
d. In a family partition between father and sons, where the mother, wife or 
daughter or widow of predeceased son of Karta/manager of the family had 
been given property towards maintenance - without anything else - then 
it shall be considered in the light of the language of document conferring 
such right.  
e. Under schedules “A” and “B”, Pattabhi Ramaswamy and Kallakuri 
Kamaraju (two sons of Kallakuri Ramaswamy) were given separate 
properties and equal shares in properties "C", "D", and "E" except Acs. 
2.09 cents where Smt. Veerabhadramma had absolute right.  
f. Ramaswamy would have been of the opinion that Acs. 2.09 cents with 
absolute right would meet the maintenance needs of 
Smt. 
Veerabhadramma after his death.  
g. A new right was created in her favour with respect to Acs. 3.55 cents giving 
life interest, leaving the remainder to two sons. 
h. Smt. Veerabhadramma had the right to bequeath property under Ex. A1 - 
Will, that property over which she had the absolute right under Section 
14(1), HSA, 1956, i.e., Acs. 2.09 cents and under Section 14(2) of HSA, 
1956, she did not have absolute rights with respect to Acs. 3.55 cents.  
i. Smt. Veerabhadramma was given absolute rights to Acs. 2.09 cents, and, 
therefore, her pre-existing right to maintenance out of the joint family was 

8|CA NO.5389/2012 
 
satisfied. The life interest with respect to plaint "A" schedule was created 
in addition to her recognized right to restrictive enjoyment of that property, 
which was distributed equally between two sons after her death. The above 
conclusion was reached in the light of the categorical difference in rights 
between the two properties. 
5. 
Having lost as above, the appellant-defendants are before this Court.  We 
have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the written 
submissions.  
6. 
The simple question in this appeal is whether the appellant-defendants are 
entitled to the entire property, in line with the position that Smt. Veerabhadramma, 
by virtue of the Hindu Succession Act of 1956, would have absolute rights over 
the subject property and, therefore, be able to bequeath the same by way of Will 
to her successors.   
 
RELEVANT STATUTORY PROVISION & CASES 
 
7. 
Section 14 of the HSA, 1956 reads thus:- 
“14. Property of a female Hindu to be her absolute 
property.―(1)Any property possessed by a female Hindu, whether 
acquired before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be held by 
her as full owner thereof and not as a limited owner.  
Explanation.―In this sub-section, “property” includes both movable 
and immovable property acquired by a female Hindu by inheritance or 
devise, or at a partition, or in lieu of maintenance or arrears of 
maintenance, or by gift from any person, whether a relative or not, 
before, at or after her marriage, or by her own skill or exertion, or by 
purchase or by prescription, or in any other manner whatsoever, and 
also any such property held by her as stridhana immediately before the 
commencement of this Act.  

9|CA NO.5389/2012 
 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to any property 
acquired by way of gift or under a will or any other instrument or under 
a decree or order of a civil court or under an award where the terms of 
the gift, will or other instrument or the decree, order or award prescribe 
a restricted estate in such property.”    
  
8. 
For ample clarity, it may be stated here that the appellant-defendants favour 
the application of Section 14(1), while the plaintiff-respondents favour the 
application of Section 14(2).  
9. 
Let us now consider judicial pronouncements on the nature, scope and 
applicability of Section 14 HSA, 1956, relevant to the instant dispute.  
9.1 
Any discussion on this section has to necessarily begin with the 
landmark judgment in V. Tulsamma (supra), which crystalised the law as 
follows: 
Fazal Ali, J. observed that  
“This being the position after marriage, it is manifest that 
the law enjoins a corresponding duty on the husband to 
maintain his wife and look after her comforts and to provide 
her food and raiments. It is well settled that under the Hindu 
law the husband has got a personal obligation to maintain 
his wife and if he is possessed of properties then his wife is 
entitled as of right to be maintained out of such properties. 
The claim of a Hindu widow to be maintained is not an 
empty formality which is to be exercised as a matter of 
concession or indulgence, grace or gratis or generosity but 
is a valuable spiritual and moral right which flows from the 
spiritual and temporal relationship of the husband and wife.. 
Thus the position is that the right of maintenance may 
amount to a legal charge if such a charge is created either 
by an agreement between the parties or by a decree.” 
 
9.2 
This Court Raghubar Singh v. Gulab Singh4 held thus: 
17. The obligations, under the Shastric Hindu law, to maintain a Hindu 
widow out of the properties of her deceased husband received a 
statutory recognition with the coming into force of the Hindu Women's 
 
4 (1998) 6 SCC 314 

10|CA NO.5389/2012 
 
Rights to Property Act, 1937. The law on the subject was, thereafter, 
consolidated and codified by the Hindu Married Women's Rights to 
Separate Residence and Maintenance Act, 1946 which came into force 
on 23-4-1946. The right to maintenance of the Hindu widow, as a pre-
existing right, was thus recognised by the two statutes referred to above 
but it was not created for the first time by any of those statutes. Her 
right to maintenance existed under the Shastric Hindu law long before 
statutory enactments came into force. After the attainment of 
independence, the need for emancipation of women from feudal 
bondage became even more imperative. There was growing agitation 
by Hindu women for enlargement of their rights as provided by 
the Shastric Hindu law in various spheres. It was at this juncture that 
Parliament stepped in and enacted various statutes like the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1956, the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956, 
and the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 providing for intestate succession.” 
 
(Emphasis Supplied)  
 
9.3  
Maintenance in its appropriate form has been discussed in Mangat 
Mal v. Punni Devi5 by Bharucha J. (as his Lordship then was) as follows:- 
“19. Maintenance, as we see it, necessarily must encompass a provision 
for residence. Maintenance is given so that the lady can live in the 
manner, more or less, to which she was accustomed. The concept of 
maintenance must, therefore, include provision for food and clothing 
and the like and take into account the basic need of a roof over the head. 
Provision for residence may be made either by giving a lump sum in 
money, or property in lieu thereof. It may also be made by providing, 
for the course of the lady's life, a residence and money for other 
necessary expenditure. Where provision is made in this manner, by 
giving a life interest in property for the purposes of residence, that 
provision is made in lieu of a pre-existing right to maintenance and the 
Hindu lady acquires far more than the vestige of title which is deemed 
sufficient to attract Section 14(1).” 
 
(Emphasis Supplied)  
 
9.4  
The right of maintenance is sufficient for the property given in lieu 
thereof to transform into absolute ownership, by way of Section 14(1) of 
the HSA, 1956.  In Jaswant Kaur v. Harpal Singh6 a bench of three learned 
 
5 (1995) 6 SCC 88 
6 (1989) 3 SCC 572 

11|CA NO.5389/2012 
 
Judges affirmed the view taken in Gulwant Kaur v. Mohinder Singh7, in 
the following terms:- 
“2. The question raised in this appeal has been considered in detail and 
is 
concluded 
by 
the 
judgment 
of 
this 
Court 
in Gulwant 
Kaur v. Mohinder Singh [(1987) 3 SCC 674] wherein it is observed: 
(SCC p. 679, para 4) 
 
“It is obvious that Section 14 is aimed at removing 
restrictions or limitations on the right of a female Hindu to 
enjoy, as a full owner, property possessed by her so long as 
her possession is traceable to a lawful origin, that is to say, 
if she has a vestige of a title. It makes no difference whether 
the property is acquired by inheritance or devise or at a 
partition or in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance 
or by gift or by her own skill or exertion or by purchase or 
by prescription or in any other manner whatsoever. The 
explanation expressly refers to property acquired in lieu of 
maintenance and we do not see what further title the widow 
is required to establish before she can claim full ownership 
under Section 14(1) in respect of property given to her and 
possessed by her in lieu of maintenance. The very right to 
receive maintenance is sufficient title to enable the ripening 
of possession into full ownership if she is in possession of 
the property in lieu of maintenance. Sub-section (2) of 
Section 14 is in the nature of an exception to Section 14(1) 
and provides for a situation where property is acquired by a 
female Hindu under a written instrument or a decree of 
Court and not where such acquisition is traceable to any 
antecedent right.” 
 
3. After this decision there are number of other decisions taking the 
same view and it is now settled law that if a female Hindu acquires 
property under a written instrument or a decree of the Court and where 
such acquisition is not traceable to any antecedent right then sub-section 
(2) of Section 14 alone would be attracted and where an antecedent right 
is traceable, a document in the nature of will is of no consequence and 
the case will be covered by provisions contained in Section 14 sub-
section (1)...” 
 
(Emphasis Supplied)  
 
10. 
What flows from the above is that the Hindu Women’s right to 
maintenance is not by virtue of statute, but is found in Shastric Hindu law; 
 
7 (1987) 3 SCC 674 

12|CA NO.5389/2012 
 
maintenance has to be proper, appropriate and adequate, giving the woman so 
maintained the ability to continue to live the life, similar to what she once lived; 
and that the very right to receive maintenance is sufficient title to enable the 
ripening of possession into full ownership if she is in possession of the property 
in lieu of maintenance.  
11. 
Let us now turn back to the instant facts –  
Smt. Veerabhadramma was given absolute right to her property, qua 2.09 
Cents of land and a life interest in respect of 3.55 Cents of land. This has been 
consistently held by the Courts below.  The appellant-defendants, however, want 
this Court to interfere with the said concurrent findings and hold that by virtue 
of Section 14(1) of the HSA, 1956, Smt. Veerabhadramma became the full and 
absolute owner of all properties, which would necessarily include the disputed 
land of 3.55 Cents. 
The findings of the Courts below, as facts are clear that absolute rights 
extended only to 2.09 Cents.  The record does not bring forth any reason for this 
Court to take a different view. The Shastric right of maintenance given statutory 
recognition by two pre-constitutional legislations, as noted by V. Tulsamma 
(supra) and Raghubar Singh (supra), stands satisfied thereby.  There have been 
no averments suggesting that the maintenance given to Smt. Veerabhadramma 
was insufficient to warrant interference in line with Punni Devi (supra), which 
states that it has to be sufficient to grant the lady so awarded maintenance to be 
able to continue a lifestyle, which she has been used to thus far.      

13|CA NO.5389/2012 
 
12.  
The law, as laid down by Gulwant Kaur (supra) and confirmed by 
Jaswant Kaur (supra), is clear. Property given in lieu of maintenance would 
solidify into absolute ownership by action of Section 14(1) of HSA, 1956. In 
other words, the right of maintenance on its own is apposite for such property to 
transfer into her sole, unquestionable, and absolute right. The partition deed of 
1933, it has been held, is clear that 3.55 Cents of land would be enjoyed by Smt. 
Veerabhadramma as a life interest and thereafter would devolve upon the two 
lines of succession, i.e., the sons of late Kallakuri Swami through his first wife 
and also his second wife.   
13. 
In that view of the matter, the appeal fails and is, accordingly, dismissed. 
Pending application, if any, shall stand disposed of.  
 
……..……………… J. 
 
 
 
 
 
[C.T. RAVIKUMAR] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
……………….…… J. 
 
 
 
 
 
[ SANJAY KAROL ] 
 
 
New Delhi; 
November  21, 2024.