2024 INSC 884
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3015 OF 2013 
 
R. KANDASAMY (SINCE DEAD) & ORS. 
 
    … APPELLANTS 
VERSUS 
T.R.K. SARAWATHY & ANR. 
 
 
            …RESPONDENTS  
WITH 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3016 OF 2013 
 
M/S. ABT LIMITED 
 
 
 
 
 
    … APPELLANT 
VERSUS  
T.R.K. SARAWATHY & ORS. 
 
 
            …RESPONDENTS 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J. 
 
THE APPEALS 
  
1. 
The appellants1 in Civil Appeal No.3015 / 2013 were the defendants in 
a suit2 for specific performance of an agreement for sale3 instituted by 
 
1 sellers, hereafter 
2 O.S. 420 of 2006 
3 Agreement, hereafter 
Digitally signed by
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2024.11.21
17:40:48 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
the first respondent as the plaintiff4, in respect of land together with a 
tenanted building5. The suit was dismissed by the Trial Court vide 
judgment and decree dated 17th December, 2007. Upon a first appeal6 
being carried under section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 19087 
by the buyer before the High Court of Judicature at Madras8, the same 
succeeded vide judgment and decree dated 21st October, 20119. The 
High Court reversed the judgment and decree of dismissal of the suit 
and granted decree for specific performance. The sellers have taken 
exception to the first appellate judgment and decree in this appeal by 
special leave, granted on 5th April, 2013. 
2. 
Civil Appeal No.3016 / 2013 is also an appeal against the impugned 
judgment, special leave wherefor was also granted on 5th April, 2013. 
It is at the instance of a company10 who had purchased the property, 
forming the subject of the Agreement, from the sellers when the first 
appeal was pending before the High Court without any order 
restraining the sellers to alienate the same. Upon such purchase, the 
subsequent purchaser derived knowledge of pendency of the first 
appeal; thus, it applied for and was impleaded as the eight respondent 
therein. 
 
 
4 buyer, hereafter 
5 property, hereafter 
6 A.S.811 of 2008 
7 CPC, hereafter 
8 High Court, hereafter 
9 impugned judgment, hereafter 
10 subsequent purchaser, hereafter 

3 
 
RESUME OF FACTS 
3. 
Although the facts leading to institution of the suit by the buyer and 
the defence raised by the sellers are captured in the decisions of the 
Trial Court as well as the High Court, for the sake of completeness, we 
consider it appropriate to briefly refer to the same hereunder: 
 
a. The parties, on mutually agreed terms, executed the Agreement 
dated 20th January, 2005 for sale of the property. Towards 
consideration, the buyer agreed to pay Rs. 2.3 crore to the sellers. 
Other noticeable features of the Agreement are: 
i.   A sum of Rs. 10 lakh was paid by the buyer as an advance. 
ii. 
The buyer had to pay the balance sale consideration within 
four months from the date of the Agreement (the period 
ending on 19th May, 2005). 
iii. 
On the date of the Agreement, the property was occupied 
by tenants and the sellers agreed that they will have the 
tenants vacate the property and deliver vacant possession 
thereof to the buyer at the time of sale. 
iv. 
Time shall be of the essence. 
b. The buyer started effecting payments in instalments. She paid Rs. 
5 lakh, Rs. 4 lakh, Rs. 1 lakh and Rs. 5 lakh on 2nd February, 24th 
February, 5th June, and 24th July, 2005, respectively, totalling to 
Rs. 15 lakh. Taking into consideration Rs.10 lakh paid in advance, 

4 
 
the buyer paid in all Rs. 19 lakh prior to 19th May, 2005 and Rs. 6 
lakh beyond that date. 
c. The sellers vide letter dated 23rd February, 2006 cancelled the 
Agreement and returned the sum of Rs. 25 lakh claiming that the 
said period of 4 (four) months had expired and that the buyer had 
not shown interest to complete the deal. However, the buyer vide 
reply letter dated 24th February, 2006 refuted the contents of the 
letter and emphasized that the sellers were bound to have the 
property vacated and the sale deed had to be executed only after 
all the tenants had vacated the property. It is noted that the last 
of the tenants vacated the property on 2nd February, 2006.  
d. The sellers vide letter dated 2nd March, 2006 asserted that the 
buyer has no right to claim purchase of the property as the 
Agreement had already been cancelled. The sellers reiterated that 
time is not the essence of the contract; the said period of 4 (four) 
months had expired; the fact of vacation of property by tenants 
was duly conveyed to the buyer multiple times; and despite 
multiple requests, the buyer did not come forward to execute the 
sale deed. For these reasons, the Agreement was cancelled vide 
letter dated 23rd February, 2006 and the pay order of Rs. 25 lakh 
was returned.  
e. Despite the letter dated 23rd February, 2006 whereby the sellers 
cancelled the Agreement (reiterated vide letter dated 2nd March, 
2006), the sellers vide a telegram dated 11th March, 2006 again 

5 
 
expressed interest to sell the property and conveyed that they 
were ready to sell it; consequently, the buyer was called upon to 
complete the sale before 24th March, 2006.  
f. The buyer, claiming that she was out of station, sent a letter on 
18th March, 2006. She asserted that as per the Agreement, she 
had four months’ time from the date of vacating of the property 
by all the tenants. A request was made calling upon the sellers to 
bring the original documents and ‘encumbrance certificate for 30 
years’ to enable her advocate prepare the sale deed.  
g. The sellers then sent a letter dated 23rd March, 2006 asserting 
therein that the period of four months is to be counted from the 
date of the Agreement, and the demand for encumbrance 
certificate was not tenable as the buyer had already obtained 
encumbrance certificate from the sellers prior to entering into the 
Agreement and had also assured that she herself would verify the 
said certificate from the date of Agreement till date of sale. The 
sellers further stated that irrespective of the above, they have 
applied for encumbrance certificate and requested the buyer to 
execute the sale deed within a week from receipt of encumbrance 
certificate, failing which, the Agreement would stand cancelled.  
h. On 25th March, 2006, the sellers called upon the buyer to pay the 
sale consideration of Rs. 2.3 crore within 7 (seven) days. The 
buyer responded vide reply notice dated 29th March, 2006 and 

6 
 
enclosed with it a draft sale deed and also demanded the sellers 
to hand over the encumbrance certificate.  
i. The sellers responded vide letter dated 6th April, 2006 and 
reiterated that photostat copies of the title deeds and 
encumbrance certificate up to the date of Agreement was already 
furnished to, and verified by the buyer before entering into the 
Agreement and that although it was not possible for them to 
deliver the original documents, they were ready to let the buyer 
verify the original documents. They also made a request to the 
buyer to pay the sale consideration within 5 (five) days from 
receipt of the letter.  
j. The sellers had not handed over the “original parent documents” 
for perusal of the buyer; hence, the buyer directly spoke to one 
of the sellers (the fourth defendant) asking him to bring the 
“original parent documents” for inspection. The buyer also sent a 
notice dated 22nd April, 2006 to the counsel of the sellers 
requesting him to advise the sellers to bring the documents for 
the buyer’s verification.  
k. Vide letter dated 26th April 2006, the sellers deplored the buyer’s 
dilatory tactic of conjuring new demands at the eleventh hour.  
Despite this, the sellers said, that they attempted their best to 
satisfy the buyer’s demand and offered the buyer the chance to 
inspect the original parent documents (vide letter dated 6th 
April,2006), which offer the buyer showed no interest in availing.  

7 
 
In view of the buyer’s failure to perform her part of the bargain 
despite multiple opportunities being given, the sellers declared 
that the Agreement finally stood cancelled,. 
l. Thereafter, vide letter dated 10th August, 2006, the buyer called 
upon the sellers to collect the pay order dated 11th February, 2006 
for Rs. 25 lakh from the buyer’s office, but the sellers did not 
collect the same. The buyer then enclosed the pay order with her 
letter dated 10th August, 2006 and sent it to the sellers who, vide 
letter dated 14th August, 2006 replied that the Agreement had 
already been cancelled and that the buyer, who earlier was not 
ready and willing,  is now trying to grab the property as the value 
of the property has gone up multiple times.  
 
4. 
It is in this factual background that litigation between the buyer and 
the seller commenced with institution of the suit by the buyer before 
the Court of the District Judge of Coimbatore. The suit was later 
transferred by the District Judge to the Court of the Additional District 
Judge (Fast Track Court I)11. Based on the averments in the plaint, 
which refer to more or less what we have narrated above in paragraph 
3, relief was claimed in the following terms:  
a. To pass a decree for specific performance of the Agreement dated 
20th January, 2005 or in the alternate a decree for refund of 
 
11 Trial Court, hereafter 

8 
 
advance amount of Rs. 25 lakh with 18% interest p.a. from the 
date of Agreement till realization.  
b. For permanent injunction restraining the sellers from alienating or 
encumbering the property.  
c. To direct the sellers to pay the costs of the suit. 
d. Any other relief that the court deems fit.  
5. 
The sellers in their written statement refuted all the contentions raised 
in the plaint and pleaded that the buyer was never ready and willing 
to purchase the property and alleged that the buyer filed the suit with 
the intention to take benefit of the increase in price of the property by 
projecting a theory that time is not of the essence. 
 
VERDICTS OF THE TRIAL COURT AND THE HIGH COURT  
6. 
The Trial Court framed and answered the issues as follows:  
6.1    Whether the agreement for sale dated 20th January, 2005, is 
true, valid and legally enforceable? Answered in the affirmative. 
6.2 
Whether as per the agreement for sale, the plaintiff was ready 
and willing to pay the balance sale consideration and get the 
sale deed executed? Answered in the negative. 
6.3 
Whether the plaintiff is entitled for a decree directing the 
defendants to receive the balance sale consideration and 
execute the sale deed? Answered in the negative.  

9 
 
6.4 
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the alternative relief of refund 
of Rs.25,00,000 with 18% interest p.a. from the defendants? 
Answered in the negative.  
7. 
As has been noticed above, the fortune of the parties changed before 
the Trial Court and the High Court. High Court, in appeal, decreed the 
suit of the buyer. High Court observed that time was not of essence as 
the sellers had received payments, without protest, even after the final 
date fixed for the performance of the Agreement. After analysing the 
documents on record, the High Court observed that the buyer was 
ready and willing and found no reason which disentitled her from the 
discretionary relief of specific performance. 
   
ARGUMENTS 
8. 
Mr. Dwivedi, learned senior counsel for the sellers, argued that the 
impugned judgment is completely flawed and hence, the appeal 
deserves interference. 
8.1 
Firstly, Mr. Dwivedi contended that the terms of the Agreement 
clearly provided that leaving aside the sum paid as advance, the 
time period for making payment of the balance sale 
consideration would be four months commencing from the date 
of such Agreement, i.e., 20th January, 2005. Admittedly, the 
buyer did not make the payment as agreed by and between the 
parties and time being the essence of the contract, the Trial 

10 
 
Court was justified in dismissing the suit (although on the point 
of time being the essence of the contract, it had held otherwise). 
8.2 
Secondly, Mr. Dwivedi invited our attention to the letter dated 
23rd February, 2006 sent by the sellers to the buyer whereby the 
sellers cancelled the Agreement and refunded the advance 
amount. The relevant part of the said letter is reproduced below: 
“…….You failed to pay the balance sale consideration 
within the period of 4 months and get the sale deed 
executed.” 
 
In reply to the above, the buyer sent a letter dated 24th February, 
2006 to the sellers. Nowhere in this reply letter did the buyer 
expressly mention that the period of four months is to be 
counted from the date of vacation of the property by the tenants. 
Hence, the assertion that the period of four months was to be 
counted from the date of vacation is merely an afterthought.    
8.3 
Thirdly, Mr. Dwivedi asserted that vide telegram dated 11th 
March, 2006, the sellers gave one last opportunity to the buyer 
to pay the balance amount and register the sale deed before 24th 
March, 2006. It has come on record that the buyer, despite being 
present in Coimbatore, falsely represented in her reply dated 
18th March, 2006 that she was out of station and, hence, was 
disabled to respond immediately. The conduct of the buyer, 
therefore, does not inspire confidence and certainly such conduct 
was sufficient to deny her equitable relief. 

11 
 
8.4 
Fourthly, Mr. Dwivedi contended that the buyer was never ready 
and willing to perform her part of the bargain and hence she was 
not entitled to the relief of specific performance. To show the 
reluctance of the buyer to go ahead with the transaction, various 
communications by and between the parties were referred to. 
The reply dated 24th February, 2006 was first referred wherefrom 
it would be evident that the buyer was aware of the fact of 
vacation of the property by the last remaining tenant. Vide 
telegram dated 11th March, 2006, the sellers called upon the 
buyer to hand over the pay order and gave time till 24th March, 
2006 to pay the balance sale amount and register the sale deed. 
Despite this, the buyer did not initiate any positive action as 
evidence of her readiness and willingness. Again, vide letter 
dated 23rd March, 2006, the sellers informed the buyer that they 
had applied for the encumbrance certificate, even though 
provision of such certificate was not a term of the Agreement. 
The sellers again called upon the buyer to execute the sale deed 
within 7 (seven) days from the date of receipt of the certificate. 
Even then, the buyer did not take steps to complete the sale. 
The sellers sent the encumbrance certificate as requested vide 
letter dated 06th April, 2006, and asked the buyer to execute the 
sale deed within 5 (five) days; however, even then, the buyer 
did not do the needful. Ultimately, having no other option, the 
sellers finally had to cancel the Agreement vide letter dated 26th 

12 
 
April, 2006. Thereafter, the buyer maintained silence for four 
months. There is no reasonable justification for such silence.  
8.5 
Fifthly, Mr. Dwivedi submitted that the buyer has nowhere 
pleaded that she had purchased the stamp papers for execution 
of the sale deed. This further suggests that the buyer was not 
ready and willing to perform her part of the obligations under 
the Agreement.   
8.6 
Sixthly, Mr. Dwivedi argued that the buyer had taken 
prevaricating stands and, therefore, is not entitled to the 
discretionary relief of specific performance. He drew our 
attention to the letter dated 24th February, 2006 wherein the 
buyer stated: 
“It appears that only few days ago, the tenant has 
vacated and the portion is kept under lock and key.”  
This shows that the buyer was aware of the fact of vacation of 
the property by the last tenant days prior to 24th February, 
2006. However, in her letter dated 18th March, 2006, she stated 
that: 
“You have vacated all the tenants only on 02.02.2006 
and it has been officially intimated to me only on 
04.03.2006 by your letter dated 02.03.2006”.  
To show the alleged wrongful conduct of the buyer, our 
attention was drawn to another instance. In her reply dated 
18th March 2006 to the telegram, the buyer stated: 
“…………………I am in receipt of your telegram dated 
11.03.2006 which has been received by my office and 

13 
 
due to my non-availability in the town I could not take 
immediate action in this……………….”  
However, when the buyer was confronted with Exs. B1 and B2 
being news items appearing in Tamil dailies dated 15th March and 
16th March, 2006 (wherein the buyer was seen receiving an 
award at Coimbatore), she admitted that between 11th March 
and 18th March, 2006 she was coming to and going out of 
Coimbatore. This fact was neither mentioned in her plaint nor in 
her sworn affidavit before the High Court. Having come with 
unclean hands by suppressing such material facts, the buyer 
disentitled herself to the relief of specific performance. 
8.7 
Seventhly, Mr. Dwivedi urged that the Agreement having stood 
cancelled at the instance of the sellers, not once but twice, it was 
necessary for the buyer to seek declaration that the cancellation 
was bad and not operative and binding qua her and in the 
absence of such a prayer, the suit itself was not maintainable in 
law. However, Mr. Dwivedi fairly pointed out that no such point 
having been raised by the sellers in their written statement, the 
Trial Court did not frame an issue on such aspect. Nevertheless, 
it was argued that this was a substantial point of law concerning 
the Court’s very jurisdiction, which ought to weigh in the mind 
of the Court while considering whether, at all, the relief of specific 
performance could be granted in favour of the buyer on the face 
of her omission/neglect to claim appropriate relief. 

14 
 
8.8 
Eighthly, while inviting our attention to several documents on 
record, more particularly the cross-examination of the buyer 
wherein she admitted that she did not have enough money in 
either of her bank accounts to pay the balance sale price and 
asserted that she had the money in cash, Mr. Dwivedi contended 
that the buyer did not have the capacity to go ahead with the 
sale transaction. 
8.9 
Ninthly, it was the submission of Mr. Dwivedi that the property 
was sold by the sellers to the subsequent purchaser after stay, 
prayed in connection with the first appeal of the buyer, was 
refused by the High Court. A property which was being sold for 
Rs.2.3 crore had fetched a price of Rs.8 crore and that relief of 
specific performance being an equitable relief, the facts and 
circumstances were not such so as to decree the suit of the buyer 
particularly having regard to her conduct. 
8.10 Finally, Mr. Dwivedi appealed that it was a fit and proper case 
where the impugned judgment of the High Court ought to be 
reversed and that of the Trial Court restored. 
9. 
Mr. Rana Mukherjee, learned senior counsel for the subsequent 
purchaser adopted the submissions of Mr. Dwivedi and submitted that 
that the conduct of the buyer disentitles her from claiming the relief of 
specific performance; therefore, the Trial Court rightly dismissed the 
suit. That apart, the subsequent purchaser being a bona fide purchaser 
of the property for value, this Court may not disturb the status quo.  

15 
 
10. Mr. Guru Krishna Kumar, learned senior counsel for the buyer, argued 
that the view taken by the High Court is correct, well-reasoned, not 
perverse and a plausible view; hence, it does not warrant interference.  
10.1 First, Mr. Kumar contended that both the Trial Court and High 
Court have concurrently found that time is not the essence of 
the contract. While inviting our attention to several documents 
on record, Mr. Kumar contended that the following conduct of 
the sellers itself evinced that for them, time was not of the 
essence: 
i. the sellers received payments on 5th June 2004 and 24th July 
2005, which is after the final date that they say was fixed for 
performance of the Agreement, i.e. 19th May 2005; 
ii. even though they purportedly cancelled the Agreement vide 
telegram dated 11th March 2006, in their subsequent letters 
dated 23rd March 2006, 24th March 2006 and 6th April 2006, 
they have given extensions to the buyer in a piecemeal 
manner; 
iii. and the sale deed could not have been executed by the 
sellers unless they evicted all tenants. Since such eviction is 
an uncertain event, time could not have been of the essence. 
10.2 Secondly, Mr. Kumar submitted that the sellers have delineated 
a conduct full of blemishes, elaborated below, which disentitles 
them from discretionary relief of specific performance: 

16 
 
i. 
vide their letter dated 23rd February 2006, sellers purportedly 
cancelled the Agreement, then taking a volte face, vide  letter 
dated 11th March 2006, the sellers conveyed that they were 
ready to sell the property; 
ii. 
the sellers never furnished the original title deeds for 
inspection by the buyer; 
iii. 
though the sellers returned the pay order of Rs. 25 lakh vide 
letter dated 11th February 2006, it was sent to a wrong 
address; 
iv. 
and the sellers never obtained and produced any document 
from their bank, viz. M/s Vijaya Bank, showing the status of 
the pay order issued by the buyer, even though the same 
could have been obtained by them and this they did 
deliberately, so that the court can conclude that either the 
buyer has encashed the same or that the buyer never 
returned the same to sellers.  
Mr. Kumar cited the decision of this Court in Ferrodous Estates 
(P) Ltd v P. Gopirathnam12 and relied on the following 
paragraph:  
“54. ...As has been found earlier in this judgment, the Sellers 
were held to have taken up dishonest pleas and also held to 
have been in breach of a solemn agreement in which they were 
to obtain the Urban Land Ceiling permission which, if not 
obtained, would, under the agreement itself, not stand in the 
way of the specific performance of the agreement between the 
parties. He who asks for equity must do equity. Given the 
conduct of the defendants in this case, as contrasted with the 
 
12 2020 SCC Online 825 

17 
 
conduct of the appellant who is ready and willing throughout to 
perform its part of the bargain. We think this is a fit case in 
which the Division Bench judgment should be set aside. As a 
result, the decree passed by the Single Judge is restored. Since 
the appellant itself offered a sum of Rs. 1.25 crores to the 
Division Bench, it must be made to pay this amount to the 
respondents within a period of eight weeks from the date of 
this judgment.”                    
                                                            (emphasis supplied) 
10.3 Thirdly, Mr. Kumar asserted that the buyer was always ready 
and willing to perform her part of the bargain. In fact, the 
buyer’s obligation to pay the balance consideration was to be 
fulfilled only after the sellers had performed their part of the 
bargain, which was to be ready to hand over the vacant 
possession of the property by evicting the tenants. Hence, 
without first performing their reciprocal promises, the sellers 
could not have called upon the buyer to pay the balance sale 
consideration. On the contrary, it was the sellers who were not 
ready to perform their part. Vide letter dated 22nd April 2006, 
the buyer demanded the sellers to produce the original title 
deeds which was refused by the sellers vide their letter dated 
26th April 2006. Even though there was no express condition in 
the Agreement for production of original title deeds, but such 
condition is implied in the Agreement. Hence, without the 
sellers having first complied with their promise, they could not 
have called upon the buyer to perform her part and later claim 
that the buyer was not ready and willing.  

18 
 
10.4 Taking the above into consideration, Mr. Kumar submitted, that 
the High Court has rightly granted the discretionary relief of 
specific performance in favour of the buyer.  
 
QUESTION 
11. The sole question that we are tasked to decide is, whether the 
impugned judgment of the High Court warrants any interdiction in 
exercise of our appellate jurisdiction. 
 
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 
12. Before embarking on the aforesaid task, it would only be just and 
proper to remind ourselves of certain well-settled principles that have 
evolved through judicial precedents laid down by this Court on certain 
points which invariably arise in specific performance suits and which 
are relevant for the purpose of a decision on these appeals.  
ON WHETHER TIME IS THE ESSENCE OF THE CONTRACT: 
13. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Chand Rani v. Kamal Rani13 
surveyed previous decisions on the question as to whether or not time 
is the essence of the contract in transactions of sale of immovable 
properties and appears to have made a slight departure from earlier 
principles by ruling as under: 
 
13 (1993) 1 SCC 519 

19 
 
“25. From an analysis of the above case-law it is clear that in 
the case of sale of immovable property there is no presumption 
as to time being the essence of the contract. Even if it is not of 
the essence of the contract the Court may infer that it is to be 
performed in a reasonable time if the conditions are: 
1. from the express terms of the contract; 
2. from the nature of the property; and 
3. from the surrounding circumstances, for example: the 
object of making the contract.” 
 
14. An instructive discussion is found in Saradamani Kandappan v. S. 
Rajalakshmi14 of how the principle of time not being the essence of 
the contract in transactions relating to sale of immovable properties 
took shape and how with changing times, the outlook of the courts in 
pleas claiming specific performance should be. We consider it 
appropriate to reproduce the same hereunder: 
“36. The principle that time is not of the essence of contracts 
relating to immovable properties took shape in an era when 
market values of immovable properties were stable and did not 
undergo any marked change even over a few years (followed 
mechanically, even when value ceased to be stable)…..This 
principle made sense during the first half of the twentieth 
century, when there was comparatively very little inflation, in 
India. The third quarter of the twentieth century saw a very 
slow but steady increase in prices. But a drastic change 
occurred from the beginning of the last quarter of the twentieth 
century. There has been a galloping inflation and prices of 
immovable properties have increased steeply, by leaps and 
bounds. Market values of properties are no longer stable or 
steady. We can take judicial notice of the comparative purchase 
power of a rupee in the year 1975 and now, as also the steep 
increase in the value of the immovable properties between then 
and now. It is no exaggeration to say that properties in cities, 
worth a lakh or so in or about 1975 to 1980, may cost a crore 
or more now. 
37. The reality arising from this economic change cannot 
continue to be ignored in deciding cases relating to specific 
performance. The steep increase in prices is a circumstance 
which makes it inequitable to grant the relief of specific 
performance where the purchaser does not take steps to 
 
14 (2011) 12 SCC 18 

20 
 
complete the sale within the agreed period, and the vendor has 
not been responsible for any delay or non-performance. A 
purchaser can no longer take shelter under the principle that 
time is not of essence in performance of contracts relating to 
immovable property, to cover his delays, laches, breaches and 
‘non-readiness’.…………… 
*** 
42. Therefore there is an urgent need to revisit the principle 
that time is not of the essence in contracts relating to 
immovable properties and also explain the current position of 
law with regard to contracts relating to immovable property 
made after 1975, in view of the changed circumstances arising 
from inflation and steep increase in prices. We do not propose 
to undertake that exercise in this case, nor referring the matter 
to a larger Bench as we have held on facts in this case that time 
is the essence of the contract, even with reference to the 
principles in Chand Rani2 and other cases. Be that as it may. 
43. Till the issue is considered in an appropriate case, we can 
only reiterate what has been suggested in K.S. Vidyanadam: 
(i) The courts, while exercising discretion in suits for 
specific performance, should bear in mind that when the 
parties prescribe a time/period, for taking certain steps 
or for completion of the transaction, that must have some 
significance and therefore time/period prescribed cannot 
be ignored. 
(ii) The courts will apply greater scrutiny and strictness 
when considering whether the purchaser was ‘ready and 
willing’ to perform his part of the contract. 
(iii) Every suit for specific performance need not be 
decreed merely because it is filed within the period of 
limitation by ignoring the time-limits stipulated in the 
agreement. The courts will also ‘frown’ upon suits which 
are not filed immediately after the breach/refusal. The 
fact that limitation is three years does not mean that a 
purchaser can wait for 1 or 2 years to file a suit and obtain 
specific performance. The three-year period is intended 
to assist the purchasers in special cases, as for example, 
where the major part of the consideration has been paid 
to the vendor and possession has been delivered in part-
performance, where equity shifts in favour of the 
purchaser.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (emphasis supplied) 
 
 

21 
 
CONSIDERATIONS IN GRANT OR REFUSAL: 
15. A three-Judge Bench of this Court in Prakash Chandra v. Angadlal15 
held, the ordinary rule is that specific performance should be granted. 
It ought to be denied only when equitable considerations point to its 
refusal and the circumstances show that damages would constitute an 
adequate relief. 
16. This Court in N.P. Thirugnanam v. R. Jagan Mohan Rao (Dr)16 
while reiterating that the remedy of specific performance is equitable 
in nature and that granting or refusing specific performance is within 
the discretion of the court, had the occasion to observe:   
“5. It is settled law that remedy for specific performance is an 
equitable remedy and is in the discretion of the court, which 
discretion requires to be exercised according to settled 
principles of law and not arbitrarily as adumbrated under 
Section 20 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (for short ‘the Act’). 
Under Section 20, the court is not bound to grant the relief just 
because there was a valid agreement of sale. Section 16(c) of 
the Act envisages that plaintiff must plead and prove that he 
had performed or has always been ready and willing to perform 
the essential terms of the contract which are to be performed 
by him, other than those terms the performance of which has 
been prevented or waived by the defendant. The continuous 
readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff is a 
condition precedent to grant the relief of specific performance. 
This circumstance is material and relevant and is required to be 
considered by the court while granting or refusing to grant the 
relief. If the plaintiff fails to either aver or prove the same, he 
must fail. To adjudge whether the plaintiff is ready and willing 
to perform his part of the contract, the court must take into 
consideration the conduct of the plaintiff prior and subsequent 
to the filing of the suit along with other attending 
circumstances. The amount of consideration which he has to 
pay to the defendant must of necessity be proved to be 
available. Right from the date of the execution till date of the 
decree he must prove that he is ready and has always been 
 
15 (1979) 4 SCC 393 
16 (1995) 5 SCC 115 

22 
 
willing to perform his part of the contract. As stated, the factum 
of his readiness and willingness to perform his part of the 
contract is to be adjudged with reference to the conduct of the 
party and the attending circumstances. The court may infer 
from the facts and circumstances whether the plaintiff was 
ready and was always ready and willing to perform his part of 
the contract.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
17. In Nirmala Anand v. Advent Corpn. (P) Ltd.17, a Bench of three 
Judges of this Court discussed what are the considerations that need 
to be kept in view while considering grant or refusal of a decree of 
specific performance in the following words: 
“6. It is true that grant of decree of specific performance lies in 
the discretion of the court and it is also well settled that it is not 
always necessary to grant specific performance simply for the 
reason that it is legal to do so. It is further well settled that the 
court in its discretion can impose any reasonable condition 
including payment of an additional amount by one party to the 
other while granting or refusing decree of specific performance. 
Whether the purchaser shall be directed to pay an additional 
amount to the seller or converse would depend upon the facts 
and circumstances of a case. Ordinarily, the plaintiff is not to be 
denied the relief of specific performance only on account of the 
phenomenal increase of price during the pendency of litigation. 
That may be, in a given case, one of the considerations besides 
many others to be taken into consideration for refusing the 
decree of specific performance. As a general rule, it cannot be 
held that ordinarily the plaintiff cannot be allowed to have, for 
her alone, the entire benefit of phenomenal increase of the 
value of the property during the pendency of the litigation. 
While balancing the equities, one of the considerations to be 
kept in view is as to who is the defaulting party. It is also to be 
borne in mind whether a party is trying to take undue 
advantage over the other as also the hardship that may be 
caused to the defendant by directing specific performance. 
There may be other circumstances on which parties may not 
have any control. The totality of the circumstances is required 
to be seen.” 
 
 
17 (2002) 8 SCC 146 

23 
 
18. In Kamal Kumar v. Premlata Joshi18, one finds the following 
instructive passage: 
“7. It is a settled principle of law that the grant of relief of 
specific performance is a discretionary and equitable relief. The 
material questions, which are required to be gone into for grant 
of the relief of specific performance, are: 
7.1. First, whether there exists a valid and concluded contract 
between the parties for sale/purchase of the suit property. 
7.2. Second, whether the plaintiff has been ready and willing to 
perform his part of contract and whether he is still ready and 
willing to perform his part as mentioned in the contract. 
7.3. Third, whether the plaintiff has, in fact, performed his part 
of the contract and, if so, how and to what extent and in what 
manner he has performed and whether such performance was 
in conformity with the terms of the contract; 
7.4. Fourth, whether it will be equitable to grant the relief of 
specific performance to the plaintiff against the defendant in 
relation to suit property or it will cause any kind of hardship to 
the defendant and, if so, how and in what manner and the 
extent if such relief is eventually granted to the plaintiff; 
7.5. Lastly, whether the plaintiff is entitled for grant of any other 
alternative relief, namely, refund of earnest money, etc. and, if 
so, on what grounds. 
8. In our opinion, the aforementioned questions are part of the 
statutory requirements [See Sections 16(c), 20, 21, 22, 23 of 
the Specific Relief Act, 1963 and Forms 47/48 of Appendices A 
to C of the Code of Civil Procedure]. These requirements have 
to be properly pleaded by the parties in their respective 
pleadings and proved with the aid of evidence in accordance 
with law. It is only then the Court is entitled to exercise its 
discretion and accordingly grant or refuse the relief of specific 
performance depending upon the case made out by the parties 
on facts.” 
 
19. Quite recently, Kamal Kumar (supra) has been followed in P. 
Daivasigamani v. S. Sambandan19.  
WHO CAN BE SAID TO BE ‘READY AND WILLING’? 
 
18 (2019) 3 SCC 793 
19 (2022) 14 SCC 793 

24 
 
20. In C.S. Venkatesh vs. A.S.C. Murthy20, this Court on consideration 
of various decisions culled out what is implied by the words “ready and 
willing”. It was held:  
“16. The words ‘ready and willing’ imply that the plaintiff was 
prepared to carry out those parts of the contract to their logical 
end so far as they depend upon his performance. The 
continuous readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff 
is a condition precedent to grant the relief of performance. If 
the plaintiff fails to either aver or prove the same, he must fail. 
To adjudge whether the plaintiff is ready and willing to perform 
his part of contract, the court must take into consideration the 
conduct of the plaintiff prior, and subsequent to the filing of the 
suit along with other attending circumstances. The amount 
which he has to pay the defendant must be of necessity to be 
proved to be available. Right from the date of the execution of 
the contract till the date of decree, he must prove that he is 
ready and willing to perform his part of the contract. The court 
may infer from the facts and circumstances whether the plaintiff 
was ready and was always ready to perform his contract. 
 
21. Requisite pleadings and proof that are required of a plaintiff to succeed 
in a suit for specific performance are succinctly captured in this Court’s 
decision of recent origin in 
U.N. Krishnamurthy v. A.M. 
Krishnamurthy21. The relevant passage reads:  
“24. To aver and prove readiness and willingness to perform an 
obligation to pay money, in terms of a contract, the plaintiff 
would have to make specific statements in the plaint and 
adduce evidence to show availability of funds to make payment 
in terms of the contract in time. In other words, the plaintiff 
would have to plead that the plaintiff had sufficient funds or was 
in a position to raise funds in time to discharge his obligation 
under the contract. If the plaintiff does not have sufficient funds 
with him to discharge his obligations in terms of a contract, 
which requires payment of money, the plaintiff would have to 
specifically plead how the funds would be available to him. To 
cite an example, the plaintiff may aver and prove, by adducing 
evidence, an arrangement with a financier for disbursement of 
 
20 (2020) 3 SCC 280 
21 (2023) 11 SCC 775 

25 
 
adequate funds for timely compliance with the terms and 
conditions of a contract involving payment of money.” 
 
 
ABSENT A PRAYER FOR DECLARATORY RELIEF THAT TERMINATION OF THE AGREEMENT IS 
BAD IN LAW, WHETHER A SUIT FOR SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE IS MAINTAINABLE? 
22. This question has been considered by this Court in I.S. Sikandar v. 
K. Subramani22 and answered in the following words:  
“37. As could be seen from the prayer sought for in the original 
suit, the plaintiff has not sought for declaratory relief to declare 
the termination of agreement of sale as bad in law. In the 
absence of such prayer by the plaintiff the original suit filed by 
him before the trial court for grant of decree for specific 
performance in respect of the suit schedule property on the 
basis of agreement of sale and consequential relief of decree 
for permanent injunction is not maintainable in law.” 
 
23.  I.S. Sikandar (supra) was followed by this Court in Mohinder Kaur 
v. Sant Paul Singh23 where, on facts, it was also held that the relief 
of specific performance being discretionary in nature, the respondent 
cannot be held to have established his case for grant of such relief. 
24. However, in the interregnum, I.S. Sikandar (supra) was also 
considered by this Court in A. Kanthamani v. Nasreen Ahmed24 and 
it was held that the former decision turns on the facts involved therein 
and is, thus, distinguishable. In the latter decision, this Court also held 
that it is a well-settled principle of law that the plea regarding the 
maintainability of suit is required to be raised in the first instance in 
the pleading (written statement) and then only such plea can be 
 
22 (2013) 15 SCC 27 
23 (2019) 9 SCC 358 
24 (2017) 4 SCC 654 

26 
 
adjudicated by the Trial Court on its merits as a preliminary issue under 
Order 14 Rule 2 CPC. Once a finding is rendered on the plea, the same 
can then be examined by the first or/and second appellate court. It is 
only in appropriate cases, where the court prima facie finds by mere 
perusal of plaint allegations that the suit is barred by any express 
provision of law or is not legally maintainable due to any legal 
provision, a judicial notice can be taken to avoid abuse of judicial 
process in prosecuting such suit. However, such was not the case 
therein. 
25. What follows from A. Kanthamani (supra) is that unless an issue as 
to maintainability is framed by the Trial Court, the suit cannot be held 
to be not maintainable at the appellate stage only because appropriate 
declaratory relief has not been prayed. 
 
ON INCONSISTENT CLAUSES IN AN AGREEMENT 
26. It is not an infrequent happening that two or more clauses in a contract 
could, in some measure, be inconsistent with each other, - the 
inconsistency arising because the clauses cannot sensibly be read 
together. Lord Wrenbury in Forbes v. Git 25 applied the following 
principle: 
“The principle of law to be applied may be stated in a few words. 
If in a deed an earlier clause is followed by a later clause which 
destroys altogether the obligation created by the earlier clause, 
the later clause is to be rejected as repugnant and the earlier 
clause prevails. In this case the two clauses cannot be 
reconciled and the earlier provision in the deed prevails over 
the later. Thus if A covenants to pay … 100 and the deed 
 
25 [1922] 1 A.C. 256 

27 
 
subsequently provides that he shall not be liable under this 
covenant, that later provision is to be rejected as repugnant 
and void, for it altogether destroys the covenant. But if the later 
clause does not destroy but only qualifies the earlier, then the 
two are to be read together and effect is to be given to the 
intention of the parties as disclosed by the deed as a whole. 
Thus if A covenants to pay … 100 and the deed subsequently 
provides that he shall be liable to pay only at a future named 
date or in a future defined event or if at the due date of payment 
he holds a defined office, then the absolute covenant to pay is 
controlled by the words qualifying the obligation in manner 
described.”  
 
27. The aforesaid principle of law was approved by this Court in Radha 
Sundar Dutta v. Mohd. Jahadur Rahim26, where a bench of three 
Judges held that it is a settled rule of interpretation that if there be 
admissible two constructions of a document, one of which will give 
effect to all the clauses therein while the other will render one or more 
of them nugatory, it is the former that should be adopted on the 
principle expressed in the maxim “ut res magis valeat quam pereat”. 
Following it up, it was also observed that if, in fact, there is a conflict 
between the earlier clause and the later clauses and it is not possible 
to give effect to all of them, then the rule of construction is well 
established that it is the earlier clause that must override the later 
clauses and not vice versa. 
28. A decision of recent origin of this Court in Bharat Sher Singh Kalsia 
v. State of Bihar27 having taken note of the aforesaid decisions, 
proceeded to hold: 
“32. We are of the considered opinion that all three clauses are 
capable of being construed in such a manner that they operate 
 
26 AIR 1959 SC 24 
27 (2024) 4 SCC 318 

28 
 
in their own fields and are not rendered nugatory. That apart, 
we are mindful that even if we had perceived a conflict between 
Clauses 3 and 11, on the one hand, and Clause 15 on the other, 
we would have to conclude that Clauses 3 and 11 would prevail 
over Clause 15 as when the same cannot be reconciled, the 
earlier clause(s) would prevail over the latter clause(s), when 
construing a deed or a contract. Reference for such proposition 
is traceable to Forbes v. Git as approvingly taken note of by a 
three-Judge Bench of this Court in Radha Sundar Dutta v. Mohd. 
Jahadur Rahim. However, we have been able, as noted above, 
to reconcile the three clauses in the current scenario.” 
 
ANALYSIS AND REASONS 
29. A suit for specific performance of a contract for sale, normally, is 
premised on a written agreement between the contracting parties, 
signifying a meeting of minds of two persons or more. Terms of the 
agreement, which are reasonably ascertainable from the written 
document, assume extreme relevance. After all, compliance with other 
requisites takes the shape of a concluded contract and should there be 
no vitiating factor, the parties are bound thereby.   
30. The first point that we need to examine is the effect of the two clauses 
of the Agreement and to apply the law laid down by this Court in 
Radha Sundar Dutta (supra) and Bharat Sher Singh Kalsia 
(supra). The said clauses read as follows: 
“The Second party will have to pay the balance sale price within 
four months from today and obtain a sale deed either in his 
name or in the name of persons nominated by him at his own 
expense.” 
 
“There are tenants in the property described below at present. 
The First Parties agree to vacate the tenants and hand over 
vacant possession to the Second Party at the time of obtaining 
the sale.” 
 

29 
 
31. On a bare reading of the aforesaid clauses, we do not find that the 
latter clause destroys the effect of the former clause altogether so 
much so that it has to be discarded. On the contrary, in this case, both 
the clauses were such that the same had to be read together and given 
effect upon ascertaining the intention of the parties as disclosed by the 
Agreement as a whole. The latter clause could not have been read 
divorced from the former, having regard to the intent of the parties 
that is discernible. The latter qualified the former in the sense that 
although it was obligatory for the buyer to pay the balance price within 
19th May, 2005 and “obtain the sale deed”, this was on the assumption 
that the property would be made free of tenants by the sellers by that 
time. However, the situation therefor did not arise on 19th May, 2005 
since the tenant, who vacated the property last, did so sometime on 
2nd February, 2006. Going by the latter clause, the buyer had time till 
1st June, 2006 to complete the deal (four months of vacating of the 
property by all the tenants to enable the sellers to hand over vacant 
possession to the buyer). In our understanding, the Trial Court and the 
High Court were right in concluding that time was not the essence 
though the Agreement provided that “time mentioned in this 
agreement shall be of the essence.”  
32. We now turn our attention to the next point, which should clinch the 
issue between the parties. It is, whether or not the buyer 
demonstrated readiness and willingness to perform her part of the 
contract and even if she did, is she entitled to the discretionary and 

30 
 
equitable relief of specific performance on facts and in the 
circumstances.  
33. For tracing an answer, one would necessarily have to bear in mind 
sections 10, 16 and (unamended) section 20 of the Act. Scanning of 
the evidence on record unmistakably points to the conclusion that the 
buyer was not ready and willing to have the terms agreed by and 
between the parties to be performed. 
34. First, the conduct of the buyer does not inspire confidence in view of 
the fact that despite being aware in February, 2006 of the property 
having been vacated by all the tenants, she started raising the bogey 
of failure of the sellers to share with her the ‘encumbrance certificate’. 
Importantly, the Agreement did not record that the sellers were under 
any obligation to share such certificate. Thus, in the absence of such 
obligation, one has to presume that the buyer was duly satisfied with 
the sellers’ title to the property and as such did not, consciously, insist 
on making such obligation a part of the Agreement of sharing of the 
‘encumbrance certificate’ prior to performance of the agreed terms. It 
is common knowledge that none interested in buying an expensive 
property would agree to terms leaving himself/herself at a potential 
risk of facing litigation in future. Even in the absence of an express 
term and if it were accepted that the obligation is an implied 
requirement of the Agreement, the buyer would have done well to 
close the deal if the sellers were taking advantage of the omission in 
the Agreement, particularly when at the time she raised such objection 

31 
 
the entire money received in advance had been returned by the sellers 
to her. This is one aspect of the matter.     
35. The other aspect is this. From the documents on record, it is clear that 
there was no readiness and willingness on the buyer’s part to pay the 
balance sale consideration and get the sale deed executed. The buyer, 
despite multiple reminders, did not come forward for execution of the 
sale deed. Vide letters dated 11th March, 2006, 23rd March, 2006, 06th 
April, 2006, the buyer was given a deadline of 13 (thirteen), 7 (seven) 
(counted from the date of receipt of ‘encumbrance certificate’) and 5 
(five) days respectively; however, the buyer did not comply with any 
of these. It is to be noted that the above communications are 
subsequent to the reply letter dated 24th February, 2006 by the buyer 
wherein she admitted her knowledge of the property having been 
vacated by the last of the tenants. Hence, the conduct of the buyer in 
not doing the needful, especially even after the property became free 
of tenants, demonstrates her reluctance and diffidence to perform the 
contract.  
36. Moving further, a perusal of the buyer’s cross-examination reveals her 
admission of not having enough fund in either of her bank accounts to 
pay the balance sale price. This, in our opinion, is sufficient proof of 
her financial incapacity to perform her part of the contract. The 
husband of the buyer could be a wealthy man having sufficient balance 
in his bank account but having perused the credit and debit entries, 
we have significant doubts in respect thereof which we need not dilate 

32 
 
here in the absence of him being a party to the proceedings. Suffice is 
to observe, the transactions evident from the bank accounts of the 
buyer’s husband do little to impress us that the buyer had 
demonstrated her financial capacity to make payment of the balance 
sale price and close the deal.    
37. Imperative and interesting it is to note, the buyer sought to return the 
demand draft to the sellers on the last day of its validity. As discussed 
above, along with letter dated 23rd February 2006 of the sellers 
cancelling the Agreement, they returned the advance amount received 
from the buyer vide demand draft dated 11th February 2006. This draft 
was retained by the buyer and returned as late as 10th August, 2006 
vide letter of even date (and not along with any of her previous 
letters). However, the demand draft dated 11th February, 2006 being 
valid only for a period of 6 (six) months, i.e., 10th August 2006, it has 
intrigued us as to why the buyer would hold on to the demand draft 
and not return it earlier if she was genuinely interested in purchasing 
the property.  
38. Such conduct of the buyer, seen cumulatively, does not inspire 
confidence in granting her the discretionary relief of specific 
performance. 
39. The question posed for an answer is, thus, decided against the buyer. 
40. Having held thus, allowing the appeal is the inevitable result. However, 
before we part, there seems to be a discordant note struck by the 
decision in A. Kanthamani (supra) while distinguishing I.S. Sikandar 

33 
 
(supra), which could create uncertainty and confusion. It is, therefore, 
considered worthwhile to attempt and clear the same.   
41. A comprehensive reading of the two decisions reveals that in a fact 
scenario where the vendor unliterally cancels an agreement for sale, 
the vendee who is seeking specific performance of such agreement 
ought to seek declaratory relief to the effect that the cancellation is 
bad and not binding on the vendee. This is because an agreement, 
which has been cancelled, would be rendered non-existent in the eyes 
of law and such a non-existent agreement could not possibly be 
enforced before a court of law. Both the decisions cited above are 
unanimous in their approval of such legal principle. However, as 
clarified in Kanthamani (supra), it is imperative that an issue be 
framed with respect to maintainability of the suit on such ground, 
before the court of first instance, as it is only when a finding on the 
issue of maintainability is rendered by trial court that the same can be 
examined by the first or/and second appellate court. In other words, 
if maintainability were not an issue before the trial court or the 
appellate court, a suit cannot be dismissed as not maintainable. This 
is what Kanthamani (supra) holds. 
42. The aforesaid two views of this Court, expressed by coordinate 
benches, demand deference. However, it is noticed that this Court in 
Kanthamani (supra) had not been addressed on the effect of non-
existence of a jurisdictional fact (the existence whereof would clothe 
the trial court with jurisdiction to try a suit and consider granting 

34 
 
relief), i.e., what would be its effect on the right to relief claimed by 
the plaintiff in a suit for specific performance of contract.  
43. In Shrisht Dhawan (Smt) v. Shaw Bros.28, an interesting discussion 
on ‘jurisdictional fact’ is found in the concurring opinion of Hon’ble R. 
M. Sahai, J. (as His Lordship then was). It reads:  
“19. *** What, then, is an error in respect of jurisdictional fact? 
A jurisdictional fact is one on existence or non-existence of 
which depends assumption or refusal to assume jurisdiction by 
a court, tribunal or an authority. In Black’s Legal Dictionary it is 
explained as a fact which must exist before a court can properly 
assume jurisdiction of a particular case. Mistake of fact in 
relation to jurisdiction is an error of jurisdictional fact. No 
statutory authority or tribunal can assume jurisdiction in 
respect of subject matter which the statute does not confer on 
it and if by deciding erroneously the fact on which jurisdiction 
depends the court or tribunal exercises the jurisdiction then the 
order is vitiated. Error of jurisdictional fact renders the order 
ultra vires and bad (Wade, Administrative Law. In Raza Textiles 
[(1973) 1 SCC 633] it was held that a court or tribunal cannot 
confer jurisdiction on itself by deciding a jurisdictional fact 
wrongly. ***” 
                                                             (emphasis supplied) 
44. Borrowing wisdom from the aforesaid passage, our deduction is this. 
An issue of maintainability of a suit strikes at the root of the 
proceedings initiated by filing of the plaint as per requirements of 
Order VII Rule 1, CPC. If a suit is barred by law, the trial court has 
absolutely no jurisdiction to entertain and try it. However, even though 
a given case might not attract the bar envisaged by section 9, CPC, it 
is obligatory for a trial court seized of a suit to inquire and ascertain 
whether the jurisdictional fact does, in fact, exist to enable it (the trial 
 
28 (1992) 1 SCC 534 

35 
 
court) to proceed to trial and consider granting relief to the plaintiff as 
claimed. No higher court, much less the Supreme Court, should feel 
constrained to interfere with a decree granting relief on the specious 
ground that the parties were not put specifically on notice in respect 
of a particular line of attack/defence on which success/failure of the 
suit depends, more particularly an issue touching the authority of the 
trial court to grant relief if the ‘jurisdictional fact’ imperative for 
granting relief had not been satisfied. It is fundamental, as held in 
Shrisht Dhawan (supra), that assumption of jurisdiction/refusal to 
assume jurisdiction would depend on existence of the jurisdictional 
fact. Irrespective of whether the parties have raised the contention, it 
is for the trial court to satisfy itself that adequate evidence has been 
led and all facts including the jurisdictional fact stand proved for relief 
to be granted and the suit to succeed. This is a duty the trial court has 
to discharge in its pursuit for rendering substantive justice to the 
parties, irrespective of whether any party to the lis has raised or not. 
If the jurisdictional fact does not exist, at the time of settling the 
issues, notice of the parties must be invited to the trial court’s prima 
facie opinion of non-existent jurisdictional fact touching its jurisdiction. 
However, failure to determine the jurisdictional fact, or erroneously 
determining it leading to conferment of jurisdiction, would amount to 
wrongful assumption of jurisdiction and the resultant order liable to be 
branded as ultra vires and bad.   

36 
 
45. Should the trial court not satisfy itself that the jurisdictional fact for 
grant of relief does exist, nothing prevents the court higher in the 
hierarchy from so satisfying itself. It is true that the point of 
maintainability of a suit has to looked only through the prism of section 
9, CPC, and the court can rule on such point either upon framing of an 
issue or even prior thereto if Order VII Rule 11 (d) thereof is applicable. 
In a fit and proper case, notwithstanding omission of the trial court to 
frame an issue touching jurisdictional fact, the higher court would be 
justified in pronouncing its verdict upon application of the test laid 
down in Shrisht Dhawan (supra).    
46. In this case, even though no issue as to maintainability of the suit had 
been framed in course of proceedings before the Trial Court, there was 
an issue as to whether the Agreement is true, valid and enforceable 
which was answered against the sellers. Obviously, owing to dismissal 
of the suit, the sellers did not appeal. Nevertheless, having regard to 
our findings on the point as to whether the buyer was ‘ready and 
willing’, we do not see the necessity of proceeding with any further 
discussion on the point of jurisdictional fact here.  
47. However, we clarify that any failure or omission on the part of the trial 
court to frame an issue on maintainability of a suit touching 
jurisdictional fact by itself cannot trim the powers of the higher court 
to examine whether the jurisdictional fact did exist for grant of relief 
as claimed, provided no new facts were required to be pleaded and no 
new evidence led. 

37 
 
CONCLUSION 
48. For the foregoing reasons, the appeals merit success and the same are 
allowed. We set aside the first appellate judgment and decree of the 
High Court and restore that of the Trial Court with the result that the 
suit instituted by the buyer shall stand dismissed. 
49. It is made clear that the buyer shall be entitled to return of the advance 
sum of Rs.25 lakh by the sellers. If not already returned, the sellers 
shall take steps in this behalf within a month from date. If the buyer 
has made any deposit pursuant to any order of court, the same shall 
also be returned to her with accrued interest, if any.  
                  
 
 
 
………..…………………J. 
                                                                             (DIPANKAR DATTA) 
 
 
 
                  
…………..………………J. 
                                                                              (SANJAY KAROL) 
NEW DELHI; 
NOVEMBER 21, 2024.