2024 INSC 885
1|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2161/2012 
 
         RAMACHANDRAN & ORS.                                       … APPELLANT(S) 
 
Versus 
 
         VIJAYAN & ORS.   
                                                …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
SANJAY KAROL, J. 
1. 
The instant appeal, preferred by the original defendants, assails the judgment 
dated 27.08.2009 passed by the High Court of Kerala in A.S. No. 563 of 1999 whereby 
the appeal was dismissed and the preliminary decree passed by the Trial Court in 
O.S.631/1999 was affirmed.  
Digitally signed by Dr.
Naveen Rawal
Date: 2024.11.22
13:57:24 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
MARUMAKKATHAYAM CUSTOMARY LAW - AN INTRODUCTION 
2. 
The present appeal concerns the devolution of property by way of traditional 
Marumakkathayam law. Prior to delving into the legal niceties, an understanding of 
certain foundation concepts is necessary. 
 
3. 
The Hindu community being a vast and diverse community is governed by 
different schools of personal laws.  Apart from the dominant Mitakshara school of 
law, some communities among Hindus have their own system of personal law like the 
Marumakkathayam law, the Nambudiri law or the Aliyasantana law. In the issue at 
hand, parties are admittedly governed by the Marumakkathayam law.  With respect to 
Marumakkathayam  law, this  Court  has  stated  in  Achuthan Nair v. Chinnamu 
Amma1 : 
 
“6. …The said law [Marumakathayam law] governs a large section 
of 
people 
inhabiting 
the 
West-Coast 
of 
South 
India. 
“Marumakkathayam” literally means descent through sisters' 
children. There is a fundamental difference between Hindu law and 
Marumakkathayam law in that, the former is founded on agnatic 
relationship while the latter is based on matriarchate. The relevant 
principles of Marumakkathayam law are well settled and, therefore, 
no citation is called for...” 
 
4. 
Under this law, tharwad, thavazhi, karanavan are dominant concepts with 
respect to joint family.  A tharwad is a Marumakkathayam joint family comprising of 
a female ancestor, her children, her daughter’s children, her daughter’s daughter’s 
 
1 1965 SCC OnLine SC 303 

3|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
children and all such other descendants, however remote, in the female line. By 
necessary exclusion, only the immediate male heir is part of the tharwad while his 
progeny are not.  A person belongs to tharwad of his or her mother only.2  Membership 
of a tharwad is acquired by virtue of birth alone and on death, his interest devolves 
upon the other members of the tharwad. Members of a tharwad do not have a fixed 
interest but a fluctuating one, subject to change as per the number of members of the 
tharwad. Unlike coparcenary in Mitakshara law which extends to three generations 
succeeding the last male holder of the property, the Marumakkathayam system gives 
equal rights to all persons, however remote. 
 
5. 
A tharwad is a larger body which holds within itself many branches. These 
branches are known as thavazhi which is a group of descendants in the female line of 
a female common ancestor.   A thavazhi can own properties, separate and distinct from 
tharwad properties. In other words, a marumakkathayee woman alongwith her 
children and further descendants, how low-soever, in a female line constitute 
thavazhi. 
 
           The concepts discussed above would be best explained by way of illustrations 
as under: 
ILLUSTRATION : 
 
2 K. Sreedhara Variar Marumakkathayam and Allied Systems of law in the Kerala State, First Edition, 1969  

4|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
 
A is married to AH. They have three children- two daughters, AD1 and AD2, and a 
son, AS.  All members shown above with the exception of AS1 form the tharwad of 
A.  This is in line with the matrilineal succession or in other words, the female being 
the ‘stock of descent’. AD2 with her children C, the daughter and B, the son and 
grandchildren C1 and C2 forms a thavazhi.    
 
6. 
A karanavan is a manager of a joint family property. It is the oldest male 
member of the family. However, this customary position does not exclude a woman 
from managing the affairs of the tharwad or thavazhi if no male member is capable 
of taking up the required duties. Under Madras Marumakkattayam Act, 1932, it is 
defined as under: 
 
“ Section 3(c)  ‘karanavan’ means the oldest male member of a 
tarwad or tavazhi, as the case may be, in whom the right to 
management of its properties vests or, in the absence of a male 
member, the oldest female member or where by custom or family 
usage the right to such management vests in the oldest female 
member, such female member;” 

5|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
 
7. 
 This Court explained the position of karanavan in Achuthan Nair v. 
Chinnamu Amma (supra)3 : 
“7. ..The management of a tarwad or tavazhi ordinarily vests in 
the eldest male member of the tarwad or tavazhi, as the case may 
be. But there are instances where the eldest female member of 
a tarwad or a tavazhi is the manager thereof. The male manager 
is 
called 
the karnavan and 
the 
female 
one, karnavati. 
A karnavati or karnavan is a representative of the tarwad or  
tavazhi and is the protector of the members thereof. He or she 
stands in a fiduciary relationship with the members thereof. … 
But it is settled law that if a property is acquired in the name of 
the karnavan, there is a strong presumption that it is 
a tarwad property and that the presumption must hold good 
unless and until it is rebutted by acceptable evidence.”                                
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
It is to be noted that, the position does not grant any special rights in the property and 
these rights standard part with any other member of the joint family.  
 
BRIEF FACTS 
 
8. 
The facts which are necessary to dispose of the appeal are presented 
hereinbelow. For ease of understanding, a chart representing the genealogy is 
produced: 
 
 
3 1965 SCCOnLine SC 303 

6|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
 

7|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
9. 
The dispute relates to the property of one Parukutty Amma. Parukutty Amma 
had four children namely Karunakara Menon, Neelakanta Menon, Narayani Amma 
and Amukutty Amma. Narayani Amma had four children namely, Kamalakshy, 
Aravindakshy Amma, Ramachandran and Padmavathi Amma.  The husband and 
children of one of these four, Padmavathi Amma, are the plaintiffs. All other children 
and grandchildren of Parukutty Amma are the defendants except Padmavathy Amma. 
The defendants, having concurrently lost before all the courts below,                     
are appellants herein. For ease of reference, the parties shall be referred, as per their 
position before the Trial Court. 
 
10. 
A suit for partition and separate possession (O.S. No.631/1993) was filed by 
Plaintiffs no. 1-8 against Defendants before the Addl. Sub Court, Ernakulam4 for 
dividing the plaint scheduled properties belonging to Andipillil Tharwad by metes and 
bounds into 16 shares. Before us, the challenge pertains to two sets of scheduled 
properties- Item no.1 and Item no.2. Some preliminary understanding is required of 
how the properties subject matter of dispute came to be divided into two heads.  
 
10.1 
Item No.1: The property is situated in Ponnurunni Desom of Poonithura 
village and was part of the erstwhile Cochin state. It was gifted by one Krishna 
Menon in favour of 11 members of the same tharwad vide gift deed 
 
4 hereinafter referred to as ‘Trial Court’ 

8|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
no.1223/1099. One of the donees, Ayyappa Menon filed a suit for partition5 of 
the said property against other donees. During the pendency of the suit, parties 
thereto entered into a compromise, and a partition deed giving effect to such 
compromise was executed dated 1.11.1950. The property was divided amongst 
nine donees as two, namely,   Ravunni Nair and Madhavi Amma had passed 
away and it was mutually allotted to five branches as shown below:- 
 
 
10.2 
 Item no.2: There was one Sankar Padmanabhan, on his demise, half of 
his property devolved on his wife, Parukutty Amma and their children; and 
another half on his mother, Parvathy Amma. His mother subsequently 
transferred her interest in the said property in favour of Parukutty Amma and her 
children through a mortgage deed. 
 
       TRIAL COURT 
11. 
The Trial Court framed as many as eleven issues. Below is a tabulated 
representation of the eleven issues and their corresponding findings. 
 
5 (O.S.77/1125) 
Ayyapa 
Menon 
(Branch 1)
Parameswar
a Menon 
(Branch 2)
Govinda 
Meon 
(Branch 3)
Raghava 
Menon 
(Branch 4)
Branch 5 
Parukutty
Amma
and
her
children
namely,
Karunakara
Menon,
Neelakanda
Menon,
Narayani Amma and Ammukutty Amma

9|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Issue 
Finding 
Decision 
1. 
Whether the suit is 
time barred? 
The plaintiffs can ignore the partition deeds since 
they are not binding on them, as execution of 
partition deeds by some of the members will not 
take away their right. 
 
No 
2. 
Whether the suit is 
bad for non-joinder 
of 
necessary 
parties? 
 
The assignees of a partition of the plaint schedule 
properties 
were 
impleaded 
as 
additional 
defendants after the issues were framed. 
No 
3. 
Whether the plaint 
schedule first item 
property was the 
property 
of 
Andippillil 
Taravadu? 
 
The executants of the partition deed formed a 
natural group of Marumakkathayees, that is, the 
matrilineal heirs, and this led to the conclusion 
that the property was tharwad property. 
Decided in 
FAVOUR 
of the 
Plaintiffs. 
4. 
Whether the Plaint 
Schedule 
second 
item property was 
the 
property 
of 
Andippillil 
Taravadu? 
Property belonged to the thavazhi of Parvathy, as 
it was allotted to her and her son as per the recitals 
in the mortgage deed. The plaint schedule second 
item property thus belonged to the thavazhi of 
Parukutty Amma (through Parvathy’s son, 
Padmanabhan), as the property, obtained through 
a mortgage deed, was in the possession and 
enjoyment of the children of Parakutty Amma.  
 
Decided in 
FAVOUR 
of the 
Plaintiffs. 
5. 
Whether 
the 
alienations made by 
Neelakanta Menon 
are valid? 
In Ammalu Amma and others v. Lakshmi Amma 
and other (1966 KLT 32) a Full Bench of the High 
Court held that the undivided interest of a member 
of a thavazhi cannot be alienated. So the 
alienations made by Neelakanta Menon are void. 
 
No 
 
6. 
Whether 
partition 
deed No.6143/1981 
is binding on the 
plaintiffs? 
 
Both items 1 and 2 were thavazhi properties the 
partition deed executed by 3 members alone does 
not bind the other members of the thavazhi. 
 
 
No 
7. 
Whether 
the 
alienations made by 
defendants 1 and 2 
are binding on the 
plaintiffs? 
The executants of partition deed did not have 
exclusive title to the properties and that document 
is not binding on the other members of the 
thavazhi. Hence, the subsequent transactions  are 
also not binding on the other members. 
 
No 
8. 
Whether 
the 
alienation made by 
the 8th defendant is 
This transaction is also not binding on the other 
members of the thavazhi, as the property was a 
thavazhi property. 
No 

10|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
binding 
on 
the 
plaintiffs? 
 
 
 
9. 
What is the share (if 
any) to which each 
of the co-owners is 
entitled in the plaint 
schedule 
properties? 
 
Defendants 1 to 8 and plaintiffs 1 to7 are entitled 
to 1/15 shares.  
 
 
1/15 share 
10. 
What is the amount 
(if any) to which 
defendants 13 and 
15 to 17 are entitled 
as 
value 
of 
improvements? 
 
There is no evidence to show that they have made 
improvements to the properties thus, no relief can 
be granted to them even if there was any 
entitlement. 
None 
 
11. 
What is the order as 
to costs? 
-- 
Costs to 
be borne 
out of the 
estate. 
 
 
12. 
It was concluded that the properties were tharwad property.  A preliminary 
decree was passed allotting one share each to defendants 1-7 and plaintiffs 2-8 
and one share to defendants 9-14 altogether.  The relevant extract reads thus: 
 
“In the result, a preliminary decree is passed in the following terms :- 
 
1. The plaint schedule properties will be divided by metes and bounds 
into 15 shares. 
 
2. Defendants 1 to 7 and plaintiffs 2 to 8 are entitled to one share each. 
Additional defendants 9 to 14 together are entitled to one share. 
 
3. The plaintiffs will be put in possession of their joint 7/15 share.  
 
4. The fifth defendant will be put in possession of her share.  
 
5. The plaintiffs and fifth defendant are allowed to realize their share 
of income out of the shares of the other co-owners who will be liable 
proportionate to their shares.  
 

11|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
6. The quantum of the share of income will be decided in the final 
decree proceedings  
 
7. The costs shall come out of the estate” 
 
 
13. 
 For adjudication of the dispute before this Court, the findings returned in issues 
3 and 4 are pertinent and the same are discussed in detail in the coming paragraphs.  
  
14. 
In respect of item No.1, it was held that even though there was no evidence as 
to the original source of the property gifted by Krishna Menon, but the fact that the 
partition deed was executed by a natural group of Marumakkatayees led to the 
conclusion that the property was tharwad property.  Parukutty Amma and her children 
forming part of a thavazhi and therefore being entitled to the property as members of 
the fifth branch is strengthened by the fact that the fifth branch comprising them was 
mentioned in the partition deed as a branch of Karunakaran Menon who was the 
Karnavan of the thavazhy. As such the conclusion drawn was that the property under 
item No. 1 was the thavazhi property of the fifth branch. 
 
15. 
Issue no.4 before the Trial Court was in regard to item No.2.  While answering  
in the affirmative, it was held that the said property would be tharwad property.  
Reasoning therefor was derived from the deed executed by Parvathy Amma in favour 
of Parukutty Amma and her children. The deed records that the former became the 
absolute owner of the property once Sankaran Padmanabhan died. Having become 
the absolute owner, she executed the said mortgage deed. Since Parvathy Amma was 

12|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
the absolute owner, she transferred the said property to her daughter-in-law and her 
successors. 
 
          HIGH COURT 
16. 
The High Court, qua item No.1, has held that the share allotted to a female on 
partition retains the tharwad characteristic.  It further held that since after the passing 
away of Madhavi Amma and Ravunni Nair, two of the eleven persons upon whom the 
property originally devolved, it was divided amongst nine surviving co-donees in 
1950.  It is clear that even at this point in time, the method adopted for succession was 
in line with the property being thavazhi in nature.  It also relied on the testimony of 
DW-1 who deposed that Parukutty Amma and her children were separated as one 
thavazhi in the above-mentioned partition of 1950. 
 
17. 
Qua item No.2, it was observed: 
 
“The document is in favour of Parukutty Amma and her minor 
children. This mortgage was never redeemed by Parvathy Amma. 
Under the Prestine Marumakkathayam Law acquisition of a property 
in the name of mother and children who form a natural group had 
always been presumed to be on behalf of the tavazhi and even the 
existence of an original nucleus was not considered essential. 
 
…Since the acquirers under Ext.A2 mortgage namely Parukutty 
Amma and her minor children formed a natural group, the property 
would enure to all the members of the tavazhi of Parukutty Amma. 
It is pertinent in this connection to note that in Ext.B3 partition dated 
28-10- 1981 as per which Karunakara Menon, Narayani Amma and 
Ammukutty Amma are alleged to have divided the property to the 
exclusion of the other tavazhi members including the plaintiffs, the 
title which is traced to plaint A schedule item No. 2 is ExtA2 
mortgage and not ExtB 11 gift deed. This also re-inforces the 

13|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
plaintiffs' case that this item was acquired by Parukutty Aroma and 
her children as per ExtA2 mortgage.” 
 
 
and then concluded that since the acquirers under mortgage deed, namely, Parukutty 
Amma and her children formed a natural group the property would enure to all the 
members of the thavazhy of Parukutty Amma.  
 
18. 
In terms of the above, the decree of the Trial Court stood confirmed by the 
High Court. 
 
ARGUMENTS OF PARTIES 
 
19. 
Learned Senior Counsel Mr. C.S. Vaidyanathan for the original-
defendants/appellants submitted that the scheduled properties are not thavazhy 
property.  It is submitted that item No.1 is a co-ownership property and item No.2 
is a Putravakasam property.  In so far as scheduled properties under item No.1 are 
concerned, the learned senior counsel submitted that the minority view expressed 
by the full Bench of the Kerala High Court in Mary Cheriyan & Anr. v. Bhargavi 
Pillai Bhasura Devi & Anr.6 should, in fact, be held as the correct view having 
regard to the difficulties of law noted by this Court in Achuthan Nair (supra). 
  
20. 
For properties mentioned under item No.2, it is submitted that the property 
originally belonged to Kadangad Sankaran Padmanabhan and his mother could 
 
6 1967 SCC OnLine Ker 68 

14|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
only execute gift deed as well as mortgage deed only to the extent of her own 
share and not the share of Padmanabhan.  
 
21. 
Learned Counsel Mr. M.P. Vinod for the original plaintiffs/respondents 
submitted that a new tharwad is formed when a female member and all her 
children jointly receive properties by gift from another Marumakathayee. With 
respect to item No.1, it is submitted that when a share was allotted to the natural 
thavazhy vide partition deed dated 01.11.1950, then such natural thavazhy will 
also have the characteristics of a tharwad property.  For item No.2, reliance is 
placed on partition deed 6143/1981 wherein it is specifically stated that Parvathy 
Amma became the sole owner after the death of her son thus she could validly 
transfer her share to Parukutty Amma and her children.  
 
          ISSUES 
 
22. 
We have gone through the detailed pleadings of the parties. The bone of 
contention is the nature and character of the scheduled properties. After carefully 
going through the pleadings, the following two questions require adjudication : 
1. Whether the property obtained by a female and her children after 
partition would be considered their separate property or would it belong to 
her tharwad? 
2. Whether, in the present facts, Parvathy Amma had the legal right to 
transfer the entire property of her son to her daughter-in-law and 

15|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
grandchildren by way of a mortgage deed or was her right only limited to 
one-sixth of the property as contended by the original defendants? 
 
         APPRECIATION OF LAW 
 
23. 
The case of plaintiffs is that scheduled properties being tharwad properties and 
they being members of the same are entitled to seek partition whereas defendants deny 
this claim.  
 
Issue 1 
 
24. 
This issue deals with the right of marumakkathayee female on partition. 
Partition is a process by which joint ownership is reduced to individual ownership. It 
puts an end to the joint status, separating members who hold their respective shares, 
which, on their death, will devolve upon their heirs. Under mitakshara law, if a 
member continues to be joint with his own male issue then the share allotted to him 
retains the characteristic of coparcenary property.  
 
25. 
However, in Marumakkathayam law, as per the original defendants the position 
of law has been incorrectly settled.  
 
26. 
The answer to the first question (supra), was answered, favouring the latter by 
the majority of the Full Bench of Kerala High Court in Mary Cheriyan (supra) but 

16|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
since the original-defendants are placing their reliance on minority opinion, we deem 
it necessary and appropriate to discuss all opinions expressed therein.  
 
27. 
 P.T. Raman Nayar, J., who penned the majority opinion, held that property 
obtained by a Nair female towards her share under an outright partition in her tharwad 
continues to retain its character as tharwad property.  He propounded that on partition, 
a tharwad breaks up into separate units with each unit a tharwad by itself, called a 
thavazhi.  Indubitably, the members added to a multi-member unit are entitled to the 
property obtained by tharwad partition the moment they become members thereof.  
While placing the multi-member unit at par with a single-member unit, he observed 
that a single-member unit formed in a tharwad partition could add to its members by 
birth or adoption and thus become a joint family. Following this line of thought, he 
further opined that when a tharwad breaks up into units, the property allotted to a 
multi-member unit undisputedly shares the same character, so that members born into 
it thereafter get a right by birth. And as such, a similar right must be given to a single 
sharer (female) in the partition. The nature of tharwad property retains its character 
in the hands of the divided units after partition, thereby securing rights in the said 
property for persons yet to be born.  
 
28. 
He further emphasized that, unlike Mitakshara law, which has a religious flair, 
Marumakkathayam law is read with a secular tone and thereby every member of a 
tharwad how low-so-ever in degree gets a right by birth, which extends even to the 

17|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
right by birth in property taken on partition.  Under the Marumakkattayam system, “a 
female is a stock of descent while the male is not”, which is why the children of a sole 
male sharer get no right to the property obtained by him on the partition, whereas a 
sole female sharer has to take it as tharwad property in which she must concede a 
share to her children, if she gives birth to any. Further, reliance was placed on Section 
38 of the Madras Marumakkathayam Act before its amendment in 1958, which 
clarifies in its explanation that a sole sharer in a partition whether a male or a female, 
takes the share with the incidents of tharwad property.  
 
29. 
However, the said opinion was not accepted by Govindan Nair, J., who 
observed that in Hindu Law, if ancestral joint family property is divided and a share 
taken by a father, a son born to that father after partition will only get an interest in 
that property by birth. The son takes such an interest by birth only because it is 
ancestral and not by reason of the fact that the property was joint family property or 
because it has retained its character as joint property. When an individual member 
obtains a share for themselves, the property ceases to be joint property after partition, 
thereby changing the nature of the property.  He differed with the interpretation of the 
majority opinion and by dissenting, opined that the statute enacted does not lay down 
or declare any general principle for the nature of property remaining a tharwad after 
the partition.  The explanation to Section 38(2) of the Madras Marumakkattayam Act, 
1932, before it was amended in 1958, only permitted a thavazhi partition and the 
absence of such an explanation in the Cochin Nayar Act, XXIX of 1113, which was 

18|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
enacted after the Madras Marumakkathayam Act further proves the intent of 
legislation to change the nature of property after the partition. He rejected the 
principle of  “once a tarwad always a tarwad” as an outmoded concept. 
 
30. 
Another minority opinion was expressed by Krishnamoorthy Iyer, J., who 
propounded that property obtained by a Nair female towards her share vide partition 
in her tharwad continues to be her separate property, notwithstanding the birth of a 
child to the female after the date of the partition. The result of partition is to convert, 
what was originally joint family non-ancestral property, into separate property. 
Further, reliance was placed on Mitakshara school of Hindu Law, which distinguishes 
the character of the property obtained by a co-parcener in the division of ancestral 
property and the shares received in the division of joint family property, not being 
ancestral property. 
 
         OUR VIEW 
 
31. 
 We have perused the judgments professing both the majority and minority 
views.  The main point of disagreement between three learned judges on one side and 
two on the other, pertains to the question as to whether a female who, at the time of 
partition did not have any heirs, retains such property as her own or as tharwad 
property which she would have to eventually part with in favour of her children or 
descendants.  
 

19|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
32. 
The majority, as is evident from the above, holds that a female who is single at 
the time of partition holds the property received in partition as tharwad by way of her 
being a single member thavazhi, thereby securing the right of persons who may 
become a member thereof either by way of adoption or birth in future.  Per contra, 
the minority holds that if at the time of partition the female is single, she continues to 
hold the property as her own, even if she has children in the future. This is for the 
reason that partition, by its very essence, alters the nature of the property from, at one 
point being jointly held property or tharwad to a property held solely by her.  
 
33. 
Having given anxious consideration to both views, we conclude that the 
minority has, in fact, understood the position correctly. Partition is an act by which 
the nature of the property is changed, reflecting an alteration in ownership. At this 
juncture, we may take note of how the word partition is defined: 
 
“- to divide into parts or shares 
  - to divide (a place, such as a country) into two or more territorial   
     units having separate political status7 
…. 
1. a division into parts; separation 
2. something that separates, such as a large screen dividing a room 
    in two 
3. a part or share 
4. a division of a country into two or more separate nations 
5.  property law 
    a division of property, esp realty, among joint owners8.” 
 
 
 
7 https://www.merriam-webster.com 
8 https://www.collinsdictionary.com 

20|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
34. 
The Advanced Law Lexicon, Third Edition defines partition in the following 
terms: 
“Partition is a division between co-owners (whether coparceners, 
joint-tenants in common) of lands, tenements and heriditaments 
held by them, the effect of such division being that the joint 
ownership is terminated, and the shares of the parties vested in 
them in severalty; 
[in mitakshara law, it] is the adjustment of diverse rights 
regarding the whole by distributing them on particular portions of 
the aggregate. 
 
Is a separation between joint owners or tenants in common of 
their respective interests in land, and setting apart such interest, 
so that they may enjoy and possess the same in severalty.” 
 
 
The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 in the explanation to Section 6 provides that a 
partition is a partition in terms of this Law if it is made by way of a partition deed 
recognised under the Registration Act, 1908 or by a decree of Court. 
 
35. 
It may be that a parcel of land for instance, may at one time, be owned by 
fourteen people but after partition is affected between them, with two people wanting 
no longer to be associated, the size of the land owned alongside the number of persons 
registered as owners both being reduced. What flows from this instance is that the two 
persons who separated from this collection of fourteen are now sole owners of their 
respective portions - the nature of the ownership being changed from joint to single.  
 
36. 
In the present context, the difference of opinion referred to above hinges on 
who may constitute a membership of a thavazhi. The majority says a single person 
can be a thavazhi whereas the minority says not.  The Madras Marumakkattayam Act, 

21|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
1932 under Section 3(j)(i) defines thavazhi (in context of females) as a group of 
persons consisting of that female, her children and all her descendants in the female 
line. 
 
37. 
Similarly, The Travancore Nayar Regulation, II of 1100 under Section 2(3) 
defines thavazhee of a female as a group of persons consisting of that female and her 
issue how-low-so-ever in the female line or such of that group as are alive. The same 
definition is employed in the Cochin Nayar Act, XXIX of 1113. 
 
38. 
The common thread between the three definitions is that all of them refer to a 
group of persons, which includes the main female and her future generations. This 
necessarily implies that in order for a thavazhi to be formed, there has to be at least 
one female and her successive generation, either male or female, in the generation 
immediately succeeding and thereafter progeny of the female line.  
 
39. 
The majority, here in our view, falters for in their understanding one single 
female is sufficient to form a thavazhi. For the reason above discussed and another 
which we shall come to in the following paragraphs, we are unable to agree with this 
view. 
 
40. 
The second reason is the amendment to Section 38 of the Marumakkattayam 
Act, 1932 (Madras) carried out in 1958. The same is reproduced hereunder: 
 

22|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
Prior to Amendment by Act 26 of 1958 : 
 
“38.(1) Any tavazhi represented by the majority of its major 
members may claim to take its share of all the properties of the 
tarwad over which it has power of disposal and separate from the 
tarwad: 
 
Provided that no tavazhi shall claim to be divided from the tarwad 
during the lifetime of an ancestress common to such tavazhi and 
to any other tavazhi or tavazhis of the tarwad except with the 
consent of such ancestress, if she is a member of the tarwad. 
 
(2) The share obtained by the tavazhi shall be taken by it with the 
incidents of tarwad property. 
 
Explanation — For the purpose of this Chapter, a male member of a 
tarwad or a female member thereof without any living child or 
descendant in the female line, shall be deemed to be a tavazhi if he 
or she has no living female ascendant who is a member of the 
tarwad.” 
 
 
Post Amendment 
 
“38. Right of member of tarwad or tavazhi to claim partition. -  Any 
member of a tarwad or tavazhi may claim to take his or her share of 
all the properties of the tarwad or tavazhi over which the tarwad or 
tavazhi has power of disposal and separate from the tarwad or 
tavazhi. 
 
Explanation 1.- Nothing in this section shall be a bar for two or more 
members belonging to the same tarwad or tavazhi claiming their 
shares of the properties and enjoying the same jointly with all the 
incidents of tarwad property. 
 
Explanation 2.- The member or members who claim partition under 
this section or the member who claims or is compelled to take his or 
her sharae under section 39 shall be entitled to such share or shares 
of the tarwad or tavazhi properties as would fall to such member or 
members, if a division Per Capita were made among the members of 
the tarwad or tavazhi then living. 
 
Explanation 3.- The provisions of the section shall apply to a tarwad 
notwithstanding the fact that immediately before the commencement 
of the Madras Marumakkattayam (Amendment) Act, 1958, the 

23|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
tarwad was included in the Schedule or that the tarwad had been 
registered as impartible.  
  
Explanation 4.- The provisions of this section shall apply to all suits 
for partition, appeals and other proceedings arising therefrom filed 
or proceeded with by members or their legal representatives and 
pending in the Courts immediately before the commencement of the 
Madras Marumakkattayam (Amendment) Act, 1958, and such suits, 
appeals and other proceedings shall be disposed of in accordance 
with the provisions of this section as if this section were in force at 
the time of the institution of such suits, appeals and other 
proceedings.” 
 
 
41. 
The majority placed its reliance on the pre-amendment version whereunder by 
virtue of sub-section (2) the position of law was that the share obtained by a thavazhi 
shall be taken by it with all incidents of it being a tharwad property. The above-
mentioned amendment removes the contents of sub-section (2) which demonstrates 
legislative intent to change the existing position of law.  That apart, per the discussion 
made above, a single person cannot form a thavazhi and, therefore, even the                 
unamended section 38 cannot be read to be placing an obligation upon a single female 
inheriting property by way of partition, to hold it as tharwad property. We are in 
complete agreement with what Govindan Nair, J., observed in Para 56 of his 
dissenting judgment, which reads thus : 
 
 “56. The same rule cannot apply to the case of an individual member 
who obtain his share for himself. The property in such cases ceases 
to be joint property after partition. What really happens on partition 
is that the joint nature of the property is destroyed. I conceive that 
right by birth can be taken in property by a Marumakkathayee only 
if that property at the time of his birth was joint property. The 
property allotted to a roup will be joint property and so children born 
in that group who normally take an interest in tarwad property 
acquire an interest in the property allotted to the group. But the same 
cannot be said when an individual member holds property, for such 

24|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
property has ceased to be joint property. On partition (forgetting for 
the moment those groups who take jointly) what happens is the 
destruction of the joint nature of the property. This happens even 
when there is only a division in status.” 
 
 
42. 
Encapsulating the above discussion with reference to the illustration given 
earlier, it follows that neither the majority nor the dissenting Judges of the Full Bench 
have any qualms with the fact that upon partition AD2 would hold the property as 
tharwad property, thereby protecting the interest of C, B and other future generations. 
The disagreement stems when the devolution of property on partition upon AD1 is 
considered. The majority held that AD1 would become a single-member thavazhi and 
hold the property received by her as tharwad property protecting the interests of any 
children which, she may have in the future whereas the dissenting Judges held that 
since at the time of devolution AD1 did not have any children, she would acquire the 
property only in her own right. 
 
43. 
Turning our attention back to the instant facts, it is not in dispute that Parukutty 
Amma and her descendants formed a thavazhi and had received the scheduled 
properties under item No.1 collectively. As we have already noticed above, the 
divergence of opinion between the minority and majority was in respect of single 
female(s) receiving property in partition. That obviously is not the case here.  All five 
Judges appear to be ad idem when it comes to property being received at partition by 
females and members of her thavazhi. Since the properties were received by the 
thavazhi and not by a woman who is single, the property is unquestionably tharwad 

25|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
property.  Para 55 of the dissenting view expressed by Govindan Nair, J. captures as 
to how groups inherit property post-partition and how such property continues to hold 
tharwad characteristics. It runs as under: 
“55. It is true that a tarwad need not always break up into its 
ultimate components; there may be branch divisions or some 
members may continue joint and continue to hold property and 
there may be several such groups and there can be a mixture of 
individuals holding property obtained on partition along with 
groups who hold jointly property allotted to each of those groups. 
The distinction to notice is that those groups hold property 
allotted to each group jointly. No member of that group has any 
separate interest which he can claim as his own. His interests in 
the property allotted to the group is of an identical nature as the 
interests he had in the entire tarwad property before partition. In 
other words, the group holds the property with all the incidents of 
tarwad property as joint property. It is because property is so held 
as joint tarwad property that future tarwad members born in that 
group take an interest in the property allotted to that group.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
44. 
Since there is no difference of opinion in this regard and further since the case 
before us is the inheritance of property by a group (branch 5), it falls in the second 
category (i.e. the category about which there is no dispute) no question arises as to 
determining the correctness of the view expressed, as is desired for us to do by the 
original-defendants.  
 
45. 
Another aspect raised in connection with properties under item No.1 is that the 
property in question is held by co-owners and is not tharwad in nature.  In our view, 
the High Court is correct in dismissing such an argument for, had it indeed been 
property co-owned, the heirs of the two deceased donees, Madhavi Amma and 

26|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
Ravunni Nair, would have also inherited their respective shares.  However, across all 
judicial fora the fact that the property devolved upon nine co-donees as opposed to 
eleven, as it was originally intended, has remained undisturbed.  We find no reason to 
take a different view. Our conclusion that branch 5 held the property jointly is 
supported by the fact that the compromise deed, which granted them the said property, 
was never challenged before any Court of law. The parties consisting the 5th branch 
are : – Parukutty Amma and her children, namely, 5-Karunaka Menon, 6-Neelakanda 
Menon, 7-Parukutty herself, 8-Narayani Amma and 9-Ammukutty Amma. This 
branch is known by the name of Karunakara Menon, who is one of the sons of 
Parukutty Amma as shown by the following words: 
 ‘A scheduled item No.5 having value of Rs.750 and B schedule item 
no.3,4,5 debt is allotted to the share of 5th branch Karunakara 
Menon and others and the separate allocated share is taken 
possession by each branches…’  
 
46. 
The appointment of Karunakara Menon as karnavan manifests the intention 
that the parties wished to jointly hold the property as tharwad.  Karanavan, as eluded 
to earlier, is the manager of a joint family property similar in position to karta, 
however, not exactly the same. The person appointed to such a position is generally 
the eldest male member of the thavazhi.  
 
47. 
In terms of the above conclusion, it appears that the original defendants’ 
reliance on the minority view may be misplaced as, at the cost of repletion, we may 

27|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
state that the difference of opinion was only with respect to inheritance by single 
females and not thavazhis.  
Issue 2 
48. 
Now adverting to the next issue, learned counsel for the petitioners make claim 
that the property under item No.2 is not governed by Marumakkathayam law but 
instead it is a puthravakasam property belonging to one Padmanabhan. The said fact 
is disputed by record as in a mortgage deed No.3181 executed by the mother of 
Padmnabhan, Parvathy Amma in favour of Purukutty Amma and her children, it is 
clearly stated that: 
“The property described in the schedule is assigned in my favour 
as Pandaravaka puthuval pattom and I obtained pattayam and 
accordingly myself and son deceased Padmanabhan along with 
other branch members have executed partition deed…… and 
accordingly myself and the said Padmanabhan had obtained 
possession and after the death of Padmanabhan his every right 
over the property is inherited by me.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
49. 
The above-extracted portion shows that Parvathy Amma, after the death of her 
son Padmanabhan, received the property in her own right. Apart from a few 
transactions, no other evidence was placed on record to prove that property was 
Putravakasha and not Marumakkathayam. Parvathy Amma executed the mortgage 
deed in favour of her daughter-in-law and her minor children. The possession was 
given to the mortgagee and it was never redeemed. 
 

28|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
50. 
Learned Counsel for the petitioners also rely on partition deed No.6143/1981 
executed by children of Padmanabhan and Parukutty Amma to hold that partition took 
place as putravaksham property but we find this argument misplaced. A relevant 
extract of the deed is reproduced below : 
“ Properties acquired in Survey 573 of Punnurunny Desom 
Poonithura Village by virtue of Document No. 1492/1950 of 
Thrippunithura SRO. (Book 1 Volume 600 Pages 389 onwards) 
and in Survey 691/2.690/1C of Vattekkunnam Kara Thrikkakara 
North Village by virtue of Document No. 3177/1096 of Alangad 
SRO. Were acquired by us along with our brother Late. 
Neelakandamenon alias Appu and mother Parukutty Amma and 
was in the joint possession and living together..….After the death 
of our mother Parukutty Amma, all her rights are vested on us and 
the said properties are in the joint possession of us and we decided 
to partition….” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
51. 
A perusal of this deed shows that the said properties were acquired by them 
through different documents but nowhere it states that it devolved upon them after 
death of their father.  
 
52. 
It is further pleaded that on the death of Padmanbhan, his wife and each of the 
children got an equal share by virtue of Section 22(1) of the Travancore Act as the 
said section deals with property acquired by gift or bequest from husband or father. 
No evidence is placed on record to show that the said property was gifted by 
Padmanbhan to his wife or children.  
 
53. 
The Trial Court in regard to these properties (item No.2) held that:  

29|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
“19. The second item property allegedly belonged to the tavazih of 
Parukutty Amma, the plaintiff's predecessor, as per document 
No.3181/1096. The contention is that property belonged to Parukutty 
Am ma's husband, Sankaran Padmanabhan of Kadangat taravadu, and 
not to Andippillil taravadu and the plaintiffs have no right over it. 
Padmanabhan and Parukutty Amma were the parents of deceased 
Neelakanda Menon and defendants 1,7 and 8. It is contended that 
Neelakanda Menon and defendants 1, 7 and 8 became entitled to the 
property as the legal heirs of their parents. 
 
20. Ext. A2 Mortgage Deed is the document relied on by the plaintiffs. 
It is seen from the recitals in the document that the plaint schedule 
second item property was allotted to the share of Parvathy and her son 
Padmanabhan, husband of Parukutty Amma, in a partition and on the 
death of Padmanabhan Parvathy became its exclusive owner. It means 
that the property belonged to the tavazhy of Parvathy. It is mentioned 
in the document that Parukutty Amma of Andippillil tarvadu had been 
given possession of this item of property even before the execution of 
Ext. A2 mortgage deed Parukutty Amma was the great grandmother 
of the plaintiffs. 
 
In 1116 M.E. Parukutty Amma's son Neelakanda Menon executed a 
document in favour of his brother Karunakara Menon the 8th 
defendant in respect of this property. Ext. Bl is a copy of the registered 
deed. In the document it is mentioned that the property was obtained 
as per Ext. A2 mortgage deed and it was in the possession and 
enjoyment of the children of Parukutty Amma. So this document 
confirms that Neelakanda Menon and other claimed right over the 
property only under Ext. A2 mortgage deed. In 1981 the children of 
Parukutty Amma executed Ext. B3 partition deed dividing the plaint 
schedule 2nd item property amongst themselves. The recitals in this 
document prove that they claimed right over the property only under 
Ext A2 mortgage deed (the -number of the document is wrongly 
shown as 3177). So the executants of Ext. B3 partition deed do not 
claim to have obtained right over the property independent of Ext. A2 
mortgage deed. The contention of the defendants that the property 
belonged to Sankaran Padmanbhan is correct only to an extent; he had 
right only as a member of the marumakkathayam tavazhy of his 
mother. When Sankaran Padmanabhan died his mother, Parvathy, 
became its absolute owner. She put it in the possession of Parukutty 
Amma and later executed Ext. A2 mortgage deed. The plaintiffs are 
descendants of Parukutty Amma in the female line. The evidence 
proves that the plaint schedule second item property also belonged to 
the tavazhy of Parukutty Amma.”  
 
 

30|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
54. 
The observations of the High Court are already reflected in Para 16 of this 
judgment.  
 
55. 
It is evident from the above that findings with respect to schedule properties in 
item No.2 are concurrent. This Court has reiterated many times9 that concurrent 
findings of fact are not to be generally interfered with unless special circumstances 
are shown warranting such interference. The scenarios in which exercise of power 
under Article 136 of the Constitution of India would be proper, non-exhaustively, can 
be culled out as thus: 
 
55.1 Interference in concurrent findings has been termed justified if the      
finding - 
a) 
recorded does not emanate from the pleadings; 
b) 
is foreign to or entirely divorced from the evidence on record; 
c) 
is reached on the basis of the evidence which is irrelevant or 
extraneous and material evidence is ignored affecting its 
sanctity; 
 
d) 
runs contrary to any provision of law; 
e) 
is such that a reasonable judicial mind could not have arrived 
at it and/or the same is arbitrary; 
 
 
9 Srinivas Ram Kumar vs. Mahabir Prasad and Ors. 1951 SCC 136; Sree Sree Iswar Gopal Jieu Thakur v. Pratapmal 
Bagaria, AIR 1951 SCC 214; Addagada Raghavamma And Anr v. Addagada Chenchamma 1964 AIR SC 136; Variety 
Emporium v. V.R.M. Mohd. Ibrahim Naina, (1985) 1 SCC 251; Indira Kaur v. Sheo Lal Kapoor, (1988) 2 SCC 488; 
Mithilesh Kumari & Anr vs Prem Behari Khare (1989) 2 SCC 95; Sardar Jogendra Singh v. State of U.P., (2008) 17 
SCC 133; Guljar Singh v. Dy. Director (Consolidation) (2009) 12 SCC 590; Ghisalal v. Dhapubai, (2011) 2 SCC 298; 
Sukhbiri Devi & ors v. Union of India & Ors. 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1322 

31|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
f) 
arrived at is perverse and the soundness of reason is 
compromised. 
 
55.2 Apart from the above-mentioned scenarios, a Court would also be justified 
in interfering with findings concurrent in nature if it is of the view that they 
cause undue hardship to the parties. 
 
55.3 Additionally, when the findings are such that the conscience of the court is 
shocked, interference would be called for. 
 
 
56. 
While the above are some contexts in which the Court may exercise its plenary 
power, the following overarching principles should always be considered prior to 
delving into such exercise: 
56.1 The power has to be used sparingly and only when grave injustice is 
being caused to the parties of the dispute; 
56.2 The burden of proof to show that concurrent findings are unjust, 
warranting interference by this Court is on the appellant.  
56.3 Interference would not be warranted merely because in a given set of 
facts, a view different from the one which stands taken by the courts 
below, is possible. 
56.4 It is not within the realm of practicality that all possibilities be mapped 
out, as to when invocation of this power would be felicitous. The court 

32|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
has to take such a call having employed its wisdom, reason and judicial 
thought.  
 
57. 
The above discussion on when interference in concurrent findings of fact will 
be justified demonstrates that while keeping in view the factors discussed in Para 51, 
any of the situations mentioned in Para 50 or other such similar situations, have to be 
met. In the present facts, we are of the considered view that none of the above 
scenarios appear to be so met.  In that view of the matter, the findings of fact in respect 
of scheduled properties under item No.2 remain undisturbed. 
 
58. 
The question of law, i.e., the difference of opinion between the majority and 
minority in Mary Cheriyan (supra) is resolved holding that the minority posited the 
correct view. However, it is clarified that the pronouncement of law in this judgment 
shall apply prospectively. For the purposes of ample clarity, we state that any 
transaction concluded or ongoing will not be disturbed by way of this judgment and 
the position of law as stated herein shall apply only henceforth.  
 
59. 
In conclusion, even though we have, on the point of law upheld the minority 
view of the Full Bench of the Kerala High Court, in the facts of the present case, the 
finding about which all five judges were ad idem applies. The views of the Trial Court 
and the High Court therefore requires no interference by this Court.  
 

33|CA 2161 of 2012 
 
60. 
Appeal stands dismissed. The preliminary decree passed by the Trial Court and 
upheld by the High Court is affirmed.  The Trial Court to proceed further as per law. 
 
61. 
No costs. 
 
 
….……....…………..J.  
(C.T. RAVIKUMAR) 
 
 
 
….…....……………..J. 
(SANJAY KAROL) 
 
 
New Delhi; 
November 22, 2024.