2024 INSC 897
Page 1 of 21 
 
    R E P O R T A B L E 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.          OF  2024 
(@ SPECIAL  LEAVE  PETITION  (CRL.)  NO. 4326 OF 2018) 
 
MAHESH DAMU KHARE                            
 
…APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.                …RESPONDENTS 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
NONGMEIKAPAM  KOTISWAR  SINGH, J. 
 
  Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeal has been filed challenging the order dated 
12.02.2018 passed by the Bombay High Court in Criminal Writ 
Petition (CRWP) No. 5190 of 2017 by which the High Court 
dismissed the petition filed under Section 482 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short “CrPC”) by the present appellant 
seeking quashing of the FIR being CR No. 302 of 2017 dated 
15.08.2017 filed by the complainant (Respondent no. 2 herein) 
registered with Kharghar Police Station, Navi Mumbai for offences 
punishable under Sections 376, 420, 504 and 506 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (in short “IPC”) holding, inter alia, that the offence 
under Section 376 of IPC is an offence against the society which 
Digitally signed by
RADHA SHARMA
Date: 2024.11.26
16:52:35 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 21 
 
would require further investigation into the matter and does not 
warrant interference. 
3. 
The brief facts leading to the filing of the said Writ Petition as culled 
from the records may be stated as follows:  
3.1 
The appellant claims to be a social worker since 1985 and 
is engaged in various socio-political activities, who provides 
help and assistance to the needy whenever sought. It was 
contended that in 2012 the appellant was approached by the 
complainant (Respondent no. 2) seeking help in resolving the 
issue of kidnapping of her elder daughter which he successfully 
accomplished. Thereafter, the complainant started visiting the 
office of the appellant and was regularly assisting in the socio-
political works of the appellant. The appellant also on her 
request used to extend financial help for support and education 
of the children of the complainant. The complainant, however, 
continued to seek more financial assistance from the appellant 
which he could not afford any longer and accordingly, helped 
her to find employment.   
3.2 
It is the case of the appellant that the complainant  
continued to seek more attention and financial help from the 
appellant, because of which the appellant tried to ignore her, to 
which she became aggressive and started issuing threats not 
only to the appellant but also to his family members to extort 
more money from the appellant which led to filing of several 
complaints against the complainant (Respondent no. 2) by the 
wife of the appellant. In all, five complaints were lodged with 
Nerul Police Station by the appellant, his wife and his office 
staff against the harassment tactics of the complainant for 

Page 3 of 21 
 
extorting money from the appellant. However, the complainant 
continued her aggressive, abusive behaviour towards the 
appellant and family members. 
4. 
The appellant, to his shock, learnt later that a complaint was filed by 
Respondent no. 2 as a counter blast which was registered as FIR No. 
302 of 2017 dated 15.08.2017 under Sections 376, 420, 504 and 506 
of the IPC stating, inter alia, as follows:- 
 
(i) 
The complainant was married in 1994 by performing Christian 
rituals out of which two daughters were born. Her husband died 
in the year 2003. Thereafter, she came to reside at Sarsole in 
Navi Mumbai and was looking for a job as she had no means of 
livelihood. While looking for a job she was introduced to the 
appellant who was also in need of a helper to look after his ailing 
wife.  
(ii) 
Accordingly, she met the appellant in 2008. The appellant told 
the complainant that his wife had skin disease, thyroid problem 
and paralytic stroke and the complainant has to look after his 
wife at his own residence at Kharghar Sector 12, behind HDFC 
ATM.  
(iii) Accordingly, on the next day in the morning she went to the 
house of the appellant along with her daughter. It was alleged 
that the appellant was with his second wife Kalpana at home 
and the wife asked her daughter to sit with her and sent the 
complainant to the bedroom to massage the feet of the appellant 
and while massaging the appellant citing reasons of illness of 
both his wives, told her that he would marry her and thereafter, 
had sexual intercourse with her forcibly without her consent. 

Page 4 of 21 
 
Thereafter, the appellant continued to exploit her sexually many 
times again and again by giving false promises of marriage.  
(iv) 
According to the complainant, she worked in the house of the 
appellant for two months and thereafter, left the job since she 
got a private job at Belapur and as the wife of the appellant 
suspected a relationship between the appellant and the 
complainant. It was alleged that since the appellant did not want 
to lose her, the appellant arranged a rented room for the 
complainant at Sector 2, LIG Colony, Nerul and the appellant 
used to come every day to her house. After staying for about a 
year, the appellant arranged another rented room for the 
complainant at Shrivane, Nerul Sector 1, Navi Mumbai in 
December 2010, where the complainant was residing with her 
daughters. It was alleged that the appellant used to come to the 
complainant's house every day and had sexual intercourse with 
the complainant forcibly and without her consent by giving 
false promise of marriage. 
(v) 
It was also alleged that whenever the complainant asked him to 
marry her, he avoided the same on one pretext or other.  
Thereafter, the appellant avoided visiting her since March 2017 
and he used to abuse and beat her when she asked for money for 
her daily needs. According to the complainant, he ended the 
relationship with her by informing her to do whatever she 
wanted and to forget the promise of marriage. Thereafter, she 
made several calls to the appellant as to why he was not coming, 
but the appellant did not receive her calls. 
(vi) 
It was also alleged that on 05.07.2017, the first wife of the 
appellant named Kavita abused and bullied the complainant by 

Page 5 of 21 
 
making calls over her mobile phone and told her to earn her 
livelihood by making her daughter do business as her elder 
daughter did who had love marriage and ran away. 
(vii) Accordingly, the complainant (Respondent no. 2) filed the said 
complaint alleging that the appellant had cheated on her by 
forcibly engaging in sexual intercourse without her consent in 
his house at Kharghar Sector-12 and also in the rented rooms at 
Nerul Sector-2 and at Shirvane, Nerul from year 2008 to 2017 
by giving false promises of marriage, depositing fixed amount 
in her bank account and also promising to purchase a house for 
her at Navi Mumbai. 
5. 
Consequently, an FIR case was registered against the appellant who 
then moved the Session Court seeking anticipatory bail in CR No. 
302 of 2017 in which he was granted an interim protection vide order 
dated 16.08.2017 and was ultimately granted anticipatory bail vide 
order dated 12.09.2017 by observing, inter alia, that the very fact 
that the complainant had indulged in sexual relations for a long 
period of 10 years goes to show that the sexual relation was not 
forcible but was consensual.  
 
6. 
According to the appellant, the complainant being aggrieved by the 
grant of anticipatory bail to the appellant, lodged another FIR by 
making false allegations being FIR No. 319/2017 dated 05.10.2017 
with Nerul Police Station against the appellant under Sections 354, 
506 of the IPC and Section 8 of Protection of Children from Sexual 
Offences Act, 2012 alleging that the appellant had molested her 
daughter at her home on 30.12.2016 and on 25.01.2017 at 8 pm. 
 

Page 6 of 21 
 
7. 
As against the aforesaid second FIR, the appellant again approached 
the Sessions Court, Thane to secure anticipatory bail in CR No. 319 of 
2017 which was granted vide order dated 23.10.2017, in which the 
Sessions Court Judge observed that the complainant did not raise any 
complaint against the appellant immediately after the first or second 
incident and after 10 to 11 years she lodged the FIR and the second 
FIR was in respect of outraging the modesty of the complainant’s 
daughter which occurred in December 2016 or January 2017 which 
could have been mentioned in the first FIR dated 15.08.2017.  
 
8. 
After the appellant was granted anticipatory bail in both the FIRs by 
the competent courts primarily on the ground that these allegations 
have been made belatedly, thus throwing doubt on the credibility of 
these allegations as it appears to be a case of consensual relationship, 
the appellant approached the Bombay High Court seeking quashing of 
the FIR being CR No. 302 of 2017 registered with Kharghar Police 
Station by filing Writ Petition No. 5190 of 2017 which, however, was 
dismissed by the High Court against which the present appeal has been 
preferred. 
 
9. 
While dismissing the petition seeking quashing of the FIR, the High 
Court noted that: 
“The petitioner herein denies having any relationship with 
the Respondent No.2 and it is the case of the petitioner that 
he has been roped in a false case by the Respondent No.2.  In 
our view, those would be the aspects in respect of the 
investigation that would be carried out and the offence being 
one under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code which is 
considered to be an offence against the society, we do not 
deem it appropriate to interfere in our writ jurisdiction. The 
reliance placed on the order passed by a Division Bench of 
this Court sitting at Nagpur does not further the case of the 
petitioner as the facts involved in the said case stand apart 
from the facts involved in the present case, as in the said case 

Page 7 of 21 
 
it appears that the accused had approached the Court on the 
ground that the relationship between the parties was 
consensual, such are not the facts in the instant case. The 
above Writ Petition is accordingly dismissed.” 
 
10. Ms. Mrunal Dattatraya Buva, learned counsel for the appellant 
submits that the High Court made an error in declining to quash the 
FIR by ignoring the aspect of consensual sex between the parties 
which is clearly evident from the factual matrix of the case which 
would take out the sting of criminal culpability attached to the offence 
of rape. It was submitted that if the above allegations made in the FIR 
were examined in the proper context, it would clearly indicate that the 
sexual relationship between the appellant and the complainant was on 
the basis of consent, and would not amount to forcible sexual act 
perpetrated by the appellant as alleged.  
According to the appellant, the complainant herself admits that 
she was in a relationship with the appellant since they met for the first 
time in 2008 which continued till 2017. Though it was alleged that the 
appellant had sexual relationship with her against her consent, it would 
be inconceivable that the appellant would force himself upon her for 
so many years without there being any protest or complaint from the 
side of complainant (Respondent no. 2). This behaviour of the 
complainant clearly shows that it was a consensual relationship and 
the allegation of rape was concocted only after the appellant refused 
to provide any further financial assistance to her or succumb to her 
demand of marrying her.   
11. Though notice was served on complainant (Respondent no. 2), no one 
appeared on her behalf and only the State-respondent appeared and 
contested without filing any counter affidavit.  

Page 8 of 21 
 
12. It was contended on behalf of the State-respondent that whether the 
said relationship was consensual or not is a matter of fact which will 
come out during the course of investigation and trial and it is not a fit 
case where this Court should intervene with the criminal process 
initiated against the appellant and consequently, the decision of the 
Bombay High Court in refusing to quash the FIR does not warrant 
interference. 
13. In order to appreciate the rival contentions of the parties, it would be 
necessary to revisit the relevant laws.  
           As far as the scope of Section 482 of CrPC which has been 
invoked by the appellant for quashing the FIR is concerned, it is a 
saving clause which deals with the inherent powers of the High Court 
to pass any order as may be necessary to give effect to any order under 
the CrPC, or to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise 
to secure the ends of justice.  
14. Law relating to quashing of FIRs has already been well-settled as 
reiterated by this Court in the State of Haryana and Ors. vs. Bhajan 
Lal and Ors.1 in which this Court held as below:  
“102. (1) Where the allegations made in the first information 
report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face 
value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie 
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused. 
 
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and 
other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not disclose 
a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police 
officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an 
order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2). 
 
xxxxxxxxxx 
 
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with 
mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously 
 
1   1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 

Page 9 of 21 
 
Instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on 
the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and 
personal grudge. 
 
15. It is to be noted that while considering these aspects, the Court does 
not have to go in detail by way of minute examination about the 
correctness or otherwise of the facts alleged and the Court has to 
examine the same by taking a prima facie view of the matter based on 
the materials on record and if on consideration of the factual matrix of 
the allegations, no prima facie case is made out of commission of any 
offence of which cognizance can be taken, the High Court would be 
within its power to intervene and quash any such complaint or FIR in 
exercise of the inherent power under Section 482 CrPC.  
           In this regard, one may also refer to the decision of this Court 
in R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab2, wherein this Court while dealing 
with Section 561-A, the counterpart provision of Section 482 in the 
erstwhile Code, observed that the High Courts should be cautious in 
interfering with a criminal proceeding at the stage of investigation. 
However, there are certain cases where the court, to prevent the abuse 
of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice 
can quash the criminal proceedings. The said cases of exceptions have 
been reiterated in the case of Neeharika Infrastructure Private 
Limited v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.3, by stating as below:  
“(i) Where it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar 
against the institution or continuance of the criminal 
proceeding in respect of the offence alleged. Absence of the 
requisite sanction may, for instance, furnish cases under this 
category. 
(ii) Where the allegations in the first information report or 
the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and 
accepted in their entirety, do not constitute the offence alleged; 
 
2 AIR 1960 SC 866 
3 (2021) 19 SCC 401 

Page 10 of 21 
 
in such cases no question of appreciating evidence arises; it is 
a matter merely of looking at the complaint or the first 
information report to decide whether the offence alleged is 
disclosed or not. 
(iii) Where the allegations made against the accused 
person do constitute an offence alleged but there is either no 
legal evidence adduced in support of the case or the evidence 
adduced clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge. In 
dealing with this class of cases it is important to bear in mind 
the distinction between a case where there is no legal evidence 
or where there is evidence which is manifestly and clearly 
inconsistent with the accusation made and cases where there 
is legal evidence which on its appreciation may or may not 
support the accusation in question. In exercising its 
jurisdiction under Section 561-A the High Court would not 
embark upon an enquiry as to whether the evidence in question 
is reliable or not. That is the function of the trial Magistrate, 
and ordinarily it would not be open to any party to invoke the 
High Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend that on a 
reasonable appreciation of the evidence the accusation made 
against the accused would not be sustained.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
16. 
Having underscored the power of the High Court to exercise inherent 
power under Section 482 CrPC for quashing of FIR, we need to 
understand the scope of the offence under Section 375 IPC which deals 
with rape, punishable under Section 376 IPC. While the said Section 
375 deals with various aspects of rape, in the present case, the 
allegation against the appellant is that the appellant had forced himself 
on Respondent No. 2 without her consent and engaged in sexual 
intercourse. What amounts to rape without a consent has been 
mentioned under Section 375 as follows: - 
“375. Rape.—A man is said to commit “rape” if he— 
(a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, 
mouth, urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with 
him or any other person; or 
(b) inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, 
not being the penis, into the vagina, the urethra or anus of a 
woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or 

Page 11 of 21 
 
(c) manipulates any part of the body of a woman so as to 
cause penetration into the vagina, urethra, anus or any part of 
body of such woman or makes her to do so with him or any 
other person; or 
(d) applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra of a 
woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person, 
under the circumstances falling under any of the following 
seven descriptions— 
First.—Against her will. 
Secondly.—Without her consent. 
Thirdly.—With her consent, when her consent has been 
obtained by putting her or any person in whom she is 
interested, in fear of death or of hurt. 
Fourthly.—With her consent, when the man knows that he 
is not her husband and that her consent is given because she 
believes that he is another man to whom she is or believes 
herself to be lawfully married. 
Fifthly.—With her consent when, at the time of giving such 
consent, by reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication or 
the administration by him personally or through another of 
any stupefying or unwholesome substance, she is unable to 
understand the nature and consequences of that to which she 
gives consent. 
Sixthly.—With or without her consent, when she is under 
eighteen years of age. 
Seventhly.—When she is unable to communicate consent.” 
 
17. In this regard, one may also refer to Section 90 of the IPC which deals 
with consent given either under fear or misconception. Section 90 
provides that a consent is not a consent under the IPC if such a consent 
is given by a person under fear of injury, or under a misconception of 
fact, and if the person doing the act knows, or has reason to believe, that 
the consent was given in consequences of such fear or misconception.  
Section 90 IPC reads as follows:  
“90. Consent known to be given under fear or 
misconception.— 

Page 12 of 21 
 
A consent is not such a consent as it intended by any 
section of this Code, if the consent is given by a person 
under fear of injury, or under a misconception of fact, and 
if the person doing the act knows, or has reason to believe, 
that the consent was given in consequence of such fear or 
misconception; or...” 
 
18. It is the case of the complainant that the appellant had engaged in sexual 
intercourse without her consent. She mentioned that there was a 
promise made by the appellant that he would be marrying her. Thus, the 
contention of the complainant was that she consented to have physical 
relationship with the appellant on the misconception of fact that he 
would marry her because of the promise made by the appellant that he 
would ultimately marry her.  
19. 
Section 375 of the IPC clearly postulates that a person is said to have 
committed rape if he performs any of the sexual acts mentioned under 
sub-clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) without the consent of the woman. As 
mentioned above, in terms of Section 90 of the IPC, if the consent is 
given under a misconception of fact, such a consent is no consent in the 
eyes of law and cannot be considered to be wilful and voluntary consent.  
20. 
Keeping this aspect in mind as to what amounts to consent with 
reference to Section 375 of the IPC, this Court has examined and 
considered in a number of cases that if the person acts with an active 
understanding of the circumstances, actions and consequences of the 
act, it would indicate the presence of consent. It was observed in the 
case of Shambhu Kharwar v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Anr.4 as 
follows:- 
“11. In  Pramod  Suryabhan  Pawar  v.  State  of  Maharashtra 
(2019) 9 SCC 608,  a two Judge Bench of this Court of which one 
 
4 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1032 
 
 

Page 13 of 21 
 
of us was a part (D.Y. Chandrachud J.), held in Sonu @ Subhash 
Kumar v.  State  of  Uttar Pradesh (2021) 18 SCC 517, observed 
that: 
 “12. This Court has repeatedly held that consent with 
respect to Section 375 of the IPC involves an active 
understanding 
of 
the 
circumstances, 
actions 
and 
consequences of the proposed act. An individual who makes 
a reasoned choice to act after evaluating various alternative 
actions (or inaction) as well as the various possible 
consequences flowing from such action or inaction, consents 
to such action…  
[…]  
14. […] Specifically in the context of a promise to marry, this 
Court has observed that there is a distinction between a false 
promise given on the understanding by the maker that it will 
be broken, and the breach of a promise which is made in 
good faith but subsequently not fulfilled…  
[…]  
16. Where the promise to marry is false and the intention of 
the maker at the time of making the promise itself was not to 
abide by it but to deceive the woman to convince her to 
engage in sexual relations, there is a “misconception of fact” 
that vitiates the woman's “consent”. On the other hand, a 
breach of a promise cannot be said to be a false promise. To 
establish a false promise, the maker of the promise should 
have had no intention of upholding his word at the time of 
giving it. The “consent” of a woman under Section 375 is 
vitiated on the ground of a “misconception of fact” where 
such misconception was the basis for her choosing to 
engage in the said act…  
[…]  
18. To summarise the legal position that emerges from the 
above cases, the “consent” of a woman with respect to Section 
375 must involve an active and reasoned deliberation towards 
the proposed act. To establish whether the “consent” was 
vitiated by a “misconception of fact” arising out of a promise 
to marry, two propositions must be established. The promise 
of marriage must have been a false promise, given in bad faith 
and with no intention of being adhered to at the time it was 
given. The false promise itself must be of immediate 
relevance, or bear a direct nexus to the woman's decision to 
engage in the sexual act.  
 (emphasis supplied) 
 
21. 
The complainant had taken the plea that the appellant had physical 
relationship with her against her consent by making a false promise 
that he would marry her.  In this regard, it has to be considered whether 

Page 14 of 21 
 
making a false promise to marry amounts to an offence. If a false 
promise of marriage is made to a woman by a man, thus deceiving the 
woman leading her to engage in sexual relations, it may amount to 
misconception of fact, in which case the consent given by the woman 
may be vitiated. In this regard one may refer to the decision of this 
Court in Niam Ahmed v. State (NCT of Delhi)5,  
 
“20. The bone of contention raised on behalf of the 
respondents is that the prosecutrix had given her consent for 
sexual relationship under the misconception of fact, as the 
accused had given a false promise to marry her and 
subsequently he did not marry, and therefore such consent was 
no consent in the eye of law and the case fell under the Clause 
- Secondly of Section 375 IPC. In this regard, it is pertinent to 
note that there is a difference between giving a false promise 
and committing breach of promise by the accused. In case of 
false promise, the accused right from the beginning would not 
have any intention to marry the prosecutrix and would have 
cheated or deceited the prosecutrix by giving a false promise 
to marry her only with a view to satisfy his lust, whereas in 
case of breach of promise, one cannot deny a possibility that 
the accused might have given a promise with all seriousness 
to marry her, and subsequently might have encountered 
certain circumstances unforeseen by him or the circumstances 
beyond his control, which prevented him to fulfill his promise. 
So, it would be a folly to treat each breach of promise to marry 
as a false promise and to prosecute a person for the offence 
under Section 376.” 
 
22. In our view, if a man is accused of having sexual relationship by making 
a false promise of marriage and if he is to be held criminally liable, any 
such physical relationship must be traceable directly to the false 
promise made and not qualified by other circumstances or 
consideration. A woman may have reasons to have physical relationship 
other than the promise of marriage made by the man, such as personal 
liking for the male partner without insisting upon formal marital ties. 
 
5 2023 SCC OnLine SC 89 
 

Page 15 of 21 
 
Thus, in a situation where physical relationship is maintained for a 
prolonged period knowingly by the woman, it cannot be said with 
certainty that the said physical relationship was purely because of the 
alleged promise made by the appellant to marry her. Thus, unless it can 
be shown that the physical relationship was purely because of the 
promise of marriage, thereby having a direct nexus with the physical 
relationship without being influenced by any other consideration, it 
cannot be said that there was vitiation of consent under misconception 
of fact.  
23. It must also be clear that for a promise to be a false promise to amount 
to misconception of fact within the meaning of Section 90 of IPC, it 
must have been made from the very beginning with an intention to 
deceive the woman to persuade her to have a physical relationship. 
Therefore, if it is established that such consent was given under a 
misconception of fact, the said consent is vitiated and not a valid 
consent. In this regard we may refer to the case of “Deepak Gulati v. 
State of Haryana”6, in which it was held as follows:  
“21. Consent may be express or implied, coerced or 
misguided, obtained willingly or through deceit. Consent is an 
act of reason, accompanied by deliberation, the mind 
weighing, as in a balance, the good and evil on each side. 
There is a clear distinction between rape and consensual sex 
and in a case like this, the court must very carefully examine 
whether the accused had actually wanted to marry the victim, 
or had mala fide motives, and had made a false promise to this 
effect only to satisfy his lust, as the latter falls within the ambit 
of cheating or deception. There is a distinction between the 
mere breach of a promise, and not fulfilling a false promise. 
Thus, the court must examine whether there was made, at an 
early stage a false promise of marriage by the accused; and 
whether the consent involved was given after wholly 
understanding the nature and consequences of sexual 
indulgence. There may be a case where the prosecutrix agrees 
to have sexual intercourse on account of her love and passion 
 
6 (2013) 7 SCC 675 

Page 16 of 21 
 
for 
the 
accused, 
and 
not 
solely 
on 
account 
of 
misrepresentation made to her by the accused, or where an 
accused on account of circumstances which he could not have 
foreseen, or which were beyond his control, was unable to 
marry her, despite having every intention to do so. Such cases 
must be treated differently. An accused can be convicted for 
rape only if the court reaches a conclusion that the intention 
of the accused was mala fide, and that he had clandestine 
motives.” 
 
“24. Hence, it is evident that there must be adequate evidence 
to show that at the relevant time i.e. at the initial stage itself, 
the accused had no intention whatsoever, of keeping his 
promise to marry the victim. There may, of course, be 
circumstances, when a person having the best of intentions is 
unable to marry the victim owing to various unavoidable 
circumstances. The “failure to keep a promise made with 
respect to a future uncertain date, due to reasons that are not 
very clear from the evidence available, does not always 
amount to misconception of fact. In order to come within the 
meaning of the term “misconception of fact”, the fact must 
have an immediate relevance”. Section 90 IPC cannot be 
called into aid in such a situation, to pardon the act of a girl 
in entirety, and fasten criminal liability on the other, unless the 
court is assured of the fact that from the very beginning, the 
accused had never really intended to marry her.” 
 
   (emphasis supplied) 
 
24. It may be also noted that there may be occasions where a promise to 
marry was made initially but for various reasons, a person may not be 
able to keep the promise to marry. If such promise is not made from the 
very beginning with the ulterior motive to deceive her, it cannot be said 
to be a false promise to attract the penal provisions of Section 375 IPC, 
punishable under Section 376 IPC. 
25. In the present case, even assuming that the appellant had made the 
promise since 2008 when they met for the first time, the fact that they 
remained unmarried for a long period till 2017 without there being any 
protest or objection by the complainant, does not indicate the intention 
at the initial stage itself to make the promise falsely to marry the 

Page 17 of 21 
 
complainant. Making an allegation of non-fulfilment of promise to 
marry without undue delay by the promissee would, on the other hand, 
be an indicator of a false promise being made from the initial stage. In 
the present case, what is not in dispute is that the physical relationship 
between the appellant and the complainant continued for a long period 
of about a decade and as such it is difficult to infer that the appellant 
had made a false promise since the initial stage and continued to make 
false promises to marry her on the basis of which she also continued to 
have physical relationship with him. 
 
26. In the present case, the nature of relationship between the appellant and 
the complainant can be characterised by the following attributes:  
(i) 
The appellant and the complainant were acquainted with each 
other since 2008. The complainant herself admits that the 
appellant has been in physical relationship since then till 2017 
without protest in spite of alleging that the appellant had done 
so without her consent. 
(ii) 
The physical relationship was going on routinely. But the 
complainant in her complaint states that after she got a rented 
room in Shirvane, Nerul Sector 1, Navi Mumbai, in December, 
2010, the appellant used to come every day and had sexual 
intercourse everyday, though without her consent and by giving 
false promise of marriage.  
(iii) The complainant does not appear to be a naive and gullible 
woman who was susceptible to deceit while maintaining 
physical relationship with the appellant and the allegation of 
false promise surfaced only when the appellant refused to 
provide further financial and other assistance.  

Page 18 of 21 
 
(iv) 
The conduct of the complainant clearly shows that she is a 
mature person clearly capable of understanding the 
consequences of her acts and she was fully aware of the kind of 
illicit relationship she was maintaining with a married person.     
(v) 
The complainant was fully aware that the appellant was already 
married and had two wives, though one of them was not keeping 
well.  
27. Thus, from the above it appears that it is more of an extra-marital affair 
during the aforesaid period without any insistence by the complainant 
for getting married to the appellant. The fact that the complainant 
continued to have a physical relationship for a long time without any 
insistence on marriage would indicate the unlikelihood of any such 
promise made by the appellant for marrying her and it rather indicates 
that the relationship was a consensual one.  
            In our opinion, the longer the duration of the physical 
relationship between the partners without protest and insistence by the 
female partner for marriage would be indicative of a consensual 
relationship rather than a relationship based on false promise of 
marriage by the male partner and thus, based on misconception of fact.  
28. Moreover, even if it is assumed that a false promise of marriage was 
made to the complainant initially by the appellant, even though no such 
cogent evidence has been brought on record before us to that effect, the 
fact that the relationship continued for nine long years, would render 
the plea of the complainant that her consent for all these years was 
under misconception of fact that the Appellant would marry her 
implausible. Consequently, the criminal liability attached to such false 
promise would be diluted after such a long passage of time and in light 
of the fact that no protest was registered by the complainant during all 

Page 19 of 21 
 
those years.   Such a prolonged continuation of physical relationship 
without demurral or remonstration by the female partner, in effect takes 
out the sting of criminal culpability and neutralises it.  
29. It will be very difficult to assume that the complainant who is otherwise 
a mature person with two grown up children, was unable to discover 
the deceitful behaviour of the appellant who continued to have sexual 
relationship with her for such a long period on the promise of marriage. 
Any such mendacious act of the appellant would have been exposed 
sooner without having to wait for nine years. The inference one can 
draw under the circumstances is that there was no such false promise 
made to the complainant by the appellant of marriage by continuing to 
have physical relationship so as to bring this act within the province of 
Section 376 IPC and therefore, there was no vitiation of consent under 
misconception of fact.  
30. Further, it appears that discontinuance of financial support to the 
complainant, rather than the alleged resiling from the promise to marry 
by the appellant appears to be the triggering point for making the 
allegation by the complainant after a long consensual relationship for 
about nine years. 
31. In our view if criminality is to be attached to such prolonged physical 
relationship at a very belated stage, it can lead to serious consequences. 
It will open the scope for imputing criminality to such long term 
relationships after turning sour, as such an allegation can be made even 
at a belated stage to drag a person in the juggernaut of stringent 
criminal process. There is always a danger of attributing criminal intent 
to an otherwise disturbed civil relationship of which the Court must 
also be mindful.  

Page 20 of 21 
 
32. It is evident from the large number of cases decided by this Court 
dealing with similar matters as discussed above that there is a worrying 
trend that consensual relationships going on for prolonged period, upon 
turning sour, have been sought to be criminalised by invoking criminal 
jurisprudence. 
33. We, however, make it clear that our decision in this case and 
observations made are to be understood in the factual matrix before this 
Court.  Every case must be decided on its own facts and circumstances, 
for we are dealing with human relationships and psychology which are 
dynamic and permeated with an array of unpredictable human 
emotions and sensitivities and hence, every decision relating to human 
relationships must be based on the peculiar facts and circumstances 
obtaining in the particular case. 
34. In light of the aforesaid facts and circumstances and for the reasons 
discussed above, we are of the opinion that in the present case no prima 
facie case has been made out about commission of an offence of rape 
punishable under Section 376 IPC. Further, on perusal of the FIR it is 
also noted that no allegations of cheating have been made against the 
appellant to fall within the scope of Section 420 IPC nor of any of the 
offences under Sections 504 and 506 of the IPC.     
35. In our opinion, allowing the criminal proceeding against the appellant 
in the facts and circumstances to continue, where no criminal liability 
can be attached, would amount to abuse of the process of court. 
Therefore, under the circumstances, we are satisfied that the appellant 
is entitled to the relief claimed for quashing the complaint/ FIR.  
36. Consequently, the appeal is allowed and the impugned judgement and 
order dated 12.02.2018 passed by the Bombay High Court in Criminal 
Writ Petition (CRWP) No. 5190 of 2017 is set aside. Resultantly, the 

Page 21 of 21 
 
FIR being CR No. 302 of 2017 dated 15.08.2017 registered against the 
appellant with the Kharghar Police Station, Navi Mumbai under 
Sections 376, 420, 504 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code is quashed. 
37. We also make it clear that quashing the FIR against the appellant will 
not be a bar to respondent no. 2 to seek any other remedy available 
under the law.   
 
 
 
 
  ……………………………J. 
        (B.V. NAGARATHNA) 
 
 
 
 
……………….…………………………J. 
                                            (NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
NOVEMBER 26, 2024.