2024 INSC 920
1
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION
   
   SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION(CIVIL) NOS. 10169-10171 OF 2008
     
ROHIT KOCHHAR                                  
        
…Petitioner(s)
                                
VERSUS
VIPUL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPERS 
       …Respondent(s)
LTD. & ORS.  
O R D E R 
1.
These petitions arise from a common order passed by a Division Bench of the
High Court of Delhi dated 11.03.2008 in FAO(OS) Nos.196-197/2005 and FAO(OS)
No.205/2005 respectively, by which the appeals filed by the respondents herein came
to be allowed and the plaint was ordered to be returned to the petitioner herein for
presenting it before the appropriate court having territorial jurisdiction to try the suit
for specific performance.
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2024.12.03
13:00:23 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
2.
The  petitioner  herein,  who  is  the  original  plaintiff,  instituted  Civil  Suit
No.1138/2004 in the Delhi High Court on its original side for permanent injunction
and specific performance of the contract dated 16/20.01.2004 entered into with the
respondents herein, the original defendants, in connection with a commercial property
admeasuring 10,747 sq. ft. situated on the second floor of the Fortune Global Hotel &
Commercial Complex in Gurgaon (“suit property”). 
3.
It is the case of the plaintiff that sometime in September 2003, the original
defendant no. 2 offered to sell to it commercial space of approximately 10,000 sq. ft.
on the second floor of the commercial complex of the Fortune Hotel and Commercial
Complex project which was being developed by the defendants. After discussions and
negotiations  regarding  the  same,  a  written  communication  was  received  by  the
plaintiff on 16.01.2004 containing the aforesaid offer in relation to the suit property
and the terms and conditions for the transaction. 
4. 
The offer was accepted by the plaintiff vide letter dated 20.01.2004 and a
cheque dated 20.01.2004 for Rs 20,000,00/- was issued by the plaintiff in favour of
original defendant no. 3 in furtherance of the said acceptance. Further payment of Rs
20,000,00/- was made by the plaintiff on 06.02.2004. 
5. 
Thereafter, disputes cropped up between the parties regarding certain terms

3
contained in the “Flat Buyers Agreement”. It is the case of the plaintiff that despite
several attempts on its part to negotiate the terms of the said agreement so as to arrive
at  a  settlement,  the  defendants  insisted  upon  unreasonable,  arbitrary  and
unconscionable terms with a view to wriggle out of their liability arising out of the
binding contract dated 16/20.01.2004. 
6. 
Aggrieved by the defendant's alleged refusal to honour the binding contract
despite  the expression  of  willingness and  readiness  by the  plaintiff on multiple
occasions, the plaintiff instituted the aforesaid suit for specific performance and
permanent injunction. 
7. 
The defendants in their written statements, inter alia, raised a preliminary
objection as regards the territorial jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court to entertain the
suit instituted by the plaintiff. The defendants submitted that there was no concluded
and  binding  contract  between  the  parties  and  the  letters  dated  16.01.2004  and
20.01.2004 respectively were only a part of the ongoing discussion and negotiations
between the parties in relation to the suit property. The letter dated 16.01.2004 was
only a letter of intent and was to be followed by a property buyer agreement to be
signed by the plaintiff which would contain detailed terms and conditions regarding
the sale of the suit property. Further, in the alternative, the defendants submitted that
the plaintiff failed to show his readiness and willingness to pay the balance amount at
any point in time and thus cannot seek specific performance of the contract. 

4
8. 
The  learned  Single  Judge  vide its  order  dated  25.04.2005  overruled  the
objection raised by the defendants as regards the territorial jurisdiction and took the
view that it had the jurisdiction to entertain the suit. The Court took the view that as
the plaintiff was seeking the relief of specific performance simpliciter and had not
prayed for a decree to put him in possession of the suit property, such a relief could be
granted and enforced by the personal obedience of the vendor and thus the Court in
whose territorial jurisdiction the vendor resides or carries on business or works for
gain would have the jurisdiction to entertain the suit. 
9.
Placing reliance on the decision of this Court in Adcon Electronics Pvt. Ltd. v.
Daulat  and  Another reported  in  (2001)  7  SCC  698,  the  Single  Judge  drew  a
distinction between a suit relating to specific performance of a contract for sale of
immovable property simpliciter and a suit where additional claim for delivery is
prayed for, and observed that a suit of the former category, that is, one for the
enforcement of contract of sale and for execution of a conveyance, cannot be said to
be a suit for determination of title to land or that the decree in it would operate on the
land. The Court further observed that Section 22 of the Specific Relief Act has been
specifically held to be an enabling provision by the decision in Adcon Electronics
(supra)  and thus the observations made by this Court in  Babu Lal v. Hazari Lal
Kishori Lal and Others reported in (1982) 3 SCR 94 would not be applicable to the
facts of the present case as the issue has been directly answered by the decision in

5
Adcon Electronics (supra). The relevant observations made by the Single Judge are
extracted hereinbelow: 
“28. I need not, therefore, deal with the various decisions of this Court
and other High Courts relied upon by Counsel for the defendants for the
reason that the decision of the Supreme Court in Adcon Electronic's case
(supra) holds the field. The said decision has taken into account Section
22 of the Specific Relief Act. Decision categorically holds that a suit
seeking specific performance of an agreement to sell simplicitor even if it
relates to immovable property is not a suit in which the relief claimed
relates to title or to land. The suit is for enforcement of terms of contract.
Decision categorically holds that it is at the option of the plaintiff to seek
delivery  of  possession.  Decision  categorically  holds  that  unless
possession of immovable property is specifically prayed for, suit could be
instituted within the local limits of the Court having jurisdiction where
the defendant resides, carries on business or personally works for gain.
29.Section  55  of  the  Transfer  of  Property  Act  is  also  an  enabling
provision and need not be enforced by the buyer.
30. In respect of the submission made by Counsel for the defendants
Pertaining to the provisions of Order 2 Rule 2 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, the point that the rule is directed to secure the exhaustion of
the reliefs in respect of a cause of action and not to the inclusion in one
and the same action, different causes of action, even though they arise
from the same transaction (see decision of Privy Counsel reported as 26
IC 228, Payana v. Panna Lal) has been lost sight of by Counsel.
31. Order 2 Rule 2 is aimed against multiplicity of the suits in respect of
same cause of action. Complete identity of cause of action and various
reliefs flowing therefrom has not to be confused with various causes of
action which may accrue under same transaction.
32. A vendee may be happy to gain title to immovable property at the
pains of the vendor having lost title and since possession was pursuant to
title, being labelled as an unauthorised occupant if after execution of
sale deed and possession being required to the delivered refuses to do so.
In such eventuality, the vendor would be liable to pay damages/mesne
profits for unauthorised occupation. This would be an entirely separate
cause of action post-execution of the sale deed.
33. I accordingly decide the objection raised by the defendants against
them. It is held that this Court has jurisdiction to entertain the suit.”

6
 
10.
The defendants, being aggrieved by the order passed by the learned Single
Judge, preferred three appeals before a Division Bench of the High Court under
Section 10 of the Delhi High Court Act, 1966. 
11.
The Division Bench of the High Court allowed the appeals and ordered the
plaint to be returned to the plaintiff in accordance with law so as to be presented
before the court of competent jurisdiction.
12.
The Division Bench of the High Court in its impugned order took into
consideration the provisions of Section 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as
also Section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and recorded the following
findings:-
“18. In the present case, it is an admitted position that the appellant had
entered into the aforesaid alleged contract at its Corporate office at
Delhi. It is the specific stand of the appellant that they were initially
residents  of  Delhi  and  that  they  had  moved  to  Gurgaon  and  their
corporate office is now also located at Gurgaon. It is the contention of
the counsel appearing for the respondents that the proviso to Section 16
of Code of Civil Procedure is applicable which is sought to be invoked,
for, the relief which is sought for could be entirely enforced through the
personal obedience of the defendants in Delhi. There is however not only
a prayer in the plaint for declaration of the right and title, but also to
transfer  the  right,  title  and  interest  in  the  suit  premises  situate  at
Gurgaon. As, in our opinion, the suit can be decreed in favour of the
plaintiff  only  when  the  Court  can  get  the  sale  deed  executed  and
registered in favour of the plaintiff which would confer the title of the suit
premises on the plaintiff, and the execution and the registration of the
sale document would have to take place at Gurgaon and, for this the
Court will also have to pass a decree directing the defendant to get the
sale deed executed and registered at Gurgaon, implication of the same
will be that a direction will have to be given to the defendant that he
shall have to move out of Delhi and go to Gurgaon and get the same
registered.  No  sale  deed  is  sought  to  be  registered  at  Delhi  and,

7
therefore, in our considered opinion such a relief cannot be entirely
obtained through the personal obedience of the defendant, who in this
case has to go to the jurisdiction of another court to get the decree
executed and the sale deed registered.
19. Accordingly, we are of the considered opinion that the submissions of
the learned counsel for the respondent and the findings recorded by the
learned Single Judge that the present case is covered by the proviso of
Section 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure are misplaced. In the facts and
circumstances of the case as delineated, the relief in the present suit
cannot  be  entirely  obtained  through  the  personal  obedience  of  the
defendants. The proviso to Section 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure
would be applicable to a case where the relief sought for by the plaintiff
was entirely obtainable through the personal obedience of the defendant,
i.e., the defendant has not at all to go out of the jurisdiction of the Court
for the aforesaid purpose. The present case is not a case of the aforesaid
nature. In the present case for execution of the sale deed the defendants
will have to go out of the jurisdiction of this Court and get the same
executed and registered in Gurgaon.
20. In the present case also it is an admitted position that possession of
the said property was with the seller and, therefore, in terms of the
provisions of Section 55(1) of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, the
relief of possession is inherent in the relief of specific performance of the
contract. In our considered opinion the ratio of the decision of the
Supreme Court in Babu Lal(supra) and the principles laid down in the
case of Harshad Chiman Lal Modi(supra) are applicable to the facts of
the present case. In Harshad Chiman Lal Modi (supra) it was found that
in addition to passing decree, the court was also required to deliver
possession of the property. It was held that such a relief can be granted
only  by  sending  the  concerned  person  responsible  for  delivery  of
possession  to  Gurgaon  and  the  court  at  Delhi  does  not  have  the
jurisdiction to get the aforesaid decree enforced for the property situate
outside territorial jurisdiction of Delhi High Court. The Court while
referring to the provisions of Section 16 of the CPC held that the location
of institution of a suit would be guided by the location of the property in
respect of which and for determination of any right or interest whereof
the  suit  is  instituted.  The  proviso  to  Section  16  CPC  is  also  not
applicable to the case, as the relief sought for cannot be entirely granted
or obtained through the personal obedience of the respondent.
21. The decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Adcon Electronics
Pvt. Ltd. v. Daulat and Another (2001) 7 SCC 698, relied upon by the
respondents, would also not be applicable to the facts of the present case.

8
The said decision was rendered in the context of the expression "suit for
land". The Supreme Court in the said decision held that suit for specific
performance of an agreement for sale of the suit property, without a
claim for delivery of possession, cannot be treated as a "suit for land"
and  is,  therefore,  triable  under  clause  12  if  the  other  conditions
thereunder  are  fulfilled.  The  facts  of  the  said  case  are,  therefore,
distinguishable and are not applicable to the case in hand. The said
decision was rendered due to specific provision therein and it is also
apparent from the fact that the case of Babu Lal(supra) was not even
referred to in that case.
22. Another decision of the Supreme Court which needs reference at this
stage is the case of Begum Sabiha Sultan v. Nawab Mohd. Mansur Ali
Khan and others (2007) 4 SCC 343. In para 12 of the said judgment it
was held by the Supreme Court that reading the plaint as a whole in this
case, there cannot be much doubt that the suit is essentially in relation to
the relief of partition and declaration in respect of the properties situate
in Village Pataudi, Gurgaon, outside the jurisdiction of court at Delhi. In
that view of the matter it was also held that the Delhi Court will have no
jurisdiction to try and decide the aforesaid suit. It was also held in the
said  decision  by  following  the  decision  of  Harshad  Chiman  Lal
Modi(supra) that the relief of partition, accounting and declaration of
invalidity  of  the  sale  executed  in  respect  of  immovable  propertied
situated  situate  in  village  Pataudi,  Gurgaon  could  not  entirely  be
obtained by personal obedience to the decree by the defendants in the
suit. It was further held that applying the test laid down therein, it is
clear that the present suit could not be brought within the purview of the
Section 16 of the Code or entertained relying on Section 20 of the Code
on the basis that three out of the five defendants are residing within the
jurisdiction of the court at Delhi.
23.  In  view  of  the  above  facts  and  circumstances,  we  are  of the
considered opinion that the Delhi court would not have the territorial
jurisdiction to  entertain and decide the aforesaid suits. Consequently, we
hold that the decision rendered by the learned Single judge cannot be
upheld. The same is accordingly set aside and quashed.
24. The appeals are allowed accordingly, the plaint be returned to the
plaintiff in accordance with law.”
13.
Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone
through the materials on record, we are of the view that no error not to speak of any

9
error of law could be said to have been committed by the High Court in passing the
impugned orders.
14.
Section 16 of the CPC deals with territorial jurisdiction of the courts and
provides that suits for recovery or partition of immovable property or for foreclosure,
sale or redemption in the case of a mortgage of or charge upon immovable property or
for determination of any other right to or interest in immovable property, or for
compensation for wrong to immovable property, or for recovery of movable property
actually under distraint or attachment, shall be instituted in the court within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate. Further, the proviso provides that a
suit to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property
held by or on behalf of the defendant, may where the relief sought can be entirely
obtained through his personal obedience be instituted either in the Court within the
local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate, or in the Court within the
local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant actually and voluntarily resides, or
carries on business, or personally works for gain.
15.
Thus, the pivotal question before us is whether the relief being sought by the
plaintiff in respect to the suit property can be entirely obtained through the personal
obedience of the defendants. If yes, then the facts of the present case would warrant
the application of the proviso to Section 16 of the CPC and the High Court on its
original side would be competent to entertain the suit instituted by the plaintiff. 

10
16.
This Court in Harshad Chiman Lal Modi v. DLF Universal Ltd. reported in
(2005) 7 SCC 791 observed that Section 16 of the CPC recognises a well-established
principle that actions against res or property should be brought in the forum where
such  res  is situate. A court within whose territorial jurisdiction the property is not
situate has no power to deal with and decide the rights or interests in such property. In
other words, this Court held that a court has no jurisdiction over a dispute in which it
cannot give an effective judgment. 
17.
On the proviso to Section 16, the Court observed that the proviso, no doubt,
states that though the court cannot, in case of immovable property situate beyond
jurisdiction, grant a relief in rem still it can entertain a suit where relief sought can be
obtained through the personal obedience of the defendant. The proviso is based on a
well-known maxim “equity acts in personam”, recognised by the Chancery Courts in
England. The Equity Courts had jurisdiction to entertain certain suits relating to
immovable properties situated abroad through personal obedience of the defendant.
The Court observed that the principle on which the maxim was based was that the
courts could grant relief in suits relating to immovable property situated abroad by
enforcing their judgments by process in personam i.e., by arrest of the defendant or by
attachment of his property. 
18.
The Court held that a suit for specific performance and delivery of possession

11
was covered under clause (d) to Section 16 of the CPC and thus the parties, even by
agreement, cannot confer territorial jurisdiction on a court within whose territory the
subject matter is not situated.  
19. Recently, this Court in  Babasaheb Dhondiba Kute v. Radhu Vithoba Barde
reported in 2024 INSC 122 held that the conveyance by way of sale would take place
only at the time of registration of a sale deed in accordance with Section 17 of the
Registration Act, 1908. Till the time of such registration, no conveyance could be said
to have taken place.
20.
Thus, even if the suit for specific performance is decreed without a specific
decree for transfer of the possession of the suit property, the same can be enforced
only when the trial court directs the defendants to convey the suit property to the
plaintiff by getting a sale deed registered with respect to the suit property, as it is only
after registration that the transfer of title would take place from the defendants to the
plaintiff. The registration of the sale deed in the present case would have to take place
at Gurugram as the suit property is situated there. The sale deed is not sought to be
registered at Delhi and the implication of the grant of specific relief would be that the
trial court will have to direct the defendants to move out of Delhi and go to Gurugram
to get the sale deed registered. As rightly held by the Division Bench of the High
Court, such a relief cannot be obtained entirely by the personal obedience of the
defendants as the defendants will have to go to the jurisdiction of another court to get

12
the decree executed. 
21.
We agree with the view expressed by the High Court in the impugned order that
the proviso to Section 16 would be applicable to a case where the relief sought by
plaintiff can be obtained through the personal obedience of the defendant, that is, the
defendant has not to go out of the jurisdiction of the court at all for the purpose of the
grant of relief. However, since the present case would require the defendants to go to
Gurugram for the purpose of execution of the sale deed, hence the proviso to Section
16 of the CPC will not be applicable. 
22.
It is also necessary to understand the true import of Section 22 of the Specific
Relief Act for a better appreciation of the issue before us. The said provision provides
that any person suing for specific performance of a contract for transfer of immovable
property may, in an appropriate case, sue for possession, or partition and separate
possession of the property, in addition to such performance. It is further provided in
sub-section (2) of the said provision that no relief under the said provision shall be
granted by the court unless it has been specifically claimed, provided that where the
plaintiff has not claimed any such relief in the plaint, the court shall, at any stage of
the proceeding, allow him to amend the plaint on such terms as may be just for
including a claim for such relief. 
23. This Court in  Babu Lal  (supra), upon a combined reading of Sections 22 and

13
28(3) of the Specific Relief Act respectively and Section 55 of the Transfer of
Property Act, observed that the it was only “in an appropriate case” that the plaintiff
was  required  to  separately  seek  the  relief  of  possession,  partition,  or  separate
possession, as the case may be, along with the relief of specific performance. The
Court observed that in other cases, say for example a case where the exclusive
possession of the suit property is with the contracting party, a decree for specific
performance of the contract of sale simpliciter, without specifically providing for
delivery of possession, may give complete relief to the decree-holder. This, the Court
observed, was the mandate flowing from Section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act.
The relevant observations made by the Court are extracted hereinbelow: 
“11. Section 22 enacts a rule of pleading. The legislature thought it will
be useful  to introduce a rule  that  in order  to avoid multiplicity  of
proceedings the plaintiff may claim a decree for possession in a suit for
specific  performance,  even  though  strictly  speaking,  the  right  to
possession accrues only when suit for specific performance is decreed.
The legislature has now made a statutory provision enabling the plaintiff
to  ask  for  possession  in  the  suit  for  specific  performance  and
empowering the court to provide in the decree itself that upon payment
by the plaintiff of the consideration money within the given time, the
defendant should execute the deed and put the plaintiff in possession.
12. The section enacts that a person in a suit for specific performance of
a  contract  for  the  transfer  of  immovable  property,  may  ask  for
appropriate reliefs, namely, he may ask for possession, or for partition or
for separate possession including the relief for specific performance.
These reliefs he can claim, notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, to the contrary. Sub-section (2) of this
section,  however, specifically  provides  that  these  reliefs  cannot  be
granted by the court, unless they have been expressly claimed by the
plaintiff in the suit. Sub-section (2) of the section recognised in clear
terms the well-established rule of procedure that the court should not
entertain a claim of the plaintiff unless it has been specifically pleaded
by the plaintiff and proved by him to be legally entitled to. The proviso to
this  sub-section  (2),  however, says  that  where the  plaintiff  has  not

14
specifically claimed these reliefs in his plaint, in the initial stages of the
suit, the court shall permit the plaintiff at any stage of the proceedings, to
include one or more of the reliefs, mentioned above by means of an
amendment of the plaint on such terms as it may deem proper. The only
purpose of this newly enacted provision is to avoid multiplicity of suits
and that the plaintiff may get appropriate relief without being hampered
by procedural complications.
13. The expression in sub-section (1) of Section 22 “in an appropriate
case” is very significant. The plaintiff may ask for the relief of possession
or partition or separate possession “in an appropriate case”. As pointed
out earlier, in view of Order 2 Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
some doubt was entertained whether the relief for specific performance
and partition and possession could be combined in one suit; one view
being that the cause of  action for claiming relief  for partition and
possession could accrue to the plaintiff only after he acquired title to the
property on the execution of a sale deed in his favour and since the relief
for specific performance of the contract for sale was not based on the
same cause of action as the relief for partition and possession, the two
reliefs could not be combined in one suit. Similarly, a case may be
visualised  where  after  the  contract  between  the  plaintiff  and  the
defendant the property passed in possession of a third person. A mere
relief for specific performance of the contract of sale may not entitle the
plaintiff to obtain possession as against the party in actual possession of
the property. As against him, a decree for possession must be specifically
claimed or such a person is not bound by the contract sought to be
enforced. In a case where exclusive possession is with the contracting
party,  a  decree  for  specific  performance  of  the  contract  of  sale
simpliciter, without specifically providing for delivery of possession, may
give complete relief to the decree-holder. In order to satisfy the decree
against him completely he is bound not only to execute the sale deed but
also to put the property in possession of the decree-holder. This is in
consonance  with  the  provisions  of  Section  55(1)  of  the  Transfer  of
Property Act which provides that the seller is bound to give, on being so
required, the buyer or such person as he directs, such possession of the
property as its nature admits.
14. There may be circumstances in which a relief for possession cannot
be effectively granted to the decree-holder without specifically claiming
relief for possession viz. where the property agreed to be conveyed is
jointly held by the defendant with other persons. In such a case the
plaintiff in order to obtain complete and effective relief  must  claim
partition of the property and possession over the share of the defendant.

15
It is in such cases that a relief  for possession must be specifically
pleaded.
xxx xxx xxx 
26.  Sub-section  (3)  of  Section  28  clearly  contemplates  that  if  the
purchaser or lessee pays the purchase money or other sum which he is
ordered to pay under the decree, the court may on application made in
the same suit, award the purchaser or lessee such further relief as he may
be entitled to. Clause (b) of sub-section (3) of Section 28 contemplates
the delivery of possession or partition and separate possession of the
property on the execution of such conveyance or lease. Sub-section (4) of
Section 28 bars the filing of a separate suit for any relief which may be
claimed under this section.”
(Emphasis supplied)
24.
Section 22 of the Specific Relief Act was considered by this Court in Adcon
Electronics (supra). The Court was called upon to interpret the expression “suit for
land” appearing in Clause 12 of the Letters Patent to the High Court of Judicature at
Bombay, and whether a suit for specific performance simpliciter where no prayer
seeking possession was made could be said to be a “suit for land” within the meaning
of the said clause. The Court referred to the decision of a five-Judge Bench of the
Federal Court in Messrs. Moolji Jaitha and Co. v. Khandesh Spinning and Weaving
Mills Co. Ltd. reported in AIR 1950 FC 83 and observed that there was a difference
of opinion as to the import of the expression “suit for land”.  Inter alia, the Court
expressed its agreement with the following observations made by Justice Mahajan in
the said decision: 
“…In my opinion, if the suit is for specific performance and a decree for
possession of the land sold is claimed, such a suit would certainly be a
suit for land; but if the suit is simpliciter for specific performance, i.e.,
for  the enforcement  of  the contract  of  sale  and for  execution  of  a

16
conveyance, in that event there can be no good ground for holding that
such a suit is a suit for determination of title to land or that the decree in
it would operate on the land. …”
25. The Court further expressed agreement with a Full Bench decision of the Madras
High Court in P.M.A. Velliappa Chettiar v. Saha Govinda Doss reported in AIR 1929
Mad 721 and observed thus: 
“[...] [I]t seems to me fairly clear that the expression ‘suit for land’
occurring in clause 12 Letters Patent, means a suit which is instituted
with the object of establishing claims regarding title to the property or
possession of it. Whether or not possession is claimed, if title to any
immovable property is to be directly affected by the result of the decision,
the suit would be a suit for land.”
26. Concluding on the basis of the aforesaid, the Court held the following as regards
the meaning of the expression “suit for land”: 
“15. From the above discussion it follows that a “suit for land” is a suit
in which the relief claimed relates to title to or delivery of possession of
land or immovable property. Whether a suit is a “suit for land” or not
has to be determined on the averments in the plaint with reference to the
reliefs claimed therein; where the relief relates to adjudication of title to
land or immovable property or delivery of possession of the land or
immovable property, it will be a “suit for land”. We are in respectful
agreement with the view expressed by Mahajan, J. in Moolji Jaitha
case.”    
27.
Further, on the aspect of Section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, the Court took
the view that although the said provision is enabling in nature yet as per the mandate
of sub-section (2), the relief of possession of immovable property which is the subject
matter of the agreement for sale cannot be granted by the court unless the relief for
possession  is  specifically  prayed  for.  The  relevant  observations  are  extracted

17
hereinbelow: 
“17. It may be seen that sub-section (1) is an enabling provision. A
plaintiff in a suit of specific performance may ask for further reliefs
mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) thereof. Clause (a) contains reliefs of
possession and partition and separate possession of the property, in
addition to specific performance. The mandate of sub-section (2) of
Section 22 is that no relief under clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1)
shall be granted by the court unless it has been specifically claimed.
Thus it follows that no court can grant the relief of possession of land or
other immovable property, subject-matter of the agreement for sale in
regard to which specific performance is claimed, unless the possession of
the immovable property is specifically prayed for.
18.  In  the  instant  case  the  suit  is  for  specific  performance  of  the
agreement for sale of the suit property wherein relief of delivery of the
suit property has not been specifically claimed, as such it cannot be
treated as a “suit for land”.
19. We cannot also accept the contention of Mr Chitale that the suit is for
acquisition of title to the land and is a “suit for land”. In its true sense, a
suit simpliciter for specific performance of contract for sale of land is a
suit for enforcement of terms of contract. The title to the land as such is
not the subject-matter of the suit.”
28. What appears from a close reading of the decision in Adcon Electronics (supra) is
that the decision of this Court in Babu Lal (supra) was not considered and reliance
was placed on the decision of the Federal Court in Moolji Jaitha (supra) which was
rendered in the context of the old Specific Relief Act. The Federal Court had no
occasion to consider the amended regime brought into being by virtue of the Specific
Relief Act enacted in 1963. The decision in  Babu Lal  (supra)  took note of the
divergent views occupying the field prior to the enactment of the Specific Relief Act
in 1963. The relevant paragraphs from  Babu Lal  (supra)  wherein the conflict in
position of law was noted are extracted hereinbelow: 

18
“6. It would be appropriate to refer to the state of law as it existed prior
to the amendment of the Specific Relief Act in 1963. One view was that
the decree-holder does not acquire title or right to recover possession
unless a sale deed is executed, in execution of the decree for specific
performance. In Hakim Enayat Ullah v. Khalil Ullah Khan [AIR 1938 All
432 : ILR 1938 All 677 : 1938 All LJ 569 : 176 IC 436] a Division Bench
of the Allahabad High Court dealing with the question observed:
“A decree for specific performance only declares the right of the
decree-holder to have a transfer executed in his favour of the
property covered by the decree. The decree by itself does not
transfer title. That this is so is apparent from the fact that in order
to get title to the property the decree-holder has to proceed in
execution in accordance with the provisions of Order 21 of the
Code. So long as the sale deed is not executed in favour of the
decree-holder, either by the defendant in the suit or by the court,
the title to the property remains vested in the defendant and till the
execution of the sale deed the decree-holder has no right to the
possession of the property. It is only the execution of the sale deed
that transfers title to the property.”
7. In Kartik Chandra Pal v. Dibakar Bhattacharjee [AIR 1952 Cal 362 :
ILR (1950) 1 Cal 350] a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court,
however, after reviewing a number of reported cases viz. Ranjit Singh v.
Kalidasi Debi [ILR (1910) 37 Cal 57 : 14 Cal WN 527 : 5 IC 205] ,
Madanmohan Singh v. Gaja Prasad Singh [(1911) 14 CLJ 159 : 11 IC
228] , Deonandan Prasad v. Janki Singh [(1920) 5 Pat LJ 314 : 1 Pat LT
325 : 56 IC 322] and Atal Behary Acharya v. Barada Prasad Banerji
[AIR 1931 Pat 179 : 12 Pat LT 636 : 131 IC 529] , observed:
“...It is incontestable that in a suit for specific performance of
contract for the sale of land it is open to the plaintiff to join in the
same suit two prayers, one for the execution of the deed of transfer
and another for recovery of possession of the land in question....
                               * * *
We ought to remember in this connection that no special form of
decree in a suit for specific performance is supplied by the Civil
Procedure Code. Chapter II, Specific Relief Act, deals with the
various circumstances under which a contract may be enforced
specifically and where it cannot be allowed. When a contract is to
be specifically enforced, it means simply this that when the parties
do not agree to perform the contract mutually the intervention of

19
the Court is required and the Court will do all such things as the
parties would have been bound to do had this been done without
the intervention of the Court. A sale of a property after payment of
the consideration and upon due execution of the deed of sale
presupposes  and  requires  the  vendor  to  put  the  purchaser  in
possession of the property. It cannot be suggested that when a
party comes to Court for the specific performance of a contract he
is to be satisfied with simply the execution of the document on
payment of the consideration money. The Court when allowing the
prayer for specific performance vests the executing court with all
the powers which are required to give full effect to the decree for
specific performance. By the decree for specific performance, the
Court sets out what it finds to be the real contract between the
parties and declares that such a contract exists and it is for the
executing court to do the rest.
It may be noticed further that a decree in a suit for specific
performance has been considered to be somewhat in the nature of
preliminary decree which cannot set out in the fullest detail all the
different steps which are required to be taken to implement the
main portion of the order directing specific performance of the
contract.  The  executing  court  is  in  such  a  case  vested  with
authority to issue necessary directions.”
8. In Balmukand v. Veer Chand [AIR 1954 All 643 : 1954 All LJ 255 :
1954 All WR (HC) 424] the decree for specific performance of a contract
of sale was silent as to the relief of delivery of possession even though
such relief was claimed in the suit. It was held by the Allahabad High
Court  that  the  executing  court  was  still  competent  to  deliver  the
possession. It was further held that it was not necessary in a suit for
specific performance either to separately claim possession nor was it
necessary for the court to pass a decree for possession. A decree for
specific performance of a contract includes everything incidental to be
done by one party or another to complete the sale transaction, the rights
and obligations of the parties in such a matter being governed by Section
55 of the Transfer of Property Act. In Janardan Kishore v. Girdhari Lal
[AIR 1957 Pat 701 : 1957 BLJR 368] the Patna High Court took the
view that the relief of possession is inherent in a relief for specific
performance of contract for lease, and the court executing a decree for
specific performance of such a contract can grant possession of the
property to the decree-holder even though the decree did not provide for
delivery of possession. In Subodh Kumar Banerjee v. Hiramoni Dasi
[AIR 1955 Cal 267] the Calcutta High Court took a similar view that the

20
right to recover possession springs out of the contract which was being
specifically enforced and not as a result of the execution and completion
of the conveyance, and as such the judgment-debtor was bound to deliver
possession to the decree-holder.
9. In Mohammed Ali Abdul Chanimomin v. Bisahemi Kom Abdulla Saheb
Momin [AIR 1973 Mys 131 : (1973) 1 Mys LJ 130] the Mysore High
Court  observed  that  the  liability  to  deliver  possession  for  specific
performance  was  necessarily  implied  in  a  decree  for  specific
performance  directing  the  defendant  to  execute  a  sale  deed  on  the
principle of clause (f) of sub-section (1) of Section 55 of the Transfer of
Property Act, according to which the liability to deliver possession arises
immediately upon execution of a sale deed unless by agreement the date
for delivery of possession is postponed.
10. In this state of the law the legislature intervened and on the basis of
the report of the Law Commission enacted Section 22 in 1963 as it
stands.”
(Emphasis supplied)
29.
Thus,  while  the  decision  in  Adcon  Electronics (supra) proceeds  on  the
understanding that a suit for specific performance of an agreement to sell is an action
in personam, the decision in Babu Lal (supra) takes into account the change brought
about by the introduction of Sections 22 and 28 to the Specific Relief Act, 1963
respectively which has changed the nature of the relief available under Section 22 by
allowing the plaintiff to seek the relief of possession, partition, etc. simultaneously
along with the prayer for specific performance.
30.
Even otherwise, we are of the view that the decision in  Adcon Electronics
(supra), is of no avail to the plaintiff. It was expressly held by this Court therein that
to determine whether a suit is a “suit for land” or not has to be determined on the basis
of the averments made in the plaint with reference to the reliefs claimed therein. In yet

21
another decision Excel Dealcomm (P) Ltd. v. Asset Reconstruction Co. (India) Ltd.
reported in (2015) 8 SCC 219 dealing with the meaning of the expression “suit for
land” appearing in Clause 12 of the Letters Patent of the High Court of Judicature at
Calcutta, this Court observed thus: 
“13. A suit for land is a suit in which the relief claimed relates to the title
or delivery of possession of land or immovable property [see Adcon
Electronics (P) Ltd. v. Daulat [Adcon Electronics (P) Ltd. v. Daulat] ].
Further, it is an established rule that to determine whether it is a suit for
land, the court will look into barely the plaint and no other evidence
(Indian Mineral & Chemicals Co. v. Deutsche Bank [(2004) 12 SCC
376] ). If by the averments in the plaint and prayers therein, it appears
that the suit is one for land, it shall be so held and if it does not so
appear, then the suit shall continue under leave granted under Clause 12.
…
xxx xxx xxx
16.  It may be noted that the sale certificate sought under the prayer
requires the delivery of possession of the suit property. Thus, we find that
the prayer for delivery of possession was an implicit one in the present
case. The prayer as sought in the plaint could not have been granted
without  the  delivery  of  possession  of  the  suit  property  as  the  sale
certificate itself contemplates the delivery of the immovable property.
Thus, in view of this we find that Adcon Electronics [Adcon Electronics
(P) Ltd. v. Daulat] would not apply as there was a prayer for delivery of
possession in the present case. Therefore, we hold that the present suit
was indeed a suit for land.”
(Emphasis supplied)
31.
Similarly, in Moolji Jaitha (supra), His Lordship Kania, C.J. held that a Suit as
a whole should be taken into consideration to find out whether it is for the purpose of
obtaining a direction for possession or a decision on title to land, or the object of the
Suit is something different but involves the consideration of the question of title to
land indirectly. His Lordship further held that the nature of the Suit and its purpose

22
have to be determined by reading the Plaint as a whole and it is not proper to dissect
the prayers and consider whether the Court has jurisdiction on the limited points. It
was further held that the inclusion or absence of a prayer is not decisive of the true
nature of the Suit, nor is the order in which the prayers are arrayed in the Plaint. The
substance or object of the Suit has to be gathered from the averments made in the
Plaint and on which the reliefs asked in the prayers were based. 
32.
In the present case, the alleged contract for the sale executed between the
parties  through  exchange  of  communications  dated  16.01.2004  and  20.01.2004
respectively contains the stipulation that 10% of the total sale consideration has to be
paid immediately by the plaintiff upon booking, 85% of the sale consideration has to
be paid by 28.02.2004 and the balance 5% of the sale consideration has to be paid at
the time of notice for possession of the premises. Further, there is a stipulation that the
possession of the suit property has to be handed over by the defendants to the plaintiff
upon payment of the balance 5% of the total sale consideration. Further, section 55(1)
(f) of the Transfer of Property Act also stipulates that the seller of an immovable
property is required to handover the possession of the property to the buyer pursuant
to the execution of the sale deed.  It was also held in Babu Lal (supra) that in view of
the interplay between Sections 22 and 28 of the Specific Relief Act respectively and
Section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act, the handing over of the possession of the
immovable property in respect of which a decree of specific performance has been
granted is only incidental. 

23
33.
Thus, it is clear from the terms of the alleged contract between the parties that
the transfer of possession of the suit property is implicit in the said contract and
absence of a specific prayer seeking transfer of possession would not have any bearing
on the character of the suit, which is one covered by Section 16(d) of the CPC. 
34. If we were to hold otherwise, then it would give rise to a situation where a plaintiff
would be allowed  to file a suit  for  specific performance  simplicter  and having
obtained a decree therein, the plaintiff would pray for the transfer of the execution
proceedings to the court within whose territorial jurisdiction the suit property lies and
thereafter seek amendment of the plaint to include a prayer for transfer of possession,
which  has  been  expressly  held  to  be  permissible  in  Babu  Lal (supra).  An
interpretation which gives rise to the possibility of such misuse of law cannot be
allowed. 
35. For all the aforesaid reasons, the Special Leave Petitions fail and are hereby
dismissed.
36. Interim relief granted earlier stands vacated. 

24
37. In view of the aforesaid, it is now for the plaintiff to take appropriate steps to
present  the  plaint  before  the  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  and  get  his  suit
adjudicated on merits in accordance with law.
38. Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
     …………………….J.
         
(J.B. PARDIWALA)
……………………J.
(R. MAHADEVAN)
NEW DELHI;
26th NOVEMBER, 2024.  
           

25