2024 INSC 926
1 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1711-1712 OF 2021 
 
 
GRASIM INDUSTRIES LIMITED  
 
   …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH  
AND ANOTHER 
 
 
 
 
…RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5158 OF 2021 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
CIVIL APPEAL  NO(S).  1711-1712/2021 
1. 
These appeals challenge the order dated 07.04.2021 
passed by the National Green Tribunal (NGT), vide which the 
NGT has held that the appellant had committed a violation of 
the provisions of Environment Protection Act. The Court 
found that the appellant had failed to install the online flow 
meter in CS2 stacks to quantify the CS2 emissions.  It also 
found that the acid produced which is a by-product of the 
process employed by the appellant was hazardous to the 
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2024.12.03
18:37:00 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
environment. The NGT, therefore, on different counts 
imposed penalty of Rs.75,00,000/- each. 
2. 
We have heard Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned senior 
counsel for the appellant and Shri Raghav Sharma, learned 
counsel appearing for Respondent No.1/State of Madhya 
Pradesh through Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board 
and Shri Rahul Pratap, learned counsel appearing for 
Respondent No.2. 
3. 
Though, Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned Senior 
Counsel, submits that there is no violation as found by the 
learned NGT, we find that the present appeals deserve to be 
allowed on the following short ground. 
4. 
After the NGT entertained the O.A. on the basis of the 
letter addressed by Respondent No.1, it initially directed the 
plant of the appellant to be examined by the State Pollution 
Control Board. After the receipt of the report of the State 
Pollution Control Board, the Court appointed a Joint 
Committee to give its report.  The said Joint Committee made 
certain recommendations and the NGT passed the impugned 
order on the basis of the said recommendations. 
5. 
The material placed on record would also reveal that the 

3 
appellant herein was not made a party to the proceedings 
before the learned NGT or before the Joint Committee.  
Though an application for impleadment was filed by the 
appellant, the same was rejected by the learned NGT. 
6. 
It further appears that even the Joint Committee 
appointed by the NGT neither gave any notice to the 
appellant nor an opportunity was given of being heard.    
Though, this objection was specifically taken by the 
appellant, the NGT observed “We asked the learned Counsel 
whether the stand of the unit is that the violations found 
never existed or whether they existed but have been 
remedied.  His answer is later.  It is patent that there were 
violations”. 
7. 
It is thus clear that the procedure followed by the 
learned NGT was totally unknown to the settled principles of 
natural justice. 
8. 
Neither was any notice given by the Joint Committee 
before giving an adverse report against the appellant nor the 
NGT permitted impleadment of the appellant as a party 
respondent.  As a matter of fact, the NGT could not have 
proceeded further with the matter even at the initial stage 

4 
without impleading the appellant herein as a party 
respondent. The approach adopted by the NGT clearly 
smacks of condemning a person unheard. A reliance in this 
respect should be placed on the judgment of this Court in the 
case of Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v. 
Ankita Sinha and Others1. 
9. 
Another glaring error that has been committed by the 
NGT is that it has based its decision only on the basis of the 
report of the Joint Committee. The NGT is a tribunal 
constituted under the National Green Tribunal Act of 2010.  
A tribunal is required to arrive at its decision by fully 
considering the facts and circumstances of the case before it. 
It cannot outsource an opinion and base its decision on such 
an opinion. A reliance in this respect should be placed on the 
judgment of this Court in Kantha Vibhag Yuva Koli Samaj 
Parivartan Trust and Others v. State of Gujarat and 
Others2. 
10. In that view of the matter, the impugned orders are not 
sustainable, the same are quashed and set aside and the 
matters are remitted back to the learned NGT for considering 
 
1 (2022) 13 SCC 401 : 2021 INSC 624 
2 2022 SCC OnLine SC 120 : 2022 INSC 79 

5 
the matters afresh. 
11. Needless to state that if the NGT decides to proceed 
further on the basis of the complaint of Respondent No.1, it 
shall not do so unless the appellant herein is impleaded as a 
party respondent. 
12. With these observations and directions, the appeals are 
allowed.  
13. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5158 OF 2021 
1. 
The facts in the present case are almost similar or 
rather more glaring than the facts in Civil Appeal Nos. 1711-
1712 of 2021. In the present appeals the complainant 
(Respondent No.2 herein) had not even mentioned the name 
of the present appellant. However, the learned National 
Green Tribunal (NGT) on the basis of the Report of the Joint 
Committee imposed penalty of Rs.82.2 Lacs and Rs.75.6 Lacs 
for violation of environment laws on two counts. 
2. 
In the appeal arising out of the same common order we 
have found that the approach of the NGT in deciding the 
matter without impleading an affected party and passing its 

6 
decision on an outsourced opinion of the experts is not 
permissible on the ground of violation of principle of natural 
justice. 
3. 
In that view of the matter, we are inclined to allow this 
appeal. 
4. 
The impugned order is quashed and set aside and the 
matter is remitted back to the learned NGT for considering 
the matter afresh. 
5. 
The appeal is accordingly allowed. 
6. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
..............................J.               
(B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
..............................J.   
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)   
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
NOVEMBER 27, 2024.