2024 INSC 909
1
 
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 13378 OF 2024
 
X                                                  
Petitioner(s)
                                VERSUS
STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ANR.          
Respondent(s)
 
O  R  D  E  R
1.
This petition arises from the impugned order passed by
the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jodhpur dated
12-02-2024 in SB Criminal Miscellaneous Bail Application
No.1351/2024  by  which  the  bail  application  filed  by  the
Respondent  No.2  –  herein  (original  accused)  came  to  be
allowed and the Respondent No.2 was ordered to be released
on bail pending trial.
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2024.11.30
10:40:17 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
2.
It  appears  from  the  materials  on  record  that  a  First
Information  Report  came  to  be  lodged  by  the  petitioner  –
herein  dated  18-09-2023  against  the  Respondent  No.2  –
herein and a co-accused for the offence punishable under
Section 376D and Section 342 of the Indian Penal Code. The
FIR bearing No.83/2023 was registered with Police Station
Nachna, District Jaisalmer, Rajasthan. 
3.
The Respondent No.2 – herein and the co-accused were
arrested  in  connection  with  the  alleged  offence.  The
co-accused was ordered to be enlarged on bail long time back.
4.
It appears that after the FIR was registered, the statement
of the victim, i.e., the petitioner – herein was recorded by the
Magistrate  under  Section  164  of  the  Code  of  Criminal
Procedure, 1973. 
5.
Upon conclusion of the investigation, charge-sheet was
filed. 
6.
The  criminal  case  being  committed  to  the  Court  of
Sessions  came  to  be  registered  as  the  Sessions  Case
No.53/2023 pending as on date in the Court of Additional
District and Sessions Judge, Pokaran (Jaisalmer). 
7.
The prosecution has examined one witness so far.

3
8.
In the midst of the trial, the Respondent No.2 – herein
preferred a bail application before the Trial Court. The Trial
Court declined to release the accused on bail. 
9.
The accused went before the High Court and prayed for
bail.  
10. The  High  Court  took  into  consideration  some
discrepancies emanating between the FIR and the statement
of the victim recorded under Section 164 of the Code. The
High Court was persuaded to release the Respondent No.2 –
herein on bail.
11. Having regard to such discrepancies in the FIR and the
statement  recorded  under  Section  164  of  the  Code,  the
operative  part  of  the  impugned  order  passed  by  the  High
Court reads thus:- 
“Para 9.  Accordingly, the instant bail application
under Section 439 Cr. P.C is allowed and it is
ordered that the accused-petitioner as amed in
the cause title shall be enlarged on bail provided
he  furnishes  a  personal  bond  in  the  sum  of
Rs.50,000/-  with  two  sureties  of  Rs.25,000/-
each to the satisfaction of the learned trial Judge
for his appearance before the court concerned on
all the dates of hearing as and when called upon
to do so.” 

4
12. In such circumstances, referred to above, the petitioner,
i.e., the victim is here before us with the present petition. 
13. We  have  heard  the  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the
petitioner and the learned counsel appearing for the State.
The Respondent No.2 – accused although served with the
notice issued by this Court, yet has chosen not to remain
present  before  this  Court  either  in-person  or  through  an
Advocate and oppose this petition. 
14. Ordinarily in serious offences like rape, murder, dacoity,
etc., once the trial commences and the prosecution starts
examining its witnesses, the Court be it the Trial Court or the
High  Court  should  be  loath  in  entertaining  the  bail
application of the accused.
15. Over a period of time, we have noticed two things, i.e., (i) 
either  bail is granted  after  the  charge  is framed  and  just
before the victim is to be examined by the prosecution before
the trial court, or (ii) bail is granted once the recording of the
oral evidence of the victim is complete by looking into some
discrepancies  here  or  there  in the  deposition and  thereby
testing the credibility of the victim. 
16. We are of the view that the aforesaid is not a correct

5
practice that the Courts below should adopt. Once the trial
commences,  it  should  be  allowed  to  reach  to  its  final
conclusion which may either result in the conviction of the
accused or acquittal of the accused. The moment the High
Court exercises its discretion in favour of the accused and
orders  release  of  the  accused  on  bail  by  looking  into  the
deposition of the victim, it will have its own impact on the
pending trial when it comes to appreciating the oral evidence
of the victim. It is only in the event if the trial gets unduly
delayed and that too for no fault on the part of the accused,
the Court may be justified in ordering his release on bail on
the ground that right of the accused to have a speedy trial
has been infringed. 
17. In the case on hand, the victim is yet to be examined. Her
mother who, according to the case of the prosecution, is an
eye-witness  has  also  not been  examined  so  far.  The  High
Court seems to have looked into few discrepancies in the FIR
compared to the statement of victim recorded under Section
164 of the Code. This could not have been a good ground to
exercise  discretion  in  favour  of  an  accused  in  a  serious
offence like rape.

6
18. However, we are of the view that now at this point of time,
we should not disturb the impugned order passed by the High
Court.  At  the  same  time,  we  should  impose  appropriate
conditions so as to ensure that the Respondent No.2 – herein
and  the  co-accused  do  not  influence  the  prosecution
witnesses or try to tamper with the evidence in any manner.
Even while enlarging the accused on bail, the High Court
should have been conscious of this fact. The High Court has
thought  fit  to  only  ask  the  Respondent  No.2  -  accused  –
herein to furnish solvent surety of an amount of Rs. 50,000/-
without imposing any appropriate conditions.
19. We wonder if the High Court was made aware of the fact
that the victim and her mother as well as both the accused
are residing in the very same village viz. Magriyan Ki Dhani
Satyaya, District Jaisalmer, Rajasthan.
20. In such circumstances, without disturbing the order of
bail passed by the High Court, we direct that the Respondent
No.2  –  herein  shall  not  enter  the  said  village  till  the
completion  of  the  trial.  As  we  have  asked  the  respondent
No.2  –  accused  not  to  enter  the  village,  he  shall  furnish
address  of  his  new  residence  to  the  investigating  officer

7
attached with the concerned police station. The Respondent
No.2  shall  not  try  to  influence  any  of  the  prosecution
witnesses  in  any  manner  or  directly  or  indirectly  try  to
contact the victim and her family.
21. Having regard to the nature of the alleged crime, it will be
in the fitness of things if the Trial Court gives some priority to
the Sessions Case No.53/2023 and try to dispose it of within
a period of three months from today. 
22. We clarify that what has been observed by us in this
order  are  just  prima  facie  observations  and  shall  not  be
considered as an expression of any final opinion as regards
the guilt or innocence of the accused.
23. The Special Leave Petition is disposed of in above terms. 
24. Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
 
…………………………………J.
( J.B. Pardiwala)
………………………………..J.
(R. Mahadevan)
New Delhi; 
27th November, 2024