2024 INSC 931
1 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS.7004-7005 OF 2021 
 
 
S. N. DUBEY AND OTHERS                       …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
RAMAN KHANDELWAL AND OTHERS    …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 7664-7666 OF 2021 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6185-6186 OF 2021 
 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
 
 
 
B.R. Gavai, J.  
 
1. 
These appeals challenge the judgments and orders dated 
20.03.2020 and 06.04.2021 passed by the learned National 
Green Tribunal, New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as “NGT”) in 
OA No. 67 of 2015 (CZ) and Review Application No. 12 of 2020 
respectively. There are a total of three appeals. One appeal is 
filed by the State Government, another by the Special Armed 
Forces and the third one by the private individuals affected by 
the orders passed by the learned NGT. 
2. 
Respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3 (Raman Khandelwal, Deepak 
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2024.12.05
10:16:34 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Gupta and Sharad Singh Kumhre) had filed an Original 
Application being OA No. 67 of 2015 (CZ) praying for directions 
to preserve and protect the area known as Bajrang Nagar 
Pahadi in village Karondi in District Jabalpur, Madhya 
Pradesh. 
3. 
It appears that on 19.10.2016 the learned NGT had 
appointed one of its Former Expert Member as a Court 
Commissioner and he was asked to submit a report. The Court 
Commissioner visited the site on 21.11.2016 and submitted 
his report on 08.12.2016. 
4. 
In the report, the salient findings as were recorded by the 
learned Court Commissioner were thus: 
(i) 
That no trees were seen at the site in question, 
except for a number of bushes and shrubs; 
(ii) 
That already there was no development zone of 
30 metres from the boundary of the Talab, 
including one Gokulpur Talab; 
(iii) 
That out of the 65 hectares of land, 48.50 
hectares was reserved in development plan for 
residential purposes, 2 hectares for roads and 
14.50 hectares for City Plantation. 
(iv) 
That the area of 48.50 hectares shown for 
residential purpose was belonging to Special 
Armed Forces. 
(v) 
That the area surrounding 12.32 square 
kilometers on south, south east and south west 
direction from the Gokulpur Talab, was a 
catchment 
area 
and 
any 
development 
surrounding the said area would obstruct the 

3 
 
free flow of water towards Gokulpur Talab and 
Narmada river. 
(vi) 
Finally, 
the 
Court 
Commissioner 
has 
recommended the development activities in 
Bajrang Nagar Pahadi should not be allowed as 
it lies in the catchment area of Gokulpur Talab 
and Narmada river. The Court Commissioner, 
therefore, suggested for declaring the said area 
as no development zone. 
 
5. 
The learned NGT by the impugned judgment and order 
dated 20.03.2020 accepted the recommendation of the Court 
Commissioner as it is and declared an area within the distance 
of one kilometer surrounding the Gokulpur Talab as no 
development zone. Being aggrieved, the present appeals. 
6. 
We have heard Shri Saurabh Mishra, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing for the State of Madhya Pradesh in CA Nos. 
7664-7666 of 2021, Shri M.C. Dhingra, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing for the appellants in C.A. Nos. 7004-7005 
of 2021 and Shri Raghav Sharma, learned counsel appearing 
for the Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board arrayed as 
party-respondent in the appeals.  
7. 
It is submitted by Shri Mishra and Shri Dhingra that if 
the directions issued by the learned NGT are implemented, the 
entire developmental activities would come to a standstill. It is 
further submitted that the development plan for the city of 

4 
 
Jabalpur has considered all the aspects. It is further 
submitted that the specific objection of the State of Madhya 
Pradesh, that there is a direct and indirect catchment area, 
has not at all been considered by the learned NGT. It is 
submitted that while preparing the development plan, the 
Planning Authority has taken into consideration the aspect of 
the catchment area. 
8. 
Though the original applicants/complainants before the 
learned NGT are duly served, no one has appeared on behalf 
of them. The respondent-Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control 
Board and the private respondents have supported the stand 
of the State Government.  
9. 
It is pertinent to note that after the Court Commissioner 
submitted his report, the State of Madhya Pradesh had raised 
objections qua the said report. Further before the learned NGT, 
a reply was filed by the State, where in para 9 it was stated as 
under: 
“The applicant has also alleged that the subjective 
land is the catchment area of Gokulpur pond as well 
as Narmada river. It is most humbly submitted that 
the catchment is defined as direct catchment and 
indirect catchment the direct catchment area is the 
area which is the main source of water for the water 
body whereas indirect catchment area could be a 
huge area which could be more than hundreds of 

5 
 
square kilometers because each and every surface on 
earth could be the catchment area for one or the 
other waterbodies therefore the subjective land may 
be considered as indirect catchment of Gokulpur 
pond as well as Narmada river but it could never be 
direct catchment of the same as while preparing the 
Jabalpur Development Scheme/Master Plan 2021 
the survey pertaining to the natural water dispersal 
system was carried out and to show the natural water 
dispersal areas map was prepared which is part and 
parcel of the master plan. In the said flow map the 
subjective area is not shown as the direct catchment 
area of Gokulpur pond as well as Narmada River. The 
copy map of natural water dispersal system is 
marked and filed herewith as ANNEXURE-R-1/3.”     
 
10. The reply clearly states that for every dispersal system 
there is direct and indirect catchment area, and that the nalas, 
streams and rivers form part of the direct catchment area. 
11. Insofar as the indirect catchment area is concerned, the 
water is absorbed in the soil and percolates to the main 
rivers/lakes. 
12. The reply would also reveal that while finalizing the 
Jabalpur Development Scheme/Master Plan for 2021, the 
survey was also conducted by the Planning Authority 
pertaining to the natural water dispersal system.  The map of 
the natural water dispersal area is a part and parcel of the 
Master Plan.  
13. The Master Plan did not show the area under 

6 
 
consideration as a direct catchment area of Gokulpur Talab as 
well as Narmada river. However, the learned NGT has not at 
all taken into consideration the objections raised by the State 
of Madhya Pradesh in the reply. The learned NGT has accepted 
the recommendation of the Court Commissioner as it is.  
14. If the report of the Court Commissioner is to be accepted, 
an area admeasuring 12.32 square kilometers surrounding 
the lake will have to be declared as no development area and 
a substantial part of construction in the Jabalpur City itself 
would be affected. 
15. The impugned order passed by the learned NGT does not 
depict any independent consideration but a mere acceptance 
of the report of the Court Commissioner as it is. 
16. This Court, by an order dated 27.11.2024 passed in CA 
Nos. 9202-9203 of 2022 titled as “Benzo Chem Industrial 
Private Limited v. Arvind Manohar Mahajan and Others”  
has deprecated the practice of the NGT of basing its judgment 
on outsourced material. A  tribunal  is  expected  to  carefully 
consider   the   material   placed  before  it  and  the  
contentions raised   on   behalf   of   both   the   parties.  It   
cannot   discharge   its    function  by  merely   relying  on  a 

7 
 
report of the Court Commissioner without even considering 
the stand of the parties before it. 
17. On this short ground alone, the appeals are allowed. The 
impugned judgments and orders dated 20.03.2020 and 
06.04.2021 passed by the learned NGT are hereby quashed 
and set aside. 
18. Needless to add that the permission for development 
which was granted after obtaining the approval of the State 
Environment Impact Assessment Agency (SEIAA) would 
continue to operate. Further, if any specific period is provided 
for such activities, the time from the date of stay granted by 
the learned NGT till today, shall stand excluded. 
19. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
….........................J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       (B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                            …............................J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           (K.V. VISWANATHAN) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
NOVEMBER 28, 2024.