2024 INSC 911
Page 1 of 18 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10800 OF 2024 
 
 
CHAUDHARY CHARAN SINGH  
HARYANA AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY,  
HISAR & ANR.                               
             
    … APPELLANTS 
 
VS. 
 
MONIKA & ORS.                                                        … RESPONDENTS 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J. 
 
THE APPEAL 
1. 
The present appeal assails the judgment and order dated 6th December, 
2023 passed by the Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court 
at Chandigarh1 in LPA No. 562/2022 (O&M), affirming the decision of the 
Single Judge whereby the first respondent was directed to be considered 
 
1  High Court, hereafter 
Digitally signed by
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2024.11.29
18:23:32 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Page 2 of 18 
 
and offered appointment in the first appellant-Chaudhary Charan Singh 
Haryana Agricultural University2 on the post of Clerk. 
THE QUESTION 
2. 
The short question arising for decision in the appeal is, whether the 
Single Judge and then the Division Bench of the High Court were in error 
in treating the first respondent as qualified for consideration and 
consequent appointment. 
RESUME OF FACTS  
3. 
The relevant facts essential to decide the present appeal are as follows:  
I. 
In 1970, the University was established upon enactment of the 
Haryana and Punjab Agricultural Universities Act, 1970.  
II. 
In 2009, the second respondent-State of Haryana3 vide Circular No. 
43/5/2001-IGSI introduced an outsourcing policy relating to 
engagement of persons on contract basis through service 
providers4. This circular was adopted by the University vide memo 
dated 24.02.2010.  
III. 
In 2014, the SoH issued a further Circular bearing No. 43/5/2001-
3GSII relating to issuance of experience certificates to persons 
engaged under the aforementioned outsourcing policy. This circular 
too was adopted by the University on 25.06.20145.  
IV. 
In 2017, the University invited tenders for the purpose of providing 
manpower relating to office/hospitality and lab/technical under Part 
 
2  University, hereafter 
3  SoH, hereafter 
4  Outsourcing Policy, hereafter  
5  Circular dated 25.06.2014, hereafter  

Page 3 of 18 
 
I of the Outsourcing Policy. Vide Office Order dated 29.03.2017, the 
contract was awarded to two service agencies by the University. 
The first respondent was engaged by one of the service agencies, 
namely, M/s Lavnya Enterprises6, to work as a clerk-cum-typist as 
outsourced manpower for the time period between 05.05.2017 and 
31.03.2018 in the University.  
V. 
A certificate of experience was awarded to the first respondent by 
Lavnya dated 01.04.2018. This certificate was countersigned by the 
Professor and Head of the Department of Soil Science of the 
University.  
VI. 
Vide an advertisement7, the University invited applications for 
direct recruitment to various Group-C (non-teaching) posts. Under 
the criteria for selection, the advertisement prescribed a maximum 
of five (5) out of hundred (100) marks for ‘Experience’. It specified 
that half a mark (0.5) would be given for experience in the same 
or higher post in any department / board / corporation / company 
/ statutory body / commission / authority of the Government of 
Haryana, for each year or part thereof which exceeds six months 
but limited to a maximum of ten (10) years.  
VII. 
In pursuance of the advertisement, the first respondent had applied 
and offered her candidature. Admittedly, the first respondent 
scored 75 marks in the written test and was, accordingly, placed in 
 
6 Lavnya, hereafter 
7 Advertisement, hereafter 

Page 4 of 18 
 
Sl. No 103 and ranked Gen-92 in the merit list, and fell short of 
selection.  
VIII. 
Aggrieved, the first respondent invoked the writ jurisdiction of the 
High Court by filing WPC No. 4402/2020 (O&M)8 impleading the 
University, the SoH and two selected candidates as the first, 
second, third and fourth respondents, respectively.  
IX. 
A Single Judge of the High Court by his judgment and order dated 
24.05.2022 ruled that the first respondent was eligible for 0.5 mark 
for the service rendered by her between 05.05.2017 and 
31.03.2018. As noted above, this decision was affirmed by the 
Division Bench. 
IMPUGNED JUDGMENTS 
4. 
Since the first respondent had admittedly worked in the University for a 
period exceeding six months, her Writ Petition was allowed by the Single 
Judge directing allotment of 0.5 mark to the first respondent. The 
University was directed to consider her for appointment as well as to 
offer 
appointment, 
without 
disturbing 
any 
selected 
candidate. 
Aggrieved, the University carried the judgment and order allowing the 
Writ Petition in a Letters Patent Appeal. The Division Bench dismissed 
the appeal presented by the University on the ground that the order of 
the learned Single Judge does not suffer from any illegality, thereby 
leaving the University still aggrieved. 
 
8  Writ Petition, hereafter 

Page 5 of 18 
 
5. 
Having perused the judgment and order of the Single Judge, since 
affirmed by the Division Bench, we have found the judgment and order 
of both the writ court as well as the appellate court to be rather cryptic. 
Exception cannot be taken to any judgment merely on the ground of its 
brevity but if the judgment is cryptic and conclusions are reached 
without proper analysis of facts and materials on record, the party 
aggrieved would be justified in seeking setting aside of such judgment. 
It is, perhaps, for such reason notice had been issued by a coordinate 
Bench pursuant whereto the first respondent appeared; and, thereafter, 
the parties 
argued their cases fully. However, since 
focused 
consideration, due application of judicial mind and clarity of reasoning 
are the imperatives of a proper judicial decision, we have thought it fit 
to reflect on the issue arising for decision with the seriousness the same 
deserves.  
CONTENTIONS 
6. 
The impugned judgment has been assailed by the University on the 
grounds that:  
I. 
Paragraph 1 of Part I of the Outsourcing Policy stipulates that 
services may be outsourced as and when required partly or 
completely by the departments where posts have not been 
sanctioned. Part II deals with engagement of persons on contract 
basis where the regular posts exist. In the instant case, the first 
respondent was deputed in one of the universities through a 
service provider under Part I of the Outsourcing Policy.  

Page 6 of 18 
 
II. 
Since the first respondent was engaged in the University by the 
service provider, Lavnya, under the Outsourcing Policy for the 
requirements of office work and not appointed on any regular or 
sanctioned post of clerk, the experience acquired by her cannot be 
equated with the experience of working on a sanctioned post of 
clerk.   
III. 
Considering that the post was not a regular or sanctioned post, the 
first respondent cannot be deemed to have gained experience of 
working in the same or higher post, as required by the 
Advertisement. 
IV. 
Experience Certificate was not issued by the University but rather 
by Lavnya. Merely because it was countersigned by the Head of 
the Department does not make it a certificate issued by the 
University. Attention was drawn to the Circular dated 25.06.2014, 
which prohibits issuance of an experience certificate by any 
authority where persons are engaged through a service provider, 
i.e., under Part I of the Outsourcing Policy.  
V. 
The High Court overlooked the fact that the first respondent’s 
application described her engagement for the concerned time 
period as contractual employment and that her employer was the 
University, which is incorrect as the first respondent was neither 
appointed by the University nor ever worked with the University 
on any temporary or permanent post.  

Page 7 of 18 
 
VI. 
The first respondent has not submitted the valid experience 
certificate issued by the department / board / corporation / 
company / statutory body / commission / authority of the 
Government of Haryana; therefore, the scrutiny committee has 
not considered the so-called experience of the first respondent and 
allotted her marks which is justified on facts and in the 
circumstances.  
VII. 
The last candidate who was selected (securing 75 marks) is still 8 
ranks higher than the first respondent.  If the relief granted by the 
High Court is upheld, then the seniority of the appointed 
candidates will have to be disturbed. Moreover, the select list 
having been exhausted, the appointment cannot be given to the 
first respondent.  
7. 
Based on these grounds, interference with the impugned judgment and 
order of the Division Bench was claimed by the University. 
8. 
Representing the first respondent, her learned counsel contended that 
the judgment and order of the Single Judge is well-considered and well-
reasoned; hence, it is unexceptionable and no interference is warranted. 
9. 
It was further contended that:  
I. 
The first respondent though had rendered services to the 
University on contract, she had done the work like other similarly 
situated persons working under either the outsourcing policy or on 
regular basis.  

Page 8 of 18 
 
II. 
As per the Policy, the essential requirement of experience is that 
the candidate must be working in any department of the 
Government of Haryana irrespective of the mode of recruitment 
because government institutes can hire manpower in any of the 
two modes and in both the cases, work is done in the government 
department.  
III. 
The University did not disclose the fact that the post of Clerk-cum-
Typist is a sanctioned post.  
IV. 
Denying marks of experience to the first respondent is 
unreasonable, arbitrary and violative of Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 
21 of the Constitution of India. 
V. 
The last candidate selected in the general category secured 76 
marks and if the mark (0.5) for experience is granted to the first 
respondent, she would enter the zone of selection for appointment 
on the post of clerk.   
VI. 
There are 13 posts lying vacant and the selection list is valid for 
one year.  
VII. 
That in the case of Sachivalaya Dainik Vetan Bhogi 
Karamchari Union v. State of Rajasthan & Ors.9, this Court 
upheld the policy of the State of Rajasthan for giving weightage to 
the services rendered by the employees, where services were used 
by the State either temporarily or on ad-hoc basis.  
 
9 (2017) 11 SCC 421.  

Page 9 of 18 
 
VIII.  The University has also issued 2nd Appointment List wherein, two 
candidates who have secured 75 marks have been selected and 
appointed for the said post, i.e., the third and the fourth 
respondent. 
10. 
Learned counsel concluded by submitting that the University read words 
in the Advertisement to exclude the first respondent from the zone of 
consideration, which was rightly interdicted by the Single Judge and the 
Division Bench in its concurrent findings. As a sequel thereto, the appeal 
deserves outright dismissal. 
ANALYSIS AND REASONS 
11. 
The crux of the dispute is whether the first respondent, in terms of the 
Advertisement, was eligible to be awarded half a mark (0.5) under the 
category of ‘experience’ vis-à-vis her engagement as outsourced 
manpower for the concerned time period, in light of the Rules and 
Circulars of the SoH as adopted by the University.  
12. 
It is an admitted fact that the first respondent was appointed under Part 
I of the Outsourcing Policy, which relates only to employment made when 
no sanctioned post exists. Although the first respondent has urged that 
the University has not disclosed the existence of a sanctioned post either 
before the High Court or this Court, nothing turns on it. It is not in 
dispute that the first respondent was never directly appointed by the 
University on any sanctioned post of Clerk. Having regard to the 
Outsourcing Policy, through which the first respondent came to be 
appointed, we shall proceed with our analysis resting on the premise 

Page 10 of 18 
 
that no sanctioned post of Clerk existed at the time when the first 
respondent was first engaged in the University through the service 
provider or, even if one existed, the first respondent could not have been 
accommodated there at the relevant time.  
13. 
The point that would engage our consideration in this case is whether 
the noun ‘post’ in the subject advertisement would invariably mean a 
sanctioned post and whether a candidate would not be eligible for mark 
for experience if he/she has not worked on a regular/sanctioned post. 
14. 
We have not been referred by the parties to any precedent having a 
direct bearing on the question arising for decision here. However, prior 
to looking at the Advertisement, it would be worthwhile to bear in mind 
what this Court held in the decisions noted below. 
15. 
In Dr. Kumar Bar Das v. Utkal University10, a case concerning the 
provision of marks for experience in connection with recruitment, a 3-
Judge Bench of this Court noted that one must not apply the words in 
the advertisement in a technical sense but must rather give effect to the 
words mentioned in the advertisement:  
“29. No doubt, in clause 9 of the endowment, it was stated that 
the procedure for selection would be the same as followed for a 
Professor's selection. This, in our view, was referable merely to the 
procedure. If the advertisement stressed on the research 
experience also and not merely the teaching experience, the 
column in the pro forma for awarding marks when it referred to 
‘teaching experience’ has to be treated as one meant to cover 
teaching and research experience. The Selection Committee and 
the Syndicate followed the right procedure but the Chancellor went 
wrong in confining himself to the actual language of the pro forma 
and in omitting to give effect to the words ‘and/or research 
experience’ contained in the advertisement and the UGC 
Regulations. This, in our view, is a clear illegality in the order of 
 
10 (1999) 1 SCC 453.  

Page 11 of 18 
 
the Chancellor. The High Court ought to have, therefore, come to 
the rescue of the appellant and set right the illegality.” 
 
                                                                 (emphasis supplied) 
 
16. 
Dr. (Major) Meeta Sahai v. State of Bihar11 arose out of a case where 
the advertisement provided for the grant of marks for work experience 
after appointment on a regular/contract basis in the government 
hospitals. In the advertisement, it was also stated that only work 
experience in government hospitals of the Government of Bihar would 
be counted for this purpose. This Court, therefore, in interpreting the 
term “government hospital” held:  
“20. It is a settled canon of statutory interpretation that as a first 
step, the courts ought to interpret the text of the provision and 
construct it literally. Provisions in a statute must be read in their 
original grammatical meaning to give its words a common textual 
meaning. However, this tool of interpretation can only be applied 
in cases where the text of the enactment is susceptible to only one 
meaning. [Nathi Devi v. Radha Devi Gupta, (2005) 2 SCC 271, 
para 13.] Nevertheless, in a situation where there is ambiguity in 
the meaning of the text, the courts must also give due regard to 
the consequences of the interpretation taken. 
 
… 
 
23. …The phrase ‘government hospital’ therefore cannot be 
construed to exclude other non-private hospitals which are 
otherwise run exclusively with the aid and assistance of the 
Governments. Additionally given the difference in common usage 
wherein ‘government hospital’ refers to all non-private hospitals 
and not hospitals established by a particular Government, Rules 5 
& 6(iii) would not be bound by Rule 2(a).” 
                                                                 (emphasis supplied) 
 
17. 
The first respondent has also referred us to the decision of Sachivalaya 
Dainik Vetan Bhogi Karamchari Union (supra). It would be 
appropriate to delve into the facts in that case before deciding the 
 
11 (2019) 20 SCC 17.  

Page 12 of 18 
 
applicability of the law laid down therein in this present dispute. In that 
case, the members of the Workers Union were Class-IV employees. The 
employees filed a writ petition seeking regularisation of service. When 
the writ petition came up for hearing, it was represented that the dispute 
was settled out of Court and the terms were reduced to writing. 
Thereafter, the respondent issued an advertisement inviting tenders 
from contractors for the supply of Class IV employees. The Workers 
Union approached the High Court once again by way of a writ petition 
challenging the advertisement on the ground that those conditions were 
contrary to the settlement. During the pendency of this writ petition, 
another advertisement was invited and the respondent decided to 
provide some weightage in favour of the members of the Union by taking 
a decision to accord certain bonus marks in favour of those who had 
been working with the Department on a temporary basis. This decision 
of the respondent was once more challenged and the High Court ruled 
that the grant of these marks was arbitrary and directed that a lower 
weightage be given. Aggrieved, the State of Rajasthan carried the matter 
to this Court. During its pendency before this Court, an Hon’ble Division 
Bench of the Rajasthan High Court ruled in the pending writ petition [WP 
No. 3235/2004] that the settlement entered into between the parties 
cannot be enforced due to the decision of the Supreme Court in 
Secretary, State of Karnataka v. Umadevi (3)12. While this Court, 
no doubt, upheld the settlement deed wherein the respondent awarded 
 
12  (2006) 4 SCC 1  

Page 13 of 18 
 
bonus marks to the candidates for working in certain ad-hoc positions, 
it did so in the background of the complex and labyrinthine facts and 
circumstances that had played out before the Rajasthan High Court. 
There is no doubt in our mind that this case must be distinguished from 
the instant case as it does not lay down a general rule regarding the 
provision of experience marks while working in a contractual/non-regular 
post, but rather is limited to the enforcement of an already existing 
settlement agreement between the State and the concerned contractual 
employees.  
18. 
In a different context, where promotion was the matter of concern before 
this Court in Union of India v. M. Bhaskar13, it was held that: 
“15. The aforesaid decision has been challenged in this appeal by 
the Union of India by contending that 2 years’ period of experience 
has to be reckoned, not from 11-10-1988, but from 21-9-1989. 
There is no dispute that the eligibility condition is 2 years’ 
experience in Grade II. Now, this respondent having really started 
working in Grade II pursuant to the order of 21-9-1989, he could 
not have gained experience prior to the date he had joined 
pursuant to this order. The mere fact that his promotion in Grade 
II was notionally made effective from 11-10-1988 cannot be taken 
to mean that he started gaining experience from that day, because 
to gain experience one has to work. Notional promotions are given 
to take care of some injustice, inter alia, because some junior has 
come to be promoted earlier. But we entertain no doubt that the 
person promoted to higher grade cannot gain experience from the 
date of the notional promotion; it has to be from the date of the 
actual promotion.” 
 
                                                                 (emphasis supplied)  
     
19. 
Also, while not a decision related to service jurisprudence, in P 
Kumaraswamy v. State Transport Appellate Tribunal, Madras14, 
 
13 (1996) 4 SCC 416 
14 (1976) 1 SCC 373.  

Page 14 of 18 
 
this Court held that the rule that prescribes marks to applicants who 
have business or technical experience in the road transport service, did 
not make any distinction between passenger transport or lorry transport. 
Upon a perusal of the decision, it is clear that a literal reading of the 
applicable framework is essential for any determination.  
20. 
Taking a cue from the aforesaid decisions, our observation is this. It 
cannot be gainsaid that even though the modalities for engagement of 
two individuals for executing similar nature of work could differ, there 
can be no quarrel that none can gain experience without being asked to 
work. One vital difference in working on a sanctioned post as a 
permanent employee and being employed in the exigencies of 
administration without having a right to post is that in the former, the 
appointee enjoys procedural safeguards bringing in a sense of security 
of service in him while in the latter the individual concerned may not 
have any such sense of security. But, in case, both perform the work of 
clerks, the experience gained would not be much at a variance subject, 
of course, that the job requirement is not too different. It would also be 
relevant to bear in mind stipulations in the advertisement if, at all, they 
call for any special requirement for marks to be secured for experience, 
viz. previous service rendered on a sanctioned post or if salary, as is 
specified, has to be received for service rendered in order to be eligible 
to apply.   
21. 
Moving on to the Advertisement in this case calling for our attention, we 
find that it required: 

Page 15 of 18 
 
“(d) Experience: One half (= 0.5) mark for each year or part 
thereof exceeding six months of experience, out of a maximum of 
10 years, on the same or a higher post in any Department/Board/ 
Corporation/Company/Statutory Body/Commission/Authority of 
Government of Haryana. No marks will be awarded for a period 
less than six months.  
(a maximum of 5 marks)” 
  
22. 
A literal reading of the terms relating to experience confirms that marks 
could be secured by an aspirant for experience gathered while working 
in the enumerated departments of the Government of Haryana; however, 
while referring to ‘same or a higher post’, the term ‘sanctioned’ as a 
prefix is conspicuous by its absence. Additionally, neither the 
Outsourcing Policy nor the Advertisement defines the word “post”. What 
follows is that an aspirant, to secure mark for experience, must prove 
with documents that he/she has been employed for performing work of 
the nature required by the same or a higher post. Importantly, it has not 
seen shown that either the Recruitment Rules or the Advertisement 
specifically bar(s) aspirants from securing marks for experience sained 
from contractual / outsourced employment. Thus, we have no hesitation 
to hold that the mode of employment is not the primary concern. To our 
mind, the primary concern is the nature of work performed and whether 
the work undertaken by the candidate has any nexus with the purported 
work to be undertaken during the course of regular service. That the first 
respondent had rendered service for a statutory body in excess of six 
months and is, therefore, covered by the last part of clause (d) does not 
admit of any doubt and hence, she had a valid claim for securing 0.5 
mark for experience. 

Page 16 of 18 
 
23. 
The state policy, specifying that the individual must have worked on a 
post equal to or higher than the advertised posts in any of the 
enumerated departments to secure marks for experience, also reflects 
the state’s belief that the experience in such departments is directly 
relevant to the advertised posts. It is not open for the University to now 
deny marks on the basis of a technical procedural deviation that the 
experience certificate was not issued by the University, but rather by the 
service provider. While we accept the contention raised by the University 
that the certificate was per se not issued by it, the fact that it was 
countersigned by the Head of the Department validates the first 
respondent’s claim that she had indeed gained certain experience which 
deserved to be given credit.  
24. 
We also do not agree with the contention of the University that the first 
respondent did not work on the post of Clerk and rather performed 
“office work”. The certificate awarded to her evidently mentions that the 
work she was required to undertake is the work of Clerk-cum-Typist. 
Moreover, the certificate also mentions that her work was found quite 
satisfactory. The first respondent has also brought on record a memo by 
the Professor and Head of the Department which specifically 
acknowledges that she has been designated as a Clerk-cum-Typist during 
her tenure.  
25. 
The first respondent, thus, cannot be denied the benefit of mark for 
experience merely because at the time of appointment as outsourced 
manpower, she was not appointed on a sanctioned post.  

Page 17 of 18 
 
26. 
The true thrust of every selection process ought to be to find out and 
select suitable candidates, having experience in the related work and 
fulfilling other criteria, from among eligible candidates and to go ahead 
with appointing the more meritorious of those found suitable. If indeed 
an individual without having any security of service performs up to the 
mark and receives commendation from none other than the Head of the 
Department, who must have closely watched his/her performance, it 
would occasion a failure of justice to exclude such individual for no better 
reason than that he/she did not work on a sanctioned post. If indeed 
such be the requirement, it had to be made explicitly clear in the 
Advertisement without any ambiguity so as not to generate false hopes 
in the minds of individuals aspiring for public employment. Any other 
view would be against both the principles of equality and non-
arbitrariness enshrined in the Constitution as well as principles of natural 
justice. Tested on the touchstone of Articles 14 and 16, the impugned 
decision of the University cannot sustain. 
27. 
An underlying current throughout the Constitution is the theme of “social 
justice”. The Preamble, as well as Article 38 of the Constitution, enjoins 
upon the State instrumentalities the duty to promote the welfare of the 
people by securing and protecting, as effectively as it may, a social order, 
in which justice – social, economic and political – shall inform all the 
institutions of national life and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in 
status, facilities and opportunities. Whenever a conflict arises between 
the powerful and the powerless, social justice commands the Courts to 

Page 18 of 18 
 
lean in favour of the weaker and poorer sections where the scales are 
evenly balanced.  
28. 
In this case, for the foregoing reasons, refusal to award any mark for 
experience to the first respondent would go against the grain of the 
constitutional duty of ensuring equality and securing social justice for 
the deprived.  
CONCLUSION 
29. 
Bound as we are to apply the Constitutional mandate prescribed in 
Articles 14 and 16 read with the preambular promise of securing social 
justice, we hold that non-grant of mark for experience to the first 
respondent was not proper and legal.  
30. 
For reasons somewhat different from those assigned by the High Court, 
we concur with the ultimate conclusion and hold that the impugned 
judgment and order of the Division Bench of the High Court warrants no 
interference. The same is, thus, affirmed. 
31. 
The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed without any order for costs.  
 
 
 ………………………………J.    
               (DIPANKAR DATTA)  
 
 
 
 
 ………………………………J.    
                (R. MAHADEVAN) 
 
New Delhi; 
November 29, 2024.