2024 INSC 908
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 551 OF 2012 
 
  
 
KAMARUDDIN DASTAGIR SANADI      
      …APPELLANT(S) 
  
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
 
 
STATE OF KARNATAKA  
THROUGH SHO KAKATI POLICE                          …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
   
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
 
PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
The accused-appellant was charged under Sections 417, 376 
and 306 of the Indian Penal Code1. The trial court acquitted 
him of all the above offences, but on appeal by the State of 
Karnataka to the High Court, he was convicted for the 
offences under Sections 417 and 306 IPC. However, the 
 
1 In short ‘IPC’ 
Digitally signed by
KANCHAN CHOUHAN
Date: 2024.11.29
14:58:25 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
acquittal under Section 376 IPC was maintained. He was 
awarded sentence of 1 year under Section 417 IPC with a fine 
of Rs.5,000/-; and with a sentence of 4 years for the offence 
under Section 306 IPC with a fine of Rs.20,000/-. Basically, 
the conviction of the accused-appellant is for the offences of 
cheating and for abetment of suicide only. 
2. 
A girl named Suvarna, aged about 21 years, was in love with 
the accused-appellant for the past 8 years i.e. she was in love 
with him since the age of 13 years. It is alleged that the 
accused-appellant had promised to marry her but when he 
refused, she consumed poison and committed suicide. 
3. 
It is alleged that the accused-appellant, Kamruddin Dastagir 
Sanadi, had promised to marry the deceased before the 
jamaat (panchayath) but 4 months prior to the incident, he 
had left the village and started living at Kakati, Karnataka. 
The deceased came to Kakati in the evening of 18.08.2007 
and when the accused-appellant clearly refused to marry her, 
she left. The deceased spent the whole night at the bus stand 
at Kakati and in the morning consumed poison which she 
had brought with her from Gadhinglaj. One Badshaha (PW-

3 
 
5), relative of the accused-appellant, found her lying at the 
bus stand and took her to hospital at about 08:50 am on 
19.08.2007. PSI Kakati (PW-15) recorded the statement of 
the deceased between 3 pm and 4 pm & thereafter sent a 
requisition to the Executive Magistrate to record the 
deceased’s dying declaration. The dying declaration of the 
deceased was recorded by the Taluka Executive Magistrate, 
Belgaum (PW-11) in the presence of the doctor (PW-12) 
between 04.50 pm and 05.20 pm. Thereafter, she died in the 
hospital on the same day itself i.e. on 19.08.2007. 
4. 
The mother of the deceased (PW-1) lodged an FIR on 
20.08.2007 under Section 306 read with Section 34 IPC at 
the Police Station, Kakati, Circle Belgaum Rural District, 
Karnataka against the accused-appellant and his uncle, 
alleging that the accused-appellant had deceived her 
daughter by promising to marry her and then refusing it, 
which led to the commission of suicide by her in frustration.  
5. 
After investigation, a chargesheet was drawn and submitted 
charging the accused-appellant under Sections 417, 376 and 
306 IPC. The accused-appellant was arrested on 20.08.2007 

4 
 
and later released on bail during the trial. The IInd Additional 
Sessions Judge, Belgaum, vide judgment and order dated 
13.04.2010 acquitted the accused-appellant of all the 
charges as there was no allegation in the dying declaration 
that the accused-appellant ever had any sexual intercourse 
with the deceased on the pretext of promise to marry her or 
ever had any physical relationship with her. Her only 
allegation was that she consumed poison as he refused to 
marry her. There was no allegation that the accused-
appellant instigated her to consume poison or to commit 
suicide. 
6. 
Moreover, the statement of mother of the deceased (PW-1) 
revealed that it was only the deceased who was in love with 
the accused-appellant and not the other way around. The 
deceased had impressed upon her mother to convince the 
accused-appellant to marry her as she was in love with him. 
The mother of the deceased (PW-1) nowhere stated that the 
accused-appellant was in love with her daughter. No other 
evidence was there to prove that any physical relationship 
was established by the accused-appellant with the deceased 

5 
 
except that he had agreed to marry her before the 
panchayath, which was not proved. 
7. 
Thus, in the facts and circumstances of the case coupled with 
the fact that there was no evidence to suggest that the 
accused-appellant had instigated or aided the deceased in 
consuming poison and committing suicide, the trial court 
acquitted the accused-appellant.  
8. 
On appeal by the State of Karnataka, the High Court 
convicted the accused-appellant under Sections 417 and 306 
IPC. Thus, the present appeal. 
9. 
Learned counsel for the parties were heard at length and 
ease. 
10. The submission of learned counsel for the accused-appellant 
is that there is no iota of evidence on record to prove 
abetment of suicide or cheating on part of the accused-
appellant and that the High Court is not justified in reversing 
the decision of acquittal passed by the trial court.  
11. The FIR alleges that the daughter of the complainant, upon 
completion of BA, took admission for MA at Gadhinglaj. She 
i.e. the mother of the deceased came to know that her 

6 
 
daughter was in love with a Muslim boy named Kamruddin 
Dastagir Sanadi of the village i.e. the accused-appellant. She 
complained about their affair with the reputed people of the 
Muslim community of the village and a meeting of the Muslim 
community was called wherein the accused-appellant and 
her deceased daughter were present and both of them agreed 
to marry. The accused-appellant cheated her daughter by 
giving false assurance of marriage and by entering into 
physical relationship with her, then refusing to marry, which 
compelled her to consume poison, leading to her death. 
12. The deceased left behind two dying declarations which are 
on record. Exh.P17 is the dying declaration recorded by PSI, 
Kakati 
(PW-15) 
whereas 
Exh.P10 
is 
another 
dying 
declaration recorded later by the Taluka Executive 
Magistrate, Belgaum (PW-11) in the presence of the doctor 
(PW-12) in the hospital between 04:50 pm to 05:20 pm on 
19.08.2007. 
13. The dying declaration of the deceased duly recorded by PSI, 
Kakati states that the deceased was a 21 year old girl 
studying in MA 1st year. She was in love with the accused-

7 
 
appellant who had left the village 4 months back and had 
started residing at Kakati, Belgaum. Allegedly about 8 days 
before the incident, he had called on her phone and asked 
her to come to Kakati. She reached Kakati in the evening of 
18.08.2007 and met him at Avanti Hotel. She asked him to 
marry her but he refused to marry and left. She, thereafter, 
went to the bus stop and consumed poison which she had 
brought with her from Gadhinglaj. 
14. The dying declaration recorded later by Taluka Executive 
Magistrate (PW-11), Belgaum, on 19.08.2007 states that she 
was aged about 21 years and was residing with her mother, 
elder sister and younger brother and was studying in MA 1st 
year. She was having an affair with the accused-appellant 
since last 8 years. Their affair came to the knowledge of the 
elder persons of both the families and all of them decided to 
perform the marriage. The accused-appellant agreed to 
marry her in front of the elders of the village. He left the 
village about 4 months ago and when she made inquiries 
about him, she came to know that he was residing at Kakati. 
She went to Kakati and searched him and made a phone 

8 
 
call. Then she met him at Avanti Hotel and asked him to 
marry her but he refused. Thereafter, she consumed poison 
which she had brought in a bottle from Gadhinglaj. She was 
shifted to the hospital for treatment by a relative of the 
accused-appellant named Badshaha Nazir Pathan (PW-5) of 
Kakati.  
15. The aforesaid statement was made in Marathi and a 
translated copy was put on record. The doctor had certified 
that the patient was fully conscious and fit to give statement. 
The Executive Magistrate, Belgaum, has recorded that the 
deceased had a frustrated mentality. 
16. The dying declaration of the deceased reveals that there is no 
allegation of any physical relationship between the accused-
appellant and the deceased or that the accused-appellant 
had ever entered into any physical relationship or had sexual 
intercourse with the deceased under the pretext of marriage. 
The dying declaration indicates that it was the deceased who 
was in love with the accused-appellant and wanted to marry 
him. When the accused-appellant had left the village, it was 
the deceased who made search about him and came to know 

9 
 
that he was residing in Kakati. She herself traced him out at 
Kakati and went after him. She called him and when they 
met, he refused to marry her and thus, as her sentiments 
were hurt, she consumed poison leading to her death.  
17. There is no allegation by her that the accused-appellant had 
instigated her to consume poison or to commit suicide. No 
other evidence in this regard has been adduced. Even the 
mother of the deceased (PW-1) in her statement revealed that 
it was the deceased who was in love with the accused-
appellant and that she wanted her mother to convince him to 
marry her. The said witness though may have stated that the 
deceased entered into physical relationship with her 
daughter but the same otherwise does not stand proved or 
corroborated, not even by the dying declarations. As regards 
the promise to marry alleged to have been made by the 
accused-appellant, it is said that the same was made before 
the village elders in context with which Najaruddin 
Mohammad Malik (PW-3) and Kashim Babalal Sankeshwar 
(PW-4) were examined. Both these witnesses have stated that 
they had provided a written document regarding the 

10 
 
panchayath proceedings to the deceased and her mother but 
no such document was produced by PW-1 to prove that the 
accused-appellant had actually ever promised or agreed to 
marry her daughter. There is allegation but no evidence to 
prove that the accused-appellant was also in love with the 
deceased or that he was in touch with her in any manner. 
The allegation that both of them were talking to each other 
on phone is without any substance as no evidence was 
produced in the form of call records of either of them to 
establish that the accused-appellant used to call the 
deceased and talk to her and to establish that he was also in 
love with her. There is no evidence to even establish that the 
accused-appellant entered into any physical relationship 
with the deceased on the pretext of marrying her. So, the 
evidence fails to prove any physical relationship between the 
two, promise to marry on the part of the accused-appellant 
and that he was instrumental in instigating the deceased to 
consume poison or to commit suicide.  
18. Section 306 IPC defines abetment of suicide which reads as 
under:  

11 
 
“306. If any person commits suicide, 
whoever abets the commission of such 
suicide, 
shall 
be 
punished 
with 
imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to ten years, and 
shall also be liable to fine.” 
 
19. It provides for the punishment for abetting the commission 
of suicide. Therefore, ‘abetment’ of suicide is an essential 
element for punishing a person for an offence under Section 
306 IPC. 
20. Abetment has been defined under Section 107 IPC and it 
reads as under: 
“107. Abetment of a thing.- A person 
abets the doing of a thing, who- 
First.-  Instigates any person to do that 
thing; or 
Secondly.-  Engages with one or more other 
person or persons in any conspiracy for the 
doing of that thing, if an act or illegal 
omission takes place in pursuance of that 
conspiracy, and in order to the doing of 
that thing; or 
Thirdly.-  Intentionally aids, by any act or 
illegal omission, the doing of that thing.” 
 
21. The very first clause of the aforesaid provision lays down that 
a person, who abets the doing of a thing, is a person who 
instigates any person to do that thing. Therefore, ‘instigation’ 

12 
 
to do a particular thing is necessary for charging a person 
with abetment. 
22. ‘Instigation’ is to provoke, incite or encourage a person to do 
an act.  
23. This Court has repeatedly observed that abetment involves a 
mental process of instigating a person or intentionally aiding 
a person in doing of a particular thing and without the 
positive act on part of the accused there would be no 
instigation. It has also been observed that to convict a person 
for abetment of suicide under Section 306 IPC, there has to 
be a clear mens rea on the part of the accused to abet such 
a crime and it requires an active act or a direct act leading 
to the commission of suicide.  
24. In Ramesh Kumar vs. State of Chhattisgarh2, a three 
Judges Bench of this Court dealt with a case of suicide by 
the wife, where the husband in anger uttered- ‘You are free 
to do whatever you wish and go wherever you like’. 
Thereafter, the wife committed suicide. The Court, after 
 
2 (2001) 9 SCC 618 

13 
 
examining the meaning of instigation which is an essential 
element for abetment of suicide, observed that such words, 
uttered out of emotion, do not constitute mens rea and do 
not amount to intentionally inciting the other party to 
actually do an act which may result in the commission of 
self-killing/suicide. 
25. Even in cases where the victim commits suicide, which may 
be as a result of cruelty meted out to her, the Courts have 
always held that discord and differences in domestic life are 
quite common in society and that the commission of such an 
offence largely depends upon the mental state of the victim. 
Surely, until and unless some guilty intention on the part of 
the accused is established, it is ordinarily not possible to 
convict him for an offence under Section 306 IPC.  
26. The salient features constituting an offence under Section 
306 IPC were elucidated by this Court in M. Mohan vs. State 
represented by the Deputy Superintendent of Police3 and 
it was observed as under:  
 
3 (2011) 3 SCC 626 

14 
 
“43. This Court in Chitresh Kumar Chopra v. 
State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi) [(2009) 16 SCC 605: 
(2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 367] had an occasion to deal 
with this aspect of abetment. The Court dealt with 
the dictionary meaning of the word "instigation" 
and "goading". The Court opined that there should 
be intention to provoke, incite or encourage the 
doing of an act by the latter. Each person's 
suicidability pattern is different from the others. 
Each person has his own idea of self-esteem and 
self-respect. Therefore, it is impossible to lay down 
any straitjacket formula in dealing with such 
cases. Each case has to be decided on the basis of 
its own facts and circumstances. 
 
44. Abetment involves a mental process of 
instigating a person or intentionally aiding a 
person in doing of a thing. Without a positive act on 
the part of the accused to instigate or aid in 
committing 
suicide, 
conviction 
cannot 
be 
sustained. 
 
45. The intention of the legislature and the ratio 
of the cases decided by this Court are clear that in 
order to convict a person under Section 306 IPC 
there has to be a clear mens rea to commit the 
offence. It also requires an active act or direct act 
which led the disease to commit suicide seeing no 
option and this act must have been intended to 
push the disease in two such a position that 
he/she committed suicide.” 
 
27. 
The same aspects have been reiterated by this Court in 
Amalendu Pal alias Jhantu vs. State of West Bengal4 
 
4 (2010) 1 SCC 707 

15 
 
and have been again repeated in Prabhu vs. State 
represented by Inspector of Police & Anr.5 
28. 
In Prabhu (supra) the Court further observed that broken 
relationships and heart breaks are part of everyday life and 
that breaking-up of the relationship would not constitute 
any instigation or abetment of suicide inasmuch as in order 
to constitute ‘Instigation’ it must be shown that the accused 
had by his acts and omissions or by continued course of 
conduct created such circumstances that the deceased was 
left with no other option except to commit suicide. 
29. 
There is no direct evidence adduced by the prosecution to 
prove that the accused-appellant has in any way instigated 
or provoked the deceased to commit suicide. The accused-
appellant on asking of the deceased had simply refused to 
marry her which is not a positive act on his part with any 
intention to abet the crime of suicide.  
30. 
If we examine the instant case on the touch stone of the 
above principles of law, we find that the accused-appellant 
 
5 2024 SCC Online SC 137 

16 
 
had simply refused to marry the deceased and thus, even 
assuming there was love between the parties, it is only a case 
of broken relationship which by itself would not amount to 
abetment to suicide. The accused-appellant had not 
provoked the deceased in any manner to kill herself; rather 
the deceased herself carried poison in a bottle from her 
village 
while 
going 
to 
Kakati, 
Karnataka 
with 
a 
predetermined mind to positively get an affirmation from the 
accused-appellant to marry her, failing which she would 
commit suicide. Therefore, in such a situation simply 
because the accused-appellant refused to marry her, would 
not be a case of instigating, inciting or provoking the 
deceased to commit suicide.  
31. 
Even assuming, though there is no evidence that the 
accused-appellant promised to marry the deceased, that 
there was such a promise, it is again a simple case of a 
broken relationship for which there is a different cause of 
action, but not prosecution or conviction for an offence 
under Section 306, specially in the facts and circumstances 

17 
 
of the case where no guilty intention or mens rea on the part 
of the accused-appellant had been established. 
32. 
In view of the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of 
the opinion that the judgment and order of the High Court 
dated 15.12.2011 cannot be sustained in law and is hereby 
set aside and the accused-appellant stands acquitted as was 
done by the trial court. 
33. 
The appeal is allowed with no order as to cost. 
 
 
.........………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL) 
 
 
 
...……………………………….. J. 
(UJJAL BHUYAN) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
NOVEMBER 29, 2024.