2024 INSC 82
 
 
Page 1 of 17 
 
Reportable 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.2888 of 2023 
 
Bhaggi @ Bhagirath @ Naran  
  …Petitioner  
Versus 
 
The State of Madhya Pradesh 
 
             
   
  …Respondents 
 
O R D E R  
 
 
1. 
The petitioner-convict seeks to assail the judgment dated 
11.10.2018 of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur in 
Criminal Appeal No.5725 of 2018. 
2. 
In troth, it is a common judgment in Criminal Reference 
No.6/2018 submitted by the Trial Court under Section 366 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.PC) for confirmation of the 
conviction under Section 376 AB of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 
(IPC) as amended by Act No.22 of 2018 and in Criminal Appeal 
No.5725 of 2018 filed by the petitioner-convict herein aggrieved 
by the conviction and sentence imposed against him for certain 
other offences under the IPC, as also against the conviction under 
the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (for 
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2024.02.05
12:29:24 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
Page 2 of 17 
 
short, ‘POCSO Act’).  As per the impugned judgment, the capital 
punishment awarded for the conviction under Section 376 AB, IPC 
was not confirmed and it was commuted to imprisonment for life, 
which, going by the provisions thereunder, means imprisonment 
for the remainder of the convict’s natural life.   
3. 
Heard the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner-
convict and the learned Additional Advocate General for the State 
of Madhya Pradesh. 
4. 
It is to be noted that in the instant case, after condoning the 
delay, limited notice on the question of sentence alone was issued 
on 24.02.2023.  Since we do not find any reason to enlarge the 
scope, the parties confined their arguments within the permissible 
scope.   
5. 
We are of the considered view that for considering the 
aforesaid question it is apposite to refer succinctly to the facts of 
the case.   On 21.05.2018, the complainant Munni Bai (PW-8) who is 
the grandmother of the victim lodged a report that her 
granddaughter X, who was examined as PW-1, aged 7 years was 
kidnapped and raped by the petitioner-convict.  After the trial, the 
Trial Court found that the prosecution had succeeded in bringing 
damning evidence to establish that the victim, aged 7 years was 

 
 
Page 3 of 17 
 
taken to Rajaram Baba Thakur Mandir by the petitioner-convict and 
there upon making her and himself nude he committed rape.   
Upon her screaming, the prosecution witnesses who went there 
found the convict, belonging to the same village, laying over and 
violating the victim and at their sight running away from there.  The 
oral testimonies of the prosecution witnesses (PWs-1, 2 and 14) on 
the culpability of the convict got credence from the medical 
evidence unerringly pointing to his guilt.  The consequential 
conviction inter alia, under Section 376 AB, IPC as amended by Act 
No.22 of 2018, originally, brought him capital sentence.  Though, 
the petitioner was also convicted under Section 376 (2) (i) and 
under Sections 3/4, Sections 5(d)/6 of the POCSO Act taking note 
of his conviction under Section 376 AB, IPC, no separate sentences 
were awarded for the aforesaid offences by the trial Court.  In view 
of the commutation of capital punishment awarded for the 
conviction under Section 376 AB, IPC it is also a matter to be 
considered if we interfere with the sentence of life imprisonment 
for the offence under Section 376 AB, IPC as amended under the 
Act No.22 of 2018.    
6. 
As noticed hereinbefore, on appreciating the evidence on 
record and coming to the conclusion that the guilt of the petitioner 

 
 
Page 4 of 17 
 
under Section 376 AB, IPC has been conclusively proved, but 
capital punishment imposed therefor, is to be commuted while 
confirming the conviction under Section 376 AB, IPC.  The High 
Court commuted it to imprisonment for life though another 
alternative 
punishment 
was 
also 
possible 
viz. 
rigorous 
imprisonment for a term not less than 20 years with fine. 
7. 
In the decision in Mulla v. State of U.P.1, this Court held:- 
“85……...It is open to the sentencing court to prescribe 
the length of incarceration. This is especially true in cases 
where death sentence has been replaced by life 
imprisonment…...” 
 
8. 
Evidently, the decision in Mulla’s case (supra) and a catena 
of decisions where death sentence was commuted to the 
imprisonment for life including the decisions in Bantu alias 
Naresh Giri v. State of M.P.2, Amrit Singh v. State of Punjab3 and 
Rameshbhai Chandubhai Rathod (2) v. State of Gujarat4 were 
considered by the High Court while commuting capital sentence to 
imprisonment for life.  A bare perusal of all those decisions would 
reveal that those are cases involving rape and murder of young 
                                                             
1 (2010) 3 SCC 508 
2 (2001) 9 SCC 615 
3 (2006) 12 SCC 79 
4 (2011) 2 SCC 764 

 
 
Page 5 of 17 
 
girls aged between 4 to 12 years.   It is true that after referring to 
those decisions the High Court, in the instant case held in 
paragraph 34 of the impugned judgment thus:- 
 
“ln the present case the important consideration is the 
manner in which the alleged offence is committed. The 
evidence of Dr. Saroj Bhuriya (PW -3) is relevant. She stated 
that there was no external injury on the person of the 
prosecutrix, specially on her neck, chick, chest, abdomen 
and thigh.  She also did not find any injuries on the outer 
part of the genital part of the prosecutrix. She has found the 
hymen was ruptured recently and there was bleeding. The 
injury was ordinary in nature. She further stated that the 
same could have been possibly be caused by hard and 
blunt object as well. The evidence has established that a 
minor child was violated by the accused. However, there 
was no other injury inflicted him either on the other parts of 
the body and also on the private part. Thus the manner in 
which the offence is committed is not barbaric and brutal. 
We have given our anxious consideration to the material on 
record and find that though the offence is condemnable, 
reprehensible, vicious and a deplorable act of violence but 
the same does not fall within the aggravating circumstances 
namely extreme depravity and the barbaric manner in 
which the crime was committed.  Taking into consideration 
the totality of the facts, nature, motive and the manner of the 
offence and further that nothing has been brought on record 

 
 
Page 6 of 17 
 
by the prosecution that the accused was having any criminal 
antecedent and the possibility of being rehabilitation and 
reformation has abo not been ruled out. Nothing is available 
on record to suggest that he cannot be useful for the society. 
In our considered opinion, it is not a ease in which the 
alternative punishment would not be sufficient to the facts of 
the case.” 
 
9. 
Now, we will refer to the rival contentions.  The contention of 
the learned counsel for the petitioner is that at the time of 
commission of offence, the petitioner was aged only 40 years.   The 
High Court after taking note of the manner in which the alleged 
offence was committed observed that it was not barbaric and brutal 
and further that owing to the absence of anything on record to 
suggest that the convict is having criminal antecedents  the 
possibility of rehabilitation and chances for his reformation could 
not be ruled out and opined that the case is not one where the 
alternative punishment would not be sufficient. The alternative 
punishment provided under Section 376 AB, IPC viz., sentence of 
rigorous imprisonment not less than 20 years and with fine alone 
may be imposed after altering the life imprisonment for the 
conviction under Section 376 AB, IPC and no separate sentence be 
awarded for the conviction under the other offences mentioned 

 
 
Page 7 of 17 
 
above.  According to the learned counsel, rigorous imprisonment 
for 20 years with a minimal fine will be the comeuppance.  Per 
contra, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent State 
would submit that the question as to what extent the capital 
sentence could be commuted, in the facts and circumstances of the 
case was considered in detail with reference to the decisions 
mentioned in the impugned judgment by the High Court and no 
case has been made out by the petitioner for further interference 
qua the quantum of sentence imposed on the petitioner. 
 
10. 
We have taken note of the observation of the High Court 
made after referring to the manner of commission of the crime 
concerned that it was not barbaric and brutal.  We are of the 
concerned view that when the words ‘barbaric’ and ‘brutal’ are 
used simultaneously they are not to take the character of synonym, 
but to take distinctive meanings.  In view of the manner in which 
the offence was committed by the petitioner-convict,  as observed 
by the High Court under the above extracted recital, according to 
us, one can only say that the action of the petitioner-convict is 
barbaric though he had not acted in a brutal manner.  We will take 
the meanings of the words ‘barbaric’, ‘barbarians’ and ‘brutal’ to 
know the distinctive meanings of the words ‘barbaric’ and ‘brutal’.  

 
 
Page 8 of 17 
 
As per the New International Webster’s Comprehensive Dictionary 
of the English Language, Encyclopedia Edition they carry the 
following meanings: 
‘Barbaric’ (adj): 1. 
of or characteristic of barbarians. 
 
 
 
  2. 
Wild; uncivilized; crude 
‘Barbarians’ : (n) 1. One whose state of culture is between 
savagery and civilization; 
 
 
 
   2. Any rude, brutal or uncultured person. 
‘Brutal’ (adj) : 
Characteristic of or like a brute; cruel; 
savage.  
In the light of the evidence on record and rightly noted by the 
High Court in the above-extracted paragraph 34 of the impugned 
judgment it may be true to say that the petitioner-convict had 
committed the offence of rape brutally, but then, certainly his action 
was barbaric.  In the instant case, the petitioner-convict was aged 
40 years on the date of occurrence and the victim was then only a 
girl, aged 7 years.  Thus, the position is that he used a lass aged 7 
years to satisfy his lust.  For that the petitioner-convict took the 
victim to a temple, unmindful of the holiness of the place disrobed 
her and himself and then committed the crime.  We have no 

 
 
Page 9 of 17 
 
hesitation to hold that the fact he had not done it brutally will not 
make its commission non-barbaric. 
11. 
In the circumstances obtained in this case there can be no 
doubt regarding the requirement of deterrent punishment for the 
conviction under Section 376 AB, IPC.  The only question is whether 
the commutation of capital punishment to sentence of life 
imprisonment requires further interference.  There can be no 
doubt with respect to the position that on such commutation of 
sentence for the conviction under Section 376 AB, IPC, the other 
alternative available is only imprisonment for a period not less than 
20 years with fine.  This position is clear from the provision under 
Section 376 AB, IPC which reads thus:- 
“376AB. Punishment for rape on woman under twelve years 
of age.—Whoever, commits rape on a woman under twelve 
years of age shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may 
extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment 
for the remainder of that person's natural life, and with fine or 
with death:  
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the 
medical expenses and rehabilitation of the victim: 
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall 
be paid to the victim.”   
 

 
 
Page 10 of 17 
 
12. 
Thus, a bare perusal of Section 376 AB, IPC would reveal that 
imprisonment for life thereunder means imprisonment for the 
remainder of the convict’s natural life and the minimum term of 
imprisonment under the Section is 20 years.  Now, while 
considering the question whether further interference with the 
sentence handed down for the conviction of the offence under 
Section 376 AB, IPC is warranted, it is only appropriate to refer to 
a decision of this Court in Shiva Kumar @ Shiva @ Shivamurthy v. 
State of Karnataka5.  In Shiva Kumar’s case (supra) this Court 
referred to the decision of a Constitution Bench of this Court in 
Union of India v. V. Sriharan alias Murugan and Ors.6 and also 
the decision in Swamy Shraddananda (2) alias Murali Manohar 
Mishra v. State of Karnataka7. Evidently, this Court in V. 
Sriharan’s case (supra),  upon considering the question whether 
imprisonment for life in terms of Section 53 read with Section 45 
IPC means imprisonment for rest of life of the prisoner or a convict 
undergoing life imprisonment has a right to claim remission, held 
after referring to the decision in Swamy Shraddananda (2) (supra) 
that the power derived from the Penal Code for any modified 
                                                             
5 (2023) 9 SCC 817 
6 (2016) 7 SCC 1 
7 (2008) 13 SCC 767 

 
 
Page 11 of 17 
 
punishment within the punishment provided for in the Penal Code 
for any specified offence could only be exercised by the High 
Court and in the event of further appeal only by the Supreme Court.  
Furthermore, in paragraph 105 of the said decision it was held:- “to 
put it differently, the power to impose modified punishment 
providing for any specific term of incarceration or till the end of the 
convict’s life as an alternate to death penalty, can be exercised only 
by the High Court and the Supreme Court and not by any other 
inferior Court.”   In Shiva Kumar’s case (supra) this Court further 
took note of what was held by the Constitution Bench in V. 
Sriharan’s case (supra) paragraph 104 as well, which reads thus: -  
“104. That apart, in most of such cases where death penalty or 
life imprisonment is the punishment imposed by the trial court 
and confirmed by the Division Bench of the High Court, the 
convict concerned will get an opportunity to get such verdict 
tested by filing further appeal by way of special leave to this 
Court. By way of abundant caution and as per the prescribed law 
of the Code and the criminal jurisprudence, we can assert after 
the initial finding of guilt of such specified grave offences and 
the imposition of penalty either death or life imprisonment, when 
comes under the scrutiny of the Division Bench of the High Court, 
it is only the High Court which derives the power under the Penal 
Code, which prescribes the capital and alternate punishment, to 
alter the said punishment with one either for the entirety of the 
convict's life or for any specific period of more than 14 years, say 

 
 
Page 12 of 17 
 
20, 30 or so on depending upon the gravity of the crime 
committed and the exercise of judicial conscience befitting such 
offence found proved to have been committed.”  
 
13. 
After referring to the relevant paragraphs from the said 
decisions in Shiva Kumar this Court held as follows: - 
  
“13.Hence, we have no manner of doubt that even in a case 
where capital punishment is not imposed or is not proposed, the 
Constitutional Courts can always exercise the power of imposing 
a modified or fixed-term sentence by directing that a life 
sentence, as contemplated by “secondly” in Section 53 of the 
IPC, shall be of a fixed period of more than fourteen years, for 
example, of twenty years, thirty years and so on. The fixed 
punishment cannot be for a period less than 14 years in view of 
the mandate of Section 433A of Cr.P.C.” 
  
14. 
In view of the decisions referred (supra) and taking note of 
the position that when once the conviction is sustained under 
Section 376 AB, IPC the fixed term punishment could not be for a 
period of less than 20 years.  Evidently, the High Court had 
referred, in paragraph 33 of the impugned judgment, to decisions 
where minor girls were raped and murdered, but did not pointedly 
consider whether for the conviction under Section 376 AB, IPC 
involving commission of rape of victim, aged 7 years not coupled 

 
 
Page 13 of 17 
 
with murder what would be the comeuppance, after deciding to 
commute the capital sentence.      
15. 
We have taken note of the hapless situation of the victim after 
being taken to a temple by the petitioner-convict.   The evidence 
would reveal that unmindful of the holiness of the place he 
disrobed her and himself and raped her.  When such an act was 
done by the petitioner, who was then aged 40 years and X who was 
then aged only 7 years and the evidence that when PW-2 and PW-
14 reached the place of occurrence, blood was found oozing from 
the private parts of the disrobed child.  The High Court had rightly 
considered the aggravating and mitigating circumstances while 
commuting the capital sentence into life imprisonment which 
going by the provisions under Section 376 AB, IPC means rest of 
the convict’s natural life.  For effecting such commutation, the High 
Court also considered the question whether there is possibility for 
reformation and rehabilitation of the petitioner and opined that it is 
not a case in which the alternative punishment would not be 
sufficient in the facts of the case.   But then, it is noted that if the 
victim is religious every visit to any temple may hark back to her 
the unfortunate, barbaric action to which she was subjected to.  So 

 
 
Page 14 of 17 
 
also, the incident may haunt her and adversely impact in her future 
married life.     
16. 
Then, we are also to take into account the present age of the 
petitioner and the fact that he has already undergone the 
incarceration.  On consideration of all such aspects, we are of the 
considered view that a fixed term of sentence of 30 years, which 
shall include the period already undergone, must be the modified 
sentence of imprisonment.    
17. 
We have already taken note of the fact that while commuting 
the capital sentence to life imprisonment, the High Court had lost 
sight of the fact that despite conviction under Section 376 (2) (i) and 
under Sections 3/4, Sections 5(d)/6 of the POCSO Act, no separate 
sentences were imposed on the petitioner for the offence under 
Section 3/4 and 5(m)/6 of the POCSO Act by the Trial Court, 
evidently, only on the ground that capital sentence is imposed on 
the petitioner for the offence under Section 376 AB, IPC.   However, 
it is a fact that the said aspect escaped the attention of the High 
Court.  That apart, in terms of the provisions under Section 376 AB, 
IPC when a sentence of imprisonment for a term not less than 20 
years which may extend upto life imprisonment is imposed, the 
convict is also liable to suffer a sentence of fine which shall be just 

 
 
Page 15 of 17 
 
and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of 
the victim which we quantify as Rupees One Lakh and the same 
shall be paid to the victim with respect to the conviction under 
Section 363, IPC.  In that regard also, there is absolutely no 
consideration in the impugned judgment.    
18. 
It is submitted by the learned counsel, with reference to 
paragraph 1 of the impugned judgment that the order in paragraph 
35 of the impugned judgment that the conviction and sentence 
under Section 366, IPC is maintained, can also be in relation to the 
conviction under Section 363, IPC and the sentence imposed 
therefor.   
19. 
We fully endorse the said contention as paragraph 1 of the 
impugned judgment itself would reveal that the High Court had 
actually taken into consideration the fact that the petitioner-convict 
was convicted only under Section 376 AB, IPC as amended by Act 
No.22 of 2018 and under Section 363 IPC.  In such circumstances, 
the conviction and sentence imposed on the petitioner-convict is 
confirmed. We have taken note of the fact that though the 
petitioner-convict was convicted for the offence under Section 3/4 
and 5 (m)/6 of the POCSO Act, no separate sentence was imposed 
on the petitioner-convict by the Trial Court taking note of the 

 
 
Page 16 of 17 
 
provision under Section 42 of the POCSO Act.  The said provision 
reads thus:-   
 
“42. Alternate punishment.—Where an act or omission 
constitutes an offence punishable under this Act and also under 
sections 166A, 354A, 354B, 354C, 354D, 370, 370A, 375, 376, 
[376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB], [376E, section 
509 of the Indian Penal Code or section 67B of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000)], then, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the 
offender found guilty of such offence shall be liable to 
punishment only under this Act or under the Indian Penal Code 
as provides for punishment which is greater in degree.” 
 
20. 
Since, even after the interference with the sentence imposed 
for the conviction of the petitioner-convict under Section 376 AB, 
IPC and modified sentence imposed on commutation by the High 
Court, we have awarded 30 years of rigorous imprisonment with a 
fine of Rupees One Lakh, no separate sentence for the aforesaid 
offence under POCSO Act is to be imposed on the petitioner-
convict.   While maintaining the conviction of the petitioner-convict 
under Section 376 AB, IPC, the sentence imposed thereunder is 
modified to a sentence of rigorous imprisonment for a term of 30 
years, making it clear that this will also include the period of 
sentence already undergone and the period, if any ordered by the 

 
 
Page 17 of 17 
 
Trial Court for set off.  The imprisonment awarded for the 
conviction under Section 363, IPC shall run concurrently.   The 
amount of fine imposed thereunder shall be added to the fine 
imposed by us viz., Rupees One Lakh. 
21. 
We further direct that the petitioner-convict shall not be 
released from jail before completion of actual sentence of 30 years, 
subject to the observation made in the matter of its computation, as 
mentioned above.   
22. 
The Special Leave Petition is partly allowed, as above.          
 
………………………, J. 
    (C.T. Ravikumar)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………….…………, J. 
                                        (Rajesh Bindal)                 
New Delhi; 
February 05, 2024