2024 INSC 919
 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 1 of 37 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 771 OF 2024 
 
 
ASHOK 
 
 
 
       
        …APPELLANT 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
 
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH    
     …RESPONDENT 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
FACTUAL ASPECT 
 
1. 
This is a very unfortunate case. The victim of the 
offence was ten years old at the time of the incident. On 
27th May 2009, around 9.00 a.m., she and her first cousin, 
PW-2, had gone to a pasture to graze her goats. The age of 
PW-2 was seven years at that time. As the victim was 
thirsty, she went near a tubewell cabin.  The appellant-
accused was working as an operator of the tubewell 
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2024.12.02
17:51:13 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 2 of 37 
 
appointed by the owner of the tubewell. The victim 
requested the appellant to provide drinking water. The 
allegation of the prosecution is that, with evil intentions, 
the appellant took her inside the cabin. He committed rape 
on her and, after that, murdered her. According to the 
prosecution’s case, PW-2 saw the appellant forcibly taking 
the victim inside the cabin and raping her. By 11.00 a.m., 
PW-2 returned to PW-1, the victim's father. PW-1 was the 
uncle of PW-2. After PW-2 narrated the story to PW-1, he 
went to the tubewell cabin to find the victim and found the 
dead body of the victim hidden in a haystack in that cabin. 
On being questioned by PW-1, the appellant fled from the 
spot and thereafter, PW-1 registered the First Information 
Report.  
2. 
The Trial Court, by judgment and order dated 24th 
December 2012, convicted the appellant for the offences 
punishable under Sections 376, 302 and 201 of the Indian 
Penal Code (for short, ‘the IPC’).  The Trial Court also 
convicted the appellant under the provisions of Section 
3(2)(v) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 3 of 37 
 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (for short, ‘the SCST 
Act’). The Trial Court imposed capital punishment. 
3. 
The High Court heard the reference under Section 
366 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘the 
CrPC’) with an appeal preferred by the appellant. Though 
the High Court confirmed the conviction, the death penalty 
was set aside and the appellant was sentenced to undergo 
life imprisonment for the remainder of his natural life 
subject to the exercise of powers of grant of remission or 
grant of clemency by the constitutional functionaries.  
4. 
The present appeal is against the judgments 
mentioned above. By order dated 20th May 2022, this 
Court granted bail to the appellant after noting that he had 
undergone actual incarceration for about 13 years. We 
may note here that earlier, learned counsel Shri M Shoeb 
Alam was appointed as amicus curiae to espouse the cause 
of the appellant. After his designation as a senior advocate, 
he continued to assist this Court. Shri Talha Abdul 
Rahman, Advocate-on-Record, was appointed amicus 
curiae to assist the learned senior counsel.  

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 4 of 37 
 
 
SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
The learned senior counsel appearing for the 
appellant has taken us through the evidence of the 
prosecution witnesses. Inviting our attention to evidence 
of PW-1, Heera Lal, the father of the victim, he pointed out 
that the version of the witness in his examination-in-chief 
is based on what was reported to him by PW-2, the minor 
witness. But, if we compare the depositions of PW-2 with 
the examination-in-chief of PW-1, there is a significant 
variance between the version of PW-2 as stated by PW-1 
and what PW-2 stated in his examination-in-chief. He 
pointed out that in the cross-examination, PW-1 has tried 
to improve upon his version by trying to depose 
consistently with the version of PW-2. Inviting our 
attention to the proceedings before the Trial Court, he 
submitted that when the examination-in-chief of the PW-1 
was recorded, the appellant-accused was not represented 
by any advocate. Therefore, the cross-examination was 
adjourned to enable the appellant to engage an advocate.  

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 5 of 37 
 
An advocate was appointed to espouse his cause after the 
examination-in-chief of PW-1 was recorded. The appellant 
was not represented by any advocate at the time of the 
framing of the charge. 
6. 
Coming to the depositions of PW-2, the learned senior 
counsel for the appellant urged that considering the 
difference between the version of PW-1 in his examination-
in-chief and cross-examination, the possibility of PW-2 
being tutored cannot be ruled out. He submitted that 
evidence of PW-2 was recorded two and half years after the 
incident, and on the date of the recording of evidence, his 
age was ten years. Possibly, he was tutored. He pointed 
out that the evidence of PW-2 was not of sterling quality 
and, therefore, cannot be the sole basis for the conviction, 
especially when evidence regarding recovery is doubtful.  
7. 
The learned senior counsel appearing for the 
appellant as amicus curiae pointed out that the alleged 
recovery of the victim’s slippers and underwear, at the 
instance of the appellant, is highly doubtful as the place 
and time of recovery have not been mentioned in the 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 6 of 37 
 
recovery memo. The prosecution did not examine the two 
witnesses to the recovery memo. He pointed out that the 
prosecution made no attempt to prove that blood stains on 
the undergarments of the appellant were that of the blood 
of the victim. No analysis was made.  
8. 
More 
importantly, 
he 
submitted 
that 
the 
incriminating circumstances brought on record in the 
evidence against the appellant were not put to him in his 
examination under Section 313 of the CrPC. Therefore, the 
appellant's right of defence was seriously prejudiced. He 
relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of Raj 
Kumar v. State (NCT of Delhi)1. 
9. 
Shri K. Parameshwar, the learned senior counsel 
appearing for the State, supported the impugned 
judgments.  However, he has assisted us on the issue of 
legal aid to the accused.  
 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
 
1 2023 SCC OnLine SC 609 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 7 of 37 
 
10.  In the examination-in-chief, PW-1 stated that PW-2 
witnessed the commission of rape and murder of the 
victim. According to the witness, PW-2 told him that as the 
door of the room was open while he was standing outside, 
he saw the act of commission of rape and murder. He 
deposed that after the PW-2 told him about the incident, 
he rushed along with two or three other persons to the 
spot. He found that the appellant was present there, and 
he questioned the appellant. Thereafter, the appellant fled. 
He tried to search for the victim. He found the dead body 
of the victim under the haystack in the room. It is pertinent 
to note that PW-2 had informed PW-1 that the appellant 
was the offender. Though two 
to three 
persons 
accompanied PW-1, he did not attempt to apprehend the 
accused and take him to the police. The conduct of PW-1 
of not apprehending the appellant, though he was present, 
is unnatural.   
11. Examination-in-chief of PW-1 was recorded by 
learned Trial Judge on 11th May 2011. At the end of the 
examination-in-chief, the learned Trial Judge recorded 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 8 of 37 
 
that the case was adjourned at the oral request of the 
appellant to engage a counsel. Before the cross-
examination was recorded on 2nd July 2011, an advocate 
was appointed to espouse the appellant's cause. The cross-
examination of PW-1 was recorded on 2nd July 2011 and 
24th September 2011. The witness reiterated that he had 
narrated the facts stated to him by PW-2. 
12. As far as PW-2 is concerned, he was 10 years old 
when his deposition was recorded. Many preliminary 
questions were put to the witness by the learned Trial 
Judge. After satisfying himself that the witness was able to 
understand the questions and give a reply to the same, an 
oath was administered to him. His version in the 
examination-in-chief is that the appellant gave drinking 
water to him and the victim. After drinking the water, when 
they tried to leave, the appellant caught the victim from 
behind, took off her undergarments, and the victim started 
screaming. He did not depose that he had seen the 
commission of rape and murder by the appellant. To this 
extent, the version of PW-2, as told to PW-1, is entirely 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 9 of 37 
 
different. PW-1 claims that PW-2 reported to him that he 
had seen the appellant committing rape and murder from 
outside the cabin. PW-8, the investigating officer, stated 
that he had recorded the Statement of PW-2 on 18th June 
2009. Thus, there was a delay of 21 days in recording his 
statement, though the FIR recorded that this witness had 
seen the appellant committing the crime.  There is some 
dispute about whether the witness's statement recorded 
under Section 161 of CrPC was produced with the charge 
sheet. The learned senior counsel appointed as amicus 
pointed out that it is not on the record of the Trial Court.  
In the list of witnesses mentioned in the charge sheet, the 
name of PW-2 has not been included. Therefore, for all the 
reasons discussed above, the evidence of PW-2, the only 
eyewitness, cannot be held to be of sterling quality. It is 
unsafe to base conviction only on his testimony. Even 
otherwise, taking his testimony as correct, the evidence of 
the PW-2 can, at the highest, be the evidence of the last 
seen together. 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 10 of 37 
 
13. Therefore, it is necessary to consider the other 
circumstantial evidence. In this case, the recovery of the 
victim’s slipper and underwear is alleged at the appellant's 
instance. We have perused the recovery memo signed by 
the circle officer and two independent witnesses.  The 
prosecution did not examine the two independent 
witnesses. Though the date of recovery is mentioned in the 
memo, the time and, most importantly, the place of 
recovery are not mentioned. Therefore, it cannot be said 
that pursuant to the statement made by the appellant, in 
accordance with Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1972 (for short, ‘the Evidence Act’), the articles were found 
at the place stated by the appellant. Hence, the 
prosecution failed to prove that the recovery was from a 
particular place. Thus, evidence of recovery will have to be 
kept out of consideration. The recovery of the articles at 
the instance of the appellant is a very important 
circumstance in the chain of circumstances. It is not 
proved. Hence, the appellant's guilt beyond reasonable 
doubt has not been established. 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 11 of 37 
 
EXAMINATION OF THE APPELLANT UNDER SECTION 
313 OF CR.P.C  
14. Now, we come to the appellant's statement, recorded 
per Section 313 of the CrPC. Only three questions were put 
to the appellant. In the first question, the names of ten 
prosecution witnesses were incorporated, and the only 
question asked to the appellant was what he had to say 
about the testimony of ten prosecution witnesses. In the 
second question, all the documents produced by the 
prosecution were referred, and a question was asked, what 
the appellant has to say about the documents. In the third 
question, it was put to the appellant that knowing the fact 
that the victim belongs to a scheduled caste, he caused her 
death after raping her and concealed her dead body, and 
he was asked for his reaction to the same. What PW-1 and 
PW-2 deposed against the appellant was not put to the 
appellant. The contents of the incriminating documents 
were not put to the appellant.  
15. In the case of Raj Kumar1, in paragraph 17, this 
Court has summarised the law laid down by this Court 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 12 of 37 
 
from time to time on Section 313 of the CrPC. Paragraph 
17 reads thus: 
“17. The law consistently laid down by 
this Court can be summarized as under: 
(i) It is the duty of the Trial Court 
to put each material circumstance 
appearing in the evidence against the 
accused 
specifically, 
distinctively 
and 
separately. 
The 
material 
circumstance 
means 
the 
circumstance or the material on the 
basis of which the prosecution is 
seeking his conviction; 
(ii) The object of examination of the 
accused under Section 313 is to enable 
the 
accused 
to 
explain 
any 
circumstance appearing against him in 
the evidence; 
(iii) The Court must ordinarily 
eschew material circumstances not 
put 
to 
the 
accused 
from 
consideration while dealing with the 
case of the particular accused; 
(iv) The failure to put material 
circumstances to the accused amounts 
to a serious irregularity. It will vitiate 
the trial if it is shown to have prejudiced 
the accused; 
(v) If any irregularity in putting the 
material 
circumstance 
to 
the 
accused does not result in failure of 
justice, it becomes a curable defect. 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 13 of 37 
 
However, while deciding whether the 
defect can be cured, one of the 
considerations will be the passage of 
time from the date of the incident; 
(vi) In case such irregularity is 
curable, even the appellate court can 
question the accused on the material 
circumstance which is not put to him; 
and 
(vii) In a given case, the case can be 
remanded to the Trial Court from the 
stage of recording the supplementary 
statement of the concerned accused 
under Section 313 of CrPC. 
(viii) While deciding the question 
whether prejudice has been caused to 
the accused because of the omission, 
the delay in raising the contention is 
only one of the several factors to be 
considered.” 
 
This Court based its decision on several decisions, 
including the decision in the case of Shivaji Sahabrao 
Bobade v. State of Maharashtra2. This Court relied 
upon what was held in paragraph 16 of the said case. 
Paragraph 16 of the said case reads thus: 
“16. ……………. 
It 
is 
trite 
law, 
nevertheless fundamental, that the 
 
2 (1973) 2 SCC 793 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 14 of 37 
 
prisoner's attention should be drawn to 
every inculpatory material so as to 
enable him to explain it. This is the 
basic fairness of a criminal trial and 
failures in this area may gravely imperil 
the validity of the trial itself, if 
consequential miscarriage of justice 
has flowed. However, where such an 
omission has occurred it does not ipso 
facto vitiate the proceedings and 
prejudice occasioned by such defect 
must be established by the accused. In 
the event of evidentiary material not 
being put to the accused, the court 
must ordinarily eschew such material 
from consideration. It is also open to 
the appellate court to call upon the 
counsel for the accused to show what 
explanation the accused has as regards 
the circumstances established against 
him but not put to him and if the 
accused is unable to offer the appellate 
court any plausible or reasonable 
explanation of such circumstances, the 
Court may assume that no acceptable 
answer exists and that even if the 
accused had been questioned at the 
proper time in the trial court he would 
not have been able to furnish any good 
ground to get out of the circumstances 
on which the trial court had relied for 
its conviction. In such a case, the Court 
proceeds on the footing that though a 
grave irregularity has occurred as 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 15 of 37 
 
regards compliance with Section 342, 
CrPC, the omission has not been shown 
to have caused prejudice to the 
accused. In the present case, however, 
the High Court, though not the trial court 
has relied upon the presence of blood on 
the pants of the blood group of the 
deceased. We have not been shown what 
explanation the accused could have 
offered 
to 
this 
chemical 
finding 
particularly when we remember that his 
answer to the question regarding the 
human blood on the blade of the knife was 
“I do not know”. Counsel for the 
appellants could not make out any 
intelligent explanation and the “blood” 
testimony takes the crime closer to the 
accused. However, we are not inclined to 
rely over much on this evidentiary 
circumstance, 
although 
we 
should 
emphasise how this inadvertance of the 
trial court had led to a relevant fact being 
argued as unavailable to the prosecution. 
Great care is expected of Sessions Judges 
who try grave cases to collect every 
incriminating circumstance and put it to 
the accused even though at the end of a 
long trial the Judge may be a little fagged 
out.” 
                 (emphasis added) 
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 16 of 37 
 
In a given case, the witnesses may have deposed in a 
language not known to the accused.  In such a case, if the 
material circumstances appearing in evidence are not put 
to the accused and explained to the accused, in a language 
understood by him, it will cause prejudice to the accused.  
16. In the present case, there is no doubt that material 
circumstances appearing in evidence against the appellant 
have not been put to him. The version of the main 
prosecution witnesses PWs-1 and 2 was not put to him. 
The stage of the accused leading defence evidence arises 
only after his statement is recorded under Section 313 of 
the CrPC. Unless all material circumstances appearing 
against him in evidence are put to the accused, he cannot 
decide whether he wants to lead any defence evidence. In 
this case, even the date and place of the crime allegedly 
committed by the appellant were not put to the appellant. 
What was reportedly seen by PW-2 was not put to the 
appellant in his examination. Therefore, the appellant was 
prejudiced. Even assuming that failure to put material to 
the appellant in his examination is an irregularity, the 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 17 of 37 
 
question is whether it can be cured by remanding the case 
to the Trial Court.  
17. The date of occurrence is of 27th May 2009. Thus, the 
incident is fifteen and a half years old. After such a long 
gap of fifteen and half years, it will be unjust if the 
appellant is now told to explain the circumstances and 
material specifically appearing against him in the 
evidence. Moreover, the appellant had been incarcerated 
for about twelve years and nine months before he was 
released on bail. Therefore, considering the long passage 
of time, there is no option but to hold that the defect 
cannot be cured at this stage. Even assuming that the 
evidence of PW-2 can be believed, the appellant is entitled 
to acquittal on the ground of the failure to put 
incriminating material to him in his examination under 
Section 313 of the CrPC.  We are surprised to note that 
both the Trial Court and High Court have overlooked non-
compliance with the requirements of Section 313 of the 
CrPC. Shockingly, the Trial Court imposed the death 
penalty in a case which ought to have resulted in acquittal. 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 18 of 37 
 
Imposing capital punishment in such a case shocks the 
conscience of this Court.  
ROLE OF THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR 
18. Under sub-Section (5) of Section 313 of CrPC (sub-
Section (5) of Section 351 of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023), the Court is entitled to secure the 
assistance of the public prosecutor and the advocate 
representing the accused to prepare the questions to be 
put in the examination under Section 313. A Public 
Prosecutor has to play an active role in ensuring that every 
trial is conducted in a fair manner and in accordance with 
the law.  Hence, it is the Public Prosecutor's duty to invite 
the Court's attention to the requirement of putting all 
incriminating material to the accused. Therefore, the 
Public Prosecutor is under an obligation to remain present 
when the examination of the accused is made to assist the 
Court.   
FAILURE TO PROVIDE LEGAL AID TO THE ACCUSED 
19. After having perused the record of the case, we found 
a very disturbing feature. It is about the failure of the State 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 19 of 37 
 
to provide timely legal aid to the appellant. The other issue 
is about the quality of legal aid. Apart from provisions of 
Article 21 and Article 39A of the Constitution of India, the 
law on the issue of the right to legal aid has been evolved 
by this Court through its landmark decisions. This Court's 
first well-known decision is in the case of Hussainara 
Khatoon (IV) v. Home Secy., State of Bihar3. In 
Paragraph 7, this Court held thus: 
“7. We may also refer to Article 39-A the 
fundamental 
constitutional 
directive 
which reads as follows: 
“39-A. Equal justice and free legal aid.—
The 
State 
shall 
secure 
that 
the 
operation of the legal system promotes 
justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, 
and shall, in particular, provide free 
legal aid, by suitable legislation or 
schemes or in any other way, to ensure 
that opportunities for securing justice 
are not denied to any citizen by reason 
of economic or other disabilities.” 
(emphasis added) 
This article also emphasises that free legal 
service is an unalienable element of 
“reasonable, fair and just” procedure for 
without 
it 
a 
person 
suffering 
from 
 
3 (1980) 1 SCC 98 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 20 of 37 
 
economic or other disabilities would be 
deprived of the opportunity for securing 
justice. The right to free legal services 
is, 
therefore, 
clearly 
an 
essential 
ingredient of “reasonable, fair and 
just”, procedure for a person accused of 
an offence and it must be held implicit 
in the guarantee of Article 21. This is a 
constitutional right of every accused 
person who is unable to engage a lawyer 
and secure legal services on account of 
reasons such as poverty, indigence or 
incommunicado situation and the State 
is under a mandate to provide a lawyer 
to 
an 
accused 
person 
if 
the 
circumstances of the case and the 
needs of justice so require, provided of 
course the accused person does not 
object to the provision of such lawyer. 
We would, therefore, direct that on the 
next remand dates, when the undertrial 
prisoners, charged with bailable offences, 
are produced before the Magistrates, the 
State Government should provide them a 
lawyer at its own cost for the purpose of 
making an application for bail, provided 
that no objection is raised to such lawyer 
on behalf of such undertrial prisoners and 
if any application for bail is made, the 
Magistrates should dispose of the same in 
accordance with the broad outlines set out 
by us in our judgment dated February 12, 
1979. The State Government will report to 
the High Court of Patna its compliance 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 21 of 37 
 
with this direction within a period of six 
weeks from today.” 
                      
 
(emphasis added) 
 
The second decision is in the case of M.H. Hoskot v. State 
of Maharashtra4. In paragraphs 14 and 25 of the 
decision, this Court held thus: 
            “14. The other ingredient of fair 
procedure to a prisoner, who has to 
seek his liberation through the court 
process is lawyer's services. Judicial 
justice, with procedural intricacies, 
legal 
submissions 
and 
critical 
examination of evidence, leans upon 
professional expertise; and a failure of 
equal justice under the law is on the 
cards where such supportive skill is 
absent for one side. Our judicature, 
moulded by Anglo-American models and 
our 
judicial 
process, 
engineered 
by 
kindred legal technology, compel the 
collaboration of lawyer-power for steering 
the wheels of equal justice under the law. 
Free legal services to the needy is part of 
the English criminal justice system. And 
the American jurist, Prof. Vance of Yale, 
sounded sense for India too when he said: 
[ Justice and Reform, Earl Johnson, Jr. p. 
11] 
 
4 (1978) 3 SCC 544 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 22 of 37 
 
 
“What does it profit a poor and ignorant 
man that he is equal to his strong 
antagonist before the law if there is no one 
to inform him what the law is? Or that the 
courts are open to him on the same terms 
as to all other persons when he has not 
the wherewithal to pay the admission 
fee?” ” 
                        
 
 (emphasis added) 
“25. If 
a 
prisoner 
sentenced 
to 
imprisonment, is virtually unable to 
exercise his constitutional and statutory 
right of appeal, inclusive of special leave 
to appeal, for want of legal assistance, 
there is implicit in the Court under Article 
142, read with Articles 21 and 39-A of the 
Constitution, power to assign counsel for 
such imprisoned individual “for doing 
complete justice”. This is a necessary 
incident of the right of appeal conferred by 
the Code and allowed by Article 136 of the 
Constitution. The inference is inevitable 
that this is a State's duty and not 
Government's 
charity. 
Equally 
affirmative is the implication that 
while legal services must be free to the 
beneficiary, the lawyer himself has to 
be reasonably remunerated for his 
services. Surely, the profession has a 
public commitment to the people but mere 
philanthropy of its members yields short 
mileage in the long run. Their services, 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 23 of 37 
 
especially when they are on behalf of the 
State must be paid for. Naturally, the 
State concerned must pay a reasonable 
sum that the court may fix when 
assigning counsel to the prisoner. Of 
course, the court may judge the situation 
and consider from all angles whether it is 
necessary for the ends of justice to make 
available legal aid in the particular case. 
In every country where free legal services 
are given it is not done in all cases but 
only 
where 
public 
justice 
suffers 
otherwise. That discretion resides in the 
court.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
This issue was again dealt with by a Bench of three Judges 
in the case of Anokhilal v. State of M.P.5. In this decision, 
this Court revisited the law on this aspect. In paragraph 
11, this Court relied upon the decision in the case of 
Hussainara Khatoon (IV)3. In paragraph 20, this Court 
summarised the principles laid down from time to time. 
Paragraph 20 reads thus: 
“20. The following principles, therefore, 
emerge from the decisions referred to 
hereinabove: 
 
5 (2019) 20 SCC 196 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 24 of 37 
 
20.1. Article 39-A inserted by the 42nd 
Amendment to the Constitution, effected 
in the year 1977, provides for free legal aid 
to ensure that opportunities for securing 
justice are not denied to any citizen by 
reason of economic or other disabilities. 
The 
statutory 
regime 
put 
in 
place 
including the enactment of the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 1987 is designed 
to achieve the mandate of Article 39-A. 
20.2. It has been well accepted that 
right to free legal services is an 
essential ingredient of “reasonable, fair 
and just” procedure for a person 
accused of an offence and it must be 
held implicit in the right guaranteed by 
Article 21. The extract from the 
decision of this Court in Best Bakery 
case [Zahira 
Habibulla 
H. 
Sheikh v. State of Gujarat, (2004) 4 
SCC 158 : 2004 SCC (Cri) 999] (as 
quoted 
in 
the 
decision 
in Mohd. 
Hussain [Mohd. Hussain v. State (NCT 
of Delhi), (2012) 9 SCC 408 : (2012) 3 
SCC (Cri) 1139] ) emphasises that the 
object of criminal trial is to search for 
the truth and the trial is not a bout over 
technicalities and must be conducted 
in such manner as will protect the 
innocent and punish the guilty. 
20.3. Even before insertion of Article 39-
A in the Constitution, the decision of this 
Court in Bashira [Bashira v. State of U.P., 
(1969) 1 SCR 32 : AIR 1968 SC 1313 : 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 25 of 37 
 
1968 Cri LJ 1495] put the matter beyond 
any doubt and held that the time granted 
to the Amicus Curiae in that matter to 
prepare for the defence was completely 
insufficient and that the award of 
sentence of death resulted in deprivation 
of the life of the accused and was in 
breach of the procedure established by 
law. 
20.4. The 
portion 
quoted 
in Bashira [Bashira v. State of U.P., (1969) 
1 SCR 32 : AIR 1968 SC 1313 : 1968 Cri 
LJ 1495] from the judgment of the Andhra 
Pradesh 
High 
Court 
authored 
[Alla 
Nageswara Rao, In re, 1954 SCC OnLine 
AP 115 : AIR 1957 AP 505] by Subba Rao, 
J., the then Chief Justice of the High 
Court, stated with clarity that mere formal 
compliance of the rule under which 
sufficient time had to be given to the 
counsel to prepare for the defence would 
not carry out the object underlying the 
rule. It was further stated that the 
opportunity must be real where the 
counsel is given sufficient and adequate 
time to prepare. 
20.5. In Bashira [Bashira v. State of U.P., 
(1969) 1 SCR 32 : AIR 1968 SC 1313 : 
1968 
Cri 
LJ 
1495] 
as 
well 
as 
in Ambadas [Ambadas 
Laxman 
Shinde v. State of Maharashtra, (2018) 18 
SCC 788 : (2019) 3 SCC (Cri) 452 : (2018) 
14 Scale 730] , making substantial 
progress in the matter on the very day 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 26 of 37 
 
after a counsel was engaged as Amicus 
Curiae, was not accepted by this Court as 
compliance with “sufficient opportunity” 
to the counsel.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
In paragraph 31, norms were laid down by this Court, 
which read thus: 
“31. Before we part, we must lay down 
certain norms so that the infirmities that 
we have noticed in the present matter are 
not repeated: 
31.1. In all cases where there is a 
possibility of life sentence or death 
sentence, learned advocates who have 
put in minimum of 10 years' practice at 
the Bar alone be considered to be 
appointed as Amicus Curiae or through 
legal services to represent an accused. 
31.2. In all matters dealt with by the High 
Court concerning confirmation of death 
sentence, Senior Advocates of the Court 
must first be considered to be appointed 
as Amicus Curiae. 
31.3. Whenever any learned counsel is 
appointed 
as 
Amicus 
Curiae, 
some 
reasonable time may be provided to 
enable the counsel to prepare the matter. 
There cannot be any hard-and-fast rule in 
that behalf. However, a minimum of seven 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 27 of 37 
 
days' time may normally be considered to 
be appropriate and adequate. 
31.4. Any 
learned 
counsel, 
who 
is 
appointed as Amicus Curiae on behalf of 
the accused must normally be granted to 
have meetings and discussion with the 
accused concerned. Such interactions 
may prove to be helpful as was noticed 
in Imtiyaz Ramzan Khan [Imtiyaz Ramzan 
Khan v. State of Maharashtra, (2018) 9 
SCC 160 : (2018) 3 SCC (Cri) 721] .” 
                               
 (emphasis added) 
20. Thus, the right to get legal aid is a fundamental right 
of the accused, guaranteed by Article 21 of the 
Constitution. Even under Section 303 of the CrPC, every 
accused has a right to be defended by a pleader of his 
choice. Section 304 provides for the grant of legal aid to an 
accused free of costs. When an accused has either not 
engaged an advocate or does not have sufficient means to 
engage an advocate, it is the trial court's duty to inform 
the accused of his right to obtain free legal aid, which is a 
right covered by Article 21 of the Constitution of India. 
Sub-Section (1) of Section 304 reads thus: 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 28 of 37 
 
“304. Legal aid to accused at State 
expense in certain cases.—(1) Where, in a 
trial before the Court of Session, the 
accused is not represented by a 
pleader, and where it appears to the 
Court 
that 
the 
accused 
has 
not 
sufficient means to engage a pleader, 
the Court shall assign a pleader for his 
defence at the expense of the State. 
(2) ……………………………………………….. 
(3) 
………………………………..…………………” 
                
 
  (emphasis added) 
 
Sections 340 and 341 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 (for short, ‘BNSS’) are the Sections which 
correspond to Sections 303 and 304 of the CrPC.   Thus, 
under Section 304 of the CrPC, it is the duty of the Court 
to ensure that a legal aid lawyer is appointed to espouse 
the cause of the accused. 
21. Now, we come back to the facts of the case. From the 
proceedings of the Trial Court, it appears that when the 
charges were framed on 8th September 2010, and when 
the plea was recorded, the appellant was not represented 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 29 of 37 
 
by any advocate. Proceedings of 26th February 2011 
record that though three witnesses of the prosecution were 
present, the appellant was not represented by any 
advocate. Therefore, assurance of the appellant has been 
recorded that he would call his counsel on the next date. 
On 11th May 2011, the examination-in-chief of PW-1 was 
recorded. In the proceedings, the court recorded that the 
appellant had not engaged any advocate on that day, and 
he was not desirous of taking legal aid. However, on 8th 
June 2011, an advocate was appointed to espouse his 
cause. We find that on 20th July 2012, 4th October 2012, 
1st November 2012, 7th November 2012, 9th November 
2012 and 23rd November 2012, the advocate appointed as 
amicus curiae for the appellant was absent. Applications 
were required to be made by him to recall certain witnesses 
as the cross-examination was closed due to his absence. 
Thus, the evidence of more than one prosecution witness 
was recorded in the absence of the legal aid advocate.  On 
7th November 2012, another advocate was appointed to 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 30 of 37 
 
espouse the appellant's cause. We find that a third 
advocate conducted the cross-examination of PW-8.   
22. At the stage of framing the charge, the appellant was 
not represented by an advocate. From 8th June 2011, the 
appellant never declined legal aid. We are surprised to note 
that the examination-in-chief of PW-1 was allowed to be 
recorded without giving legal aid counsel to the appellant, 
who was not represented by an advocate. If the 
examination-in-chief of a prosecution witness is recorded 
in the absence of the advocate for the accused, a very 
valuable right of objecting to the questions asked in 
examination-in-chief is taken away. The accused is also 
deprived of the right to object to leading questions. It will 
not be appropriate to comment on the capabilities of the 
two legal aid lawyers appointed in this case as they are not 
parties before us.  But suffice it to say that the cross-
examination of the witnesses was not up to the mark. 
Some of the crucial questions that normally would have 
been put in the cross-examination have not been asked.  
 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 31 of 37 
 
CONCLUDING PART 
23. Our conclusions and directions regarding the role of 
the Public Prosecutor and appointment of legal aid lawyers 
are as follows: 
a. It is the duty of the Court to ensure that proper 
legal aid is provided to an accused; 
b. When an accused is not represented by an 
advocate, it is the duty of every Public 
Prosecutor to point out to the Court the 
requirement of providing him free legal aid.  
The reason is that it is the duty of the Public 
Prosecutor to ensure that the trial is conducted 
fairly and lawfully; 
c. Even if the Court is inclined to frame charges 
or 
record 
examination-in-chief 
of 
the 
prosecution witnesses in a case where the 
accused has not engaged any advocate, it is 
incumbent upon the Public Prosecutor to 
request the Court not to proceed without 
offering legal aid to the accused; 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 32 of 37 
 
d. It is the duty of the Public Prosecutor to assist 
the Trial Court in recording the statement of 
the accused under Section 313 of the CrPC.  If 
the 
Court 
omits 
to 
put 
any 
material 
circumstance brought on record against the 
accused, the Public Prosecutor must bring it to 
the notice of the Court while the examination 
of the accused is being recorded. He must 
assist the Court in framing the questions to be 
put to the accused. As it is the duty of the 
Public Prosecutor to ensure that those who are 
guilty of the commission of offence must be 
punished, it is also his duty to ensure that 
there are no infirmities in the conduct of the 
trial which will cause prejudice to the accused; 
e. An accused who is not represented by an 
advocate is entitled to free legal aid at all 
material stages starting from remand.  Every 
accused has the right to get legal aid, even to 
file bail petitions; 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 33 of 37 
 
f. At all material stages, including the stage of 
framing the charge, recording the evidence, 
etc., it is the duty of the Court to make the 
accused aware of his right to get free legal aid.  
If the accused expresses that he needs legal 
aid, the Trial Court must ensure that a legal 
aid advocate is appointed to represent the 
accused; 
g. As held in the case of Anokhilal5, in all the 
cases where there is a possibility of a life 
sentence or death sentence, only those learned 
advocates who have put in a minimum of ten 
years of practice on the criminal side should be 
considered to be appointed as amicus curiae or 
as a legal aid advocate.  Even in the cases not 
covered by the categories mentioned above, the 
accused is entitled to a legal aid advocate who 
has good knowledge of the law and has an 
experience of conducting trials on the criminal 
side. It would be ideal if the Legal Services 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 34 of 37 
 
Authorities at all levels give proper training to 
the newly appointed legal aid advocates not 
only by conducting lectures but also by 
allowing 
the 
newly 
appointed 
legal 
aid 
advocates to work with senior members of the 
Bar in a requisite number of trials; 
h. The State Legal Services Authorities shall issue 
directions to the Legal Services Authorities at 
all levels to monitor the work of the legal aid 
advocate and shall ensure that the legal aid 
advocates attend the court regularly and 
punctually when the cases entrusted to them 
are fixed; 
i. It is necessary to ensure that the same legal aid 
advocate is continued throughout the trial 
unless there are compelling reasons to do so or 
unless the accused appoints an advocate of his 
choice; 
j. In the cases where the offences are of a very 
serious nature and complicated legal and 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 35 of 37 
 
factual issues are involved, the Court, instead 
of appointing an empanelled legal aid advocate, 
may appoint a senior member of the Bar who 
has a vast experience of conducting trials to 
espouse the cause of the accused so that the 
accused gets best possible legal assistance; 
k. The right of the accused to defend himself in a 
criminal trial is guaranteed by Article 21 of the 
Constitution of India. He is entitled to a fair 
trial. But if effective legal aid is not made 
available to an accused who is unable to 
engage an advocate, it will amount to 
infringement 
of 
his 
fundamental 
rights 
guaranteed by Article 21; 
l. If legal aid is provided only for the sake of 
providing it, it will serve no purpose. Legal aid 
must be effective. Advocates appointed to 
espouse the cause of the accused must have 
good knowledge of criminal laws, law of 
evidence and procedural laws apart from other 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 36 of 37 
 
important statutes. As there is a constitutional 
right to legal aid, that right will be effective only 
if the legal aid provided is of a good quality. If 
the legal aid advocate provided to an accused 
is not competent enough to conduct the trial 
efficiently, the rights of the accused will be 
violated.  
 
24. For the reasons recorded earlier, the appeal is 
allowed. The impugned judgments and orders are set 
aside, and the appellant is acquitted of offences alleged 
against him. The bail bonds of the appellant stand 
cancelled. 
25. A copy of this judgment shall be forwarded to all State 
Legal Services Authorities to enable the authorities to take 
necessary measures. 
26. We record our appreciation for the able assistance 
rendered to the Court by the learned senior counsel Shri 
M.Shoeb Alam, appointed to espouse the cause of the 
appellant. We must also record that the learned senior 

 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 771 of 2024 
 
Page 37 of 37 
 
counsel, 
Shri 
K.Parameshwar, 
appearing 
for 
the 
respondent, has fairly assisted the Court.  
 
 
……………………..J. 
(Abhay S. Oka) 
 
……………………..J. 
(Ahsanuddin Amanullah) 
 
……………………..J. 
(Augustine George Masih) 
New Delhi; 
December 02, 2024