2024 INSC 921
 
 
               Civil Appeal @ Diary No. 20250 of 2021 
 
Page 1 of 10 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL No. 13730 OF 2024 
(Arising out of Diary No. 20250 OF 2021) 
 
 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.       
       …APPELLANTS 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
SAROJ DEVI     
   
   
             …RESPONDENT 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
FACTUAL ASPECT 
2. 
The respondent is the widow of late Naik Inderjeet 
Singh (for short, ‘the deceased’). The deceased was 
employed in the Indian Army on 27th February 1996. He 
was part of an Area Domination Patrol. The Area 
Domination Patrol was launched from Manjit Main to 
Rangwar Post for domination of the Rangwar gap in the 
proximity of the Line of Control (for short, ‘LC’) along the 
Anti Infiltration Obstacle System (for short, ‘AIOS’). A fence 
Digitally signed by
ASHISH KONDLE
Date: 2024.12.03
15:36:40 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
               Civil Appeal @ Diary No. 20250 of 2021 
 
Page 2 of 10 
 
built by the Indian Army to prevent cross-border 
infiltration is known as AIOS. He complained of 
breathlessness during duty in extreme climatic conditions 
from 1.00 a.m. to 3.30 a.m. on 23rd January 2013. He was 
taken to the nearby Rangwar Post. The regimental medical 
officer found the condition of the deceased very critical. He 
could not be air-evacuated due to bad weather. Therefore, 
he was evacuated on foot. When he was taken to 
Chowkibal's MI room, he was declared dead. The cause of 
death was cardiopulmonary arrest. His death was initially 
classified as a ‘battle casualty’ but was later classified as a 
‘physical casualty’ attributable to military service. The 
respondent was granted all terminal benefits, including a 
special family pension. As she was denied a Liberalised 
Family Pension (LFP), she filed an original application 
before the Armed Forces Tribunal (for short, ‘the 
Tribunal’). The respondent sought quashing of the order 
dated 10th February 2016, by which the benefit of LFP was 
denied to her. She prayed for a direction to grant her LFP 
with interest. The appellants opposed the original 
application. Ultimately, by the impugned judgment dated 
23rd August 2019, the Tribunal allowed the application 
and directed that the respondent be granted LFP and ex-
gratia lumpsum amount payable in case of battle 
casualties dying in harness. The present appeal takes 
exception to the said judgment and order. 

 
 
               Civil Appeal @ Diary No. 20250 of 2021 
 
Page 3 of 10 
 
SUBMISSIONS 
3. 
Shri 
Vikramjeet 
Banerjee, 
learned 
Additional 
Solicitor General, pointed out that LFP is governed by the 
order dated 31st January 2001 issued by the Director 
(Pensions) of the Ministry of Defence, Government of India. 
He submitted that LFP is granted in case of death of an 
armed 
forces 
personnel 
under 
the 
circumstances 
mentioned in categories D and E of paragraph 4.1 of the 
order dated 31st January 2001. He submitted that, 
admittedly, category D does not apply to the deceased. He 
submitted that the case of the deceased is not covered by 
any of the clauses in category E. He submitted that as the 
deceased died due to cardiopulmonary arrest, his case was 
classified as a ‘physical casualty’ attributable to military 
service, and, therefore, the respondent was paid a special 
family pension. He relied on this Court's decisions in the 
case of Kanchan Dua v. Union of India and Anr.1, and 
Radhika Devi v. Union of India and Ors.2 He submitted 
that the present case is covered by both decisions. He 
submitted that the view taken by the Tribunal is entirely 
erroneous.  
4. 
Shri K Parameshwar, learned senior counsel 
appearing for the respondent, supported the impugned 
 
1 (2020) 18 SCC 709 
2 (2020) 18 SCC 715 

 
 
               Civil Appeal @ Diary No. 20250 of 2021 
 
Page 4 of 10 
 
judgment by relying upon documents annexed to the 
counter affidavit.  
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
We must deal with the factual aspects. In paragraph 
4.3 of the original application filed by the respondent, the 
following are the averments made: 
“4.3 
That while the husband of the 
applicant was posted in J&K and was part of 
Area Domination Patrol which was launched 
from Manjit Main to Rangwar Post for 
domination of Rangwar Gap in the proximity 
of LC and along the AIOS in extreme climatic 
condition on 23/01/2013 from 0100 Hrs to 
0330 Hrs. The husband of the applicant 
complained of breathlessness and was taken 
to Rangwar Post where he was given First Aid. 
The condition of the husband of the applicant 
deteriorated and was required for immediate 
evacuation, 
but due to the inclement 
weather, air evacuation could not be done 
and husband of the applicant was taken on 
foot to Chowkibal where he was declared 
dead. The Commanding Officer of the Unit 
has issued a Battle Casualty Certificate on 
23/01/2013 whereby the death of the 
husband of the applicant has been treated as 
Battle Casualty.” 
 
In the reply filed to the original application, the appellants 
did not dispute the correctness of the averments made in 
paragraph 4.3. The appellants could not have disputed the 

 
 
               Civil Appeal @ Diary No. 20250 of 2021 
 
Page 5 of 10 
 
said facts as they were also mentioned in the certificate 
issued by the Commanding Officer.  
6. 
There is no dispute that the grant of LFP is governed 
by the order dated 31st January 2001 issued by the 
Director (Pensions). The said order applies to those who 
were in service as of 1st January 1996 or joined service 
thereafter. Clause 6.1 of the order dated 31st January 2001 
reads thus: 
 
“6. 
Liberalised Family Pension (LFP) 
6.1 
In case of death of an Armed Forces 
Personnel 
under 
the 
circumstances 
mentioned in category “D” & “E” of Para 4.1 
above, the eligible member of the family shall 
be entitled to Liberalised Family Pension 
equal to reckonable emoluments last drawn 
as defined in Para 3.1 above, both for officers 
and PBOR. Liberalised Family Pension at this 
rate shall be admissible to the widow in the 
case of officers and to the nominated heir in 
the 
case 
of 
PBOR 
until 
death 
or 
disqualification. 
……………………………………………………….” 
 
7. 
In the present case, the respondent has not 
contended that the case of the deceased falls in category D. 
The tribunal accepted that the case falls in category E, 
which reads thus: 
“Category E 
Death or disability arising as a result of:- 
(a) Enemy action in international war. 

 
 
               Civil Appeal @ Diary No. 20250 of 2021 
 
Page 6 of 10 
 
(b) Action 
during 
deployment 
with 
a 
peacekeeping mission abroad. 
(c)          Border skirmishes. 
(d) 
During laying or clearance of mines 
including enemy mines as also minesweeping 
operation. 
(e)          On account of accidental explosions 
of mines while laying operationally oriented 
mine-field or lifting or negotiating minefield 
laid by enemy or own forces in operational 
areas near international borders or the line of 
control. 
(f)         War 
like 
situations, 
including 
cases 
which 
are 
attributable 
to/aggravated by :- 
(i) Extremist acts, exploding mines 
etc. while on way to an operational 
area. 
(ii) Battle 
inoculation 
training 
exercises or demonstration with live 
ammunition.  
(iii) Kidnapping by extremists while on 
operational duty. 
(g)          An 
act 
of 
violence/attack 
by 
extremists, anti-social elements, etc.  
(h) 
Action against extremists, antisocial 
elements, 
etc. 
Death/disability 
while 
employed in the aid of civil power in quelling 
agitation, riots or revolt by demonstrators will 
be covered under this category. 
(i) Operations specially notified by the Govt. 
from time to time.”  
(emphasis added) 
 
A perusal of the reply filed to the original application shows 
that the stand of the appellants is that clause (f) of category 

 
 
               Civil Appeal @ Diary No. 20250 of 2021 
 
Page 7 of 10 
 
E is not applicable as the death of the deceased was 
attributable to military service and was classified as a 
‘physical casualty’. It was contended that the death was 
not treated as a ‘battle casualty’. The stand taken is that 
the case of the deceased was not covered by clause (f) of 
category E as it was not a case of ‘battle casualty’ as the 
deceased died due to cardiopulmonary arrest. Therefore, 
the only question to be decided is whether the case will be 
covered by the category of ‘battle casualty’.  
8. 
It is brought on record that initially, the Commanding 
Officer had categorised the death as a ‘battle casualty’, and 
later on, it was changed to a ‘physical casualty’. To the 
counter filed by the respondent, a copy of Army Order 1 of 
2003 
has 
been 
annexed 
as 
Annexure 
R-6. 
The 
circumstances for the classification of physical/battle 
casualties have been incorporated in Appendix ‘A’. In 
Appendix ‘A’, category 1 is of battle casualties. Clause (g) 
thereto reads thus: 
 
“(g) 
Casualties 
occurring 
while 
operating on the International Border or 
Line of Control due to natural calamities 
and 
illness 
caused 
by 
climatic 
conditions.” 
 
9. 
Coming to the facts of the case, it is not disputed 
that on the date of the death, the deceased was posted 
with his battalion in Jammu and Kashmir as part of 

 
 
               Civil Appeal @ Diary No. 20250 of 2021 
 
Page 8 of 10 
 
Operation Rakshak. He was part of an Area Domination 
Patrol for domination of the Rangwar gap in the proximity 
of LC. He was doing duty from 1.00 a.m. to 3.30 a.m. The 
certificate issued by the Commanding Officer records the 
following facts: 
a) The deceased was working in extreme 
climatic conditions on the date of his death; 
b) He was part of Operation Rakshak, and he 
was also part of the routine Area Domination 
Patrol close to LC. There were extreme 
climatic conditions at that place; and 
c) When the deceased became breathless, his 
condition 
was 
such 
that 
he 
needed 
immediate evacuation. However, immediate 
evacuation by air could not be done due to 
bad weather conditions. Ultimately, he was 
taken on foot, and when the team carried 
him to Chowkibal's MI room, he was 
declared dead. 
10. Thus, the death can be attributed to illness caused 
by extreme climatic conditions. Hence, as per clause 1 (g) 
of Appendix ‘A’ of the Army Order 1 of 2003, the case will 
fall in ‘Battle Casualties’. The reason is that the deceased 
was operating near LC in extreme climatic conditions. He 
was part of Operation Rakshak and was on duty near LC. 
The casualty caused by illness due to climatic conditions 

 
 
               Civil Appeal @ Diary No. 20250 of 2021 
 
Page 9 of 10 
 
is covered by clause 1 (g). In this case, the respondent’s 
husband was a victim of illness caused by extreme 
climatic conditions. Therefore, the case of the deceased 
will fall in the category of ‘Battle Casualties’. 
11. Clause (f) of category E is attracted when death 
arises as a result of war-like situations. The definition of 
death as a result of war-like situations is an inclusive 
definition, and the case cannot remain confined to sub-
clauses (i) to (iii) of category E (f). In this case, the death 
has occurred as a result of a war-like situation prevailing 
near LC. Therefore, we concur with the view taken by the 
Tribunal that clause (f) of category E was applicable.  
12. The decisions in the cases of Kanchan Dua v. Union 
of India and Anr.1 and Radhika Devi v. Union of India 
and Ors.2 have been decided on the basis of the peculiar 
facts of the cases. The same can have no application to 
the facts of this case. In the first case, the deceased was 
found dead in his room. In the second case, the death was 
not caused by extreme climatic conditions. 
13. In our view, in a case like this, the respondent ought 
not to have been dragged to this Court, and the decision-
making authority of the appellants ought to have been 
sympathetic to the widow of a deceased soldier who died 
in harness. Therefore, we propose to impose costs 

 
 
               Civil Appeal @ Diary No. 20250 of 2021 
 
Page 10 of 10 
 
quantified as Rs.50,000/-, which will be payable to the 
respondent.  
14. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed. The directions 
contained in paragraph 13 of the impugned judgment 
shall be implemented within a maximum period of three 
months from today. We direct the appellants to pay the 
costs quantified as Rs.50,000/- to the respondent within 
a period of two months from today.  
 
……………………..J. 
(Abhay S. Oka) 
 
……………………..J. 
(Augustine George Masih) 
New Delhi; 
December 03, 2024