2024 INSC 923
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 573 OF 2023  
                    
 
WADLA BHEEMARAIDU                                .…APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
STATE OF TELANGANA  
                    ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
 
1. 
The instant appeal by special leave arises out of the judgment 
and order dated 20th March, 2019, passed by the Division Bench 
of the High Court of Telangana at Hyderabad, dismissing the 
Criminal Appeal No. 1078 of 2016 preferred by the appellant and 
affirming the judgment dated 13th October, 2016 rendered by the 
Family 
Court-cum-VII-Additional 
Sessions 
Judge, 
Mahabubnagar1. 
2. 
Eight accused persons were put up for trial. The appellant 
(A1) and two co-accused (A2 and A3) were charged and tried for 
 
1 Hereinafter, being referred to as the ‘trial Court’. 
Digitally signed by
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2024.12.03
18:14:15 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
the offences punishable under Sections 384, 364, 302 and 201 of 
the Indian Penal Code, 18602, whereas the remaining co-accused 
(A4-A8) were charged and tried for the offences punishable under 
Sections 302, 201 read with Section 109 IPC.  
3. 
Vide judgment dated 13th October, 2016, the trial Court 
acquitted A4 to A8 of all the charges. The appellant (A1) and the 
two co-accused (A2 and A3) were convicted and sentenced as 
below: 
(i) Section 302 IPC: Life Imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 5,000/- 
(in default to undergo Simple Imprisonment for six months)  
 
(ii) Section 364 IPC: Rigorous Imprisonment for 10 years and a 
fine of Rs. 5,000/- (in default to undergo Simple Imprisonment 
for six months). 
 
(iii) Section 384 IPC: Rigorous Imprisonment for 3 years and a 
fine of Rs. 5,000/- (in default to undergo Simple Imprisonment 
for six months). 
 
(iv) Section 201 IPC: Rigorous Imprisonment for 5 years and a 
fine of Rs. 5,000/- (in default to undergo Simple Imprisonment 
for six months). 
 
4. 
A common appeal was preferred by the appellant herein(A1), 
A2 and A3, before the High Court of Telangana assailing the 
judgment of the trial Court. The Division Bench of the High Court 
of Telangana proceeded to uphold the conviction and sentence 
awarded to the appellant herein and at the same time, acquitted 
 
2 Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘IPC’. 

3 
 
A2 and A3 of all the charges vide judgment dated 20th March, 2019 
which is the subject matter of challenge in this appeal.  
Brief facts:-  
5. 
As per the prosecution case, K. Nagesh (the deceased) and 
Smt. Shivaleela @ Wadla Anjali, wife of the appellant herein (A1), 
developed an extra-marital affair with each other. On 7th January, 
2013, they eloped from their village Thipraspally3, District 
Rangareddy, Telangana. Smt. Shivaleela @ Wadla Anjali returned 
to the village after four days, but K. Nagesh failed to turn up. 
Consequently, on 8th January, 2013, the mother of K. Nagesh 
namely, Smt. B. Laxmamma (PW-1) lodged a missing complaint4 
at Police Station Utkoor, Telangana5.  
6. 
Based on the said complaint, V. Sampath, Sub-Inspector, PS 
Utkoor registered a case6, under the caption ‘man missing’ and 
initiated an enquiry. It is stated that during the course of enquiry, 
it came to light that K. Nagesh and Smt. Shivaleela @ Wadla Anjali, 
wife of the appellant (A1) were involved in an extra-marital affair, 
and a panchayat was convened in relation thereto in the village. 
The appellant (A1), being the husband of Smt. Shivaleela, and the 
 
3 Hereinafter being referred to as ‘village’. 
4 Exhibit P-38 
5 Hereinafter being referred to as ‘PS Utkoor’. 
6 Crime No. 15 of 2013. 

4 
 
other accused persons threatened the family members of K. 
Nagesh in the panchayat and under the fear of retribution, the 
family members agreed to pay a compensation of Rs. 3,50,000/- 
to the appellant (A1) within 10 days. It is further the case of the 
prosecution that the appellant (A1) was not satisfied with the above 
resolution and thus, he hatched a plan to eliminate K. Nagesh.  
7. 
In furtherance of this nefarious design, the appellant (A1) 
contacted his wife (Smt. Shivaleela) over phone and asked her to 
return to the village to which she agreed. The appellant was in 
continuous contact with his father-in-law (G. Hanumanth) who 
conveyed that Smt. Shivaleela (wife of the appellant) and K. Nagesh 
would be reaching Raichur railway station on 11th January 2013. 
In order to carry out the plan to eliminate K. Nagesh, the appellant 
(Al), along with his brother (A2) on one motorcycle and his brother-
in-law (A3) on another proceeded to Raichur railway station. The 
accused (A4 to A8) were also informed about the arrival of K. 
Nagesh and accordingly, they too proceeded to Raichur railway 
station in a car. At about 00:30 hours, K. Nagesh and Smt. 
Shivaleela, wife of the appellant (Al), got down at Raichur railway 
station. K. Nagesh proceeded to Raichur bus stand in an auto 
rickshaw. He was pursued by A1, A2, and A3, who abducted him 

5 
 
and took him towards Shakthi Nagar on their motorcycles. A1 
directed A4, A5, A6, A7 and A8 to return. A1, A2 and A3 disrobed 
K. Nagesh. A1 and A2 strangled and killed him with a towel 
brought by A1. The assailants then crushed the face of K. Nagesh 
by a big boulder so as to destroy his identity. The dead body was 
concealed in a nearby water channel. The clothes worn by K. 
Nagesh (the deceased) were tied up in the towel used to murder 
him and were thrown in the Krishna River near Devasugur.  
8. 
On 19th January, 2013, the family members of the deceased, 
on a demand made by the accused persons paid a penalty of 
Rs.3,50,000/- to the appellant (A1). On 8th February, 2013, the 
appellant (Al), along with his family members went to the house of 
his in-laws at Makthal and divorced his wife Smt. Shivaleela and 
also took an undertaking from her. When A1 came to know about 
a case having been registered at PS Utkoor regarding the 
disappearance of K. Nagesh, out of fear, he approached P. 
Ramalingappa (PW-6), a resident of the village, and prayed for 
being provided protection. V. Sampath, Sub-Inspector, PS Utkoor 
purportedly recorded the statement of PW-6 and based thereupon, 
he proceeded to apprehend the accused (A1) and recorded his 
confessional statement. Based on the confession so made by the 

6 
 
appellant herein (A1), the missing person complaint was converted 
into an FIR7 for the offences punishable under Sections 384, 364, 
302, 201 read with Section 109 IPC. 
9. 
Further investigation of the case was assigned to N. 
Venkateshwarla, Circle Inspector of Police, Makthal8 (PW-22). All 
the accused persons were arrested in furtherance of the confession 
made by the appellant (A1). During the course of investigation, the 
Investigating Officer (PW-22) claims to have recorded the 
information memo/confessional panchnama9 of the appellant (A1) 
and thereafter, he forwarded a letter to the S.P., Mahabubnagar 
seeking permission to visit the crime scene located at Egsanhally 
village of Raichur district. A requisition was sent to H.B. 
Sanamani, PSI, Raichur Rural (PW-21) for arranging local panchas 
to conduct the spot panchnama. Accordingly, PW-21 arranged two 
local panch witnesses namely Javeed (PW-9) and Baswaraj Patil 
(PW-19). The Investigating Officer (PW-22) thereafter, proceeded to 
the crime scene and prepared the spot panchnama in the presence 
of Javeed (PW-9), Mallikarjun (PW-16), V. Venkataiah (PW-17) and 
Baswaraj Patil (PW-19). The crime scene was photographed by K. 
 
7 FIR No. 15/2013, PS Utkoor. 
8 Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘Investigating Officer (PW-22)’. 
9 Exhibit P22-A. 

7 
 
Papireddy (PW-7). No human dead body was found at the spot. 
However, the Investigating Officer (PW-22) noticed some remains 
viz hair, lower jaw embedded with teeth, three rib bones, one piece 
of underwear(MO5), two shirt buttons (MO1), one jeans pant 
button (MO2) and a boulder (MO4) at the spot which he seized vide 
seizure panchnama10 dated 19th March, 2013 with the assistance 
of Dr. Syed Irshad, Medical Officer (PW-15). The material objects 
i.e. the bones and hair etc. found at the spot were packed by the 
Medical Officer (PW-15), who handed the same over to the 
Investigating Officer (PW-22). He in turn forwarded these human 
remains along with the seized material objects to the FSL11.  
10. The DNA profiling report12 was received which purportedly 
indicated that the DNA profile of the skeletal remains collected 
from the crime scene matched the DNA profile of Smt. B. 
Laxmamma (mother of the deceased) (PW-1). 
11. Upon concluding the investigation, the Investigating Officer 
(PW-22) proceeded to file a charge sheet against A1 to A8 for the 
offences mentioned above13. The offence punishable under Section 
302 IPC being exclusively sessions triable, the case was committed 
 
10 Exhibit P-34 
11 Forensic Science Laboratory 
12 Exhibit P-42 
13 Supra, Para No. 2 

8 
 
and transferred for trial to the Court of Sessions Judge, 
Mahabubnagar vide committal order dated 28th March, 2014. The 
trial Court framed charges against the accused persons (A1 to A8) 
for the above offences14. The accused persons pleaded not guilty 
and claimed trial. In order to bring home the charges, the 
prosecution examined as many as 22 witnesses and exhibited 42 
documents and 23 material objects. 
12. The accused, upon being questioned under Section 313 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 197315 denied the prosecution’s 
allegation and claimed to be innocent. Upon hearing the 
arguments advanced by the prosecution and defence, and after 
appreciating the evidence available on record, the trial Court vide 
judgment dated 13th October, 2016, proceeded to acquit A4 to A8 
of the charges. A1(the appellant herein), A2 and A3 were convicted 
and sentenced in the above terms16.  
13. The Division Bench of the High Court of Telangana in 
appeal17 reversed the conviction of A2 and A3 and acquitted them 
while affirming the conviction and sentence awarded by the trial 
 
14 Ibid 
15 Hereinafter being referred to as ‘CrPC’. 
16 Supra, Para No. 3. 
17 Criminal Appeal No. 1078 of 2016. 

9 
 
Court to the appellant (A1). Aggrieved, the appellant (A1) is before 
us in the present appeal by special leave. 
Submissions on behalf of the accused-appellant: - 
14. Shri A. Sirajudeen, learned senior counsel representing the 
accused appellant advanced the following pertinent submissions 
to assail the impugned judgments seeking acquittal for the 
accused appellant: - 
(i) That the entire case of the prosecution is false and 
fabricated. The prosecution has failed to prove the motive 
attributed to the appellant (A1) for commission of the 
offence, because neither B. Laxmamma (PW-1), the mother 
of the deceased nor G. Hanumanth (PW-2), the father of the 
deceased, supported the prosecution case regarding the 
alleged theory of motive which was based upon the so called 
extra-marital affair of the deceased with Smt. Shivaleela 
(PW-8), the wife of the appellant, who also did not support 
the prosecution case on this aspect. 
(ii) That the sole circumstance of recovery of the skeletal 
remains relied upon by the High Court for convicting the 
accused appellant could not be proved by the prosecution 
by leading cogent and clinching evidence. In this regard, it 

10 
 
was contended that the information provided by the accused 
(A1) to the Investigating Officer (PW-22) under Section 27 of 
the Indian Evidence Act, 187218 was never proved as per law 
and thus, the discovery pales into insignificance and cannot 
be read in evidence. 
(iii) That the clothes which were allegedly discovered at the 
crime scene were not identified by any of the witnesses 
examined during the course of the trial as belonging to the 
deceased K. Nagesh. 
(iv) That the prosecution heavily relied upon DNA profiling 
report19 to claim that the DNA of the skeletal remains 
collected from the crime scene matched with the DNA of 
Smt. B. Laxmamma (PW-1), the mother of the deceased. But 
the fact remains that the prosecution led no evidence 
whatsoever to establish that the blood samples of B. 
Laxmamma (PW-1) (the mother of the deceased) were 
actually collected during the course of investigation. In this 
regard, the attention of the Court was drawn to the 
testimony of PW-1 to urge that the witness never stated that 
her blood samples were collected during the course of the 
 
18 Hereinafter being referred to as ‘IEA’. 
19 Exhibit P-42. 

11 
 
investigation. Even the Medical Officer (PW-15) did not state 
that he collected blood samples of any person related to the 
deceased for the purpose of DNA finger printing. It was 
submitted that the testimony of Smt. B. Laxmamma (PW-1) 
and the Medical Officer (PW-15) totally contradicts the 
version of the Investigating Officer (PW-22) on this aspect of 
the prosecution case.  
(v) That the crime scene was not pointed out by the appellant 
(A1) to the Investigating Officer (PW-22). The Medical Officer 
(PW-15) categorically admitted in his cross-examination that 
the police and other persons had shown him the scene of 
incident from where he collected the skeletal remains. Thus, 
the circumstance of discovery of the incriminating evidence 
at the instance of the accused could not be proved by proper 
evidence. 
(vi) That the alleged incident took place on 11th January, 2013 
whereas, the skeletal remains were recovered on 19th March, 
2013 i.e. nearly after two months of the incident and it is 
absolutely impossible to believe that the skeletal remains 
would still be lying at the crime scene after such a long 
duration.  

12 
 
(vii) That it is settled law that in a case purely based on 
circumstantial evidence, the chain of circumstances must 
be proved beyond all manner of doubt. Even if one of the 
links in the chain of incriminating circumstances is broken, 
the accused becomes entitled to the benefit of doubt. 
Reliance in this regard was placed on Bhim Singh v. State 
of Uttarakhand20 and Darshan Singh v. State of Punjab21. 
15. Learned senior counsel concluded his submissions by urging 
that the prosecution could not prove the chain of incriminating 
circumstances by leading cogent/reliable evidence and failed to 
even remotely establish that the appellant was in any manner 
connected with the alleged crime. 
16. On these grounds, the learned counsel representing the 
appellant implored the Court to accept the appeal, set aside the 
impugned judgment and acquit the accused appellant by giving 
him the benefit of doubt. 
Submissions on behalf of Respondent-State: - 
17. Per contra, Ms. Devina Sehgal, learned Standing Counsel 
representing the State, vehemently and fervently opposed the 
submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant 
 
20 (2015) 4 SCC 281. 
21 2024 INSC 19. 

13 
 
and submitted that every reasonable hypothesis based on the 
evidence led by the prosecution irrefutably points toward the guilt 
of the accused appellant. She urged that the two Courts, i.e., the 
trial Court as well as the High Court after appreciating and 
reappreciating the evidence, have recorded concurrent findings of 
facts for convicting the appellant and for affirming his conviction 
and hence, this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 
136 of the Constitution of India should be slow to interfere in such 
concurrent findings of facts. She advanced the following 
submissions seeking dismissal of the appeal: - 
i. That the prosecution has led cogent evidence that K. Nagesh 
(the deceased) was involved in an illicit affair with the wife of 
the accused appellant and fueled with the said motive, he 
hatched a conspiracy with the co-accused and acting in 
furtherance of such nefarious design, K. Nagesh (the 
deceased) was murdered and his dead body was concealed 
so as to destroy the evidence of the crime.  
ii. That crime scene was in the exclusive knowledge of the 
appellant(A1). He suffered a disclosure statement22 to the 
Investigating Officer (PW-22), and based thereupon, the 
 
22 Exhibit P22-A 

14 
 
Investigating Officer along with the panch witnesses (PW-9 
and PW-19) proceeded to the crime scene and recovered the 
skeletal remains of the deceased K. Nagesh. Since the place 
of concealment of the skeletal remains of the deceased was 
in the exclusive knowledge of the appellant (A1), the recovery 
thereof at his instance would give rise to the only inference 
that it was the appellant (A1) and no one else who murdered 
K. Nagesh (the deceased) and then tried to destroy the 
evidence by hiding his dead body. 
iii. That there was a gap of two months between the time of 
murder and the discovery of the skeletal remains, 
apparently thus, the dead body must have been destroyed 
by the scavengers/natural elements. 
iv. That the DNA of the skeletal remains recovered from the 
crime scene matched with the blood samples of Smt. B. 
Laxmamma (PW-1), the mother of the deceased, as is clearly 
proved by the DNA profiling report23. This incriminating 
circumstance irrefutably points towards the guilt of the 
accused.  
 
23 Exhibit P-42 

15 
 
On these grounds, learned counsel contended that the 
present appeal against the judgment of the trial Court and the 
High Court deserve to be dismissed. 
Discussion and Conclusion: - 
18. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at the bar and have gone through the 
material placed on record. 
19. There is no dispute that the case of prosecution is based 
purely on circumstantial evidence, since no witness claims to have 
seen the alleged incident wherein K. Nagesh (the deceased) was 
murdered.  
20. The law is well-settled that in a case based purely on 
circumstantial evidence, the prosecution is under an obligation to 
prove each and every link in the chain of incriminating 
circumstances beyond all manner of doubt and that the 
circumstances so relied upon by the prosecution should point 
unequivocally towards the guilt of the accused and should be 
inconsistent with the guilt of anyone else or the innocence of the 
accused. Only in the event of the complete/unbroken chain of 
circumstances being proved by cogent and clinching evidence 
which does not admit of any other inference, otherwise that of the 

16 
 
guilt of the accused, the conviction can be recorded. Reference in 
this regard may be made to Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State 
of Maharashtra24, the relevant extract of which reads as under: - 
“153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the 
following conditions must be fulfilled before a case against an 
accused can be said to be fully established: 
 
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to 
be drawn should be fully established. 
 
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the 
circumstances concerned “must or should” and not “may be” 
established. There is not only a grammatical but a legal 
distinction between “may be proved” and “must be or should be 
proved” as was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade 
v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 793] where the 
observations were made: [SCC para 19, p. 807] 
 
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused 
must be and not merely may be guilty before a court 
can convict and the mental distance between ‘may 
be’ and ‘must be’ is long and divides vague 
conjectures from sure conclusions.” 
 
(2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the 
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they should 
not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the 
accused is guilty, 
 
(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and 
tendency, 
 
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the 
one to be proved, and 
 
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to 
leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent 
with the innocence of the accused and must show that in 
all human probability the act must have been done by the 
accused. 
 
 
24 (1984) 4 SCC 116. 

17 
 
154. These five golden principles, if we may say so, constitute 
the panchsheel of the proof of a case based on circumstantial 
evidence.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
21. Having noted the principles governing the case based purely 
on circumstantial evidence, we now proceed to discuss the case 
set up by the prosecution in order to bring home the guilt of the 
accused appellant. 
22. In view of the detailed discussion of the facts enumerated 
above, it is apparent that the following circumstances were 
portrayed by the prosecution in its endeavour to establish the 
charges against the accused appellant: - 
(i) Motive, i.e. to say that K. Nagesh (the deceased) and Smt. 
Shivaleela, the wife of the appellant (PW-8) were involved in 
an illicit extra-marital affair which fueled the appellant 
herein with such animosity that he hatched a plan to 
eliminate K. Nagesh (the deceased). 
(ii) Incriminating recoveries in the form of skeletal remains of 
the deceased and the clothes and other articles such as a 
cover containing an amount to a tune of Rs. 3,50,000/- and 
motorcycle used in commission of the crime allegedly 

18 
 
recovered in furtherance of the information25 provided by the 
appellant (A1) to the Investigating Officer (PW-22). 
(iii) The DNA profiling report26, which establishes that the 
profiling of the blood collected from the mother of the 
deceased (PW-1) matched with the DNA profile of the 
allegedly recovered skeletal remains. 
23. Firstly, we proceed to consider the theory of motive. On going 
through the entire evidence led by the prosecution, we do not find 
an utterance of a single word by any of the prosecution witnesses 
including the mother of the deceased (PW-1), the father of the 
deceased (PW-2), that there was any complaint of an illicit affair 
between K. Nagesh (the deceased) and Smt. Shivaleela, the wife of 
the appellant. 
24. The prosecution alleged that owing to this illicit affair, the 
appellant got convened a panchayat wherein, he demanded and 
extorted a sum of Rs. 3,50,000/- from the family members of the 
deceased. However, such a suggestion was totally denied by PW-1 
and PW-2. Both these witnesses stated that it was the chit amount 
collected by their son (the deceased) which was paid by them.  
Further, on going through the testimony of the Investigating 
 
25 Exhibit P22-A 
26 Exhibit P-42 

19 
 
Officer (PW-22), we find that even he did not state that any 
information was provided to him regarding the so-called illicit 
affair between the deceased and the wife of the appellant (PW-8) 
during the entire course of investigation. The only evidence 
provided regarding this aspect of motive, as per the testimony of 
Investigating Officer (PW-22) was in the form of a photograph 
(Exhibit P-37). However, the fact remains that even the parents of 
the deceased (PW-1 and PW-2) were not made to identify this 
photograph. Thus, the theory of motive attributed by the 
prosecution to the accused appellant could not be established by 
any credible evidence.  
25. The second and most vital link of circumstantial evidence 
sought to be relied upon by the prosecution was the alleged 
discovery and recovery of the skeletal remains of the deceased in 
furtherance of the information27 provided by the accused appellant 
(A1) to the Investigating Officer (PW-22). 
26. The law is well settled by a catena of judgments of this Court 
that the information under Section 27 IEA which leads to discovery 
of an incriminating material/evidence must be proved by the 
Investigating Officer as being voluntary and uninfluenced by 
 
27 Exhibit P22-A 

20 
 
threat, duress or coercion. The Investigating Officer is also 
required to prove the contents of the information/confessional 
memo to the extent they relate to the facts discovered. 
27. This Court in the recent judgment of Babu Sahebgouda 
Rudragoudar v. State of Karnataka28, while referring to the 
earlier judgments on this point, examined the aspect regarding the 
standard of proof of information provided by the accused to the 
Investigating Officer under Section 27 IEA in the following terms:- 
“60. We would now discuss about the requirement under law 
so as to prove a disclosure statement recorded under Section 
27 of the Evidence Act, 1872 (hereinafter being referred to as 
“the Evidence Act”) and the discoveries made in furtherance 
thereof. 
 
61. The statement of an accused recorded by a police officer 
under Section 27 of the Evidence Act is basically a 
memorandum of confession of the accused recorded by the 
investigating officer during interrogation which has been taken 
down in writing. The confessional part of such statement is 
inadmissible and only the part which distinctly leads to 
discovery of fact is admissible in evidence as laid down by this 
Court in State of U.P. v. Deoman Upadhyaya [State of U.P. 
v. Deoman Upadhyaya, 1960 SCC OnLine SC 8 : AIR 1960 
SC 1125] . 
 
62. Thus, when the investigating officer steps into the 
witness box for proving such disclosure statement, he 
would be required to narrate what the accused stated to 
him. The investigating officer essentially testifies about 
the conversation held between himself and the accused 
which has been taken down into writing leading to the 
discovery of incriminating fact(s). 
 
63. As per Section 60 of the Evidence Act, oral evidence in all 
cases must be direct. The section leaves no ambiguity and 
mandates that no secondary/hearsay evidence can be given in 
case of oral evidence, except for the circumstances enumerated 
 
28 (2024) 8 SCC 149. 

21 
 
in the section. In the case of a person who asserts to have heard 
a fact, only his evidence must be given in respect of the same. 
 
64. The manner of proving the disclosure statement under 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act has been the subject matter of 
consideration by this Court in various judgments, some of 
which are being referred to below. 
 
65. In Mohd. Abdul Hafeez v. State of A.P. [Mohd. Abdul 
Hafeez v. State of A.P., (1983) 1 SCC 143 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 
139] , it was held by this Court as follows : (SCC p. 146, para 
5) 
 
“5. … If evidence otherwise confessional in character 
is admissible under Section 27 of the Evidence Act, it 
is obligatory upon the investigating officer to state 
and record who gave the information; when he is 
dealing with more than one accused, what words were 
used by him so that a recovery pursuant to the 
information received may be connected to the person 
giving the information so as to provide incriminating 
evidence against that person.” 
 
66. Further, in Subramanya v. State of Karnataka 
[Subramanya v. State of Karnataka, (2023) 11 SCC 255] , 
it was held as under : (SCC pp. 299-300, paras 76 to 78) 
 
“76. Keeping in mind the aforesaid evidence, we 
proceed to consider whether the prosecution has been 
able to prove and establish the discoveries in 
accordance with law. Section 27 of the Evidence Act 
reads thus: 
 
‘27. How much of information received from 
accused may be proved.—Provided that, 
when any fact is deposed to as discovered in 
consequence of information received from a 
person accused of any offence, in the 
custody of a police officer, so much of such 
information, whether it amounts to a 
confession or not, as relates distinctly to the 
fact thereby discovered, may be proved.’ 
 
77. The first and the basic infirmity in the 
evidence 
of 
all 
the 
aforesaid 
prosecution 
witnesses is that none of them have deposed the 
exact statement said to have been made by the 
appellant herein which ultimately led to the 

22 
 
discovery of a fact relevant under Section 27 of 
the Evidence Act. 
 
78. If, it is say of the investigating officer that the 
appellant-accused while in custody on his own free 
will and volition made a statement that he would 
lead to the place where he had hidden the weapon 
of offence, the site of burial of the dead body, 
clothes, etc. then the first thing that the 
investigating officer should have done was to call 
for two independent witnesses at the police 
station itself. Once the two independent witnesses 
would arrive at the police station thereafter in 
their presence the accused should be asked to 
make an appropriate statement as he may desire 
in regard to pointing out the place where he is said 
to have hidden the weapon of offence, etc. When 
the accused while in custody makes such 
statement before the two independent witnesses 
(panch witnesses) the exact statement or rather 
the exact words uttered by the accused should be 
incorporated in the first part of the panchnama 
that the investigating officer may draw in 
accordance with law. This first part of the 
panchnama for the purpose of Section 27 of the 
Evidence Act is always drawn at the police station 
in the presence of the independent witnesses so 
as to lend credence that a particular statement 
was 
made 
by 
the 
accused 
expressing 
his 
willingness on his own free will and volition to 
point out the place where the weapon of offence 
or any other article used in the commission of the 
offence had been hidden. Once the first part of the 
panchnama is completed thereafter the police 
party along with the accused and the two 
independent witnesses (panch witnesses) would 
proceed to the particular place as may be led by 
the accused. If from that particular place anything 
like the weapon of offence or bloodstained clothes 
or any other article is discovered then that part of 
the entire process would form the second part of 
the panchnama. This is how the law expects the 
investigating officer to draw the discovery 
panchnama as contemplated under Section 27 of 
the Evidence Act. If we read the entire oral 
evidence of the investigating officer then it is 
clear that the same is deficient in all the aforesaid 
relevant aspects of the matter.” 
 

23 
 
67. Similar view was taken by this Court in Ramanand v. State 
of U.P. [Ramanand v. State of U.P., (2023) 16 SCC 510 : 2022 
SCC OnLine SC 1396] , wherein this Court held that mere 
exhibiting of memorandum prepared by the investigating officer 
during investigation cannot tantamount to proof of its contents. 
While testifying on oath, the investigating officer would be 
required to narrate the sequence of events which transpired 
leading to the recording of the disclosure statement.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
28. Keeping the above principle in mind, let us now examine the 
testimony of the Investigating Officer (PW-22) on the aspect of 
disclosure and discovery of incriminating facts at the instance of 
the accused. The relevant extracts of his testimony are reproduced 
hereunder:- 
“The L.W.24-Sampat, S.I. of Police, produced A1-Bheem Raidu 
before me. On my interrogation he admitted commission of 
offence and when he about mood of confess I secured the 
mediators P.W.s 16 and 17. In their presence I prepared 
confession panchanama of A1. Ex.P.22-A, after preparing the 
confession 
panchanama 
I 
send 
letter 
to 
the 
S.P., 
Mahabubnagar, for obtaining the permission to visit the scene 
of offence situated at Egsanhally village of Raichur District of 
Karnataka State along with panchas and P.W.7, to Photograph 
the 
scene. 
After 
applying 
the 
permission 
from 
S.P. 
Mahabubnagar, I also filed requisition before the police, 
P.W.21, of Raichur Rural with a request to provide two panch 
witnesses and to visit the scene. Accordingly, P.W.21 provided 
two panch witnesses P. Ws.9, and 19. 
 
Accordingly with the help of P.Ws.9 and 19 along with P.Ws. 16 
and 17 I prepared scene of offence panchanama and 
photographed the scene of offence with the help of P.W.7. At the 
scene of offence there was no dead body was found but some 
hair, lower jaw embedded with teeth, 3-rip bones, one piece of 
under wear two shirt buttons, one jean pant button, one 
boulder, were found. 
 
Alongwith panchas PW.16 and P.W.17 and myself went with 
A.1. Al lead us to his village of Tipraspally village of 

24 
 
Utkurmandal of Mahabubnagar District, there A2 and A3 were 
also present in the house. Thereafter Al went in side his house 
and brought a cover containing Rs.3,50,000/- (Rupees Three 
Lakhs fifty thousand only) cash and one cell phone. Al also 
shown the Hero Honda motor bearing No. AP22-N-7927 Hero 
Honda C.D. Delux, Black Colour as crime vehicle which was 
used in the commission of offence. M.O.6 is cash of 
Rs.3,50,000/- later it was deposited in FDR No.0919458, 
26.05.2014 in the JMFC, Narayanpet, M.O.7 is cell phone 
Samsung Company, MO.8 Hero Honda Motor Cycle br. No.AP 
22 N 7927.” 
 
29. On going through the aforesaid version of Investigating 
Officer (PW-22), it is clear that the accused appellant (A1) was 
produced before him by V. Sampath (LW-24) (IO in the ‘man 
missing’ case). The said LW-24 was not examined by the 
prosecution in this case. Pursuant to production of the accused, 
the Investigating Officer (PW-22) proceeded to interrogate him and 
allegedly recorded his confession/information followed by the so-
called recovery of the skeletal remains of the deceased. 
30. From the aforesaid version of PW-22, it can clearly be 
discerned that neither did the witness narrate the words spoken 
by the accused regarding the place of concealment of the dead body 
of K. Nagesh nor that the said fact/place was exclusively in his 
knowledge and that he could get the same recovered. Rather, there 
is a very startling fact which is evident from the aforesaid extract 
of the Investigating Officer’s evidence 
inasmuch as 
the 
Investigating Officer did not utter a single word that the accused 

25 
 
also accompanied him and the panch witnesses for pointing out 
and getting recovered the skeletal remains and the clothes 
purported to be of the deceased.  
31. Contrary thereto, on the aspect of recovery of Rs. 3,50,000/- 
from the house of the accused, the Investigating Officer (PW-22) 
made a pertinent deposition that he along with the panchas (PW-
16 and PW-17), accompanied by the accused went to the accused’s 
house. The accused(A1) led them inside his house and brought out 
a cover containing Rs. 3,50,000/-. Thus, so far as the aspect of 
recovery of the currency notes is concerned, the Investigating 
Officer categorically stated that it was the accused who led them 
to the place of discovery, but so far as the crime scene is 
concerned, there is not even a slightest utterance by the 
Investigating Officer (PW-22) that the accused made the disclosure 
or led them to the place where the skeletal remains were found. 
32. In addition, thereto, we may also refer to the testimony of Dr. 
Syed Irshad, Medical Officer (PW-15) who also admitted in his 
cross-examination that police and other persons had shown him 
the skeletal remains. The panch witness (PW-9 and PW-19) also 
did not make a whisper regarding the accused, leading them to the 
place from where the incriminating articles were recovered.  

26 
 
33. Hence, we have no hesitation in holding that neither was the 
disclosure allegedly suffered by the accused 
before the 
Investigating Officer (PW-22) under Section 27 IEA proved as per 
law nor did the prosecution establish that the discovery was made 
on being pointed out by the accused. Since the very factum of the 
discovery/recovery of incriminating skeletal remains was not 
proved by proper evidence, the same cannot be linked to the 
accused appellant. 
34. The third link of circumstantial evidence is that the recovered 
skeletal remains were purportedly matched with the blood of the 
mother of the deceased (PW-1) by the process of DNA profiling. 
However, as has been noted above, PW-1 did not utter a single 
word that her blood sample was collected by the Investigating 
Officer (PW-22) during the course of the investigation. Also, even 
Dr. Syed Irshad, Medical Officer (PW-15) did not state that he 
collected the blood samples of PW-1. Thus, the DNA profiling 
report29 pales into insignificance and cannot be treated as an 
incriminating circumstance against the accused. 
35. As a consequence of the above discussion, we have no 
hesitation in holding that none of the incriminating circumstances 
 
29 Exhibit P-42 

27 
 
portrayed by the prosecution in its endeavour to bring home the 
charges against the accused appellant were established by cogent 
and clinching evidence, and therefore, the conviction of the 
accused appellant as recorded by the trial Court and affirmed by 
the High Court cannot be sustained. 
36. Resultantly, the impugned judgments dated 13th October, 
2016 and 20th March, 2019 are hereby quashed and set aside. The 
accused appellant is acquitted of the charges. He is in custody and 
shall be released forthwith, if not wanted in any other case. 
37. The appeal is allowed accordingly. 
38. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………………….……….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(DIPANKAR DATTA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ………………………….J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
 
New Delhi; 
December 03, 2024