2024 INSC 964
 
 
 
Page 1 of 7 
 
 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.              OF 2024 
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.2029 of 2023) 
 
 
P.N.D. PRASAD                       
 
   … APPELLANT 
 
                          VERSUS 
 
BILLA SATISH & OTHERS                       … RESPONDENTS 
 
 
 
 
O R D E R 
 
 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The appellant herein is aggrieved by what has been 
observed by the High Court for the State of Telangana in its 
order in paragraphs 14 and 15 dated 09.06.2022 passed in 
Criminal Petition No.5937 of 2016. As a consequence of the 
said observations, the docket order dated 21.07.2014 passed by 
the 
Court 
of 
XIX 
Metropolitan 
Magistrate, 
Cyberabad, 
Miyanpur, Kukatpally, in Crl.M.P. No.2383 of 2013 in Crime 
No.408 of 2013 filed by the appellant herein has been set aside.  
Digitally signed by
NEETU SACHDEVA
Date: 2024.12.11
16:38:00 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
 
 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
 
 
3. 
We have heard learned counsel for the appellant and 
learned senior counsel for respondent nos.1 to 5 and learned 
counsel for respondent no.6-State and perused the material on 
record.  
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that on 
the filing of a report by the concerned Sub-Inspector of Police, 
P.S. K.P.H.B. Cyberabad, the appellant herein filed a protest 
petition on 19.09.2013. By then, the Sworn Statement dated 
01.08.2013 and 10.01.2013 had been recorded and the expert 
opinion had also been recorded. Taking note of the same, the 
learned Metropolitan Magistrate, Cyberabad by the impugned 
docket order accepted the protest petition filed by the 
complainant/appellant herein and consequently observed as 
under:- 
“On perusal of the record found that the police filed 
second report stating that as false case. After receiving 
the notice the Defacto Complainant appeared before the 
court and filed the present case requesting the court to 
direct to proceed with the further investigation as a 
statement of Phanikumar disclosed there is no evidence 
if it is so Phanikumar is also guilty for fabricating the 
document and deceiving the authorities. The Sworn 
Statement 
of 
the 
Complainant 
disclosed 
that 
Phanikumar handed over some documents with forged 
signatures and the accused by using fake rubber 
stamps created documents and the exports by 
examining is admitted signatures with the signatures 

 
 
 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
 
on the fabricated documents opined that the signatures 
on the said documents were forged and fabricated. 
Therefore by considering the Sworn Statement of the 
Complainant and the Statement of Phanikumar dated 
1-8-2013 8-1-2013 the Investigating Agency is directed 
to reconsider the case and to ascertain the true facts 
basing on the sworn statement of the Defacto 
Complainant and by verifying the Expert Opinion and 
to submit report as early as possible” 
(underlining by us) 
 
4. 
Being aggrieved by the said order, the private respondents 
herein preferred Criminal Petition No.5937 of 2016 under 
Section 482 of the Cr.P.C.  before the High Court seeking a two-
fold relief. Firstly, the private respondents sought for quashing 
of the very complaint filed by the appellant herein which prayer 
the High Court did not accept as it opined that there was a 
prima facie case and the allegations leveled against the private 
respondents herein had to be considered by the Trial Court.  As 
far as the second aspect of the matter is concerned, the High 
Court found that the proceedings before the Trial Court were 
liable to be set-aside as the Trial Court could not have directed 
for a reinvestigation of the matter; that no such powers are 
envisaged for the Trial Court to order for reinvestigation in the 
matter. In the circumstances, paragraphs “14” and “15” of the 

 
 
 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
 
order of the High Court, as assailed by the appellant herein are 
reproduced hereunder:- 
“14. In the case on hand, a direction was given to the 
police by the Court to reinvestigate the matter. In view 
of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the 
said direction is without any jurisdiction. Therefore, the 
proceedings before the Trial Court are liable to be set 
aside. Once the proceedings are liable to be set aside, 
the only material available before the trial Court is the 
final report filed by the police stating that there is no 
material to proceed against the case, wherein the Police 
have already filed the final report. 
 
15. 
In the result, the criminal petition is allowed, 
quashing the order dated 21.07.2014 passed by the 
learned 
XIX 
Metropolitan 
Magistrate, 
Cyberabad, 
Kukatpally in Crl.M.P.No.2383 of 2013 in FIR No.408 of 
2013.” 
 
5. 
The controversy in this case would turn on the directions 
issued by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, in view of the 
fact that the expression used in the docket order dated 
21.07.2014 is “the investigating agency is directed to reconsider 
the case and to ascertain the true facts”. 
 
6. 
Learned 
senior 
counsel 
appearing 
for 
the 
private 
respondents submitted that the High Court rightly found that 
the direction to reconsider the case could not have been issued 
by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate inasmuch as no such 

 
 
 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
 
power is envisaged in law, therefore, the High Court was 
justified in setting aside the docket order dated 21.07.2014.  
 
7. 
In response to this submission, learned counsel for the 
appellant submitted that the aforesaid expression must be 
construed in accordance with what is envisaged in law. It 
cannot be to mean that there has to be a reinvestigation of the 
case as that was not the import of the aforesaid expression of 
the Trial Court; and that the learned Metropolitan Magistrate 
only directed continuing of the investigation having regard to 
the fact that he was considering the protest petition. The merit 
of the observations of the learned Metropolitan Magistrate has 
to be construed in light of what has been observed in the said 
order itself and in accordance with law. 
 
8. 
It was therefore submitted by learned counsel for the 
appellant as well as learned counsel for the respondent-State 
that it was not necessary for the High Court to have set aside 
the docket order dated 21.07.2014, thereby allowing the 
criminal petition filed by the private respondents herein.  This 
is particularly so when the High Court had also found that 
there was a prima facie case against the private respondents 

 
 
 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
 
herein and the allegations leveled against them could not have 
been simply brushed aside or quashed. 
  
9. 
Considering the submissions advanced at the bar we find 
that the choice of expression by the learned Metropolitan 
Magistrate may not have been appropriate. However, the 
meaning of the said expression could be discerned as a 
direction for a continuation of the investigation, having regard 
to the material on record. In the circumstances, we find that 
the High Court ought to have construed the true import of what 
the learned Metropolitan Magistrate had observed in the docket 
order dated 21.07.2014. If the same is perceived in the 
aforesaid context then the observations made in paragraphs 
“14” and “15” of the High Court order would be improper and 
hence, to that extent the appeal filed by the appellant herein 
has to be allowed and is allowed. The observations at 
paragraph “14” and “15” are set aside.  
 
10. Consequently, the direction issued by the learned 
Metropolitan Magistrate in the docket order dated 21.07.2014 
ought to be construed in accordance with the true legal import. 
Hence, the learned Metropolitan Magistrate is now directed to 

 
 
 
Page 7 of 7 
 
 
 
indicate the consequence of the said order and to conclude the 
proceedings in accordance with law by following the procedure 
envisaged in law on the protest petition, filed by the appellant 
herein. 
 
11. In this regard, reliance could be placed on the 
observations of this Court made in the case of Vishnu Kumar 
Tiwari vs. State of Uttar Pradesh through Secretary Home, 
Civil Secretariat, Lucknow and Another (2019 8 SCC 27) at 
paragraphs 14-27, as pointed out by learned counsel for the 
respondent-State 
and 
learned 
Senior 
Counsel 
for 
the 
respondents. 
  
This appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms.  
 
 
..…….…….…………………………………J. 
                                   (B.V. NAGARATHNA) 
 
 
 
  ….…….………………………………………J. 
                                  (NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH) 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
DECEMBER 05, 2024