2024 INSC 958
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION Diary No(s). 39665/2024
IN
M.A.D.No.14381/2024
IN
M.A.No. 714 of 2022
IN
W.P.(C) 429 of 2020
AJAY KUMAR JAIN                                 …Petitioner(s)
                               
VERSUS
THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.               …Respondent(s)
O R D E R
1.
Delay condoned.
2.
Application seeking permission to appear and argue-in-person
is allowed.
3.
This  miscellaneous  application  is  at  the  instance  of  the
original petitioner of Writ Petition (Civil) No.429 of 2020.
4.
In this miscellaneous application, the applicant has prayed
for the following reliefs:-
“A. To Direct the Hon'ble Distt. Judge, Agra; The S.S.P.,
Agra  to  grant  protection  to  the  applicant  during  the
pendency  of  Civil  appeal  number  126/2021  pending  before
the  Hon'ble  Distt.  Judge,  Agra  on  29th  March,2022  and
subsequent dates; and
B.  pass  such  a  order  and  directions  as  deemed  fit  and
proper in the facts and circumstances of this case.”
1
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2024.12.10
17:56:30 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

5.
We  take  notice  of  the  fact  that  the  Writ  Petition  (Civil)
No.429/2020 came to be disposed of vide order dated 6-8-2021 in the
following terms:-
"The  petitioner,  who  appears  in  person,  seeks  a  two-fold
direction under Article 32 of the Constitution:
(i)  A  direction  to  the  first  respondent  to  devise  a
mechanism for enforcing court orders; and
(ii) A direction to the District Judge to dispose of the
proceedings which have been initiated by the petitioner for
breach of the order which enures to his benefit,
2.  The wider relief which has been sought by the petitioner
in  (i)  above  cannot  be  entertained  in  these  proceedings
under Article 32, However, insofar as the specific grievance
of  the  petitioner  is  concerned,  we  direct  that  the
application, Contempt Application No 26 of 2016, which has
been  filed  by  him  complaining  of  a  breach  of  the  order
enuring to his benefit may be disposed of expeditiously, if
it  has  not  already  been  disposed  of,  within  a  period  of
three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of
this order.
3. We clarify that we have made no observations on the
merits of the issues which are sought to be raised in the
contempt proceedings.
4. The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
5. Pending application, if any, stands disposed of."
6.
Thus, while disposing of the main matter, this Court observed
that in so far as the wider relief which was prayed for by the
applicant  –  herein,  could  not  have  been  granted  in  proceedings
under Article 32 of the Constitution of India. However, this Court
proceeded to issue directions to the District Judge to dispose of
2

the contempt application No.26/2016 filed by the applicant herein
expeditiously.
7.
We have heard Dr. Ajay Kumar Jain appearing in-person.
8.
Dr.  Jain  brought  to  our  notice  that  in  pursuance  of  the
directions issued by this Court, referred to above, his contempt
application No.26/2016 was heard and the same was allowed. Against
such order, the contemnor went in appeal and his appeal is also
dismissed vide order dated 11-11-2024.
9.
His  grievance  is  that  despite  all  the  aforestated
developments, he has not been able to achieve any positive result
in his litigation,
10.
Today, he apprehends threat to himself and his family members
at the end of the contemnor.
11.
This  Miscellaneous  Application  on  the  face  of  it  is  not
maintainable in law.
12.
It is high time that this Court says something on the practice
of the litigants filing miscellaneous applications in disposed of
proceedings and that too after a period of 5 years, 7 years, 10
years.
13.
These  miscellaneous  applications  which  are  being  filed  on
daily basis have something to do with fresh cause of action that
might  have  arisen  with  a  very  remote  connection  with  the  main
proceedings.
14.
No  miscellaneous  application  is  maintainable  in  a  writ
petition to revive proceedings in respect of subsequent events.
3

15.
In  fact,  the  Court  has  no  jurisdiction  to  entertain  such
application as no proceedings could be said to be pending before
it. When proceedings stand terminated by final disposal of the writ
petition be it under Article 32 of the Constitution or Article 226
of the Constitution before the High Court, it is not open to the
Court  to  re-open  the  proceedings  by  means  of  a  miscellaneous
application in respect of a matter which provided a fresh cause of
action. If this principle is not followed, there would be confusion
and chaos and the finality of the proceedings would cease to have
any meaning. 
16.
In the recent past, a co-ordinate bench of this Court observed
the following in “Jaipur Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd, and Others vs.
Adani Power Rajasthan Ltd. and Another reported in 2024 SCC OnLine
SC 313”:-
“We  felt  it  necessary  to  examine  the  question  about
maintainability of the present application as we are of the
view that it was necessary to spell out the position of law
as  to  when  such  post-disposal  miscellaneous  applications
can  be  entertained  after  a  matter  is  disposed  of.  This
Court  has  become  
 
 functus  officio
 
  and  does  not  retain
jurisdiction to entertain an application after the appeal
was disposed of by the judgment of a three-Judge Bench of
this  Court  on  31.08.2020  through  a  course  beyond  that
specified in the statute. This is not an application for
correcting any clerical or arithmetical error. Neither it
is an application for extension of time. A post disposal
application for modification and clarification of the order
of disposal shall lie only in rare cases, where the order
passed  by  this  Court  is  executory  in  nature  and  the
directions  of  the  Court  may  become  impossible  to  be
implemented because of subsequent events or developments.
The  factual  background  of  this  Application  does  not  fit
into that description.”
(Emphasis supplied)
17.
Thus, this Court made it abundantly clear that a miscellaneous
application  filed  in  a  disposed  of  proceedings  would  be
maintainable only for the purpose of correcting any clerical or
arithmetical  error.  The  Court  further  clarified  that  a  post
4

disposal application for modification or clarification of the order
would lie only in rare cases where the order passed by this Court
is executory in nature and the directions of the Court may have
become impossible to be implemented because of subsequent events or
developments. 
18.
The Registry shall not circulate any miscellaneous application
filed in a disposed of proceedings unless and until there is a
specific  averment  on  oath  that  the  filing  of  the  miscellaneous
application has been necessitated as the order passed in the main
proceedings being executory in nature and have become impossible to
be implemented because of subsequent events or developments. 
19.
The Registry shall insist from every applicant who intends to
file any miscellaneous application in a disposed of proceedings for
such a declaration as above on solemn affirmation.
20.
If the applicant appearing in-person has an apprehension that
the contemnor is likely to cause any harm to him or any of his
family members, it is open for him to file a writ petition before
the territorial High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution
and seek appropriate relief in that regard.
21.
This Miscellaneous Application stands rejected with liberty to
the applicant appearing in-person to avail appropriate legal remedy
before the appropriate forum in accordance with law.
22.   Application  for  appeal  against  Registrar’s  order  is  also
rejected.
23.
If any writ petition is filed by the applicant before the High
Court,  seeking  protection  the  High  Court  may  look  into  it  in
accordance with law at the earliest. 
5

24.
Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
………………………………J.
                                          J.B. PARDIWALA
         
 
………………………………J.
                                           R. MAHADEVAN
New Delhi.
9th December, 2024.
6