2024 INSC 945
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6557 OF 2022 
 
 
TEJ BHAN (D) THROUGH LR. & ORS.        
        ...APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
RAM KISHAN (D) THROUGH LRS. & ORS.      
     …RESPONDENT(S)  
 
 O R D E R 
1. 
Interpreting Section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act, 19561, in V. 
Tulasamma & Ors. v. Sesha Reddy (Dead) by LRs.2”, Justice Bhagwati 
observed that this is a classic instance of a statutory provision which, 
by reason of its inapt draftsmanship, has created endless confusion for 
litigants and has proved to be a paradise for lawyers. Raising concern 
about the legislative indifference and interpretative difficulties 
presented by sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 14, leading to judicial 
divergence, which might as well be described as chaotic, robbing the 
law of that modicum of certainty which it must always possess, Justice 
Bhagwati observed; 
 
1 Hereinafter the ‘Act’. 
2  (1977) 3 SCC 99. 
Digitally signed by
KAPIL TANDON
Date: 2024.12.09
18:12:14 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
“67. ….. The question is of some complexity and it has evoked 
wide diversity of judicial opinion not only amongst the different 
High Courts but also within some of the High Courts themselves. 
It is indeed unfortunate that though it became evident as far 
back as 1967 that sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 14 were 
presenting serious difficulties of construction in cases where 
property was received by a Hindu female in lieu of maintenance 
and the instrument granting such property prescribed a 
restricted estate for her in the property and divergence of judicial 
opinion was creating a situation which might well be described 
as chaotic, robbing the law of that modicum of certainty which it 
must always possess in order to guide the affairs of men, the 
legislature, for all these years, did not care to step in to remove 
the constructional dilemma facing the courts and adopted an 
attitude of indifference and inaction, untroubled and unmoved 
by the large number of cases on this point encumbering the files 
of different courts in the country, when by the simple expedient 
of an amendment, it could have silenced judicial conflict and put 
an end to needless litigation. This is a classic instance of a 
statutory provision which, by reason of its inapt draftsmanship, 
has created endless confusion for litigants and proved a 
paradise for lawyers….” 
 
2. 
With this trepidation, they proceeded to resolve the confusion 
surrounding the interplay between sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 
14 of the Act and to enunciate the principles that govern disposition of 
property in favour of Hindu female. The principles formulated in 
Tulsamma, as extracted in paragraph 4 of this judgment, substantially 
hold the field. However as of date, there are atleast 18 judgments from 
this Court comprising decisions from two and three Judge benches that 
are varying and sometimes inconsistent with the view taken in 
Tulsamma’s case. While arriving at their respective decisions, these 
judgments sought to explain, distinguish, negotiate or ignore the 
principles in Tulsamma and in the process they have either 
contradicted Tulsamma or implicitly departed from its principles sub-

3 
 
silentio. Almost four decades after the judgment in Tulsamma, we have 
two streams of thoughts. While the first applies principles in Tulsamma 
as an inviolable principle steadfastly holding that property possessed 
by a Hindu female before or after the commencement of the Act shall 
be held by her as a full owner. The other seems to be evolving from case 
to case, influenced by, i) the method and manner by which the Hindu 
female is possessed of the property, ii) the instrument through which 
the right is acquired, and iii) the time at which such possession takes 
place, to mention a few.  
3. 
Having gone through the precedents in detail, our endeavour was 
to reconcile the judgments and restate the principles with clarity and 
certainty. However, in view of the fact that we are in a combination of 
a two-Judge bench, such an exercise will not be fruitful as our 
judgment would be subject to the decision of many three Judge 
benches which need to be reconciled. The issue is of utmost importance 
as it affects the rights of every Hindu female, her larger family and such 
claims and objections that may be pending consideration in almost all 
original and appellate courts across the length and breadth of the 
country. It is absolutely necessary that there must be clarity and 
certainty in the position of law that would govern proprietary interests 
of parties involving interpretation of Section 14. 

4 
 
4. 
In this view of the matter, we have directed the Registry to place 
our order along with the appeal paper book before the Hon’ble Chief 
Justice of India for referring the matter to an appropriate larger bench. 
In order to assist the Hon’ble CJI, we have reviewed the precedents that 
have caused some inconsistencies and uncertainties. 
5. 
Before we examine the precedents in detail, the short facts 
involved in the present appeal are as under: 
6. 
The appellant before the court is the purchaser of the suit 
scheduled property under a sale deed dated 02.03.1981 executed by 
the wife of one Kanwar Bhan, the testator, who was the original owner 
of the property. Mr. Kanwar Bhan during his lifetime executed a will 
dated 03.03.1965 in favour of his wife. The will created a life estate in 
favour of his wife. The relevant portion of the will creating the life estate 
is as under: 
“After my death, whatever rights I will be having in my above 
said property, in that eventuality, out of the land situated at 
village Nalvi Kalan, my wife Smt.Lachhmi Bai shall be having 
ownership of land measuring about 2½ Acre comprised in 
Rectangle No.4, Killa No.17/2, 18, 19/1, 23/1, and she will be 
entitled to maintain herself out of the proceeds from the same. 
She will not be entitled to mortgage or sell the said land. Of the 
remaining property, my son Shri Mool Chand will be owner to the 
extent of 1/2 share and Ram Kishan and Nand Lal sons of Shri 
Mool Chand (my grand-sons), will be absolute owners of 1/2 
share in equal shares. My wife Smt.Lachhmi Bai will be owner, 
of the houses situated at village Kunjpura and she will be 
entitled to reside in the said house or to rent out the same. She 
will not be able to mortgage or sell the same. After her death, my 
son Shri Mool Chand will be absolute owner of the same to the 
extent of 1/2 share and my grand-sons Shri Ram Kishan Lal and 
Nand Lal to the extent of 1/2 share.” 

5 
 
 
7. 
After the execution of the above referred will, the testator Kanwar 
Bhan died on 11.10.1965. As indicated earlier, his wife executed a sale 
deed in favour of the appellant herein leading to the son and grandson 
of Tej Bhan instituting a suit for declaration that the sale deed in favour 
of the petitioner is void and also sought delivery of possession. 
8. 
In its judgment dated 31.01.1986, the Trial Court relied on 
decision in Tulsamma’s case and held that the property given to the 
wife of Kanwar Bhan is in the nature of maintenance and such a pre-
existing right shall enlarge into full estate. Rejecting the contention of 
the respondent plaintiffs based on Section 14(2) and also rejecting the 
applicability of the judgment of this Court in Karmi v. Amru3 and certain 
other decisions of the same High Court, the Trial Court dismissed the 
suit. Even in the first appeal, the respondent-plaintiffs relied on Karmi 
(supra) and certain other decisions of this Court to submit that the 
disposition of the property by the wife of the testator falls under sub-
section (2) of Section 14. The First Appellate Court dismissed the appeal 
and affirmed the decision of the Trial Court following the principle in 
Tulsamma and also rejected the submission of the respondent based 
on Karmi’s decision. The High Court, from which the impugned order 
arises reversed the concurrent findings of the court below only on a 
 
3 (1972) 4 SCC 86 

6 
 
question of law. According to the High Court, the correct principles 
were laid down in the decision of Sadhu Singh v. Gurdwara Sahib 
Narike & Ors4. 
9. 
Mr. Dhruv Mehta, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of 
the appellant submitted that Sadhu Singh (supra) is wrongly decided 
and is contrary to the principles laid down in Tulsamma. He has also 
referred to a number of other decisions such as Gulwant Kaur v. 
Mohinder Singh5, Thota Sesharathamma v. Thota Manikyamma6, 
Balwant Kaur v. Chanan Singh & Ors.7, Shakuntala Devi v. Kamla8, 
Jupudy Pardha Sarathy v. Pentapati Rama Krishna9 and V. 
Kalyanaswamy v. L. Bakthavatsalam10. On the other hand, Mr. Sunil 
K. Mittal, learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that the 
decision of Karmi (supra) is of a three-Judge bench and it has not been 
overruled. He would further submit that the said judgment was in fact 
followed in Bhura and Ors. v. Kashiram11 where the position of law 
involving interplay between sub-section 1 and 2 of Section 14 has been 
explained. He would also rely on the decision in Sadhu Singh (supra) 
which was also relied on by the High Court. Further, it was submitted 
 
4  (2006) 8 SCC 75 
5  (1987) 3 SCC 674   
6  (1991) 4 SCC 312 
7  (2000) 6 SCC 310 
8  (2005) 5 SCC 390 
9  (2016) 2 SCC 56 
10  (2021) 16 SCC 543 
11  (1994) 2 SCC 111 

7 
 
that judgments in Gaddam Ramakrishnareddy and Ors. v. Gaddam 
Ramireddy and Anr.12, Jagan Singh (Dead) through LRs. v. Dhanwanti 
and Anr.13, Shivdev Kaur (Dead) by LRs. and Ors.  v. RS Grewal14, Ranvir 
Dewan v. Rashmi Khanna and Anr.15  and Jogi Ram v. Suresh Kumar 
and Ors16 adopt the same line. 
10. We will first reproduce Section 14 of the Act, before referring and 
reviewing the judgments of this Court interpreting the Section. 
“Sec 14. Property of a female Hindu to be her absolute 
property.— (1) Any property possessed by a female Hindu, 
whether acquired before or after the commencement of this Act, 
shall be held by her as full owner thereof and not as a limited 
owner.  
Explanation.—In this sub-section, “property” includes both 
movable and immovable property acquired by a female Hindu by 
inheritance or devise, or at a partition, or in lieu of maintenance 
or arrears of maintenance, or by gift from any person, whether a 
relative or not, before, at or after her marriage, or by her own 
skill or exertion, or by purchase or by prescription, or in any other 
manner whatsoever, and also any such property held by her as 
stridhana immediately before the commencement of this Act. 
 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to any 
property acquired by way of gift or under a will or any other 
instrument or under a decree or order of a civil court or under an 
award where the terms of the gift, will or other instrument or the 
decree, order or award prescribe a restricted estate in such 
property.” 
 
11. We will commence with a 1967 judgment of this Court in Mangal 
Singh and Ors. v. Rattno (Dead) by LRs. and Anr.17.  In this decision, 
 
12  (2010) 9 SCC 602 
13 (2012) 2 SCC 628 
14 (2013) 4 SCC 636 
15 (2018) 12 SCC 1 
16 (2022) 4 SCC 274 
17 AIR 1967 SC 1786 

8 
 
the court explained the scope and ambit of the expression of “any 
property possessed by a female Hindu” in Section 14(1) of the Act. In 
Seth Badri Prasad v. Smt. Kanso Devi18, a three Judge bench observed 
that sub-section (2) of Section 14 is more in the nature of a proviso or 
an exception to sub-section (1) and it comes into operation if 
acquisition of the property by a female Hindu is made through any of 
the methods mentioned therein for the first time and without their 
being any pre-existing right.  
12. Tulsamma was decided in 1977. It referred19 to a number of 
decisions of this Court and that of the High Courts and has followed20, 
approved21 or overruled22 them.  
 
18  (1969) 2 SCC 586 
19  Referred to: Gummalapura Taggina Matada Kotturuswami v. Setra Veeravva (1959) Supp 1 SCR 
968; RBSS Munna Lal v. SS Rajkumar (1962) Supp 3 SCR 418, Mangal Singh v. Rattno AIR 1967 SC 
1786; Narayan Rao Ramachandra Pant v. Ramabai LR 5 IA 114; Mst Dan Kuer v. Mst Sarla Devi LR 
73 IA 208; Pratapmull Agarwalla v. Dhanabati Bibi LR 63 IA 33; Namangini Dasi v. Kedarnath Kundu 
Chowdhry ILR 16 Cal 758 (PC). 
20 Followed: Seth Badri Parsad v. Smt. Kanso Devi (1969) 2 SCC 586; Nirmal Chand v. Vidya Wanti 
(1969) 3 SCC 628; Rani Bai v. Yadunandan Ram (1969) 1 SCC 604; RBSS Munnalal v. SS Raj Kumar 
(1962) Supp 3 SCR 418; Eramma v. Veerupana (1966) 2 SCR 626; Mangal Singh v. Rattno (1967) 2 
SCR 454; Sukhram v. Gauri Shankar (1968) 1 SCR 476;  
21 Approved: B.B. Patil v. Gangabai, AIR 1972 Bom 16, Sumeshwar Misra v. Swami Nath Tiwari AIR 
1970 Pat 348; Gadew Reddayya v. Varapula Venkataraju AIR 1965 AP 66; Lakshmi Devi v. Shankar 
Jha AIR 1967 Mad 428; H Venkanagouda v. Hanamanagouda AIR 1972 Mys 286; Smt Sharbati Devi 
v. Pt. Hiralal AIR 1964 Punj 114; Seshadhar Chandra Devi v. Tara Sundari Dasi AIR 1962 Cal 438; 
Saraswathi Ammal v. Anantha Shenoi AIR 1966 Ker 66; Kunji Thomman v. Meenakshi ILR (1970) 2 
Ker 45; Sumeshwar Mishra v. Swami Nath Tiwari AIR 1970 Pat 348; Sasadhar Chandra Day v. Tara 
Sundari Dasi AIR 1962 Cal 438. 
22 Overruled: Naraini Devi v. Ramo Devi (1976) 1 SCC 574, Gurunadham v. Sundrarajulu ILR (1968) 
1 Mad 467; Santhanam v. Subramania ILR (1967) 1Mad 68; S Kachapalaya Gurakkal v. Subramania 
Gurukkal AIR 1972 Mad 219; Shiva Pujan Rai v. Jamuna Missir ILR (1947) Pat 1118; Gopisetti 
Kondaiah v. Gunda Subbarayudu ILR (1968) AP 621; Ram Jag Misir v. Director of Consolidation AIR 
1975 All 151; Ajab Singh v. Ram Singh AIR 1959 J&K 92; Narayan Patra v. Tara Patrani (1970) 36 
Cut LT 567; Gopisetty Kondaiah v. Gunde Subbarayodu ILR 1968 AP 621; Gurunadham v. 
Sundrajulu Chetty  ILR (1968) 1 Mad 567. 

9 
 
The principles that were formulated in this landmark decision are as 
follows; 
“(1) The Hindu female's right to maintenance is not an empty 
formality or an illusory claim being conceded as a matter of grace 
and generosity, but is a tangible right against property which 
flows from the spiritual relationship between the husband and 
the wife and is recognised and enjoined by pure Shastric Hindu 
Law and has been strongly stressed even by the earlier Hindu 
jurists starting from Yajnavalkya to Manu. Such a right may not 
be a right to property but it is a right against property and the 
husband has a personal obligation to maintain his wife and if he 
or the family has property, the female has the legal right to be 
maintained therefrom. If a charge is created for the maintenance 
of a female, the said right becomes a legally enforceable one. At 
any rate, even without a charge the claim for maintenance is 
doubtless a pre-existing right so that any transfer declaring or 
recognising such a right does not confer any new title but merely 
endorses or confirms the pre-existing rights. 
  
(2) Section 14(1) and the Explanation thereto have been couched 
in the widest possible terms and must be liberally construed in 
favour of the females so as to advance the object of the 1956 Act 
and promote the socio-economic ends, sought to be achieved by 
this long needed legislation.  
 
(3) Sub-section (2) of s. 14 is in the nature of a proviso and has a 
field of its own without interfering with the operation of s.14(1) 
materially. The proviso should not be construed in a manner so 
as to destroy the effect of the main provision or the protection 
granted by s. 14(1) or in a way so as to become totally 
inconsistent with the main provision. 
 
(4) Sub-section (2) of s. 14 applies to instruments, decrees, 
awards, gifts etc. which create independent and new titles in 
favour of the females for the first time and has no application 
where the instrument concerned merely seeks to confirm, 
endorse, declare or recognise preexisting rights. In such cases a 
restricted estate in favour of a female is legally permissible and 
s. 14(1) will not operate in this sphere. Where, however, an 
instrument merely declares or recognises a pre-existing right, 
such as a claim to maintenance or partition or share to which the 
female is entitled, the sub-section has absolutely no application 
and the female's limited interest would automatically be en- 
larged into an absolute one by force of s. 14(1) and the 
restrictions placed, if any, under the document would have to be 
ignored. Thus where a property is allotted or transferred to a 
female in lieu of maintenance or a share at partition, the 
instrument is taken out of the ambit of subsection (2) and would 

10 
 
be governed by s. 14(1) despite any restrictions placed on the 
powers of the transferee.  
 
(5) The use of express terms like "property acquired by a female 
Hindu at a partition", "or in lieu of maintenance", "or arrears of 
maintenance" etc. in the Explanation to s. 14(1) clearly makes 
sub-s. (2) inapplicable to these categories which have been 
expressly excepted from the operation of sub-s. (2). 
 
(6) The words "possessed by" used by the Legislature in s. 14(1) 
are of the widest possible amplitude and include the state of 
owning a property even though the owner is not in actual or 
physical possession of the same: Thus, where a widow gets a 
share in the property under a preliminary decree before or at the 
time when the 1956 Act had been passed but had not been given 
actual possession under a final decree, the property would be 
deemed to be possessed by her and by force of s. 14(1) she 
would get absolute interest. in the property. It is equally well 
settled that the possession of the widow, however, must be 
under some vestige of a claim, right or title, because the section 
does not contemplate the possession of any trespasser without 
any right or title. 
 
(7) That the words "restricted estate" used in s. 4(2) are wider 
than limited interest as indicated in s. 14(1) and they include not 
only limited interest, but also any other kind of limitation that 
may be placed on the transferee.” 
 
13. The decision in Tulsamma (supra) was followed in the case of 
Gulwant Kaur v. Mohinder Singh23 and this was affirmed by a three-
Judge bench in Jaswant Kaur v. Major Harpal Singh24. 
14. In a 1991 decision, a two-Judge bench in Thota Sesharathamma 
(supra), while following the decision in Tulsamma (supra), noticed 
another three-Judge bench decision in Karmi (supra) which was not 
noticed in Tulsamma. Having examined the matter in detail, one of the 
Judges observed that the decision in Karmi (supra) “is a short judgment 
 
23 Id no. 5- See para nos.  4 and 9.  
24 (1989) 3 SCC 572. 

11 
 
without adverting to any provisions of Section 14(1) or 14(2) of the Act. 
The judgment neither makes any mention of any argument raised in this 
regard nor there is any mention of the earlier decision in Badri Pershad 
v. Smt Kanso Devi. The decision in Mst Karmi cannot be considered as 
an authority on the ambit and scope of Section 14(1) and (2) of the Act”25. 
Taking a similar stand, the concurring Judge held that in Karmi (supra) 
“the attention of this Court to Section 14(1) was not drawn nor had an 
occasion to angulate in this perspective. Therefore, the ratio therein is of 
little assistance to the appellant”26.  
15. It is true that the decision in Karmi (supra) neither analysed the 
provisions of the Act nor has considered the purpose and object of 
Section 14 and the precedents on this subject. However, the principle 
on the basis of which the Court in Karmi (supra) decided the case 
resonates in many subsequent decisions which have in fact followed it 
as a precedent. 
16. A 1996 decision of this Court in the case of C. Masilamani 
Mudaliar and Ors. v. Idol of Sri Swaminathaswami Swaminathaswami 
Thirukoil and Ors27  is important for the reason that it is of a three 
 
25 Id n 6 – See para 10 
26  Ibid – See para 29 
27  (1996) 8 SCC 525 

12 
 
Judge bench and it identifies a discordant note in a subsequent case 
of a two Judge bench in Gumpha v. Jaibai28, the court observed that : 
“28. In Gumpha case though the Will was executed in 1941 and 
the executor died in 1958 after the Act had come into force, the 
concept of limited right in lieu of maintenance was very much in 
the mind of the executor when Will was executed in 1941 but 
after the Act came into force, the Will became operative. The 
restrictive covenant would have enlarged it into an absolute 
estate; but unfortunately the Bench had put a restrictive 
interpretation which in our considered view does not appear to 
be sound in law.” 
 
17. The above referred decision in Masilamani Mudaliar (supra) was 
followed in Bhoomireddy Chenna Reddy v. Bhoospalli Pedda Verrappa29 
and V. Kalyanaswamy v. L. Bakthavatsalam, Nazar Singh v. Jagjit 
Kaur30, Balwant Kaur (supra), Shakuntala Devi (supra), Santosh & Ors. 
v. Smt Saraswathibai & Anr31, Jupudy Pardha Sarathy (supra) as well 
as the recent, Munni Devi Alias Nathi Devi (D) v. Rajendra Alias Lallu Lal 
(D)32 and Kallakuri Pattabhiramswamy (D) Through LRs v. Kallakuri 
Kamaraju & Ors33 are other decisions that have followed Tulsamma 
(supra).  
18. The other stream of thought seems to have originated in a three-
Judge bench of this Court in Karmi (supra) about which we have 
 
28  (1994) 2 SCC 511 
29  (1997) 10 SCC 673 
30  (1996) 1 SCC 35 
31   (2008) 1 SCC 465 
32  (2022) 17 SCC 434 
33   2021 INSC 883; in addition to Tulasamma this case also relied on Raghubar Singh v. Gulab Singh 
(1998) 6 SCC 314, Mangat Mal v. Punni Devi (1995) 6 SCC 88 and Jaswant Kaur v. Harpal Singh 
(1989) 3 SCC 572. 

13 
 
already mentioned. The conclusion in this decision is drawn from a 
different perspective of statutory construction, elucidation of which is 
seen in the subsequent decision of this Court in Bhura (supra). 
However, it is only in Gumpha (supra) that the principle of the alternate 
thoughts are formulated as under: 
1. While qualifying the law relating to intestate succession, to 
become a complete code, the Act also deals with testamentary 
succession. In Section 30, the law which had been judicially 
expounded is incorporated by creating absolute power in a 
Hindu to dispose of his property by will. This power extends to 
creating restricted right in favour of a female. 
 
2. Will under Indian Succession Act, applies to Hindu Succession 
Act as well, operates from the date of death of the testator.  
 
3. Position of the property contemplated in Section 14(1) cannot 
include acquisition by will. 
 
4. The expression, ‘any manner whatsoever’, will not include a 
will, which is specifically mentioned in Section 14(2). 
 
5. Even though the instances in the explanation are not 
exhaustive, it cannot include disposition by way of a will under 
Section 14(2). 
 
6. Parliament has never intended to confirm a higher right on a 
Hindu female, than what was enjoyed by a male Hindu. 
 
7. Possession under Section 14(1) must be legal, therefore if the 
position is placeable to a will, then she cannot get a higher right 
than what is stipulated in the document. 
 
8. A combined reading of the Sections is that when the law 
attempts to remove the disability imposed by customary Hindu 
law, it does not enlarge and exchange the right she will get under 
a will.  
 
9. The judgement in the case of Thota (supra) is not relevant for 
interpretation. As in that case, the testator died before the Hindu 
Succession Act came into force and the widow was in possession 
as limited owner and her rights became absolute.  
 
10. In the present case succession opened after the Act has come 
into force. 

14 
 
 
19. In the above referred decision of this Court in Gumpha (supra), the 
Court distinguishes the decision in Thota Sesharathamma (supra) on 
the ground that the testator died before the commencement of the 
Hindu Succession Act.  
20. The next important decision of this Court is Sadhu Singh (supra) 
the principle as formulated in this judgment can be restated as under: 
1. A hindu wife is entitled to be maintained by her husband 
u/s.18 HAMA and a hindu widow, being a dependent u/s.21 
HAMA, is entitled to claim maintenance from heirs of her 
husband u/s.22 HAMA to the extent of the estate inherited 
by them. Further, s.28 HAMA entitles her to claim 
maintenance against a transferee even. However, this 
aforesaid entitlement nowhere allows her to create a charge 
on her husband’s property. In fact, s.27 HAMA expressly 
states to the contrary.  
 
2. The test therefore is to look at the nature of right acquired by 
a female hindu - If she takes as an heir, she does it 
absolutely. But if it’s under a devise, then any restriction 
placed will apply in view of s.14(2).  
 
3. S.30 is an affirmation to an owner’s right to deal with his 
property. Thus, when an owner executes a will, laying down 
the bequest with respect to his estate, the legatee takes 
subject to terms therein. S.14(2) reaffirms the affirmation in 
s.30. Any interpretation of s.14(1) which renders s.14(2) and 
s.30 otios cannot be allowed.  
 
4. Ratio in Tulasamma has application only when a female 
Hindu is possessed of the property on the date of the Act 
under semblance of a right (limited or pre-existing). The 
decision in Karmi can only be justified on the premise that the 
widow had no pre-existing right in the self-acquired property 
of 
her 
husband. 
Decision 
in 
Bhura 
and 
 
Sharad 

15 
 
Subramanyan Vs. Soumi Mazumdar & Ors.34 is along the 
same lines.  
 
5. Thus, the essential ingredients for determining application of 
s.14(1) are as follows - antecedents of the property, the 
possession of the property as on the date of the Act and the 
existence of a right in the female over it, however limited it 
may be.  
 
6. Any acquisition of possession of property (not right) by a 
female Hindu after the coming into force of the Act, cannot 
normally attract Section 14(1) of the Act.  
 
21. As this judgment is argued to be contrary to the principles laid 
down in Tulsamma and also bad in law for the reason that it is a 
decision of a two-Judge bench, it is necessary to extract the portion of 
the judgment. The extract will also indicate how Tulsamma was 
understood and analysed in this judgment. The relevant portion of this 
judgment is extracted herein for ready reference: 
“4. Under Section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance 
Act, a Hindu wife is entitled to be maintained by her husband 
during her lifetime, subject to her not incurring the 
disqualifications provided for in sub-section (3) of that section. 
The widow is in the list of dependants as defined in Section 21 
of the Act. The widow remains a dependant so long as she does 
not remarry. Under Section 22, an obligation is cast on the heirs 
of the deceased Hindu to maintain the dependant of the 
deceased out of the estate inherited by them from the deceased. 
Under sub-section (2), where a dependant has not obtained by 
testamentary or intestate succession, any share in the estate of 
a Hindu dying after the commencement of the Act, the 
dependant would be entitled, but subject to the provisions of the 
Act, to maintenance from those who take the estate. It is seen 
that neither Section 18 relating to a wife nor Section 21 dealing 
with a widow, provides for any charge for the maintenance on 
the property of the husband. To the contrary, Section 27 
specifies that a dependant's claim for maintenance under that 
 
34 (2006) 8 SCC 91 

16 
 
Act, shall not be a charge on the estate of the deceased unless 
one would have been created by the will of the deceased, by a 
decree of court, by an agreement between the dependant and 
the owner of the estate or otherwise. Thus a widow has no 
charge on the property of the husband. Section 28 provides that 
where a dependant had a right to receive maintenance out of 
an estate, that right could be enforced even against a transferee 
of the property if the transferee had notice of the right, or if the 
transfer is gratuitous, but not against a transferee for 
consideration without notice of the right. Section 28 is in pari 
materia with Section 39 of the Transfer of Property Act. The 
Kerala High Court in Kaveri Amma v. Parameswari Amma [AIR 
1971 Ker 216 : 1971 KLT 299] has liberally interpreted the 
expression “right to receive maintenance” occurring in the 
section as including a right to claim enhanced maintenance 
against the transferee. The sum and subtotal of the right under 
the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act is only to claim 
maintenance and the right to receive it even against a 
transferee. In the absence of any instrument or decree providing 
for it, no charge for such maintenance is created in the separate 
properties of the husband. 
 
11. On the wording of the section and in the context of these 
decisions, it is clear that the ratio in V. Tulasamma v. Shesha 
Reddy [(1977) 3 SCC 99 : (1977) 3 SCR 261] has application 
only when a female Hindu is possessed of the property on the 
date of the Act under semblance of a right, whether it be a 
limited or a pre-existing right to maintenance in lieu of which 
she was put in possession of the property. Tulasamma [(1977) 
3 SCC 99 : (1977) 3 SCR 261] ratio cannot be applied ignoring 
the requirement of the female Hindu having to be in possession 
of the property either directly or constructively as on the date of 
the Act, though she may acquire a right to it even after the Act. 
The 
same 
is 
the 
position 
in Raghubar 
Singh v. Gulab 
Singh [(1998) 6 SCC 314 : AIR 1998 SC 2401] wherein the 
testamentary succession was before the Act. The widow had 
obtained possession under a will. A suit was filed challenging 
the will. The suit was compromised. The compromise sought to 
restrict the right of the widow. This Court held that since the 
widow was in possession of the property on the date of the Act 
under the will as of right and since the compromise decree 
created no new or independent right in her, Section 14(2) of the 
Act had no application and Section 14(1) governed the case, her 
right 
to 
maintenance 
being 
a 
pre-existing 
right. 

17 
 
In Karmi v. Amru [(1972) 4 SCC 86 : AIR 1971 SC 745] the 
owner of the property executed a will in respect of a self-
acquired property. The testamentary succession opened in 
favour of the wife in the year 1938. But it restricted her right. 
Thus, though she was in possession of the property on the date 
of the Act, this Court held that the life estate given to her under 
the will cannot become an absolute estate under the provisions 
of the Act. This can only be on the premise that the widow had 
no pre-existing right in the self-acquired property of her 
husband. In a case where a Hindu female was in possession of 
the property as on the date of the coming into force of the Act, 
the same being bequeathed to her by her father under a will, 
this Court in Bhura v. Kashi Ram [(1994) 2 SCC 111] after 
finding on a construction of the will that it only conferred a 
restricted right in the property in her, held that Section 14(2) of 
the Act was attracted and it was not a case in which by virtue 
of the operation of Section 14(1) of the Act, her right would get 
enlarged into an absolute estate. This again could only be on 
the basis that she had no pre-existing right in the property. 
In Sharad Subramanyan v. Soumi Mazumdar [(2006) 8 SCC 91 
: JT (2006) 11 SC 535] this Court held that since the legatee 
under the will in that case, did not have a pre-existing right in 
the property, she would not be entitled to rely on Section 14(1) 
of the Act to claim an absolute estate in the property bequeathed 
to her and her rights were controlled by the terms of the will 
and Section 14(2) of the Act. This Court in the said decision has 
made a survey of the earlier decisions including the one 
in Tulasamma [(1977) 3 SCC 99 : (1977) 3 SCR 261] . Thus, it 
is seen that the antecedents of the property, the possession of 
the property as on the date of the Act and the existence of a 
right in the female over it, however limited it may be, are the 
essential ingredients in determining whether sub-section (1) of 
Section 14 of the Act would come into play. What emerges 
according to us is that any acquisition of possession of property 
(not right) by a female Hindu after the coming into force of the 
Act, cannot normally attract Section 14(1) of the Act. It would 
depend on the nature of the right acquired by her. If she takes 
it as an heir under the Act, she takes it absolutely. If while 
getting possession of the property after the Act, under a devise, 
gift or other transaction, any restriction is placed on her right, 
the restriction will have play in view of Section 14(2) of the Act. 
 
13. An owner of property has normally the right to deal with 
that property including the right to devise or bequeath the 

18 
 
property. He could thus dispose it of by a testament. Section 30 
of the Act, not only does not curtail or affect this right, it actually 
reaffirms that right. Thus, a Hindu male could testamentarily 
dispose of his property. When he does that, a succession under 
the Act stands excluded and the property passes to the 
testamentary heirs. Hence, when a male Hindu executes a will 
bequeathing the properties, the legatees take it subject to the 
terms of the will unless of course, any stipulation therein is 
found invalid. Therefore, there is nothing in the Act which 
affects the right of a male Hindu to dispose of his property by 
providing only a life estate or limited estate for his widow. The 
Act does not stand in the way of his separate properties being 
dealt with by him as he deems fit. His will hence could not be 
challenged as being hit by the Act. 
 
14. When he thus validly disposes of his property by providing 
for a limited estate to his heir, the wife, the wife or widow has 
to take it as the estate falls. This restriction on her right so 
provided, is really respected by the Act. It provides in Section 
14(2) of the Act, that in such a case, the widow is bound by the 
limitation on her right and she cannot claim any higher right by 
invoking Section 14(1) of the Act. In other words, conferment of 
a limited estate which is otherwise valid in law is reinforced by 
this Act by the introduction of Section 14(2) of the Act and 
excluding the operation of Section 14(1) of the Act, even if that 
provision is held to be attracted in the case of a succession 
under the Act. Invocation of Section 14(1) of the Act in the case 
of a testamentary disposition taking effect after the Act, would 
make Sections 30 and 14(2) redundant or otiose. It will also 
make redundant, the expression “property possessed by a 
female Hindu” occurring in Section 14(1) of the Act. An 
interpretation that leads to such a result cannot certainly be 
accepted. Surely, there is nothing in the Act compelling such an 
interpretation. Sections 14 and 30 both have play. Section 14(1) 
applies in a case where the female had received the property 
prior to the Act being entitled to it as a matter of right, even if 
the right be to a limited estate under the Mitakshara law or the 
right to maintenance.” 
 
 
22. It is important to note that except, Karmi (supra), the decisions in 
Bhura, Gumpha and Sadhu Singh (supra) are all by two Judge benches. 

19 
 
The larger perspective in which Section 14 was interpreted holistically 
commenced from Karmi and was followed in many subsequent cases. 
Some of the decisions in the same line are Gaddam Ramakrishnareddy,  
Jagan Singh, Shivdev Kaur, Ranvir Dewan and Jogi Ram (supra).  
23. We have noticed that while following Tulsamma, the subsequent 
decisions in Thota Sesharathamma, Masilamani Mudaliar and 
Shakuntala Devi (supra) have made passing observations about the 
discordant note in the case of Karmi, Bhura and Gumpha (supra) but 
they have not been clearly and categorically overruled. Perhaps this is 
the reason why the subsequent decisions consistently followed the idea 
in Karmi and enunciated different principles in the subsequent 
decisions of Gumpha, Sadhu Singh (supra) and that perspective 
continued on its own strength. 
24. We heard the present appeal in detail and have also taken a view 
in the matter, but having realised that there are a large number of 
decisions which are not only inconsistent with one another on principle 
but have tried to negotiate a contrary view by distinguishing them on 
facts or by simply ignoring the binding decision, we are of the view that 
there must be clarity and certainty in the interpretation of Section 14 
of the Act.  

20 
 
25. In view of the above, we direct the Registry to place our order along 
with the appeal paper book before the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India for 
constituting an appropriate larger bench for reconciling the principles 
laid down in various judgments of this Court and for restating the law 
on the interplay between sub-section (1) and (2) of Section 14 of the 
Hindu Succession Act. 
 
………………………………....J. 
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 
………………………………....J. 
[SANDEEP MEHTA] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
DECEMBER 09, 2024.