2024 INSC 951
1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 13348 OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP(C) No.12221 of 2022) 
 
 
BANWARI AND OTHERS                         …APPELLANTS(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
HARYANA STATE INDUSTRIAL  
AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT  
CORPORATION LIMITED (HSIIDC)  
AND ANOTHER 
         
 
        …RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
 
1. 
Leave granted.  
2. 
This appeal challenges the judgment and order dated 
25th November 2021 passed by the learned Single Judge of 
the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in 
CWP No. 19814 of 2021 (O&M), whereby the writ petition 
filed by respondent No.1 under Articles 226/227 of the 
Constitution of India praying for a writ of certiorari for 
quashing the order passed by the District Revenue Officer-
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2024.12.10
14:11:44 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
cum-Land Acquisition Collector, Jhajjar (hereinafter referred 
to as “LAC”) dated 15th September 2020, came to be allowed.  
3. 
The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeal are 
as under: 
3.1 By a notification under Section 4 of the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter referred to as “1894 Act”) 
dated 17th November 2004, the land of the appellants 
admeasuring 8 Kanal 17 Marla of village Majri, Tehsil 
Bahadurgarh, District Jhajjar was acquired for Kundli 
Manesar Palwal Expressway. By an award dated 1st March 
2006, a compensation of Rs.12,50,000/- per acre was 
determined. 
3.2 Aggrieved by the said award, similarly circumstanced 
land-owners preferred a reference for enhancement of 
compensation before the learned Additional District Judge, 
Jhajjar under Section 18 of the 1894 Act. Vide order dated 
17th January 2012, the said reference was dismissed. 
3.3 The said land-owners preferred a Regular First Appeal 
(RFA) being No. 429 of 2013 before the High Court of Punjab 
and Haryana.  Vide judgment and order dated 2nd May 2016, 
the High Court of Punjab and Haryana allowed the said RFA 

3 
 
and enhanced the compensation to Rs.19,91,300/- along 
with statutory benefits.  
3.4 Immediately thereafter the appellants on 30th June 2016 
filed an application under Section 28-A of the 1894 Act 
before the LAC, Jhajjar as reference was not filed by the 
appellants. 
3.5 Vide order dated 15th September 2020, the LAC held 
that the appellants were entitled to the benefit of the 
judgment and order of the High Court in RFA No. 429 of 
2013 dated 2nd May 2016 and enhanced the compensation 
payable to the appellants to Rs.19,91,300/- per acre along 
with statutory benefits as awarded by the High Court to the 
similarly circumstanced land-owners. 
3.6 Being aggrieved thereby, respondent No.1 preferred a 
writ petition before the High Court. The High Court vide 
impugned judgment and order, relying on its earlier 
judgment in CWP No. 8456 of 2020 titled “Haryana State 
Industrial and Infrastructure Development Corporation 
Limited v. Smt. Shanti and Others” decided on 6th 
September 2021, allowed the writ petition and set aside the 
order dated 15th September 2020 passed by the LAC. In its 

4 
 
earlier judgment, the High Court has placed reliance on the 
judgments of this Court including the case of Ramsingbhai 
(Ramsangbhai) Jerambhai v. State of Gujarat and 
Another1, whereby this Court has held that the application 
under Section 28-A of the 1894 Act can only be filed within a 
period of three months from any judgment of the Reference 
Court under Section 18 of the 1894 Act, arising from the 
same acquisition but not from the date of judgment of this 
Court or the High Court. 
3.7 Being 
aggrieved 
thereby, 
the 
appellants 
have 
approached this Court. 
4. 
We have heard Shri Piyush Sharma, learned counsel 
appearing for the appellants and Shri Rajat Sangwan, 
learned counsel appearing for the respondents. 
5. 
Learned counsel for the appellants submits that the 
High Court has erred in relying on the judgment of this 
Court 
in 
the 
case 
of 
Ramsingbhai 
(Ramsangbhai) 
Jerambhai (supra), inasmuch as the said judgment does 
not take into consideration the earlier judgment of this Court 
in the case of Union of India and Another v. Pradeep 
 
1 (2018) 16 SCC 445 : 2018 INSC 405 

5 
 
Kumari and Others2. He, therefore, submits that the appeal 
be allowed. 
6. 
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents would 
submit that the High Court has rightly relied on the 
judgment of this Court in the case of Ramsingbhai 
(Ramsangbhai) Jerambhai (supra).  He, therefore, submits 
that the appeal be dismissed. 
7. 
This Court, speaking through a bench of three learned 
Judges, in the case of Ramsingbhai (Ramsangbhai) 
Jerambhai (supra), has observed thus: 
“3. It is clear from the opening words of the 
provision that the redetermination under Section 
28-A is available only in respect of an “award” 
passed by the “court” under Part III of the Act, 
comprising Sections 18 to 28-A (both inclusive). The 
“Court” referred to in Section 28-A of the Act is the 
Court as defined under Section 3(d) to mean “… a 
Principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction …”. 
Thus, the judgment of the appellate court is not 
within the purview of Section 28-A. It is also to be 
noted that the appellate courts under Section 54 are 
under 
Part 
VIII 
of 
the 
Act 
whereas 
the 
redetermination is only in respect of the award 
passed by the Reference Court under Part III of the 
Act. [See Jose Antonio Cruz Dos R. Rodriguese v. 
LAO [Jose Antonio Cruz Dos R. Rodriguese v. LAO, 
(1996) 6 SCC 746] ]. In its recent judgment in 
Bharatsing v  State of Maharashtra [Bharatsing v. 
State of Maharashtra, (2018) 11 SCC 92 : (2018) 5 
SCC (Civ) 44] , this Court has surveyed the 
 
2 (1995) 2 SCC 736 : 1995 INSC 180 

6 
 
decisions on this issue and reiterated the legal 
principle. 
4. 
What the appellant seeks is redetermination of 
compensation under the Act in terms of the 
judgment in Ramsingbhai v. State of Gujarat 
[Ramsingbhai v. State of Gujarat, 2014 SCC OnLine 
Guj 5840 : 2015 AIR CC 1046] of the High Court 
passed under Section 54 of the Act. In view of the 
settled legal position which we have explained 
above, the appellant is not entitled to such a relief; 
his entitlement, if any, is only in terms of Section 
28-A of the Act based on the award of the Reference 
Court.” 
 
8. 
It can thus be seen that, this Court has held that as the 
appellant 
therein 
was 
seeking 
redetermination 
of 
compensation on the basis of the judgment of the High Court 
passed under Section 54 of the 1894 Act, he was not entitled 
to such a relief. It was held that the application under 
Section 28-A of the 1894 Act had to be made within a period 
of three months from the date of the award passed by the 
Court under Part-III of the Act and the appellate courts are 
not within purview of Section 28-A of the 1894 Act. 
9. 
It, however, appears that this Court in the case of 
Ramsingbhai (Ramsangbhai) Jerambhai (supra), has not 
noticed an earlier judgment rendered by this Court in 
Pradeep Kumari and Others (supra). 
10. In the case of Pradeep Kumari and Others (supra), 

7 
 
though the award of LAC therein was not challenged by 
Pradeep Kumari, the similarly circumstanced persons whose 
land was acquired had made references. In one of the 
references, an award was made on 21st February 1987. 
Immediately within a period of three months, the said 
Pradeep Kumari filed an application under Section 28-A of 
the 1894 Act before LAC for claiming the benefit of the said 
award. On the said application, the Collector made an order 
dated 14th March 1988 awarding an additional amount of 
compensation on the basis of the award of the Reference 
Court dated 21st February 1987. Feeling aggrieved by the 
said order of Collector, the Union of India filed a writ petition 
before the High Court of Himachal Pradesh. The High Court 
dismissed the writ petition. Civil Appeals were filed before 
this Court, challenging the judgment of the High Court. The 
same were dismissed. Aggrieved still, Review Petitions were 
filed. This Court, speaking in a combination of three learned 
Judges, observed thus:  
“8. We may, at the outset, state that having regard 
to the Statement of Objects and Reasons, referred to 
earlier, the object underlying the enactment of 
Section 28-A is to remove inequality in the payment 
of compensation for same or similar quality of land 
arising on account of inarticulate and poor people 

8 
 
not being able to take advantage of the right of 
reference to the civil court under Section 18 of the 
Act. This is sought to be achieved by providing an 
opportunity to all aggrieved parties whose land is 
covered 
by 
the 
same 
notification 
to 
seek 
redetermination once any of them has obtained 
orders for payment of higher compensation from the 
reference court under Section 18 of the Act. Section 
28-A is, therefore, in the nature of a beneficent 
provision intended to remove inequality and to give 
relief to the inarticulate and poor people who are 
not able to take advantage of right of reference to 
the civil court under Section 18 of the Act. In 
relation to beneficent legislation, the law is well-
settled that while construing the provisions of such 
a legislation the court should adopt a construction 
which advances the policy of the legislation to 
extend the benefit rather than a construction which 
has the effect of curtailing the benefit conferred by 
it. The provisions of Section 28-A should, therefore, 
be construed keeping in view the object underlying 
the said provision. 
9. A perusal of the provisions contained in sub-
section (1) of Section 28-A of the Act would show 
that after an award is made under Part III whereby 
the court allows to the applicant any amount of 
compensation in excess of the amount awarded by 
the Collector under Section 11, a right accrues to a 
person interested in the other land covered by the 
same notification under sub-section (1) of Section 4 
who is also aggrieved by the award of the Collector 
but who had not made an application to the 
Collector under Section 18, to move an application 
before the Collector for redetermination of the 
amount of compensation payable to him on the 
basis of the amount of compensation awarded by 
the court. This application for redetermination of 
the compensation is required to be made within 
three months from the date of the award of the 
court. The right to make the application under 
Section 28-A arises from the award of the court on 
the basis of which the person making the 

9 
 
application is seeking redetermination of the 
compensation. There is nothing in sub-section (1) of 
Section 28-A to indicate that this right is confined 
in respect of the earliest award that is made by the 
court after the coming into force of Section 28-A. By 
construing the expression “where in an award 
under this Part” in sub-section (1) of Section 28-A to 
mean “where in the first award made by the court 
under this Part”, the word ‘first’, which is not found 
in sub-section (1) of Section 28-A, is being read 
therein and thereby the amplitude of the said 
provision is being curtailed so as to restrict the 
benefit conferred by it. In the matter of construction 
of a beneficent provision it is not permissible by 
judicial interpretation to read words which are not 
there and thereby restrict the scope of the said 
provision.  
10. It is possible to visualise a situation where in 
the first award that is made by the court after the 
coming into force of Section 28-A the enhancement 
in the amount of compensation by the said award is 
not very significant for the reason that the person 
who sought the reference was not able to produce 
adequate evidence in support of his claim and in 
another reference where the award was made by the 
court subsequently such evidence is produced 
before the court and a much higher amount is 
awarded as compensation in the said award. By 
restricting the benefit of Section 28-A to the first 
award that is made by the court after the coming 
into force of Section 28-A the benefit of higher 
amount of compensation on the basis of the 
subsequent award made by the court would be 
denied to the persons invoking Section 28-A and the 
benefit of the said provision would be confined to 
redetermination of compensation on the basis of 
lesser amount of compensation awarded under the 
first award that is made after the coming into force 
of Section 28-A. There is nothing in the wordings of 
Section 28-A to indicate that the legislature 
intended to confer such a limited benefit under 
Section 28-A. Similarly, there may be a situation, as 

10 
 
in the present case, where the notification under 
Section 4(1) of the Act covers lands falling in 
different villages and a number of references at the 
instance of persons having lands in different villages 
were pending in the court on the date of coming into 
force of Section 28-A and awards in those references 
are made by the court on different dates. A person 
who is entitled to apply under Section 28-A 
belonging to a particular village may come to know 
of the first award that is made by the court after the 
coming into force of Section 28-A in a reference at 
the instance of a person belonging to another 
village, after the expiry of the period of three months 
from the date of the said award but he may come to 
know of the subsequent award that is made by the 
court in the reference at the instance of a person 
belonging to the same village before the expiry of the 
period of three months from the date of the said 
award. This is more likely to happen in the cases of 
inarticulate and poor people who cannot be 
expected to keep track of all the references that 
were pending in court on the date of coming into 
force of Section 28-A and may not be in a position 
to know, in time, about the first award that is made 
by the court after the coming into force of Section 
28-A. By holding that the award referred to in 
Section 28-A(1) is the first award made after the 
coming into force of Section 28-A, such persons 
would be deprived of the benefit extended by 
Section 28-A. Such a construction would thus 
result in perpetuating the inequality in the payment 
of compensation which the legislature wanted to 
remove by enacting Section 28-A. The object 
underlying Section 28-A would be better achieved 
by giving the expression “an award” in Section 28-A 
its natural meaning as meaning the award that is 
made by the court in Part III of the Act after the 
coming into force of Section 28-A. If the said 
expression in Section 28-A(1) is thus construed, a 
person would be able to seek redetermination of the 
amount of compensation payable to him provided 
the following conditions are satisfied: 

11 
 
(i) An award has been made by the court 
under Part III after the coming into force 
of Section 28-A; 
(ii) By the said award the amount of 
compensation in excess of the amount 
awarded by the Collector under Section 
11 has been allowed to the applicant in 
that reference; 
(iii) The person moving the application 
under Section 28-A is interested in other 
land covered by the same notification 
under Section 4(1) to which the said 
award relates; 
(iv) The person moving the application did 
not make an application to the Collector 
under Section 18; 
(v) The application is moved within three 
months from the date of the award on the 
basis of which the redetermination of 
amount of compensation is sought; and 
(vi) Only one application can be moved 
under Section 28-A for redetermination of 
compensation by an applicant. 
11. Since the cause of action for moving the 
application for redetermination of compensation 
under Section 28-A arises from the award on the 
basis of which redetermination of compensation is 
sought, the principle that “once the limitation 
begins to run, it runs in its full course until its 
running is interdicted by an order of the court” can 
have no application because the limitation for 
moving the application under Section 28-A will 
begin to run only from the date of the award on the 
basis of which redetermination of compensation is 
sought.” 
 
11. It can thus be seen that this Court has held that the 

12 
 
object underlying the enactment of Section 28-A of the 1894 
Act is to remove inequality in the payment of compensation 
for same or similar quality of land arising on account of 
inarticulate and poor people not being able to take 
advantage of the right of reference to the civil court under 
Section 18 of the 1894 Act.  It was held that this is sought to 
be achieved by providing an opportunity to all aggrieved 
parties whose land is covered by the same notification to 
seek redetermination once any of them has obtained orders 
for payment of higher compensation from the Reference 
Court under Section 18 of the 1894 Act. It was held that 
while construing the provisions of such a legislation, the 
Court should adopt a construction which advances the 
policy of the legislation to extend the benefit rather than a 
construction which has the effect of curtailing the benefit 
conferred by it. 
12. It has further been held by this Court that under 
Section 28-A of the 1894 Act, a right accrues to a person 
interested in the other land covered by the same notification 
under sub-section (1) of Section 4, where the Court allows a 
higher compensation to the similarly circumstanced persons 

13 
 
who are covered by the said notification.  It has been held 
that the application for redetermination of the compensation 
is required to be made within three months from the date of 
the award by the Court.  It has been held that the right to 
make an application under Section 28-A of the 1894 Act 
arises from the award of the Court on the basis of which the 
person making the application is seeking redetermination of 
the compensation.  The Court further held that there is 
nothing in sub-section (1) of Section 28-A of the 1894 Act to 
indicate that this right is confined in respect of the earliest 
award that is made by the Court after coming into force of 
Section 28-A of the 1894 Act. This Court held that Section 
28-A of the 1894 Act if read in such a manner, it will be 
contrary to the principles of construction of a beneficial 
provision. It is further held that by judicial interpretation, the 
Court could not read the words which are not there and 
thereby restrict the scope of a provision.  
13. In paragraph 10 of the said case, this Court had 
referred to various eventualities that may occur if such a 
restrictive interpretation is given to the provision of Section 
28-A of the 1894 Act.  The Court observed that it has to be 

14 
 
seen from the point of view of inarticulate and poor people. 
The Court held that the object underlying Section 28-A of the 
1894 Act would be better achieved by giving the expression 
“an award” in Section 28-A of the 1894 Act, its natural 
meaning as meaning the award that is made by the Court in 
Part III of the 1894 Act after  coming  into  force of Section 
28-A.  
14. This Court has laid down the conditions which are 
required to be satisfied for invoking the provisions of Section 
28-A(1) of the 1894 Act as follows:  
(i) 
An award has been made by the Court under Part III 
of the Act after coming into force of Section 28-A;  
(ii) 
By the said Award, the amount of compensation in 
excess of the amount awarded by the Collector under 
Section 11 has been allowed to the applicant in that 
reference;  
(iii) The person moving the application under Section 28-
A is interested in other land covered by the same 
notification under Section 4(1) to which the said 
award relates;  
(iv) 
The person moving the application did not move the 

15 
 
application under Section 18;  
(v) 
The application is moved within three months from 
the date of the award on the basis of which 
redetermination of amount of compensation is 
sought; and  
(vi) 
Only one such application can be moved under 
Section 28-A for redetermination of the compensation 
by the applicant. 
15. In the present case, it is not in dispute that the First 
Appeal which was allowed by the High Court vide judgment 
and order dated 2nd May 2016 was in respect of the land 
which was covered by the same notification under which 
notification the appellants’ land is also covered. It is also not 
in dispute that the amount awarded by the High Court in the 
said First Appeal is in excess of the amount awarded by the 
Collector under Section 11 of the 1894 Act in the case of the 
land of the appellants. It is also not in dispute that the 
appellants had not made an application to the Collector 
under Section 18 of the 1894 Act.  It is also not in dispute 
that the application made by the appellants under Section 
28-A of the 1894 Act to the Collector was within a period of 

16 
 
three months from the date of the judgment and order of the 
High Court.   
16. From the perusal of the judgment of this Court in the 
case of  Pradeep Kumari and Others (supra), it is clear that 
the limitation for moving the application under Section 28-A 
of the 1894 Act will begin to run only from the date of the 
award on the basis of which redetermination of the 
compensation 
is 
sought. 
The 
appellants 
are 
seeking 
redetermination of the compensation on the basis of the 
judgment and order of the High Court in First Appeal No.429 
of 2023 dated 2nd May 2016. It is not disputed that the 
application of the appellants under Section 28-A of the 1894 
Act is within a period of three months from 2nd May 2016. 
17. We are, therefore, of the considered view that the case of 
the appellants is fully covered by the judgment of this Court 
in the case of Pradeep Kumari and Others (supra).  
18. It is further to be noted that the cases of Pradeep 
Kumari 
and 
Others 
(supra) 
and 
Ramsingbhai 
(Ramsangbhai) Jerambhai (supra), both have been decided 
by a Bench strength of three learned Judges of this Court.  
The case of Pradeep Kumari and Others (supra) is decided 

17 
 
on 10th March 1995, whereas Ramsingbhai (Ramsangbhai) 
Jerambhai (supra), has been decided on 24th April 2018.  
19. A perusal of the judgment rendered in Ramsingbhai 
(Ramsangbhai) Jerambhai (supra), would reveal that the 
said case does not take note of the earlier view taken by three 
learned judges of this Court in the case of Pradeep Kumari 
and Others (supra).   
20. In this respect, we may gainfully refer to the 
observations of a Constitution Bench of this Court in the 
case of National Insurance Company Limited v. Pranay 
Sethi and Others3. The relevant paragraphs of the judgment 
read as under: 
“27. We are compelled to state here that in Munna 
Lal Jain , the three-Judge Bench should have been 
guided by the principle stated in Reshma Kumari 
which has concurred with the view expressed in 
Sarla Verma or in case of disagreement, it should 
have been well advised to refer the case to a larger 
Bench. We say so, as we have already expressed the 
opinion that the dicta laid down in Reshma Kumari  
being earlier in point of time would be a binding 
precedent and not the decision in Rajesh. 
 
28. In this context, we may also refer to Sundeep 
Kumar Bafna v. State of Maharashtra [Sundeep 
Kumar Bafna v. State of Maharashtra, (2014) 16 
SCC 623 : (2015) 3 SCC (Cri) 558] which correctly 
lays down the principle that discipline demanded by 
 
3 (2017) 16 SCC 680 : 2017 INSC 1068 

18 
 
a precedent or the disqualification or diminution of 
a decision on the application of the per incuriam 
rule is of great importance, since without it, 
certainty of law, consistency of rulings and comity 
of courts would become a costly casualty. A decision 
or judgment can be per incuriam any provision in a 
statute, rule or regulation, which was not brought 
to the notice of the court. A decision or judgment 
can also be per incuriam if it is not possible to 
reconcile its ratio with that of a previously 
pronounced judgment of a co-equal or larger Bench. 
There can be no scintilla of doubt that an earlier 
decision of co-equal Bench binds the Bench of same 
strength. Though the judgment in Rajesh case was 
delivered on a later date, it had not apprised itself of 
the law stated in Reshma Kumari but had been 
guided by Santosh Devi . We have no hesitation that 
it is not a binding precedent on the co-equal 
Bench.” 
 
21. It can thus be seen that, this Court in unequivocal 
terms has held that an earlier decision of a Bench of 
particular strength would be binding on the subsequent 
Benches of this Court having the same or lesser number of 
judges. 
22. While considering the rule of per incuriam, the 
Constitution Bench of this Court has held that a decision or 
judgment can be said to be per incuriam if it is not possible to 
reconcile its ratio with that of a previously pronounced 
judgment of a co-equal or larger Bench. 
23. In any case, the judgment in Pradeep Kumari and 

19 
 
Others (supra) has been rendered by three learned Judges of 
this Court after considering the relevant provisions of the 
Statute and the principles of interpretation.  However, the 
judgment in the case of Ramsingbhai (Ramsangbhai) 
Jerambhai (supra) is a short judgment only referring to the 
text of Section 28-A(1) of the 1894 Act. 
24. As already discussed hereinabove, the provisions of 
Section 28-A(1) of the 1894 Act have been elaborately 
considered by a three Judges Bench of this Court in the case 
of Pradeep Kumari and Others (supra). In the said case, it 
has been held that the Statement of Objects and Reasons of 
Section 28-A would reveal that the object underlying the 
enactment of the said provision is to remove inequality in the 
payment of compensation for same or similar quality of land.  
It has been held that the said provision is for giving benefit to 
inarticulate and poor people not being able to take advantage 
of the right of reference to the civil court under Section 18 of 
the Act.  It has been held that this is sought to be achieved 
by providing an opportunity to all aggrieved parties whose 
land 
is 
covered 
by 
the 
same 
notification 
to 
seek 
redetermination once any of them has obtained orders for 

20 
 
payment of higher compensation from the reference court 
under Section 18 of the Act.  The same benefit would be 
available to the other landholders under Section 28-A.  It has 
been held that Section 28-A being a beneficent legislation 
enacted in order to give relief to the inarticulate and poor 
people, the principle of interpretation which would be 
required to be adopted is the one which advances the policy 
of the legislation to extend the benefit rather than a 
construction which has the effect of curtailing the benefit 
conferred by it.    
25. We are, therefore, inclined to allow the appeal. The 
impugned judgment and order of the High Court dated 25th 
November 2021 is quashed and set aside and the order of the 
LAC dated 15th September 2020 is upheld.  
26. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
      
  ..............................J.  
                                                                     (B.R. GAVAI) 
 
 
................................J.   
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)   
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
DECEMBER 10, 2024.