2024 INSC 955
 
1 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 458 OF 2012  
 
 
 
 
NUSRAT PARWEEN                                      .…APPELLANT(S) 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
STATE OF JHARKHAND                              ....RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
 
WITH 
 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 2032 OF 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
Mehta, J. 
1. 
The present appeals by special leave are preferred on behalf of 
appellant-Nusrat Parween1 and appellant-Ahmad Khan2, assailing 
 
1 In Criminal Appeal No. 458 of 2012, the appellant is Nusrat Parween. Hereinafter referred to as ‘Nusrat 
Parween/appellant No. 1.’  
2 In Criminal Appeal No. 2032 of 2017, the appellant is Ahmad Khan. Hereinafter referred to as ‘Ahmad 
Khan/appellant No. 2.’ 
Digitally signed by
geeta ahuja
Date: 2024.12.10
17:15:52 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
2 
the judgment dated 19th January, 2011 passed by the Division Bench 
of the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi in Criminal Appeals3 
upholding the separate judgments of conviction and orders of 
sentence4 passed by the 1st Additional Sessions Judge, Jamshedpur5 
in Session trial cases6, whereby appellant No. 1, appellant No. 2 and 
Abdul Rahman Khan/accused No. 3 were convicted for the offence 
punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 18607, and 
were sentenced to undergo life imprisonment. 
2.   The facts giving rise to the present appeals are as under: 
2.1 Hamida Parween was married to Abdul Hamid Khan, the 
brother of Ahmad Khan/appellant No. 2 and Abdul Rahman 
Khan/accused No. 3.  Abdul Hamid Khan, the husband of Hamida 
Parween, passed away two years prior to the incident.  Late Abdul 
Hamid Khan owned Holding No. 13 situated at Dhatkidih in ‘A’ Block 
wherein the accused-appellants as well as Hamida Parween along 
with her three children, namely, Md. Sahid Khan(PW3), Md. Javed 
 
3 Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 101 of 2004, Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 1741 of 2003 and Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 
1810 of 2003.  
4 Conviction Order dated 25th November 2003 & Sentence Order dated 1st December 2003. 
5 Hereinafter referred as ‘the trial Court.’  
6 Sessions trial Case No. 228 of 1998 and Sessions trial Case No. 393 of 2000. 
7 Hereinafter referred as ‘IPC.’ 

 
3 
Khan and Kahkasan Anujam were jointly residing. Despite Late 
Abdul Hamid Khan having partitioned a part of Holding No. 13 in 
favour of the accused-appellants, they were still pressurizing Hamida 
Parween to give up her remaining share in the property.  On this 
count, Hamida Parween had earlier lodged a complaint against the 
accused-appellants under Section 107 read with Section 116(3) of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 19738. 
2.2 On 11th March, 1997, at around 8:00 am, Hamida Parween sent 
her sons, Md. Sahid Khan(PW3) and Md. Javed Khan to school. Both 
the boys returned home after school time and found their house 
locked from outside. When their mother did not turn up by evening, 
both the boys approached their maternal uncle, Md. Firoj(PW4) 
whose shop was situated at Golmuri Road No. 304, Sakchi, and 
narrated the sequence of events to him. 
2.3   Md. 
Firoj(PW4), 
accompanied 
by 
his 
brother, 
Parvej 
Ahmad(PW9) and their father, Md. Yunush(PW8), launched a search 
for Hamida Parween at various places including the houses of their 
relatives but they were unable to trace her.  Md. Firoj(PW4) went to 
 
8 Hereinafter referred as ‘CrPC.’ 

 
4 
the Bistupur Police Station to report about the disappearance of his 
sister Hamida Parween, but the police officials rather than registering 
any complaint advised him to continue the search.  When the efforts 
to search Hamida Parween failed, Md. Firoj(PW4) again went to 
Bistupur Police Station on the next day, i.e., on 12th March, 1997, at 
around 10:15 am, and informed the Officer-in-Charge that his sister, 
Hamida Parween, had been missing since 11th March, 1997. Based 
on the said complaint, the police official recorded a missing person's 
report in the station diary. Sub-Inspector, Jitendra Kumar(PW12) 
proceeded to the locality and made inquiries.  The neighbours 
divulged that a quarrel had taken place between Hamida Parween 
and her relatives i.e., the accused-appellants around 8:00 am on the 
day of the incident. Thereafter, the accused-appellants fled away in 
a tempo, but none of the neighbours saw Hamida Parween coming 
out of the house. After that the police officials broke open the lock of 
the front door in the presence of panch witnesses and found the dead 
body of Hamida Parween lying inside the room.  These proceedings 
were recorded in a memorandum9. 
 
9 Exhibit 2 and 2/1. 

 
5 
2.4     Sub-Inspector, Jitendra Kumar(PW12) recorded the Fardbayan 
(statement) of Md. Firoj(PW4), the first informant, who alleged that 
after the death of Hamida Parween's husband, the accused-
appellants, who lived in the same house along with her, were 
pressurizing her to give up the property. This resulted in frequent 
quarrels amongst them. The strifes escalated to such an extent that 
Hamida 
Parween(deceased) 
was 
even 
threatened 
with 
dire 
consequences, and resultantly, she was compelled to file a complaint 
against the accused persons under Section 107 read with 116(3) of 
the CrPC. Md. Firoj(PW4) alleged that his sister, Hamida Parween, 
had been done to death by the accused namely Ahmad Khan10, Abdul 
Rahman Khan11, Nusrat Parween12, Sayeda Bibi13, Rahemaa 
Khatoon@Chanda14, Reshma Bibi15, Md. Shahnawaz@Pappu16 and 
Amirullah Khan@Babar17, with the intention of usurping her house 
and other properties.  The accused-appellants tried to cover up the 
incident by hiding the dead body of Hamida Parween inside the house 
 
10 Brother-in-law of Hamida Parween (deceased). 
11 Brother-in-law of Hamida Parween (deceased). 
12 Sister-in-law of Hamida Parween (deceased).  
13 Sister-in-law of Hamida Parween(deceased). 
14  Sister-in-law of Hamida Parween (deceased). 
15 Sister-in-law of Hamida Parween (deceased). 
16 Nephew of Hamida Parween (deceased). 
17 Nephew of Hamida Parween (deceased). 

 
6 
and locked it up from the outside so as to conceal the evidence of the 
crime. Sub-Inspector, Jitendra Kumar(PW12) noted this Fardbayan 
of Md. Firoj(PW4) on 12th March,1997, at around 11:30 am at the 
house of Hamida Parween(deceased) and based on the same, an FIR18 
came to be registered at Bistupur Police Station on the same day for 
the offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the 
IPC.    
2.5  Inquest was conducted on the dead body of Hamida Parween 
which was then forwarded to the hospital for post mortem 
examination. The autopsy was 
carried out by 
Dr. Lalan 
Choudhary(PW10), who found several injuries on the dead body of 
Hamida Parween. There were abrasions on the front of the neck, 
waist, right elbow, left knee, and both hands. Additionally, there were 
large bruises on the front and side of the neck, and the hyoid bone 
was fractured. According to Dr. Lalan Choudhary(PW10), the cause 
of death was asphyxia, resulting from pressure applied to the neck. 
Based on these findings, the post-mortem report19 was issued. Upon 
concluding investigation, the Investigating Officer(PW12) filed 
 
18 Case No. 67/1997. 
19 Exhibit 3. 

 
7 
separate charge-sheets against the accused persons for the offences 
punishable under Sections 302 and 34 of the IPC. Since the offence 
under Section 302 IPC was exclusively triable by a Court of Session, 
the case was committed and transferred for trial to the Court of 1st 
Additional Sessions Judge, Jamshedpur(‘trial Court’).  Separate trials 
were parallelly held against the accused persons. Ahmad 
Khan/appellant No. 2 was put up for trial in Sessions Trial Case No. 
228 
of 
1998 
with 
the 
co-accused 
including 
Amirullah 
Khan@Babar(since acquitted), Rahemaa Khatoon@Chanda(since 
acquitted), 
Md. 
Shahnawaz@Pappu(acquitted) 
and 
Reshma 
Bibi(acquitted). Nusrat Parween/appellant No. 1, Abdul Rahman 
Khan/accused No. 3, and Sayeda Bibi(acquitted) were tried in 
Sessions trial Case No. 393 of 2000. 
2.6  The trial Court framed charges against all the charge-sheeted 
accused persons for the above offences who abjured their guilt and 
claimed trial. The prosecution examined 12 witnesses to prove its 
case as per the following table: 
 
 

 
8 
PWs 
Name  
Relations/Positions 
PW1  
Chand Mohammad 
Neighbour 
PW2 
Matiur Rahman 
Neighbour Shopkeeper  
PW3 
Md. Sahid Khan  
Deceased’s Son 
PW4 
Md. Firoj  
Brother of the deceased 
PW5 
Md. Sagir Ahmad Ansari 
Tenant of the Shop owned by the deceased 
PW6 
Fazal Khan 
Neighbour Shopkeeper  
PW7 
Ragho Sharma 
Neighbour Shopkeeper  
PW8 
Md.Yunush 
Father of the deceased 
PW9 
Parvej Ahmad 
Brother of the deceased 
PW10 
Dr. Lalan Choudhary 
Assistant Professor (Post-Mortem Examiner) 
PW11 
Md. Sagir Ahmad Ansari 
Formal Witness 
PW12 
Jitender Kumar 
Sub-Inspector Police Station 
 
2.7  The accused persons were questioned under Section 313 of the 
CrPC and were confronted with the circumstances appearing against 
them in the prosecution case, which they denied and claimed to be 
innocent.  The trial Court, vide its judgment20 in Session Trial Case 
No. 228 of 1998, held that the prosecution had successfully 
established its case beyond reasonable doubt and, therefore, 
 
20 Dated 25th November 2003. 

 
9 
convicted Ahmad Khan/appellant No. 2 for the offence punishable 
under Section 302 of the IPC and sentenced him to life imprisonment. 
The trial Court acquitted Amirullah Khan@Babar, Rahemaa 
Khatoon@Chanda, Md. Shahnawaz@Pappu, and Reshma Bibi, on the 
ground of insufficient evidence against them. Based on the evidence 
on record, the trial Court in Session Trial Case No. 393 of 2000 held 
Nusrat Parween/appellant No. 1 and Abdul Rahman Khan/accused 
No. 3 guilty for the offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC 
and sentenced them to life imprisonment. Sayeda Bibi was acquitted 
due to insufficient evidence against her.  
2.8  Aggrieved 
by 
their 
conviction 
and 
sentence, 
Nusrat 
Parween/appellant No. 1, Ahmad Khan/appellant No. 2, and Abdul 
Rahman Khan/accused No. 3 filed separate Criminal Appeals21 
before the High Court, which upheld the judgment of the trial Court 
convicting 
the 
accused-appellants 
and 
Abdul 
Rahman 
Khan/accused No. 3, confirming the sentence of life imprisonment 
awarded to them by the trial Court. The impugned judgment of the 
High Court dated 19th January 2011 is subjected to challenge by 
 
21 Supra Note No. 3.  

 
10 
Nusrat Parween/appellant No. 1 and Ahmad Khan/appellant No. 2 
in these appeals by special leave. Abdul Rahman Khan/accused No. 
3, has not filed any appeal in this matter.  
Submissions on behalf of the appellants: - 
3. 
Learned counsel for the accused-appellants submitted that the 
entire prosecution case is based on circumstantial evidence and that 
the prosecution miserably failed to prove even a single of the so-called 
incriminating circumstances so as to bring home the guilt of the 
accused-appellants. Learned counsel for the accused-appellants 
advanced the following pertinent submissions to urge that the 
conviction of the accused-appellants as recorded by the trial Court 
and affirmed by the High Court is unsustainable on the face of 
record: - 
(i)    The prosecution failed to prove the motive attributed to the 
accused-appellants for commission of the crime.  In this 
regard, attention of the Court was drawn to the evidence of Md. 
Sahid Khan(PW3) [the son of Hamida Parween(deceased)] to 
urge that he could have been the best person to elaborate upon 
the 
disputes 
allegedly 
going 
on 
between 
Hamida 

 
11 
Parween(deceased) and the accused-appellants over the 
subject property22 but he did not state anything specific 
regarding the same in his testimony.  Even if there were some 
on-going day to day squabbles between the accused and the 
deceased, Md. Sahid Khan(PW3) did not specifically state that 
any quarrel took between the accused-appellants and Hamida 
Parween(deceased) on the fateful day which was allegedly the 
immediate cause of the incident. 
(ii) That to prove the theory of motive, the prosecution heavily 
relied upon the alleged complaint lodged by Hamida 
Parween(deceased) against the accused-appellants under 
Section 107 read with Section 116 (3) of the CrPC.  However, 
the said complaint was never proved in evidence and hence, 
there is no tangible incriminating material on record against 
the accused-appellants so as to corroborate the theory of 
motive. 
(iii) That the circumstance of last seen together could not be 
proved by the prosecution, as neither Md. Sahid Khan(PW3) 
 
22 Holding No. 13 

 
12 
[the son of Hamida Parween(deceased)] nor any of the 
immediate neighbours, i.e Chand Mohammad(PW1), Matiur 
Rahman(PW2), Md. Sagir Ahmad Ansari(PW5), Fazal Khan(P6) 
and Ragho Sharma(PW7) uttered a single word to suggest that 
the accused-appellants and the co-accused Abdul Rahman 
Khan/accused No. 3 were present in the house when Md. 
Sahid Khan(PW3) and his brother Md. Javed Khan left for the 
school or that the accused persons were seen fleeing away from 
the house on the day of incident. 
(iv) The trial Court as well as the High Court heavily relied 
upon Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act, 187223 so as to 
hold that the accused-appellants were under the burden to 
explain 
the 
circumstances 
under 
which 
Hamida 
Parween(deceased) who was living in the same premises, was 
found dead in her room. However, the fact remains that no 
tangible evidence whatsoever was led by the prosecution to 
lend credence to the theory that any or all of the three 
convicted accused-appellants were actually present in the 
 
23 Hereinafter the ‘Evidence Act’. 

 
13 
house on the fateful morning, i.e., 11th March, 1997.  As this 
basic and foundational fact was not proved by leading cogent 
evidence, it has to be inferred that the prosecution miserably 
failed to establish the circumstance of last seen together. 
Hence, the accused-appellants could not have been placed 
under the burden to explain the circumstances in which 
Hamida Parween was done to death. 
(v) That the very inception of the prosecution case is shrouded 
under a grave cloud of doubt.  In this regard, it was contended 
that 
Md. 
Firoj(PW4), 
[the 
brother 
of 
Hamida 
Parween(deceased)], being the first informant, categorically 
stated that there was a strife going on between his sister and 
the accused persons over Holding No. 13. The situation had 
gone bad to such an extent that Hamida Parween(deceased) 
was compelled to lodge a complaint against the accused-
appellants under Section 107 read with Section 116(3) of the 
CrPC.  The first informant, Md. Firoj(PW4), also alleged in the 
FIR that the accused-appellants had quarreled with Hamida 
Parween(deceased) on the morning of the incident and 

 
14 
thereafter, they were all seen moving out from Holding No.13 
and fleeing away in a tempo. Hamida Parween(deceased) was 
not seen alive after the accused-appellants absconded from the 
place of incident.  In this background, the first and natural 
reaction of the family members on finding out about the 
quarrel followed by absence of Hamida Parween and noticing 
the house locked from outside would have been to break open 
the lock and to take stock of the situation inside.  The utter 
failure 
of 
the 
maternal 
family 
members 
of 
Hamida 
Parween(deceased) to take any step in this regard clearly 
establishes that the entire case of the prosecution is based 
purely on conjectures and surmises without an iota of truth in 
it.  
On these grounds, learned counsel appearing for the accused-
appellants implored the Court to accept the appeals, set aside the 
impugned judgments and direct acquittal of the accused-appellants 
from the charges levelled against them. 
 
 

 
15 
Submission on behalf of the Respondent/State: - 
4. 
Per contra, learned standing counsel appearing for the State, 
vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions advanced on 
behalf of the accused-appellants and advanced the following 
pertinent submissions imploring this Court to dismiss the appeals: -  
(i) 
That the trial Court's judgment convicting the accused-
appellants for the murder of Hamida Parween(deceased) is 
based on sound reasoning and evidence. The case of 
prosecution is based on a complete chain of highly 
incriminating circumstances which irrefutably point towards 
the guilt of the accused. The prosecution established a strong 
motive rooted in an ongoing property dispute between the 
accused-appellants and Hamida Parween(deceased), and the 
said theory has been corroborated by the complaint filed by 
Hamida Parween(deceased) against the accused under 
Section 107 read with Section 116(3) of the CrPC.  
(ii) 
That 
Nusrat 
Parween/appellant 
No. 
1, 
Ahmad 
Khan/appellant No. 2 and Abdul Rahman Khan/accused No. 

 
16 
3 used to reside in the same premises24 with Hamida 
Parween(deceased). The accused-appellants and Hamida 
Parween(deceased) were last seen quarrelling with each other 
in the house on the morning of 11th March, 1997 whereafter, 
the accused-appellants absconded after locking the house 
from outside and leaving behind the dead body of Hamida 
Parween inside the house.  
(iii) That the absence of the accused-appellant from the house 
when the sons of Hamida Parween(deceased) i.e., Md. Sahid 
Khan(PW3) and Md. Javed Khan returned home from school 
unerringly points towards their involvement in the crime. 
Thus, it was a fit case for invocation of Section 106 of the 
Evidence Act thereby, requiring the accused-appellants to 
explain the circumstances in which Hamida Parween died. 
The accused-appellants miserably failed to discharge this 
onus cast upon them by law and thus their conviction for the 
charge of murder is fully justified.  
 
24 Holding No. 13 

 
17 
(iv) 
That the medical evidence affirmed the cause of death as 
strangulation, aligning with the sequence of events proved by 
cogent convincing evidence, which bolstered the case of 
prosecution against the accused-appellants. 
(v) 
That the trial Court and the High Court both minutely 
analyzed and marshalled the circumstantial evidence to 
concurrently hold that the prosecution established a 
complete chain of incriminating circumstances linking the 
accused-appellants to the crime.  
On these grounds, the learned counsel for the State contended 
that the present appeals against the judgments of the trial court and 
the High Court should be dismissed, as both courts have applied the 
law to the facts on record correctly and reached the only possible 
conclusion pointing towards the guilt of the accused. 
Discussion and Conclusion: - 
5. 
We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
parties and have pursued the evidence available on record.  

 
18 
6. 
There is no dispute that the case of prosecution is based on 
purely circumstantial evidence in the form of motive and the theory 
of last seen together, since no witness claims to have seen the alleged 
incident wherein Hamida Parween was done to death. The fact that 
death of Hamida Parween was homicidal was duly proved by the 
Medical Officer(PW15) in his evidence. The Medical Officer(PW15) also 
proved the post mortem report25 wherein a large number of injuries 
were noted on the dead body of Hamida Parween and the cause of 
death was opined to be asphyxia owing to strangulation. Thus, there 
is no doubt on the aspect that the death of Hamida Parween was 
homicidal in nature. 
7. 
It is a well-established principle of criminal jurisprudence that 
conviction on a charge of murder may be based purely on 
circumstantial evidence, provided that such evidence is deemed 
credible and trustworthy. In cases involving circumstantial evidence, 
it is crucial to ensure that the facts leading to the conclusion of guilt 
are fully established and that all the established facts point 
irrefutably to the accused person’s guilt. The chain of incriminating 
 
25 Exhibit 3.  

 
19 
circumstances must be conclusive and should exclude any 
hypothesis other than the guilt of the accused. In other words, from 
the chain of incriminating circumstances, no reasonable doubt can 
be entertained about the accused person's innocence, demonstrating 
that it was the accused and none other who committed the offence. 
The law with regard to conviction based on circumstantial evidence 
has been crystalised by this Court in the case of Sharad 
Birdhichand Sharda v. State of Maharashtra26, wherein it was 
held:  
“153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the 
following conditions must be fulfilled before a case against an 
accused can be said to be fully established: 
 
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is 
to be drawn should be fully established. 
 
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the 
circumstances concerned “must or should” and not “may be” 
established. There is not only a grammatical but a legal 
distinction between “may be proved” and “must be or should be 
proved” as was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade 
v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 793] where the 
observations were made: [SCC para 19, p. 807] 
 
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that the 
accused must be and not merely may be guilty before 
a court can convict and the mental distance between 
 
 (1984) 4 SCC 116.  

 
20 
‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long and divides vague 
conjectures from sure conclusions.” 
 
(2) the facts so established should be consistent only with 
the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say, 
they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis 
except that the accused is guilty, 
 
(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and 
tendency, 
 
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except 
the one to be proved, and 
 
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to 
leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent 
with the innocence of the accused and must show that in 
all human probability the act must have been done by the 
accused. 
                                                    (emphasis supplied) 
8. 
Having noted the principles governing a case based purely on 
circumstantial evidence, we now proceed to discuss the evidence led 
by the prosecution in order to bring home the charges against the 
accused-appellants. The prosecution portrayed the following 
circumstance in its endeavour to establish the charge of murder 
against the accused-appellants: - 
(i) 
Motive, i.e., to say that Hamida Parween(deceased) and 
the accused-appellants were involved in an ongoing 

 
21 
strife, wherein the accused-appellants were pressuring 
her to give away her remaining share in the property in 
question i.e., Holding No. 13. On the morning of 11th 
March, 1997, Hamida Parween(deceased) and accused-
appellants quarrelled with each other which fueled the 
accused-appellants with such animosity that they 
murdered her for usurping her property. 
(ii) 
‘Last seen together’ theory i.e., to say that Hamida 
Parween(deceased) and the accused-appellants were the 
only persons present in Holding No. 13 when her sons, 
Md. Sahid Khan(PW3) and Md. Javed Khan left for the 
school. The accused-appellants absconded from Holding 
No. 13, after killing Hamida Parween and hiding her dead 
body inside the house and locking it up from the outside 
so as to conceal the evidence of the crime.   
9. 
Firstly, we proceed to consider the theory of motive. It is trite 
law that proof of motive is not sine qua non in a case of murder. 
However, in a case based purely on circumstantial evidence, motive 
if properly established, assumes great significance and would 

 
22 
definitely provide an important corroborative link in the chain of 
incriminating circumstances and strengthen the case of prosecution. 
The reliance in this regard may be placed on the case of Nandu 
Singh v. State of Chhattisgarh.27 
10. Hamida Parween(deceased)’s son Md. Sahid Khan(PW3), her 
brother Md. Firoj(PW4), her father Md. Yunush(PW8) and her brother 
Parvej Ahmad(PW9) in their oral evidence stated about the so-called 
quarrels going on between the accused-appellants and Hamida 
Parween(deceased). All these witnesses have made omnibus 
allegations that the accused-appellants used to quarrel with Hamida 
Parween(deceased) in relation to the property in question i.e. Holding 
No.13.  
11. Ongoing squabbles between close relatives residing under one 
roof are nothing out of usual and may give rise to an inference that 
all was not well within the family. However, in our opinion, merely 
because such quarrels were going on between the accused persons 
and Hamida Parween(deceased), that by itself could not be a ground 
 
27 2022 SCC Online SC 1454.  

 
23 
to impute motive to the accused-appellants for murder of Hamida 
Parween(deceased). 
12. Immediate cause of the incident as per the prosecution was a 
quarrel which allegedly took place between the accused-appellants 
and Hamida Parween(deceased) on the morning of 11th March, 1997 
just before her children i.e. Md. Sahid Khan(PW3) and Md. Javed 
Khan left for school. However, upon a close scrutiny of the 
depositions of Md. Sahid Khan(PW3) and the immediate neighbours, 
namely, Chand Mohammad(PW1), Matiur Rahman(PW2), Md. Sagir 
Ahmad Ansari(PW5), Fazal Khan(PW6) and Ragho Sharma(PW7), we 
do not find anything in their evidence which can even remotely 
suggest that there had been any quarrel between the accused-
appellants and Hamida Parween(deceased) on the day of the incident. 
Hence, there is a total lack of evidence to convince the Court that 
there was any immediate strife on the fateful day which could have 
fuelled the accused-appellants with such rage that they were 
impelled to murder Hamida Parween. 
13. The Investigating Officer, Jitender Kumar(PW12) stated in his 
evidence 
that 
Md. 
Yunush(PW8) 
[the 
father 
of 
Hamida 
Parween(deceased)] had informed him that his son-in-law i.e. Abdul 

 
24 
Hamid Khan [the husband of Hamida Parween] had already given 
half a share of the house to Ahmad Khan/appellant No. 2 and Abdul 
Rahman Khan/accused No. 3 during his lifetime. Thus, the theory of 
motive attributed to the accused-appellants i.e., that they wanted to 
usurp Holding No. 13 could not be established by unimpeachable 
evidence.  
14. The complaint under Section 107 read with Section 116(3) of 
the CrPC allegedly lodged by Hamida Parween(deceased) against the 
accused persons could have provided an important corroborative link 
in the chain of incriminating circumstances.  However, on a 
threadbare scrutiny of the record, and after going through the 
statements of the material prosecution witnesses, we notice that the 
said complaint never saw the light of the day inasmuch as, neither it 
was placed on record with the charge-sheet nor did any of the 
prosecution witnesses bother to prove the same during the evidence.  
Hence, the most important document, in the form of a complaint filed 
by Hamida Parween(deceased), under Section 107 read with Section 
116(3) of the CrPC on which the prosecution heavily relied upon in 
support of the theory of motive, was never proved as per law. 

 
25 
15. Thus, we have no hesitation in holding that the evidence led by 
the prosecution to prove the theory of motive for commission of the 
crime as attributed to the accused-appellants is far from convincing 
and a vital link in the chain of incriminating circumstances is 
snapped. In view of the above finding, unquestionably, the trial Court 
as well as the High Court erred in holding that the prosecution has 
been able to prove the motive for the murder against the accused-
appellants beyond all manner of doubt. 
16. The second circumstance on which the prosecution relied upon 
was the theory of ‘last seen together’, thereby, trying to shift the 
burden of proof by virtue of Section 106 of the Evidence Act and 
placing the accused-appellants under the onus to explain the 
circumstances under which Hamida Parween(deceased) was found 
murdered in the house by manual strangulation.  
17. It is a cardinal principle of criminal jurisprudence that Section 
106 of the Evidence Act shall apply and the onus to explain would 
shift on to the accused only after the prosecution succeeds in 
establishing the basic facts from which a reasonable inference can be 
drawn regarding the existence of certain other facts which are within 
the special knowledge of the accused.  When the accused fails to offer 

 
26 
a proper explanation about the existence of the said other facts, the 
Court can draw an appropriate inference against the accused. In 
cases based on circumstantial evidence, the accused's failure to 
provide a reasonable explanation as required under Section 106 of 
the Evidence Act can serve as an additional link in the chain of 
circumstantial evidence - but only if the prosecution has already 
established other essential ingredients sufficient to shift the onus on 
to the accused. However, if the prosecution fails to establish a 
complete chain of circumstances in the first place, then the accused's 
failure to discharge the burden under Section 106 of the Evidence 
Act becomes irrelevant. 
18. The law concerning the invocation of shifting of onus under 
Section 106 of the Evidence Act has been explained by this Court in 
the case of Shambu Nath Mehra v. State of Ajmer28, wherein it was 
held as follows: 
 
“8. Section 106 is an exception to section 101. Section 101 
lays down the general rule about the burden of proof. 
 
"Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal 
right or liability dependent on the existence of facts which he 
asserts, must prove that those facts exist". 
  
Illustration (a) says- 
 
28 AIR 1956 SC 404. 

 
27 
  
"A desires a Court to give judgment that B shall be punished 
for a crime which A says B has committed.  
 
A must prove that B has committed the crime".  
 
9. 
This lays down the general rule that in a criminal case 
the burden of proof is on the prosecution and section 106 
is certainly not intended to relieve it of that duty. On the 
contrary, it is designed to meet certain exceptional cases 
in which it would be impossible, or at any rate 
disproportionately 
difficult, 
for 
the 
prosecution 
to 
establish facts which are "especially" within the knowledge 
of the accused and which he could prove without difficulty 
or inconvenience. The word "especially" stresses that. It 
means facts that are pre-eminently or exceptionally within 
his knowledge. If the section were to be interpreted 
otherwise, it would lead to the very startling conclusion 
that in a murder case the burden lies on the accused to 
prove that he did not commit the murder because who 
could know better than he whether he did or did not. It is 
evident that that cannot be the intention and the Privy 
Council has twice refused to construe this section, as 
reproduced in certain other Acts outside India, to mean 
that the burden lies on an accused person to show that he 
did not commit the crime for which he is tried. These cases 
are Attygalle v. Emperor and Seneviratne v. R. 
 
11. We recognise that an illustration does not exhaust the full 
content of the section which it illustrates but equally it can 
neither curtail nor expand its ambit; and if knowledge of certain 
facts is as much available to the prosecution, should it choose 
to exercise due diligence, as to the accused, the facts cannot be 
said to be "especially" within the knowledge of the accused. 
This is a section which must be considered in a 
commonsense way; and the balance of convenience and the 
disproportion of the labour that would be involved in 
finding out and proving certain facts balanced against the 
triviality of the issue at stake and the ease with which the 
accused could prove them, are all matters that must be 
taken into consideration. The section cannot be used to 
undermine the well established rule of law that, save in a 
very exceptional class of case, the burden is on the 
prosecution and never shifts.”  
 
                                                                 (emphasis supplied) 

 
28 
 
19. Further, in Tulshiram Sahadu Suryawanshi and Anr. v. 
State of Maharashtra29, this Court observed as under:  
 
“23. It is settled law that presumption of fact is a rule in law of 
evidence that a fact otherwise doubtful may be inferred from 
certain other proved facts. When inferring the existence of a fact 
from other set of proved facts, the court exercises a process of 
reasoning and reaches a logical conclusion as the most 
probable position. The above position is strengthened in view of 
Section 114 of the Evidence Act, 1872. It empowers the court 
to presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely 
to have happened. In that process, the courts shall have 
regard to the common course of natural events, human 
conduct, etc. in addition to the facts of the case. In these 
circumstances, the principles embodied in Section 106 of 
the Evidence Act can also be utilised. We make it clear that 
this section is not intended to relieve the prosecution of its 
burden to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable 
doubt, but it would apply to cases where the prosecution 
has succeeded in proving facts from which a reasonable 
inference can be drawn regarding the existence of certain 
other facts, unless the accused by virtue of his special 
knowledge regarding such facts, failed to offer any 
explanation which might drive the court to draw a different 
inference.  
 
 
                                                                  (emphasis supplied) 
 
 
20.   A similar observation is found in Nagendra Sah v. State of 
Bihar30, wherein the Court held that: - 
 
“22. Thus, Section 106 of the Evidence Act will apply to those 
cases where the prosecution has succeeded in establishing the 
facts from which a reasonable inference can be drawn regarding 
 
29 (2012) 10 SCC 373. 
30 (2021) 10 SCC 725. 

 
29 
the existence of certain other facts which are within the special 
knowledge of the accused. When the accused fails to offer 
proper explanation about the existence of said other facts, the 
court can always draw an appropriate inference.  
 
23. When a case is resting on circumstantial evidence, if the 
accused fails to offer a reasonable explanation in discharge of 
burden placed on him by virtue of Section 106 of the Evidence 
Act, such a failure may provide an additional link to the chain 
of circumstances. In a case governed by circumstantial 
evidence, if the chain of circumstances which is required to be 
established by the prosecution is not established, the failure of 
the accused to discharge the burden under Section 106 of the 
Evidence Act is not relevant at all. When the chain is not 
complete, falsity of the defence is no ground to convict the 
accused.”  
 
 
 
21. Recently, this Court in the case of Anees v. The State Govt. of 
NCT31, held in the following terms:   
“40.   Section 106 of the Evidence Act cannot be invoked to 
make up the inability of the prosecution to produce evidence of 
circumstances pointing to the guilt of the accused. This section 
cannot be used to support a conviction unless the prosecution 
has discharged the onus by proving all the elements necessary 
to establish the offence. It does not absolve the prosecution 
from the duty of proving that a crime was committed even 
though it is a matter specifically within the knowledge of the 
accused and it does not throw the burden on the accused to 
show that no crime was committed. To infer the guilt of the 
accused from absence of reasonable explanation in a case 
where the other circumstances are not by themselves enough 
to call for his explanation is to relieve the prosecution of its 
legitimate burden. So, until a prima facie case is established by 
such evidence, the onus does not shift to the accused.” 
 
 
 
31 2024 INSC 368. 

 
30 
22. Applying the aforesaid principles to the case at hand, the 
prosecution would be required to establish that the accused-
appellants and Hamida Parween(deceased) were present inside the 
house i.e., Holding No. 13 on the fateful morning, and to be specific 
during the time immediately preceding the incident.  
23. The best witness to narrate about the presence of the accused-
appellants in the house with Hamida Parween(deceased) on the 
fateful morning would have been none other than the sons of Hamida 
Parween(deceased) i.e., Md. Sahid Khan(PW3), and Md. Javed Khan. 
24. On a minute perusal of the deposition of Md. Sahid Khan(PW3), 
we find nothing in his testimony which could even remotely suggest 
that any or all of the three accused persons were present in the house 
or that they had quarrelled with his mother when he left for school 
along with his brother Md. Javed Khan.  
25. In addition thereto, none of the neighbours i.e., Chand 
Mohammad(PW1), 
Matiur 
Rahman(PW2), 
Md. 
Sagir 
Ahmad 
Ansari(PW5), Fazal Khan(P6) and Ragho Sharma(PW7) made any 
such assertion in their testimonies that they had seen the accused 
present with Hamida Parween(deceased) or that they were seen 
fleeing away from Holding No. 13 on the fateful morning.  

 
31 
26. From the evidence of Md. Yunush(PW8) [the father of Hamida 
Parween(deceased)], 
it 
also 
transpires 
that 
Hamida 
Parween(deceased) had 3 children i.e. two sons, Md. Sahid 
Khan(PW3) and Md. Javed Khan, and a daughter, namely, Kahkasan 
Anujam.  However, the prosecution has not explained as to where the 
girl child was on the date of the incident.  Nothing is available on 
record to throw light regarding the age of the girl child, or to infer 
that she was incapable of testifying or was not present with her 
mother on the fateful day. Likewise, the prosecution has also failed 
to provide any explanation whatsoever as to why the other son, Md. 
Javed Khan was not examined in evidence. The prosecution failed to 
show that Md. Javed Khan and Kahkasan Anujam were incapable of 
giving evidence and hence, failure to examine them in evidence calls 
for drawing of adverse inference thereby, further denting the 
credibility of the prosecution case. 
27. Md. Firoj(PW4), the first informant alleged in the FIR32 that 
Abdul Rahman Khan/accused No.3 and Nusrat Parween/appellant 
No.1 started fighting with his sister in the morning and, sometime 
 
32 Exhibit 4.  

 
32 
later, her other sister-in-law namely Sayedi Bibi, also came to the 
house located at Holding No. 13. As many as eight accused-persons33 
were charge-sheeted in the case, however, the trial Court acquitted 
all other charge-sheeted accused citing insufficient evidence while 
convicting the appellants, namely, Nusrat Parween/appellant No. 1, 
Ahmad Khan/appellant No. 2 and Abdul Rahman Khan/accused No. 
3. 
28. Hence, we have no hesitation in holding that the prosecution 
failed to prove presence or what to say exclusive presence of the 
accused-appellants 
in 
Holding 
No. 
13 
with 
Hamida 
Parween(deceased) contemporaneous to the time of the incident, 
thereby, demolishing the prosecution theory of last seen together. 
29. There is no credible evidence on record of the case to establish 
the exclusive presence of the accused-appellants with Hamida 
Parween(deceased) in the house in question at any time before the 
incident, justifying the shifting of the burden of proof on to the 
accused-appellants by invocation of Section 106 of the Evidence Act. 
 
33 Refer Para 2.4 of this judgment. 

 
33 
Thus, the theory of last seen together attributed by the prosecution 
could not be proved beyond all manner of doubt. 
30. There is another doubtful feature which cast a grave doubt on 
the truthfulness of the prosecution case. The first informant, Md. 
Firoj(PW4) alleged that he had gone to the police station on 11th 
March, 1997 to inform about the disappearance of his sister, Hamida 
Parween. However, the Investigating Officer, Jitender Kumar(PW12) 
emphatically denied that Md. Firoj(PW4) or any other relative of 
Hamida Parween(deceased) had visited the police station on 11th 
March, 1997 for lodging a report regarding disappearance of Hamida 
Parween(deceased). As per the Investigating Officer, Jitender 
Kumar(PW12), 
Md. 
Firoj(PW4) 
[the 
brother 
of 
Hamida 
Parween(deceased) had come to the police station only on the 
morning of 12th March, 1997 for the first time and made a complaint 
regarding the disappearance of his sister upon which an entry was 
made in the station diary at Serial No. 517.  However, the said station 
diary entry was not brought on record which is yet another 
circumstance which persuades us to draw an adverse inference 
against the prosecution. 

 
34 
31. The maternal family relatives of Hamida Parween(deceased) 
have come out with a categoric assertion that after the death of 
Hamida Parween’s husband, the accused persons were continuously 
quarreling with her for usurping the entire Holding No. 13.  The first 
informant, Md. Firoj(PW4) also alleged in the FIR that the accused 
persons had quarreled with Hamida Parween(deceased) in the 
morning of the incident and were seen fleeing away together in the 
tempo.  Had there been an iota of truth in these allegations, the 
immediate and natural reaction of the maternal family members after 
being informed about the missing of Hamida Parween(deceased) and 
noticing the lock on the door of the house would have been to break 
open the lock and take a stock of the situation inside.  The utter 
indifference of the family members in taking any such measures 
makes the entire prosecution story doubtful. 
32. As a consequence of the discussion made above, we are of the 
view that the prosecution has failed to prove the chain of 
incriminating circumstances against the accused-appellants by 
convincing evidence and beyond the shadow of doubt, so as to affirm 
their guilt. The trial Court as well as the High Court clearly erred 
while appreciating the evidence and in holding that the prosecution 

 
35 
has proved the case against the accused-appellants beyond all 
manner of doubt. Hence, the accused-appellants deserve to be 
acquitted of the charges by giving them the benefit of doubt.  
33. It is noteworthy that Abdul Rahman Khan/accused No. 3 did 
not file any appeal before this Court challenging the judgment of the 
High Court. Since we have consistently found that the case of the 
accused-appellants herein is identical to that of Abdul Rahman 
Khan/accused No. 3, we are inclined to extend the benefit of this 
judgment to Abdul Rahman Khan/accused No.3 as well by exercising 
our power under Article 142 of the Constitution of India. 
34. Resultantly, the impugned judgment dated 19th January, 2011 
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court and judgments and 
orders dated 25th November, 2003, and 1st December, 2003 passed 
by the trial Court are hereby reversed and set aside.  
35. The accused-appellants, namely, Nusrat Parween/appellant 
No. 1, Ahmad Khan/appellant No. 2 and Abdul Rahman 
Khan/accused No. 3 are acquitted of the charges. 
36. Nusrat Parween/appellant No. 1 and Ahmad Khan/appellant 
No. 2 are on bail. They need not surrender. Their bail bonds are 
discharged.  

 
36 
37. We also direct that if Abdul Rahman Khan/accused No. 3 is in 
custody, he shall be released forthwith, if not wanted in any other 
case. 
38. The appeals are allowed accordingly.  
39. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 
………………………J. 
(DIPANKAR DATTA) 
 
 
..…………………….J. 
(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
DECEMBER 10, 2024