2024 INSC 954
 
                 
  
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 1 of 14 
 
 
 
 
NON-REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.14132 OF 2024 
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 27549 of 2024) 
 
 
STATE OF ODISHA & ORS.      
           …APPELLANTS 
VERSUS 
DILIP KUMAR MOHAPATRA                      …RESPONDENT 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
MANOJ MISRA, J. 
1.   Leave granted. 
2.   By an office order dated 23.04.2001 issued by the 
Director of Teacher Education & SCERT, Bhubaneswar, 
Orissa1, the first respondent was engaged as Computer 
Technician at the College of Teacher Education, Balasore2. 
The terms of his engagement were as follows:   
 
1 The Director 
2 The College 
Digitally signed by
INDU MARWAH
Date: 2024.12.10
17:13:53 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
                 
  
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 2 of 14 
 
 
“………is engaged as Computer Technician at 
College of Teacher Education, Balasore in the 
scale of Rs. 5500-9000 with usual DA/ADA as 
admissible from time to time for a period of one 
year or till the post is filled up on a regular basis, 
whichever is earlier, with effect from the date he 
joins his assignment. 
 
This is purely temporary assignment to help 
operate the computer system available to the 
college under UGC Development grant.” 
 
3.   Pursuant to the order of engagement, the first 
respondent joined the office of the Principal of the College 
on 01.05.2001. Later, his services were dispensed with by 
the Director vide office order dated 22.01.2002 which 
reads thus:   
“As the services of Sri Dilip Kumar Mohapatra, 
working as Computer Technician in the CTE, 
Balasore, 
no 
more 
required 
is 
hereby 
terminated with effect from 22.01.2002 (A.N.)” 
 
4.   Aggrieved by the disengagement order, the first 
respondent filed O.A. No. 828 (C) of 2002 before Orissa 
Administrative Tribunal Cuttack Bench, Cuttack3, inter 
alia, on the following grounds: 
(a) the order violates the principles of natural justice; 
and 
(b) the order is bereft of reasons. 
 
3 The Tribunal 

 
                 
  
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 3 of 14 
 
 
5.   The appellant (i.e., the State of Odisha) contested the 
proceedings before the Tribunal, inter-alia, on the following 
grounds:  
(a) the engagement of the first respondent was 
purely temporary and for a fixed term just to meet 
the exigencies of establishment i.e. training 
programme and pre-service training programme 
and since December 2002 the pressure of work 
had 
lessened, 
the 
first 
respondent 
was 
disengaged; and  
(b) the engagement was not pursuant to any 
recruitment exercise therefore the first respondent 
had no right to the post. 
 
6.   During the course of proceedings before the Tribunal, 
the first respondent placed reliance on two orders passed 
by the Tribunal in O.A. Nos. 2242 of 2002 and 481 of 2008 
wherein, according to the first respondent, similarly 
situated persons like the first respondent were given the 
benefit of reinstatement and pursuant thereto, they were 
offered regular appointments. 

 
                 
  
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 4 of 14 
 
 
7.   The Tribunal took the view that since the first 
respondent was not appointed by following any procedure 
known to law for appointment to a public post, and the 
engagement was for a fixed term, the only relief which 
could be granted to him is pay and allowances from the 
date of his disengagement (i.e. 22.01.2002) till expiry of his 
original term of engagement (i.e. 30.04.2002). 
8.   Aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal, the first 
respondent invoked jurisdiction of the Orissa High Court 
at Cuttack4 under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution 
of India.5 
9.   By 
the 
impugned 
judgment 
and 
order 
dated 
15.12.2022, the High Court allowed the writ petition, 
quashed the order of the Tribunal and directed 
reinstatement of the first respondent in service with all 
service and financial benefits as due and admissible to the 
post. While directing so, the High Court reasoned thus: 
 
“7. This 
Court 
after 
going 
through 
the 
materials available on record finds that the 
Petitioner was appointed as a Computer 
Technician vide Office order dated 23.04.2001 
 
4 The High Court 
5 The Constitution 

 
                 
  
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 5 of 14 
 
 
under Annexure-1. The said order was issued 
with a condition that the Petitioner will 
continue for a period of one year or till the post 
is filled up on regular basis. But prior to 
completion of the said period of one year and 
prior to taking any step to fill up the post on 
regular basis, the Petitioner was abruptly 
terminated from his service vide order under 
Annexure-3. From the pleadings available on 
the record, it is quite evident that prior to 
issuing such order of termination under 
Annexure-3 on 22.01.2002 the Petitioner was 
neither show caused nor any opportunity of 
hearing was given to him. The impugned order 
of termination was also passed without 
assigning any reason whatsoever. It is also not 
the case of the Opposite Parties that the 
Petitioner prior to being terminated was ever 
show caused and given an opportunity of 
hearing. It is also not the case of the Opposite 
Parties that the order of termination was 
issued because of the fact that the post will be 
filled up on regular basis. This Court however 
finds that persons similarly situated and 
disengaged along with the Petitioner were re-
engaged and subsequently regularized in their 
service in terms of the order passed by the 
Tribunal in O.A. No.2242 of 2002 and O.A. 
No.481 of 2008.   
 
 
Since the Tribunal while entertaining similar 
applications allowed the claim by interfering 
with the order of termination and pursuant to 
the order so passed, the applicants in O.A. 
No.481 of 2008 and O.A. No.2242 of 2002 
were not only re-engaged in their services, but 
also have been regularized in the meantime, 
as per the considered view of this Court, the 
Petitioner is entitled to get similar benefit. The 
Tribunal as per the considered view of this 
Court never take into account the benefit 
extended in favour of the applicants in O.A. 
No.2242 of 2002 and O.A. No.481 of 2008 in 
its proper perspective though the said fact was 
brought to the notice of the Tribunal and 
discussed under Para-8 of the order.  
 

 
                 
  
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 6 of 14 
 
 
8. In view of such admitted position and 
placing reliance on the decisions as cited 
(supra), this Court finds that the impugned 
order of termination has been issued in 
violation of the principle of natural justice as 
well as without assigning any reason. The 
Tribunal also failed to extend similar relief as 
has been extended in O.A. No.2242 of 2002 
and O.A. No.481 of 2008. Therefore, this Court 
is 
inclined 
to 
quash 
the 
order 
dated 
23.09.2010 passed by the Tribunal in O.A. 
No.828 (C) of 2002 under Annexure-5 as well 
as the order dated 22.01.2002 passed by the 
Opposite Party No.2 under Annexure-3. While 
quashing both the orders, this Court held that 
the Petitioner is also entitled for his re-
engagement with all service and financial 
benefits as due and admissible.” 
 
10. 
Aggrieved by the order of the High Court, the State 
is in appeal before us. 
11. 
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and 
have perused the material on record. 
 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT 
 
12. 
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted:  
(i) It is an admitted position that the first 
respondent was engaged for a period of one year 
or till regular selection is made, whichever is 
earlier. The order of engagement also specified 
that it was purely temporary in nature. In such 

 
                 
  
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 7 of 14 
 
 
circumstances, as the order of disengagement was 
non stigmatic, there was no violation of the 
principles of nature justice.  
(ii) Assuming that pursuant to an order of the 
Tribunal, passed in a separate proceeding, two 
similarly situated persons were reinstated, the 
same could not have been a ground to allow the 
writ petition of the first respondent, particularly, 
when the order of the Tribunal suffered from no 
illegality/perversity.  
(iii) Once the findings of the Tribunal that 
appointment of the first respondent was without 
following any procedure known to law remained 
undisturbed, and no material was placed by the 
first respondent to satisfy the conscience of the 
Court that he was appointed by following the 
prescribed recruitment procedure, there was no 
justification for the High Court to interfere.  
(iv) Even if it is assumed that dis-engagement 
prior to expiry of the term was illegal, the 

 
                 
  
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 8 of 14 
 
 
appropriate relief would have been to award 
compensation as awarded by the Tribunal. 
 
SUBMISSIONS 
ON 
BEHALF 
OF 
THE 
FIRST 
RESPONDENT 
 
13. 
Per contra, the learned counsel for the first 
respondent submitted:  
(i) The disengagement was without assigning any 
reason and as such was arbitrary. Moreover, it 
was in violation of the principles of natural justice.  
(ii) The stand taken by the appellant-State that 
due to less work, the services of the first 
respondent were dispensed with has no basis, in 
as much as similarly situated persons, whose 
services were dispensed with in a similar manner, 
were given the benefit of reinstatement.  
(iii) State being the employer cannot discriminate 
between similarly situated employees. Hence, the 
High 
Court 
was 
justified 
in 
directing 
reinstatement of the first respondent. 
 
 

 
                 
  
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 9 of 14 
 
 
ANALYSIS 
14. 
We have considered the rival submissions and 
have perused the materials on record. At the outset, we 
may observe that there is no dispute as regards the 
engagement of the first respondent being purely temporary 
to help in operation of computer system made available to 
the College under UGC Development Grant and that too 
for a fixed term of one year or till regular selection is made, 
whichever was earlier. Further, there is no material to 
demonstrate that the first respondent was engaged/ 
appointed against a pre-existing or freshly created 
substantive 
vacancy 
and 
that 
his 
engagement/ 
appointment was made by following a procedure 
prescribed by statutory rules or executive instructions.  
15. 
In Secretary, State of Karnataka and Ors. Vs. 
Umadevi 
and 
Ors.,6 
this 
Court 
had 
cautioned 
Constitutional Courts against issuance of directions for 
regularization/absorption or continuance of temporary, 
contractual, casual, daily-wage or ad hoc employees 
 
6  (2006) 4 SCC 1 

 
                 
  Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 10 of 14 
 
 
unless the recruitment itself was made regularly and in 
terms of the constitutional scheme.  
16. 
Importantly, in this case, the Tribunal had 
returned a finding that there was nothing on record to 
demonstrate that appointment was made by following any 
known procedure for appointment to a public post.  
17. 
Admittedly, the engagement of the first respondent 
was for a fixed term for providing help in running computer 
system made available under UGC Development Grant. 
Further, the stand of the appellant before the Tribunal was 
that for shortage of work available, such persons were 
disengaged. In these circumstances, even if it is assumed 
that in absence of any allegation of misconduct, they ought 
not to have been disengaged prior to completion of their 
term, direction to reinstate / re-engage them, particularly 
after the term period was over, was not justified. In our 
view, therefore, the Tribunal was justified in only granting 
compensation to the first respondent for the remaining 
period of his term.  

 
                 
  Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 11 of 14 
 
 
18. 
The High Court, however, granted relief of 
reinstatement/re-engagement to the first respondent 
because in its view the State had reinstated similarly 
disengaged persons pursuant to Tribunal’s orders passed 
in separate proceedings instituted by such of those 
persons. This, in our view, was not legally correct because 
the High Court ought to have examined Tribunal’s order 
qua first respondent on its own merit, particularly when 
the High Court was not bound by Tribunal’s order.  
Besides that, the State cannot be forced to suffer an order 
which is not sound in law.  
19. 
In State of Odisha v. Anup Kumar Senapati7, 
after noticing a series of decisions, a three-Judge Bench of 
this Court rejected an argument that petitioners must get 
the benefit of parity even if they are not otherwise entitled 
to the relief.  It was held: 
“In our opinion, there is no concept of negative 
equality under Article 14 of the Constitution. 
In case the person has a right, he has to be 
treated equally, but where right is not 
available a person cannot claim rights to be 
treated equally as the right does not exist, 
negative equality when the right does not 
exist, cannot be claimed.” 
 
7 (2019) 19 SCC 626 

 
                 
  Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 12 of 14 
 
 
 
 
20. 
In State of U.P. & Ors. v. Rajkumar Sharma & 
Ors.8, this Court held that even if in some cases 
appointments have been made by mistake, or wrongly, 
that does not confer any right on another person. It was 
also held that Article 14 of the Constitution does not 
envisage negative equality, and if the State committed the 
mistake, it cannot be forced to perpetuate the same 
mistake.  
21. 
In the light of the discussion above, we are of the 
view that the direction of the High Court to reinstate / re-
engage the first respondent, particularly after lapse of the 
term of his engagement, is not legally sustainable and, 
therefore, it deserves to be set aside.  
22. 
The question which now arises is as to what relief 
the first respondent be provided at this stage. Admittedly, 
the direction of the High Court to reinstate/ re-engage was 
not implemented on account of stay on contempt 
proceedings, therefore equities have not been created in 
 
8 (2006) 3 SCC 330 

 
                 
  Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 13 of 14 
 
 
favour of the first respondent by dint of length of his 
continuation in service. In such circumstances, the first 
respondent 
can 
be 
compensated 
with 
monetary 
compensation. In ordinary circumstances, the relief of 
compensation as was awarded by the Tribunal would have 
been sufficient. But here the State is held to have treated 
similarly situated persons differently which has resulted in 
unwarranted expectation and prolonged litigation. No 
doubt, an attempt is there on part of the State to 
distinguish the case of the first respondent with those in 
whose favour Tribunal’s order was there, but details of 
those distinguishing features have not been brought to our 
notice during the course of hearing. Under these 
circumstances, we deem it appropriate to award a lump 
sum compensation of Rs. 5 lacs to the first respondent as 
full and final settlement of all claims against the appellant. 
23. 
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.  Order of the 
High Court is set aside.  The appellant shall, within three 
months from today, pay Rs.5 lacs to the first respondent. 

 
                 
  Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 27549/2024                                            Page 14 of 14 
 
 
The said amount shall be full and final settlement of all 
claims of the first respondent qua the appellant.   
24. 
Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of. 
 
 
 
                    
….............................................J. 
   
                                 (Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha) 
 
 
 
 
................................................J. 
                                                                         (Manoj Misra) 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
December 10, 2024