2024 INSC 86
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.          OF 2024
(Arising out of SLP(C)No.18612 of 2015)
JAGMOHAN AND ANOTHER              
…  Appellant(s)
VERSUS
BADRI NATH AND OTHERS
      
 
… Respondent(s)
JUDGMENT
RAJESH BINDAL, J.
Leave granted.
2.
The defendants are before this Court challenging the
concurrent findings of fact recorded by all the courts below.
3.
It is a case in which the respondents had filed a suit1
on  25.01.1984  for  possession  by  pre-emption  of  the  plot
measuring 719 square yards, situated at Light Railway Bazar,
Jagadhri (hereinafter referred to as ‘the property in dispute’).
1 Civil Suit No. 309
1
Digitally signed by
Vijay Kumar
Date: 2024.02.06
17:07:15 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

The Trial Court2 decreed the suit. The judgment and decree3 of
the Trial Court was upheld upto the High Court4.
4.
The facts in brief are that the respondents (plaintiffs
in  the  suit)  claimed  themselves  to  be  the  tenants  in  the
property in dispute since 1949. The property in dispute was
owned  by  Anarkali  and  others.  The  same  was  sold  by  the
owners thereof to the appellants (defendants in the suit) by
way  of  a  registered  sale-deed  dated  25.01.1983.  The
respondents filed the suit exercising their right of pre-emption
of the sale claiming that in terms of the provisions of the 1913
Act5, they had preferential right to purchase the property.  They
offered to pay same sale consideration of  ₹43,000/-. The Trial
Court decreed the suit subject to payment of ₹50,238/- to the
vendee  after  deducting  1/5th of  the  pre-emption  amount
deposited in the Court at the time of filing of the suit. The
amount so directed by the Trial Court was including stamp duty,
registration  fee  and  miscellaneous  expenses  incurred  on
registration of the sale-deed6.
2 Additional Senior Sub Judge, Jagadhri
3 Judgment and decree dated 27.05.1989
4 High Cour of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh
5 The Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1913
6 Sale-deed dated 25.01.1983
2

5.
Challenging the judgment of the High Court, learned
counsel  for  the  appellants  submitted  that  in  view  of  the
notification  08.10.1985,  issued  by  the  State  in  exercise  of
powers under section 8(2) of the 1913 Act, the suit filed by the
respondents  deserved  to  be  dismissed  as  the  right  of  pre-
emption did not exist for sale of land falling in the areas of any
municipality in Haryana. It is not a matter of dispute that the
sale in question was pertaining to the property located within
the municipal limits of Jagadhri (State of Haryana). In terms of
the  Constitution  Bench  judgment  of  this  Court  in  Shyam
Sunder and others v. Ram Kumar and another
 
 7, the right
of pre-emption has to exist on the date of registration of the
sale-deed, on the date of filing of suit and also on the date the
same is decreed by the first Court. In the case in hand, no
doubt, the suit was pending when the aforesaid notification was
issued,  however,  the  Trial  Court  had  decided  the  same  on
27.05.1989, hence the decree could not have been passed. The
courts  below  have  failed  to  appreciate  that  aspect  of  the
matter. 
6.            He further submitted that the sale deed was
registered in favour of the appellants on 25.01.1983, the suit
7 (2001) 8 SCC 24
3

having  been  filed  on  25.01.1984  was  time-barred  as  the
limitation thereof is one year, which expired on 24.01.1984. It
was  further  argued  that  the  courts  below  have  wrongly
appreciated  the  issue  regarding  the  custom  of  pre-emption
prevailing in the area. It was not a matter of dispute that the
area in which the property is situated, falls within the extended
area of municipal limits of Jagadhri. Though some evidence was
led pertaining to the custom prevailing in the urban area of
municipal limits of Jagadhri, however, for the extended area, no
evidence was produced. In terms of the judgment of the High
Court  in  Sandeep  Bansal  v.  M.  L.  Hans  and  others
 
 8,
decided on 24.08.2009, the same custom cannot be relied upon
for any transaction of sale in the extended area.
7.
On  the  other  hand,  learned  counsel  for  the
respondents  submitted  that  though  issue  of  limitation  was
raised by the appellants before the Trial Court, however, the
same was not seriously contested for the reason that the suit
filed by the respondents was within limitation.  The Schedule
attached to the 1963 Act9 provides for a period of one year for
filing of suit for pre-emption. If the same is read along with
8 R.S.A. No. 2109 of 1998
9 The Limitation Act, 1963
4

Section 12 of the aforesaid Act, in terms of which the date of
registration of sale deed is to be excluded, the  suit filed by the
respondents was within limitation. It was for this reason that
the  appellants  did  not  press  the  aforesaid  issue  before  the
lower Appellate Court10 or the High Court.
8.
It was further submitted that the notification dated
08.10.1985, as is sought to be relied upon by the appellants,
will  not  be  applicable  in  the  case  in  hand.  From  a  perusal
thereof, it is evident that the exemption is only with reference
to sale of land within the municipal area. In the case in hand, it
is not the sale of land, rather immovable property in the form of
a rolling mill, which cannot be termed to be land. The aforesaid
notification has been issued in exercise of powers under Section
8(2) of the 1913 Act which enables the State Government to
exclude any transaction of sale of any land or property or class
of land or property for exercise of right of pre-emption.  The
right to the respondents flows from Section 16 of the 1913 Act
which provides that right of pre-emption in respect of urban
immovable  property  vests  in  the  tenant.  The  term  ‘urban
immovable property’ has been defined in Section 3(3) of the
1913 Act to mean immovable property within the limits of town,
10 Additional District Judge, Yamuna Nagar at Jagadhri
5

other than agricultural land. Section 3(1) thereof defines any
agricultural land to mean land as defined in 1900 Act11. Section
3(2) defines ‘village immovable property’ to mean immovable
property within the limits of a village, other than agricultural
land.
9.
The expression ‘land’ is defined in 1900 Act to mean
the land which is not occupied by site of any building in a town
or village and is occupied or let out for agricultural purposes or
for purposes subservient to agriculture. He also referred to the
definition of ‘immovable property’, as provided for in Section
3(26) of the 1897 Act12. As the sale in the case in hand was
pertaining to not the land situated within the municipal limits
but of a constructed area which was being used a rolling mill,
the exemption as granted vide notification dated 08.10.1985
will not be applicable in the case of the appellants.  Very fairly,
he did not dispute the proposition of law as laid down by the
Constitution  Bench  of  this  Court  in  Shyam  Sunder  and
others’ case (supra). However, he submitted that the same
will not be applicable in the facts and circumstances of the case
11 Punjab Alienation of Land Act, 1900
12 The General Clauses Act, 1897
6

as  the  notification  does  not  come  to  the  rescue  of  the
appellants.
10.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused
the relevant referred record.
11.
The relevant provisions of the 1900 Act and 1913 Act
are extracted below:
           
“Sections 3(1) (2) and (3), 8, 15 and 16 of the
Punjab Pre-emption 1913 Act
3.  Definitions.  - In  this  Act,  unless  a  different
intention appears from the subject or context, - 
(1)‘agricultural  land’  shall  mean  land  as
defined  in  Punjab  Alienation  of  Land  Act,
1900 (XIII of 1900) (as amended by act, 1 of
1907), but shall not include the rights of a
mortgage,  whether  usufructuary  or  not  in
such land:
(2)‘village immovable property’ shall mean
immovable  property  within  the  limits  of  a
village, other than agricultural land:
(3)‘urban immovable property’ shall mean
immovable  property  within  the  limits  of
town, other than agricultural land. For the
purposes of this Act a specified place shall
be deemed to be a town (a)
7

If so declared by the State Government by
notification in the Official Gazette or (b) if so
found by the Courts:
                xx                      xx                         xx
8.        State Government may exclude areas
from pre-emption- (1)   Except as may otherwise
be declared in the case of any agricultural land in a
notification  by  the  State Government,  no  right  of
pre-emption shall exist within any cantonment.
 (2)        The State Government may declare by
notification that in any local area or with respect to
any land or property or class of land or property or
with respect to any sale or class of sales, no right of
pre-emption or only such limited right as that the
State Government may specify, shall exist.
                           xx                     xx
xx
15.  Persons  in  whom  right  of  pre-emption
vests in respect of sales of agricultural land
and village immovable property. (1) The right of
pre-emption  in  respect  of  agricultural  land  and
village immovable property shall vest-
(a) where the sale is by sole owner-
First,  in  the  son  or  daughter  or  son’s  son  or
daughter’s son of the vendor;
8

Secondly, in the brother or brother’s son of the
vendor;
Thirdly,  in  the  father’s  brother  or  father’s
brother’s son of the vendor;
Fourthly, in the tenant who holds under tenancy
of  vendor  the land  or  property  sold  or
apart thereof.
(b)Where the sale is of a share out of joint land or
property made by all the co-sharers jointly-
First in the sons or daughters or sons’ sons or
daughters’ sons of the vendor or vendors;
Secondly,  in  the brothers  or  bother’s  sons  of the
vendor  or vendors;
Thirdly, in the father’s brother or father’s brother’s
sons  of the vendor or vendors;
Fourthly, in the other co-sharer’s;
Fifthly, in the tenants who hold under tenancy of the
vendor or vendor the land or property sold
or a part thereof;
(c)  where  the  sale  is  of  land  or  property  owned
jointly and is made by all the co-sharers jointly-
First, in the sons or daughters or son’s sons or
daughter’s sons of the vendors;
Secondly, in the brothers or bother’s sons of the
vendors;
9

Thirdly,  in  the  father’s  brother’s  or  father’s
brother’s sons of vendors;
Fourthly, in the tenants who hold under tenancy
of the vendors or any one of them the land
or property sold or a part thereof.
(2)  Notwithstanding  anything contained in  sub-
section (1):-
(a) where the sale is by a female of land or
property to which she has succeeded through her
father or brother or the sale in respect of such
land or property is by the son daughter of such
female after inheritance, the right of pre-emption
shall vest:-
(i)  if  the  sale  is  by  such  female  in  her
brother or brother’s son:
(ii) if the sale is by the son or daughter of
such female in the mother’s brother or
the mother’s brother’s son of the vendor
or vendors;
b. 
where the sale is by a female of land or
property to which she has succeeded through her
husband, or through her son in case the son has
inherited  the  land  or  property  sold  from  his
father, the right or pre-emption shall vest-
    First, in the son or daughter of such husband of
the female;
10

Secondly,  in  the  husband’s  brother  or
husband’s brother’s son of such female.
16.     Person in whom right of pre-emption
vests  in  an  urban  immovable  property- The
right of pre-emption in respect of urban immovable
property shall vest in the tenant who holds under
tenancy of the vendor the property sold or apart
thereof.”
Section 2(3) of the 1900 of Punjab Alienation
of Land  Act, 1900
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in
the subject or context, --
                xx                        xx                                xx
(3) the expression “land” means land which is not
occupied as the site of any building in a town or
village  and  is  occupied  or  let  for  agricultural
purposes or for purposes subservient to agriculture
or for pasture, and includes—
(a) the sites of buildings and other structures
on such land;
(b) a  share  in  the  profits  of  an  estate  or
holding;
(c) any dues or any fixed percentage of the
land-revenue payable by an inferior land-
owner to a superior land-owner;
11

(d) a right to receive rent; and 
(e) any right to water enjoyed by the owner or
occupier of land as such:
12.
The right of the respondents/tenants in the property
flows from Section 16 of the 1913 Act. It is not a matter of
dispute that the respondents were tenants in the property from
the year 1949 onwards where the rolling mill had been set up.
The  term  ‘urban  immovable  property’  has  been  defined  in
Section  3(3)  of  the  1913  Act  to  mean  immovable  property
within the limits of town, other than agricultural land. Section
3(1) defines any agricultural land to mean land as defined in
1900 Act. The term ‘land’ as defined in Section 2(3) of the 1900
Act  excludes  any  site  of  any  building  in  a  town  or  village.
Meaning thereby that the immovable property would be more
than the land only or the land on which the construction has
already been made. The fact that the property in dispute is
located in a municipal area of Jagadhri is not in dispute.
13.
After coming to the conclusion that the property in
dispute  on  which  right  of  pre-emption  was  sought  to  be
exercised  by  the  respondents  was  an  urban  immovable
property, the only issue which requires consideration by this
12

Court is as to whether the exemption of pre-emption as granted
vide notification dated 08.10.1985 would be available to the
property in dispute.
14.
A perusal of the notification shows that it has been
issued in exercise of powers conferred under Section 8(2) of the
1913 Act, which enables the State Government to declare by
notification either no right of pre-emption or only limited right
will  exist  in  any  local  area  or  with  respect  to  any  land  or
property or class of land or property.  The notification provides
that right of pre-emption shall not exist in respect of sale of
land falling in the areas of municipalities in Haryana. 
15.
As we have already noticed above, the term ‘land’ as
such has not been defined in the 1913 Act as it is only the
agricultural land which is defined. If the aforesaid notification is
read  with  reference  to  the  powers  available  with  the  State
Government to grant exemption from pre-emption, it is evident
that the same has been granted with reference to land only and
not the immovable property. The fact that Section 8(2) of the
1913 Act uses two terms independently, clearly suggests that
the land and the immovable property have different meanings.
It is evident even from the language of Section 15 of the 1913
13

Act,  which  also  provides  right  of  pre-emption  in  respect  of
agricultural  land  and  village  immovable  property.  ‘Village
immovable  property’  has  been  defined  to  mean  immovable
property within the limits of a village other than the agricultural
land. 
16.
From the aforesaid provisions of the 1913 Act, if read
Scheme of the Act, it is abundantly clear that the land and the
immovable property are two different terms. The immovable
property is more than the land on which certain construction
has been made. Guidance can also be taken from the definition
of  immovable  property,  as  provided  in  Section  3(26)  of the
1897 Act, which includes land, means something more than the
land.
17.
As  the  notification  dated  08.10.1985  limits  its
application for taking away the right of pre-emption only with
reference to sale of land falling in the areas of any municipality,
the same will not come to the rescue of the appellants. In the
case in hand, admittedly it is sale of immovable property, which
is more than the land as a rolling mill had already been set up
on the land, which was in occupation of the respondents as
tenants.
14

18.
The issue regarding limitation for filing of the suit is
also misconceived if considered in the light of the facts of the
case, the provisions of the 1961 Act and also that the same was
not raised by the appellants before the lower Appellate Court or
the High Court.
19.
For the reasons mentioned above, we do not find any
merit  in  the  present  appeal.  The  same  is,  accordingly,
dismissed.
 
      …...………….……………..J.
     (C.T.RAVIKUMAR)
…...………….……………..J.
     (RAJESH BINDAL)
New Delhi
February 06, 2024.
15