2024 INSC 91
Criminal Appeal no.1465 of 2011 
 
   Page 1 of 11 
 
Non-Reportable 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION  
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1465 OF 2011 
  
 
Kishore & Ors.  
 
 
 
 
    … Appellants 
 
versus 
 
State of Punjab  
 
 
 
 
  … Respondent 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The appellants are the accused nos.2, 3 and 5 – Kishore, 
Bala, and Banaras respectively.  Five accused faced trial for the 
offences punishable under Section 148 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (for short, ‘the IPC’), Section 460 read with Section 
149 of the IPC and Section 302 read with Section 149 of the 
IPC.  All the five accused were convicted.  For the offences 
punishable under Section 148 of the IPC, they were sentenced 
to undergo imprisonment for two years.  For the second offence 
punishable under Section 460, read with Section 149 of the 
IPC, they were sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 
ten years.  For the offence punishable under Section 302 read 
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.02.07
18:07:31 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

Criminal Appeal no.1465 of 2011 
 
   Page 2 of 11 
 
with Section 149 of the IPC, they were sentenced to undergo 
life imprisonment. 
2. 
The accused preferred an appeal before the High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh.  By the impugned 
judgment dated 27th April 2010, the High Court acquitted the 
accused no.1–Raka and the accused no.4–Lakhan but 
confirmed the conviction of the present appellants. 
3. 
According to the prosecution case, on the intervening 
night of 3rd and 4th July 2003, PW-8 (Khushbir Singh) was 
sleeping with his parents Pratap Singh and Gurpal Kaur, in 
their bedroom.  Khushbir Singh is the complainant.  His 
brother Satbir Singh and his wife Narinder Kaur (PW-9) were 
sleeping in another room.  The two daughters of Satbir Singh 
and Narinder Kaur were sleeping in another room.  PW-8 heard 
the cries of his nieces, and therefore, he was awakened from 
sleep.  According to him, four to five persons who had entered 
his house assaulted PW-8, PW-9 and her husband–Satbir 
Singh.  They broke the locks of the almirah in the house and 
took away ornaments and cash.  The accused assaulted Pratap 
Singh and Gurpal Kaur. Both of them were injured and 
succumbed to injuries in the hospital.  
SUBMISSIONS 
4. 
The learned counsel appearing for the appellants has 
taken us through the evidence of the material prosecution 
witnesses.  The learned counsel submitted that though the two 
eye-witnesses, PW-8 (Khushbir Singh) and PW-9 (Narinder 

Criminal Appeal no.1465 of 2011 
 
   Page 3 of 11 
 
Kaur), did not know the accused, a test identification parade 
was not conducted.  The witnesses purported to identify the 
accused in the Court for the first time one year after the 
incident.  Moreover, both the witnesses have not stated that 
they had seen any of the accused assaulting the deceased – 
Pratap Singh and Gurpal Kaur.  The learned counsel pointed 
out that the most crucial witnesses, Lovepreet Kaur and 
Amritpal Kaur, whose respective ages were 17 and 8 years, 
were not examined.  The learned counsel pointed out that only 
after hearing the shouts of these two girls that PW-8 and PW-9 
were awakened.  Therefore, the prosecution needed to examine 
at least one of them.  Secondly, Satbir Singh – the husband of 
PW-9 (Narinder Kaur), who was the injured witness, has not 
been examined.  Inviting our attention to the evidence of PW-8 
and PW-9, the learned counsel submitted that their evidence is 
entirely doubtful and cannot be believed at all.   
5. 
The learned counsel invited our attention to the evidence 
of PW-7, who is a witness to the disclosure statements made 
by the accused and the consequent recovery.  The ornaments 
were recovered based on the disclosure statements of all five 
accused.  Though recovery was also made from Raka (accused 
no.1) and Lakhan (accused no.4), they have been acquitted by 
the High Court by the impugned judgment.  She pointed out 
that PW-7 deposed that the seized ornaments were mixed with 
other ornaments for the purposes of identification.  He stated 
that a goldsmith was called for the identification of ornaments.  
However, the goldsmith was not examined.  Therefore, serious 

Criminal Appeal no.1465 of 2011 
 
   Page 4 of 11 
 
doubt is created about the prosecution case regarding the 
identification of the stolen ornaments by PW-9.   
6. 
The learned counsel appearing for the respondent–State 
of Punjab, urged that both PW-8 and PW-9 had seen the 
accused for a sufficiently long time during the incident, and 
their examination had been recorded within one year from the 
date of the incident. Therefore, the test identification parade 
was not necessary at all.  He urged that the failure to hold the 
test identification parade was not fatal to the prosecution as 
the testimony of PW-8 and PW-9 was reliable.  The learned 
counsel relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of Raju 
Manjhi v. State of Bihar1.  He submitted that the 
eyewitnesses have identified the present appellants and 
therefore, no interference is called for. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
7. 
We find that as the appellants had undergone sentence 
for more than seven years, by the order dated 25th July 2011 
of this Court, they have been enlarged on bail till the disposal 
of this appeal.  We must note here that all the five accused were 
convicted for the offence punishable under Section 148 of the 
IPC, which is the offence of “rioting, armed with deadly 
weapon”.  Section 146 of the IPC provides that whenever force 
or violence is used by unlawful assembly or by any member 
thereof in prosecution of the common object of such assembly, 
every member of the unlawful assembly is guilty of the offence 
 
1  (2019) 12 SCC 784 

Criminal Appeal no.1465 of 2011 
 
   Page 5 of 11 
 
of rioting.  Therefore, the condition precedent for attracting 
Section 148 of the IPC is that there has to be an unlawful 
assembly.  Under Section 141 of the IPC, the unlawful 
assembly must be of five or more persons.  All five accused have 
been convicted for the offences punishable under Sections 460 
and 302 with the aid of Section 149.  Section 149 incorporates 
vicarious liability of all the members of an unlawful assembly 
for the acts done with a common object.  In the present case, 
the High Court has acquitted two out of three accused of all 
charges.  Therefore, we will have to proceed on the footing that 
there was no unlawful assembly within the meaning of Section 
141 of the IPC. Thus, the conviction under Section 148 of the 
IPC cannot be sustained.  Even the conviction for the offences 
under Sections 460 and 302 with the aid of Section 149 of the 
IPC cannot be upheld as there was no unlawful assembly.  
Perhaps the High Court could have altered the charge by 
applying Section 34 of the IPC, provided there was evidence on 
record.  But that has not been done. 
8. 
It is true that a test identification parade is not 
mandatory.  The test identification parade is a part of the 
investigation.  It is useful when the eyewitnesses do not know 
the accused before the incident.  The test identification parade 
is usually conducted immediately after the arrest of the 
accused.  Perhaps, if the test identification parade is properly 
conducted and is proved, it gives credence of the identification 
of the accused by the concerned eyewitnesses before the Court.  

Criminal Appeal no.1465 of 2011 
 
   Page 6 of 11 
 
The effect of the prosecution's failure to conduct a test 
identification parade will depend on the facts of each case. 
9. 
In this case, the evidence of both eyewitnesses was 
recorded within one year of the date of the incident.  There is 
no significant time gap between the date of the incident and the 
identification by the witnesses before the Court.  If the evidence 
of these two witnesses is reliable and inspires confidence, the 
conviction can be based on their testimonies. 
10. 
Therefore, we must analyse the testimonies of PW-8 and 
PW-9 to ascertain whether their version inspires confidence.  
PW-8 (Khushbir Singh) is the son of the deceased Pratap Singh 
and Gurpal Kaur.  He deposed that his two nieces, Lovepreet 
Kaur and Amritpal Kaur (daughters of PW-9 Narinder Kaur), 
were sleeping in a room next to the room where he, along with 
his deceased parents, were sleeping.  PW-8 stated that around 
3 to 4 a.m., he heard the cries of his nieces.  Thereafter, he 
found that there were three to four persons in the house, who 
were in the age group of 32 to 35 years.  He claimed that the 
lights in the house were on.  He identified only three accused 
(the appellants).  The witness claimed that he challenged one 
of them, who gave a blow by ‘Sarva’ on his right ear.  He stated 
that the blow was given by accused no.3-Bala (appellant no.2).  
Thereafter, he vaguely stated that his parents challenged the 
accused, but they also caused injuries to them as well.  
Further, he stated that his brother – Satbir Singh and PW-9 
also woke up, and both suffered injuries.  However, the witness 
has not stated which accused and in what manner, the accused 

Criminal Appeal no.1465 of 2011 
 
   Page 7 of 11 
 
assaulted his parents (the deceased).  There is only one vague 
statement that when the deceased challenged them, the 
accused caused injuries to them.  Thereafter, he stated that 
they demanded keys to open the cupboard, and due to the 
threat administered by them, the keys were handed over to 
them.  Later, the accused walked away with cash and 
ornaments.  In the cross-examination, he reiterated that he 
was awakened after hearing the cries of his nieces.  He also 
accepted that he had not seen the accused before the 
occurrence, and therefore, he could not tell the names of the 
accused.  
11. 
PW-9 (Narinder Kaur) stated that around 2 to 3 a.m., she 
heard the cries of her family members.  At that time, the lights 
in her house were put on.  She stated that two persons entered 
her room, and one of them inflicted injuries on her husband–
Satbir Singh.  She stated that she received injuries from 
accused no.2–Kishore (appellant no.1), and she became 
unconscious.  After pointing out to accused no.5 – Banaras 
(appellant no.3), she stated that he caused injuries to her 
husband – Satbir Singh.  But she has not stated anything 
about the weapon of assault used by them for assault.  Then, 
she described the ornaments which were taken by the accused.  
She deposed that on 22nd October 2003, she identified the 
ornaments in the police station in the presence of the 
witnesses.  In the cross-examination, she was confronted with 
her statement recorded under Section 161 of Cr. PC.  She 
accepted that in the statement, she had not stated that she 

Criminal Appeal no.1465 of 2011 
 
   Page 8 of 11 
 
could identify the accused.  Her explanation was that no such 
question was put to her.  She stated that she had not seen the 
accused before the occurrence of the incident.  She stated that 
the ornaments produced in the Court could be procured from 
Sarafa Bazaar, and she had not given any specific mark of 
identity on the ornaments except stones. 
12. 
Thus, PW-9 has not even stated that she had seen any of 
the accused assaulting the deceased.  As pointed out earlier, 
even the version of PW-8 is very vague about the accused 
assaulting the deceased.  Another important aspect is that PW-
8 stated that he was awakened due to the cries of his nieces, 
Lovepreet Kaur and Amritpal Kaur.  Though he accepted that 
Lovepreet Kaur was 16 to 17 years old, the prosecution has not 
examined Lovepreet Kaur.  Similarly, Satbir Singh, husband of 
PW-9, who was the injured witness, has not been examined.  
The prosecution has not come out with any reason for not 
examining these two vital witnesses.  It is very difficult to 
connect any accused with the injuries sustained by the 
deceased in the absence of any cogent evidence.  Therefore, it 
is not possible to uphold the conviction for the offence 
punishable under Section 302 of the IPC. 
13. 
At the highest, from their evidence, it can be deduced that 
accused no.3–Bala caused injuries to PW-8, accused no.5–
Banaras assaulted PW-9’s husband and accused no.2 – 
Kishore assaulted PW-9.  As far as Satbir Singh is concerned, 
PW-1 has deposed that injury no.1 (lacerated wound 
measuring 6cm×2cm on the posterior carpel of the left ear and 

Criminal Appeal no.1465 of 2011 
 
   Page 9 of 11 
 
to the pinna) was dangerous.  However, he has not deposed 
about any fracture suffered by him.  As far as PW-9 is 
concerned, she suffered a horizontal fracture of the temporal 
bone.  As regards PW-8, PW-1 has not deposed that he suffered 
any fracture.  He deposed about the wound on the right ear 
pinna and lacerated wound measuring 4cm×0.6 cm on the 
back of the base of the right ear.  In the absence of the charge 
under Section 34 of the IPC, at the highest, accused Banaras 
and Bala could have been convicted of the offence punishable 
under Section 323 of the IPC and accused no.2–Kishore could 
have been held to be guilty of the offences punishable under 
Section 326 of the IPC.  However, all of them have undergone 
sentences of more than seven years, which is more than what 
can be imposed for these offences in the facts of this case.  
Therefore, in any case, they will have to be let off. 
14. 
Now, we turn to the evidence of recovery of ornaments.  
Two of the five accused from whom the recovery was made, 
have been exonerated by the High Court.  PW-7 (ASI Ajaib 
Singh) deposed that PW-9 identified the recovered ornaments 
from the other ornaments which were arranged through MHC.  
In the cross-examination, he stated that the other ornaments 
were arranged by a goldsmith and were mixed with the 
ornaments recovered at the instance of the accused.  However, 
he stated that he was not aware of the fact how MHC had 
procured the said ornaments.  The examination of the 
goldsmith or the person from whom the other ornaments were 
brought was necessary to prove that the ornaments were 

Criminal Appeal no.1465 of 2011 
 
   Page 10 of 11 
 
identical to the ones recovered at the instance of the accused. 
But that was not done. Therefore, even the identification of the 
ornaments by PW-9 becomes doubtful. The prosecution case 
regarding the recovery of the ornaments at the instance of the 
appellants also becomes doubtful. 
15. 
Moreover, as regards the offence punishable under 
Section 460 of the IPC, there was no specific role attributed to 
any of the accused by PW-8 and PW-9, and all of them have 
been convicted only with the aid of Section 149 of the IPC.  It 
is established that there was no unlawful assembly as two out 
of five accused have been acquitted.  The High Court could have 
altered the charge by applying Section 34 instead of Section 
149 of the IPC, but that was not done.  Now, twenty-one years 
after the incident, at this stage, we cannot modify or alter the 
charge, especially when all three appellants accused have 
undergone incarceration for more than seven years. Even if we 
do that, even otherwise, the prosecution has failed to prove the 
commission of the offence.  
16. 
Accordingly, the appeal must succeed.  We set aside the 
impugned judgment and order dated 27th April 2010 of the 
High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh rendered in 
the Criminal Appeal no.197-DB of 2009 and the impugned 
judgment and order passed in SC No.32/T dated 20th February 
2004 by the Additional Sessions Judge, Patiala on 12th January 
2009 insofar as the present appellants are concerned and 
acquit them of the charges framed against them.  As the 

Criminal Appeal no.1465 of 2011 
 
   Page 11 of 11 
 
appellants are presently on bail, their bail bonds stand 
cancelled. 
17. 
The appeal is, accordingly, allowed. 
 
 
 
 
….…………………….J. 
 
                  (Abhay S. Oka) 
 
 
…..…………………...J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (Ujjal Bhuyan) 
New Delhi; 
February 7, 2024.