2024 INSC 94
1 
 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL No.4672 OF 2012 
 
 
  
 
NARESH CHANDRA AGRAWAL 
 
           …APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
THE INSTITUTE OF CHARTERED 
        ACCOUNTANTS OF INDIA AND OTHERS 
…RESPONDENT(S) 
 
 
J U D G E M E N T 
 
Aravind Kumar, J.  
 
1. 
The facts in brief are set out herein below: 
 
The Bank of Rajasthan Limited, (hereinafter referred to as 
‘Complainant-bank’) had engaged the services of M/s Ramesh C.  
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2024.02.08
16:22:13 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
Agrawal & Co. (hereinafter referred to interchangeably as ‘the 
firm’/’service provider’) for the purpose of conducting audit work. 
The audit work was to be carried out in respect of Sahara India, Aliganj, 
Lucknow Branch for a period of 3 years commencing from 01.01.2007. 
According to this arrangement, the service provider was required to 
submit monthly audit reports in respect of daily transactions/banking 
affairs of the concerned branch. This report had to be submitted within 
a particular time frame, i.e., by the 7th of the succeeding month. The 
service provider was also required to report any suspicious activity or 
foul play pertaining to the transactions under review, to the Chief 
Executive Officer of the Complainant bank. 
 
On 27.09.2009, a series of circuitous transactions (hereinafter referred 
to as ‘subject transaction’) involving large sums of money are said to 
have taken place in certain accounts of the branch, which were neither 
regular nor normal in nature. However, in the audit report submitted to 
the Complainant bank, these transactions were not flagged. 
 
2. 
According to the Complainant, the main purpose of engaging the 
firm for audit related work was to assist it in timely detection of irregularities/ 
lapses, besides observing as to whether the transactions were within the 

3 
 
policy parameters as laid down by the Reserve Bank of India. In having 
failed to point out the suspicious transactions that took place on 27.09.2009, 
the Complainant alleges that the firm had utterly failed to discharge its 
professional obligation under the terms, as agreed. 
 
3. 
It is in this background that the Complainant wrote to the firm, vide 
letter dated 05.03.2009 and called for its explanation. No satisfactory 
response was received. On 05.09.2009, yet another letter was issued to the 
firm, but no reply was received in that regard. 
 
4. 
Accordingly, the Complainant proceeded to register its complaint 
against the audit firm before the Director (Discipline) on 21.12.2009. The 
Director (Discipline) forwarded a copy of the complaint to the firm and 
called upon it to disclose the name(s) of the member/person(s) who was/were 
responsible for conducting the audit and preparing the report pertaining to 
the subject transaction.  
 
5. 
On 15.02.2010, there was a letter communication received by the 
Director (Discipline) from the audit firm, in which it was stated that the 
Appellant was given the responsibility for reviewing the subject transactions. 
The Appellant filed his written statement on 02.04.2010. The Complainant 
bank submitted its rejoinder on 02.06.2010. Certain additional documents 

4 
 
were sought by the Director (Discipline) from the Complainant on 
10.12.2010. 
 
6. 
On consideration of the complaint, the written statement and the 
other matters on record, the Director (Discipline) arrived at a prima facie 
conclusion that the Appellant was not guilty of any professional or other 
misconduct within the meaning of clause (7), (8) and (9) of Part 1 of the 
Second Schedule of the Chartered Accountants’ (Amendment) Act, 2006.  
 
7. 
On such opinion of the Director being placed before the Board of 
Discipline, Respondent No.1 informed the Appellant that the Board of 
Discipline had disagreed with the prima facie opinion of the Director 
(Discipline) and the Board had decided to refer the matter to the Disciplinary 
Committee for further action under Chapter V of the Chartered Accountants’ 
(Procedure of Investigation of Professional and Other Misconduct and 
Conduct of Cases) Rules, 2007 (for short ‘Rules, 2007’). 
 
8. 
The action of the Board in disagreeing with the prima facie opinion 
of the Director (Discipline) and referring the matter for further action before 
the Disciplinary Committee was impugned before the High Court of Delhi 
in W.P.(C) No.6488 of 2011. The prayer in the said writ petition was to 
declare Rule 9(3)(b) of the Rules, 2007 as invalid on the ground that the said 

5 
 
rule was ultra vires section 21 A (4) of the Act. The Ld. Division Bench 
having repelled the said challenge, the Appellants are now before us.  
 
9. 
According to the Ld. Counsel for the Appellant, when the Director 
(Discipline) was of the prima facie opinion that the Appellant was not guilty 
of the alleged misconduct, the Board had two options available to it 
according to Section 21 A (4) of the Act. It could either close the matter at 
that very stage or direct the Director (Discipline) to further investigate and it 
could not have assumed the role of the Director and acted as the investigating 
agency by referring the matter to the Disciplinary Committee. It is submitted 
that there is no substantive basis in the parent Act for the action impugned in 
this appeal. The Ld. Counsel argued that the impugned Rule, being a 
delegated legislation, cannot provide for any action which is not 
contemplated under the parent Act. 
 
10. 
Per contra, Ld. Counsel for the Respondent has sought to justify the 
correctness of the view taken in the impugned order. According to him, if the 
argument of the Appellant is accepted, the result would be that the Director 
(Discipline), who is merely a Secretary to the Board of Discipline, would 
have greater powers than the Board itself. This is because the Board would 
not be able to overrule the prima facie view taken by the Director 

6 
 
(Discipline). The Board could, at best, direct the Director (Discipline) to 
conduct further investigation and nothing more. It is submitted that the 
legislature would not have intended such a consequence. There is nothing in 
the scheme of the Act to suggest that the Board cannot refer the matter to the 
Disciplinary Committee for further action.  
 
11. 
Therefore, considering the arguments canvassed on behalf of both 
sides, the following question falls for our consideration: 
“Whether Rule 9(3)(b) of the Rules, 2007 is inconsistent with 
and beyond the rule-making power of the Central 
Government?” 
 
 
Relevant provisions in the Act and Rules:  
12. 
It may be necessary to refer to certain provisions of the Act in order 
to better understand the scheme of the applicable law pertaining to 
investigation of complaints alleging misconduct. The relevant provisions are 
extracted hereinbelow: 
“21. Disciplinary Directorate. - 
(1) The Council shall, by notification, establish a 
Disciplinary Directorate headed by an officer of the Institute 
designated as Director (Discipline) and such other 
employees for making investigations in respect of any 
information or complaint received by it. 
(2) On receipt of any information or complaint along with 
the prescribed fee, the Director (Discipline) shall arrive at a 
prima facie opinion on the occurrence of the alleged 
misconduct. 

7 
 
(3) Where the Director (Discipline) is of the opinion that a 
member is guilty of any professional or other misconduct 
mentioned in the First Schedule, he shall place the matter 
before the Board of Discipline and where the Director 
(Discipline) is of the opinion that a member is guilty of any 
professional or other misconduct mentioned in the Second 
Schedule or in both the Schedules, he shall place the matter 
before the Disciplinary Committee. 
 
(4) In order to make investigations under the provisions of 
this Act, the Disciplinary Directorate shall follow such 
procedure as may be specified. 
(5) Where a complainant withdraws the complaint, the 
Director (Discipline) shall place such withdrawal before the 
Board of Discipline or, as the case may be, the Disciplinary 
Committee, and the said Board or Committee may, if it is of 
the view that the circumstances so warrant, permit the 
withdrawal at any stage. 
  
21A. Board of Discipline. — 
(1) The Council shall constitute a Board of Discipline 
consisting of-- 
(a) a person with experience in law and having knowledge 
of disciplinary matters and the profession, to be its presiding 
officer. 
(b) two members one of whom shall be a member of the 
Council elected by the Council and the other member shall 
be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the 
persons of eminence having experience in the field of law, 
economics, business, finance or accountancy. 
(c) the Director (Discipline) shall function as the Secretary 
of the Board. 
(2) The Board of Discipline shall follow summary disposal 
procedure in dealing with all cases before it. 
(3) Where the Board of Discipline is of the opinion that a 
member is guilty of a professional or other misconduct 
mentioned in the First Schedule, it shall afford to the member 
a pportunity of being heard before making any order against 
him and may thereafter take any one or more of the following 
actions, namely: -- 
(a) reprimand the member. 
(b) remove the name of the member from the Register up to 
a period of three months. 

8 
 
(c) impose such fine as it may think fit, which may extend to 
rupees one lakh. 
(4) The Director (Discipline) shall submit before the Board 
of Discipline all information and complaints where he is of 
the opinion that there is no prima facie case and the Board 
of Discipline may, if it agrees with the opinion of the 
Director (Discipline), close the matter or in case of 
disagreement, may advise the Director (Discipline) to 
further investigate the matter.] 
 
21B. Disciplinary Committee. — 
(1) The Council shall constitute a Disciplinary Committee 
consisting of the President or the Vice-President of the 
Council as the Presiding Officer and two members to be 
elected from amongst the members of the Council and two 
members to be nominated by the Central Government from 
amongst the persons of eminence having experience in the 
field of law, economics, business, finance or accountancy: 
Provided that the Council may constitute more Disciplinary 
Committees as and when it considers necessary. 
(2) The Disciplinary Committee, while considering the cases 
placed before it shall follow such procedure as may be 
specified. 
(3) Where the Disciplinary Committee is of the opinion that 
a member is guilty of a professional or other misconduct 
mentioned in the Second Schedule or both the First Schedule 
and the Second Schedule, it shall afford to the member an 
opportunity of being heard before making any order against 
him and may thereafter take any one or more of the following 
actions, namely: -- 
(a) reprimand the member. 
(b) remove the name of the member from the Register 
permanently or for such period, as it thinks fit. 
(c) impose such fine as it may think fit, which may extend to 
rupees five lakhs. 
(4) The allowances payable to the members nominated by 
the Central Government shall be such as may be specified.] 
 
 
“29A. Power of Central Government to make rules: 
 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make 
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 

9 
 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all or 
any of the following matters, namely :−  
(a) the manner of election and nomination in respect of 
members to the Council under sub-section (2) of Section 9; 
 (b) the terms and conditions of service of the Presiding 
Officer and Members of the Tribunal, place of meetings and 
allowances to be paid to them under sub-section (3) of 
Section 10B4; 
(c) the procedure of investigation under sub-section (4) of 
Section 21 ;  
(d) the procedure while considering the cases by the 
Disciplinary Committee under sub-section (2), and the 
fixation of allowances of the nominated members under sub-
section (4) of Section 21B;  
(e) the allowances and terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and members of the Authority and the manner 
of meeting expenditure by the Council under Section 22C; 
(f) the procedure to be followed by the Board in its meetings 
under Section 28C ; and 
 (g) the terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson 
and members of the Board under sub-section (1) of Section 
28D.] 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 
Rule 9 of the Rules, 2007 is extracted hereinbelow: 
 
Rule 9. Examination of the Complaint  
(1) The Director shall examine the complaint, written 
statement, if any, rejoinder, if any, and other additional 
particulars or documents, if any, and form his prima facie 
opinion as to whether the member or the firm is guilty or not 
of any professional or other 10 misconduct or both under the 
First Schedule or the Second Schedule or both.  
(2) (a) Where the Director is of the prima facie opinion that, 
−  
(i) the member or the firm is guilty of any misconduct under 
the First Schedule, he shall place his opinion along with the 
complaint and all other relevant papers before the Board of 
Discipline.  
(ii) the member or the firm is guilty of misconduct under the 
Second Schedule or both the First and Second Schedules, he 

10 
 
shall place his opinion along with the complaint and all 
other relevant papers before the Committee.  
(b) If the Board of Discipline or the Committee, as the case 
may be, agrees with the prima facie opinion of the Director 
under clause (a) above, then the Board of Discipline or the 
Committee may proceed further under Chapter IV or V 
respectively. 
 (c) If the Board of Discipline or the Committee, as the case 
may be, disagrees with the prima facie opinion of the 
Director under clause (a) above, it shall either close the 
matter or advise the Director to further investigate the 
matter 
(3) Where the Director is of the prima facie opinion that the 
member or the firm is not guilty of any misconduct either 
under the First Schedule or the Second Schedule, he shall 
place the matter before the Board of Discipline, and the 
Board of Discipline, −  
(a) if it agrees with such opinion of the Director, shall pass 
order, for closure.  
(b) if it disagrees with such opinion of the Director, then it 
may either proceed under chapter IV of these rules, if the 
matter pertains to the First Schedule, or refer the matter to 
the Committee to proceed under Chapter V of these rules, 
if the matter pertains to the Second Schedule or both the 
Schedules and may advise the Director to further 
investigate the matter.  
(4) The Director shall, after making further investigation as 
advised by the Board of Discipline under sub-rule (2) or (3) 
of this rule or by the Committee under sub-rule (2), shall 
further proceed under this rule.”  
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
13. 
 Section 21(1) empowers the Council to establish a Disciplinary 
Directorate for making investigations into the complaints received by it. The 
head of this authority is designated as Director (Discipline). Section 21(2) 
provides that the Director (Discipline), on receipt of any information or 
complaint, shall arrive at a prima facie opinion on the occurrence of the 

11 
 
alleged misconduct. Section 21(3) states that should the Director (Discipline) 
arrive at a prima facie opinion that the member is guilty of professional 
misconduct, he shall refer the matter to the Board of Discipline or the 
Disciplinary Committee, depending on whether the alleged misconduct falls 
within the First Schedule or the Second Schedule or both. If the alleged 
misconduct falls within the First Schedule, the matter is placed before the 
Board of Discipline and if it falls within the Second Schedule or in both the 
Schedules, the matter is placed before the Disciplinary Committee. Section 
21(4) provides that the procedure for investigation would be as prescribed 
under the relevant rules.1  In the event where the Complainant wishes to 
withdraw his/her complaint, Section 21(5) provides that the Director 
(Discipline) shall place the request for withdrawal before the Board of 
Discipline or the Disciplinary Committee, as the case may be, and the Board 
or Committee would take a final call in this regard.  
 
14. 
 The Board of Discipline is constituted under Section 21A of the Act. 
The Director (Discipline) is to function as the Secretary of the Board, as per 
Section 21A(1)(c) of the Act. Section 21A (2) provides that the Board shall 
follow a summary procedure in dealing with cases referred to it. Where the 
 
1 Chartered Accountants’ (Procedure of Investigation of Professional and Other Misconduct and 
Conduct of Cases) Rules, 2007  

12 
 
Board finds that a member is guilty of professional or other misconduct 
mentioned in First Schedule, it may resort to imposing any of the three 
punishments enumerated in Section 21A (3).  
 
15. 
Section 21A (4) requires the Director (Discipline) to submit all 
information and complaints to the Board, where he is of the opinion that there 
is no prima facie case in the complaint. It further provides that if the Board 
agrees with the opinion of the Director (Discipline), it may close the matter 
and if it disagrees with the opinion, it may advise the Director (Discipline) 
to further investigate into the complaint. 
 
16. 
Similar scheme to deal with complaints relating to misconduct as 
prescribed in the Second Schedule is found in Section 21B (1) to (4).  
 
 
17. 
Section 29A is titled ‘Power of Central Government to make rules’. 
Section 29A (1) enables the Central Government ‘to make rules to carry out 
the provisions of this Act’.  Section 29A (2) sets out enumerated heads under 
which rules may be made. Rule 9(3), which is part of Rules, 2007 appears to 
have been made under Section 29A(2)(c). It is relevant to note that the power 
to make rules under sub-section (2) of Section 29A is ‘without prejudice to 
the generality of the foregoing power’ provided for in Section 29A(1).  

13 
 
 
18. 
Having discussed the scheme of relevant provisions in the parent Act, 
we may now peruse the contents of Rule 9. 
 
19. 
Rule 9 is titled ‘Examination of Complaint’. Sub-clause (1) provides 
for the procedure to be followed on receipt of complaint. The Director 
(Discipline) is required to form his prima facie opinion as to whether the 
member is guilty or not of the alleged misconduct. Sub-clause (2) sets out 
the procedure to be followed in the event where the Director (Discipline) 
reaches a prima facie opinion that the member is guilty of professional 
misconduct. What is of utmost significance for us is to see the procedure to 
be followed when the Director (Discipline) comes to a prima facie opinion 
that the member is not guilty of alleged misconduct, as has been examined 
in the instant case. This can be found in sub-clause (3) of Rule 9. It provides 
that the Board can accept the opinion of the Director (Discipline) and pass 
an order for closure (Rule 9(3)(a)). Where the Board disagrees with the 
opinion of the Director (Discipline), it may proceed under Chapter IV of the 
Rules, 2007 if the matter pertains to the First Schedule or it may advise the 
Director to further investigate the matter. Similarly, the Board could refer the 
matter to the Disciplinary Committee for action under Chapter V if the matter 

14 
 
pertains to the Second Schedule or it could advise the Director (Discipline) 
to conduct further investigation. 
 
Analysis and Findings:  
 
20. 
Now, let us contrast Section 21A (4) with Rule 9(3) to examine if 
there is any substance in the argument that Rule 9(3) is ultra vires Section 
21A (4). In the event the Board disagrees with the opinion of the Director 
(Discipline), Section 21A(4) provides that the Board may advise the Director 
to further investigate the matter. However, Rule 9(3) does not limit itself to 
just this option. It also enables the Board to straightaway proceed to act by 
itself or refer the matter to the Disciplinary Committee, depending on 
whether the alleged misconduct relates to the First Schedule or Second 
Schedule.  It is in this background that the learned counsel for the Appellant 
has strenuously submitted that the Rule goes beyond the enabling power set 
out in the parent Act.  
 
21. 
In State of Tamil Nadu and Anr. v. P. Krishnamurthy and Ors. (2006) 
4 SCC 517, this Court recollected the following principles while adjudging 
the validity of subordinate legislation, including regulations: 
15. There is a presumption in favour of constitutionality 
or validity of a subordinate legislation and the burden is 

15 
 
upon him who attacks it to show that it is invalid. It is also 
well recognized that a subordinate legislation can be 
challenged under any of the following grounds: 
 
(a) Lack of legislative competence to make the 
subordinate legislation. 
 
(b) Violation of fundamental rights guaranteed under the 
Constitution of India. 
 
(c) Violation of any provision of the Constitution of India. 
 
(d) Failure to conform to the statute under which it is 
made or exceeding the limits of authority conferred by the 
enabling Act. 
 
(e) Repugnancy to the laws of the land, that is, any 
enactment. 
 
(f) Manifest arbitrariness/unreasonableness (to an extent 
where the court might well say that the legislature never 
intended to give authority to make such rules) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
22. 
Of the six available grounds for challenging subordinate legislation, 
it is quite clear that the scope of the challenge raised in this petition is 
restricted to one ground in the instant case; that the Rule exceeds the limits 
of authority conferred by the enabling Act. Therefore, it becomes important 
to examine the scope of power available under the Act before we can adjudge 
whether the Rules exceed the limits of authority conferred by the enabling 
Act. 
  

16 
 
23. 
As we have noted earlier, the Rules, 2007, have been framed 
purportedly in exercise of the power conferred under Section 29A(2)(c) of 
the Act, which enables the Central Government to make rules regarding ‘the 
procedure of investigation under sub-section (4) of Section 21’. However, 
the enumerated heads set out in Section 29A(2) cannot be read as exhaustive 
since the legislature has deployed  the expression ‘without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing provisions’ before enumerating the specific heads 
for exercising the rule-making power.  In that sense, the power to make rules 
generally for carrying out the provisions of the Act is found in Section 
29A(1). Section 29A (2) is only an illustrative list of subjects with respect to 
which the Central Government may make rules. The illustrative list of 
subjects cannot limit the scope of general power available under the wider 
rule-making power found in Section 29A(1).  
 
24. 
Experience of legislative drafting in India has shown that, generally, 
the delegation of power to formulate rules follows a standardized pattern 
within statutes. Typically, a section of the statute grants this authority in 
broad terms, using phrases like 'to carry out the provisions of this Act' or 'to 
carry out the purposes of this Act.' Subsequently, another sub-section details 
specific matters or areas for which the delegated power can be exercised, 
often employing language such as 'in particular and without prejudice to the 

17 
 
generality of the foregoing power.' Judicial interpretation of such provisions 
underscores that the specific enumeration is illustrative and should not be 
construed as limiting the scope of the general power. This approach allows 
for flexibility in rulemaking, enabling the authorities to address unforeseen 
circumstances. A key principle emerges from this interpretation: even if 
specific topics are not explicitly listed in the statute, the formulation of rules 
can be justified if it falls within the general power conferred, provided it stays 
within the overall scope of the Act.  This mode of interpretation has been 
categorised as the ‘generality versus enumeration’ principle in some 
precedents of this Court2. This delicate balance between specificity and 
generality in legal delegation is crucial for effective governance and 
adaptability to evolving legal landscapes.  
 
25. 
For the sake of completeness, we may refer to some leading 
precedents of this Court which have discussed the ‘generality versus 
enumeration’ principle.  
 
 
2 See, BSNL v. TRAI, (2014) 3 SCC 222; King Emperor v. Sibnath Banerji: AIR 1945 PC 156; Afzal Ullah 
v. State of U.P, AIR 1964 SC 264; Rohtak and Hissar Districts Electric Supply Co. Ltd. v. State of U.P.,AIR 
1966 SC 1471; K. Ramanathan v. State of T.N. (1985) 2 SCC 116; D.K. Trivedi and Sons v. State of 
Gujarat, 1986 Supp SCC 20 

18 
 
26. 
In State of Jammu and Kashmir v Lakhwinder Kumar and Ors., 
(2013) 6 SCC 333, this Court held that when a general power to make 
regulations is followed by a specific power to make regulations, the latter 
does not limit the former. This is the principle of 'generality vs enumeration': 
a residuary provision can always be given voice. 
 
27. 
In Academy of Nutrition Improvement v. Union of India (2011) 8 
SCC 274, this Court had interpreted a pari materia expression "in particular 
and without the generality of the foregoing power, such Rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters". This Court held as follows :  
“………where power is conferred to make subordinate 
legislation in general terms, the subsequent particularisation 
of the matters/topics has to be construed as merely illustrative 
and not limiting the scope of the general power. 
Consequently, even if the specific enumerated topics in 
section 23(1A) may not empower the Central Government to 
make the impugned rule (Rule 44-I), making of the Rule can 
be justified with reference to the general power conferred on 
the central government under section 23(1), provided the rule 
does not travel beyond the scope of the Act” 
 
28. 
In the case of State of Kerala v. Shri M. Appukutty (1963) 14  STC 
242, the provisions of Section 19 (1) and (2) (f) of the Madras General Sales 
Tax Act of 1939 came up for consideration of this Court. It was 

19 
 
unsuccessfully argued therein that Rule 17(1) was ultra vires the rule making 
power specifically enumerated in Section 19(2)(f).  
 
29. 
The relevant provisions involved there were similar in form to the 
applicable provisions in the instant case.  
Section 19 (1),(2),2(f) read as follows:  
 
(1) The State Government may make rules to carry out the 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of 
foregoing power such rules may provide for-- ***** 
(f) the assessment to tax under this Act of any turnover which 
has escaped assessment and the period within which such 
assessment may be made, not exceeding three years; 
 
Dealing with the objection raised, this Court observed:-- 
 
“..... Rule 17 (1) and (3A) ex facie properly fall under Section 
19(2)(f). In any event as was said by the Privy Council in King 
Emperor v. Sibnath Banerji MANU/PR/0024/1945, the rule-
making power is conferred by Sub-section (1) of that section 
and the function of Sub-section (2) is merely illustrative and 
the rules which are referred to in Sub-section (2) are 
authorised by and made under Sub-section (1). The pro-
visions of Sub-section (2) are not restrictive of Sub-section 
(1) as expressly stated in the words 'without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power' with which Sub-section 
(2) begins and which words are similar to the words of Sub-
section (2) of Section 2 of the Defence of India Act which 
the Privy Council was considering.....” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
30. 
While examining the “generality versus enumeration” principle, this 
Court, in PTC India Ltd. v. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission, 

20 
 
(2010) 4 SCC 603, referred with approval to its earlier Judgement in 
Hindustan Zinc Ltd. vs Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board (1991) 3 
SCC 299, wherein the scope of Sections 49(1) & (2) of the Electricity Supply 
Act, 1948 fell for consideration. Under Section 49(1), a general power was 
given to the Board to supply electricity to any person not being a licensee, 
upon such terms and conditions as the Board thinks fit and the Board may, 
for the purposes of such supply, frame uniform tariff under Section 49(2). 
The Board was required to fix uniform tariff after taking into account certain 
enumerated factors. In this context, this Court, in Hindustan Zinc Ltd., held 
that the power of fixation of tariff in the Board ordinarily had to be done in 
the light of specified factors; however, such enumerated factors in Section 
49(2) did not prevent the Board from fixing uniform tariff on factors other 
than those enumerated in Section 49(2), as long as they were relevant and in 
consonance with the Act. This Court then referred, with approval, to its 
judgment in Shri Sitaram Sugar Co. Ltd. vs Union of India (1990) 3 SCC 
223, wherein it was held that the enumerated factors/topics in a provision did 
not mean that the authority cannot take any other matter into consideration 
which may be relevant; and the words in the enumerated provision are not a 
fetter; they are not words of limitation, but are words for general guidance. 
 

21 
 
31. 
In Afzal Ullah vs. The State of Uttar Pradesh reported in 1963 SCC 
Online SC 76, it was argued that the impugned bye-laws were invalid, 
because they were outside the authority conferred on the delegate to make 
bye-laws by Section 298(2) of the Act, and it was also contended that the 
bye-laws were invalid for the additional reason that they were inconsistent 
with Section 241 of the Act. Rejecting the said contentions, this Court 
observed as follows:  
 
“Even if the said clauses did not justify the impugned bye-
law, there can be little doubt that the said bye-laws would be 
justified by the general power conferred on the Boards by s. 
298(1). It is well-settled that the specific provisions such as 
are contained in the several clauses of s. 298(2) are merely 
illustrative and they cannot be read as restrictive of the 
generality of powers prescribed by s. 298(1) vide Emperor v. 
Sibnath Banerji & Ors MANU/PR/0024/1945. If the powers 
specified by s. 298(1) are very wide and they take in within 
their scope bye-laws like the ones with which we are 
concerned in the present appeal, it cannot be said that the 
powers enumerated under s. 298(2) control the general 
words used by s. 298(1). These latter clauses merely 
illustrate and do not exhaust all the powers conferred on 
the Board, so that any cases not falling within the powers 
specified by section 298(2) may well be protected by s. 
298(1), provided, of course, the impugned bye-laws can be 
justified by reference to the requirements of s. 298(1). 
There can be no doubt that the impugned bye-laws in regard 
to the markets framed by respondent No. 2 are for the 
furtherance of municipal administration under the Act, and 
so, would attract the provisions of s. 298(1). Therefore we 
are satisfied that the High Court was right in coming to the 
conclusion that the impugned bye-laws are valid.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(emphasis supplied) 

22 
 
 
 
32. 
From reference to the precedents discussed above and taking an 
overall view of the instant matter, we proceed to distil and summarise the 
following legal principles that may be relevant in adjudicating cases where 
subordinate legislation are challenged on the ground of being ‘ultra vires’ the 
parent Act:  
 
(a) 
 The doctrine of ultra vires envisages that a Rule making body must 
function within the purview of the Rule making authority, conferred on it by 
the parent Act. As the body making Rules or Regulations has no inherent 
power of its own to make rules, but derives such power only from the statute, 
it must necessarily function within the purview of the statute. Delegated 
legislation should not travel beyond the purview of the parent Act. 
 
(b) 
 Ultra vires may arise in several ways; there may be simple excess of 
power over what is conferred by the parent Act; delegated legislation may be 
inconsistent with the provisions of the parent Act; there may be non-
compliance with the procedural requirement as laid down in the parent Act. 
It is the function of the courts to keep all authorities within the confines of 
the law by supplying the doctrine of ultra vires. 

23 
 
(c) 
If a rule is challenged as being ultra vires, on the ground that it 
exceeds the power conferred by the parent Act, the Court must, firstly, 
determine and consider the source of power which is relatable to the rule. 
Secondly, it must determine the meaning of the subordinate legislation itself 
and finally, it must decide whether the subordinate legislation is consistent 
with and within the scope of the power delegated.  
 
(d) 
 Delegated rule-making power in statutes generally follows a 
standardized pattern. A broad section grants authority with phrases like ‘to 
carry out the provisions’ or ‘to carry out the purposes.’ Another sub-section 
specifies areas for delegation, often using language like ‘without prejudice 
to the generality of the foregoing power.’ In determining if the impugned rule 
is intra vires/ultra vires the scope of delegated power, Courts have applied 
the ‘generality vs enumeration’ principle.  
 
 
(e) 
The “generality vs enumeration” principle lays down that, where a 
statute confers particular powers without prejudice to the generality of a 
general power already conferred, the particular powers are only illustrative 
of the general power, and do not in any way restrict the general power. In 
that sense, even if the impugned rule does not fall within the enumerated 
heads, that by itself will not determine if the rule is ultra vires/intra vires. It 

24 
 
must be further examined if the impugned rule can be upheld by reference to 
the scope of the general power.  
 
 
(f) 
The delegated power to legislate by making rules ‘for carrying out 
the purposes of the Act’ is a general delegation, without laying down any 
guidelines as such. When such a power is given, it may be permissible to 
find out the object of the enactment and then see if the rules framed satisfy 
the Act of having been so framed as to fall within the scope of such general 
power confirmed. 
 
 
(g) 
However, it must be remembered that such power delegated by an 
enactment does not enable the authority, by rules/regulations, to extend the 
scope or general operation of the enactment but is strictly ancillary. It will 
authorize the provision of subsidiary means of carrying into effect what is 
enacted in the statute itself and will cover what is incidental to the execution 
of its specific provision. In that sense, the general power cannot be so 
exercised as to bring into existence substantive rights or obligations or 
disabilities not contemplated by the provisions of the Act itself. 
 

25 
 
(h) 
If the rule making power is not expressed in such a usual general 
form but are specifically enumerated, then it shall have to be seen if the rules 
made are protected by the limits prescribed by the parent Act. 
 
33. 
With this background in view, we may now apply the principles to 
the factual context obtained in the instant case.  
 
34. 
In the instant case, the ultra vires challenge has been mounted on the 
ground that the impugned Rule exceeds the power conferred by the parent 
Act. If we look at the parent Act, the rule-making power has been conferred 
under Section 29A, which is titled as ‘Power of the Central Government to 
make Rules’. While sub-clause (1) of Section 29A sets out the general power 
of delegation, sub-clause (2) provides for enumerated heads. As noted earlier, 
the power to make rules under the latter clause is without prejudice to the 
general power under the former clause. In exercise of the enabling power 
(Section 29A(2)(c)) to make rules relating to procedure of investigation 
under Section 21(4), the Rules 2007 have been made. Admittedly, Rule 9(3) 
goes beyond what is provided for under Section 21A(4) in terms of the 
options available to the Board of Discipline in case it disagrees with the 
opinion of the Director (Discipline). Other than the option of advising the 
director to further investigate, Rule 9(3) provides the additional option to the 

26 
 
Board for proceeding to deal with the complaint by itself or referring it to the 
Disciplinary Committee, depending on whether the alleged misconduct falls 
under the First Schedule or the Second Schedule. But as we have seen from 
principles discussed above, the scrutiny cannot stop at examining if the 
impugned rule is relatable to any specific enumerated head. We must go 
further and examine if it can be related to the general delegation of power 
under Section 29A(1), which authorises the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.  
 
35. 
Since the general delegation of power is without any specific 
guideline, it may be necessary to understand the object of the Act vis-à-vis 
the chapter on Misconduct. It is only then can we examine whether the 
impugned rule falls within the scope of such general power conferred.  
 
Object of the CA Act vis a vis Chapter on Misconduct:  
 
36. 
The Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, is a legislation that governs 
the regulation of the chartered accountancy profession in India. The chapter 
on "Misconduct" in the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, plays a crucial role 
in maintaining the ethical standards of the profession in India. Its main 
objectives are to set ethical guidelines, prevent actions that may compromise 

27 
 
public interests, ensure accountability among chartered accountants, and 
preserve the profession's reputation. This Chapter defines and prohibits 
professional misconduct, while aiming to uphold honesty, integrity, and 
professionalism in the practice of chartered accountancy. By addressing 
instances of misconduct, it establishes a framework for accountability, 
reinforcing the credibility of individual professionals and the reputation of 
the entire profession. To achieve these goals, the Act includes a disciplinary 
mechanism, ensuring a fair and transparent process for investigating and 
adjudicating alleged cases of misconduct. 
 
37. 
Seen in this background, we have not the slightest hesitation to 
conclude that the impugned rule is completely in sync with the object and 
purpose of framing the Chapter on ‘Misconduct’ under the Act. As has been 
rightly argued by the learned counsel for the Respondent, accepting the 
contention of the Appellant will create an anomalous situation. The Director 
(Discipline) who functions as a secretary to the Board of Discipline as per 
Section 21A (2) will be having greater powers than the Board itself. The 
‘prima facie’ opinion of the Director will become nothing but a final opinion 
if the Board will have no option except to direct the Director (Discipline) to 
further investigate the matter. The Section is silent as to what would happen 

28 
 
in a situation where the Director (Discipline) on further investigation 
concludes in accordance with his preliminary assessment. Therefore, even if 
we accept, for the sake of argument, that Rule 9(3) cannot be saved under 
Section 29A(2)(c), as it directly relates to furthering the purposes of the Act 
in ensuring that a genuine complaint of professional misconduct against the 
member is not wrongly thrown out at the very threshold, it can be easily 
concluded that the impugned Rule falls within the scope of the general 
delegation of power under Section 29A(1).  
 
38. 
Accordingly, we dismiss this appeal.   No costs. 
 
 
 
 
…………….………………….J. 
 (Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha) 
 
 
 
…………….………………….J. 
  (Aravind Kumar) 
 
New Delhi, 
February 08, 2024