IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 
 
OF 2024 

PERUMAL RAJA... 
APPELLANT 

VERSUS 

STATE, REP. BY INSPECTOR OF POLICE... 
RESPONDENT 

JUDGMENT 
 
SANJIV KHANNA, J. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
2. 
The impugned judgment1 by the High Court of Judicature at Madras 
affirms the conviction of the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal 
for murder of Rajini ajinikanth under Section 302 of the Indian 
Penal Code, 18602 and Section 201 of the IPC, by the Principal 
Sessions Judge, Puducherry in SC No. 22 of 20143, in the charge 
sheet arising from the First Information Report4 No. 80 of 2008 
 
1 Dated 31.08.2016 passed in. 
2 For short, “IPC”. 
3 Dated 07.04.2016. 
4 For short, “FIR”. registered on 24.04.2008 in Police Station5 Odiansalai, District – 
Puducherry. 
 
3. 
The appellant – Perumal Raja erumal stands sentenced to 
imprisonment for life and fine of Rs.5,000/- for the offence under 
Section 302 of the IPC and rigorous imprisonment for three years 
and fine of Rs.3,000/- for the offence under Section 201 of the IPC. 
 
4. 
The other co-accused, namely, Saravanan rishnan, Mohan ohankumar, and Ravi avichandran were acquitted by the trial 
court, which acquittal has become final. One ‘N’ was tried as a 
juvenile and acquitted. On 15.02.2013, the case of another 
co-accused – Chella ugundhan was split up since he was 
absconding. Subsequently, vide judgment dated 04.06.2019, which 
has been placed on record as additional evidence, Chella ukundhan has been acquitted. 
 
5. 
The prosecution case in brief is as follows: 

On 20.04.2008, Rajaram, who was settled in France, returned 
to Puducherry as his son Rajini ajinikanth, who was living 
in India, had gone missing. 

On 20.04.2008, Rajaram had approached PS Odiansalai, 
Puducherry, and made an oral complaint stating that when he 
 
5 For short, “PS”. had opened his house No. 13, Chinna Vaikkal Street, 
Puducherry, he had found articles to be scattered all over the 
place. His motorcycle was missing. He had suspected that his 
son – Rajini ajinikanth and his sister’s husband 
Krishnamurthy could have taken the bike. He requested the 
Police to make inquiries. However, in spite of being asked, he 
did not make any written complaint. He stated that he was 
exhausted and would come back to lodge written complaint 
afterwards. 

Next day on 21.04.2008, Rajaram was murdered. FIR No. 
204 of 2008 was registered at PS Grand Bazaar, District – 
Puducherry under Sections 147, 148, 341 and 302 of the IPC 
read with Section 149 of the IPC. 

On 24.04.2008, Arumugam, father of Rajaram, had made a 
written complaint at Odiansalai PS, Puducherry that his 
grandson Rajini ajinikanth was missing. The complaint 
was registered as Diary No. 80 of 2008 for a ‘missing man’ 
and was taken up for investigation. 

The appellant – Perumal Raja erumal, son of 
Krishnamurthy (husband of the sister of Rajaram), was 
detained and taken into custody during the course of 
investigation in FIR No. 204 of 2008 for murder of Rajaram. 

On 25.04.2008, the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal 
made a disclosure statement (Exhibit P-37).6 
(vii) The appellant – Perumal Raja erumal, along with other 
co-accused, had committed murder of Rajini ajinikanth 
on 23.11.2007 at Rajaram’s house at Chinna Vaikkal Street, 
Puducherry. His dead body was thrown in the sump tank 
located in the same house. 
(viii) The appellant – Perumal Raja erumal had also removed 
various belongings from the same house, including iron box, 
home theatre, CD player, documents of the house, 
motorcycle, RC book, key, Rajini ajinikanth’s passport, 
Rajini ajinikanth’s passport size photograph, birth 
registration of the grandmother, ration card, etc. 

Later on, the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal, and other 
co-accused, decided to remove the dead body of Rajini ajinikanth from the sump tank as they had learnt that 
Rajaram was returning to India as his son Rajini ajinikanth was missing. 

Accordingly, the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal had 
bought a knife and sack bags. They opened the sump tank 
 
6 We shall be subsequently referring to the admissible portions of the disclosure statement under 
Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, and also to a limited extent in terms of Section 8 of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872. and took out Rajini ajinikanth’s body, which was in a 
decomposed state. They had cut Rajini ajinikanth’s body 
into two pieces and put it in two sack bags. The knife and rope 
were put in another sack bag. The three sack bags were 
taken by them from Chinna Vaikkal Street, and after passing 
through Gandhi Street they threw the sack bags in the 
canal/river from the Uppanaru Bridge near the railway 
crossing. 

On the basis of the disclosure statement (Exhibit P-37), the 
sack bags with the decomposed dead body of Rajini ajinikanth were recovered on 26.04.2008 from the 
Uppanaru canal/river. Knife was also recovered. 
(xii) The body parts which were in a decomposed state were sent 
for post mortem, which was conducted by Dr. S. Diwakar 
(PW-24), Senior Medical Officer, Department of Forensic 
Medicine, Government General Hospital, Puducherry on 
26.04.2008. 
(xiii) On 30.04.2008, eight articles were recovered from the water 
sump tank at the house of the deceased, namely, gloves, 
lower jaw, rib, cervical vertebrae, tarsal and metatarsal, small 
and big size bone pieces, and knee cap. 
(xiv) The skull recovered from the canal/river and the lower part of 
the jaw recovered from the sump tank were sent for 

superimposition test to ascertain whether they belong to the 
deceased Rajini ajinikanth. C. Pushparani, Scientific 
Assistant Grade II, Anthropology Division, Forensic Sciences 
Department, Chennai, who had deposed as PW-29, proves 
the superimposition test report dated 20.01.2009 (Exhibit P-
25), which confirms that the skull and mandible were of the 
deceased – Rajini ajinikanth. 
(xv) On the basis of the disclosure statement, various articles, 
including the motorcycle, ignition key, original RC book were 
recovered from the co-accused Mohan Kumar ohan and 
a juvenile. 
(xvi) The motive for the crime was inter se family property disputes 
and the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal’s desire to 
acquire and become owner of the property No. 13, Chinna 
Vaikkal Street, Puducherry. 
 
6. 
Several public witnesses turned hostile and did not support the 
prosecution case. This includes Arumugam (PW-20), the 
grandfather of the deceased Rajini ajinikanth, who had filed the 
‘missing man’ complaint for Rajini ajinikanth, vide Diary No. 80 
of 2008. However, Arumugam (PW-20) did accept that his son, 
Rajaram, who was living abroad had come home when he was 
murdered on 21.04.2008. Arumugam (PW-20) also accepts that his 

grandson Rajini ajinikanth had not attended crematorial rites of 
his father Rajaram and was missing. 
 
7. 
Narayanasamy (PW-12), then head constable, PS Odiansalai, has 
testified that he had received the oral complaint of Rajaram on 
20.04.2008, in connection with the scattered articles in his house, 
and the missing motorcycle. Rajaram had assumed that his son 
Rajini ajinikanth could have taken it away. 
 
8. 
Kaniyakumaran (PW-10), involved in real estate business, did not 
specifically implicate the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal, but 
has accepted that Punitha (PW-3), a relative of the deceased Rajini 
ajinikanth, had tried to sell the property in Kurumbapet. 
Reliance can be also placed on the documentary evidence to 
establish that the property in question in the name of Rajaram was 
dealt with by Porkilai (PW-4), mother of the appellant – Perumal 
Raja erumal. In support, the following documents are relied: 

sale deed in favour of Rajaram executed on 26.06.1990 
(Exhibit P-66); 

sale agreement between Porkilai (PW-4) and accused 
no.5 - Ravi avichandran executed on May, 2007 
(Exhibit P-66); 

release deed in favour of Rajaram by Porkilai (PW-4), 
executed on 27.06.1990 (Exhibit P-68); 

sale agreement in favour of Thangaveni Ammal, mother 
of Rajaram, executed on 19.08.1981 (Exhibit P-69). 
 
9. 
Chinta Kodanda Rao (PW-30), Inspector of Police, PS Grand 
Bazaar, the investigating officer in FIR No. 204 of 2008 relating to 
the murder of Rajaram by unknown persons, has testified on the 
disclosure statement made by the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal (Exhibit P-37). The relevant portion of the disclosure 
statement reads: 
“…myself and xxx pull Rajni’s xxx, put him in the sump 
tank near the bathroom and closed it… 
 
…took xxx, Iron box, Home theatre, xxx, xxx, rental 
documents of my uncle’s house at Chittankudi, Hero 
Honda CD Dawn motorcycle, RC book and key, Rajini’s 
passport book, Rajini’s passport size photo, birth 
registration of grandmother, family ration card of uncle 
and the copy of documents written in English, bunch of 
keys of the house and my uncle Ranjith’s notebook, xxx 
xxx xxx, took Hero Honda CD Dawn motorbike of my 
uncle Rajaram…..one bag was put by Mohan xxx xxx 
xxx the house of Mohan nearby to the Tollgate of 
Ariyankuppam, kept 2 bags in Mohan’s house… 
 
…I, immediately, went to N (name withheld) house and 
gave him document, ration card, bunch of keys, Rajini’s 
passport, by keeping them in Ranjith notebook and 
stated to keep them safe… 
 
…I took the already kept 3 sack bags, rope, curry knife, 
showed the sump tank to xxx. When he opened the 
cover of the sump tank, he bend down and lifted the 
hand of the body of Rajini, who was already killed and 
put in the sump by us, since Rajini’s body was in 
decomposed stage, his hand had alone come. I put the 
hand in sack bag. Then we tied rope in chest, myself 
and xxx pulled the body outside from sump. Then, head 
has come alone. I put head in the sack bag. Then xxx 
took knife from me and cut Rajini’s body into two pieces 

and put them in two sack bags, then put knife and xxx 
in another sack bag and kept the sack bags near 
kitchen, then xxx closed the sump… 
 
…via Chinnavaikal Street and Gandhi Street, turned on 
the left side of the street, in front of small clock tower, 
via Varnarapettai Billu Shop, on the centre of the bridge 
of Railway Crossing on the left side, threw the two bags, 
containing the decomposed body of Rajini, on the right 
side threw the sack bag, containing knife and xxx… 
 
…Also, I gave statement that if I was taken, I would 
identify the Chinnavaikal street, which is the place of 
occurrence, my maternal uncle’s house which is in the 
same street..the place where I had left the motor cycle 
of my (nc) and the place where I had put the body of 
Rajini... ” 
 
10. 
On the aspect of the recovery of two nylon sack bags with body 
parts, we have affirmative depositions of Chinta Kodanda Rao (PW-
30), Inspector of Police, PS Grand Bazaar, public witness 
Devadass (PW-21) and Satyamurthy (PW-11). The recovery was 
photographed by Selvaganapathy (PW-26), police photographer 
vide photographs marked Exhibit P-19. The recovery was duly 
recorded in the rough sketch plan (Exhibit P-30) and the mahazar 
(Exhibit P-31). 
 
11. 
On 29.04.2008, accused no. 4 - Mohan Kumar ohan was 
arrested. On the same day, stolen items including, the motorcycle 
and ignition key of motorcycle, original registration book, insurance 
certificate of the motorcycle, iron box, home theatre and speaker 

box belonging to the deceased were recovered, as recorded vide 
seizure mahazar (Exhibits P-44, P-45, P-46 and P-47). 
 
12. 
On 30.04.2008, eight articles were recovered from the water sump 
tank at the house of the deceased, namely, gloves, lower jaw, rib, 
cervical vertebrae, tarsal and metatarsal, small and big size bone 
pieces, and knee cap. T. Bairavasamy (PW-32), Circle Inspector, 
PS Odiansalai has deposed about the recovery and proved the 
Mahazar (Exhibit P-48). The recovery was photographed by 
Subburayan (PW-25), police photographer vide photographs 
marked Exhibit P-18 and duly witnessed by public witness 
Devadass (PW-21). 
 
13. 
To determine the identity of the deceased person, some of the body 
parts were sent for a superimposition test to C. Pushparani (PW-
29), who was working as a Scientific Assistant Grade II, 
Anthropology Division, Forensic Sciences Department, Chennai. 
She has deposed about having received the case properties, 
consisting of a skull with mandible on 10.09.2008. The mandible 
was attached with the skull by means of a spring. For the purpose 
of identification, she had two identical colour photographs of a male 
individual sent to her in a sealed envelope as Item Nos. 2 and 3. 
The photographs were enlarged to the size of a self-portrait. Using 
the computer aided video superimposition technique, she had 

examined the skull and mandible viz. the photographs. For the 
purposes of the examination, the flesh thickness and the 
anthroposcopic landmarks in the face were also taken into 
consideration. C. Pushparani (PW-29), Scientific Assistant Grade 
II, Anthropology Division, Forensic Sciences Department, Chennai 
opined that the landmarks on the face matched well with those of 
the skull. She submitted her forensic report dated 20.01.2009 with 
analysis on the anthroposcopy and superimposition test (Exhibit P-
25). The skull, as per C. Pushparani (PW-29), Scientific Assistant 
Grade II, Anthropology Division, Forensic Sciences Department, 
Chennai belonged to the male individual seen in the photograph at 
serial no.4. With the report, Exhibit P-25, C. Pushparani (PW-29), 
Scientific Assistant Grade II, Anthropology Division, Forensic 
Sciences Department, Chennai had enclosed the computer laser 
printouts taken by her at the time of examination to establish and 
prove that the photographs of deceased – Rajini ajinikanth 
match with the mandible and the skull (Exhibits P-26 to P-28). We 
have carefully examined the computer laser print outs, and are of 
the opinion that the findings of the High Court affirming the 
judgment of the trial court are justified. 
 
14. 
On behalf of the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal, it is 
submitted that as per Dr. S. Diwakar (PW-24), Senior Medical 

Officer, Department of Forensic Medicine, Government General 
Hospital, Puducherry no definite cause of death could be 
ascertained due to decomposition of the body. However, it is 
pertinent to note that Dr. S. Diwakar (PW-24), Senior Medical 
Officer, Department of Forensic Medicine, Government General 
Hospital, Puducherry has also deposed that the deceased could be 
between 25-30 years of age and probable death could have 
occurred six months prior to the autopsy. It must be further noted 
that the deceased – Rajini ajinikanth was about 30 years of age 
and he had been missing for about six months prior to the date on 
which the autopsy was conducted. 
 
15. 
It has been submitted with considerable emphasis that 
Dr. S. Diwakar (PW-24), Senior Medical Officer, Department of 
Forensic Medicine, Government General Hospital, Puducherry has 
accepted that the lower jaw (mandible) was not found. Whereas, 
deposition of C. Pushparani (PW-29), Scientific Assistant Grade II, 
Anthropology Division, Forensic Sciences Department, Chennai 
and the photo superimposition done by her specifically refer to the 
lower jaw. We have examined this contention. Dr. S. Diwakar (PW-
24), Senior Medical Officer, Department of Forensic Medicine, 
Government General Hospital, Puducherry, in his examination-in-
chief, has testified that the police had sent the skull, sternum and 

right femur which were preserved by him from the autopsy material. 
Dr. S. Diwakar (PW-24), Senior Medical Officer, Department of 
Forensic Medicine, Government General Hospital, Puducherry has 
also stated that the lower jaw and the left lower first premolar tooth 
were preserved by him from the skeleton remains for onward 
transmission to Central Forensic Science Laboratory, Hyderabad, 
for necessary photo superimposition and DNA test through the 
Judicial Magistrate-II, Puducherry. The mahazar dated 21.5.2008 
(Exhibit P-15) was prepared after collecting the aforesaid body 
parts. 
 
16. 
We do not find that any confusion or doubt arises from the 
deposition of Dr. S. Diwakar (PW-24), Senior Medical Officer, 
Department of Forensic Medicine, Government General Hospital, 
Puducherry. He had conducted the post mortem examination 
(Exhibit P-16) on 26.04.2008, wherein he had examined the 
remains/body parts of the deceased which were found in the two 
nylon sack bags on the same day. Other body parts including, the 
lower part of the skull i.e. the mandible and the tooth were found 
subsequently in the sump tank on 30.04.2008. Therefore, Dr. S. 
Diwakar (PW-24), Senior Medical Officer, Department of Forensic 
Medicine, Government General Hospital, Puducherry, in his 
deposition, while referring to Exhibit P-17 dated 19.05.2008, has 

referred to the lower jaw (mandible) and the left lower first premolar 
tooth, to send the said body parts to the Central Forensic Science 
Laboratory at Hyderabad. 
 
17. 
It has been submitted on behalf of the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal that Dr. S. Diwakar (PW-24), Senior Medical Officer, 
Department of Forensic Medicine, Government General Hospital, 
Puducherry, in his cross-examination, has accepted that body parts 
were sent to him in two nylon sack bags only once, and nothing was 
sent thereafter. The post mortem was completed on 26.04.2008, 
vide the post mortem report (Exhibit P-16) of the same date. 
 
18. 
Dr. S. Diwakar (PW-24), Senior Medical Officer, Department of 
Forensic Medicine, Government General Hospital, Puducherry had 
issued bone-case certificate (Exhibit P-17) on 19.05.2008. Dr. S. 
Diwakar (PW-24), Senior Medical Officer, Department of Forensic 
Medicine, Government General Hospital, Puducherry has clarified 
that while he did not mention the lower jaw in the post mortem 
26.04.2008 (Exhibit P-16), he had mentioned that the lower jaw was 
preserved in the bone-case certificate (Exhibit P-17) dated 
19.05.2008.7 Further, the aforesaid deposition of Dr. S. Diwakar 
(PW-24), Senior Medical Officer, Department of Forensic Medicine, 
 
7 The recovery of lower jaw from the sump took place on 30.04.2008. Thus, it could not have been 
mentioned in the post mortem report dated 26.04.2008. 

Government General Hospital, Puducherry has to be read with the 
testimony of T. Bairavasamy (PW-32), Circle Inspector, PS 
Odiansalai, who had deposed that he had taken the letter written 
by Dr. S. Diwakar (PW-24), Senior Medical Officer, Department of 
Forensic Medicine, Government General Hospital, Puducherry and 
had obtained the signatures of Judicial Magistrate-II, Puducherry 
for conducting DNA test. Thereafter, the material objects were sent 
through Form 95 No. 02876 (Exhibit P-60) to the Judicial 
Magistrate-II, Puducherry. The skull and the mandible were sent for 
photo superimposition test after addressing a letter to Judicial 
Magistrate-II, Puducherry which was signed by Dr. S. Diwakar (PW-
24), Senior Medical Officer, Department of Forensic Medicine, 
Government General Hospital, Puducherry (Exhibit P-61). 
 
19. 
The prosecution’s case, in the absence of eye witnesses, is based 
upon circumstantial evidence. As per Section 25 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 18728, a confession made to a police officer is 
prohibited and cannot be admitted in evidence. Section 26 of the 
Evidence Act provides that no confession made by any person 
whilst he is in the custody of a police officer shall be proved against 
such person, unless it is made in the immediate presence of a 
 
8 For short ‘the Evidence Act’. 

Magistrate. Section 279 of the Evidence Act is an exception to 
Sections 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act. It makes that part of the 
statement which distinctly leads to discovery of a fact in 
consequence of the information received from a person accused of 
an offence, to the extent it distinctly relates to the fact thereby 
discovered, admissible in evidence against the accused. The fact 
which is discovered as a consequence of the information given is 
admissible in evidence. Further, the fact discovered must lead to 
recovery of a physical object and only that information which 
distinctly relates to that discovery can be proved. Section 27 of the 
Evidence Act is based on the doctrine of confirmation by 
subsequent events – a fact is actually discovered in consequence 
of the information given, which results in recovery of a physical 
object. The facts discovered and the recovery is an assurance that 
the information given by a person accused of the offence can be 
relied. 
 
20. 
In Pulukuri Kottaya v. King Emperor10, the Privy Council held that 
the fact discovered embraces the place from which the physical 
 
9 27. How much of information received from accused may be proved. – Provided that, when any 
fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of information received from a person accused of any 
offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a 
confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved. 
 PC 67. object is produced and the knowledge of the accused as to this, and 
the information given, must distinctly relate to this fact. 
 
21. 
In State (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu alias Afsan Guru11, this 
Court affirmed that the fact discovered within the meaning of 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act must be some concrete fact to which 
the information directly relates. Further, the fact discovered should 
refer to a material/physical object and not to a pure mental fact 
relating to a physical object disassociated from the recovery of the 
physical object. 
 
22. 
However, we must clarify that Section 27 of the Evidence Act, as 
held in these judgments, does not lay down the principle that 
discovery of a fact is to be equated to the object produced or found. 
The discovery of the fact resulting in recovery of a physical object 
exhibits knowledge or mental awareness of the person accused of 
the offence as to the existence of the physical object at the 
particular place. Accordingly, discovery of a fact includes the object 
found, the place from which it was produced and the knowledge of 
the accused as to its existence. To this extent, therefore, factum of 
discovery combines both the physical object as well as the mental 
consciousness of the informant accused in relation thereto. In 
 
11 (2005). 

Mohmed Inayatullah v. State of Maharashtra12, elucidating on 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act, it has been held that the first 
condition imposed and necessary for bringing the section into 
operation is the discovery of a fact which should be a relevant fact 
in consequence of information received from a person accused of 
an offence. The second is that the discovery of such a fact must be 
deposed to. A fact already known to the police will fall foul and not 
meet this condition. The third is that at the time of receipt of the 
information, the accused must be in police custody. Lastly, it is only 
so much of information which relates distinctly to the fact thereby 
discovered resulting in recovery of a physical object which is 
admissible. Rest of the information is to be excluded. The word 
‘distinctly’ is used to limit and define the scope of the information 
and means ‘directly’, ‘indubitably’, ‘strictly’ or ‘unmistakably’. Only 
that part of the information which is clear, immediate and a 
proximate cause of discovery is admissible. 
 
23. 
The facts proved by the prosecution, particularly the admissible 
portion of the statement of the accused, would give rise to two 
alternative hypotheses, namely, (i) that the accused had himself 
deposited the physical items which were recovered; or (ii) only the 
accused knew that the physical items were lying at that place. The 
 
12 (1976). second hypothesis is wholly compatible with the innocence of the 
accused, whereas the first would be a factor to show involvement 
of the accused in the offence. The court has to analyse which of the 
hypotheses should be accepted in a particular case. 
 
24. 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act is frequently used by the police, and 
the courts must be vigilant about its application to ensure credibility 
of evidence, as the provision is vulnerable to abuse. However, this 
does not mean that in every case invocation of Section 27 of the 
Evidence Act must be seen with suspicion and is to be discarded 
as perfunctory and unworthy of credence. 
 
25. 
The pre-requisite of police custody, within the meaning of Section 
27 of the Evidence Act, ought to be read pragmatically and not 
formalistically or euphemistically. In the present case, the 
disclosure statement (Exhibit P-37) was made by the appellant – 
Perumal Raja erumal on 25.04.2008, when he was detained in 
another case, namely, FIR No. 204/2008, registered at PS Grand 
Bazar, Puducherry, relating to the murder of Rajaram. He was 
subsequently arrested in this case, that is FIR.No.80/2008, which 
was registered at PS Odiansalai, Puducherry. The expression 
“custody” under Section 27 of the Evidence Act does not mean 
formal custody. It includes any kind of restriction, restraint or even 
surveillance by the police. Even if the accused was not formally 

arrested at the time of giving information, the accused ought to be 
deemed, for all practical purposes, in the custody of the police. 
 
26. 
Reference is made to a recent decision of this Court in Rajesh & 
Anr. v. State of Madhya Pradesh13, which held that formal 
accusation and formal police custody are essential pre-requisites 
under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. In our opinion, we need not 
dilate on the legal proposition as we are bound by the law and ratio 
as laid down by the decision of a Constitution Bench of this Court 
in State of U.P. v. Deoman Upadhyaya14. The law laid down by 
this Court in a decision delivered by a Bench of larger strength is 
binding on any subsequent Bench of lesser or coequal strength.15 
This Court in Deoman Upadhyay (supra) observed that the bar 
under Section 25 of the Evidence Act applies equally whether or 
not the person against whom evidence is sought to be led in a 
criminal trial was in custody at the time of making the confession. 
Further, for the ban to be effective the person need not have been 
accused of an offence when he made the confession. The reason 
is that the expression “accused person” in Section 24 and the 
expression “a person accused of any offence” in Sections 26 and 
 
13. 
14 (1961). 
15 See Judgments of the Constitution Bench of this Court in Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra 
Community and Anr. v. State of Maharashtra and Anr., (2005) and Union of India and Anr. v. Raghubir Singh (Dead) By Lrs., (1989). Raghubir Singh (supra) and Central Board of 
Dawoodi Bohra Community (supra) have been subsequently followed and applied by this Court in 
Trimurthi Fragrances (P) Ltd. v. Government of N.C.T. of Delhi,. 

27 have the same connotation, and describe the person against 
whom evidence is sought to be led in a criminal proceeding. The 
adjectival clause “accused of any offence” is, therefore, descriptive 
of the person against whom a confessional statement made by him 
is declared not provable, and does not predicate a condition of that 
person at the time of making the statement. 
 
27. 
Elaborating on this aspect, a three judge Bench of this Court in 
Aghnoo Nagesia v. State of Bihar16 has held that if the FIR is 
given by the accused to a police officer and amounts to a 
confessional statement, proof of the confession is prohibited by 
Section 25 of the Evidence Act. The confession includes not only 
the admission of the offence but all other admissions of 
incriminating facts related to the offence, except to the extent that 
the ban is lifted by Section 27 of the Evidence Act. While dealing 
with the admission of part of confession report dealing with motive, 
subsequent conduct and opportunity, this Court rejected the 
severability test adopted by some High Courts. The statement can, 
however, be relied upon and admitted to identify the accused as the 
maker, and the portion within the purview of Section 27 of the 
Evidence Act is admissible. Aghnoo Nagesia (supra) has been 
 
 SC 119. applied and followed by this Court in Khatri Hemraj Amulakh v. 
State of Gujarat.17 
 
28. 
The words “person accused of an offence” and the words “in the 
custody of a police officer” in Section 27 of the Evidence Act are 
separated by a comma. Thus, they have to be read distinctively. 
The wide and pragmatic interpretation of the term “police custody” 
is supported by the fact that if a narrow or technical view is taken, it 
will be very easy for the police to delay the time of filing the FIR and 
arrest, and thereby evade the contours of Sections 25 to 27 of the 
Evidence Act. Thus, in our considered view the correct 
interpretation would be that as soon as an accused or suspected 
person comes into the hands of a police officer, he is no longer at 
liberty and is under a check, and is, therefore, in “custody” within 
the meaning of Sections 25 to 27 of the Evidence Act. It is for this 
reason that the expression “custody” has been held, as earlier 
observed, to include surveillance, restriction or restraint by the 
police. 
 
29. 
This Court in Deoman Upadhyay (supra), while rejecting the 
argument that the distinction between persons in custody and 
persons not in custody violates Article 14 of the Constitution of 
 
17 (1972). 

India, observed that the distinction is a mere theoretical possibility. 
Sections 25 and 26 were enacted not because the law presumed 
the statements to be untrue, but having regard to the tainted nature 
of the source of the evidence, prohibited them from being received 
in evidence. A person giving word of mouth information to police, 
which may be used as evidence against him, may be deemed to 
have submitted himself to the “custody” of the police officer. 
Reference can also be made to decision of this Court in Vikram 
Singh and Ors. v. State of Punjab18, which discusses and applies 
Deoman Upadhyay (supra), to hold that formal arrest is not a 
necessity for operation of Section 27 of the Evidence Act. This 
Court in Dharam Deo Yadav v. State of Uttar Pradesh19, has held 
that the expression “custody” in Section 27 of the Evidence Act 
does not mean formal custody, but includes any kind of 
surveillance, restriction or restraint by the police. Even if the 
accused was not formally arrested at the time of giving information, 
the accused is, for all practical purposes, in the custody of the police 
and the bar vide Sections 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act, and 
accordingly exception under Section 27 of the Evidence Act, apply. 
Reliance was placed on the decisions in State of A.P. v. Gangula 
 
18 (2010). 
19 (2014). 

Satya Murthy20 and A.N.Vekatesh and Anr. v. State of 
Karnataka21. 
 
30. 
However, evidentiary value to be attached on evidence produced 
before the court in terms of Section 27 of the Evidence Act cannot 
be codified or put in a straightjacket formula. It depends upon the 
facts and circumstances of the case. A holistic and inferential 
appreciation of evidence is required to be adopted in a case of 
circumstantial evidence. 
 
31. 
When we turn to the facts of the present case, the body parts of the 
deceased Rajini ajinikanth were recovered on the pointing out 
of appellant – Perumal Raja erumal in his disclosure statement. 
Rajini ajinikanth had been missing for months and was 
untraceable. In the present case, as discussed above, the 
homicidal death of Rajini ajinikanth, the disclosure statement 
marked Exhibit P-37, and the consequent recovery as elucidated 
above have been proved beyond doubt and debate. 
 
32. 
In State of Maharashtra v. Suresh22, this Court in the facts therein 
held that recovery of a dead body, which was from the place pointed 
out by the accused, was a formidable incriminating circumstance. 
 
20 (1997). 
 
21 (2005). 
22 (2000). 

This would, the Court held, reveal that the dead body was 
concealed by the accused unless there is material and evidence to 
show that somebody else had concealed it and this fact came to 
the knowledge of the accused either because he had seen that 
person concealing the dead body or was told by someone else that 
the dead body was concealed at the said location. Here, if the 
accused declines and does not tell the criminal court that his 
knowledge of the concealment was on the basis of the possibilities 
that absolve him, the court can presume that the dead body (or 
physical object, as the case may be) was concealed by the accused 
himself. This is because the person who can offer the explanation 
as to how he came to know of such concealment is the accused. If 
the accused chooses to refrain from telling the court as to how else 
he came to know of it, the presumption is that the concealment was 
by the accused himself. 
 
33. 
The aforesaid view has been followed subsequently and reiterated 
in Harivadan Babubhai Patel v. State of Gujarat23, Vasanta 
Sampat Dupare v. State of Maharashtra24, State of Maharashtra 
v. Damu S/o Gopinath Shinde and Ors.25, and Rumi Bora Dutta 
v. State of Assam26. 
 
23 (2013). 
24 (2015). 
25 (2000). 
26 (2013). 

34. 
Our reasoning, which places reliance on Section 106 of the 
Evidence Act, does not in any way dilute the burden of proof which 
is on the prosecution. Section 106 comes into play when the 
prosecution is able to establish the facts by way of circumstantial 
evidence. On this aspect we shall delve upon subsequently. 
 
35. 
Apart from Section 27 of the Evidence Act, Section 8 of the said Act 
would be also attracted insofar as the prosecution witnesses, 
namely, the investigating officers, Chinta Kodanda Rao (PW-30), 
Inspector of Police, PS Grand Bazaar and T. Bairavasamy (PW-
32), Circle Inspector, PS Odiansalai, have referred to the conduct 
of the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal with regard to any fact 
in issue or a relevant fact when the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal was confronted and questioned.27 Reference in this regard 
may also be made to the judgment of this Court in Sandeep v. 
State of U.P.28 which held that: 
“52. (…) It is quite common that based on admissible 
portion of the statement of the accused whenever and 
wherever recoveries are made, the same are 
admissible in evidence and it is for the accused in those 
situations to explain to the satisfaction of the court as to 
the nature of recoveries and as to how they came into 
possession or for planting the same at the places from 
where they were recovered.” 

27 See State (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu, (2005), ¶¶ 190, 204-206, 219-223, 225. 
28 (2012). 

36. 
On the basis of the prosecution evidence, the following factual 
position has been established: 

Rajini ajinikanth was missing for months before his father 
Rajaram came from France to India, on 20.04.2008. 

On return, Rajaram had noticed that the articles in the 
property No.13, Chinna Vaikkal street, Puducherry, where 
deceased Rajini ajinikanth used to reside and was owned 
by Rajaram, were scattered. The motorcycle owned by 
Rajaram, which the deceased Rajini ajinikanth used to 
use, was missing. 

Rajaram was murdered on 21.04.2008. 

The appellant – Perumal Raja erumal is a close relative 
of Rajini ajinikanth and Rajaram (son of sister of 
Rajaram). 

 Rajaram as the owner of the immovable property No.13, 
Chinna Vaikkal street, Puducherry and Rajini ajinikanth, 
as the son of Rajaram, were hindrance in the way of the 
appellant – Perumal Raja erumal acquiring the said 
property. There were also inter se family disputes relating to 
the property in Kurumbapet. This was the motive for the 
offence. 

On the basis of the disclosure statement made by the 
appellant – Perumal Raja erumal on 25.04.2008 (Exhibit 

P-37) – (a) two nylon sack bags were recovered containing 
decomposed human body parts; and (b) human bones were 
also recovered from the sump tank in property bearing No.13, 
Chinna Vaikkal street, Puducherry. 
(vii) The superimposition report dated 20.01.2009 (Exhibit P-25) 
by C. Pushparani (PW-29), Scientific Assistant Grade II, 
Anthropology Division, Forensic Sciences Department, 
Chennai states that the skull and the mandible which were 
recovered from the river and the sump tank were that of the 
deceased Rajini ajinikanth. The report relies on the 
computer laser print out of the skull and the mandible for 
comparison with the photograph of the deceased Rajini ajinikanth. It is shown that the skull and the mandible were 
of the deceased Rajini ajinikanth. 
(viii) As per the post mortem report (Exhibit P-16), though the 
cause of death could not be ascertained due to 
decomposition of the body, the bones were that of a person 
between 25-30 years of age. Further, the death had probably 
occurred six months prior to the autopsy. The deceased Rajini 
ajinikanth was of 30 years in age and he had been 
missing for about six months. 

Motorcycle bearing registration No. PY 01 X 9857 belonging 
to Rajaram (which was then at Rajaram’s house and in 

possession of Rajini ajinikanth, as Rajaram was in 
France), keys, insurance papers, as well as other personal 
belongings were recovered from Mohan Kumar ohan 
and a juvenile, whose name is withheld. 
37. 
In Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra29, this 
Court referred to Hanumant v. State of Madhya Pradesh30, and 
laid down the five golden principles (‘panchsheel’) that should be 
satisfied before a case based on circumstantial evidence against 
an accused can be said to be fully established: 

the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be 
drawn should be fully established; 

the facts so established should be consistent only with the 
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they 
should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that 
the accused is guilty; 

the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and 
tendency; 

they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the 
one to be proved; and 

there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave 
any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the 
 
29 (1984). 
30 (1952). innocence of the accused and must show that in all human 
probability the act must have been done by the accused. 
 
38. 
This Court in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda (supra) rejected the 
contention that if the defence case is false it would constitute an 
additional link as to fortify the case of the prosecution. However, a 
word of caution was laid down to observe that a false explanation 
given can be used as a link when: 

various links in the chain of evidence laid by the prosecution 
have been satisfactorily proved; 

circumstance points to the guilt of the accused with 
reasonable definiteness; and 

the circumstance is in proximity to the time and situation. 
 
If these conditions are fulfilled only then the court can use the false 
explanation or a false defence as an additional link to lend an 
assurance to the court and not otherwise. Thus, a distinction has to 
be drawn between incomplete chain of circumstances and a 
circumstance after a chain is complete and the defence or 
explanation given by the accused is found to be false, in which 
event the said falsehood is added to reinforce the conclusion of the 
court. 

39. 
This Court in Deonandan Mishra v. State of Bihar31 has laid down 
the following principle regarding circumstantial evidence and the 
failure of accused to adduce any explanation: 
“It is true that in a case of circumstantial evidence not 
only should the various links in the chain of evidence be 
clearly established, but the completed chain must be 
such as to rule out a reasonable likelihood of the 
innocence of the accused. But in a case like this where 
the various links as stated above have been 
satisfactorily made out and the circumstances point to 
the appellant as the probable assailant, with reasonable 
definiteness and in proximity to the deceased as 
regards time and situation, and he offers no 
explanation, which if accepted, though not proved, 
would afford a reasonable basis for a conclusion on the 
entire case consistent with his innocence, such 
absence of explanation or false explanation would itself 
be an additional link which completes the chain. We are, 
therefore, of the opinion that this is a case which 
satisfies the standards requisite for conviction on the 
basis of circumstantial evidence.” 
 
40. 
The appellant – Perumal Raja erumal in his statement under 
Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 plainly denied 
all accusations without furnishing any explanation regarding his 
knowledge of the places from which the dead body was recovered. 
In this circumstance, the failure of the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal to present evidence on his behalf or to offer any cogent 
explanation regarding the recovery of the dead body by virtue of his 
special knowledge must lead to a reasonable adverse inference, by 
application of the principle under Section 106 of the Evidence Act, 
 
31 (1955). thus forming an additional link in the chain of circumstances. The 
additional link further affirms the conclusion of guilt as indicated by 
the prosecution evidence. 
 
41. 
The whereabouts of Rajini ajinikanth were unknown. The 
perpetrator(s) were also unknown. It is only consequent to the 
disclosure statement by the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal, 
that the police came to know that Rajini ajinikanth had been 
murdered and his body was first dumped in the sump tank and after 
some months, it was retrieved, cut into two parts, put in sack bags, 
and thrown in the river/canal. The police, accordingly, proceeded 
on the leads and recovered the parts of the dead body from the 
sump tank and sack bags from the river/canal. It has been also 
established that Rajini ajinikanth was murdered. In addition, 
there have been recoveries of the motorcycle and other belongings 
at the behest of the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal. These 
facts, in the absence of any other material to doubt them, establish 
indubitable conclusion that the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal is guilty of having committed murder of Rajini ajinikanth. The presence of motive reinforces the above 
conclusion. 
 
42. 
It has been contended before us that the appellant – Perumal Raja 
erumal had been acquitted in the case crime No. 

204 of 2008 relating to the murder of Rajaram. The judgment 
passed by the trial court32 has been taken on record as additional 
evidence. However, we do not find this judgment in any way 
relevant or negating the prosecution evidence, which we have 
referred to and elucidated earlier in the prosecution case against 
the appellant, because the murder trial of Rajaram was primarily 
based upon an entirely different set of evidence. The evidence we 
have mentioned in the present case is not relevant and directly 
connected with the murder of Rajaram. The two occurrences are 
separate, albeit the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal was 
accused of the murder of Rajaram and his son Rajini ajinikanth. 
The murders certainly were committed on two different dates – 
23.11.2007 
(or 
thereabout) 
and 
21.04.2008 
respectively, 
approximately five months apart. Except for the fact that the 
appellant – Perumal Raja erumal was taken into custody during 
the course of investigation in FIR No. 204 of 2008 for murder of 
Rajaram and thereupon on 25.04.2008 his disclosure statement 
(Exhibit P-37) was recorded, there is no connection between the 
two offences. The conviction of the appellant is, therefore, 
sustainable in view of the evidence placed on record in the present 
case. The judgment of acquittal would not qualify as relevant and 
 
32 Dated 13.06.2017. of evidentiary value so as to acquit the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal in the present case.33 
 
43. 
Acquittal of the co-accused, as noticed in paragraph 4 above, again 
is for want of evidence against them. At best, they were found in 
possession of the articles connected with the crime on the basis of 
the disclosure statement (Exhibit P-37) dated 25.04.2008 made by 
the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal. Section 27 of the 
Evidence Act could not have been applied to the other co-accused 
for the simple reason that the provision pertains to information that 
distinctly relates to the discovery of a 'fact' that was previously 
unknown, as opposed to fact already disclosed or known. Once 
information is given by an accused, the same information cannot be 
used, even if voluntarily made by a co-accused who is in custody. 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act does apply to joint disclosures, but 
this is not one such case.34 This was precisely the reason given by 
the trial court to acquit the co-accused. Even if Section 8 of the 
Evidence Act is to apply, it would not have been possible to convict 
the co-accused. The trial court rightly held other co-accused not 
guilty. For the same reason, acquittal of co-accused Chella ukundhan, who was earlier absconding, is also of no avail. 

33 See §§ 40-43 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
34 See State (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu, (2005), ¶ 145. 

44. 
As far as acquittal of the juvenile is concerned, reference can be 
made to the provisions of Sections 40 to 43 of the Evidence Act. 
 
45. 
In view of the above discussion, we have no difficulty in upholding 
the conviction of the appellant – Perumal Raja erumal. The 
appeal is dismissed. 

… 
NEW DELHI; 
JANUARY 03, 2024.