IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

Tejashwi Prasad Yadav 

 … Petitioner 
 
versus 
 
Hareshbhai Pranshankar Mehta 
 
 … Respondent 

JUDGMENT 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The respondent filed a private complaint against the 
petitioner in the Court of the Additional Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate, Ahmedabad, alleging commission of the offence 
under Section 499, which is punishable under Section 500 of 
the Indian Penal Code (for short, ‘the IPC’). The learned 
Magistrate issued a summons on 28th August 2023. The 
present petition seeks a transfer of the complaint from the 
Court in Ahmedabad to a Court in Delhi. 
2. 
The complaint is based on the utterances of the 
petitioner, which formed part of a public statement made by 
the petitioner on 22nd March 2023, which was reported by 
both electronic and print media. It is alleged in the complaint 

that the petitioner made a public statement to the following 
effect:- 
“Jo bhi do thug hai na, jo thug hai, thug 
ko anumati jo hai, aaj ke desh ke 
condition me dekha jaye then only 
Gujarati hi thug ho sakte hai, aur uske 
thug ko maaf kiya jayega. LIC ko paisa 
do, bank ko paisa do, fir wo log le ke 
bhag 
jayenge, 
to 
kaun 
jimmedaar 
hoga?” 
The respondent relied upon a pen drive of a video of the 
petitioner's statement appearing on YouTube. The case made 
out by the respondent is that by the above utterances, the 
petitioner has defamed the Gujarati people and the entire 
society of Gujarat. His contention is that the petitioner 
described all Gujarati people as “thugs”. According to the 
case made out in the complaint, as a result of the said 
utterances, people from other societies have started looking 
upon Gujaratis as crooks and criminals. When the complaint 
was filed, the petitioner was the Deputy Chief Minister of 
Bihar. 
3. 
This Court issued notice on 6th November 2023 and 
granted a stay of proceedings of the Complaint. At that time, 
the statement of the learned senior counsel appearing for the 
petitioner was recorded that he would seek necessary 
instructions from the petitioner. The petitioner filed an 
affidavit dated 18th January 2024. Paragraphs 1 to 4 of the 
said affidavit read thus: 

“1. At the outset, I wish to clarify 
that qua that part of the speech that is 
alleged to be defamatory, it was made 
in the context of a question asked to 
me with respect to the Red Corner 
notice issued against Mehul Choksi 
which has been revoked. In that 
context, I was asked whether the CBI 
has failed to bring back Mehul Choksi 
to India. I was responding to the 
failure of CBI to deal with such alleged 
swindlers. 
2. 
My answer was in response to 
this specific question. I wondered how 
such swindlers were allowed to operate 
in India in the fashion that they did 
and in that context, I referred to the 
expression Gujarati and said "Only 
Gujarati may be swindler and these 
swindlers 
may 
be 
exonerated". 
I 
further said, "If provide the money of 
LIC and provide money of the bank to 
the swindlers then these swindlers will 
take money and ran away, who shall 
be responsible?" 
3. 
My 
statement 
has 
been 
interpreted to mean that I intentionally 
wanted to defame Gujaratis as a 
community. This is far from the truth. 
I hold Gujaratis, as a community in 
great esteem and have no against 
them. Further want to state greatest 
gift to the mankind i.e. our great 
Mahatma Gandhi was from Gujarat. I 
had no intentions to defame Gujaratis 
as a community. However, if any 
Gujarati feels that I by using the 
expression noted above hurt their 
sentiments, that certainly was not my 
intention. 

4. 
Therefore, 
I 
unconditionally 
withdraw that part of my statement 
made on 22.03.2023 in which I use the 
expression that only "Only Gujarati 
may be swindler and these swindlers 
may be exonerated".” 
(underline supplied) 
4. 
On 29th January 2024, when this petition was heard, 
the learned counsel appearing for the respondent pointed out 
that the petitioner had not withdrawn his entire offending 
statement. Therefore, the petitioner filed another affidavit 
dated 31st January 2024. Paragraphs 4 to 6 thereof read 
thus: 
“4. Therefore, I unconditionally withdraw 
that part of my statement made on 
22.03.2023 in which I use the expression 
that only "Only Gujarati may be swindler 
and these swindlers may be exonerated". 
Further I unconditionally withdraw any 
part 
of 
my 
statement 
made 
on 
22.03.2023 against “People of State of 
Gujarat”. 
5. I reiterate that the context in which 
the statement was made related to those 
fugitives 
who 
had 
swindled 
money, 
cheated the Government and ran away 
from the country. The said statement 
was not meant to hurt the sentiments of 
Gujaratis as a community. 
6. 
I have clarified the intent of my 
statement made on 22.03.2023 and 
withdrawn it so that no Gujarati may feel 
defamed as alleged.” 
(underline supplied) 

5. 
From the two affidavits, it is clear that not only has the 
petitioner withdrawn the offending statements made by him 
based on which the complaint was filed, but he has also 
stated that he never intended to defame Gujaratis as a 
community. He has also stated that he holds Gujaratis as a 
community in great esteem. On a conjoint reading of both the 
affidavits, it is very clear that the petitioner has withdrawn 
the statements made by him on 22nd March 2023, which, 
according to the respondent, were defamatory to the entire 
Gujarati community. 
6. 
On 22nd January 2024, the learned counsel for the 
respondent was granted time to take instructions on the first 
affidavit filed by the petitioner. On 29th January 2024, we 
had put the respondent to notice that if the petitioner 
withdraws his offending statements, it will be appropriate that 
the entire controversy is put to rest by quashing the 
complaint. 
7. 
On 5th February 2024, the learned counsel appearing for 
the respondent stated that the respondent has not given him 
specific instructions to consent to quashing the complaint. 
However, the learned counsel fairly submitted that in the light 
of the withdrawal of the statements and two affidavits filed by 
the petitioner, this Court may pass appropriate orders. 
8. 
We have already reproduced the statements on oath 
made by the petitioner. The conjoint reading of the affidavits 
of the petitioner indicates that the statements made by the 

petitioner on the basis of which a complaint of defamation 
was filed, have been unconditionally withdrawn. The 
petitioner has stated that he holds Gujaratis as a community 
in great esteem and has no ill will or animus against them. In 
fact, he has stated that Gujarat has given the greatest gift to 
mankind of Mahatma Gandhi. He has repeatedly stated that 
he had no intention of defaming Gujaratis as a community. 
He stated that on 22nd March 2023, while briefing the media 
outside the Bihar Legislative Assembly, he made the 
statement in response to a question asked to him as regards 
the allegation that the Red Corner Notice issued against one 
Mehul Choksi has been revoked. Now by filing affidavits, the 
petitioner has unconditionally withdrawn the statements 
made by him which were objected to by the respondent. 
9. 
It is true that every prosecution for defamation for the 
offence under Section 499, which is punishable under Section 
500 of the IPC, cannot be quashed on the ground that the 
offending allegations have been withdrawn. 
10. 
However, in the facts of the present case, not only that 
the statements have been unconditionally withdrawn, but the 
petitioner has also explained the circumstances and the 
context in which the statements were made. Under Article 
142 of the Constitution of India, this Court possesses 
extraordinary Constitutional powers to pass any decree or 
order which is necessary for doing complete justice between 
the parties. In this case, the respondent appears to have 
been hurt in view of the statements made by the petitioner 

generally about Gujarati people. Now, after the petitioner has 
explained the context in which he made the statements and 
after withdrawal of those statements, in the facts of the case, 
it is unjust to continue the prosecution. No purpose will be 
served by continuing the prosecution. Therefore, we are of 
the view that in the peculiar facts of the case, this is a fit case 
to quash the complaint. 
11. 
Hence, 
we 
quash 
criminal 
case 
bearing 
no.CC/83849/2023 
arising 
out 
of 
the 
case 
no.CR/EN/7110/2023, titled Hareshbhai Pranshankar Mehta 
versus Tejaswi Lalu Prasad Yadav, pending in the Court of the 
learned 
Additional 
Chief 
Metropolitan 
Magistrate, 
Ahmedabad. As the complaint has been quashed, the prayer 
for transfer will not survive. 
12. 
The petition is disposed of on the above terms. 

 ….…………………….J. 
 
 (Abhay S. Oka) 

…..…………………...J. 

 (Ujjal Bhuyan) 
New Delhi; 
February 13, 2024.