IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). OF 2024 
( SLP(C) No. 11975/2019) 

CHATRAPAL 

 …. APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH 
& ANR.... RESPONDENTS 

JUDGMENT 

PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J. 

Leave granted. 

2. 
The present appeal, by special leave, is directed against 
the judgment and order dated 08.01.2019 passed by the High 
Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Writ Petition (C) No. 297 of 

2008, whereby the High Court has dismissed the petition of the 
appellant being devoid of merit. 
 
3. 
The facts, briefly stated, are that the appellant was 
appointed on permanent basis on the post of Ardly (a class IV 
Post) in the Bareilly Judgeship. The appellant was transferred 
and posted as Process Server in the Nazarat of outlying court 
of Baheri, District Bareilly on 24.08.2001. In compliance of the 
transfer order, the appellant joined the Nazarat Branch in 
Baheri, District Bareilly as Process Server on 31.08.2001 but he 
was being paid the remuneration of Ardly. 
 
3.1 
Being 
aggrieved, 
the 
appellant 
made 
a 
representation on 20.01.2003 to the District Judge to pay the 
salary due to the post of Process Server. The said 
representation was duly considered by the competent authority 
and a report from the Munsarim in the office of Civil Judge, 
Baheri, Bareilly was called for. As per the report of Munsarim 
dated 27.02.2003, the appellant joined the post of Process 
Server in the Court of Civil Judge, Baheri, Bareilly on 
31.08.2001 and since then is working on the said post. 

Allegedly, after submission of the said report, the Central Nazir 
started harassing the appellant and demanded illegal amount 
of gratification for settling his dues. 
 
3.2 
Since the grievance of the appellant was not being 
redressed, he made a representation dated 05.06.2003 to the 
Janapad Nyaayaadeesh inter alia stating that he is deprived of 
the allowance that is admissible to the incumbents who are 
posted at an outlying court as Process Server. It is further 
stated that when the appellant went to meet the Central Nazir 
on 04.06.2003, he demanded bribe to get his work done. The 
District Judge, Bareilly sought an explanation from the Central 
Nazir, Bareilly Judgeship who in turn admitted that by mistake 
the salary of the appellant has been shown as against the post 
of Ardly, however, he denied having demanded illegal 
gratification from the appellant. 
 
3.3 
The District Judge placed the appellant under 
suspension vide order dated 21.06.2003 and initiated a 
departmental inquiry. The Inquiry Officer vide memorandum 
dated 22.08.2003 served the charge sheet on the appellant on 
the charges firstly, the appellant vide communication dated 

05.06.2003 
had 
used 
inappropriate, 
derogatory 
and 
objectionable language and made false allegations against the 
officers including the District Judge as well as against the 
Presiding Officer of Aonla Court and secondly, the appellant 
communicated letters and representations to the Registrar 
General of High Court and other officials of the State 
Government including the then Chief Minister without routing 
the same through proper channel. The Inquiry Officer, upon 
completion of enquiry, recorded in his report dated 21.04.2006 
that the charges levelled against the appellant are duly 
established. The District Judge, Bareilly accepted the inquiry 
report dated 21.04.2006 and vide order dated 30.04.2007 
dismissed the appellant which was challenged in appeal before 
the High Court and the same was dismissed vide order dated 
19.09.2007 being devoid of any substance while affirming the 
order dated 30.04.2007 passed by the Disciplinary Authority 
imposing punishment of dismissal. 
 
3.4 
Being aggrieved by the order dated 19.09.2007 
passed by the Administrative Judge of the High Court of 
Allahabad, the appellant filed the Writ Petition (C) No. 297 of 

2008 before the High Court which attained the same fate as 
that of the appeal. Hence, the present appeal. 

4. 
Learned counsel for the appellant would submit that the 
first charge, in particular, is vague as no finding has been 
recorded by the Inquiry Officer with regard to the allegations 
made in the letter dated 05.06.2003 against the officials. 
Learned counsel would further submit that if it is presumed 
that the language used in the complaint constitutes flagrant 
breach of Rule 3 of the U.P. Government Servant Conduct 
Rules, the quantum of punishment imposed on the appellant is 
not commensurate to the guilt. Learned counsel for the 
appellant next submits that the appellant was not supplied 
copy of various documents including proposed evidence and 
thus he was prejudiced. It is lastly argued that the findings of 
guilt recorded by the enquiry officer is perverse. 
 
In support of his submissions, learned counsel for the 
appellant has placed reliance on the decisions of this Court 

rendered in ‘Sawai Singh vs. State of Rajasthan’1 and 
‘Santosh Bakshi vs. State of Punjab2’ 
 
5. 
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the High Court 
would submit that the appellant is habitual of making false 
allegations against the senior officers including the District 
Judge and the charges framed against him are specific and 
definite and not vague. 
 
6. 
We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length 
and perused the case papers. 
 
7. 
The appellant was subjected to the departmental inquiry 
on two charges of misconduct and insubordination. For the first 
charge, it was alleged that he used inappropriate, derogatory 
and objectional language and made false allegations against 
the Central Nazir and higher officials and earlier also he had 
lodged a false report against the Presiding Officer of 
Aonla Court. For the second charge, he allegedly sent a 
representation dated 05.06.2003 to the Registrar General of 
the High Court and Harijan Society Welfare Minister as also to 
 
1AIR 1986 SC 995 
 SC 2966 

the Chief Minister without using the proper channel and without 
permission of the Head of the Department. 
 
8. 
The Inquiry Officer has found both the charges to be 
proved. In the discussion with respect to the first charge, it is 
mentioned in the inquiry report that the appellant’s statement 
in his letter dated 05.06.2003 that he met the Central Nazir, 
Bareilly number of times between 24.08.2001 to 15.01.2003 is 
false because from the order dated 21.06.2003 of the District 
Judge, Bareilly it is clear that the Central Nazir took charge at 
Bareilly on 23.07.2002, therefore, he could not have met the 
Central Nazir, Bareilly before 23.07.2002. 
 
9. 
However, the finding of the Inquiry Officer that the 
appellant’s statement in his application dated 05.06.2003 that 
he met the Central Nazir number of times between 24.08.2001 
to 15.01.2003 is not reflected in appellant’s representation. In 
fact, the application dated 05.06.2003 was addressed to the 
Janapad Nyaayaadeesh and the relevant statement is that the 
applicant met the addressee i.e. Janapad Nyaayaadeesh 
number of times between 24.08.2001 to 15.01.2003. There is 
no statement that he met the Central Nazir during this period. 

In respect of meeting the Central Nazir, his statement is that 
he met him on 04.06.2003. Thus, the finding of making false 
statement 
and 
allegation 
in 
his 
representation 
dated 
05.06.2003 is not borne out from the record. Since, this finding 
is the fulcrum of the reasoning to hold that charge no. 1 is 
proved, in our considered view, this finding in the inquiry 
report is perverse. 
 
10. 
Insofar as the allegation that the appellant made false 
allegations of discrimination on caste basis, it is significant to 
notice that the appellant himself has not made any such 
allegation in his letter dated 05.06.2003. In the said letter, he 
has stated that it was the Central Nazir who told him that the 
District Judge is saying that the appellant is a Harijan 
employee, and he hates the people of such community. Thus, it 
is clear that the appellant himself has not made any such 
allegation against the District Judge but it was the Central 
Nazir who made that statement. The Inquiry Officer had 
referred to the report of the Central Nazir dated 20.06.2003 
which is available on record. Regarding the above statement, 
the Central Nazir has not denied specifically. He has only stated 

that the charges levelled by the appellant are false and 
baseless. The Central Nazir has neither made any specific 
denial that he has not demanded illegal gratification of Rs. 
3,000/- from the appellant. Even though, in his letter dated 
05.06.2003, the appellant has made specific allegation to this 
effect against the Central Nazir. 
 
11. 
The charge no. 2 against the appellant concerns directly 
sending the representations to the High Court and Hon’ble 
Chief Minister/Minister without routing the same through 
proper channel. In this regard, it is suffice to observe that 
Class-IV employee, when in financial hardship, may represent 
directly to the superior but that by itself cannot amount to 
major misconduct for which punishment of termination from 
service should be imposed. Even otherwise, the appellant has 
cited examples of other employees of the District Court, 
Bareilly who have sent representations directly to the 
superiors, but no action has been taken against them. 
 
12. 
It is trite law that ordinarily the findings recorded by the 
Inquiry Officer should not be interfered by the appellate 
authority or by the writ court. However, when the finding of 

guilt recorded by the Inquiry Officer is based on perverse 
finding the same can always be interfered as held in Union of 
India vs. P. Gunasekaran3, State of Haryana vs. Rattan 
Singh4 and Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board vs. T.T. Murali Babu5. In P. Gunasekaran 
(supra), the following has been held by this Court in para nos. 
12, 13, 16 & 17: 
“12. Despite the well-settled position, it is painfully 
disturbing to note that the High Court has acted as 
an 
appellate 
authority 
in 
the 
disciplinary 
proceedings, reappreciating even the evidence 
before the enquiry officer. The finding on Charge I 
was accepted by the disciplinary authority and was 
also 
endorsed 
by 
the 
Central 
Administrative 
Tribunal. In disciplinary proceedings, the High Court 
is not and cannot act as a second court of first 
appeal. The High Court, in exercise of its powers 
under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, 
shall not venture into reappreciation of the 
evidence. The High Court can only see whether: 
 
(a) the enquiry is held by a competent authority; 
(b) the enquiry is held according to the 
procedure prescribed in that behalf; 
(c) there is violation of the principles of natural 
justice in conducting the proceedings; 
(d) the authorities have disabled themselves 
from 
reaching 
a 
fair 
conclusion 
by 
some 
considerations extraneous to the evidence and 
merits of the case; 
 
3 (2015) 
4 (1977) 
5 (2014) 

(e) the authorities have allowed themselves to 
be 
influenced 
by 
irrelevant 
or 
extraneous 
considerations; 
(f) the conclusion, on the very face of it, is so 
wholly 
arbitrary 
and 
capricious 
that 
no 
reasonable person could ever have arrived at 
such conclusion; 
(g) the disciplinary authority had erroneously 
failed to admit the admissible and material 
evidence; 
(h) the disciplinary authority had erroneously 
admitted inadmissible evidence which influenced 
the finding; 
(i) the finding of fact is based on no evidence. 
 
13. Under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of 
India, the High Court shall not: 
(i) reappreciate the evidence; 
(ii) interfere with the conclusions in the enquiry, 
in case the same has been conducted in 
accordance with law; 
(iii) go into the adequacy of the evidence; 
(iv) go into the reliability of the evidence; 
(v) interfere, if there be some legal evidence on 
which findings can be based. 
(vi) correct the error of fact however grave it 
may appear to be; 
(vii) go into the proportionality of punishment 
unless it shocks its conscience. 
 
16. These principles have been succinctly summed 
up by the living legend and centenarian V.R. 
Krishna Iyer, J. in State of Haryana v. Rattan 
Singh [(1977): 1977 SCC (L&S) 298]. 
To 
quote 
the 
unparalleled 
and 
inimitable 
expressions: (SCC p. 493, para 4) 
“4. … in a domestic enquiry the strict and 
sophisticated rules of evidence under the Indian 

Evidence Act may not apply. All materials which 
are logically probative for a prudent mind are 
permissible. There is no allergy to hearsay 
evidence provided it has reasonable nexus and 
credibility. 
It 
is 
true 
that 
departmental 
authorities and administrative tribunals must be 
careful in evaluating such material and should 
not glibly swallow what is strictly speaking not 
relevant under the Indian Evidence Act. For this 
proposition it is not necessary to cite decisions 
nor textbooks, although we have been taken 
through case law and other authorities by 
counsel on both sides. The essence of a judicial 
approach is objectivity, exclusion of extraneous 
materials or considerations and observance of 
rules of natural justice. Of course, fair play is the 
basis and if perversity or arbitrariness, bias or 
surrender of independence of judgment vitiate 
the conclusions reached, such finding, even 
though of a domestic tribunal, cannot be held 
good.” (emphasis supplied) 
 
17. In all the subsequent decisions of this Court up 
to the latest in Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply 
and Sewerage Board v. T.T. Murali Babu (2014): (2014) 1 SCC (L&S) 38, these principles 
have been consistently followed adding practically 
nothing more or altering anything.” 
 
13. 
Having considered the entire material available on record 
and keeping in view that the appellant is a Class-IV employee 
against whom charge no. 1 was found proved on the basis of 
perverse finding and charge no. 2 is only about sending the 
representation to the High Court directly without availing the 

proper channel, we deem it appropriate to set-aside the 
impugned judgment of the High Court as well as the order 
dated 30.04.2007 whereby the appellant was terminated from 
service. Consequently, the appellant is reinstated in service 
with all consequential benefits. The appeal is allowed. 

 ………………………………………J. 

 (B.R. GAVAI) 
 
………………………………………J. 

 (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
FEBRUARY 15, 2024 
NEW DELHI.