SLP (Crl.) No.8696 of 2021 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 [ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No(s). 8696 of 2021] 

N. MANOGAR & ANR. 

VERSUS 
 
THE INSPECTOR OF POLICE 
& ORS. 

ORDER 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeal has been filed by the Appellant(s) 
assailing the correctness of a decision of the Madras High Court 
(the “High Court”) dated 13.09.2021, setting aside an order 
dated 24.10.2019 passed by the Ld. XIV Metropolitan 
Magistrate, Egmore, Chennai (the “Trial Court”) whereunder, 
the Trial Court rejected the application instituted by the 
Complainant under Section 216 read with Section 319 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (the “CrPC”) seeking (i) the 
summoning of; and (ii) the impleadment of the Appellant(s) as 

SLP (Crl.) No.8696 of 2021 

accused person(s) in connection with Case Crime No. 7243 of 
2018 under Section(s) 452, 294(b), 323 and 506(1) of the Indian 
Penal Code, 1860 (the “IPC”) (the “Impugned Order”). 
3. 
The brief fact(s) culled out of the record are as follows: 
 
3.1. Pursuant to an order of the High Court dated 24.01.2018, 
Respondent No. 1 registered a First Information Report 
(“FIR”) dated 20.04.2018 under Section(s) 448, 294(b), 
323 and 506(1) of the IPC pursuant to a complaint lodged 
by Respondent No. 2 i.e., the Complainant whereunder it 
was alleged that, Respondent No. 3 came to the 
Complainant’s home asking about one Vidhul i.e., the 
Complainant’s son. Upon being told that Viduhl was the 
Complainant’ son Respondent No. 3 slapped the 
Complainant, pushed her on the sofa, made vulgar 
comments and thereafter dragged Vidhul out of the 
bathroom and physically assaulted him up until he fell 
unconscious. Subsequently, Respondent No. 3 extended 
threat(s) to the Complainant. Pertinently, it was also stated 
in the FIR that Respondent No. 3 was accompanied by her 
husband and another ‘boy’, however no role was ascribed 
to aforesaid person(s). 
3.2. 
A chargesheet came to be filed before the Trial Court by 
Respondent No. 1 against Respondent No. 3 under 
Section(s) 294(b), 323, 506(1) and 448 IPC. Subsequently 
the charge under Section 448 IPC came to be altered to 
Section 452 IPC. Pertinently, the Complainant, other 
eyewitnesses and the doctor who examined the injured 
victim(s) only named; and ascribed a role to Respondent 
No. 3 in their statement(s) under Section 161 CrPC before 
the investigating authorities. 

SLP (Crl.) No.8696 of 2021 

3.3. 
An application dated 27.01.2019 under Section 482 CrPC 
came to be preferred by the Complainant before the High 
Court seeking re-investigation qua the FIR. At this stage, 
for first time, the Complainant individually (a) named (i) 
Appellant No. 1 i.e., Respondent No. 3’s husband; and (ii) 
Appellant No. 2 i.e., a relative of Respondent No. 3; and 
(b) ascribed a particular role qua the alleged incident to 
them i.e., that the Appellant(s) trespassed into the 
Complainant’s home, hurled vulgar abuses and also 
threatened to kill the Complainant’s son. It was also stated 
that although the Complainant allegedly named the 
aforesaid person(s), the same was not recorded in the FIR 
(“Re-Investigation Application”). The High Court vide 
an order dated 05.02.2019 in the Re-Investigation 
Application, 
observed 
that 
the 
investigation 
had 
concluded; and a chargesheet had be filed by the 
investigating authorities. Accordingly, the High Court 
granted the Complainant liberty to prefer an application 
under Section(s) 319 read with 216 of the CrPC before the 
Trial Court seeking impleadment of the Appellants qua the 
proceedings emanating from the FIR. Further, the Trial 
Court was directed to consider the application of the 
Complainant under Section(s) 319 read with 216 of the 
CrPC and implead the Appellant(s) as accused person(s) 
during the examination of witnesses (if necessary) (the 
“Re-Investigation Order”). 
3.4. 
Pursuant to the Re-Investigation Order, an application 
dated 19.03.2019 under Section(s) 319 read with 216 of 
the CrPC came to be preferred by the Complainant before 
the Trial Court whereunder it was stated that (i) despite 
naming the Appellants, the FIR only came to be lodged 

SLP (Crl.) No.8696 of 2021 

against Respondent No. 3 i.e., allegedly the names of the 
Appellants were omitted by the investigating authorities; 
(ii) the statement(s) recorded by investigating authority 
under Section 161 of the CrPC were mechanically 
recorded and purposely did not disclose to names of the 
Appellants; (iii) that the prosecution witnesses (“PWs”) 
Nos. 1-5 have named the Appellants’ during their 
examination-in-chief before the Trial Court; and have also 
ascribed a specific role to the Appellants’ (the 
“Underlying Application”). 
3.5. 
Vide an order dated 06.05.2019, the Trial Court partly 
allowed the aforesaid application i.e., impleaded Appellant 
No. 1 as an accused person in the proceedings emanating 
from the FIR observing inter alia that Appellant No. 1 i.e., 
a policeman ought to have prevented an offence from 
taking place and accordingly, his omission would 
necessarily amount to abetment, however, the Trial Court 
rejected the prayer qua the impleadment of Appellant 
No. 2 as an accused on the ground that no reason(s) have 
been attributed as to how the Complainant; and other PWs’ 
have been able to identify the unknown ‘boy’ as Appellant 
No. 2. 
3.6. 
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, revision petition(s) were 
filed by Appellant No. 1 and Respondent No.2 before the 
High Court. Vide an order dated 10.06.2019, the revision 
petition(s) came to be allowed by the High Court on the 
ground that the Appellants’ were not issued notice in the 
Underlying Application and accordingly, the Underlying 
Application could not be decided without affording the 
Appellants’ an opportunity of hearing as mandated by this 
Court in Jogendra Yadav vs. State of Bihar, (2015) 9 SCC 

SLP (Crl.) No.8696 of 2021 

244. Thus, the High Court remanded the Underlying 
Application back to be considered afresh by the Trial Court 
in line with our decision in Hardeep Singh v State of 
Punjab & Ors., (2014) (the “Remand Order”). 
3.7. 
Pursuant to the Remand Order, the Trial Court vide an 
order dated 24.10.2019 dismissed the Underlying 
Application observing inter alia that there is no evidence 
qua the involvement of the Appellants to justify 
impleading the Appellants as accused person(s) in light of 
the fact that no specific allegation(s) had been levelled by 
the Complainant in either the underlying complaint; or 
before PW-6 i.e., the doctor treating the victim(s) 
immediately after the alleged offence (the “Underlying 
Order”). 
3.8. 
Aggrieved by the Underlying Order, the Complainant filed 
a criminal revision petition before the High Court. Vide the 
Impugned Order, the High Court held inter alia that the 
allegation(s) in the underlying complaint; and statement(s) 
recorded under Section 161 CrPC disclose that the 
Appellants were present with Respondent No. 3 at the time 
of the commission of the alleged offence; and accordingly 
trespassed into the home of the Complainant. Additionally, 
the High Court observed that the standard to be adopted by 
the Trial Court at the stage of invoking its’ powers under 
Section 319 CrPC would be a prima facie satisfaction that 
that the accused person has committed the alleged offence. 
Accordingly, in view of the aforesaid, the High Court (i) 
allowed the criminal revision petition; (ii) set aside the 
Underlying Order; and (ii) directed the Trial Court to 
implead the Appellants as Accused No. 2 and Accused No. 

SLP (Crl.) No.8696 of 2021 

3 respectively, in the CC No. 7243 of 2018 before the Trial 
Court (the “Underlying Proceedings”). 
 
4. 
Mr. S. Nagamuthu, learned senior counsel appearing on 
behalf of the Appellants has submitted before us that the High 
Court has exercised jurisdiction under Section 319 of the CrPC 
and erroneously reversed the Trial Court Order without 
appreciating (i) that the allegation qua the Appellants are vague 
and omnibus; (ii) that there is no evidence on record to suggest 
the involvement of the Appellants in the alleged offence; and (iii) 
the dicta laid down by this Court in Hardeep Singh (Supra). 
5. 
On the other hand, the learned counsel(s) appearing on 
behalf of the Respondent(s) have vehemently opposed the 
aforesaid contention; and submitted that the High Court has 
rightly appreciated the allegations disclosed in the underlying 
complaint, the statement(s) recorded under Section 161 CrPC 
and the examination-in-chief of the PWs to conclude that the 
evidence on record underscored the involvement of the 
Petitioners in the commission of a crime and accordingly, the 
Impugned Order could not be faulted on account of any 
perversity in view of our decision in Jitendra Nath Mishra v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh, (2023). 
6. 
We have heard the learned counsel(s) appearing on behalf 
of the parties and perused the materials on record. 

SLP (Crl.) No.8696 of 2021 

7. 
The principles of law governing the exercise of 
jurisdiction under Section 319 of the CrPC are well established. 
Notably, a constitution bench of this Court in Hardeep Singh 
(Supra) observed as under: 
“105. Power Under Section 319 Code of 
Criminal Procedure is a discretionary and an 
extraordinary power. It is to be exercised 
sparingly and only in those cases where the 
circumstances of the case so warrant. It is not to 
be exercised because the magistrate or the 
sessions judge is of the opinion that some other 
person may also be guilty of committing that 
offence. Only where strong and cogent evidence 
occurs against a person from the evidence laid 
before the court that such power should be 
exercised and not in a casual and cavalier 
manner. 
106. Thus we hold that though only a prima facie 
case is to be established from the evidence laid 
before the court, not necessarily tested on the 
anvil of cross-examination, it requires much 
strong evidence that near probability of his 
complicity. The test that has to be applied is one 
which is more than prima facie case as exercised 
at the time of framing of charge, but short of 
satisfaction to an extent that the evidence, if goes 
unrebutted, would lead to conviction. In the 
absence of such satisfaction, the court should 
refrain from exercising power Under Section 
319 Code of Criminal Procedure.” 

SLP (Crl.) No.8696 of 2021 

8. 
The aforesaid position was reiterated by this Court in 
Sagar v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr., (2022) 
wherein it was opined that: 
“9. The Constitution Bench has given a caution 
that power Under Section 319 of the Code is a 
discretionary and extraordinary power which 
should be exercised sparingly and only in those 
cases where the circumstances of the case so 
warrant and the crucial test as notice above has 
to be applied is one which is more that prima 
facie case as exercised at the time of framing of 
charge, but short of satisfaction to an extent that 
the evidence, if goes unrebutted, would lead to 
conviction….” 
 
9. 
In the present case, the High Court overturned the Trial 
Court Order; and accordingly impleaded the Appellants’ as 
accused person(s) in the Underlying Proceedings on the 
satisfaction of a prima-facie finding that the materials on record 
i.e., (i) vague allegations emanating from the underlying 
complaint; (ii) the Complainant’s statement under Section 161 of 
the CrPC; and (iii) the Complainant’s examination-in-chief, are 
sufficient to proceed against the Appellant(s). 
10. 
In our considered view, the approach adopted by the High 
Court was not in consonance with this Court’s opinion in 
Hardeep Singh (Supra). The High Court failed to appreciate that 
the discretionary powers under Section 319 of the CrPC ought to 
have been used sparingly where circumstances of the case so 

SLP (Crl.) No.8696 of 2021 

warrant. In the present case, the Trial Court Order was well 
reasoned and did not suffer from any perversity. Moreover, the 
materials on record could not be said to have satisfied the 
threshold envisaged under Hardeep Singh (Supra) i.e., more 
than a prima facie case, as exercised at the time of framing of 
charge but short of evidence that if left unrebutted would lead to 
conviction. 
11. 
Consequently, this appeal stands allowed and the 
Impugned Order is set aside. Pending application(s), if any, stand 
disposed of. 

……………………………………J. 
 [VIKRAM NATH] 

……………………………………J. 
 [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY 16, 2024