IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Dr. Mrs. Suman V. Jain 

…..Appellant 
 
Versus 
 
Marwadi Sammelan through its 

 …..Respondents 
Secretary and Others. 
 
JUDGMENT 
J.K. Maheshwari J. 
1. 
The instant appeal arises out of the judgment dated 
04.07.2008, passed by the Division Bench of the ‘High Court of 
Judicature at Bombay’ in Appeal No. 63 of 2008, whereby the 
Division Bench dismissed the appeal preferred by the appellant 
and confirmed the order dated 08.08.2006 passed by learned 
Single Judge in. The said writ 
petition was filed by the appellant being aggrieved by an order 
dated 30.04.2004 passed by the ‘Mumbai University and College 
Tribunal, Mumbai’ (hereinafter referred to as “College Tribunal”) 
in ‘’. Before the College Tribunal, the 
appellant filed an appeal to quash the order dated 10.09.2003 
passed by respondent No. 1 “Marwadi Sammelan Trust” 

(hereinafter referred to as “Trust”) rejecting her request for 
withdrawal of resignation vide letter dated 09.09.2003. As such, 
this appeal is the orders passed by the three fora 
before whom the challenge was made by the appellant to the 
rejection of withdrawal of her prospective resignation, prior to the 
effective date, and the rejection of her prayer for rejoining the 
duties. 
FINDINGS OF THE COLLEGE TRIBUNAL 
2. 
Assailing the rejection of request for withdrawal of the 
prospective resignation prior to the effective date, appellant 
preferred an Appeal No. 51 of 2003 before the College Tribunal. 
The College Tribunal vide judgment dated 30.04.2004 was of the 
opinion that since it was not an order of dismissal, removal or 
termination of service, therefore, the appeal was not maintainable 
under Section 59(1) of the Maharashtra Universities Act, 1994 
(hereinafter referred to as “1994 Act”) and on such, the question 
of limitation under Section 59(2) does not arise. The College 
Tribunal having found that the appeal is not maintainable, even 
delved into the question of withdrawal of the prospective 
resignation before the effective date on merits. After appreciating 
the facts, it was held in law that the prospective resignation can 

be withdrawn before the expiry of the intended date. However, on 
facts, it was held that there was an implied understanding between 
the parties’ prohibiting withdrawal of resignation. Hence, 
according to the College Tribunal, the present case fell within the 
exception in the judgment of the House of Lords in the case of “The 
Rev. Oswald Joseph Reichel Vs. The Right Rev. John Fielder 
(1889), House of Lords, XIV, 249”, and hence, the College 
Tribunal dismissed the appeal. 
FINDINGS RECORDED BY THE LEARNED SINGLE JUDGE 
3. 
The said judgment was challenged by filing a before the Bombay High Court. Learned Single Judge 
considered the question as to whether a right to withdraw the 
prospective resignation can be given up or abandoned? While 
considering the same, learned Single Judge relied upon the 
judgment of Rev. Oswald (supra) and after quoting the same, 
observed that the right to withdraw the prospective resignation is 
capable of being given up or waived off by the person who holds 
that right. Later, the Court referred to the judgment on the 
principle of ‘estoppel’ and ‘waiver’ and in view of the letters dated 
28.03.2003, 08.04.2003 and looking to the conduct of the 
appellant held that the findings recorded by the tribunal on merits 

did not warrant any interference. Learned Single Judge failed to 
appreciate the aspect about the Tribunal having once found the 
appeal as not maintainable, as to how far it was justified in 
confirming the findings and examining the issue on merits. 
FINDINGS OF THE DIVISION BENCH OF HIGH COURT 
4. 
On challenge, the Division Bench confirmed those findings. 
In para 12 of the judgment, it was held that in normal 
circumstances, it was open for the appellant to withdraw her 
resignation before it came into effect, subject to a contract to the 
contrary. The Division Bench then proceeded to consider the issue 
as to whether the Tribunal committed any error in considering the 
factual aspect of the matter. The Division Bench considered the 
correspondence made from the very inception, i.e., letters dated 
18.02.2003, 25.03.2003, 31.03.2003 and 11.8.2003 written by the 
appellant and letters dated 25.03.2003, 28.03.2003 and 
08.04.2003 written by the management and observed that the 
acceptance of withdrawal of resignation was not objected for quite 
some time and that it reflected an understanding that the 
resignation was irrevocable, final and binding between the parties. 
Relying upon the judgment rendered in the case of Rev. Oswald 
(supra) and also in the case of “Century Spinning and 

Manufacturing Company Limited and Another Vs. The 
Ulhasnagar Municipal Council and Another, AIR 1971 SC 
1021” and “Union of India and Others Vs. M/s. Anglo Afghan 
Agencies Limited, AIR 1968 SC 718” on the issue of estoppel, 
the findings recorded by the College Tribunal and the learned 
Single Judge of the High Court were affirmed. 
ARGUMENTS RAISED 
5. 
Learned counsel for the appellant placed reliance upon the 
judgment of “Union of India and Others Vs. Gopal Chand Misra 
and Others, (1978) ” to contend that the decision of 
Rev. Oswald (supra) has been considered and distinguished in 
the said case. It is submitted that in the absence of any contrary 
provision governing the employment, prospective resignation given 
by an employee can be withdrawn at any time before it becomes 
effective. Reliance has further been placed on the judgments of 
“Srikantha S.M. Vs. Bharath Earth Movers Limited, (2005) ”; Balram Gupta Vs. Union of India and Another, 
1987 (Supp) SCC 228; “Air India Express Limited and Others 
Vs. Captain Gurdarshan Kaur Sandhu, (2019) ” 
and “New Victoria Mills and Others Vs. Shrikant Arya, (2021) 
”. It is pointed out that on filing of an appeal before 

the Tribunal, there was a stay in favour of the appellant till the 
disposal of the said appeal, i.e., 30.04.2004. On disposal of the 
appeal by the College Tribunal and during the pendency of the 
proceedings before the High Court, she secured another job as 
Principal at M.M.P. Shah College and after joining on 01.10.2007, 
she worked till the age of superannuation, i.e., till 31.10.2015. It 
is urged that the period from the date of acceptance of the 
resignation till the joining in the new college may be directed to be 
regularized on reinstatement, as otherwise, it may cause serious 
prejudice to the appellant in the matter of payment of pension. It 
is stated that, in the instant case, there was no written contract or 
any contrary Rule governing the service of appellant, hence, it is 
contended that she was entitled to withdraw the prospective 
resignation. Learned Counsel contested the finding of implied 
contract after referring to the correspondence between the 
appellant and the management. According to the learned counsel, 
the said finding was recorded without appreciating the contents of 
the letter in their correct perspective. The College Tribunal, learned 
Single Judge and the Division Bench, according to learned counsel 
have relied upon the case of Rev. Oswald (supra) which was a 
judgment based on the deed of resignation executed before the 
witnesses. Therefore, the ratio of the said judgment is not 

applicable in the facts of this case and the findings as recorded are 
not in conformity with the law. 
6., learned counsel for the Trust vehemently opposed 
the stand taken by the appellant and argued in support of the 
reasonings and findings of the impugned judgment. It is contended 
that the present case is not a case of withdrawal of resignation 
from a future effective date, rather it is a case where, by mutual 
understanding resignation was accepted by the management and 
the controversy was put to rest. Learned counsel contends that in 
fact both parties have mutually agreed and the controversy was 
put at rest by accepting the resignation. Further, the doctrine of 
“locus poenitentiae” or the opportunity for withdrawal of 
resignation by change of mind is of no help to the appellant 
because the letter dated 08.04.2003 was not objected for quite 
some time. According to the learned counsel, from the 
correspondence between the appellant and the respondent it is 
clear that the management intended to initiate departmental 
inquiry and to avoid that inquiry, appellant submitted her 
resignation from the prospective date, which was accepted as 
irrevocable, final and binding. Thus, the findings recorded by the 
College Tribunal, learned Single Judge and the Division Bench 

against the appellant according to learned counsel warrants no 
interference. In support of the contentions, reliance has been 
placed on “BSES Yamuna Power Limited Vs. Ghanshyam 
Chand Sharma and Others, (2020) ”, “B.L. 
Shreedhar and Others Vs. K.N. Munireddy and Others, (2003) 
”, Air India Express Limited (supra), Gopal Chand 
Misra (supra), Balram Gupta (supra) and The Rev. Oswald 
(supra) and it has been submitted that this appeal deserves to be 
dismissed. 
7. 
Learned counsel for the Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 submits 
that the College was run by the Trust affiliated by “Shreemati 
Nathibhai Damodar Thackersey Women’s University” (hereinafter 
referred to as “SNDT University”). As per Clause 8(3)(d) of SNDT 
Women’s University Statute, the Governing Body of the 
management is empowered to accept the resignation on giving six 
months’ notice or payment of salary and the government has no 
role to play in refusal or acceptance of the resignation. However, 
in the facts of the case, once the resignation has been accepted by 
the Governing Body, the findings as recorded by the Tribunal and 
High Court did not warrant any interference. 

8. 
In view of the findings recorded by the three fora, and the 
arguments advanced by learned counsels for the parties in the 
facts of this case, the following questions arise for determination 
before this Court – 
A. Whether in the facts of the case, withdrawal of 
resignation dated 25.03.2003 submitted by the 
appellant prior to the effective date, i.e., 
24.09.2003 ought to have been permitted? 
B. Whether in the facts of the case, letter of the 
Management dated 08.04.2003 accepting the 
resignation was final, binding and irrevocable; 
and the rejection of the request for withdrawal of 
such resignation was in accordance with law? 
C. Whether in the facts of the case, what relief could 
be granted to the Appellant? 
DISCUSSION ON QUESTIONS (A) AND (B) 
9. 
For the sake of convenience and since the discussion on the 
facts and legal issues are common, questions (A) and (B) are taken 
up together and dealt with simultaneously. On perusal of the 
findings as recorded by the three fora, it is spelt out that relying 

upon the judgment of the House of Lords in the case of Rev. 
Oswald (supra), appeal, writ petition and the further appeal to 
Division Bench have been dismissed. Therefore, we first need to 
analyze in detail the said judgment. In the said case, the 
controversy arose from the conduct of the ‘Vicar’ who was informed 
by the Bishop that he must either submit to an inquiry or cease to 
hold his benefice. On such proposal being made by the Bishop, the 
Vicar executed an unconditional deed of resignation before the 
witnesses and sent it to the Bishop’s Secretary on which the 
Bishop postponed the formal acceptance of Vicar’s resignation 
until first of October. However, on tenth of June, the Vicar by 
another document revoked the earlier deed of resignation and 
communicated the same to the Bishop’s Secretary on sixteenth of 
July. The Bishop in spite of the revocation by Vicar, signed the 
document and accepted the resignation from the first of October 
and declared the vicarage void. Aggrieved by the same, the Vicar 
brought an action against the Bishop and others seeking a 
declaration that he was a Vicar and the acceptance of the 
resignation by the Bishop was void. He also sought an injunction 
to restrain the defendants from treating the benefice as vacant. 
The matter reached the House of Lords in appeal, which affirmed 
the decision of the Court of Appeal and held that the resignation 

was voluntary, absolute, validly executed and irrevocable. Hence, 
the action brought by the Vicar was not successful. 
10. The judgment of Rev. Oswald (supra) was placed before the 
Constitution Bench of this Court for consideration in the case of 
Gopal Chandra Misra (supra) and in para 69, it was 
distinguished on facts and observed as thus – 
“69. 
Reichal is no authority for the proposition that an 
unconditional prospective resignation, without 
more, normally becomes absolute and operative 
the moment it is conveyed to the appropriate 
authority. The special feature of the case was that 
Reichal had, of his own free will, entered into a 
“perfectly binding agreement” with the Bishop, 
according to which, the Bishop had agreed to 
abstain from commencing an inquiry into the 
serious charges against Reichal if the latter 
tendered his resignation. In pursuance of that 
lawful agreement, Reichal tendered his resignation 
and did all to complete it, and the Bishop also at 
the 
other 
end, 
abstained 
from 
instituting 
proceedings against him in the Ecclesiastical 
Court. The agreement was thus not a nudum 
pactum but one for good consideration and had 
been acted upon and “consummated before the 
supposed withdrawal of the resignation of Mr. 
Reichal”, who could not, therefore, be permitted “to 
upset the agreement” at his unilateral option and 
withdraw the resignation “without the consent of 
the Bishop”. It was in view of these exceptional 
circumstances, Their Lordships held Reichal’s 
resignation had become absolute and irrevocable. 
No extraordinary circumstances of this nature exist 
in the instant case.” 

11. The Constitution Bench in the said case laid down the 
principles with regard to prospective or potential resignation and 
held that such resignation can be withdrawn at any time before it 
becomes effective. The relevant paras 28, 29, and 41 are 
reproduced, for ready reference, as thus – 
“28. 
The substantive body of this letter (which has 
been extracted in full in a foregoing part of this 
judgment) is comprised of three sentences only. 
In the first sentence, it is stated: “I beg to resign 
my office as Judge, High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad.” Had this sentence stood alone, or 
been the only content of this letter, it would 
operate as a complete resignation in praesenti, 
involving immediate relinquishment of the office 
and termination of his tenure as Judge. But this 
is not so. The first sentence is immediately 
followed by two more, which read: “I will be on 
leave till July 31, 1977. My resignation shall be 
effective on August 1, 1977.” The first sentence 
cannot be divorced from the context of the other 
two sentences and construed in isolation. It has 
to be read along with the succeeding two which 
qualify it. Construed as a whole according to its 
tenor, the letter dated May 7, 1977, is merely an 
intimation or notice of the writer's intention to 
resign his office as Judge, on a future date viz. 
August 1, 1977. For the sake of convenience, we 
might call this communication as a prospective 
or potential resignation, but before the arrival of 
the indicated future date it was certainly not a 
complete and operative resignation because, by 
itself, it did not and could not, sever the writer 
from the office of the Judge, or terminate his 
tenure as such. 
29. 
Thus tested, sending of the letter dated May 7, 
1977 by Appellant 2 to the President, did not 
constitute a complete and operative resignation 

within the contemplation of the expression 
“resigns his office” used in proviso (a) to Article 
217(1). Before the arrival of the indicated future 
date (August 1, 1977), it was wholly inert, 
inoperative and ineffective, and could not, and 
in fact did not, cause any jural effect. xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
41. 
The general principle that emerges from the 
foregoing conspectus, is that in the absence of 
anything to the contrary in the provisions 
governing the terms and conditions of the 
office/post, an intimation in writing sent to the 
competent authority by the incumbent, of his 
intention or proposal to resign his office/post 
from a future specified date can be withdrawn 
by him at any time before it becomes effective, 
i.e. before it effects termination of the tenure of 
the office/post or the employment. 
 
 ” 
12. As per the law laid down above by the Constitution Bench, 
the prospective or intending resignation would be complete and 
operative on arrival of the indicated future date in the absence of 
anything contrary in the terms and conditions of the employment 
or contract. The intimation sent in writing to the Competent 
Authority by the incumbent employee of his intention or proposal 
to resign from his office/post from a future specified date can be 
withdrawn at any time before it becomes effective. 
13. Now to appreciate the findings recorded by three fora, the 
facts of the present case are required to be discussed with 
precision. In the case at hand, the appellant was appointed as 

Principal on 01.07.1992 in “B.M. Ruia Girls and G.D. Birla Girls 
College” (hereinafter referred to as “College”), affiliated to SNDT 
University and run by respondent No. 1 – Trust. Her appointment 
was permanent, and she was discharging the duties for a decade 
long period. In the month of December 1998, the management of 
the Trust was changed, and the functioning of the school was 
taken over by the new management. In 2001, one Mr. Biani was 
appointed as Convenor and it is alleged that there was interference 
in the day-to-day functions and passing of lewd and inappropriate 
comments. Distressed by it, the appellant along with her 
colleagues wrote a letter dated 18.02.2003 containing some 
allegations and raised a protest. It should also be noticed that one 
of the Trustees sent a letter to appellant on 05.03.2003, stating 
that there are certain allegations of financial irregularities and 
indiscipline against her, and she was called upon to submit her 
justification. Appellant did not submit any response to the said 
letter, and vide letter dated 04.03.2003, withdrew her protest 
letter. On 25.03.2003, due to serious health issues, the appellant 
submitted an intimation of resignation to the President of Trust 
and informed that she wishes to resign from future date, i.e., 
24.09.2003. The President on the same date informed the 
appellant that the Management Committee has decided to conduct 

a detailed enquiry by a “Fact Finding Committee”. Appellant was 
directed to proceed on leave for two months and hand over the 
charge to one Mrs. Purvi Shah who shall work as “officiating 
Principal” with immediate effect. Shortly within three days, i.e., on 
28.03.2003, the President informed the appellant to submit a fresh 
unconditional resignation. For ready reference, the relevant 
portion of the said letter is reproduced as under – 
“ 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
If you want to resign unconditionally of your own volition 
with immediate effect and settle the controversy on this 
footing, the management can perhaps consider your request 
to drop the enquiry subject to affirmation of managing 
committee. Your resignation with effect from 24.09.2003 is 
not acceptable to the management. Six months’ notice can 
be waived on both sides in view of the present situation is 
not mandatory. 
If you 
are not 
willing 
to resign 
unconditionally with immediate effect, it is your choice. If 
you want to resign with immediate effect, the management 
may perhaps be persuaded to drop the proposed enquiry in 
larger interest of the institute. 
If no reply is received from you within 48 hours from 
receipt of this letter, the management shall take appropriate 
action in the matter as deemed fit. xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 ” 
14. The appellant did not submit a fresh resignation and 
submitted her response to the said letter on 31.03.2003 and 
requested the management to consider her prayer to accept 
resignation from prospective date, i.e., 24.09.2003. The relevant 

portion of the letter specifying the reasons are reproduced as under 
– 
“ 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
(1) As per Government statute, I am supposed to give a 6 
months’ notice before resigning from the post of 
Principal. I would like to adhere to this government rule. 
 
(Ref. Dated ) 
(2) I have a total of approximately 7 months’ leave to my 
credit which I would like to avail of before resigning. 
Since I shall be receiving my remuneration from the 
government, there will be no financial burden on the 
management. 
(3) Since I am already on long leave on medical advice, I 
shall not be in a position to attend college till I am 
medically fit to do so in view of the very serious nature 
of my brain and spine problems. 
In view of the above, I request you to accept my resignation 
valid from 24.09.2003. I am hopeful that the management 
will take a sympathetic view of my request. xxx 
 xxx 
 xxx 
 xxx 
 ” 
15. Thereafter, the management vide letter dated 08.04.2003 
accepted the resignation in the following terms and replied to the 
appellant. The necessary relevant portion is reproduced as thus – 
“ 
xxx 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
I acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 31.03.2003. 
The management hereby accepts your unconditional 
resignation with 6 months’ notice, i.e., with effect from 24th 
September 2003 as final, binding and irrevocable. You shall 
be on leave till 23.09.2003. As suggested by you, the entire 
leave period shall be debited to your leave account. 

In view of the above, the allegations and averments on 
either side need not be dealt with. The same are not 
admitted. The unpleasant dispute and the controversy is 
thus closed on the above footing. 
We have already appointed officiating Principal. We shall 
proceed with the appointment of a regular Principal with 
effect from 24.09.2003. The process shall be started soon. 
During this period, you shall not represent the college before 
any authority or elsewhere. xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 

” 
16. From the above correspondence, it appears that the 
management wanted unconditional resignation from appellant and 
to waive the notice period mutually, they further proposed to 
consider dropping the enquiry which was not accepted by the 
appellant. The appellant did not submit any unconditional 
resignation and reiterated to consider her resignation dated 
25.03.2003 with effect from the future date i.e., 24.09.2003 as 
prayed vide response dated 31.03.2003. The management on its 
own accepted the said resignation from future date but unilaterally 
mentioned as follows: – “hereby accept your unconditional 
resignation with six months’ notice w.e.f. 24.09.2003 as final, 
binding and irrevocable.” 
17. The stand taken by the respondent that the contents of letter 
dated 11.08.2003 written by appellant is a sort of an implied 
understanding. Hence, the contents of the letter is required to be 

reproduced to appreciate the findings as recorded in this regard by 
the three fora which reads as thus – 
“ 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
This is to point out to you that some office bearers of the 
managing committee have on certain occasions (meetings, 
functions etc.) including a program held in the college on 
09.09.2003 made unsubstantiated, unproved, incorrect and 
unauthentic allegations against me publicly. 
This is contrary to your own letter dated 08.04.2003 in which it 
has been mentioned that “The allegations and averments on 
either side need not be dealt with. The same are not admitted. 
The unpleasant dispute and controversy is thus closed on the 
above footing. 
Making false allegations publicly amounts to character 
assassination and defamation. 
I therefore request you to ensure that henceforth members of the 
managing committee do not publicly or otherwise make false 
defamatory statements against me. xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
 ” 
On perusal of the same, the reference to the letter dated 
08.04.2003 made in the said letter of 11.08.2003, referring to the 
contents, particularly the lines “The allegations and averments on 
either side need not be dealt with. The same are not admitted. The 
unpleasant dispute and controversy thus end on above footing”, 
cannot be said to be an acknowledgment of unconditional 
resignation. The consent must be prior to the date of accepting the 
resignation. The contents of letter dated 11.08.2003 do not 
indicate that it was an acceptance of the resignation w.e.f. 

24.09.2003 as final, binding and irrevocable. On the basis of the 
contents of the letter dated 11.08.2003, we cannot countenance 
the findings as recorded in impugned order, maintaining the order 
of rejection of her request to withdraw the potential resignation 
with future date. 
18. We have perused the above correspondence in detail. It does 
not appear to us that the resignation was submitted by the 
appellant to foreclose the commencement of any enquiry against 
her. Nothing has been placed on record to demonstrate that the 
resignation was submitted in lieu of the waiving of any 
departmental enquiry. Any correspondence of the appellant 
showing prior consent has also not been placed before us. The 
College Tribunal and the High Court recorded the finding relying 
on the letter dated 08.04.2003 attributing an acknowledgment by 
the appellant vide letter dated 11.08.2003. The Courts below have 
treated it to be an implied understanding or contract because the 
letter of 08.04.2003 was not replied to for quite some time. 
19. On perusal of the contents of the resignation letter dated 
25.03.2003, it is clear that the appellant requested to accept her 
resignation from future date w.e.f. 24.09.2003 due to medical 
reasons. Vide letter dated 28.03.2003, the management demanded 

unconditional resignation of appellant waiving the 6 months’ 
notice period by mutual consent, which was not agreed and a reply 
was submitted on 31.03.2003 justifying the resignation from a 
prospective date. Thereafter, vide letter dated 08.04.2003 the 
resignation dated 25.03.2003 was accepted from a prospective 
date ‘unilaterally’ using the words “final, binding and irrevocable.” 
20. The judgment in Rev. Oswald (supra) was relied upon in the 
impugned judgment to say that facts of the instant case are 
similar. In our view, the case of Rev. Oswald (supra) was a case 
in which unconditional deed of resignation was executed before the 
witnesses and sent to the Bishop’s Secretary with an 
understanding of postponing the formal acceptance until the 
future date. The resignation deed so executed before witnesses was 
unilaterally withdrawn by the Vicar, therefore, the House of Lords 
held that the resignation was voluntary, absolute, validly executed 
and irrevocable. 
21. In the case at hand, the unconditional resignation waiving 
the requirement of six months’ notice as demanded by the Trust 
was not submitted by the appellant. Without prior consent, the 
acceptance of resignation vide letter dated 08.04.2003 using the 
words final, binding and irrevocable was unilateral. In the 

subsequent letter dated 11.08.2003, acceptance of the words 
“final, binding and irrevocable” was not expressly made. In fact, it 
was in the context of the wordings of the letter dated 08.04.2003 
extracted hereinabove. The averments in the letter dated 
11.08.2003, which is after date of acceptance of resignation also 
does not disclose any implied agreement to the contents of the 
letter dated 08.04.2003. From above discussion, in our view, we 
cannot accept the said line of reasonings recorded by three fora. 
Therefore, in our view, the judgment of Rev. Oswald (supra) does 
not apply to the facts of the present case. Thus, dismissal of the 
petition of appellant on similarity of facts with the case of Rev. 
Oswald (supra) is not correct and such findings by three for are 
unsustainable. In our view, on the facts of this case, the ratio of 
the judgment of the Constitutional Bench in the case of Gopal 
Chandra Misra (supra) applies in full force. 
22. Our said view is further fortified by the judgment of this Court 
in Balram Gupta (supra), wherein reiterating the view taken in 
“Raj Kumar Vs. Union of India, AIR 1969 SC 180”, this Court 
held that till the resignation is accepted by the Competent 
Authority in consonance with the rules governing the acceptance, 
the employee has the ‘locus poenitentiae’, but not thereafter. On 

the facts referred hereinabove of the present case, the withdrawal 
of the resignation was made two weeks prior to the effective date, 
i.e., on 09.09.2003, however, the appellant was having locus to 
withdraw the resignation prior to the effective date of resignation. 
23. In a later judgment of this Court in Srikantha S.M. (supra), 
the principle of “vinculum juris” has been propounded, paras 26 
and 27 whereof, are relevant therefore, reproduced as thus – 
 “26. 
On the basis of the above decisions, in our opinion, 
the learned counsel for the appellant is right in 
contending that though the respondent Company 
had accepted the resignation of the appellant on 4-
1-1993 and was ordered to be relieved on that day, 
by a subsequent letter, he was granted casual 
leave from 5-1-1993 to 13-1-1993. Moreover, he 
was informed that he would be relieved after office 
hours on 15-1-1993. The vinculum juris [[Ed.: 
vinculum (per OED): A bond of union, a tie. Usually 
figurative, and juris (per Black's): Of Law; Of 
Right]], therefore, in our considered opinion, 
continued and the relationship of employer and 
employee did not come to an end on 4-1-1993. The 
relieving order and payment of salary also make it 
abundantly clear that he was continued in service 
of the Company up to 15-1-1993. 
27. 
In the affidavit-in-reply filed by the Company, it 
was stated that resignation of the appellant was 
accepted immediately, and he was to be relieved 
on 4-1-1993. It was because of the request of the 
appellant that he was continued up to 15-1-1993. 
In the affidavit-in-rejoinder, the appellant had 
stated that he reported for duty on 15-1-1993 and 
also worked on that day. At about 12.00 noon, a 
letter was issued to him stating therein that he 
would be relieved at the close of the day. A cheque 

of Rs 13,511 was paid to him at 17.30 hrs. The 
appellant had asserted that he had not received 
terminal benefits such as gratuity, provident fund, 
etc. It is thus proved that up to 15-1-1993, the 
appellant remained in service. If it is so, in our 
opinion, as per settled law, the appellant could 
have withdrawn his resignation before that date. 
It is an admitted fact that a letter of withdrawal of 
resignation was submitted by the appellant on 8-
1-1993. It was, therefore, on the Company to give 
effect to the said letter. By not doing so, the 
Company has acted contrary to the law and 
against the decisions of this Court and hence, the 
action of the Company deserves to be quashed and 
set aside. The High Court, in our opinion, was in 
error in not granting relief to the appellant. 
Accordingly, the action of the Company as upheld 
by the High Court is hereby set aside. 
 ” 
24. In the above case, on submitting the resignation, appellant 
was relieved on 04.01.1993 granting leave from 05.01.1993 till 
13.01.1993. The effective date of resignation was prospective, i.e., 
15.01.1993. The appellant therein withdrew the resignation before 
the effective date on 08.01.1993. The Company refused to accept 
such withdrawal of resignation. In the said factual context, this 
Court set-aside such an action of refusal to accept the withdrawal 
of resignation and explained the principle of “vinculum juris” 
holding that the relationship of employer and employee did not 
come to an end on the date of sending an intimation of withdrawal 
of resignation and it would continue till the actual date of 
acceptance. In the said case, after quashing the action of the 

company, this Court held that it would be unjust to deny 
assignment of further work to the employee by the employer and 
the employee was held entitled for salary and other consequential 
benefits. In our view, the facts of the present case are broadly 
similar to the said case. 
25. Learned counsel for Trust has placed reliance on the 
judgment of this Court in BSES Yamuna Power Limited (supra), 
however, the facts of the said case are different. In the said case, 
the resignation was treated as request for voluntary retirement 
however, the High Court counting the past service of petitioner 
held him entitled for pensionary benefits. The petitioner in the said 
case was regularized on 22.12.1971. He submitted resignation on 
07.07.1990, which was accepted. The acceptance of the said 
resignation would have resulted in forfeiture of past service. The 
High Court has treated it as request for voluntary retirement and 
granted pensionary benefits. Dealing with the said issue, this 
Court after referring the provision of Rule 26 of Central Civil 
Services Pension Rules, 1972, clarified that the resignation would 
have entailed forfeiture of service, and such request cannot be 
treated as request for voluntary retirement. With the said 
discussion, the judgment of the High Court was set-aside. In our 

view, looking to the facts of this case, the said judgment is of no 
help to the respondent. 
26. The judgment of Captain Gurdarshan Kaur Sandhu 
(supra) has been relied upon by the counsels for both sides, 
wherein this Court in paragraph 12 reaffirmed the law laid down 
in Gopal Chandra Misra (supra) and Balram Gupta (supra). The 
relevant para of the said judgment is reproduced as thus – 
“12. 
It is thus well settled that normally, until the 
resignation becomes effective, it is open to an 
employee to withdraw his resignation. When 
would the resignation become effective may 
depend upon the governing service regulations 
and/or the terms and conditions of the office/post. 
As stated in paras 41 and 50 in Gopal Chandra 
Misra [Union of India v. Gopal Chandra Misra, 
(1978): 1978 SCC (L&S) 303], “in the 
absence of anything to the contrary in the 
provisions governing the terms and conditions of 
the office/post” or “in the absence of a legal 
contractual or constitutional bar, a ‘prospective 
resignation’ can be withdrawn at any time before 
it becomes effective”. Further, as laid down in 
Balram Gupta [Balram Gupta v. Union of India, 
1987 Supp SCC 228: 1988 SCC (L&S) 126], “If, 
however, 
the 
administration 
had 
made 
arrangements acting on his resignation or letter of 
retirement to make other employee available for his 
job, that would be another matter. 
 
 ” 
In the said case, this Court carved out an exception on the basis 
of a legal, contractual or a constitutional bar for withdrawal of 
prospective resignation as referred in paragraph 50 of Gopal 

Chandra Misra (supra). This Court referring to the “Civil Aviation 
Requirements, 2009” (hereinafter referred to as “CAR”) made a 
distinction that the public interest would prevail over the interest 
of an employee’s own interest. Interpreting Clause 3.7 of the CAR, 
the Court observed that without appointment of pilots for 
operating the flights, the public interest would be adversely 
affected. Thus, it was said that the guiding idea of the eventuality 
specified therein were the parameters required to be taken by 
employer in public interest and, the interest of an employee cannot 
be given prominence over the public interest. In our view, the said 
judgment has no application in the facts of instant case wherein 
the charge of Principal was given on the date of intimation of 
resignation itself, to one Mrs. Purvi Shah who was appointed as 
“officiating Principal” with immediate effect, directing the appellant 
to proceed on leave. 
27. In view of the foregoing discussion, we answer question (A) 
and (B) in favour of appellant and hold that letter dated 25.03.2003 
is an intimation of resignation from a prospective date i.e., 
24.09.2003, which could have been withdrawn by the appellant 
prior to the effective date. There is no Rule or Regulation brought 
to our notice which restrains such withdrawal. There was no prior 

consent to the letter dated 08.04.2003 for accepting resignation 
w.e.f. 24.09.2003 as ‘final, binding and irrevocable’ which is on 
record and therefore, by using such words, the acceptance of 
resignation was unilateral. As discussed, there was no implied 
contract and understanding with prior consent. Therefore, the 
withdrawal of such resignation by appellant prior to the effective 
date is permissible as per the law laid down in the case of Gopal 
Chandra Misra (supra) and Srikantha S.M. (supra). Learned 
counsel for the parties have also relied on some more case law, but 
there is no need to burden our judgment as the question of law as 
decided in those cases is one and the same. It is further required 
to be observed that in view of the findings recorded hereinabove, 
we are not examining the question about how far the Tribunal was 
justified in dealing with the issue on merits. In view of the above 
discussion, both the questions are answered in favour of appellant. 
ANALYSIS OF QUESTION (C) 
28. In the absence of anything contrary in the provisions 
governing the terms and conditions of the office or post and in the 
absence of any legal contractual or constitutional bar, a 
prospective resignation can be withdrawn at any time before it 
becomes effective as discussed above. The Trust had made 

arrangements giving officiating charge to the Principal in the place 
of appellant and as such there was no prejudice to public interest. 
29. In the peculiar facts of this case, it is clear that the effective 
date of resignation was 24.09.2003. The College Tribunal granted 
stay on 20.09.2003 which remained operative till the final 
judgment was delivered by the College Tribunal on 30.04.2004. On 
filing of the writ petition and appeal against the order of Writ Court, 
it was decided against the appellant by the impugned judgment. 
During pendency of litigation before the High Court, the appellant 
got selected on the post of Principal in M.P.P. Shah College and on 
joining duty on 01.10.2007 worked till attaining the age of 
superannuation i.e., 31.10.2015. Thus, because of the setting-
aside of the orders impugned and due to the superannuation, she 
cannot now be allowed to join the duty in the respondent No. 1 
institution. Simultaneously, it would not be appropriate to give 
liberty to the Trust to initiate departmental action for the 
allegations as raised in the letter of Trustee dated 05.03.2003, 
especially after a lapse of more than 20 years, in particular when 
the appellant had already attained the age of superannuation in 
2015. Therefore, while deciding the questions (A) and (B) in favour 
of appellant, we deem it appropriate to direct the Trust to 

regularize the service period of the appellant from 24.09.2003 
(when they wrongly treated the appellant as having resigned) till 
the date of joining the duty at the new Institution as Principal on 
01.10.2007. In the facts of the case, the principle of ‘no work no 
pay’ would apply and the appellant would not be entitled to back-
wages and salary for such regularized period, as she has not 
worked with the Trust. Thus, it would suffice to observe that in 
view of her deemed continuance and in view of our findings 
hereinabove, the period from 24.09.2003 to 01.10.2007 would be 
regularized by the respondent and be counted as period spent on 
duty for all purposes including pension. 
30. In view of the above discussion, we direct that on the 
regularization of the period and treating the same as period spent 
on duty, the service tenure of the appellant, both in the institution 
run by Trust and in M.M.P. Shah College would be counted 
without any break in service. Since she would have then completed 
minimum 20 years’ service required for pension under the Rules, 
she would be entitled to her pension and other retiral benefits. The 
retiral and pensionary benefits should be calculated and paid 
accordingly including the arrears of pension. The said exercise be 
completed within a period of four months from the date of this 

judgment. On failure to pay retiral benefits/pension and arrears 
thereof within the time as specified, the appellant shall be entitled 
to interest @ 7% per annum. 
31. Accordingly, this appeal stands allowed in the above terms, 
and the orders passed by the College Tribunal and the High Court 
stand set-aside. Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand 
disposed of. No order as to costs. 
 
…………….…………J. 
(J.K. MAHESHWARI) 
 
………………………..J. 
(K.V. VISWANATHAN) 
New Delhi, 
20.02.2024