IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 1046 OF 2024
((CRL.) NO(S). 911 OF 2019)
JOSHINE ANTONY 
 
 …..APPELLANT(S) 
 VERSUS
SMT. ASIFA SULTANA & ORS.
 …..RESPONDENT(S)
 
JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.
Leave granted.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
2.
Heard the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant.
3.
The appellant, who is claiming to be Honorary Animal Welfare
Officer complained to the fifth respondent-Dr. Omkar Patil,
Assistant Director of the Veterinary Department about illegal
storage of a large quantity of meat of cow in a godown of the first
to third respondents.
4.
Initially, while registering the First Information Report, the
offences punishable under Sections 420 and 429 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 (‘the IPC’) were applied and later on, the provisions of
the Karnataka Prevention of Cow Slaughter and Cattle Preservation
Act, 1964 (for short ‘the 1964 Act’) and, in particular, Sections 4
and 5 thereof were added. The High Court in exercise of its

jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (for short ‘the CrPC’) has quashed the First Information
Report.
5.
The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant
submitted that this was a case where huge quantity of meat of cow
was found in the custody of the first to third respondents. He
pointed out that even before the investigation could proceed, that
the High Court has interjected. He submitted that there is
overwhelming prima facie evidence on record to show that the meat
found in the custody of the first to third respondents was a meat
of cow and, therefore, prima facie, the offences under Sections 4
and 5 of the 1964 Act were attracted.
6.
He also invited our attention to the various documents on
record including the panchnama drawn. He submitted that the packets
stored in the cold storage of the first to third respondents were
deliberately labelled as “Super Fresh Frozen Boneless Buffalo Meat”
and that is how Section 420 of the IPC was applied by the police.
He further submitted that the sample collected from the cold
storage of the first to third respondents was sent for DNA test,
which revealed that the meat was of cow. He would submit that in
this case, the fifth respondent-herein was duly authorized officer
under Section 10 of the 1964 Act and he had authority to enter any
premises and to inspect the said premises as he had a reason to
believe that the offence under the 1964 Act has been committed. He
submitted that the High Court has virtually conducted a mini trial.
We have also heard the learned counsel appearing for the respondent
Nos. 1 to 3.

CONSIDERATION
7.
The entire prosecution story is premised on the fact that the
fifth respondent, who was the Assistant Director of the Veterinary
Department, on information received from the appellant, entered the
factory premises of the first to third respondents and opened two
packets kept in ice and collected a sample of meat from the
packets. The sample was put in the thermocol box and packed by
putting ice around it. The seized sample was sent for analysis. The
panchnama to that effect is of 25.01.2018. Thus, the sample was
collected not by a police officer but by the fifth respondent, who
was the Assistant Director of the Veterinary Department. Assuming
that he was an authorized person, his powers were very limited
under Section 10 of the 1964 Act, which read thus: -
“10. Power to enter and inspect.- (1) For the
purposes of this Act, the competent authority or
any person authorised in this behalf by the
competent authority (hereinafter referred to as the
“authorised person”) shall have power to enter and
inspect any premises where the competent authority
or the authorised person has reason to believe that
an offence under this Act has been or is likely to
be committed.
(2) Every person in occupation of any such premises
shall allow the competent authority or the
authorised person such access to the premises as
may be necessary for the aforesaid purpose and
shall answer to the best of his knowledge and
belief any questions put to him by the competent
authority or by the authorised person.”
8.
Thus, the power was confined to enter and inspect. Under the
1964 Act, he had no power to seize any sample of meat. What is
interesting to note is that, on the same day, there was one more
panchnama drawn in presence of an Assistant Sub-Inspector. The said
panchnama records that the sample was already collected and has

been sent for testing to the expert. It also records that the meat
was stored in a cold storage, which was not functioning. Therefore,
the seizure of three rooms and meat packets was made. The police
officer did not collect any sample for sending it for analysis. 
9.
The crux of the matter is that the sample of the meat was
admittedly collected by the Assistant Director, who had no
authority in law to collect the sample. He did not collect the
sample after notice to the first to third respondents. Thus, the
act of collection of sample by the Assistant Director was
completely illegal. It is this sample which was sent for chemical
analysis. Thus, the entire case of the prosecution is based on
unauthorizedly and illegally collected sample of the meat.
Therefore, the High Court was right when it interfered by quashing
the First Information Report.
10.
For the aforesaid reasons, we find no error in the view taken
by the High Court and the appeal is, accordingly, dismissed. 
11. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…………………………………...J.
 [ABHAY S. OKA]
…………………………………...J.
 [UJJAL BHUYAN]