Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Kalinga ushal 

 ….Appellant 
 
Versus 
 
State of Karnataka By Police Inspector Hubli 
 
 ….Respondent 
 
JUDGMENT 
SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J. 
1. 
Master Hrithik, aged 2.5 years, lost his life on the fateful 
day of 03.11.2002 in Hubli, Karnataka. PW-1, his father and 
complainant in this case, filed a complaint and the allegation was 
levelled against the appellant/accused, who is the younger 
brother of PW-1. After a full-fledged trial, Trial Court acquitted 
the appellant from the charges levelled upon him. The High Court 
reversed the order of acquittal and convicted the appellant. The 
mystery of Hrithik’s death continues as the matter has landed 
before this Court in the form of the present appeal, which assails 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
the order dated 28.03.2011 passed by the High Court of 
Karnataka (Circuit Bench at Dharwad) in. 
FACTUAL MATRIX 
2. 
At the outset, we consider it apposite to note that there is 
considerable divergence between the parties (as well as between 
the decisions rendered by the Trial Court and the High Court) as 
regards the sequence of events and timelines involved in this 
case. To avoid any confusion or presumption, the facts delineated 
herein represent the version of the prosecution for the purpose of 
understanding the story. On 03.11.2002, at around 11 A.M., the 
son of PW-1 had gone out for playing and went missing. PW-1 
and other family members of the child searched for him in and 
around the locality. Upon finding no trace of the child till 
evening, a missing complaint was lodged at around 10 P.M. by 
PW-1 at PS Vidyanagar, Hubli, Karnataka. The complaint came 
to be registered as Crime No. 215/2002. 
3. 
Fast forward to 14.11.2002, the appellant (also the brother 
of PW-1) appeared at the house of PW-1 in a drunken state and 
started blabbering about the missing incident of Hrithik and about 
mishappening with the child. The encounter on 14.11.2002 
happened late at night and PW-1 did not pursue the same at that 
point of time. On the morning of 15.11.2002, PW-1 went to his 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
shop and returned around 12:30 P.M. At this point, PW-1, his 
mother and wife enquired about the child from the appellant and 
the appellant stated that he had murdered Hrithik and thrown his 
body in the well. Thereafter, PW-1 took the appellant to PS 
Vidyanagar for filing the complaint which led to the registration 
of the First Information Report (FIR) in this case. 
4. 
It is the case of the prosecution that on reaching the police 
station, the appellant confessed to the commission of crime as 
well as the act of throwing the child in the well. The voluntary 
statement of the accused, in the nature of extra judicial 
confession, was recorded by PW-16 (Investigating Officer/IO of 
the case) as Ex.P.21. At the instance of the appellant, PW-16 took 
PW-1, mother and wife of PW-1 and panchas in a police jeep to 
a place near the back side of Kamat Café. On reaching there, the 
appellant took PW-16, PW-1 and panchas near the well and told 
them that the dead body of the deceased was thrown in the said 
well. When they looked into the well, a dead body of a child was 
found floating there. The dead body was taken out and inquest 
panchnama was conducted. Thereafter, spot panchnama was 
prepared and the body was sent for post mortem. Thereafter, 
accused no. 2 and 3 were arrested and upon their disclosure and 
at their instance, jewelry articles exhibited as M.O.s 5 and 6 were 
recovered from PW-17, which were allegedly taken off from the 
body of the deceased child and were sold off to PW-17. 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
5. 
In this factual backdrop, PW-16 investigated the case and 
filed the chargesheet. Upon committal of the case to the Court of 
Sessions, charges were framed upon the three accused persons 
under Sections 201, 302, 363, 364 read with 34 of Indian Penal 
Code, 18601. Upon the culmination of trial, the Trial Court 
acquitted all the accused persons vide order dated 30.04.2004 
passed by Ld. ASJ-01, Dharwad (Hubli). 
6. 
While ordering acquittal of the accused persons, the Trial 
Court gave the following reasons: 
i. 
There is no eye witness to support the case of 
the prosecution and the case is entirely based on 
circumstantial evidence. ii. 
The prosecution case is built upon the extra-
judicial confession of the appellant and factum of 
recovery of the dead body from the well in 
consequence of the information disclosed by the 
appellant. iii. 
The credibility of an extra judicial confession 
depends upon the veracity of the witnesses before 
whom it is given and the circumstances in which it 
was given. The statements of PW-1 in the Court and 
in the complaint Ex.P1 are different. In the 
complaint, PW-1 had mentioned about the involved 
of co-accused persons, whereas his testimony in the 
Court was completely silent regarding the involved 
of other accused persons. iv. 
PW-1 stated that his wife and mother were 
also present when the confession was made by the 
 
1 Hereinafter referred as “IPC” 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
appellant. However, neither wife nor mother of PW-
1 was examined by the prosecution as a witness. v. 
PW-1 deposed that after the confession was 
made by the appellant, he took the appellant to the 
police station where he disclosed the involvement 
of accused no. 2 and 3. However, in the complaint 
Ex.P1 which was given by him at the police station, 
there is no mention of accused no. 3. The 
contradiction in this regard is material as, if the 
appellant had disclosed the involvement of accused 
no. 2 and 3 before going to the police station, there 
was no reason for PW-1 to skip the name of accused 
no. 3 from Ex.P1. vi. 
The Trial Court noted the multiplicity of 
versions by PW-1 and held that an extra judicial 
confession must be free from suspicion, which is 
not the case in the testimony of PW-1. vii. 
The Trial Court also noted the discrepancy 
regarding the arrest of the accused. PW-1 deposed 
that he took the appellant to the police station after 
his disclosure, whereas PW-16 deposed that after 
registering the complaint, he had arrested the 
appellant from his house. viii. No mention of the incident of utterance of 
certain words by the appellant on 14.11.2002 in the 
complaint given by PW-1 on the following day. ix. 
PW-1 took no steps in furtherance of the 
information supplied by PW-5 that he had seen the 
appellant taking away the child on 03.11.2002 or in 
furtherance of the information supplied by PW-7, 
who had informed PW-1 on 10.11.2002 that he had 
seen three people throwing something into the well. 
The conduct of PW-1 was not found to be natural. 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
x. 
PW-1 failed to explain the discrepancy in the 
clothes allegedly worn by the deceased and the 
clothes found on the body of the deceased. 
Moreover, PW-12 deposed that at the time of filing 
the complaint, he had enquired from PW-1 
regarding any ornaments on the child. PW-1 had 
replied in negative. xi. 
The theory of last seen was also rejected by 
the Trial Court and PWs in that regard - PW-5, PW-
6, PW-7 and PW-18 - were disbelieved. 
 
7. 
The decision of the Trial Court was assailed before the 
High Court by the State in appeal. The High Court analyzed the 
evidence on record and partially allowed the appeal by holding 
the appellant guilty for the commission of offences punishable 
under Sections 201, 302, 363, 364 of IPC. Notably, the High 
Court was in agreement with the conclusion of acquittal 
regarding accused no. 2 and 3. 
8. 
On a re-appreciation of evidence pitched against accused 
no. 2 and 3, the High Court agreed with the view of the Trial 
Court that the evidence was not trustworthy. The theory of last 
seen, as propounded to bring accused no. 2 and 3 within the ambit 
of criminality, was rejected. Similarly, the allegation of recovery 
of ornaments from PW-17 at the instance of the accused was also 
rejected. Since, there is no divergence of opinion with respect to 
accused no. 2 and 3, this Court is not required to delve further 
into the same. The High Court set aside the view of the Trial 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
Court regarding the rejection of the voluntary extra judicial 
confession of appellant and recovery of dead body of the 
deceased at his instance. The High Court went on to convict the 
appellant on the strength of the following reasons: 
i. 
The extra judicial confession of the appellant 
was a voluntary confession and there is no reason to 
doubt the same. ii. 
Information disclosed by the appellant led to 
the discovery of dead body of the deceased and 
minor discrepancies in the version of PW-1 are not 
material. iii. 
The Trial Court committed an error by not 
properly appreciating the evidence of PW-1, 
especially the voluntary statement and recovery of 
dead body. 
 
SUBMISSIONS OF APPELLANT 
9. 
Assailing the order of the High Court, the appellant 
submits that the High Court did not appreciate the discrepancies 
in the evidence of PW-1 and went on to accept the same. He 
further submits that the High Court failed to take note of the 
improvements made by PW-1 at every stage. He further submits 
that the Trial Court had elaborately appreciated the entire 
evidence on record and it was not open for the High Court to 
reappreciate the entire evidence and arrive at a different 
conclusion of its own. Further, it is submitted that the High Court 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
did not notice the absence of mother and wife of PW-1 from the 
list of witnesses of the prosecution. 
10. 
The appellant further submits that the finding of the Trial 
Court regarding the sequence of arrest of the appellant has not 
been discussed at all in the impugned order. It is further submitted 
that the High Court did not examine the extra judicial confession 
of the appellant in its correct perspective, especially in light of 
the suspicion raised by the Trial Court. It is urged that the High 
Court did not subject the extra judicial confession to a stern test 
and went on to place undue reliance on the same. It is further 
contended that the High Court overlooked the discrepancy 
between the description of clothes found on the dead body and 
that indicated by PW-1 in his complaint. Lastly, it is submitted 
that if two views were possible on a reappreciation of evidence, 
the High Court must have adopted the view in favour of the 
accused, thereby providing benefit of doubt to the appellant. 
11., it is submitted on behalf of the State that there 
is no infirmity in the impugned order as it is based on a correct 
appreciation of evidence. It is further submitted that the voluntary 
extra judicial confession of appellant constituted crucial evidence 
and the fact that it led to the discovery of the dead body of the 
deceased, added credibility to the same. Reliance has been placed 
upon the decisions of this Court in Sansar Chand v. State of 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
Rajasthan2 and Piara Singh v. State of Punjab3. It is further 
submitted that the Court must not consider every doubt as a 
reasonable doubt and minor discrepancies must not be allowed to 
demolish the entire testimony of a witness. In this regard, reliance 
has been placed upon the decisions of this Court in Mallikarjun 
v. State of Karnataka4 and Hari Singh & Anr. v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh5. 
12. 
We have heard Sh. Sharan Thakur, Advocate for the 
appellant and Mr. Muhammed Ali Khan, AAG, for the 
respondent State. 
DISCUSSION 
13. 
We may now proceed to delineate the issues that arise for 
the consideration of this Court, as follows: 
i. 
Whether the extra judicial confession of the 
appellant/accused was admissible, credible and 
sufficient for conviction of the accused thereon? ii. 
Whether the testimony of PW-1 could be 
termed as reliable and trustworthy? iii. 
 Whether 
the 
chain 
of 
circumstantial 
evidence is complete and consistent for arriving at 
the conclusion of guilt? 

2 (2010) 
3 (1977) 
4 (2019) 
5 (SC) 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
14. 
The conviction of the appellant is largely based on the 
extra judicial confession allegedly made by him before PW-1. So 
far as an extra judicial confession is concerned, it is considered 
as a weak type of evidence and is generally used as a 
corroborative link to lend credibility to the other evidence on 
record. In Chandrapal v. State of Chattisgarh6, this Court 
reiterated the evidentiary value of an extra judicial confession in 
the following words: 
“11. At this juncture, it may be noted that as per Section 30 
of the Evidence Act, when more persons than one are being 
tried jointly for the same offence, and a confession made by 
one of such persons affecting himself and some other of such 
persons is proved, the court may take into consideration such 
confession as against such other person as well as against the 
person who makes such confession. However, this court has 
consistently held that an extra judicial confession is a weak 
kind of evidence and unless it inspires confidence or is fully 
corroborated by some other evidence of clinching nature, 
ordinarily conviction for the offence of murder should not be 
made only on the evidence of extra judicial confession. As 
held in case of State of M.P. Through CBI v. Paltan Mallah, 
the extra judicial confession made by the co-accused could 
be admitted in evidence only as a corroborative piece of 
evidence. In absence of any substantive evidence against the 
accused, the extra judicial confession allegedly made by the 
co-accused loses its significance and there cannot be any 
conviction based on such extra judicial confession of the co-
accused.” 
 
15. 
It is no more res integra that an extra judicial confession 
must be accepted with great care and caution. If it is not 
 
6 (2022) SCC On Line SC 705 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
supported by other evidence on record, it fails to inspire 
confidence and in such a case, it shall not be treated as a strong 
piece of evidence for the purpose of arriving at the conclusion of 
guilt. Furthermore, the extent of acceptability of an extra judicial 
confession depends on the trustworthiness of the witness before 
whom it is given and the circumstances in which it was given. 
The prosecution must establish that a confession was indeed 
made by the accused, that it was voluntary in nature and that the 
contents of the confession were true. The standard required for 
proving an extra judicial confession to the satisfaction of the 
Court is on the higher side and these essential ingredients must 
be established beyond any reasonable doubt. The standard 
becomes even higher when the entire case of the prosecution 
necessarily rests on the extra judicial confession. 
16. 
In the present case, the extra judicial confession is 
essentially based on the deposition of PW-1, the father of the 
deceased. Without going into the aspect of PW-1 being an 
interested witness at the threshold, his testimony is fatal to the 
prosecution case on multiple parameters. PW-1 deposed that the 
appellant had arrived at his residence on 14.11.2002 and 
mentioned about the deceased. Despite so, the appellant was 
allowed to leave the residence and no action whatsoever was 
taken by PW-1. The incident took place on 03.11.2002 and 
despite lapse of 11 days, PW-1 had no clue about his deceased 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
son. On the eleventh day, when the appellant arrives at his 
residence and mentions adversely about his deceased son, PW-1 
does nothing about it. In fact, on the next day as well, PW-1 
started off normally and went to his shop in a routine manner. 
Thereafter, he came back home in the afternoon of 15.11.2002 
and confronted the appellant about the incident. There is no 
explanation as to how the appellant arrived at his residence again 
on 15.11.2002. Nevertheless, PW-1 deposed that when he, his 
mother and wife confronted the appellant, he confessed to the 
murder of the deceased. Thereafter, they took him to the police 
station. 
17. 
Before we refer to the proceedings which took place at the 
police station, it is of utmost relevance to note that the confession 
was made before PW-1, his mother and wife. However, the 
mother and wife of PW-1 were never examined as witnesses by 
the prosecution. This glaring mistake raises a serious doubt on 
the very existence of a confession, or even a statement, of this 
nature by the appellant. 
18. 
Once the appellant was taken to the police station, as the 
examination in chief of PW-1, the appellant confessed to the act 
of throwing the deceased in the well along with accused no. 2 and 
3. Notably, there was no mention of the co-accused persons in the 
original statement of the appellant, as per the examination in 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
chief of PW-1. One finds a third version of the same fact when 
the complaint Ex.P1 is perused. The said complaint was given by 
PW-1 at the police station of 15.11.2002. As per this complaint, 
the appellant was queried by PW-1 and his mother (presence of 
wife not mentioned). Furthermore, as per the complaint, the 
appellant confessed to the commission of offence along with one 
other accused (accused no.2) only. The complaint Ex.P1 is also 
silent on the episode that took place at the residence of PW-1 on 
14.11.2002, a day prior to the filing of complaint. There is no 
explanation as to how and in what circumstances the incident of 
14.11.2002 was omitted from Ex.P1. The omission assumes great 
importance in light of the fact that the incident of 14.11.2002 was 
the precursor of the confrontation that followed the next day, 
which culminated into the act of filing the complaint. The 
complaint Ex.P1 is also silent on the information received by 
PW-1 from PW-5 and PW-6 that they had seen his child going 
with the appellant on the date of incident. The introduction of 
these witnesses was an exercise of improvement, as we shall see 
in the following discussion. 
19. 
The confession was followed by two things – arrest of the 
appellant and recovery of dead body of the deceased. The 
evidentiary aspects concerning these facts are equally doubtful. 
As per the testimony of PW-1, he had taken the appellant to the 
police station and he was arrested there. Contrarily, PW-16/I.O. 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
deposed that after recording the complaint, he had arrested the 
appellant from his house. The mode and manner of arrest, 
especially the place of arrest, is doubtful. It also raises a question 
on the aspect of confession – whether the confession was 
recorded when the appellant himself visited the police station 
with PW-1 or when he was arrested from his house and was taken 
to the police station by PW-16. The confessions, one made after 
a voluntary visit to the police station and the other made after 
arrest from the house, stand on materially different footings from 
the point of view of voluntariness. The likelihood of the latter 
being voluntary is fairly lesser in comparison to the former. 
20. 
The next element which weighed upon the High Court in 
reversing acquittal is the recovery of dead body of the deceased 
at the instance of the appellant. Notably, the element of recovery 
is based on the same statement/confession of the appellant which, 
as observed above, fails to inspire the confidence of the Court. 
The Trial Court has rightly analyzed the evidence regarding the 
recovery of dead body and the High Court fell in an error in 
accepting the evidence on its face value, without addressing the 
reasonable doubts raised by the Trial Court. 
21. 
The recovery of dead body from the well is not in question. 
However, the proof of such recovery to be at the instance of the 
appellant is essentially based on the disclosure statement made 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
by the appellant. Again, the prime witness for proving the 
disclosure statement is PW-1, whose testimony has failed to 
inspire the confidence of the Court, in light of the contradictions, 
multiplicity of versions and material improvements. The other 
witness to prove the recovery is PW-2, the panch. Notably, PW-
2 was a waiter at a restaurant and he deposed that he had visited 
the police station himself. It is difficult to accept that PW-2 just 
happened to visit the police station on his own and ended up 
becoming a witness of recovery of the dead body. Firstly, his visit 
to the police station does not fit in the normal chain of 
circumstances as it is completely unexplained. A police station is 
not per se a public space where people happen to visit in the 
ordinary course of business and therefore, an explanation is 
warranted. Secondly, a normal person would generally be 
hesitant in becoming a witness to the recovery of a dead body. 
There is nothing on record to indicate that any notice to join 
investigation was given to PW-2 by the I.O./PW-16. In such 
circumstances, it would not be safe to rely upon the testimony of 
PW-2 as he could reasonably be a stock witness of the I.O. 
22. 
Furthermore, we deem it appropriate to note that the 
identity of the dead body recovered from the well is also not 
beyond question. The Trial Court had also noted the doubts 
regarding the identity of the dead body, however, the identity of 
the deceased was held to be established in light of the fact that 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
the identification was done by PW-1, father of the deceased. The 
Trial Court also relied upon the fact that the identification was 
not challenged by either side. Be that as it may, we consider it 
important to note that there exist serious doubts regarding the 
identity of the dead body recovered from the well. The 
description of the deceased given by PW-1 in his complaint 
Ex.P1 did not match with the description of the dead body. The 
clothes found on the dead body were substantially different from 
the clothes mentioned by PW-1 in his complaint. The presence of 
ornaments was not mentioned in the complaint. Furthermore, 
identification of the dead body by face was not possible as the 
body had started decomposing due to lapse of time. Admittedly, 
the dead body was recovered after 12 days of the incident from a 
well. Sensitive body parts were found bitten by aquatic animals 
inside the well. The theory of ornaments has already been held to 
be a figment of imagination by the Trial Court and the High Court 
in an unequivocal manner. Therefore, the prosecution case 
regarding the identity of the dead body is not free from doubts. 
23. 
Another circumstance which weighs against PW-1 in a 
material sense is the deafening silence on his part when PW-5 and 
PW-6 informed him regarding the factum of the deceased being 
thrown into the well. Notably, the said fact was brought to the 
knowledge of PW-1 well before 15.11.2002. Despite so, PW-1 
maintained silence and did not even approach the police for 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
investigation or information on such a crucial aspect of 
investigation. An anxious father would have rushed to the police 
station on receiving an information of this nature. The subsequent 
conduct of PW-1, after the receipt of such material information, 
is unnatural. Furthermore, PW-5 only saw the appellant taking 
away the child, PW-6 also saw the appellant only and PW-7 saw 
three persons throwing the child in the well. The versions are 
manifold. In such circumstances, it cannot be held that the 
testimony of PW-1 is trustworthy and reliable. 
24. 
Notably, it is a peculiar case wherein the appellant has been 
convicted for the commission of murder without ascertaining the 
cause of death in a conclusive manner. The report prepared by 
PW-14 reveals drowning as the cause of death. For attributing the 
act of throwing the deceased into the well upon the appellant, the 
prosecution has relied upon PW-7 and PW-18, the witnesses in 
support of the last seen theory. The testimonies of these witnesses 
have been held to be incredible by both Trial Court and the High 
Court. We suffice to observe that we agree with the findings of 
the said Courts on this point. Furthermore, the post mortem 
reveals the time of death within a time frame of 3 to 12 days. 
Allegedly, the death took place on 03.11.2002. Such a wide time 
frame concerning the crucial question of time of death raises a 
serious doubt on the reliability of the post mortem report. When 
this fact is seen in light of the already existing doubts on the 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
identity of the deceased, one is constrained to take the report with 
a pinch of salt. More so, this discrepancy again brings into 
question the element of recovery of the dead body and identity of 
the deceased. 
25. 
This Court cannot lose sight of the fact that the Trial Court 
had appreciated the entire evidence in a comprehensive sense and 
the High Court reversed the view without arriving at any finding 
of perversity or illegality in the order of the Trial Court. The High 
Court took a cursory view of the matter and merely arrived at a 
different conclusion on a re-appreciation of evidence. It is settled 
law that the High Court, in exercise of appellate powers, may 
reappreciate the entire evidence. However, reversal of an order of 
acquittal is not to be based on mere existence of a different view 
or a mere difference of opinion. To permit so would be in 
violation of the two views theory, as reiterated by this Court from 
time to time in cases of this nature. In order to reverse an order 
of acquittal in appeal, it is essential to arrive at a finding that the 
order of the Trial Court was perverse or illegal; or that the Trial 
Court did not fully appreciate the evidence on record; or that the 
view of the Trial Court was not a possible view. 
26. 
At the cost of repetition, it is reiterated that the anomaly of 
having two reasonably possible views in a matter is to be resolved 
in favour of the accused. For, after acquittal, the presumption of 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
innocence in favour of the accused gets reinforced. In Sanjeev v. 
State of H.P.7, this Court summarized the position in this regard 
and observed as follows: 
“7. It is well settled that: 
7.1. While dealing with an appeal against acquittal, the 
reasons which had weighed with the trial court in acquitting 
the accused must be dealt with, in case the appellate court is 
of the view that the acquittal rendered by the trial court 
deserves to be upturned (see Vijay Mohan Singh v. State of 
Karnataka8, Anwar Ali v. State of H.P.9) 
7.2. With an order of acquittal by the trial court, the normal 
presumption of innocence in a criminal matter gets 
reinforced (see Atley v. State of U.P.10) 
7.3. If two views are possible from the evidence on record, 
the appellate court must be extremely slow in interfering 
with the appeal against acquittal (see Sambasivan v. State of 
Kerala11)” 
 
27. 
It may be noted that the entire case of the prosecution is 
based on circumstantial evidence. The principles concerning 
circumstantial evidence are fairly settled and are generally 
referred 
as 
the 
“Panchsheel” 
principles. 
Essentially, 
circumstantial evidence comes into picture when there is absence 
of direct evidence. For proving a case on the basis of 
circumstantial evidence, it must be established that the chain of 
circumstances is complete. It must also be established that the 
 
7 (2022) 
8 (2019) 
9 (2020) ) 
 SC 807 
11 (1998) 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
chain of circumstances is consistent with the only conclusion of 
guilt. The margin of error in a case based on circumstantial 
evidence is minimal. For, the chain of circumstantial evidence is 
essentially meant to enable the court in drawing an inference. The 
task of fixing criminal liability upon a person on the strength of 
an inference must be approached with abundant caution. As 
discussed above, the circumstances sought to be proved by the 
prosecution are inconsistent and the inconsistencies in the chain 
of circumstances have not been explained by the prosecution. The 
doubtful existence of the extra judicial confession, unnatural 
conduct of PW-1, recovery of dead body in the presence of an 
unreliable witness PW-2, contradictions regarding arrest, 
unnatural prior and subsequent conduct of PW-1, incredible 
testimony of the witnesses in support of the last seen theory etc. are some of the inconsistencies which strike at the root of the 
prosecution case. To draw an inference of guilt on the basis of 
such evidence would result into nothing but failure of justice. The 
evidence on record completely fails the test laid down for the 
acceptability of circumstantial evidence. Therefore, in light of the 
consolidated discussion, all three issues are hereby answered in 
negative. 
28. 
Before parting, we consider it our duty to refer to the 
catena of judgments relied upon by the respondent to contend that 
minor inconsistencies could not be construed as reasonable 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
doubts for ordering acquittal. Reference has been made to Sucha 
Singh v. State of Punjab12, Mallikarjun13 and Hari Singh v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh14. 
29. 
No doubt, it is trite law that a reasonable doubt is 
essentially a serious doubt in the case of the prosecution and 
minor inconsistencies are not to be elevated to the status of a 
reasonable doubt. A reasonable doubt is one which renders the 
possibility of guilt as highly doubtful. It is also noteworthy that 
the purpose of criminal trial is not only to ensure that an innocent 
person is not punished, but it is also to ensure that the guilty does 
not escape unpunished. A judge owes this duty to the society and 
effective performance of this duty plays a crucial role in securing 
the faith of the common public in rule of law. Every case, wherein 
a guilty person goes unpunished due to any lacuna on the part of 
the investigating agency, prosecution or otherwise, shakes the 
conscience of the society at large and diminishes the value of the 
rule of law. Having observed so, the observations in this regard 
may not advance the case of the respondent in the present appeal. 
It is so because the inconsistencies in the case of the prosecution 
are not minor inconsistencies. As already discussed above, the 
prosecution has miserably failed to establish a coherent chain of 
 
12 (2003) 
13 Supra 
14 Supra 

Crl. Appeal No. 622/2013 
circumstances. The present case does not fall in the category of a 
light-hearted acquittal15, which is shunned upon in law. 
30. 
In light of the foregoing discussion, we hereby conclude 
that the High Court has erred in reversing the decision of 
acquittal. The evidence of the prosecution, at best, makes out a 
case for suspicion, and not for conviction. Accordingly, the 
impugned order and judgment are set aside. We find no infirmity 
in the order of the Trial Court and the same stands restored. 
Consequently, the appellant is acquitted from all the charges 
levelled upon him. The appellant is directed to be released 
forthwith, if lying in custody. 
31. 
The captioned appeal stands disposed of in the aforesaid 
terms. Interim applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of. 
32. 
No order as to costs. 
 
…………………………J. 
[ Bela M. Trivedi ] 

…………………………..J. 
[ Satish Chandra Sharma ] 
New Delhi 
February 20, 2024 
 
15 ‘Proof of Guilt’, Glanville Williams.