IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

 SLP (C) NO. 5278 /2019 
 
MANOJ KUMAR 
 
 …. APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. 
 
JUDGMENT 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
This appeal is by the appellant seeking appointment as a 
primary school teacher. He is aggrieved by the judgment of the 
Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi dismissing the writ 
appeal,1 which was filed against the order of the Single Judge 
dismissing his writ petition.2 
3. 
Pt. Deendayal Upadhyaya Institute for the Physically 
Handicapped, hereinafter referred to as the ‘Institute’, issued an 
advertisement in March 2016 calling applications for appointment 
 
1 L.P.A. No. 158/2018 dated 16.10.2018. 
2 W.P. (C) No. 5279/2017 and C.M. 22382/2017 dated 24.01.2018. to the post of primary school teachers. The vacancy circular issued 
for this purpose provided the qualifications and the procedure for 
selection. The basic qualification was senior secondary with a two-
year diploma or certificate course in ETE/JBT or B.EI.Ed. The 
candidates were required to have passed the secondary level with 
Hindi as a subject. The final selection was to be made after 
conducting an interview of qualified candidates. The Institute 
reserved its right to evaluate, review the process of selection, and 
shortlist candidates at any stage, and its decision would be final 
and binding. This discretionary power is notified under Clauses 14 
and 19 of the vacancy circular. The relevant clauses relied on by 
the Institute are as follows: 
"14. Decision of the institute in all matters regarding 
eligibility of the candidate, the stages at which such 
scrutiny of eligibility is to be undertaken, the documents to 
be produced for the purpose of conduct of interview, 
selection and any other matter relating to recruitment will 
be final and binding on the candidate. Further, the institute 
reserves the right to stall/ cancel the recruitment partially/ 
fully at any stage during the recruitment process at its 
discretion, which will be final and binding on the candidate. 
 
19. Fulfilment of conditions of minimum qualification shall 
not necessarily entitle any applicant to be called for further 
process of recruitment, in case of large number of 
applications, Institute reserves the right to short-list 
applications in any manner as may be considered 
appropriate 
and 
no 
reason 
for 
rejection 
shall 
be 
communicated and no claim for refund of fee shall be 
entertained in any case.” 

4. 
On 27.04.2016, the Institute deviated from the procedure 
prescribed in the original advertisement/vacancy circular and 
issued a notification dispensing with the interview requirement, 
which was a part of the selection process for Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ 
posts. Instead, it prescribed allocation of additional marks for 
essential 
qualifications, 
additional 
qualifications, 
essential 
experience, and the written test. 
5. 
The issue arising for consideration in the present case relates 
the allocation of marks for additional qualifications, for which 10 
marks had been prescribed. The break-up of the 10 allocable 
marks is as under: 
SL 
Particulars 
Marks 
2. 
Marks 
for 
Additional 
Qualifications 

a 
PG Diploma 

b 
PG Degree 

c 
MPhil/ Professional Qualification in the 
Field 

d 
PhD 

6. 
It is evident from the above that a candidate possessing a Post 
Graduate Diploma and a Post Graduate Degree would be entitled 
to allocation of 5 and 6 marks respectively for their additional 

qualification. However, a person possessing an MPhil degree or a 
professional qualification in the field would be entitled to allocation 
of 7 marks for their additional qualification. 
7. 
When the results were declared on 22.05.2017, the appellant 
got an aggregate of 57.5 marks, and respondent no. 3 got 58.25 
marks. On enquiry, the appellant came to know that marks of 
respondent no. 3 are inclusive of the 7 marks that she was entitled 
to for holding the professional qualification of Masters in 
Education (M.Ed.). The appellant has no complaint against the 
allocation of 7 additional qualification marks to respondent no. 3. 
He was however surprised by the denial of 6 marks for the 
additional qualification of PG Degree that he held, on the ground 
that his PG Degree was not “in the relevant subject”. 
8. 
The appellant’s simple case is that had he been allocated 6 
marks for the PG Degree that he possessed, he would be the 
highest in the list by aggregating a total of 63.5 marks. Denial of 6 
marks on a new ground that the PG Degree held by him is not in 
the relevant subject, he says, is illegal and arbitrary. He made a 
representation on 26.05.2017 for allocation of 6 marks. Due to 

inaction, he approached the Delhi High Court by way of a writ of 
mandamus to the Union and the Institute to remedy the injustice. 
9. 
The learned Single Judge of the High Court refused to 
interfere by following the principle laid down in the judgment of 
this Court in University Grants Commission v. Neha Anil Bobde 
(Gadekar),3 where it was held that in academic matters, the 
qualifying criteria must be left to the discretion of the concerned 
institution. The appellant then preferred a Writ Appeal, and the 
Division Bench also followed the principle in Neha Anil Bobde, as 
reiterated in other decisions,4 and held that in academic matters, 
the interference of the Court should be minimum. In para 13 of its 
judgment, the High Court also relied on Clauses 14 and 19 of the 
vacancy circular to hold that the Institute in any event reserves 
the right to shortlist applications as it considers appropriate. Thus, 
the appellant approached this Court in 2019 itself. 
10. At the outset, we note that the procedure for selection was 
provided in the vacancy circular issued in March 2016. Instead of 
following the said procedure, the Institute chose to adopt a new 
 
3 (2013). 
4 Tamil Nadu Education Department Ministerial and General Subordinate Services Association v. State of Tamil 
Nadu (1980); All India Council for Technical Education v. Surinder Kumar Dhawan (2009). method by its notification dated 27.04.2016, wherein it dispensed 
with the interview and prescribed the allocation of marks for 
additional qualifications. We make it clear at this very stage that 
the appellant has not challenged the variation in the original 
selection process of an interview and its replacement with 
allocation of marks for additional qualifications. The only challenge 
is that the denial of 6 marks for the additional qualification of a PG 
Degree that he possesses is illegal and arbitrary. On the other 
hand, the respondents raised the standard defence by invoking 
Clauses 14 and 19 to submit that they have reserved the right of 
shortlisting candidates as is considered appropriate. They also 
submit that the appellant cannot be given the benefit of 6 marks 
for additional qualifications as he did not possess the PG Degree 
in the “relevant subject”. 
11. Analysis: The standard argument made consistently and 
successfully before the Single Judge and Division Bench must fail 
before us. Clauses 14 and 19 of the vacancy circular do nothing 
more than reserving flexibility in the selection process. They 
cannot be read to invest the Institute with unbridled discretion to 
pick and choose candidates by supplying new criteria to the 
prescribed qualification. This is a classic case of arbitrary action. 

The submission based on Clauses 14 and 19 must fail here and 
now. 
12. The other submission of the respondent about restricting a 
“PG Degree" to a “PG Degree in Relevant Subject” must also be 
rejected. The illegality in adopting and applying such an 
interpretation is evident from a simple reading of the notification 
dated 27.04.2016 providing for additional qualifications. The 
additional qualifications provided under clauses ‘a’ to ‘d’ are under 
two categories. While ‘a’, ‘b’, and ‘d’ relating to PG Diploma, PG 
Degree, and PhD are general qualifications providing for 5, 6, and 
10 marks respectively, the category under ‘c’ relates to Professional 
Qualification in the field. This is where specialization is prescribed. 
If we add the requirement of specialization to category ‘b’, i.e., PG 
Degree, then that category becomes redundant. The whole purpose 
of providing PG Degree independently and allocating a lesser 
quantum of 6 marks will be completely lost if such an 
interpretation is adopted. This can never be the purpose of 
prescribing distinct categories. No further analysis is necessary. 
We reject this submission also. 
13. The Single Judge as well as the Division Bench did not really 
analyse the prescription of additional qualifications and the 

distinct marks allocated to each of them, but confined their 
decision to restraint in judicial review and dismissed the 
appellant’s prayer. When a citizen alleges arbitrariness in 
executive action, the High Court must examine the issue, of 
course, within the context of judicial restraint in academic 
matters. While respecting flexibility in executive functioning, 
courts must not let arbitrary action pass through. For the reasons 
stated above, we are of the opinion that the decisions of the Single 
Judge and the Division Bench are not sustainable, and we hereby 
set aside their judgments. 
14. The story does not end here. 
15. While reserving the judgment, we directed the respondents to 
file an additional affidavit with respect to the availability of a 
vacant position. Following the direction, respondents 1 and 2 have 
filed an affidavit. Paragraph 3 and 4 of the affidavit read as under: 
“3. I state that the applications were invited to fill up the 
vacancy for Primary School Teacher at the Model Integrated 
Primary School [hereinafter the ‘School’] which was run by 
the Respondent No. 2 Institute. The Petitioner and the 
Respondent had applied in the SC category for which there 
was single post. The School has been closed on 01.04.2023 
with the approval of the 128th Standing Committee held on 
13.05.2022 and 49th General Council held on 26.05.2022. I 
further state that the Respondent No. 3 who was select in 
pursuance of aforementioned application had joined the 
post of Primary Teacher on 02.04.2018 and has since 
resigned on 24.10.2019. 

4. I therefore state that on account of the closure of the 
School, there is no vacancy in the post of Primary Teacher 
to which the Petitioner and the Respondent No. 3 had 
applied and which is the subject matter of the Special Leave 
Petition. The letter dated 13/14.12.2023 of the Pt. 
Deendayal Upadhyay National Institute for Persons with 
Physical Disabilities (Divyangjan) to the Ministry of Law and 
Justice is also annexed herewith for reference as Annexure 
A1.” 
 
16. It is evident from the above that the school for which the 
advertisement was issued was closed on 01.04.2023. In view of the 
closure of the school, we cannot direct the respondent Institute to 
employ the appellant as a primary school teacher. This is an 
unfortunate situation where the Court finds that the action of the 
respondent was arbitrary, but the consequential remedy cannot be 
given due to subsequent developments. One stark reality of the 
situation is the time that has passed between the order of 2018 
impugned herein and the judgment that we pronounce in 2024. 
17. Judicial review of administrative action in public law is 
qualitatively distinct from judicial remedies in civil law. In judicial 
review, constitutional courts are concerned with the exercise of 
power by the State and its instrumentalities. 
18. Within the realm of judicial review in common law 
jurisdictions, it is established that constitutional courts are 
entrusted with the responsibility of ensuring the lawfulness of 

executive decisions, rather than substituting their own judgment 
to decide the rights of the parties, which they would exercise in 
civil jurisdiction.5 It has been held that the primary purpose of 
quashing any action is to preserve order in the legal system by 
preventing excess and abuse of power or to set aside arbitrary 
actions. Wade on Administrative Law states that the purpose of 
quashing is not the final determination of private rights, for a 
private party must separately contest his own rights before the 
administrative authority.6 Such private party is also not entitled to 
compensation merely because the administrative action is illegal.7 
A further case of tort, misfeasance, negligence, or breach of 
statutory duty must be established for such person to receive 
compensation.8 
19. We are of the opinion that while the primary duty of 
constitutional courts remains the control of power, including 
setting aside of administrative actions that may be illegal or 
arbitrary, it must be acknowledged that such measures may not 
singularly address repercussions of abuse of power. It is equally 
incumbent upon the courts, as a secondary measure, to address 
 
5 Sir Clive Lewis, Judicial Remedies in Public Law (5th edn, Sweet and Maxwell 2015). 
6 HWR Wade and CF Forsyth, Administrative Law (11th edn, Oxford University Press 2014) 596-597. 
7 Peter Cane, ‘Damages in Public Law’ (1999) 9(3) Otago Law Review 489. 
8 Henry Woolf and others, De Smith’s Judicial Review (8th edn, Sweet and Maxwell 2018) 1026-1027. the injurious consequences arising from arbitrary and illegal 
actions. This concomitant duty to take reasonable measures to 
restitute the injured is our overarching constitutional purpose. 
This is how we have read our constitutional text, and this is how 
we have built our precedents on the basis of our preambular 
objective to secure justice.9 
20. In public law proceedings, when it is realised that the prayer 
in the writ petition is unattainable due to passage of time, 
constitutional courts may not dismiss the writ proceedings on the 
ground of their perceived futility. In the life of litigation, passage of 
time can stand both as an ally and adversary. Our duty is to 
transcend the constraints of time and perform the primary duty of 
a constitutional court to control and regulate the exercise of power 
or arbitrary action. By taking the first step, the primary purpose 
and object of public law proceedings will be subserved. 
21. The second step relates to restitution. This operates in a 
different dimension. Identification and application of appropriate 
remedial measures poses a significant challenge to constitutional 
 
9 The Preambular goals are to secure Justice, Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity for all citizens. courts, largely attributable to the dual variables of time and limited 
resources. 
22. The temporal gap between the impugned illegal or arbitrary 
action and their subsequent adjudication by the courts introduces 
complexities in the provision of restitution. As time elapses, the 
status 
of 
persons, 
possession, 
and 
promises 
undergoes 
transformation, directly influencing the nature of relief that may 
be formulated and granted. 
23. The inherent difficulty in bridging the time gap between the 
illegal impugned action and restitution is certainly not rooted in 
deficiencies within the law or legal jurisprudence but rather in 
systemic issues inherent in the adversarial judicial process. The 
protracted timeline spanning from the filing of a writ petition, 
service of notice, filing of counter affidavits, final hearing, and then 
the eventual delivery of judgment, coupled with subsequent 
appellate procedures, exacerbates delays. Take for example this 
very case, the writ petition was filed against the action of the 
respondent denying appointment on 22.05.2017. The writ petition 
came to be decided by the Single Judge on 24.01.2018, the 
Division Bench on 16.10.2018, and then the case was carried to 
this Court in the year 2019 and we are deciding it in 2024. The 

delay in this case is not unusual, we see several such cases when 
our final hearing board moves. Appeals of more than two decades 
are awaiting consideration. It is distressing but certainly not 
beyond us. We must and we will find a solution to this problem. 
24. It is in this reality and prevailing circumstance that we must 
formulate an appropriate system for preserving the rights of the 
parties till the final determination takes place. In the alternative, 
we may also formulate a reasonable equivalent for restitution of 
the wrongful action. 
25. Returning to the facts of the present case, in exercise of our 
primary duty, we have set aside the action of the respondents as 
being illegal and arbitrary. In furtherance of our duty to provide a 
reasonable measure for restitution, we have explored the 
possibility of directing the Institute to appoint the appellant as a 
primary teacher in any other school run by them. However, it 
seems that the only primary school run by the Institute is the one 
for which they sought to fill vacancies and it is closed since 2023. 
In this situation, we must consider an alternative restitutory 
measure in the form of monetary compensation. 

26. We appreciate the spirit of the appellant who has steadfastly 
contested his case like the legendary Vikram,10 from the year 2017 
when he was illegally denied the appointment by the executive 
order dated 22.05.2017, which we have set aside as being illegal 
and arbitrary. In these circumstances, we direct the Institute 
(respondent no. 2) to pay an amount of Rs. 1,00,000/- as 
compensation. This amount shall be paid to the appellant within 
a period of six weeks from the date of passing of this order. 
27. For the reasons stated above, we allow the appeal and set 
aside the judgment of the High Court in W.P. (C) No. 5279 of 2017 
and C.M. No. 22382 of 2017 dated 24.01.2018 and in L.P.A. No. 
158 of 2018 dated 16.10.2018 and direct the Institute (respondent 
no. 2) to pay Rs. 1,00,000/- as a compensation with cost 
quantified at Rs. 25,000/-. 
……………………………………….J. 
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha] 

……………………………………….J. 
[Sandeep Mehta] 
New Delhi. 
February 20, 2024. 
 
10 Against Betala, in the famous Vetalapancavimsati, the original being the Kathasaritsagara 
work of the 11th Century by Somadeva.