IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024
( SLP (CRL.) NO. 2052 OF 2017)
MOHD ABAAD ALI & ANR.
 …APPELLANTS

VERSUS

DIRECTORATE OF REVENUE 
PROSECUTION INTELLIGENCE
 …RESPONDENT
JUDGMENT

SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
Leave granted.
1.
The present appellant was one of the four accused in a
case instituted, inter-alia under Section 135(1)(b) of
Customs Act, 1962. He faced trial (S.C. No. 33 of 2009)
where he was ultimately acquitted by the Additional
Sessions Judge, North, Delhi vide order dated
06.10.2012. 
2.
Against the order of acquittal, the Directorate of Revenue
Intelligence filed an appeal before the High Court on
27.06.2013. That appeal against acquittal filed under

Section 378 of CrPC was accompanied by a delay
condonation application, since the appeal was belated by
72 days. The delay condonation application was allowed
by the Delhi High Court on 18.05.2016.
3.
 An application was then moved by the present appellant
before the High Court under Section 482 of CrPC for
recalling of the said order on grounds that Section 5 of
the Limitation Act would not apply in case of an appeal
against acquittal since the period of filing an appeal
against acquittal, has been prescribed under Section
378(5) of CrPC itself, where there is no provision for
condonation of delay. By order dated 20.01.2017 the
Delhi High Court nonetheless dismissed the application
for recall filed by the appellant, although no reasons were
assigned while dismissing the application under Section
482.
4.
This order has been challenged before us on the grounds
that the High Court has committed a patent error in
allowing the belated appeal against acquittal filed by
public servant as the High Court has no powers to
condone the delay since the provisions of the Limitation

Act would not be applicable as Section 378 is a self-
contained Code as far as limitation is concerned since
there is no period prescribed in the Limitation Act for
filing a appeal against acquittal.
5.
In support of his argument, the learned counsel for the
appellant Mr. Vijay Kumar Aggarwal, has relied upon the
judgment of this Court in Kaushalya Rani v. Gopal
Singh (1964). The facts of Kaushalya Rani
are as follows: Kaushalya Rani had filed a case against
one Gopal Singh under Section 493 IPC and alternatively
under Section 496 IPC, alleging that Gopal Singh had
deceitfully made her believe that he is her lawfully
married husband and thus had sexual intercourse with
her. Gopal Singh faced a trial in which he was acquitted
by the Trial Court and an appeal against acquittal was
filed by Kaushalya Rani under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 (hereafter referred to as the “old CrPC”),
under Section 417. The appeal was filed beyond the
period of 60 days as provided under sub-section (4) of
Section 417, i.e., the then prevailing Criminal Procedure
Code. The appeal was dismissed on grounds of limitation

by the Punjab & Haryana High Court. This matter was
thus taken by Kaushalya Rani before this Court. The
case was filed before this Court on a certificate of fitness
granted by the Punjab & Haryana High Court and the
question for determination before this Court was whether
the provisions of Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1908
(i.e. Act 9 of 1908 i.e. the old Limitation Act) would apply
to an application for special leave to appeal from an order
of acquittal under sub-section 3 of Section 417 of the old
CrPC. 
6.
This Court on its interpretation of sub-section 4 of
Section 4171 of old CrPC and Section 29(2) of the old
Limitation Act i.e. Indian Limitation Act, 1908 held that
Section 5 of the Limitation Act would not apply in an
application for leave to appeal under sub-section 3 of
1 Section 417 of the old CrPC is as follows:
417 (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), the State Government may, in any case, direct the 
Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the High Court from an original or appellate order of a acquittal passed
by any Court other than a High Court.
(2) If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case in which the offence has been investigated by the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment constituted under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (XXXV of 
1946), the Central Government may also direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the High Court 
from the order of acquittal.
(3) If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case instituted upon the complaint and the High Court, on an 
application made to it by the complainant in this behalf, grants special leave to appeal from the order of 
acquittal, the complainant may present such an appeal to the High Court.
(4) No application under sub-section (3) for the grant of special leave to appeal from the order of acquittal shall 
be entertained by the High Court after the expiry of sixty days from the date of that order of acquittal.
(5) If, in any case, the application under sub-section (3) for the grant of special leave to appeal from an order of 
acquittal is refused, no appeal from that order of acquittal shall lie under sub-section (1).

Section 417 of the old CrPC before High Court, in as
much as Section 417 is a special code in itself and the
limitation prescribed therein is 60 days and the court has
no power to relax such a limitation to condone the delay.
Relying upon a full Bench judgment of the Bombay High
Court [Anjanabai v. Yeshwantrao Daulatrao Dudhe
ILR (1961) Bom 135] which held that Section 417(4) was
special law within the meaning of Section 29(2) of the
Limitation Act. Thus, the appeal was dismissed while
relying on Section 29(2) of the old Limitation Act.
 
 For ready convenience of this Court, Section 29(2) of
the old Limitation Act is reproduced below: 
“(2) Where any special or local law
prescribes for any suit, appeal or
application a period of limitation different
from the period prescribed therefore by
the first schedule, the provisions of
Section 3 shall apply, as if such period
were prescribed therefor in that schedule,
and for the purpose of determining any
period of limitation prescribed for any
suit, appeal or application by any special
or local law—
(a) the provisions contained in Section 4,
Sections 9 to 18, and Section 22 shall
apply only in so far as, and to the extent
to which, they are not expressly excluded
by such special or local law; and
(b) the remaining provisions of this Act
shall not apply.”

A perusal of the aforesaid provision clearly shows that
where there is a special or local law prescribing the
period of limitation in any suit, appeal or application
which is different from the period of limitation prescribed
in the first schedule of the Limitation Act, the
applicability of the Limitation Act will be only as
regarding Section 4 and Sections 9 to 18 & 22 of the
Limitation Act. The meaning thereby afforded is that
Section 5 of the old Act was expressly excluded in cases
where special law or local law provides for a period of
limitation. The learned counsel for the appellant would
argue that although in the present case, we are dealing
with present Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 and the new
Limitation Act, 1963 however, the provisions in the
present Code for appeal against acquittal i.e., under
Section 378 of CrPC are of similar nature regarding the
prescription of a period of limitation for filing an appeal
and therefore the law as laid down by Kaushalya Rani
(supra), would apply in the present case as well.
7.
This submission of the learned counsel is not correct.
Subsequent to the decision of this Court in Kaushalya

Rani (supra), this Court in Mangu Ram v. Municipal
Corporation of Delhi (1976), while dealing
with a similar problem of limitation (in an appeal against
acquittal), distinguished Kaushalya Rani as Kaushalya
Rani was dealing with the old Criminal Procedure
Code,1898 and the old Limitation Act, 1908, where
provisions were differently worded. Under Section 378 of
the new CrPC read with Section 29(2) of the Limitation
Act, 1963 though a limitation is prescribed, yet Section
29(2) of 1963 Act, does not exclude the application of
Section 5. Section 29(2) of Limitation Act, 1963 reads as
under:-
“(2) Where any special or local law
prescribes for any suit, appeal or
application a period of limitation different
from the period prescribed by the
Schedule, the provisions of Section 3 shall
apply as if such period were the period
prescribed by the Schedule and for the
purpose of determining any period of
limitation prescribed for any suit, appeal or
application by any special or local law, the
provisions contained in Sections 4 to 24
(inclusive) shall apply only insofar as, and
to the extent to which, they are not
expressly excluded by such special or local
law.”
 (emphasis supplied)

The crucial difference here is of applicability of Section 5
of Limitation Act. In both the Limitation Acts, i.e.
Limitation Act of 1908 and the present Limitation Act of
1963, the provision of extension of time of limitation is
given in Section 5 of the two Acts. Whereas 1908 Act
specifically states that Section 5 will not apply when the
period of limitation is given in special Acts, the 1963 Act
makes Section 5 applicable even in the special laws when
a period of limitation is prescribed, unless it is expressly
excluded by such special law. A comparative provision of
Section 29(2) in the two Acts is given below:-
Section 29(2) of the
Old Limitation Act of

Section 29(2) of the
new Limitation Act of

(2) Where any special or
local law prescribes for
any suit, appeal or
application a period of
limitation different from
the period prescribed
therefor by the first
schedule, the provisions
of section 3 shall apply
as if such period were
prescribed therefor in
that schedule and for the
purpose of determining
any period of limitation
prescribed for any suit,
appeal or application by
any special or local law:
(2) Where any special or
local law prescribes for
any suit, appeal or
application a period of
limitation different from
the period prescribed by
the
 
Schedule,
 
the
provisions of section 3
shall apply as if such
period were the period
prescribed
 
by
 
the
Schedule and for the
purpose of determining
any period of limitation
prescribed for any suit,
appeal or application by
any special or local law,

 the
 
provisions
contained in section 4,
sections 9 to 18, and
section 22 shall apply
only in so far as, and to
the extent to which, they
are
 
not
 
expressly
excluded by such special
or local law; and 

 the
 
remaining
provisions of this Act
shall not apply. the provisions contained
in sections 4 to 24
(inclusive) shall apply
only in so far as, and to
the extent to which, they
are
 
not
 
expressly
excluded by such special
or local law.
As
 Kaushalya Rani
 (supra) was decided under
provisions of old Limitation Act of 1908, this Court in
Mangu Ram (supra) distinguished Kaushalya Rani and
held as under: 
“There is an important departure made by
the Limitation Act, 1963 insofar as the
provision contained in Section 29, sub-
section (2), is concerned. Whereas, under
the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, Section
29, sub-section (2), clause (b) provided
that for the purpose of determining any
period of limitation prescribed for any suit,
appeal or application by any special or
local law, the provisions of the Indian
Limitation Act, 1908, other than those
contained in Sections 4, 9 to 18 and 22,
shall not apply and, therefore, the
applicability of Section 5 was in clear and
specific terms excluded, Section 29, sub-
section (2) of the Limitation Act, 1963
enacts in so many terms that for the
purpose of determining the period of
limitation prescribed for any suit, appeal or
application by any special or local law the

provisions contained in Sections 4 to 24,
which would include Section 5, shall apply
insofar as and to the extent to which they
are not expressly excluded by such special
or local law. Section 29, sub-section (2),
clause (b) of the Indian Limitation Act,
1908 specifically excluded the applicability
of Section 5, while Section 29, sub-section
(2) of the Limitation Act, 1963, in clear and
unambiguous terms, provides for the
applicability of Section 5 and the ratio of
the decision in
 
 Kaushalya Rani case
 
 can,
therefore, have no application in cases
governed by the Limitation Act, 1963, since
that decision proceeded on the hypothesis
that the applicability of Section 5 was
excluded by reason of Section 29(2)(b) of
the Indian Limitation Act, 1908. Since
under the Limitation Act, 1963, Section 5
is specifically made applicable by Section
29, sub-section (2), it can be availed of for
the purpose of extending the period of
limitation prescribed by a special or local
law, if the applicant can show that he had
sufficient cause for not presenting the
application within the period of limitation.
It is only if the special or local law
expressly excludes the applicability of
Section 5, that it would stand displaced.
Here, as pointed out by this Court
in Kaushalya Rani case the time limit of
sixty days laid down in sub-section (4) of
Section 417 is a special law of limitation
and we do not find anything in this special
law which expressly excludes the
applicability of Section 5. It is true that the
language of sub-section (4) of Section 417
is mandatory and compulsive, in that it
provides in no uncertain terms that no
application for grant of special leave to
appeal from an order of acquittal shall be
entertained by the High Court after the

expiry of sixty days from the date of that
order of acquittal. But that would be the
language of every provision prescribing a
period of limitation. It is because a bar
against entertainment of an application
beyond the period of limitation is created
by a special or local law that it becomes
necessary to invoke the aid of Section 5 in
order that the application may be
entertained despite such bar. Mere
provision of a period of limitation in
howsoever peremptory or imperative
language is not sufficient to displace the
applicability of Section 5. The conclusion
is, therefore, irresistible that in a case
where an application for special leave to
appeal from an order of acquittal is filed
after the coming into force of the Limitation
Act, 1963, Section 5 would be available to
the applicant and if he can show that he
had sufficient cause for not preferring the
application within the time limit of sixty
days prescribed in sub-section (4) of
Section 417, the application would not be
barred and despite the expiration of the
time limit of sixty days, the High Court
would have the power to entertain it.
 (emphasis supplied)
8.
Mr. Vijay Kumar Aggarwal, learned counsel would then
rely upon two cases, namely, Hukumdev Narain Yadav
v. Lalit Narain Mishra [AIR 1974 SC 480] and
subsequently Gopal Sardar v. Karuna Sardar [2004
(4) SCC 252]. 
9.
Both the above mentioned cases were dealing with special
laws where a period of limitation was prescribed.

Whereas Hukumdev Narain Yadav (supra) relates to
Election matter where Section 81 of the Representation of
People’s Act, 1951, prescribes a limitation of 45 days for
filing an Election Petition, Gopal Sardar (supra) dealt
with the right of pre-emption under Section 8 of the West
Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 which again prescribed
three months limitation for a bargadar and four months
for a ‘raiyat’ to make an application for pre-emption to the
concerned authorities. 
10.
There can be no quarrel with the argument that where a
special law prescribes a period of limitation, Section 5 of
the Limitation Act would have no application, subject
only to the language used in the special statute. The
language prescribing a period of limitation is an
important factor as well. 
 For example, in the
Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 Section 81 prescribes
limitation for presenting an election petition as under:-
“81. Presentation of petitions.—(1) An
election petition calling in question any
election may be presented on one or
more of the grounds specified
in 207[sub-section (1)] of Section 100
and Section 101 to the 208[High
Court] by any candidate at such
election or any elector 209[within forty-

five days from, but not earlier than the
date of election of the returned
candidate or if there are more than one
returned candidate at the election and
dates of their election are different, the
later of those two dates].
Explanation.—In this sub-section,
“elector” means a person who was
entitled to vote at the election to which
the election petition relates, whether
he has voted at such election or not.
(2) [Omitted]
(3) Every election petition shall be
accompanied by as many copies
thereof as there are respondents
mentioned in the petition [* * *] and
every such copy shall be attested by
the petitioner under his own signature
to be a true copy of the petition.”
Section 86(1) further says that in case an election petition
is filed beyond a period of 45 days it shall be dismissed.
Section 86(1) reads as under:-
“86. Trial of election petitions.—(1) The
High Court shall dismiss an election
petition which does not comply with the
provisions of Section 81 or Section 82 or
Section 117.
Explanation.—An order of the High
Court dismissing an election petition
under this sub-section shall be deemed
to be an order made under clause (a) of
Section 98.”

The election statute thus expressly bars filing of an
election petition beyond 45 days. The language of the
statute, leaves no ambiguity in this regard. 
 
“The High Court shall dismiss an election petition”, is the
language given in the statute. Simply put the Court has
no choice but to dismiss an election petition, which is
filed beyond a period of 45 days. 
There is no scope for condoning the delay in an election
matter. Therefore in Hukumdev Narain Yadav (supra) it
was stated as under:-
“17. Though Section 29(2) of the Limitation
Act has been made applicable to appeals
both under the Act as well as under the
Code of Criminal Procedure, no case has
been brought to our notice where Section
29(2) has been made applicable to an
election petition filed under Section 81 of
the Act by virtue of which either Sections
4, 5 or 12 of the Limitation Act has been
attracted. Even assuming that where a
period of limitation has not been fixed for
election petitions in the Schedule to the
Limitation Act which is different from that
fixed under Section 81 of the Act, Section
29(2) would be attracted, and what we have
to determine is whether the provisions of
this Section are expressly excluded in the
case of an election petition….. In our view,
even in a case where the special law does
not exclude the provisions of Sections 4 to
24 of the Limitation Act by an express
reference, it would nonetheless be open to

the Court to examine whether and to what
extent the nature of those provisions or the
nature of the subject-matter and scheme of
the special law exclude their operation. The
provisions of Section 3 of the Limitation
Act that a suit instituted, appeal preferred
and application made after the prescribed
period shall be dismissed are provided for
in Section 86 of the Act which gives a
peremptory command that the High Court
shall dismiss an election petition which
does not comply with the provisions of
Sections 81, 82 or 117.
 (emphasis supplied)
11.
Later, while dealing another special statute viz West
Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 this Court in Gopal
Sardar (supra) had an occasion to comment on Mangu
Ram (supra) where it says that the decision of
Hukumdev Narain Yadav (supra) was not brought to the
notice of this Court when Mangu Ram (supra) was
decided (we have discussed Mangu Ram in the preceding
paragraphs). Much reliance has been placed by the
learned counsel for the appellant Shri Agarwal on this
observation of the Court.
Hukumdev Narain Yadav as we have already
discussed above relates to election laws which falls in an
entirely different category, as far as period of limitation is

concerned. A bare comment of this Court that a case
was not considered would not mean that the entire
findings of the court arrived in Mangu Ram (supra) are
wrong. We must appreciate Gopal Sardar for what it
decides and the facts and the context on which this
decision is based. What were the facts of Gopal Sardar
and what were the findings of this Court? In Gopal
Sardar, this Court was again dealing with the period of
limitation relating to West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955
and the application of Section 5 of the Limitation Act.
Section 8 of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955
gave certain right to a “raiyat” for transfer of land of co-
sharer, exercising his right of pre-emption but this right
had to be exercised “within a period of 4 months of the
date of cause of action”. The same Act in its Section
14-‘O’ and Section 19 while discussing the period of
appeal provides that Section 5 of the Limitation Act
would apply. This Court thus came to a finding that
though Section 5 of the Limitation Act would apply in the
case of appeal but it will not apply in a case when the
proceedings itself had to be initiated in form of suit under

Section 8 of the Act which had to be done within a period
of 4 months. 
Section 8 of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955
reads as under: 
“8. Right of purchase by co-sharer or
contiguous tenant.—(1) If a portion or
share of a plot of land of a raiyat is
transferred to any person other than a co-
sharer of a raiyat in the plot of land,
the bargadar in the plot of land may,
within three months of the date of such
transfer, or any co-sharer of a raiyat in the
plot of land may, within three months of
the service of the notice given under sub-
section (5) of Section 5, or any raiyat
possessing land adjoining such plot of
land, may, within four months of the date
of such transfer, apply to the Munsif
having territorial jurisdiction for transfer
of the said portion or share of the plot of
land to him, subject to the limit mentioned
in Section 14-M on deposit of the
consideration money together with a
further sum of ten per cent of that
amount.
This is what this Court said on these two provisions:
“19. We conclude that Section 5 of the
Limitation Act cannot be pressed into
service in aid of a belated application
made under Section 8 of the Act seeking
condonation of delay. The right of pre-
emption conferred under Section 8 is a
statutory right besides being weak; it has
to be exercised strictly in terms of the said

section and consideration of equity has
no place. On the facts found in these
appeals, applications under Section 8
were not made within four months from
the date of transfer but they were made
four years and six years after the date of
transfer
 
respectively
 
which
 
were
hopelessly barred by time. Benefit of
Section 5 of the Limitation Act not being
available to the applications made under
Section 8, Section 3 of the Limitation Act
essentially entails their dismissal.”
 Neither Hukumdev Narain Yadav nor Gopal Sardar
would help the case of the appellant as both these cases
deal with special laws which prescribed a period of
limitation and the expression of the language contained
in the law is very clear that under no circumstances can
such a limitation be condoned. The relevant provisions
have already been discussed earlier. 
In the present case, there is no such exclusionary
provision under Section 378 of CrPC, or at any other
place in the Code. The benefit of Section 5 read with
Sections 2 and 3 of the Limitation Act, 1963 can therefore
be availed in an appeal against acquittal. There is no
force in the contentions raised by the appellants as
regards the non-application of Section 5 of the Limitation

Act in the present case and the appeal is therefore
dismissed. 
12.
The interim order dated 20.03.2017 passed by this Court
is hereby vacated. The Registry is hereby directed to
apprise these proceedings to the Delhi High Court so that
the matter may continue....………………………….J.
 [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]..……….………………….J.
 [PRASANNA BHALACHANDRA VARALE]
New Delhi.
February 20, 2024.