IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

ANUN DHAWAN & ORS. 

 …PETITIONER(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 
 
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
 
1. The petitioners claiming to be the social activists have filed the present 
petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India seeking various 
directions against the States and Union Territories to formulate a 
scheme to implement the concept of Community Kitchens to combat 
hunger, malnutrition and starvation and the deaths resulting thereof. 
The petitioners have also sought direction against the National Legal 
Services Authority to formulate a scheme in order to further the 

provisions of Article 50(1)A of the Constitution, as also against the 
Central Government to create a National Food Grid beyond the scope 
of the Public Distribution Scheme. 
2. This Court vide the order dated 27.10.2021 had directed the Union of 
India to interact with the concerned stakeholders for consideration of the 
Community Kitchens Scheme or any other similar schemes relating to 
Community Kitchens which are already in operation in different states. 
Subsequently also various orders were passed by the Court directing 
the States to attend the meetings managed by the Union of India for 
exploring the possibility of framing up of the Community Kitchens 
Scheme. 
3. The States/Union Territories have filed their counter affidavits/ 
responses stating in detail about the schemes adopted and enforced in 
their respective states like Poshan Abhiyan, Take Home Ration, 
Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana, Mid-Day Meal, Open Market 
Sales Scheme, One Nation One Ration Card Scheme, Annapurna 
Scheme, Antyodaya Anna Yojana etc. also stating that some of the 
schemes are monitored by the Integrated Child Development Services 
and Integrated Tribal Development Program. The States in their 
respective affidavits had also stated that there were no deaths reported 

due to starvation or malnutrition. The Union of India has also submitted 
that the Government is committed to focus on combating hunger and 
malnutrition by implementing various schemes through the State 
Governments to enhance the food security. As per the submission, the 
Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana was launched to address 
economic disruptions and is extended to free grain provision to 
Antyodaya Anna Yojana and Priority Households to alleviate poverty 
burdens; Atma Nirbhar Bharat Package allocated additional food grain 
for migrants during the Covid-19 crisis; Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti 
Nirman Scheme aims to improve nutrition among school students and 
accordingly allocates food grains; Scheme for Adolescent Girls focuses 
to improve the health and nutrition of adolescent girls aged 11 to 18 
years; Annapurna Scheme provides indigent senior citizens with free 
food grains. The Advisories are being issued from time to time to include 
millets and to widen nutritional standards to enhance nutrition levels 
amongst the beneficiaries. 
4. The learned counsels for the petitioners submitted that undoubtedly the 
Union of India and the States have taken the steps to combat hunger, 
malnutrition and starvation by implementing various Central and State 
Government Schemes, however according to them even if the hunger, 

malnutrition or starvation may not necessarily result in death, the Centre 
and States have the constitutional duty to ensure basic sustainability of 
human life. The learned ASG Mr. R. Bala submitted that this being not 
an adversarial litigation, the details of schemes, programmes, policies 
and other measures taken by the Central Government and the State 
Governments have been submitted to satisfy the conscience of the court 
that they have successfully implemented the schemes for protecting the 
fundamental rights of the citizens. He also submitted that there is no 
further need for continued monitoring by this Court. 
5. It is significant to note that though the Constitution of India does not 
explicitly provide for Right to food, the fundamental Right to life 
enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution does include Right to live with 
human dignity and right to food and other basic necessities. The Article 
47 of the Constitution also provides that the State shall regard the 
raising of level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and 
the improvement of public health as among its primary duties. 
6. Keeping in view the goal of eradicating extreme poverty and hunger as 
one of the goals of United Nations, and keeping in view the constitutional 
guarantees for ensuring food security of the people as also for improving 
the nutritional status of the population, especially of women and 

children, the Parliament has enacted the National Food Security Act, 
2013 (for short NFSA). The object of the said Act is to provide for food 
and nutritional security in human life cycle approach, by ensuring access 
to adequate quantity of quality food at affordable prices to people to live 
a life with dignity and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. With the enactment of the NFSA there was a paradigm shift in 
the approach to food security from “welfare to rights based approach.” 
The said Act has been implemented in all States/ UTs. One of the 
guiding principles of the Act is its “life cycle approach, wherein special 
provisions have been made for pregnant women and lactating mothers 
and children in the age group of 6 months to 14 years, by entitling them 
to receive nutritious meals free of cost, through a widespread network 
of Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) centers, called 
Anganwadi centers under the ICDS schemes, and also through the 
schools under Mid-day Meal (MDM) scheme”. Higher nutritional norms 
have also been prescribed for malnourished children. Pregnant women 
and lactating mothers are entitled to receive cash maternity benefit to 
partly compensate them for the wage loss during the period of 
pregnancy and to supplement nutrition. The Central Government after 
consultation with the State Governments, has also framed the Rules 

called Cash Transfer of Food Subsidy Rules 2015, in exercise of the 
powers conferred by clause (d) of sub section 2 of Section 39 read with 
clause (h) of sub section 2 of Section 12 of the NFSA. Under the said 
Rules, the State Governments have been enabled to implement the 
scheme with the approval of the Central Government to provide food 
subsidy in cash directly into the bank accounts of entitled households to 
purchase the entitled quantity of food grains from the open market. 
Significantly, Chapter VI under the Head “Women Empowerment” has 
been incorporated which provides that the eldest woman who is not less 
than 18 years of age in every eligible household, shall be head of the 
household for the purpose of issue of ration cards. The Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism at the District and the State level has also been 
provided for expeditious and effective redressal of grievances of the 
aggrieved persons in the matters relating to distribution of entitled food 
grains or meals under Chapter II and to enforce entitlements under the 
Act. 
7. Thus, there being a systematic legal framework provided under the 
NFSA for the implementation of the schemes and programmes like 
Targeted Public Distribution System, Mid-day Meal Scheme, Integrated 
Child Development Services and Maternity Cash Entitlement along with 

a Monitoring Mechanism and a Grievance Redressal Mechanism, and 
the States/UTs having also implemented various other schemes and 
programmes under the said Act, we do not propose to direct the 
States/UTs to implement the concept of Community Kitchens as prayed 
for by the petitioners in the instant petition. 
8. It is well settled that the scope of judicial review in examining the policy 
matters is very limited. The Courts do not and cannot examine the 
correctness, suitability or appropriateness of a policy, nor are the courts 
advisors to the executive on the matters of policy which the executive is 
entitled to formulate. The Courts cannot direct the States to implement 
a particular policy or scheme on the ground that a better, fairer or wiser 
alternative is available. Legality of the policy, and not the wisdom or 
soundness of the policy, would be the subject of judicial review.1 
9. As elaborated earlier, when the NFSA with a ‘right based approach’ for 
providing food and nutritional security, is in force and when other welfare 
schemes under the said Act have also been framed and implemented 
by the Union of India and the States, to ensure access to adequate 
quantity of quality food at affordable prices to people to live a life with 
 
1 Directorate of Film Festivals and Others vs. Gaurav Ashwin Jain and Others, (2007) 

dignity, we do not propose to give any further direction in that regard. 
We have not examined whether the concept of Community Kitchens is 
a better or wiser alternative available to the States to achieve the object 
of NFSA, rather we would prefer to leave it open to the States/UTs to 
explore such alternative welfare schemes as may be permissible under 
the NFSA. 
10. Subject to the afore stated observations, the Writ Petition is disposed of. 

 …………………………. J. 
 [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 

 …………………………. J. 
 [PANKAJ MITHAL] 
 
NEW DELHI, 

FEBRUARY 22nd, 2024