SLP (C) No. 17437 of 2018 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
[ SLP (Civil) No(s). 17437 of 2018] 

NAJRUL SEIKH 

VERSUS 
 
DR. SUMIT BANERJEE & ANR. 
 
ORDER 
 
1. 
Delay condoned. 
2. 
Leave granted. 
3. 
The Appellant before us, a BPL card holder, is the father 
of Master Irshad, a 13-year-old boy who lost complete vision in 
his right eye following an allegedly negligent cataract surgery 
undertaken by the Respondents. The complaint preferred by the 
Appellant under Section 12 of the Consumer Protection Act, 
1986 was allowed by the District Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission (‘DCDRC’) However, the order of the DCDRC was 
set aside by the West Bengal State Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission (‘SCDRC’) and thereafter, the revision petition 
preferred by the Appellant before the National Consumer 

SLP (C) No. 17437 of 2018 

Disputes Redressal Commission (the ‘NCDRC’) was also 
dismissed vide order dated 09.06.2016, which is impugned before 
this Court. 
Brief Facts: 
4. 
The facts, to the extent relevant, are that on 14.11.2006, 
Master Irshad sustained an injury in his right eye. The next day, 
he was taken to Disha Eye Hospital and the examination report 
revealed that Irshad was suffering from traumatic cataract and 
required a minor surgery. Being unable to finance his son’s 
treatment at Disha Eye Hospital, the Appellant approached 
Respondent No.1, a doctor and partner at Megha Eye Centre i.e., 
Respondent No. 2 on 18.11.2006. 
5. 
Thereafter, Respondent No. 1 affirmed the previous 
medical opinion and accordingly, conducted the surgery on 
24.11.2006. After the surgery, Irshad began experiencing 
irritation, pain, and blood clotting and despite visiting 
Respondent No. 1 multiple times, there was no improvement in 
his condition. Eventually, Respondent No.1 referred them to the 
Regional Institute of Ophthalmology (‘RIO’) and a month later, 
on 19.04.2007, the Appellant and his son visited the RIO and 
were informed that it was a case of Retinal detachment leading 
to permanent loss of vision in the right eye, caused due to the 
faulty operation conducted by Respondent No. 1. 

SLP (C) No. 17437 of 2018 

6. 
Vide order dated 16.05.2013, the DCDRC found that there 
was deficiency in the medical services provided by the 
Respondents herein and inter alia directed payment of INR 
9,00,000 as compensation, in favour of the Appellant within a 
period of one month, failing which, the amount would be subject 
to an interest @ 10% until the date of realisation. The DCDRC 
relied on the uncontroverted expert evidence provided by Dr. 
Anindya Gupta, RMO-cum-Clinical tutor from the Burdwan 
Medical College to hold that Irshad lost his vision due to the 
negligent and careless attitude of Respondent No. 1 manifesting 
through lapses in pre-operative and post-operative care and 
rehabilitation. 
7. 
On the other hand, the SCDRC vide order dated 
11.09.2015 held that the Appellant herein failed to establish 
deficiency of service/negligence on part of the Respondents and 
dismissed the complaint of the Appellant. The SCDRC relied on 
the report of the West Bengal Medical Council (the ‘Medical 
Council’) dated 18.05.2015 which exonerated Respondent No. 1 
of all charges of misconduct/negligence and instead found 
contributory negligence on part of the Appellant as he visited the 
RIO only after a delay of 1 month, contrary to the advice of 
Respondent No. 1. 
8. 
Similarly, the NCDRC also held that there was no 
negligence on part of the Respondents and concluded that the 

SLP (C) No. 17437 of 2018 

Appellant’s delay of one month in approaching the RIO was fatal 
for his son. 
Submissions & Analysis: 
9. 
Learned Counsel for the Appellant vehemently contends 
that the NCDRC failed to consider that the SCDRC undertook a 
selective appreciation of evidence, completely disregarding the 
uncontroverted expert evidence provided by Dr. Gupta regarding 
the lapses in pre-operative and post-operative care provided by 
the Respondents. 
10., Learned Counsel for the Respondents submits 
that both the NCDRC and the SCDRC have correctly placed 
reliance on the decision of the Medical Council to arrive at their 
conclusions regarding the absence of negligence on part of the 
Respondents. 
11. 
This Court has heard the Learned Counsel for the parties 
and perused the record. 
12. 
Upon perusal of the orders of the NCDRC and the SCDRC, 
we find significant merit in the contention of the Learned 
Counsel for the Appellant. At this stage, it would be appropriate 
to refer to the findings of the DCDRC regarding the negligence 
of the Respondents. The operative paragraph(s) of the order 
passed by the DCDRC read as under: 

SLP (C) No. 17437 of 2018 

“So, we are very much affirmed that 
diagnosis of Disha Eye Hospital regarding 
"traumatic cataract" was known to the O.P. No.1 
before the operation. This O.P. No.l has admitted in 
the last portion, of para-23 of the written version by 
saying that 'from medical point of view it is well 
established that management and rehabilitations of 
traumatic cataract, specially in a child, is very 
difficult, unpredictable and any complication may 
happen at any moment and it cannot be ascertained 
before 
hand. 
Unfortunately 
this 
type 
of 
complication happened to the son of the 
complainant. 
If that be the position, why the doctor did not 
take any post-operative care of traumatic cataract. 
In this regard the expert doctor Anindya Gupta who 
is the RMO-cum-Clinical Tutor department of 
Ophthalmology, Burdwan Medical College and 
Hospital has specifically stated that "prior to 
operation skin test is done for determining any drug 
allergy if at all". But no test of drug allergy was 
advised in the prescriptions. Apart from that expert 
doctor has stated that OT date was on 24.11.2006 
but the medical card of the patient does not reflect 
the treatment prior to 24.11.2006 except urine test 
pending and there is nothing mention of next date of 
review after 24.11.2006. It has further stated 
normally a patient is checked on the next date of 
operation if not discharged earlier. The expert 
doctor has further stated that theoretically speaking 
any check after 72 hours of the operation is 
sufficient in a normal case during post-operative 
period but the card shows that the next date of 
checking is 1.12.2006 after (24.11.2006, date of 
OT). The expert doctor further stated that on 
6.12.2006 the vision rating, is not normal. It is 

SLP (C) No. 17437 of 2018 

pertinent to point that the expert doctor has 
specifically stated that "as a doctor one should take 
care of all risk factor of the patient before 
performing the operation". So, it is clear inspite of 
knowing the fact of seriousness of the treatment i.e. operation of traumatic cataract O.P. No.l doctor did 
nothing on the medical point of view. So, we are 
opined that it is not only the unfortunate of the 
patient but it is the unfortunate of the society at 
large that this type of unruly negligent doctor still 
performing operation in the medical field, 
particularly when he had no faith upon the medical 
science and medical ethics and regulations. In this 
regard the expert doctor has stoutly stated in the end 
of his deposition that a doctor must always be 
updated. If a doctor violates the code of medical 
ethics and regulations it can be said to be 
professional misconduct. 
Apart from that, the expert did not stop of 
saying against the treatment of this O.P. No.l but 
stated "non-adherence to medical prescription, 
post-operative trauma etc. are the contributory 
factor for the loss of vision after operation. Extra 
Capsular Surgery is the modern level of surgery and 
risk factor may be less in case of Extra Capsular 
Surgery compared to other method of surgery which 
is available in all Eye Hospital. The O.P. No.l has 
admitted in para No.20 of written version that he is 
being a one of the partner of Megha Eye Centre, 
which is well equipped and (modernized institution 
with world class microscope for examination. If that 
be so, what prompted the O.P. No.1 not to induct 
surgery in the modern method i.e. Capsular 
Surgery?, particularly when he was well aware 
regarding the gravity of disease namely traumatic 
cataract and also aware that on medical point of 

SLP (C) No. 17437 of 2018 

view management and rehabilitation of traumatic 
cataract specially in a child is very difficult, 
unpredictable and any type of complication may 
happen at any point of time which cannot be 
ascertained before hand.” 
 
It is evident that the DCDRC has made specific findings 
regarding lapses in duty of care by Respondent No.1 vis a vis both 
pre-operative and post-operative standards for conducting a 
traumatic cataract surgery. More pertinently, through the 
evidence of Dr. Gupta, a nexus was established between the 
lapses in post-operative care (the delay in review, the abnormal 
vision rating on 06.12.2006 which was left unchecked by 
Respondent No. 1, failure to undertake extra capsular method of 
surgery despite having the necessary equipment) and the 
development of loss of vision after the operation. It must be re-
emphasized that the expert evidence of Dr. Gupta went entirely 
uncontroverted due to the absence of cross-examination and the 
failure of the Respondents to bring on record any other 
contradictory expert evidence. 
13. 
Despite the presence of evidence pointing towards 
negligence of the Respondents, both the SCDRC and the 
NCDRC failed to consider it and relied only on the report of the 
Medical Council. On a perusal of the Medical Council report, it 
appears that the Medical Council did not delve into the nuances 
of pre-operative and post-operative care. Further, the finding of 

SLP (C) No. 17437 of 2018 

contributory negligence attributed to the Appellant is entirely 
unsubstantiated by expert opinion. 
14. 
Under these circumstances, both the SCDRC and the 
NCDRC ought to have examined the evidence in totality, 
especially since this plea was urged by the Counsel for the 
Appellant in both the forums. Instead, both the forums have 
mechanically and exclusively relied upon the Medical Council 
report and reiterated its findings without any reference to the 
evidence of Dr. Gupta. While the report of the Medical Council 
can be relevant for determining deficiency of service before a 
consumer forum, it cannot be determinative, especially when it 
contradicts the evidentiary findings made by a consumer forum. 
In these circumstances, the appellate forum is tasked with the 
duty of undertaking a more thorough examination of the evidence 
on record. On this failing alone, the orders of the SCDRC and 
DCDRC deserve to be set aside. 
15. 
As it stands today, the specific findings made by the 
DCDRC regarding lapses in post-operative care by the 
Respondents and the resultant development of Retinal 
detachment remains unchallenged by the other evidence on 
record. In fact, the holding of the DCDRC is strengthened not 
only by the report of the Medical Council which states that 
development of Retinal Detachment is not uncommon in cases of 
blunt trauma as in the case of Irshad, but also by the admission 

SLP (C) No. 17437 of 2018 

of the Respondent No. 1 itself that management and 
rehabilitation of traumatic cataract for a child is very difficult, 
unpredictable, and prone to complications. That being the case, 
and in view of the established principle of law that in cases of 
deficiency of medical services, duty of care does not end with 
surgery, we have no hesitation in affirming the finding of the 
DCDRC that there was a deficiency in the medical services 
provided by the Respondents to the Appellant’s son. 
16. 
In view of the aforesaid, the present appeal succeeds and 
the order of the NCDRC and the SCDRC are set aside. 
Accordingly, the Respondents are directed to comply with the 
order of the DCDRC within one month from the date of this 
order. 
17. 
Resultantly, the appeal stands allowed. 
18. 
Pending applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of. 
 
……………………………………J. 

 [VIKRAM NATH] 

……………………………………J. 
 [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY 22, 2024