IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

RAVINDRA KUMAR 

…Appellant (s) 
 
Versus 
 
STATE OF U.P. & ORS....Respondent(s) 

JUDGMENT 

K.V. Viswanathan, J. 
 
1. 
The vexed question is back again. Is it a hard and fast and a 
cut and dried rule that, in all circumstances, non-disclosure of 
a criminal case (in which the candidate is acquitted) in the 
verification form is fatal for the candidate’s employment? We 
think not and it ought not to be so too. Fortunately, we have 
a judicial chorus supporting our view. Each case will turn on 
the special facts and circumstances. We have endeavoured to 
analyse the applicable precedents and have followed those 

line of cases, which have a striking similarity to the facts at 
hand. 
 
Facts of the case: 
2. 
Ravindra Kumar (the appellant), on 12.02.2004, applied for 
the post of Constable. His record was unblemished. Five days 
after submitting the application, i.e. on 17.02.2004, he was 
embroiled in a criminal case for offences punishable under 
Sections 324, 352 and 504 Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“IPC”), 
which he claims was a false case. He cleared the written exam 
and the interview. Earlier he had cleared the physical 
efficiency test too. 
3. 
In the meantime, the criminal case took an interesting turn as 
by the judgment dated 13.09.2004, the appellant was 
acquitted. At that criminal trial, the informant PW-1 Srikant, 
who according to the prosecution, was allegedly injured in the 
incident on account of injuries allegedly inflicted by the 
appellant and by Vijendra, Ishwar Dayal and Radhey Shyam, 
turned hostile. The son of the informant, PW-2 Ram Gulam 

with whom according to the prosecution, the accused party 
was quarreling, till PW-1 Srikant intervened and allegedly 
became subject to physical attack, also turned hostile. Ram 
Gulam clearly deposed that he could not identify any of the 
accused. The witnesses even stated that the Daroga Ji (Station 
House Officer) did not record their statement. In the cross-
examination, they also stated that there was a big crowd at the 
occurrence and as such they could not identify the assailants. 
Insofar as Section 504 IPC was concerned which deals with 
intentional insult with the intent to provoke breach of peace, 
both the parties have filed a compromise memo, which was 
accepted by the Court. In view of the above, they were 
acquitted of all the charges. 
4. 
The Appellant, after being selected, was required to submit 
an Affidavit disclosing criminal antecedents, if any. The 
Appellant submitted the affidavit on 30.10.2004, wherein, he 
inter alia, stated that no criminal case, cognizable or non-
cognizable, has ever been registered against him. 

5. 
Thereafter, he was asked to report for training and when he 
reported, he was not sent for training on the ground that there 
was a character verification pending. Subsequently, on 
12.04.2005, he was given the following letter cancelling his 
selection: 
“It is to inform that you have been selected on the post of 
Recruit Constable PAC by the Selection Committee, 8th 
Battalion PAC, Bareilly after the examination. After 
selection, you submitted affidavit dated 30.10.2004, in 
which, you have mentioned that no criminal case/case, 
cognizable or non cognizable, has never been registered 
against you and no challan and police investigations are 
pending against you. On getting made your character 
verification from the Superintendent of Police of your 
Home District Deoria, this fact has come in light that a 
Crime No.95/04 under Section 324/504 and 352 I.P.C. was 
registered against you at the Police Station - Gauri Bazar, 
District Deoria discharged you from the charge in 
question on 13.09.2004. 
 
It is clear from the above that you have concealed 
the above offence and filed false affidavit. Therefore, due 
to producing false affidavit, your selection on the post of 
Recruit Constable in PAC is hereby cancelled.” 
 
6. 
The case of the Department was that, under Clause 9 of the 
recruitment notification dated 20.01.2004, if any fact is 
concealed in the affidavit by the candidate, his candidature is 

liable for cancellation. Clause 9, being relevant, is extracted 
herein below: 
“9. Character Verification: 
Character verification of all the candidates found eligible 
as above will be done as per the government rules 
prevailing at that time. In character verification, eligible 
candidates will have to furnish an affidavit in the 
prescribed format on a non-judicial stamp paper duly 
attested by a public notary. The format of the affidavit will 
be made available by the Selection Committee to the 
candidates finally selected in the interview. If it is found 
through the character verification or any other means that 
facts have been concealed in the affidavit by the candidate, 
not only will the selection of the candidate be cancelled 
but legal action can also be taken against him. No 
candidate/person/organization will have the right to 
protest in any court in case the selection is cancelled due 
to false facts being mentioned in the affidavit or not 
providing the prescribed required information.” 
 
7. 
The multiple Clauses of the Affidavit, verified on 30.10.2004, 
namely, Clause 4, 5, 6, 7 and 11 read as under: 
“4. That to the best of my knowledge, no criminal 
case/matter (cognizable or non-cognizable) has ever been 
registered against me, nor has the police challaned me in 
any such criminal case, nor is any police investigation 
pending against me. NO 
 
5. That I have never been arrested in any criminal case 
(cognizable or non-cognizable) nor have I ever 
surrendered in any such criminal case. NO 

6. That the details of the criminal cases which have been 
registered against me or in which I have been challaned or 
which were/are pending against me in the court or under 
investigation by the police are as follows (if the 
information is nil then write ‘zero’) 
 
7. That the details of the criminal cases pending against me 
in any court and in which I was punished or acquitted or 
discharged are as follows (if the information is nil then 
write ‘zero’) ZERO 
 
11. That if anything mentioned in the application is found 
to be false or the facts are found to be concealed and if I 
am immediately unconditionally terminated from the Uttar 
Pradesh Police Service and also given statutory 
punishment, then it will be acceptable to me.” 
 
8. 
In the meantime, the police verification proceeded. On 
09.12.2004, the report of Police Station, Gauri Bazar, District 
Deoria stated that while a case in crime no. 95 of 2004 under 
Sections 324, 352 and 504 IPC was registered against the 
candidate, the candidate was acquitted and there was no appeal 
filed against the acquittal order. Further, there was no other 
case pending in any court nor was any case registered against 
the candidate at the police station. The SHO further mentioned 
as follows: 

“The character of the candidate is excellent. As per my 
consent the candidate is eligible to do government service 
under the State Government” 
 
Moreover, the Gram Pradhan also seconded the “excellent” 
character of Appellant in the Character Certificate issued by 
him. The Character Certificate issued by the Gram Pradhan 
reads as under:- 
 
“CHARACTER CERTIFICATE 
It is certified that Ravindra Kumar s/o Late Pardesi Prasad, 
is a permanent resident of Village Bagapar, Post Katora, 
Police Station Gauri Bazar, District Deoria (Uttar 
Pradesh). I know and recognize him very well. His 
character is excellent. I wish him a bright future. 
 
Signature and seal 
 
Gram Pradhan” 

9. 
Thereafter, on 10.12.2004, the Superintendent of Police, 
Deoria, whilst taking note of the report of Police Station, 
Gauri Bazar, District Deoria, informed the Commandant, 8th 
Battalion, PAC., Bareilly that, in his opinion, the candidate 
was eligible to do government service under the State 

Government. The relevant portion of the letter dated 
10.12.2004 is reproduced as follows- 
“….The character of the candidate is excellent. Therefore, 
the candidate Shri Ravindra Kumar s/o Shri Pardesi Ram 
r/o Bagapar, Post Kathaura, Police Station Gauri Bazar, 
District Deoria is eligible to do government service under 
the State government.” 
 
10. 
The State of U.P., in support of the cancellation letter dated 
12.04.2005, relies on a letter dated 31.12.2004 written on 
behalf of the Inspector General of Police, PAC to the 
Commandant, 8th Battalion, PAC wherein it was stated, that 
with regard to the cases of the appellant and two others, who 
were found to be acquitted in criminal cases during character 
verification and who had not mentioned the factum of those 
cases in the affidavit, it was to be ensured that action as per 
the rules regarding submission of false affidavit be taken 
against those candidates. The State has also placed on record 
a letter of 07.01.2005 by the Inspector General of Police to 
all the Commandants of PAC Battalion, U.P. stating that with 
regard to submission of false affidavit, action should be taken 

as per the instructions issued. In the cases of candidates who 
had mentioned the facts related to the charges registered 
against them in the affidavit, action should be taken as per 
their discretion and the Government orders. 
11. The State has also placed on record the “Form of verification 
of character” setting out that it was necessary to verify the 
character and antecedents before appointment of any 
candidate. The Verifying Authority was to report directly if 
found eligible. If the candidate is ineligible according to report 
then the report was to be sent to the District Magistrate. The 
District Magistrate was to call the candidate and record his 
statement and write down his opinion as to what he considers 
about the candidate and also send the statement of the 
candidate. In the note appended, it was even set out that, even 
a conviction need not by itself involve the refusal of a 
certificate of good character. The circumstances of the 
conviction should be taken into account and if they involve no 
moral turpitude or association with crimes of violence or with 

a movement which has as its object, the overthrow by violent 
means of Government as by law established in Union of India 
then mere conviction need not be regarded as a 
disqualification. It is also mentioned in Clause 4 of the Form 
of Verification of Character as follows:- 
“4. It is further requested that the following general 
rules regarding conduct of candidates for government 
jobs should also be kept in mind. 

The character of a candidate for direct 
appointment must be such as to render him suitable in 
all respects for employment in the service or post to 
which he is to be appointed. It would be the duty of 
the appointing authority to satisfy itself on this point.” 
 
Proceedings in the High Court:- 
12. Aggrieved by the letter dated 12.04.2005 of the cancellation of 
selection, the appellant filed a before the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad. The appellant argued that there was no deliberate 
or willful concealment on his part as he has been acquitted in 
the criminal case. The Ld. Single Judge, vide judgement dt. 
16.05.2005, dismissed the Writ Petition holding that the 

petitioner has suppressed material information with regard to 
his involvement in a criminal case at the time of filling up the 
form. It was held that the subsequent acquittal of his 
involvement in the criminal case will not absolve him from the 
fact that he had suppressed material information. 
13. The Appellant, being aggrieved by the Judgement of Ld. 
Single Judge, filed an appeal bearing Special Appeal No. 
896/2005. The Division Bench, vide impugned judgment 
dated 29.10.2020, dismissed the Special Appeal holding that 
if a person swears a false affidavit at the time of enrollment, 
he is not fit to be enrolled in the disciplined service. It was 
further held that the act of swearing false affidavit on its own, 
is an act, which touches upon the conduct and character of the 
person. The suppression of the material information from the 
employer does not get vindicated by the subsequent acquittal 
in the case. Moreover, the appointing authority was not 
required to go into the details of the allegations in the criminal 

case, the evidence led in the trial and the reasons for which the 
criminal court had convicted or acquitted the candidate. 
14. The Appellant, being aggrieved of the Judgment dated 
29.10.2010, is before us in the instant appeal. 
Contentions:- 
15. 
Before us Mr. Premashis Choudhary, learned advocate for the 
appellant, contended that there was no willful concealment; 
that at the time of submitting of the application form on 
12.02.2004, there was no criminal case pending against the 
appellant; and at that stage there was no requirement to 
furnish any affidavit. The appellant was acquitted in the 
criminal case on 13.09.2004 i.e. much prior to the filing of 
his affidavit on 30.10.2004. Since no criminal case was 
pending at the time of filing of affidavit, the appellant was 
under a bona fide belief that there was no requirement to 
disclose. It is further contended that as such there was no 
intention to deceive. 

16. On the other hand, Ms. Garima Prashad, learned Additional 
Advocate General and Ms. Ruchira Goel, learned Standing 
Counsel for the State have contended that the appellant made 
a false representation in Clauses 4, 5, 6 and 7 of his Affidavit. 
Further, along with the appellant, two other persons, who were 
found to have been given false statements, have also been 
visited with the cancellation. Moreover, the present case is 
covered in favour of the State, by the judgment of this Court 
in case of Avtar Singh Vs. Union of India and Others, (2016), particularly, para 38.1, 38.2, 38.3 and 38.11 
thereof. 
Questions for consideration:- 
17. In the above background, the questions that arise for 
consideration are:- 
i. 
Was the State justified in cancelling the selection 
of the appellant, vide its order of 12.04.2005? ii. 
To what relief, if any, is the appellant entitled to? 

Discussion and findings: 
18. As the facts reveal, admittedly on 12.02.2004, when the 
appellant applied for the post of Constable, there was no 
criminal case registered or pending. Five days after submitting 
the application, no doubt, he was embroiled in a criminal case 
which has since resulted in an acquittal by the trial court, vide 
order dated 13.09.2004, and no appeal was filed against the 
same. There is no dispute that under Clause 9 of the 
recruitment notification dated 20.01.2004, he was required to 
furnish an Affidavit in the format given by the Selection 
Committee. It is also specifically mentioned in Clause 9 that if 
it is found that facts have been concealed in the Affidavit the 
selection of the candidate is liable for cancellation. As will be 
seen from paras 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the affidavit, information 
(though somewhat repetitive) was sought. It did obligate the 
candidate to disclose any criminal case which was registered 
against him; any arrest made in the past, the details of the cases 
which were pending and, most importantly, the details of 

acquittals were also called for. It is also an undisputed fact that 
the appellant said ‘No’ to each of these queries. The 
appellant’s explanation is that since he was acquitted, he bona 
fide believed that he was only obliged to give details of any 
pending proceedings. 
19. The State had taken the position that Clause 9 of the 
recruitment notification and the queries in the affidavit were 
quite clear and that there being suppression, the cancellation 
was perfectly justified. 
20. The law on this issue is settled by a three-Judge Bench of this 
Court in Avtar Singh (Supra). Paras 34, 35, 36 & 38, which 
sets out the conclusions, are extracted herein below:- 
“34. No doubt about it that verification of character and 
antecedents is one of the important criteria to assess 
suitability and it is open to employer to adjudge 
antecedents of the incumbent, but ultimate action should 
be based upon objective criteria on due consideration of all 
relevant aspects. 
 
35. Suppression of “material” information presupposes 
that what is suppressed that “matters” not every technical 
or trivial matter. The employer has to act on due 
consideration of rules/instructions, if any, in exercise of 

powers in order to cancel candidature or for terminating 
the services of employee. Though a person who has 
suppressed the material information cannot claim 
unfettered right for appointment or continuity in service 
but he has a right not to be dealt with arbitrarily and 
exercise of power has to be in reasonable manner with 
objectivity having due regard to facts of cases. 
 
36. What yardstick is to be applied has to depend upon the 
nature of post, higher post would involve more rigorous 
criteria for all services, not only to uniformed service. For 
lower posts which are not sensitive, nature of duties, 
impact of suppression on suitability has to be considered 
by authorities concerned considering post/nature of 
duties/services and power has to be exercised on due 
consideration of various aspects. 
 
38. We have noticed various decisions and tried to explain 
and reconcile them as far as possible. In view of the 
aforesaid discussion, we summarise our conclusion thus: 
 
38.1. Information given to the employer by a candidate as 
to conviction, acquittal or arrest, or pendency of a criminal 
case, whether before or after entering into service must be 
true and there should be no suppression or false mention 
of required information. 
 
38.2. While passing order of termination of services or 
cancellation of candidature for giving false information, 
the employer may take notice of special circumstances of 
the case, if any, while giving such information. 
 
38.3. The employer shall take into consideration the 
government orders/instructions/rules, applicable to the 
employee, at the time of taking the decision. 
 
38.4. In case there is suppression or false information of 
involvement in a criminal case where conviction or 

acquittal had already been recorded before filling of the 
application/verification form and such fact later comes to 
knowledge of employer, any of the following recourses 
appropriate to the case may be adopted: 
 
38.4.1. In a case trivial in nature in which conviction had 
been recorded, such as shouting slogans at young age or 
for a petty offence which if disclosed would not have 
rendered an incumbent unfit for post in question, the 
employer may, in its discretion, ignore such suppression 
of fact or false information by condoning the lapse. 
 
38.4.2. Where conviction has been recorded in case which 
is not trivial in nature, employer may cancel candidature 
or terminate services of the employee. 
 
38.4.3. If acquittal had already been recorded in a case 
involving moral turpitude or offence of heinous/serious 
nature, on technical ground and it is not a case of clean 
acquittal, or benefit of reasonable doubt has been given, 
the employer may consider all relevant facts available as 
to antecedents, and may take appropriate decision as to the 
continuance of the employee. 
 
38.5. In a case where the employee has made declaration 
truthfully of a concluded criminal case, the employer still 
has the right to consider antecedents, and cannot be 
compelled to appoint the candidate. 
 
38.6. In case when fact has been truthfully declared in 
character verification form regarding pendency of a 
criminal case of trivial nature, employer, in facts and 
circumstances of the case, in its discretion, may appoint 
the candidate subject to decision of such case. 
 
38.7. In a case of deliberate suppression of fact with 
respect to multiple pending cases such false information 
by itself will assume significance and an employer may 

pass appropriate order cancelling candidature or 
terminating services as appointment of a person against 
whom multiple criminal cases were pending may not be 
proper. 
 
38.8. If criminal case was pending but not known to the 
candidate at the time of filling the form, still it may have 
adverse impact and the appointing authority would take 
decision after considering the seriousness of the crime. 
 
38.9. In case the employee is confirmed in service, holding 
departmental enquiry would be necessary before passing 
order of termination/removal or dismissal on the ground of 
suppression or submitting false information in verification 
form. 
 
38.10. For determining suppression or false information 
attestation/verification form has to be specific, not vague. 
Only such information which was required to be 
specifically mentioned has to be disclosed. If information 
not asked for but is relevant comes to knowledge of the 
employer the same can be considered in an objective 
manner while addressing the question of fitness. However, 
in such cases action cannot be taken on basis of 
suppression or submitting false information as to a fact 
which was not even asked for. 
 
38.11. Before a person is held guilty of suppressio veri or 
suggestio falsi, knowledge of the fact must be attributable 
to him.” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
21. As would be clear from Avtar Singh (Supra), it has been 
clearly laid down that though a person who has suppressed the 
material information cannot claim unfettered right for 
appointment, he or she has a right not to be dealt with 

arbitrarily. The exercise of power has to be in a reasonable 
manner with objectivity and having due regard to the facts. In 
short, the ultimate action should be based upon objective 
criteria after due consideration of all relevant aspects. 
22. 
Avtar Singh (Supra) also noticed the judgment in 
Commissioner of Police and Others Vs. Sandeep Kumar, 
(2011). In Sandeep Kumar (supra), this Court set 
out the story of the character “Jean Valjean” in Victor Hugo’s 
novel Les Miserables, where the character was branded as a 
thief for stealing a loaf of bread for his hungry family. It also 
discussed the classic judgment of Lord Denning in Morris v. 
Crown Office, (1970) 2 QB 114 and concluded as follows:- 
“10… … 
In our opinion, we should display the same wisdom as 
displayed by Lord Denning. 
 
 11. As already observed above, youth often commits 
indiscretions, which are often condoned. 
 12. It is true that in the application form the respondent 
did not mention that he was involved in a criminal case 
under Sections 325/34 IPC. Probably he did not mention 
this out of fear that if he did so he would automatically be 
disqualified. At any event, it was not such a serious offence 

like murder, dacoity or rape, and hence a more lenient view 
should be taken in the matter.” 
 
Thereafter, in Avtar Singh (supra) dealing with Sandeep 
Kumar (supra), this Court observed as under: 
“24… … 
This Court has observed that suppression related to a case 
when the age of Sandeep Kumar was about 20 years. He 
was young and at such age people often commit 
indiscretions and such indiscretions may often be 
condoned. The modern approach should be to reform a 
person instead of branding him a criminal all his life. In 
[Morris v. Crown Office, (1970) 2 QB 114: (1970) 2 WLR 
792 (CA)], the observations made were that young people 
are no ordinary criminals. There is no violence, dishonesty 
or vice in them. They were trying to preserve the Welsh 
language. Though they have done wrong but we must 
show mercy on them and they were permitted to go back 
to their studies, to their parents and continue the good 
course.” 
 
23. In Ram Kumar vs. State of U.P. and Others, (2011), another case noticed and discussed in Avtar Singh 
(Supra) near identical facts and construing a 
similar clause in the verification form, this Court, while 
granting relief, held as follows:- 

“9. We have carefully read the Government Order dated 
28-4-1958 on the subject “Verification of the character 
and antecedents of government servants before their first 
appointment” and it is stated in the government order that 
the Governor has been pleased to lay down the following 
instructions in supersession of all the previous orders: 
 “The rule regarding character of candidate for appointment 
under the State Government shall continue to be as 
follows: 
 The character of a candidate for direct appointment must 
be such as to render him suitable in all respects for 
employment in the service or post to which he is to be 
appointed. It would be the duty of the appointing authority 
to satisfy itself on this point. xxx xxx 
12. On a reading of the order dated 18-7-2002 of the 
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate it would show that the 
sole witness examined before the court, PW 1, Mr 
Akhilesh Kumar, had deposed before the court that on 2-
12-2000 at 4.00 p.m. children were quarrelling and at that 
time the appellant, Shailendra and Ajay Kumar amongst 
other neighbours had reached there and someone from the 
crowd hurled abuses and in the scuffle Akhilesh Kumar got 
injured when he fell and his head hit a brick platform and 
that he was not beaten by the accused persons by any sharp 
weapon. In the absence of any other witness against the 
appellant, the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate 
acquitted the appellant of the charges under Sections 
323/34/504 IPC. On these facts, it was not at all possible 
for the appointing authority to take a view that the 
appellant was not suitable for appointment to the post of a 
police constable. 

13. The order dated 18-7-2002 of the Additional Chief 
Judicial Magistrate had been sent along with the report 
dated 15-1-2007 of Jaswant Nagar Police Station to the 
Senior Superintendent of Police, Ghaziabad, but it appears 
from 
the 
order 
dated 
8-8-2007 
of 
the 
Senior 
Superintendent of Police, Ghaziabad, that he has not gone 
into the question as to whether the appellant was suitable 
for appointment to service or to the post of constable in 
which he was appointed and he has only held that the 
selection of the appellant was illegal and irregular because 
he did not furnish in his affidavit in the pro forma of 
verification roll that a criminal case has been registered 
against him. 
 
14. As has been stated in the instructions in the 
Government Order dated 28-4-1958, it was the duty of the 
Senior Superintendent of Police, Ghaziabad, as the 
appointing authority, to satisfy himself on the point as to 
whether the appellant was suitable for appointment to the 
post of a constable, with reference to the nature of 
suppression and nature of the criminal case. Instead of 
considering whether the appellant was suitable for 
appointment to the post of male constable, the appointing 
authority has mechanically held that his selection was 
irregular and illegal because the appellant had furnished an 
affidavit stating the facts incorrectly at the time of 
recruitment. xxx xxx 
 
17. For the aforesaid reasons, we allow the appeal, set 
aside the order of the learned Single Judge and the 
impugned order of the Division Bench and allow the writ 
petition of the appellant and quash the order dated 8-8-
2007 of the Senior Superintendent of Police, Ghaziabad. 
The appellant will be taken back in service within a period 
of two months from today but he will not be entitled to any 

back wages for the period he has remained out of service. 
There shall be no order as to costs.” 

Ram Kumar (supra) was also a case of cancellation of 
selection to the post of Constable. 
24. 
More recently in Pawan Kumar vs. Union of India and 
Another, (2022) SCC OnLine SC 532, involving 
appointment 
to the post of Constable in Railway 
Protection Force and setting aside the order of discharge due 
to alleged suppression in the verification form, this Court, 
after noticing Avtar Singh (Supra) held as under:- 
“11. This cannot be disputed that the candidate who 
intends to participate in the selection process is always 
required to furnish correct information relating to his 
character and antecedents in the verification/attestation 
form before and after induction into service. It is also 
equally true that the person who has suppressed the 
material information or has made false declaration indeed 
has no unfettered right of seeking appointment or 
continuity in service, but at least has a right not to be dealt 
with arbitrarily and power has to be judiciously exercised 
by the competent authority in a reasonable manner with 
objectivity having due regard to the facts of the case on 
hand. It goes without saying that the yardstick/standard 
which has to be applied with regard to adjudging suitability 
of the incumbent always depends upon the nature of post, 

nature of duties, effect of suppression over suitability to be 
considered by the authority on due diligence of various 
aspects but no hard and fast rule of thumb can be laid down 
in this regard. 
13. What emerges from the exposition as laid down by this 
Court is that by mere suppression of material/false 
information regardless of the fact whether there is a 
conviction 
or 
acquittal 
has 
been 
recorded, 
the 
employee/recruit is not to be discharged/terminated 
axiomatically from service just by a stroke of pen. At the 
same time, the effect of suppression of material/false 
information involving in a criminal case, if any, is left for 
the employer to consider all the relevant facts and 
circumstances available as to antecedents and keeping in 
view the objective criteria and the relevant service rules 
into consideration, while taking appropriate decision 
regarding continuance/suitability of the employee into 
service. What being noticed by this Court is that mere 
suppression of material/false information in a given case 
does not mean that the employer can arbitrarily 
discharge/terminate the employee from service. 
19. Consequently, the appeal succeeds and is allowed. The 
judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court dated 
17th November, 2015 and the order of discharge dated 
24th April, 2015 and dated 23rd December, 2021 are hereby 
quashed and set aside. The Respondents are directed to 
reinstate the appellant in service on the post of Constable 
on which he was selected pursuant to his participation in 
reference to employment notice no. 1/2011 dated 
27th February, 2011. We make it clear that the appellant 
will not be entitled for the arrears of salary for the period 
during which he has not served the force and at the same 
time he will be entitled for all notional benefits, including 
pay, seniority and other consequential benefits, etc. 

Necessary orders shall be passed within a period of one 
month from today. No costs.” 
25. 
In Mohammed Imran vs. State of Maharashtra and Others, 
(2019), no doubt, a case where a candidate made 
the disclosure of criminal case, this Court speaking through 
Navin Sinha, J. made the following telling observation which 
resonates with the hard realities of everyday existence: 
“5. Employment opportunities are a scarce commodity in 
our country. Every advertisement invites a large number of 
aspirants for limited number of vacancies. But that may not 
suffice to invoke sympathy for grant of relief where the 
credentials of the candidate may raise serious questions 
regarding 
suitability, 
irrespective 
of 
eligibility. 
Undoubtedly, judicial service is very different from other 
services and the yardstick of suitability that may apply to 
other services, may not be the same for a judicial service. 
But there cannot be any mechanical or rhetorical 
incantation of moral turpitude, to deny appointment in 
judicial service simplicitor. Much will depend on the facts 
of a case. Every individual deserves an opportunity to 
improve, learn from the past and move ahead in life by 
self-improvement. To make past conduct, irrespective of 
all considerations, an albatross around the neck of the 
candidate, may not always constitute justice. Much will, 
however depend on the fact situation of a case.” 
 
26. 
We have also kept in mind the recent judgment of this Court 
in Satish Chandra Yadav vs. Union of India and Others, 

(2023) and the broad principles set out by this 
Court in para 93, especially, paras 93.1, 93.3 & 93.7. Even 
the broad principles set out therein recognize that each case 
should be scrutinized thoroughly by the public employer 
concerned and the Court is obliged to examine whether the 
procedure of enquiry adopted by the authority concerned was 
fair and reasonable. Avtar Singh (Supra) in para 38.2 has 
held that while passing the order of cancellation of 
candidature for giving false information, the employer may 
take notice of special circumstances of the case, if any, while 
giving such information. Further, in para 38.4.3 of Avtar 
Singh (Supra) the principle that, in case of suppression or 
false information of involvement of criminal case, where 
acquittal has already been recorded, the employer can still 
consider all relevant facts available as to antecedents and may 
take appropriate decision as to the continuance of the 
employee. We have read and understood the broad principles 

laid down in Satish Chandra Yadav (supra) with the 
following crucial para in Avtar Singh (Supra): 
“35. Suppression of “material” information presupposes 
that what is suppressed that “matters” not every technical 
or trivial matter. The employer has to act on due 
consideration of rules/instructions, if any, in exercise of 
powers in order to cancel candidature or for terminating 
the services of employee. Though a person who has 
suppressed the material information cannot claim 
unfettered right for appointment or continuity in service 
but he has a right not to be dealt with arbitrarily and 
exercise of power has to be in reasonable manner with 
objectivity having due regard to facts of cases.” 
 
27. 
We have also examined the judgment in Director General of 
Police, Tamilnadu, Mylapore vs. J. Raghunees, (2023) SCC 
OnLine SC 1379 and we find that the case of the appellant is 
more aligned with the facts in the judgment of this Court in 
Pawan Kumar (supra), Sandeep (supra) and Ram Kumar 
(supra). Hence, we find that the judgment in J. Raghunees 
(supra) is clearly distinguishable. 
28. 
The nature of the office, the timing and nature of the criminal 
case; the overall consideration of the judgement of acquittal; 
the nature of the query in the application/verification form; 

the contents of the character verification reports; the socio 
economic strata of the individual applying; the other 
antecedents of the candidate; the nature of consideration and 
the contents of the cancellation/termination order are some of 
the crucial aspects which should enter the judicial verdict in 
adjudging suitability and in determining the nature of relief 
to be ordered. 
29. 
Having discussed the legal position above, it is necessary to 
set out certain special features that obtain in the case at hand. i. 
The appellant hails from the small village Bagapar, 
P.O. Kataura, Police Station Gauri Bazar, District 
Deoria, U.P. ii. 
On the date of the application, there was no 
criminal case pending and there was no 
suppression in the application form. iii. 
The criminal case was registered when he was 21 
years of age for the offences very similar to the one 

referred to in Sandeep Kumar (supra) and even in 
the criminal case he was acquitted. iv. 
No doubt, the multiple columns in the verification 
affidavit, questions were asked from him in 
different permutations and combinations. He must 
have been in a deep dilemma as there was an 
imminent prospect of losing his employment. v. 
Most importantly, we find from the verification 
documents fairly and candidly made available by 
the learned Additional Advocate General, that the 
verification report after noticing the criminal case 
and the subsequent acquittal stated that his 
character was good, that no complaints were found 
against him and that his general reputation was 
good. vi. 
Not stopping there, the person who visited the spot 
even wished him a bright future in the report. vii. The SHO, Gauri Bazar Police Station, who 
forwarded the report to the Superintendent of 
Police after reiterating the contents of the report 
observed that he was acquitted and no appeal was 
filed. Further, there was no other case pending and 
nor was any case registered against the candidate. viii. The SHO certified the character of the candidate as 
excellent and that he was eligible to do 
Government Service under the State Government. 
He annexed the report of the Police Station as well 
as the report of the Gram Pradhan and the Court 
documents. ix. 
The Superintendent of Police, in his letter to the 
Commandant, endorsed the report and reiterated 
that the character of the candidate was excellent. x. 
While examining whether the procedure adopted 
for enquiry by the authority was fair and 
reasonable, we find that the order of cancellation of 

12.04.2005 does not even follow the mandate 
prescribed in Clause 4 of the Form of verification 
of character set out in the earlier part of this 
judgment. Like it was found in Ram Kumar 
(supra) instead of considering whether the 
appellant was suitable for appointment, the 
Appointing Authority has mechanically held his 
selection was irregular and illegal because the 
appellant had furnished an affidavit with incorrect 
facts. Hence, even applying the broad principles 
set out in para 93.7 of Satish Chandra Yadav 
(supra), we find that the order of cancellation dated 
12.04.2005 is neither fair nor reasonable. Clause 9 
of the recruitment notification has to be read in the 
context of the law laid down in the cases set out 
hereinabove. 
30. 
On the facts of the case and in the backdrop of the special 
circumstances set out hereinabove, where does the non- 

disclosure of the unfortunate criminal case, (which too ended 
in acquittal), stand in the scheme of things? In our opinion on 
the peculiar facts of the case, we do not think it can be deemed 
fatal for the appellant. Broad-brushing every non-disclosure 
as a disqualification, will be unjust and the same will 
tantamount to being completely oblivious to the ground 
realities obtaining in this great, vast and diverse country. Each 
case will depend on the facts and circumstances that prevail 
thereon, and the court will have to take a holistic view, based 
on objective criteria, with the available precedents serving as 
a guide. It can never be a one size fits all scenario. 
 
Relief: 
31. 
For the reasons set out hereinabove, the appeal is allowed and 
the order of the learned Single Judge and the impugned order 
of the Division Bench dated 29.10.2010 in Special Appeal 
No. 896/2005 are set aside. The order of 12.04.2005 of the 
third respondent, Commandant 27th Battalion, PAC, Sitapur 

is quashed and set aside. The respondents are directed to 
appoint the appellant in service on the post of Constable for 
which he was selected, pursuant to his participation in 
reference to the Recruitment Notification dated 20.01.2004. 
We make it clear that the appellant will not be entitled for the 
arrears of salary for the period during which he has not served 
the force. At the same time, we direct that the appellant will 
be entitled for all notional benefits, including pay, seniority 
and other consequential benefits. Necessary orders shall be 
passed within a period of four weeks from today. There shall 
be no order as to costs. 

…...…………………J. 

 (J.K. Maheshwari) 

…..…………………J. 

 (K.V. Viswanathan) 
New Delhi; 
February 22, 2024.