IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 250 OF 20

THAKORE UMEDSING NATHUSING            
 ….Appellant(s)
                                VERSUS
STATE OF GUJARAT                      
     ….Respondent(s)
WITH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 218­219 OF 2016 

JUDGMENT
   
Mehta, J.
1.
These appeals take exception to the common judgment dated
11th  December,   2015   passed   by   the   High   Court   of   Gujarat   at
Ahmedabad in Criminal Appeal Nos. 949 of 1994 and 1012 of 1993.
2.
The appellants being the original accused Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 5

namely Thakore Laxmansing Halsing (hereinafter being referred to
as A1), Thakore Pravinsing Rajsing(hereinafter being referred to as
A2), Thakore Umedsing Nathusing (hereinafter being referred to as
A3), Thakore Khemsing Halsing(hereinafter being referred to as A5)
alongwith   original   accused   No.4,   namely,   Thakore   Prabhatsing
Kapursing(hereinafter   being   referred   to   as   A4),   were   tried   in
Sessions Case Nos. 107 and 143 of 1990 respectively by the learned
Additional   Sessions   Judge,   District   Banaskantha   at   Palanpur
(hereinafter   being   referred   to   as   ‘trial   Court’).   The   accused
appellants   were   convicted   by   the   trial   Court   for   the   offence
punishable under Section 392 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for
short   ‘IPC’)   and   were   sentenced   to   undergo   10   years’   rigorous
imprisonment with fine of Rs. 5,000/­ and in default, to undergo
further three months simple imprisonment. The learned trial Court
acquitted accused appellants of the charges under Sections 302
read   with   Section   34   and   Sections   396   and   397   IPC   vide   the
judgment   and   final  order   dated   21st  August,   1993.   The   original
accused No.4 was acquitted of all the charges.
3.
Being   aggrieved,   the   accused   appellants   preferred   Criminal
Appeal No. 1012 of 1993 against the judgment and order dated 21st
August, 1993 and craving acquittal whereas, the State preferred

 seeking to assail the acquittal of
the accused appellants for the charged offences, i.e. Sections 302
read with Section 34 and Sections 396 and 397 of IPC.
Brief Case of Prosecution:
 
 ­
4.
One Vithalbhai Kachrabhai Barot PW­1 lodged a complaint
dated 1st March, 1990 [Exhibit­21] at Gadh Police Station, Taluka
Palanpur,   Gujarat   alleging  inter   alia  that   his   son   Bharatbhai
(deceased) who used to drive a Jeep bearing registration No.GJ­08­
114 had been murdered and his dead body was found lying in the
field   of   one   Nizamkhan   at   village   Dangiya   on   Dantiwada   Road.
Based on the said complaint, 
came to be registered at  Gadh  Police  Station,  Taluka Palanpur,
Gujarat and the investigation was commenced.
5.
In the early hours of 2nd  March, 1990, PSI J.N. Chaudhary
(PW­22)   of   Sardarnagar   Police   Station   saw   a   jeep   being   rapidly
driven near Charannagar, Ahmedabad.   The PSI tried to stop the
jeep which was being driven away at a high speed and the same
was stopped at some distance. Four persons alighted from the jeep
and tried to run away. One of these persons was chased down and
was apprehended and he divulged his name to be Laxmansing(A1).
6.
It is alleged that A1, upon interrogation by the police disclosed

the names of four co­accused (A2, A3, A4 and A5) and stated that
they were the ones who were travelling with him in the jeep.
7.
During interrogation, A1 also confessed to the murder of the
owner of the jeep and also that the vehicle was looted in the course
of the said transaction.  He also stated that the persons who had
escaped from the spot were also privy to the murder.  Since the jeep
bore blood stains, it was seized and A1 was taken into custody. 
8.
The   usual   investigation   was   conducted;  panchnama  was
prepared; the remaining four accused were apprehended. At the
instance  of   A2,  a  blood  stained   knife  was   recovered   which  was
alleged to be the weapon of offence.  This recovery was alleged to be
from a nala. A3 and A4 were arrested. Blood stained clothes of A3
were recovered. A4 was arrested on 4th April, 1990 and a knife was
produced   on   his   information   by   one   Shobhnaben   wife   of   Kanji
Chhara.   The   Investigating   Officer   concluded   that   the   accused
persons had taken the jeep taxi of Bharatbhai (deceased) on hire
and thereafter they murdered the victim and looted the jeep.
9.
Two   separate   charge­sheets   came   to   be   filed   against   the
accused   in   the   Court   of   Judicial   Magistrate   Ist
 Class   (JMFC)
concerned for the offences punishable under Sections 302 read with
Section 34 and Sections 396 and 397 of the IPC. The offences being

exclusively triable by the Court of Sessions, both sets of charge­
sheeted   accused   were   committed   to   the   Sessions   Court,
Banaskantha, at Palanpur from where the cases were made over to
the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Banaskantha at Palanpur
for   trial.   Charges   were   framed   against   A1,   A2,   A3   and   A4   in
Sessions Case No. 107 of 1990 for the offences punishable under
Section 302 read with Section 34 of the IPC and Sections 396 and
397 of the IPC. Identical charges came to be framed against A5 in
Sessions Case No. 143 of 1990. The accused pleaded not guilty and
claimed to be tried.   Though charges were framed separately, the
trial of both sets of accused was conducted jointly.
10.
Twenty five (25) witnesses were examined and twenty three(23)
documents were exhibited by the prosecution in order to prove its
case. Upon being questioned under Section 313 of Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter being referred to as ‘CrPC’) and when
confronted with the circumstances portrayed by the prosecution
against   the   accused,   they   denied   the   same   and   claimed   to   be
innocent.
11.
After hearing the arguments advanced by the learned Public
Prosecutor   and   the   defence   counsel   and   upon   appreciating   the
evidence available on record, the learned trial Court, proceeded to

acquit accused No. 4 in entirety. While recording acquittal of A1,
A2, A3 and A5 from the charges for the offences punishable under
Section 302 read with Section 34 and Sections 396 and 397 of the
IPC, they were held guilty and convicted for the offence punishable
under Section 392 of the IPC and were sentenced to undergo 10
years’ rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 5,000/­, in default to
further undergo 3 months simple imprisonment.   Being aggrieved
by   their   conviction,   the   accused   A1,   A2,   A3   and   A5   preferred
   whereas   the   State   preferred
 for assailing acquittal of A1, A2,
A3 and A5 before the Gujarat High Court.
12.
The appeal preferred by the State being  was allowed by the Division Bench of the High Court of
Gujarat   vide   judgment   dated   11th  December,   2015   whereas   the
appeal   preferred   by   the   accused   appellants   was   dismissed.   The
High Court reversed the  acquittal of  the  accused and convicted
them for the offences punishable under Sections 302 and 396 IPC
and sentenced them to undergo life imprisonment and the fine and
default sentence imposed by learned trial Court was maintained.
13.
The aforesaid judgment dated 11th December, 2015 is assailed
in these appeals preferred on behalf of the accused appellants.

Submissions on behalf of accused appellants:­
14.
Learned counsel for the accused appellants contended that the
prosecution did not prove any document whatsoever to establish
that the jeep bearing registration No.GJ­08­114 was owned by or
was   in   possession   of   the   deceased.   The   incriminating   articles
allegedly recovered at the instance of the accused were never got
examined through the Forensic Sciences Laboratories (FSL). Only
the   blood   samples   of   two   accused   were   sent   to   the   FSL   for
serological examination. 
15.
The prosecution miserably failed to prove the fact that A1 was
found present in the Jeep bearing registration No.GJ­08­114, when
the same was stopped by the PSI J.N. Chaudhary (PW­22) of the
Kubernagar Police Station. In this regard, attention of the Court
was drawn to the communication i.e. Exhibit­96 forwarded by PSI
J.N. Chaudhary (PW­22) to the officer in­charge of the Sardarnagar
Police Station wherein the registration number of the jeep is not
mentioned.  Learned counsel urged that this omission is fatal to the
prosecution case.
16.
It   was   thus   urged   that   there   is   no   reliable   and   tangible
evidence establishing guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt
so as to justify conviction of the accused­appellants as directed by

the Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court while reversing the
findings of acquittal recorded by the trial Court.
17.
It   was   further   contended   that   A2,   A3   and   A5   have   been
convicted solely on the basis of the confessional statement of A1
recorded by the Police Inspector PW­22. Learned counsel submitted
that the said disclosure being in the form of a confession recorded
by the Police Officer, is totally inadmissible in evidence as being hit
by Sections 25 and 26 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872(hereinafter
being referred to as ‘Evidence Act’).
18.
It was further submitted that the High Court, while reversing
the acquittal of the accused as recorded by the trial Court, has not
recorded any such finding that the view taken by the trial Court
was perverse or two views i.e. one favouring the accused and the
other favouring the prosecution were not possible from the evidence
as available on record. It was contended that the findings recorded
by the High Court in the impugned judgments are not based on any
tangible   evidence   and   are   drawn   sheerly   on   conjectures   and
surmises. They, therefore, submitted that the accused are entitled
to   an   acquittal   and   the   impugned   judgment   deserves   to   be   set
aside.
Submissions on behalf of Respondent­State:­

19.  Per contra, Ms. Archana Pathak Dave, learned senior counsel
appearing   for   the   respondent­State   vehemently   opposed   the
submissions   advanced   by   the   learned   counsel   representing   the
accused­appellants.   She   submitted   that   the   High   Court,   after
thorough   and   apropos   appreciation   of   the   substantial   and
convincing   circumstantial   evidence   led   by   the   prosecution   has
recorded unimpeachable findings holding the accused guilty of the
offences. She thus implored the Court to dismiss the appeals and
affirm the judgment of the High Court.
Discussion:­
20.
We   have   given   our   thoughtful   consideration   to   the
submissions   advanced   at   bar   and   thoroughly   perused   the
impugned judgment minutely and the evidence available on record.
21.
Two   fundamental   issues   are   presented   for   adjudication   in
these appeals:­

The   scope   of   interference   by   High   Court   in   an
appeal challenging acquittal of the accused by the trial
Court;

The   standard   of   proof   required   to   bring   home
charges   in   a   case   based   purely   on   circumstantial
evidence.
22.
It is not in dispute that the prosecution did not lead any direct

evidence so as to bring home the charges against the accused and
the entire case of prosecution is based on circumstantial evidence.  
23.
The principles required to bring home the charges in a case
based purely on circumstantial evidence have been crystalized by
this Court in the case of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of
Maharashtra,  (1984). The following five golden rules
were laid down in the above judgment: ­
“(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is
to be drawn must or should be and not merely “may be”,
fully established. 
(2) the facts so established should be consistent only with
the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say,
they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis
except that the accused is guilty, 
(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and
tendency,
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except
the one to be proved, and 
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to
leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent
with the innocence of the accused and must show that in
all human probability the act must have been done by the
accused.”
24.
The principles that govern the scope of interference by the
High Court in exercise of appellate jurisdiction while dealing with
an   appeal   against   acquittal   under   Section   378(1)(b)   CrPC   were
reiterated by this Court recently in the case of H.D. Sundara and

Others v. State of Karnataka, (2023)  as follows: 
“(a) The acquittal of the accused further strengthens the
presumption of innocence;
(b) The appellate Court, while hearing an appeal against
acquittal,   is   entitled   to   re­appreciate   the   oral   and
documentary evidence;
(c) The appellate Court, while deciding an appeal against
acquittal, after re­appreciating the evidence, is required to
consider whether the view taken by the Trial Court is a
possible view which could have been taken on the basis of
the evidence on record;
(d) If the view taken is a possible view, the appellate Court
cannot overturn the order of acquittal on the ground that
another view was also possible; and
(e)   The   appellate   Court   can   interfere   with   the   order   of
acquittal   only   if   it   comes   to   a   finding   that   the   only
conclusion   which   can   be   recorded   on   the   basis   of   the
evidence on record was that the guilt of the accused was
proved   beyond   a   reasonable   doubt   and   no   other
conclusion was possible.”
25.
  Viewed in the light of these well settled legal principles, we
now   proceed   to   evaluate   the   impugned   judgment   whereby   the
conviction of the accused has been recorded reversing the acquittal
by trial Court. Relevant findings from the impugned judgment dated
11th  December 2015 are reproduced hereinbelow for the sake of
ready reference: ­
“[6.1]. At the outset it is required to be noted and it is not
in dispute that the dead body of the deceased Bharatbhai
was found on 01.03.1990 in the agricultural field of one
Nizamkhan at village Dangiya on Dantiwada road within
the   jurisdiction   of   the   Gadh   Police   Station,   Taluka
Palanpur. It is not in dispute that that original accused No.
1   Laxmansingh   was   apprehended   by   the   PSI   Shri.

Chaudhary of Sardarnagar Police Station on 02.03.1990
in the early morning. That on 02.03.1990, in early morning
at   Ahmedabad   near   Chharanagar,   PSI   of   Sardarnagar
Police station saw one jeep (muddamal jeep) coming in
speed and he tried to stop the same. That four persons
other than the original accused No. 1 were successful in
running away from jeep, however the original accused No.
1   was   arrested   and   interrogated.   That   the   original
accused No. 1 tried to explain his presence in the jeep in
his further statement recorded under section 313 of the
CrPC. According to original accused No. 1, as he wanted to
go to Palanpur from Gitamandir Bus stand and one jeep
was taking passengers to Palanpur, he was offered to sit
in the same on payment of charges and therefore, he along
with other passengers sat in the jeep and on the road near
Sardarnagar   Police   tried   to   stop   the   jeep   which   was
stopped at some distance and therefore, the passengers
and the driver ran away and when he alighted from the
jeep, the police arrested him. However, by giving cogent
reasons   the   learned   trial   Court   has   not   accepted   the
defence of the original accused No. 1. It is required to be
noted that to go to Palanpur from Gitamandir Bus stand,
Chharanagar from where the original accused No. 1 was
apprehended from jeep, was not the route at all. To got to
Palanpur   from   Gitamandir   Bus   stand,   one   was   not
required to go to Chharanagar/Sardarnagar at all. Under
the circumstances, as such the original accused No. 1 gave
the   false   explanation/defence   in   his   further   statement
recorded under section 313 of the CrPC. At this stage it is
required to be noted that the design of the tyres of the jeep
tallies with the tyre marks found at the place of incident
from where the dead body of the deceased Bharatbhai
was found. Even the design of the slippers of the original
accused No. 1 tallies with the design of slipper found at
the place of incident.
[6.2] In the present case there is recovery of the knife used
in   committing   the   offence,   at   the   instance   of   original
accused No. 2 Pravinsingh which was recovered from the
place which could have been known to the said accused
alone   i.e.   from   Nala   near   Palanpur­Siddhpur   Highway
road.   The   recovery   of   the   knife   at   the   instance   of   the
original accused No. 2 has been established and proved
by examining the panch witnesses.
[6.3] In the present case even there is a recovery of the
knife at the instance of the original accused Nos. 3 and 5
and   the   knife   used   in   committing   the   offence   was

recovered from the place which was known to the said
accused   alone.   Even   the   trousers/pant   of   the   original
accused Nos. 3 and 5 were recovered at their instance
from   the   house   of   one   Kanjibhai   ­   friend   of   the   said
accused. The said pants were having blood stains. The
original accused Nos. 3 and 5 have failed to explain the
blood   stains   on   their   trousers.   The   recovery   of   the
trouser/pants  and  the  knife  at  the  instance  of  original
accused Nos. 3 and 5 have been established and proved
by   examining   Kanjibhai   at   Exh.77   and   his   wife
Shobhnaben.
[6.4]. It is further submitted that therefore when there are
recoveries of the weapons used in committing the offence
and even recovery of trousers/pants of original accused
Nos. 3 and 5 having blood stains, at the instance of the
original   accused   Nos.   2,   3   and   5   and   when   original
accused No. 1 was as such found/apprehended/arrested
with the muddamal jeep and his defence/explanation is
found   to   be   false   and   when   the   prosecution   has   been
successful   in   establishing   and/or   proving   the   complete
chain of events with respect to the involvement of the jeep
which was driven by the original accused No. 1, it cannot
be said that the trial Court has committed any error in
convicting the accused Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 5 for the offence
punishable under section 392 of the IPC. It is required to
be noted that even the blood stains were found on the
hood of the jeep and even on the knife.
[6.5]. Now, that takes us to the appeal preferred by the
State   against   the   impugned   judgment   and   order   of
acquittal passed by the learned trial Court acquitting the
original   accused   for   the   offences   punishable   under
sections 302 and 396 of the IPC.
 
So   far   as   the   impugned   judgment   and   order   of
acquittal passed by the learned trial Court acquitting the
accused for the offence punishable under section 396 of
the IPC is concerned, it appears that by the impugned
judgment and order, the learned trial Court has acquitted
the accused for the offence punishable under section 306
of the IPC on the ground that as original accused No. 4 has
been   acquitted   and   the   number   of   remaining   convicted
accused would be only four, the learned trial Court has
acquitted the remaining accused for the offence punishable
under section 396 of the IPC. However, it is required to be
noted that from the very beginning there were allegations
of involvement of five persons in committing the offence. It
is true that out of five accused, original accused No. 4 has

been acquitted for want of sufficient evidence. However,
on   that   ground   alone   the   remaining   accused   could   not
have   been   acquitted   for   the   offence   punishable   under
section   396   of   the   IPC.   As   observed   by   the   Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Manoj Giri (Supra), in a given
case it may happen that there can be five or more persons
and   the   factum   of   five   or   more   persons   either   is   not
disputed or is clearly established, but the Court may not
be able to record a finding as to identity of all the persons
said to have committed dacoity and may not be able to
convict   them   and   order   their   acquittal,   observing   that
thereafter identity is  not  established, or that  otherwise
there is insufficient evidence to convict them, in such case
there can be a conviction of less than five persons or even
one for dacoity. Similar is the view taken by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Saktu (Supra). Under the
circumstances and in the facts and circumstances of the
case, learned trial Court has materially erred in acquitting
the remaining original accused Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 5 for the
offences punishable under section 396 of the IPC.
[6.6] Similarly, the learned trial Court has committed grave
error   in   acquitting   the   original   accused   for   the   offence
punishable under section 302 of the IPC. From the findings
recorded by the learned trial Court as such the learned
trial Court has specifically observed and given a finding
that original accused Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 5 have committed
the murder/loot and dacoity and there is ample material /
evidence against them connecting them with respect to the
murder of the deceased Bharatbhai. Therefore, as such
the learned trial Court has already convicted the accused
for the offence punishable under section 392 of the IPC. As
observed hereinabove, original accused Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 5
are also held to be guilty for the offence punishable under
section 396 of the IPC. Once the accused are convicted for
the offence punishable under section 396 of the IPC i.e. dacoity   with   murder   and   the   death   of   the   deceased
Bharatbhai was homicidal death, the learned trial Court
ought   to   have   convicted   the   accused   for   the   offence
punishable under section 302 of the IPC also. As observed
hereinabove,   the   prosecution   has   been   successful   in
proving and establishing the complete chain of events by
leading cogent evidence and therefore, accused persons
were   liable   to   be   convicted   for   the   offence   punishable
under section 302 of the IPC.
[6.7]. Now, so far as the reliance placed upon the decisions
of   the   Hon'ble   Supreme   Court   in   the   cases   of   Rakesh

(Supra);   Vijay   Kumar   (Supra)   and   Kanhaiyalal   (Supra)
relied upon by the learned advocate appearing on behalf
of the original accused is concerned, it is required to be
noted   that   on   facts   and   the   findings   recorded   by   this
Court, none of the aforesaid decisions shall be applicable
and/or of any assistance to the accused.
[6.8]. Now, so far as the reliance placed upon the decision
of   the   Hon'ble   Supreme   Court   in   the   case   of   Rakesh
(Supra) by the learned advocate appearing on behalf of the
accused is concerned, it is required to be noted that in the
present case there is recovery of knife/s at the instance of
original accused No. 2 and original accused Nos. 3 and 5
and that there is discovery of clothes of original accused
Nos. 3 and 4 with blood stains which are not explained by
the original accused Nos. 2, 3 and 5. Similarly, in the case
before   the   Hon'ble   Supreme   Court   in   the   case   of
Kanhaiyalal (Supra), except last seen together, there was
no   other   evidence   connecting   the   accused.   Under   the
circumstances, none of the aforesaid decisions shall be
applicable to the facts of the case on hand and/or shall be
of any assistance to the accused.
[7.0].  In  view  of  the  above  and  for the  reasons  stated
above,  preferred by the
original accused against  their conviction for the offence
punishable   under   section   392   of   the   IPC   is   hereby
dismissed.”
26.
On going through the record, we find that the prosecution
relied upon the circumstantial evidence comprising of disclosures,
recoveries   and   discoveries   for   bringing   home   the   guilt   of   the
accused. 
27.
The   most   important   recovery   is   alleged   to   be   of   the   jeep
bearing registration No.GJ­08­114.
28.
We may note that the said recovery is attributed to A1, who
was allegedly apprehended by PSI J.N. Chaudhary (PW­22) on 02nd

March, 1990. He forwarded a report/communication (Exhibit­96)
dated 2nd  March, 1990 to the officer in­charge of the Sardarnagar
Police Station wherein, the confession made by the A1 implicating
himself and the other accused is recorded.
29.
It is trite that confession of an accused in custody recorded by
a police officer is inadmissible in evidence as the same would be hit
by Section 25 of the Evidence Act. Thus, that part of the statement
of   A1   as   recorded   in   the   report/communication   (Exhibit­96),
wherein he allegedly confessed to the crime of murder of the jeep
driver and looting the jeep and named the other accused persons as
particeps  criminis  is   totally   inadmissible   and   cannot   be   read   in
evidence  except  to  the   extent  provided   under   Section  27  of   the
Evidence Act.
30.
After A1 had been apprehended, PSI J.N. Chaudhary (PW­22)
prepared   two  panchnamas  i.e.   Exhibit­88   and   Exhibit­89.   The
panchnama (Exhibit­89) was prepared at 08:30 hours on 2nd March,
1990 wherein, there is no mention that A1 had disclosed the names
of the other accused. This omission is very striking and goes to the
root of the matter. It creates a grave doubt on the truthfulness of
the evidence of PSI J.N. Choudhary (PW­22).  As a consequence, the
so called disclosure statement made by A1(Exhibit­96) on which the

prosecution   banked   upon   and   the   High   Court   relied   upon   by
treating it to be an incriminating circumstance against the accused
persons is totally inadmissible and unworthy of reliance. 
31.
One   of   the  panch  witnesses   Pratap   Tolaram   Makhija   was
examined as PW­21 and in his deposition, he did not utter a single
word
 
regarding
 
the
 
accused
 
having
 
made
 
any
confessional/disclosure  statement to  PSI  J.N.   Choudhary(PW­22)
when the memos (Exhibits­88 and 89) were prepared.
32.
When   PSI   J.N.   Chaudhary   (PW­22)   was   examined,   the
prosecution did not even make an attempt to prove the confessional
part   of   the   communication   (Exhibit­96)   and   rightly   so   in   our
opinion.
33.
Even if it is assumed for the sake of arguments that A1 was
present in the jeep owned by Bharatbhai (deceased), this fact in
isolation cannot lead to an inference about culpability of the said
accused for the offences of murder and dacoity. As per the admitted
case of the prosecution, more than one person was present in the
jeep, when the same was flagged down by PSI J.N. Chaudhary (PW­
22). Thus, the possibility of the A1 (Laxmansing) travelling in the
jeep   as   an   innocent   passenger   cannot   be   ruled   out.  No   other
circumstance except for presence in the jeep was portrayed in the

prosecution case so as to bring home the guilt of A1. 
34.
The prosecution pinned the identity of A2, A3, and A5 as the
assailants on the basis of the disclosure statement (Exhibit­96) of
A1. They were primarily convicted on the basis of the recoveries of
knives and clothes. On going through the entire record, we find that
these   so   called   incriminating   articles   allegedly   recovered   at   the
instance of the accused were never sent to the Serology expert for
comparison of the blood groups existing thereupon with the blood
group of the deceased. 
35.
We have gone through the evidence of the concerned police
officials associated with the recoveries and find their testimonies to
be highly doubtful. The knife which was recovered at the instance of
A3 was found from a nala which is a place open and accessible to
all. The knife attributed to A4 was presented by one Shobhnaben
wife of Kanji Chhara and thus it cannot be linked to A4. Thus,
these recoveries in no manner can be treated to be incriminating in
nature. In the case of  Mustkeem alias Sirajudeen v. State of
Rajasthan,  reported in (2011), this Court held that
the   solitary   circumstance   of   recovery   of   blood­stained   weapons
cannot constitute such evidence which can be considered sufficient
to convict an accused for the charge of murder. We thus find the

recoveries to be highly doubtful and tainted. Even if it is assumed
for a moment that such recoveries were effected, the same did not
lead to any conclusive circumstance in form of Serological report
establishing the presence of the same blood group as that of the
deceased and hence they do not further the cause of prosecution. In
addition thereto, we find that the prosecution failed to lead the link
evidence   mandatorily   required   to   establish   the   factum   of   safe
keeping of the muddamal articles and hence, the recoveries became
irrelevant.
36.
At the cost of repetition, it may be noted that the veracity of
disclosure statement of A1 as recorded by PW­22 has already been
doubted by us. In addition thereto, it is manifest that the disclosure
statement   of   A1   cannot   be   read   in   evidence   against   the   other
accused i.e. A2, A3 and A5. The evidentiary value of the confession
of one co­accused against the other was considered by this Court in
the case of Haricharan Kurmi v. State of Bihar reported in AIR
1964   SC   1184  and   it   was   held   that   such   statement   is   not   a
substantive piece of evidence. The said case dealt with a judicial
confession made by an accused and it was held that even such
confession   cannot   be   treated   as   a   substantive   evidence   against
other co­accused persons. In the case at hand, the situation is even

worse because the High Court has relied upon the interrogation
note of A1 (Exhibit­96) so as to hold A2, A3 and A5 guilty of the
offence. The interrogation note of A1 being hit by Section 25 of the
Evidence   Act   cannot   be   read   in   evidence   for   any   purpose
whatsoever.
37.
From   a  thorough   appreciation   of   the   evidence   available  on
record, we find that the prosecution miserably failed to lead reliable,
tangible   and   convincing   links   forming   a   complete   chain   of
incriminating circumstances so as to bring home the guilt of the
accused for the charge of murder punishable under Section 302
IPC.
38.
We   may   note   from   the   quoted   portions   of   the   impugned
judgment that while reversing the acquittal of the accused recorded
by the trial Court for the charges under Sections 302 read with
Section 34 and Sections 396 and 397 IPC, the High Court did not
record any such finding that the view taken by the trial Court,
based on appreciation of evidence was either perverse or it was not
one of the permissible views favouring the acquittal of the accused.
In this background, the impugned judgment rendered by the High
Court   falls   short   of   the   satisfaction   mandatorily   required   to   be
recorded for reversing a judgment of acquittal and converting it to

one of conviction.
39.
We are rather compelled to hold that the judgment of the High
Court is based sheerly on conjectures and surmises rather than
being based on any substantive or reliable circumstantial evidence
pointing   exclusively   to   the   guilt   of   the   accused.  Insofar   as   the
conviction of the accused as recorded by the trial Court for the
offence under Section 392 is concerned, the same is also based on
the same set of inadmissible and unreliable links of circumstantial
evidence which we have discarded in the preceding discussion.
Conclusion: ­
40.
As   a   consequence   of   the   above   discussion,   the   impugned
judgment dated 11th December, 2015 passed by the High Court of
Gujarat at Ahmedabad in  and
 does not stand to scrutiny and is
hereby quashed and set aside.  Further, the judgment dated 21st
August, 1993 passed by the trial Court convicting and sentencing
the accused for the offences punishable under Section 392 IPC is
also unsustainable on the face of the record. Both the judgments
are thus, quashed and set aside.
41.
Resultantly,   the   appeals   are   allowed.  The   appellants   are
acquitted   of   the   charges   and   are   directed   to   be   set   at   liberty

forthwith, if not required in any other case.
42.
Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
   
…

New Delhi;
February 22, 2024