SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal No. of 2024 
( SLP (Crl.) No.1196/2018) 

Vikas Chandra...Appellant 
 
Versus 
 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr....Respondents 

JUDGMENT 

C. T. Ravikumar, J. 

Leave granted. 
 
1. 
The captioned appeal is directed against the 
judgment and order dated 10.10.2017 passed by the 
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Application 
under Section 482 No.5961 of 2013. As per the 
impugned order, in invocation of the power under 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(for short “the Cr.PC”), the High Court quashed the 
order dated 05.04.2012 passed by the Court of Chief 
Judicial Magistrate, Shahjahanpur in Criminal Case 
No.1478 of 2012, summoning the respondent No. 2 
herein in the appeal to face the trial for the offence 
under Section 306 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for 
short “the IPC”). 
 
2. 
Heard 
learned 
counsel 
appearing 
for 
the 
appellant, 
learned 
counsel 
appearing 
for 
the 
respondent No.1–State of Uttar Pradesh and the learned 
counsel appearing for respondent No.2. 
 
3. 
It is a matter where, initially, the complainant 
approached the Court of jurisdictional Magistrate with a 
complaint and on being refused to forward the 
complaint for investigation under Section 156 (3), 
Cr.PC, the matter was taken up in revision and upon its 
dismissal 
before 
the 
High 
Court 
in 
Criminal 
Miscellaneous 
Writ 
Petition 
No.9134/2005. 
Consequently, based on the orders of the High Court 
thereon, F.I.R. No.107/2005 was registered at Alhaganj 
Police Station under Section 306, IPC. The final report 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

filed under Section 173(2), Cr.PC, would reveal that 
after the investigation, virtually, a closure report was 
filed by the investigating agency. The learned 
Magistrate did not accept the closure report. In the 
protest petition filed by the appellant herein the 
learned Magistrate made an inquiry as contemplated 
under Section 202, Cr.PC, and based on all the 
materials collected issued summons to respondent No.2 
herein as per order dated 05.04.2012 and it is the 
challenge against the same that culminated in the 
impugned order. 
 
4. 
Compendiously stated, the case of the appellant is 
that respondent No.2 committed abetment of suicide 
inasmuch as his father Shri Brijesh Chandra, committed 
suicide, by consuming poison, in the office of Sub-
Mandi, Alhaganj, where he was working, after leaving a 
suicide note attributing responsibility for the same on 
respondent No.2. The appellant’s father was earlier 
working in Mandi Samiti, Puwaya as Security Guard and 
the respondent No.2 was the then Secretary of the 
Mandi Samiti. The complaint is to the effect that the 
salary of the deceased from March, 2004 to August, 
2004 and September, 2004 onwards was not paid by 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

Mandi Samiti, Jalalabad and on 12.10.2004, when he 
requested for its release, respondent No.2 told: - 
“I will see that how will you get your salary and 
who will help you in getting your salary, I will 
bring out your military-man-ship and either you 
die or your children, but I do not care, get out of 
here, why you do not take poison”. 
 
5. 
According to the appellant, the deceased was a 
retired military man and subsequent to the events on 
12.10.2004 he returned home in moony mood and on 
23.10.2004 at around 10.00 a.m. went to attend duty at 
Sub-Mandi, Alhaganj from Warikhas and committed 
suicide thereafter leaving a suicide note noting down 
such incident as well. 
 
6. 
We have given our anxious consideration to the 
rival contentions and also have gone through the 
detailed discussion made by the High Court to come to 
the conclusion to invoke the power under Section 482, 
Cr.PC, to quash the order dated 05.04.2012. The bifold 
contentions of the appellant raised, based on law, 
against the impugned judgment are as under:- 

The High Court has committed grave error in 
law in quashing the summons issued against 
respondent No.2; 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

The High Court has stepped beyond the 
settled guidelines and parameters ordained by 
this Court in catena of decisions with respect to 
exercise of power under Section 482, Cr.PC, and 
in view of such guidelines and parameters, the 
High Court was not justified in interfering with the 
summons issued by the Trial Court. 
 
7., the learned counsel appearing for 
respondent No.2 would submit that though the 
Magistrate is having the power to issue summons 
despite the fact that the Final Report filed under Section 
173 (2), Cr.PC, is a closure report in the case on hand, it 
was issued against the respondent No.2 without 
satisfying on the ground for proceeding further in the 
manner required under law. At any rate, the 
summoning order did not reflect application of mind to 
form the opinion regarding sufficient basis for 
proceeding against him. The learned counsel for the 
State, the first respondent, would submit that there 
occurred no legal error in the matter of exercise of 
power by the High Court and hence, the order of the 
High Court did not suffer from any infirmity requiring 
interference. 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

8. 
There cannot be any doubt with respect to the 
power of the Magistrate to issue summons even after 
filing of a negative report by the police. In other words, 
the Magistrate is not duty bound to accept the Final 
Report filed under Section 173 (2), Cr.PC. The power 
not to accept the Final Report and to issue summons to 
the accused is recognized by this Court in the decision 
in Union of India v. Prakash P. Hinduja & Anr.1. In this 
context, it is to be noted that this Court in the decision 
in Bhagwant Singh v. Commissioner of Police & Anr.2 
held that when a Final Report under Section 173 (2), 
Cr.PC, is filed before the Magistrate, which happens to 
be a negative report, usually called a “closure report”, 
he gets the following four choices to be adopted, taking 
into account the position obtained in the case 
concerned: 
 
(1) to accept the report and drop the Court 
proceedings (2) to direct further investigation to be 
made by the police (3) to investigate himself or 
refer for the investigation to be made by another 
Magistrate under Section 159, Cr.PC, (4) to take 
cognizance of the offence under Section 200, 
 
1 (2003) 
2 (1985) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

Cr.PC, as a private complaint when the materials 
are sufficient in his opinion and if the complainant 
is prepared for that course. 
 
9. 
Now, there can be no two views that “existence of 
power” and “exercise of power” are different and 
distinct. 
 
Having 
found 
that 
a 
Magistrate 
is 
jurisdictionally competent to take cognizance and issue 
summons despite the receipt of closure report following 
the prescribed procedure, we will have to consider the 
sustainability of the exercise of such power, in view of 
the legal and factual position obtained, in this case. In 
the decision in M/s Pepsi Foods Ltd. & Anr. v. Special 
Judicial Magistrate & Ors.3, this Court laid down the 
golden standard for summoning an accused after 
holding that summoning an accused is a serious matter 
involving interference with life and liberty of a person. 
Paragraph 28 therein is noteworthy and it reads thus: - 
 “28. Summoning of an accused in a criminal case 
is a serious matter. Criminal law cannot be set into 
motion as a matter of course. it is not that the 
complainant has to bring only two witnesses to 
support his allegations in the complaint to have the 
criminal law set into motion. The order of the 
magistrate summoning the accused must reflect 
 
3 (1998) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

that he has applied his mind to the facts of the case 
and the law applicable thereto. He has to examine 
the nature of allegations made in the complaint and 
the evidence both oral and documentary in support 
thereof and would that be sufficient for the 
complainant to succeed in bringing charge home 
to the accused. It is not that the Magistrate is a 
silent spectator at the time of recording of 
preliminary evidence before summoning of the 
accused. Magistrate has to carefully scrutinize the 
evidence brought on record and may even himself 
put questions to the complainant and his witnesses 
to elicit answers to find out the truthfulness of the 
allegations or otherwise and then examine if any 
offence is prima facie committed by all or any of 
the accused.” 
 
10. In the contextual situation, it is also relevant to 
refer to the decision of this Court in D.N. Bhattacharjee 
& Ors v. State of West Bengal & Anr.4, wherein this 
Court observed that while conducting an inquiry, the 
Magistrate could go into the merits of the evidence 
collected by the investigating agency to determine 
whether there are sufficient grounds for proceeding. 
It is relevant to note, in this context, that the sine 
qua non for exercise of the power under Section 204, 
Cr.PC, to issue process is the subjective satisfaction 
regarding the existence of sufficient ground for 
 
4 (1972) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

proceeding. 
 
11. 
Paragraph 7 in D.N. Bhattacharjee’s case (supra), 
in so far as it is relevant, reads thus: - 
“7…… It is true that the Magistrate is not debarred, 
at this stage, from going into the merits of the 
evidence produced by the complainant. But, the 
object of such consideration of the merits of the 
case, at this stage, could only be to determine 
whether 
there 
are 
sufficient 
grounds 
for 
proceeding further or not”. 
 
12. In Mehmood Ul Rehman & Ors. v. Khazir 
Mohammad Tunda and Ors.5 this Court held thus: - 
“22…..The 
satisfaction 
on 
the 
ground 
for 
proceeding would mean that the facts alleged in 
the complaint would constitute an offence, and 
when considered along with the statements 
recorded, would, prima facie, make the accused 
answerable before the court……….In other words, 
the Magistrate is not to act as a post office in taking 
cognizance of each and every complaint filed 
before him and issue process as a matter of course. 
There must be sufficient indication in the order 
passed by the Magistrate that he is satisfied that the 
allegations in the complaint constitute an offence 
and when considered along with the statements 
recorded and the result of inquiry or report of 
investigation under Section 202 of CrPC, if any, the 
accused is answerable before the criminal court, 
 
5 (2015) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

there is ground for proceeding against the accused 
under Section 204 of CrPC, by issuing process for 
appearance. 
Application 
of 
mind 
is 
best 
demonstrated by disclosure of mind on the 
satisfaction………..To be called to appear before 
criminal court as an accused is serious matter 
affecting one’s dignity, self respect and image in 
society. Hence, the process of criminal court shall 
not be made a weapon of harassment.” 
 
13. A close scrutiny of the position of law revealed 
from the aforesaid decisions, which are constantly and 
consistently being followed by this Court, would reveal 
that issuance of summons is a serious matter and, 
therefore, shall not be done mechanically and it shall 
be done only upon satisfaction on the ground for 
proceeding further in the matter against a person 
concerned based on the materials collected during the 
inquiry. 
 
14. In the aforesaid circumstances, the next question 
to be considered is whether a summons issued by a 
Magistrate can be interfered with in exercise of the 
power under Section 482, Cr.PC. In the decisions in 
Bhushan Kumar & Anr. v. State (NCT of Delhi) & Anr.6 
and M/s Pepsi Foods Ltd.’s case (supra) this Court 
 
6 (2012) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

held that a petition filed under Section 482, Cr.PC, for 
quashing 
an 
order 
summoning 
the 
accused 
is 
maintainable. There cannot be any doubt that once it is 
held that sine qua non for exercise of the power to issue 
summons is the subjective satisfaction “on the ground 
for proceeding further” while exercising the power to 
consider the legality of a summons issued by a 
Magistrate, certainly it is the duty of the Court to look 
into the question as to whether the learned Magistrate 
had applied his mind to form an opinion as to the 
existence of sufficient ground for proceeding further 
and in that regard to issue summons to face the trial for 
the offence concerned. In this context, we think it 
appropriate to state that one should understand that 
‘taking cognizance’, empowered under Section 190, 
Cr.PC, and ‘issuing process’, empowered under 
Section 204, Cr.PC, are different and distinct. (See the 
decision in Sunil Bharti Mittal v. C.B.I.7). 
 
15. In Sunil Bharti Mittal’s case (supra), this Court 
interpreted the expression “sufficient grounds for 
proceeding” and held that there should be sufficiency of 
materials against the accused concerned before 
 
7 (2015) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

proceeding under Section 204, Cr.PC. It was held 
thus:- 
“53. However, the words “sufficient ground for 
proceeding” appearing in Section 204 are of 
immense importance. It is these words which amply 
suggest that an opinion is to be formed only after 
due application of mind that there is sufficient basis 
for proceeding against the said accused and 
formation of such an opinion is to be stated in the 
order itself. The order is liable to be set aside if no 
reason is given therein while coming to the 
conclusion that there is prima facie case against the 
accused, though the order need not contain 
detailed reasons. A fortiori, the order would be bad 
in law if the reason given turns out to be ex facie 
incorrect.” 
 
16. In the decision in S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. 
Neeta Bhalla & Anr.8, this Court held that the settled 
position for summoning of an accused is that the Court 
has to see the prima facie evidence. This Court went on 
to hold that the ‘prima facie evidence’ means the 
evidence sufficient for summoning the accused and not 
the evidence sufficient to warrant conviction. The 
inquiry under Section 202, Cr.PC, is limited only to 
ascertain whether on the material placed by the 
 
8 (2005) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

complainant a prima facie case was made out for 
summoning the accused or not. 
 
17. In an earlier decision in Smt. Nagawwa v. 
Veeranna Shivalingappa Konjalgi & Ors.9, this Court 
laid down certain conditions whereunder a complaint 
can be quashed invoking the power under Section 482, 
Cr.PC, thus: - 
“(1) where the 
allegations 
made 
in 
the 
complaint or the statements of the witnesses 
recorded in support of the same taken at their 
face value make out absolutely no case 
against the accused or the complaint does not 
disclose the essential ingredients of an offence 
which is alleged against the accused; 
 (2) where the allegations made in the 
complaint are patently absurd and inherently 
improbable so that no prudent person can 
ever reach a conclusion that there is sufficient 
ground for proceeding against the accused; 
(3) where the discretion exercised by the 
Magistrate in issuing process is capricious and 
arbitrary having been based either on no 
evidence or on materials which are wholly 
irrelevant or inadmissible; and 

where 
the 
complaint 
suffers 
from 
fundamental legal defects, such as, want of 
sanction, or absence of a complaint by 
legally competent authority and the like.” 

9 (1976) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

18. Having understood the scope of interference with 
issuance of summons in exercise of power under 
Section 482, Cr.PC, we will move on to consider the 
question whether the impugned order justifies such 
interference or in other words, whether impugned 
order invites interference? We have briefly narrated 
the case revealed from the complaint and also taken 
note of the fact(s) that the High Court under the 
impugned judgment arrived at the finding that no 
material is available, suggesting instigation by the 
respondent No.2 in the suicide note and nothing 
indicative of occurrence of an incidence and utterance 
of words as mentioned by the complainant, were vividly 
stated or even alluded, therein. In view of the fact that 
summons was issued to the respondent No.2 to stand 
the trial for the offence under Section 306, IPC it is only 
apt to analyse the said Section to find out the 
ingredients to attract the same and also whether the 
complaint and the evidence collected during the 
inquiry and also during the investigation which resulted 
in the filing of the closure report prima facie discloses 
sufficient ground for proceeding and to issue summons 
to the respondent No.2 to face the trial for the offence 
under Section 306, IPC. 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

19. In the decision in M. Vijayakumar v. State of 
Tamil Nadu10, this Court considered Section 306, IPC 
and its co-relation with Section 107, IPC after referring 
to the decisions in M. Mohan v. State represented by 
the Deputy Superintendent of Police11, Madan Mohan 
Singh v. State of Gujarat & Anr.12, and Chitresh Kumar 
Chopra v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi)13. After 
analysing the provisions under Section 306, IPC with 
reference to ‘abetment’, as defined under Section 107, 
IPC and the decisions in M. Mohan’s case (supra), 
Madan Mohan Singh’s case (supra) and Chitresh 
Kumar Chopra’s case (supra) it was held that “in order 
to bring out an offence under Section 306, IPC specific 
abetment as contemplated by Section 107, IPC on the 
part of the accused with an intention to bring about the 
suicide of the person concerned as a result of that 
abetment is required. The intention of the accused to 
aid or to instigate or to abet the deceased to commit 
suicide is a must for this particular offence under 
Section 306, IPC,…” Thus, in view of the decision, it is 
clear that what matters in deciding the question 

11 (2011) 
12 (2010) 
13 (2009) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

whether there is ground for proceeding against a 
particular person and to issue summons to him to face 
the trial for the offence under Section 306, IPC is 
whether the complaint and the materials collected 
during the inquiry/investigation prima facie disclose 
mens rea on the part of the accused to bring about 
suicide of the victim. This position of law and condition 
Nos. 1 and 2 in Smt. Nagawwa’s case (supra), extracted 
in paragraph 17 above, are to be borne in mind while 
considering the question whether a prima facie case of 
‘abetment of suicide’ is made out against the 
respondent No.2. Obviously, the High Court held it in 
the negative under the impugned judgment. As per the 
complainant, who was examined before the learned 
Magistrate in the inquiry, the respondent No.2 by 
uttering the instigative words on 12.10.2004 (extracted 
hereinbefore) abetted his father to commit suicide. 
However, the impugned judgment would reveal that the 
High Court upon careful perusal of the suicide note 
found conspicuous absence of any reference, either 
explicitly or implicitly, in the suicide note regarding 
any such occurrence, as alleged by the complainant, on 
12.10.2004 or anything suggesting that the respondent 
No.2 was conscious of the fact that the victim was bent 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

upon to commit suicide in case of non-disbursement of 
salary and despite such knowledge he desisted 
disbursal of salary and instigated the victim to commit 
suicide. 
 
20. As per the impugned judgment the High Court 
went on to consider and held thus:- 
“As per mandate of this Section, there must be 
explicit or implicit abetment or some overt act 
indicative 
or 
suggestive 
of 
fact 
that 
some 
instigation was given for committing suicide and 
the applicant was having an interest in it. Nothing 
has surfaced, which may reflect on the mindset of 
the 
applicant 
that 
he 
ever 
intended 
the 
consequence that the deceased would commit 
suicide and with that view in mind, he stopped 
payment of salary. Had it been the actual position 
then obviously the suicide note must have 
whispered about that particular aspect or it would 
have at least alluded to that situation, but on 
careful perusal of the suicide note it explicit that 
the deceased himself was bent upon committing 
suicide in case the salary was not drawn in his 
favour. But under circumstances, there is nothing to 
suggest that the applicant was conscious of that 
position and knowing the same situation he insisted 
that he would not pay the salary in question. The 
trial court, however, ignoring all these legal 
aspects took cognizance of the offence by rejecting 
the final report submitted by the Investigating 
Officer and issued process against the applicant by 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

way of summoning. Resultantly, this application is 
allowed. Criminal proceedings of impugned order 
dated 
05.04.2012 
passed 
by 
Chief 
Judicial 
Magistrate, 
Shahjahanpur 
in 
Criminal 
Case 
No.1478 of 2012, Vikas Vs. Ram Babu, Case Crime 
No.C-2 of 2005, under Section 306 IPC, Police 
Station- Alhaganj, District Shahjahanpur by which 
the applicant has been summoned to face the trial 
is hereby quashed.” 
 
21. Certain 
relevant 
and 
indisputable 
aspects 
revealed from the material on record are also to be 
noted, with reference to the relevant decisions, as 
under: 

There is no explicit or implicit reference 
about any occurrence on 12.10.2004 involving the 
deceased and the respondent No.2, as alleged in 
the complaint and as stated by the complainant in 
the inquiry, is made in the so-called suicide note 
dated 23.10.2004; 

There is no proximity between the alleged 
occurrence 
of 
utterance 
of 
the 
so-called 
instigative 
words 
on 
12.10.2004 
and 
the 
commission of suicide by Brijesh Chander 
inasmuch as it was committed only on 23.10.2004. 
The so-called suicide note did not refer to any 
such occurrence. If any such incident had, in 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

troth, occurred and if that was the reason which 
pushed him to commit suicide it would have been 
mentioned, explicitly or implicitly in the so-called 
suicide note, as rightly observed and held by the 
High Court. What makes it dubious and unfit for 
being formative foundation for prosecution for an 
offence under Section 306, IPC, will be dealt with 
a little later. 
 
22. It is to be noted that apart from the above 
mentioned alleged incident, there is no allegation of 
continued course of conduct (against the respondent 
No.2) creating circumstances compelling the victim to 
or leaving the victim with no other option but to, commit 
suicide. In this contextual situation from the decision of 
this Court in Chitresh Kumar Chopra v. State (Govt. of 
NCT of Delhi)14, paragraphs 16 and 17 therein dealing 
with the expression ‘instigation’ are worthy for 
reference and they read thus:- 
“16…instigation is to goad, urge forward, provoke, 
incite or encourage to do “an act”. To satisfy the 
requirement of “instigation”, though it is not 
necessary that actual words must be used to that 
effect or what constitutes “instigation” must 
necessarily and specifically be suggestive of the 
 
14 (2009) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

consequence. Yet a reasonable certainty to incite 
the consequence must be capable of being spelt 
out. Where the accused had, by his acts or 
omission or by a continued course of conduct, 
created such circumstances that the deceased was 
left with no other option except to commit suicide, 
in which case, an “instigation” may have to be 
inferred. A word uttered in a fit of anger or emotion 
without intending the consequences to actually 
follow, cannot be said to be instigation.” 
 
“17.Thus, to constitute “instigation”, a person 
who instigates another has to provoke, incite, 
urge or encourage the doing of an act by the 
other by “goading” or “urging forward”. The 
dictionary meaning of the word “goad” is “a 
thing that stimulates someone into action; 
provoke to action or reaction” (see Concise 
Oxford English Dictionary); “to keep irritating 
or annoying somebody until he reacts…” 
(emphasis in original) 
 
23. In the decision in Ramesh Kumar v. State of 
Chhattisgarh15, this Court held that where the accused 
by his acts or continued course of conduct creates such 
circumstances that the deceased was left with no other 
option except to commit suicide, an instigation may be 
inferred. 

15 [(2001) ] 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

24. Now, reverting to the so-called suicide note, we 
do not find any reason to interfere with its evaluation by 
the High Court, for reasons more than one. We have 
already noted the conspicuous absence of any 
reference about the alleged incident on 12.10.2004 
involving the deceased and the respondent No.2, either 
explicitly or implicitly, therein. Before looking into and 
applying the principles enunciated for appreciation of a 
suicide note in the decisions of this Court in Netai Dutta 
v. State of West Bengal16 and Madan Mohan Singh’s 
case (supra), we will have a glance at the tenor of the 
suicide note. As observed and held by the High Court, 
the so-called suicide note would not reveal and reflect 
that the victim was disturbed on account of non-receipt 
of salary and for that reason, he was bent upon to 
commit suicide. Though it is stated that the respondent 
No.2 is responsible for his suicide however, there is 
absolute absence of any material or even a case in the 
complaint and in the so-called suicide note that the 
respondent No.2 has abetted late Brijesh Chandra in a 
manner that will attract the provisions under Section 
107, IPC. There is absolute absence of any allegation of 
continued course of conduct on the part of the 
 
16 (2005) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

respondent No.2 with a view to create circumstances 
leaving the deceased with no other option except to 
commit suicide. In such circumstances, the mere 
statement in suicide note dated 23.10.2004, ‘Shri Ram 
Babu Sharma, Secretary, Mandi Samiti, Puwaya will be 
responsible for his suicide’ would not be a ground at all 
to issue summons to the respondent No.2 to face the 
trial for the offence under Section 306, IPC. The 
principles enunciated in Madan Mohan Singh’s case 
(supra) and Netai Dutta’s case (supra), on application 
to the facts obtained in this case would also justify the 
interference by the High Court with the subject 
summons. 
 
25. In the case on hand, the undisputable position is 
that at the time of the commission of suicide, the 
deceased was not working in the office of Mandi Samiti, 
Puwaya where the respondent No.2 was working as 
Secretary and when the former committed the suicide 
he was attached to the office of the Mandi Samiti, 
Jalalabad and was working in Sub-Mandi, Alhaganj. 
 
26. In Madan Mohan Singh’s case (supra), the salary 
of the deceased, who was allegedly abetted to commit 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

suicide, for 15 days was deducted by the accused. That 
apart, in that case also a suicide note was left by the 
deceased, which in so far as it is relevant was quoted in 
paragraph 7 of the said decision thus: - 
“I am going to commit suicide due to his 
functioning 
style. 
Alone 
M.M. 
Singh, 
DET 
Microwave Project is responsible for my death. I 
pray humbly to the officers of the Department that 
you should not cooperate as human being to 
defend M.M. Singh. M.M. Singh has acted in breach 
of discipline disregarding the norms of discipline. I 
humbly request the enquiry officer that my wife 
and son may not be harassed. My life has been 
ruined by M.M. Singh”. 
 
27. Paragraph 13 and 14 of the said judgment, in so 
far as they are relevant are also worthy to be extracted. 
They read thus: - 
“13…… In fact, there is no nexus between the so-
called suicide (if at all it is one for which also there 
is no material on record) and any of the alleged 
acts on the part of the appellant. There is no 
proximity either. In the prosecution under Section 
306 IPC, much more material is required. The 
courts have to be extremely careful as the main 
person is not available for cross-examination by 
the appellant-accused. Unless, therefore, there is 
specific allegation and material of definite nature 
(not imaginary or inferential one), it would be 
hazardous to ask the appellant-accused to face the 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

trial. A criminal trial is not exactly a pleasant 
experience. The person like the appellant in the 
present case who is serving in a responsible post 
would certainly suffer great prejudice, were he to 
face 
prosecution 
on 
absurd 
allegations 
of 
irrelevant nature… 
14. As regards the suicide note, which is a 
document of about 15 pages, all that we can say is 
that it is an anguish expressed by the driver who 
felt that his boss (the accused) had wronged him. 
The suicide note and the FIR do not impress us at 
all. They cannot be depicted as expressing 
anything intentional on the part of the accused that 
the deceased might commit suicide. If the 
prosecutions are allowed to continue on such basis, 
it will be difficult for every superior officer even to 
work.” 
 
28. In Netai Dutta’s case (supra) from the dead body 
a suicide note was recovered and on its basis the police 
registered a case against the appellant under Section 
306, IPC. Paragraphs 5, in so far as it is relevant, and 6 
of the said decision read thus: - 
 “5. …An offence under Section 306 IPC would 
stand only if there is an abetment for the 
commission of the crime. The parameters of 
“abetment” have been stated in Section 107 of the 
Penal Code, 1860. Section 107 says that a person 
abets the doing of a thing, who instigates any 
person to do that thing; or engages with one or 
more other person or persons in any conspiracy for 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

the doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission 
takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, or the 
person should have intentionally aided any act or 
illegal omission. The Explanation to Section 107 
says that any wilful misrepresentation or wilful 
concealment of a material fact which he is bound to 
disclose, may also come within the contours of 
“abetment”. 
6. In the suicide note, except referring to the name 
of the appellant at two places, there is no reference 
of any act or incidence whereby the appellant 
herein is alleged to have committed any wilful act 
or omission or intentionally aided or instigated the 
deceased Pranab Kumar Nag in committing the act 
of suicide. There is no case that the appellant has 
played any part or any role in any conspiracy, 
which ultimately instigated or resulted in the 
commission of suicide by deceased Pranab Kumar 
Nag.” 
 
29. In short, applying the principles of the decisions 
referred above to the facts of the case on hand would 
reveal that the impugned judgment of the High Court 
did not suffer from any legal infirmity, illegality or 
perversity and the conclusions are arrived at after a 
rightful appreciation of the complaint and the other 
materials on record, within the permissible parameters. 
 
30. Considering the facts and circumstances of the 
case, we do not find anything warranting any 

SLP (Crl.) No.1196 of 2018 

interference by this Court. The appeal is, therefore, 
dismissed....,J. 
(C.T. Ravikumar)...,J. 
(Rajesh Bindal) 

New Delhi; 
February 22, 2024.