NON­
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
PETITION FOR SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (C) NO.18366 of 

SWAMI GOVERDHAN RANGACHARIJI & ORS.  …Petitioner(s)

VERSUS

M/S. A.J. PRINTERS
        …Respondent(s)
JUDGMENT
Sanjay Karol, J.
1.
The   dispute   is
 inter   se 
the   instant   petitioners
(hereinafter referred to as the “landlords”) and the respondent
herein (hereinafter referred to as the “tenant”) with respect to
the property bearing Bungalow No.97, Ground Floor, Sunder
Nagar,   New   Delhi   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   the   “demised
premises”).
2.
In terms of the impugned judgment dated 03.08.2021
passed   in   CM(M)   No.646/2020,   the   learned   Single   Judge
(High   Court   of   Delhi)   has   remanded   the   matter   to   the
competent authority, i.e., the Rent Controller for adjudication
1|SLP(C)NO.18366/21

of the lis under the provisions of the Delhi Rent Control Act,
1995.  Noticeably, the landlord is a Trust and the respondent
is occupying the demised premises as a tenant in terms of the
written lease deed dated 01.10.1972 at a monthly rental of
Rs.2,000/­,   which,   at  this   point,   we   are   informed,   stands
enhanced to Rs.3,328/­.  
3.
On 23.01.2024, when the matter came up for hearing,
learned   counsel   for   the   parties   sought   time   to   obtain
instructions   from   their   respective   clients   for   amicable
resolution of the dispute on the terms which were orally spelt
out during the course of proceedings.   As such, the matter
was posted for hearing today.  
4.
Appreciably more so, on account of the efforts put in by
learned   counsel,   all   disputes  inter   se  the   parties   stand
resolved, which, on the basis of the instructions imparted to
the learned counsel for the respective parties, as stated in the
Court, are recorded herein under and the petition is being
disposed of in the said terms:­

The   relationship   between   the   parties   i.e.,   the
landlord and the tenant is not in dispute.  

The   tenant   agrees   for   passing   of   an   order   of
ejectment   on   the   grounds   specified   in   the
2|SLP(C)NO.18366/21

ejectment petition.  Accordingly, an order in terms
of the Rent Control Act is passed in favour of the
landlord and against the tenant.
(iii) Considering the fact that the tenant who is 82
years of age, has lost his wife during the time of
COVID­19 is granted time to vacate the demised
premises   till   28th 
February,   2025.  
  The
respondent­tenant   undertakes   to   hand   over   the
vacant   and   peaceful   possession   of   the   demised
premises to the petitioners­landlords before such
date.
(iv) The undertaking, oral in nature, is accepted and
taken on record making the tenant aware of the
consequence   of   breach   thereof,   including
initiation of proceedings for contempt.   However,
additionally, an affidavit to this effect, furnishing
an undertaking in writing be positively filed within
three weeks from today.  It stands clarified that in
the event of failure of the tenant to comply with
the   same,   it   shall   be   open   to   the   landlord   to
immediately   initiate   appropriate   proceedings   for
ejectment, as also contempt of Court.  

The tenant shall clear all arrears of rent, if any,
and   shall   continue   to   pay   the   same   at   the
contractual   rate,   i.e.,   Rs.3,328/­  per   month   till
the   date   of   handing   over   of   the   vacant   and
peaceful possession of the  demised premises to
the landlord.  
(vi) The tenant shall not cause any damage or create
any encumbrance of any kind, so also shall not
3|SLP(C)NO.18366/21

transfer possession in any manner of the demised
premises.
(vii) The   tenant   shall   continue   to   occupy,   use,   and
enjoy   the   property   strictly   in   terms   of   the
municipal by­laws. No further construction, more
so unauthorized in nature, shall be carried out by
the tenant.  
(viii) Before   handing  over   the   possession,   the   tenant
shall clear all statutory dues, on such terms, as
are mutually agreed inter se the parties.
(ix) In the event the tenant violates any of the terms, it
shall   be   open   to   the   landlord   to   initiate
proceedings for obtaining possession in terms of
the   order   of   ejectment   and   also   initiate
proceedings for contempt, if so advised.

It is needless to add that the landlord shall not
cause any hindrance in the peaceful occupation
and  enjoyment of  the demised  premises by the
tenant.  
(xi) All litigation inter se the parties, in relation to the
demised premises shall stand closed.
5.
The   petition   shall   stand   disposed   of   in   the   aforesaid
terms.  Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
  
……………..…………J.
(J.K. MAHESHWARI)
…………….…………J.
(SANJAY KAROL)
New Delhi;
February 23, 2024.
4|SLP(C)NO.18366/21