IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 

 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 1610 OF 2023 

MOHAMMED KHALID AND ANOTHER 
 
….APPELLANT(S) Criminal Appeal No. 594 
of 2011

VERSUS 

THE STATE OF TELANGANA 
 
 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

WITH 
 
 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 1611 OF 2023 

JUDGMENT 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
These appeals take exception to the final impugned judgment 
dated 10th November, 2022 passed by the High Court for the State 
of Telangana at Hyderabad rejecting the preferred by the appellants assailing the judgment dated 
30th May, 2011 passed by the Metropolitan Sessions Judge, 
Hyderabad(hereinafter being referred to as ‘trial Court’) in Sessions 
Case No. 563 of 2010. 

2. 
By the aforesaid judgment, the learned trial Court, convicted 
the appellants for the offence punishable under Section 8(c) read 
with Section 20(b)(ii)(c) of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances Act, 1985(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘NDPS 
Act’) and sentenced each of them to undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for a period of ten years and to pay a fine of 
Rs.1,00,000/- each, in default, to suffer simple imprisonment for 
a period of six months. 
3. 
During the pendency of the appeal before the High Court, 
A-1 (Mohd. Ishaq Ansari) expired and, therefore, the proceedings 
qua him stood abated before the High Court. 
4. 
For the sake of convenience, the accused will be referred to 
as A-1(Md. Ishaq Ansari)(expired), A-2(S.A. Shafiullah), A-3(Mohd. 
Khalid) and A-4(Md. Afsar). 
Brief Facts: 
5. 
Mr. M. Srinivasa Rao, Inspector of Police(PW-1), West Zone 
Task Force (hereinafter being referred to as ‘Inspector PW-1’) 
claims to have received credible information on 8th May, 2009 
regarding transportation of ganja by two persons from Sangareddy 
to Hyderabad in a ‘Toyota Qualis’ vehicle. PW-1 apprised his 

superior officers about such source information and after 
obtaining permission, secured the presence of two panchas, 
namely, Shareef Shah and Mithun Jana, to associate as panchas 
and proceeded to the spot along with his team. The Inspector PW-
1 and the team members intercepted a Toyota Qualis vehicle 
bearing registration no. AP 09 AL 6323 near Galaxy Theatre at 
15:00 hours. A-1 and A-2 were allegedly found present in the 
vehicle. The Inspector PW-1 served them a notice under Section 
50 of the NDPS Act. On the request of the accused, a Gazetted 
Officer i.e., Inspector PW-4(V. Shambabu) was called to the spot to 
associate in the proceedings. The accused were again given a 
notice under Section 50 of the NDPS Act by PW-4(V. Shyambabu) 
who also participated in the search proceedings and it is alleged 
that three bundles of ganja weighing around 80 kgs found lying in 
the vehicle were seized in presence of Inspector PW-1 and the 
panchas. 
6. 
A-1 and A-2 were arrested and interrogated at the spot. Three 
samples weighing about 50 grams were drawn from each bundle 
contraband and remaining muddamal ganja was seized vide 
confession-cum-seizure panchnama (Exhibit P-3). One part of the 
sample was handed over to A-1 and A-2. 

7. 
Inspector PW-1 thereafter proceeded to hand over the 
accused along with the seized articles to LW-10(G. Naresh Kumar, 
Sub-Inspector of Police, Golkonda Police Station)(hereinafter being 
referred to as ‘Sub-Inspector LW-10’) for further action. Based on 
these proceedings, a complaint came to be lodged at the Golkonda 
Police Station and was registered 
and investigation was commenced. 
8. 
One part of sample collected from the recovered contraband 
was forwarded to the Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL) from 
where a report (Exhibit P-11) was received concluding that the 
sample was of ganja as defined under Section 2(b) of the NDPS Act. 
Acting on the confession/interrogation of the two occupants of the 
car, i.e. A-1 and A-2, the Investigating Officer (PW-5 K. 
Chandrasekhar 
Reddy)(hereinafter 
being 
referred 
to 
as 
‘Investigating Officer PW-5’) apprehended the accused A-3 and A-
4. After concluding the investigation, a charge-sheet was filed 
against the four accused in the trial Court. 
9. 
Upon being charged for the offence punishable under Section 
8 read with Section 20(b)(ii)(c) of the NDPS Act, the accused 
pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. The prosecution examined 

five witnesses and exhibited 13 documents to prove its case as per 
the following table:- 
PW1 
M. Srinivasa Rao, complainant-cum-investigating 
officer 
PW2 
Mohd. Illiyas Akber, panch witness 
PW3 
Sk. Shamshuddin Ahmed, panch 
PW4 
V. Shyambabu, Gazetted Officer 
PW5 
K. Chandrasekhar Reddy, Investigating Officer 
 
Exhibit P1 
Notice to accused 
Exhibit P2 
Complaint 
Exhibit P3 
Confession-cum-seizure panchnama of A1 and 
A2 
Exhibit P4 
Bunch of (2) photographs 
Exhibit P5 
Signature of PW2 on panchnama of A3 
Exhibit P6 
Signature of PW2 on panchnama of A4 
Exhibit P7 
Signature of PW3 on panchnama of A3 
Exhibit P8 
Signature of PW3 on panchnama of A4 
Exhibit P9 
Notice to accused No. 1 and 2 
Exhibit P10 
First Information Report 
Exhibit P11 
FSL Report 
Exhibit P12 
Seizure panchnama of A3 
Exhibit P13 
Seizure panchnama of A4 
 
10. The accused, upon being questioned under Section 313 of 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being referred to as 
‘CrPC’) denied the prosecution allegations but chose not to lead 
any evidence in defence. The trial Court proceeded to convict and 
sentence the accused in the above terms by the judgment dated 
30th May, 2011. 

11. Being aggrieved by their conviction and the sentence awarded 
by the trial Court, the accused preferred an appeal under Section 
374(2) CrPC in the High Court for the State of Telangana at 
Hyderabad which stood rejected vide the judgment dated 10th 
November, 2022. 
12. A-3 and A-4 have preferred 
and A-2 has preferred for 
assailing the impugned judgment dated 10th November, 2022 of 
High Court whereby the conviction recorded and sentences 
awarded to the accused by the trial Court have been affirmed. 
Submissions on behalf of the accused appellants: 
13. Learned counsel representing A-2(S.A. Shafiullah) advanced 
the following submissions to assail the impugned judgment and 
seeking acquittal for the accused:- 

That the independent panch witnesses associated with the 
search and seizure were not examined in evidence and 
hence the entire search and seizure proceedings become 
doubtful and are vitiated; 

That it is admitted that the contraband ganja was seized 
from three bags which were also having green chillies 

therein. However, the Seizure Officer made no effort 
whatsoever to segregate the chillies and the alleged 
contraband and hence it cannot be held with any degree of 
certainty that the recovered contraband ganja fell within 
the category of commercial quantity; 
(iii) That the prosecution failed to ensure compliance of the 
requirements of Section 52A of the NDPS Act inasmuch as, 
no sampling procedure was undertaken before the 
Magistrate; 

That the Seizure Officer (Inspector PW-1) claims to have 
collected a total of three samples (one from each bundle of 
ganja) and handed over one part of the sample to the 
accused. However, when the articles were received at the 
FSL, three distinct sample packages were found which 
upon testing gave the presence of ‘cannabis sativa’. It was 
thus submitted that only two samples remained with the 
Investigation Officer and hence there is a grave 
contradiction and doubt regarding the sanctity of the 
samples collected by the Seizure Officer (Inspector PW-1) 
at the time of seizure. 

Attention of the Court was also drawn to the evidence of 
PW-5 who stated that three samples of ganja were taken 
by Sub-Inspector LW-10, who handed over these sample 
packets to witness. However, this fact is contradicted by 
the evidence of the Seizure Officer(Inspector PW-1)), who 
stated that it was he who collected three samples from the 
contraband(three bundles of ganja) and handed one over 
to the accused under proper acknowledgment. Thus, as 
per the learned counsel, the FSL report is honest in the 
eyes of law as the sampling procedure is totally flawed; 

That three bundles/packets of ganja were allegedly seized 
from the vehicle ‘Toyota Qualis’ in possession of A-1(Mohd. 
Ishaq Ansari) and A-2(S.A. Shafiullah) but when 
Investigating Officer PW-5 appeared in the witness box, he 
produced seven packets wherein the contraband was 
packed. These packets were not having any seals or 
identifying marks, i.e., signature of the accused and the 
panchas. Thus, it is apparent that the original muddamal 
seized at the spot was never produced and exhibited in the 
Court; 

(vii) That Sub-Inspector LW-10 who allegedly handed over the 
sample packets to Investigating Officer PW-5 was not 
examined in evidence. Furthermore, the carrier Constable 
who transmitted the samples to the FSL was also not 
examined by the prosecution; 
(viii) No document pertaining to deposit of the samples at the 
Police Station and the transmission thereof to the FSL was 
exhibited on record. The samples were forwarded to the 
FSL after a gross delay of more than two months and 
hence, the FSL report cannot be read in evidence because 
the required link evidence is missing. 
14. Learned counsel representing A-3 and A-4 urged that these 
accused were not found present at the spot at the time of seizure. 
They were arrested on 30th May, 2009 merely on the basis of the 
interrogation notes of A-1 and A-2 and were charged for offence 
under Section 8 read with Section 20(b)(ii)(c) of NDPS Act. As the 
prosecution never came out with a case that the contraband was 
recovered from the possession of these two accused, their 
conviction for the offence under Section 8 read with Section 
20(b)(ii)(C) of the NDPS Act is ex facie illegal and unsustainable on 
the face of the record. 

Arguments on behalf of State: 
15. Per 
contra, 
learned 
counsel 
representing 
the 
State, 
vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions advanced by 
learned counsel for the appellants. He urged that two Courts, i.e., 
the trial Court as well as the High Court, have recorded concurrent 
findings of facts for convicting the appellants and for affirming 
their conviction and hence, this Court in exercise of the 
jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution of India should 
be slow to interfere in such concurrent findings of facts. He thus 
implored the Court to dismiss the appeals. 
Discussion and Conclusion: 
16. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at the Bar and have gone through the 
impugned judgment and the evidence available on record. 
17. Before discussing the prosecution evidence, we would like to 
note that the case as set up by the prosecution is regarding 
recovery of narcotics from a vehicle which was stopped during 
transit. Thus, the procedure of search and seizure would be 
governed by Section 43 read with Section 49 of the NDPS Act which 
are reproduced below:- 

 “43. Power of seizure and arrest in public place.—Any officer 
of any of the departments mentioned in Section 42 may— 
(a) seize in any public place or in transit, any narcotic 
drug or psychotropic substance or controlled substance 
in respect of which he has reason to believe an offence 
punishable under this Act has been committed, and, 
along with such drug or substance, any animal or 
conveyance or article liable to confiscation under this 
Act, any document or other article which he has reason 
to believe may furnish evidence of the commission of an 
offence punishable under this Act or any document or 
other article which may furnish evidence of holding any 
illegally acquired property which is liable for seizure or 
freezing or forfeiture under Chapter V-A of this Act; 
(b) detain and search any person whom he has reason 
to believe to have committed an offence punishable 
under this Act, and if such person has any narcotic drug 
or psychotropic substance or controlled substance in 
his possession and such possession appears to him to 
be unlawful, arrest him and any other person in his 
company. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression 
“public place” includes any public conveyance, hotel, shop, or 
other place intended for use by, or accessible to, the public. 
49. Power to stop and search conveyance.—Any officer 
authorised under Section 42, may, if he has reason to suspect 
that any animal or conveyance is, or is about to be, used for the 
transport of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance [or 
controlled substance], in respect of which he suspects that any 
provision of this Act has been, or is being, or is about to be, 
contravened at any time, stop such animal or conveyance, or, in 
the case of an aircraft, compel it to land and— 
(a) rummage and search the conveyance or part thereof; 
(b) examine and search any goods on the animal or in 
the conveyance; 
(c) if it becomes necessary to stop the animal or the 
conveyance, he may use all lawful means for stopping it, 
and where such means fail, the animal or the 
conveyance may be fired upon.” 

18. We now proceed to some important excerpts from the 
prosecution evidence:- 
(a) Complaint dated 8th May, 2009(Exhibit P-2) 
“Then I recorded the confession-cum-seizure panchnama of 
the accused persons A-1 and seized three bundles containing 
Ganja in it from their possession. On weighing the three 
bundles it was found about 80 kgs of Ganja in it. Out of the 
seized Ganja we have taken three samples and marked as S-
1 and S-3 each sample packet containing 50 grams of Ganja 
and affixed panch chits. Also seized Maroon, colour Qualis 
vehicle bearing No. AP 09AL 6323 Engine No. 2L9722612, 
Chassis No. LF50-104863512/01 from the possession of the 
accused persons. Out of the seized Ganja drawn three 
samples containing 50 grams marked S-1 to S-3, each 
packed in polythene covers and attached panch chits to 
them. The sample is supplied to the accused Mohd Ishaq 
Ansari and S.A. Ashafiullah.” 
 
(b) Exhibit P-11(FSL Report) – 
 
“Received one sealed cloth parcel sealed with six seals, which 
are intact and tallying with the sample seal labelled as “Cr. 
No. 181/2009” containing a cardboard box containing three 
closed polythene packets each labelled as “S-1, S-2 & S-3” 
respectively described below through Sri K. Narsimulu, PC 
7770 on 14/07/2009.” 
 
(C )PW-1 
“I collected three samples weighing about 50 gms each and 
given 
one 
sample 
to 
the 
accused 
under 
proper 
acknowledgement.” 
“M.O.I is the ganja packed in seven bags.” 
“There are no panch chits right now on M.O.I bags.” 
“It is true that the bags, deposited before the court are not 
having, seals. I, have weighed the Ganja only and it is 
weighing 80 Kgs, but I have not weighed the chillies. The 
total weight of the Ganja bundles as mentioned in the 
panchnama includes the weight, of chillies. I have not 
mentioned about sealing of samples in my panchnama. I 

have not mentioned in panchnama in what containers. I 
have taken, the samples.” 
“As per the panchnama one sample was given to the accused. 
I have taken 3 samples and out of them I have given one 
sample to both the accused and two samples I handed over 
in police station.” 
(d) PW-4 
 
“PW1 seized 3 ganja bundles weighing around 80 kgs and 
collected samples of 50 grams from the bundles.” 
(e )PW-5 
“Originally three bundles of ganja was seized from the 
accused and as the Ganja was becoming dry and turning into 
dust, and due to the holes of the bags it is coming out, and 
therefore we transferred the Ganja into 7 new bags, which 
was already marked as M.O.1.” 
“Three samples of Ganja have been taken by LW 10 and 
handed over the samples to me. We have forwarded the three 
samples to FSL through A.C.P., and submitted FSL report 
Ex. P.11.” 
“The samples were taken on 8.5.2009 and they were 
forwarded to FSL on 7.7.2009 i.e. after two months of taking 
of samples. The samples were not deposited in the court.” 
“I did not file any document to show that where the property 
was kept in Maalkhana. I did not produce any Maalkhana 
register in this case. The property was sent to FSL after two 
months of its seizure. The FSL report, does not disclose 
about the panch chits and seals and quantity of samples. 
The property deposited in court is not having any official 
seals.” 
“I did not report to the court till today that the ganja was 
getting dried up and becoming dust, I converted them from 
three bundles to 7 bags for safe custody.” 
 
19. A perusal of the evidence of the Seizure Officer (Inspector PW-
1) and the confession-cum-seizure panchnama (Exhibit P-3) would 
reveal that the prosecution claims to have recovered the 
contraband from three bags wherein the ganja as well as green 

chillies were present. Seizure Officer(Inspector PW-1) made no 
effort whatsoever to conduct a separate weighment of the 
contraband by segregating the chillies. Rather, the panchnama is 
totally silent about presence of chillies with the bundles of ganja. 
Thus, it cannot be said with any degree of certainty that the 
recovered ganja actually weighed 80 kgs. Seizure Officer(Inspector 
PW-1) also stated that he collected three samples of ganja at the 
spot and handed over one sample to accused. If this was true, 
apparently only two sample packets remained for being sent to the 
FSL. Contrary to the evidence of PW-1, PW-5 stated that three 
samples of ganja were taken by LW-10 who handed the same over 
to him. Thereafter, these samples were forwarded to the FSL 
through the ACP and a FSL report (Exhibit P-11) was received. 
When PW-5 appeared for deposition, he produced the muddamal 
ganja in the Court and it was seen that the same was packed in 
seven new bags as against the three bags referred to in the seizure 
memo (Exhibit P-3). Neither any proceedings were conducted nor 
any memo was prepared by the police officers for repacking the 
seized ganja bundles in new packaging. 
20. The two independent panch witnesses i.e. Shareef Shah and 
Mithun Jana who were associated in the recovery proceedings, 

were not examined in evidence and no explanation was given by 
the prosecution as to why they were not being examined. 
21. Sub-Inspector LW-10, who prepared three samples of ganja, 
as per the testimony of PW-5, was not examined in evidence. In 
addition thereto, the prosecution neither examined any witness 
nor produced any document to satisfy the Court regarding safe 
keeping of the samples right from the time of the seizure till the 
same reached the FSL. The official who collected the samples from 
the police station and carried the same to the FSL was not 
examined at the trial. From the quoted portion of the evidence of 
Seizure Officer(Inspector PW-1), it is clear as day light that he 
handed over one of the three samples to the accused. The witness 
also admitted that he did not mention about sealing of the samples 
in the panchnama. Contrary to the evidence of PW-1, PW-5 stated 
that three samples of ganja were taken out by Sub-Inspector LW-
10 and were handed over to the witness who forwarded the same 
to the ACP for sending it to FSL. In cross-examination, the witness 
admitted that he did not file any document to show that the 
property was kept in malkhana. The malkhana register was not 
produced in the Court. The FSL report (Exhibit P-11) does not 
disclose about the panch chits and seals and signature of the 

accused 
on 
samples. 
 
The 
property 
deposited 
in 
the 
Court(muddamal) was not having any official seals. The witness 
also admitted that he did not take any permission from the Court 
for changing the original three packets of muddamal ganja to seven 
new bags for safe keeping. These glaring loopholes in the 
prosecution case give rise to an inescapable inference that the 
prosecution has miserably failed to prove the required link 
evidence to satisfy the Court regarding the safe custody of the 
sample packets from the time of the seizure till the same reached 
the FSL. Rather, the very possibility of three samples being sent 
to FSL is negated by the fact that the Seizure Officer handed over 
one of the three collected samples to the accused. Thus, their 
remained only two samples whereas three samples reached the 
FSL. This discrepancy completely shatters the prosecution case. 
22. Admittedly, no proceedings under Section 52A of the NDPS 
Act were undertaken by the Investigating Officer PW-5 for 
preparing an inventory and obtaining samples in presence of the 
jurisdictional Magistrate. In this view of the matter, the FSL 
report(Exhibit P-11) is nothing but a waste paper and cannot be 
read in evidence. The accused A-3 and A-4 were not arrested at 
the spot. The offence under Section 20(b)(ii)(c) deals with 

production, manufacture, possession, sale, purchase, transport, 
import or export of cannabis. It is not the case of the prosecution 
that the accused A-3 and A-4 were found in possession of ganja. 
The highest case of the prosecution which too is not substantiated 
by any admissible or tangible evidence is that these two accused 
had conspired sale/purchase of ganja with A-1 and A-2. The entire 
case of the prosecution as against these two accused is based on 
the interrogation notes of A-1 and A-2. 
23. It is trite that confession of an accused recorded by a Police 
Officer is not admissible in evidence as the same is hit by Section 
25 of the Evidence Act. Neither the trial Court nor the High Court 
adverted to this fatal flaw in the prosecution case and proceeded 
to convict A-3 and A-4 in a sheerly mechanical manner without 
there being on iota of evidence on record of the case so as to hold 
them guilty. 
24. As a consequence of the above discussion, we are of the firm 
opinion that the prosecution has miserably failed to prove the 
charges against the accused. The evidence of the police witnesses 
is full of contradictions and is thoroughly unconvincing. The 
conviction of the accused appellants as recorded by the trial Court 

and affirmed by the High Court is illegal on the face of record and 
suffers from highest degree of perversity. 
25. Resultantly, the judgment dated 10th November, 2022 passed 
by the High Court affirming the judgment of the trial Court 
convicting and sentencing the accused appellants for the charge 
under Section 8(c) read with 20(b)(ii)(c) of the NDPS Act is hereby 
quashed and set aside. The appellants are acquitted of all the 
charges. They are in custody and shall be released forthwith, if 
not wanted in any other case. 
26. The appeals are accordingly allowed. 
27. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

…………………………..J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

………………………….J. 

(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
NEW DELHI; 
MARCH 01, 2024