IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
 
Rajesh Monga.… Appellant(s)

VERSUS

Housing Development Finance
Corporation Limited & Ors.
 
 …. Respondent(s)
 JUDGMENT
A.S. Bopanna, J.
1.
 The appellant is before this Court in this appeal
claiming to be aggrieved by the order dated 10.11.2022
passed by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission, New Delhi (‘NCDRC’ for short) in Consumer
Complaint No. 2367 of 2018. By the said order the NCDRC
has concluded that the appellant is bound by the terms and
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 1

conditions of the agreement dated 11.01.2006, while the
respondent was bound by various instructions of the
Reserve Bank of India (‘RBI’ for short), at the time of signing
the agreement dated 11.01.2006. Hence the complaint filed
by the appellant was dismissed. The appellant is therefore
before this Court.
2.
 The brief facts are that the appellant was in need of
home loan. The respondents No. 2 and 3 being the
employees of respondent No. 1 approached the appellant
during August 2005. The appellant was exploring the option
of securing loan from other financial institutions as well.
The case of the appellant is that respondents No. 2 and 3
being the direct sales agent and the resident manager of
respondent No. 1 - HDFC convinced the appellant that the
rate of interest charged by the respondent No. 1 on home
loan was lesser than what was being charged by ICICI
Bank. In this regard, the appellant relied on an email dated
05.10.2005 from respondent No. 2 to contend that a
comparison was provided in the said email to the appellant
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 2

that the rate of interest offered by respondent No.1 was
cheaper.
3.
 It is contended that the respondent No. 2, on behalf of
respondent No. 1 had assured that the rate of interest would
be charged based on the Prime Lending Rate of RBI. Based
on such representations the appellant is stated to have
applied for home loan of Rs.3,50,00,000/= (Rupees Three
Crores and Fifty Lakhs) from respondent No.1, which was
sanctioned and the loan agreement dated 11.01.2006 was
entered into. The loan amount was disbursed to DLF
Universal Ltd., in instalments between January 2006 to
December 2007. As per the loan agreement, interest at
7.25% p.a and margin of 3.5 % per annum was provided.
Though this was the position, the grievance of the appellant
is that the respondent No. 1 revised the rate of interest to
8.25 %, despite RBI not having changed the Prime Lending
Rate during 11.01.2006 to 01.05.2006.
4.
 In spite of the complainant contacting the respondent
No. 2 and other officers, there was no relief, instead, the
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 3

respondent No. 1 raised the rate of interest to 8.75 %, to
9.25% and again to 10.5% though there was no change
made by RBI with regard to the Prime Lending Rate. The
appellant therefore got issued a legal notice dated
27.09.2007 demanding to return the interest amount which
was charged over and above 7.5% p. a. The respondent No.1
vide their reply to the notice dated 09.10.2007 contended
that the appellant through the agreement opted for
‘Adjustable Rate of interest’, as such rate of interest was
varying as per the retail prime lending rate of respondent
No. 1. It is in that background the appellant approached the
Consumer Forum.
5.
 We have heard Sri. Vikas Singh, learned senior
counsel for the appellant, Sri. Aniruddha Choudhary for the
respondents and perused the appeal papers.
6.
 The thrust of the contention is that the respondent No.
2 on behalf of respondent No.1 had assured that the interest
charged by respondent No.1 is as per the retail prime
lending rate to be notified by RBI. As such the interest
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 4

which was indicated at 7.25% p.a. can be altered only if the
RBI had altered the rate of interest and not otherwise.
Though, in the agreement it is contained that the rate of
interest would be as per the prime lending rate of interest of
respondent No.1, the same is contrary to the assurance that
was held out to the appellant that such adjustable rate of
interest agreed is only when the rate of interest is varied by
the RBI and not as per the interest to be varied by
respondent No.1. The learned senior counsel for the
appellant in that regard has placed strong reliance on the
email dated 05.10.2005, to contend that such assurance
was made to the appellant.
7.
 The learned senior counsel for the appellant has relied
on Texco Marketing (P) Ltd. v. TATA AIG General
Insurance Co. Ltd., (2023), wherein the issue
considered was with regard to an exclusion clause in an
insurance policy which materially altered the nature of the
contract. It was observed in this regard that insurance
contracts are standard form contracts wherein the insurer
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 5

being the dominant party dictates its own terms and the
consumer has weak bargaining power and as such the
contracts are one sided. The concept of freedom of contract
loses some significance in a contract of insurance. Such
contracts demand a very high degree of prudence, good
faith, disclosure and notice on the part of the insurer, being
different facets of the doctrine of fairness. The bench
consisting of two Hon’ble judges was of the opinion that one
cannot give a restrictive or narrow interpretation to the
provisions relating to unfair trade practices as given under
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. The Court’s finding
against one of the parties qua the existence of unfair trade
practice has to be transformed into an adequate relief in
favour of the other, particularly in light of Section 14 of the
1986 Act. Once, the State Commission or the NCDRC, as
the case may be, comes to the conclusion that the term of a
contract is unfair, particularly by adopting an unfair trade
practice, the aggrieved party has to be extended the
resultant relief which is further strengthened by Sections 47
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 6

and 49 of the 2019 Act. It was also observed that under
sub-section (2) of Sections 49 and 59 of the Consumer
Protection Act, 2019 the State Commission and the NCDRC,
respectively, may declare any terms of the contract being
unfair to any consumer to be null and void and there exists
ample power to declare any terms of the contract as unfair,
if in its opinion, its introduction by the insurer has certain
elements of unfairness.
In Debashis Sinha v. R.N.R. Enterprise (2023), the dispute was regarding amenities promised by the
real estate developers in their brochures/advertisement
which were not delivered by them. It was noted that once
the NCDRC arrived at a finding that the respondents
therein were casual in their approach and had even resorted
to unfair trade practice, it was its obligation to consider the
appellants' grievance objectively and upon application of
mind and thereafter give its reasoned decision. If at all, the
appellants had not forfeited any right by registration of the
sale deeds and if indeed the respondents were remiss in
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 7

providing any of the facilities/amenities as promised in the
brochure/advertisement, it was the duty of NCDRC to set
things right. 
8.
In Pradeep Kumar v. Postmaster General (2022), in those facts and circumstances it was found by
this Court that fraud was committed by an officer and
employee of the post office. It was held that the Post Office,
as an abstract entity, functions through its employees.
Employees, as individuals, are capable of being dishonest
and committing acts of fraud or wrongs themselves or in
collusion with others. Such acts of bank/post office
employees, when done during their course of employment,
are binding on the bank/post office at the instance of the
person who is damnified by the fraud and wrongful acts of
the officers of the bank/post office and such acts within
their course of employment will give a right to the
appellants to legally proceed for injury, as this is their only
remedy against the post office. Thus, the post office, like a
bank, can and is entitled to proceed against the officers for
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 8

the loss caused due to the fraud, etc. but this would not
absolve them from their liability if the employee involved
was acting in the course of his employment and duties.
9.
 From a perusal of the above noted cases, it would
disclose that they are circumstances where certain aspects
were contained in the agreements in question, but a
contention was raised contrary to the same and this Court
had rejected such contention. The learned senior counsel
would however contend that though the parties may have
agreed on certain aspects in the agreement, what is
important is the intention of the parties and any
correspondence exchanged between the parties as a prelude
to the transaction before executing the agreement will be
relevant to know the intention of the parties. It is in that
regard contended that the email dated 05.10.2005 was prior
to the agreement dated 11.01.2006 and as such the said
intention should be gathered and given effect to. In order to
persuade us to accept this contention, the learned senior
counsel for the appellant has relied on the decision in
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 9

Board of Trustees of Chennai Port Trust v. Chennai
Container Terminal Private Ltd. (2014) 1 CTC 573
wherein it was contended that the petitioner therein had
granted licence to Respondent No. 1 therein for the
development and maintenance of Chennai Container
Terminal in terms of Licence Agreement entered into
between parties in 2001. Contentions were raised that pre-
contractual correspondence cannot be relied upon as the
correspondence fructified into a contract. It was held that
while English jurisprudence is clear on the aspect of pre-
contractual correspondence losing its significance once the
contract comes into existence, a straightjacket formula
cannot be applied in India as there may be people from
different states and different languages as their mother
tongue whose wishes culminate into a contract which is
drafted and concluded in a foreign language. 
10. Having perused the precedents on which reliance was
placed, we are of the opinion that the same does not come
to the aid of the appellant. In the instant case, at the outset,
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 10

it is to be noted that the respondent No.1 being a NBFC and
as a corporate body would be bound by its policies and
procedures with regard to lending and recovery. In that
regard, the applicability of the rate of interest to be charged
is also a matter of policy and cannot be case-specific unless
the individual agreement entered into between the parties
indicate otherwise.
11. In that backdrop, a perusal of the fact situation in the
instant case will disclose that the appellant filed the loan
application on 16.09.2005. It was indicated therein that the
‘Rate option’ is ‘Adjustable’, which discloses that, what was
opted is an Adjustable Rate of Interest, which will depend
on the increase or decrease of the rate of interest. The issue
however is as to whether such an Adjustable Rate of Interest
will apply based only on the rate of interest being fixed/
altered by RBI or as to whether the Rate of Interest fixed/
altered by Respondent No.1 - HDFC will apply in respect of
the loan transaction. It is in that regard contended that
respondent No.2, representing respondent No. 1 - HDFC
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 11

had made a tabulation comparing the rate of interest to
represent that it is beneficial to the appellant and had
explicitly indicated in the email dated 05.10.2005 that- “PLR
is decided by RBI, whereas FRR is decided by the individual
Bank, HDFC is the only Institution working on PLR”. It also
indicated that in other banks like ICICI there is a clause
that the change in FRR is on sole discretion of the bank.
12. The agreement dated 01.11.2006 executed between the
parties inter alia provides as follows;
 
 “1.1 (e). The expression ‘rate of interest’ means the 
Rate of interest referred to in Article 2.2 of this
Agreement and as varied from time to time in
terms of this Agreement. 
(h) The expression ‘Adjustable Interest Rate’ or
“AIR” means the interest rate announced by HDFC
from time to time as its retail prime lending rate
and applied by HDFC with spread, if any, as may
be decided by HDFC, on the loan of the borrower
pursuant to this Agreement.

The expression “Retail Prime Lending Rate” or
’RPLR’ means the interest rate announced by
HDFC from time to time as its retail prime lending
rate.

2.2 (a). Until and as varied by HDFC in terms of
this Agreement the AIR applicable to the said loan
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 12

as at the date of execution of this agreement is as
stated in the Schedule. is as stated in the
Schedule.
 
3(f). HDFC may vary its retail crime lending rate
from time to time in such manner including as to
the loan amounts as HDFC may deem fit in its own
discretion.”
13. At the threshold, it can be noted that the appellant is
not an illiterate person to take the benefit of the precedents
relied upon. On the other hand, when it is contended that
the appellant had the option of securing loan from other
banks and that being misled by the email had entered into
the transaction, would by itself indicate that the appellant
was worldly wise. In such circumstance when the parties
have signed the agreement dated 01.11.2006, the terms
agreed therein would bind the parties and the email
exchanged between the parties cannot override the policy
decisions of the respondent No.1 institution. In order to
contend that the appellant has been misled or that the
earlier representation will constitute unfair trade practice,
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 13

the appellant ought to have raised such contention when
the agreement was to be signed.
14. Having executed the agreement; having agreed to the
terms and conditions; having received the loan amount, the
appellant cannot raise any objection for the first time when
the rate of interest was increased after having acquiesced
by signing the agreement. Further, the appellant having
repaid the loan amount with interest as per the terms of
agreement cannot make out a grievance in hindsight and
seek refund of the amount paid.
15. That apart, though it is contended that the appellant
had the option of securing financial assistance from other
institutions but was lured by respondent No.2 through the
email and therefore amounts to unfair trade practice
causing loss to the appellant, due to which he is entitled to
be compensated, there is no material on record or evidence
tendered to establish that the appellant had in fact
approached any other financial institution which had
agreed to sanction loan or to demonstrate that it was a
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 14

better bargain and if taken from such institution the
appellant was in a better position.
16. Therefore, if all these aspects of the matter are kept in
perspective and the order passed by the NCDRC is perused,
we are of the view that no error has been committed so as
to call for interference. Accordingly, the appeal is
dismissed with no order as to costs.
17. Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
 …………….…………………J. 
 (A.S. BOPANNA)..………….…………………J.
 
 (M.M. SUNDRESH)
New Delhi,
March 04, 2024
 C.A. No.1495 of 2023 Page 15