IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

THANGAM AND ANOTHER 

… Appellant(s) 
 
VERSUS 
 
NAVAMANI AMMAL 
 
 … Respondent(s) 
 
JUDGMENT 
Rajesh Bindal, J. 
 
1. 
 
The issue under consideration in the present appeal is 
regarding genuineness of the Will dated 09.10.1984, which is a registered 
document, executed by Palaniandi Udyar in favour of Navamani Amma. 
2. 
 
A suit1 filed by the respondent/plaintiff for declaration and 
injunction was decreed by the Trial Court2, holding the Will to be 
 
1 O.S. No. 402 of 1986. 
2 Additional District Munsif Court, Ariyalur. genuine. In appeal3 by the appellants, judgment and decree of the Trial 
Court was reversed by the First Appellate Court4. In second appeal5 filed 
by the respondent the judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court 
was set aside and that of the Trial Court was restored by the High Court6. 
3. 
 
Before we embark upon to consider the issues in detail, we 
deem it appropriate to mention the relations between the parties and 
certain brief facts. 
3.1. 
The testator of the Will dated 09.10.1984, Palaniandi Udayar, 
was the husband of appellant no. 1 Thangam and father of appellant no. 2 
Laila. 
3.2. 
The Will was executed on 09.10.1984 in favour of Navamani 
Amma/Plaintiff, who as per the narration in the Will is said to be daughter 
of the brother of the testator. 
3.3. 
The defendant in the suit originally filed was widow of the 
testator, however, later on his minor daughter was also impleaded. Both 
are the appellants before this Court. 
 
3 Appeal Suit No. 7 of 1991. 
4 Subordinate Judge, Ariyalur. 
5 Second Appeal No. 1344 of 1996. 
6 High Court of Judicature at Madras. 

3.4 
 
The appellant no. 1 is the third wife of the testator. The earlier 
two wives expired and were not having any child from the loins of the 
testator. 
3.5 
 
Even as per the admitted case of the defendant no. 1/widow of 
the testator, the testator was having total land about 8 acres besides three 
houses. 
3.6 
 
By way of Will, the testator had bequeathed approximately 
3.5 Acres of land in favour of the plaintiff stating therein that she is like his 
daughter, being daughter of his brother. The value of the suit property 
was estimated to be about ₹16,000/-. 

ARGUMENTS 
4. 
 
In the aforesaid factual matrix, the argument raised by learned 
counsel for the appellants challenging the judgment and decree of the 
High Court was that the execution of Will was surrounded by various 
suspicious circumstances and deserves to be discarded as was rightly 
done by the First Appellate Court. The finding of facts recorded by the 
First Appellate Court was erroneously reversed by the High Court without 
the same being perverse. Re-appreciation of the facts merely to come to 
another possible conclusion does not fall within the scope of 

consideration of a matter in second appeal. There was no substantial 
question of law involved in the second appeal before the High Court. 
There were discrepancies in the statements of the scribe and the attesting 
witnesses to the Will. The health of the testator was not good and he was 
not in a position to understand and comprehend the contents of the Will. 
There were differences in the thumb impressions of the testator on the 
Will and on the register in the office of the Sub-Registrar. 
5. 
 
Though, admittedly the testator left behind his widow and a 
minor daughter but there is no mention in the Will about the same. How 
their interest was taken care of, the Will is silent. In fact, the appellants 
were in possession of the suit property. The suit filed by the respondent 
was totally misconceived. 
6. 
 
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent 
submitted that the execution of Will by a person in favour of any other 
relative always would mean that the testator wishes to take away some 
property from the normal course of inheritance. In fact, the respondent 
being like daughter to the testator was taking care of his health, who was 
suffering from asthma and chronic cough. It is not that the entire property 
owned by the testator was given to the respondent by way of Will, rather 

it was only a part thereof. She is in possession of the suit property after 
the death of the testator. The need to file the suit arose more than two 
years after the death of the testator as her possession was disturbed by 
the appellants. Otherwise also the appellants had not taken any step to 
take care of the testator when he was not keeping good health or the 
property left by him after his death. Admittedly, the appellant no. 1 was 
living away from the testator. Even at the time of his death the appellants 
were not present as she came later on. Even the expenses for performing 
last rites of the testator were borne by the husband of the respondent. 
There is no error in the judgment of the High Court. The findings recorded 
by the First Appellate Court being totally perverse were rightly 
interfered by the High Court. 
6.1 
 
In the written statement filed by the appellants, there was no 
specific denial to the claim made by the respondent/plaintiff. No para-
wise reply was given. In the absence thereof, the allegations in the plaint 
were deemed to be admitted. 

DISCUSSION 
7. 
 
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the 
relevant referred record. We may record that the translated copies of 

whatever documents have been placed on record by the parties, are 
being considered as such as to the same, no dispute has been raised by 
the either side. 
8. 
 
What is required to be considered while examining the 
correctness of the judgment of the High Court is as to whether the Will in 
question was surrounded by suspicious circumstances whereby the 
testator had not mentioned the names of his widow and minor daughter in 
the Will and has bequeathed a part of his property to the respondent. 
8.1 
 
The appellant no. 1 is the third wife of the testator whereas the 
appellant no. 2 is the daughter. From the earlier two wives no child was 
born. 
9. 
 
Firstly, coming to the health of the testator the Plaintiff/PW-1 
stated in her examination-in-chief that though the testator was having 
Asthma but otherwise he was in good health condition. In her Cross-
Examination PW-1 stated that the testator was suffering from Asthma and 
Cough for about 5 to 6 years. She denied that the testator was having any 
drinking habit. She denied the suggestion that the testator was bed-
ridden for three months before executing the Will. 

9.1 
 
PW-2/Vadivelu, who is an attesting witness to the Will, in his 
cross-examination stated that he inquired about the health of the testator 
and he told PW-2 that he was having some cough problem and was 
otherwise suffering from T.B. 
9.2 
 
PW-3/Govindasamy, who was a witness in the office of Sub-
Registrar, in his cross-examination stated that at the time of execution of 
Will the testator was having cough. 
9.3 
 
PW-4/Subramanian, who is Scribe of the Will, stated in his 
examination-in-chief that at the time of execution of Will the testator was 
in good physical condition and he was having cough only. He was not put 
any question in this regard in cross-examination. 
9.4 
 
DW-1/Thangam Ammal, who is the widow of the testator, 
stated in her examination-in-chief that before his death the testator ‘was 
suffering from lever wound and he had dysentery and suffered very 
much’ (sic). DW-1 in her cross-examination sated that three months 
before his death the testator was not in good physique and before that he 
was in good condition. DW-1 further stated that the testator was bed 
ridden for 3 months and she was taking care of him. 

9.5 
 
From the aforesaid evidence of the witnesses with reference 
to the health of the testator we do not find that he was not in good senses 
and was unable to understand his welfare or take correct decisions. 
Hence, the Will cannot be held to be suspicious on the ground of the 
alleged ill-health of the testator at the time of the execution of the Will. 

10. 
 
Now, coming to another aspect with reference to the 
genuineness of the Will, the PW-4/Subramanian, who is scribe of the Will, 
stated in his examination-in-chief that the testator had put his thumb 
impression on the Will and that he witnessed the same. He further stated 
the Will was registered in the office of Sub-Registrar. 
10.1 
In his cross-examination, he stated that on enquiry testator told 
him that the Plaintiff can take the suit property and other properties can 
be taken by the Defendants i.e., his wife and daughter. This shows that 
even at the time of execution of the Will, the testator was fully conscious 
of the welfare of his widow and minor daughter as sufficient property was 
left for them. 
11. 
 
The Plaintiff examined PW-2/Vadivelu, who was the attesting 
witness to the Will. In his examination-in-chief he stated that the testator 

was very well known to him and that he was witness in the above Will. He 
stated that the Will was written under a tree at Palavur. Details were given 
by the Testator. After writing of Will, the testator asked PW-4/scribe to 
read over the same. After hearing and being satisfied the testator had put 
his thumb impression. He and one other attesting witness, Muruganian 
(DW-2), had witnessed the testator putting thumb impression on the Will. 
In his cross-examination he stated that the Will was written without 
compulsion and in good conscious were expressed by Testator alone. He 
asked testator whether he was having any legal heir and testator told him 
that as per his desire alone the Will was written. 
11.1 
The Defendants examined Murugaian, who was also an 
attesting witness to the Will, as DW-2, who in his examination-in-chief 
stated that he was asked by Paramasivam, who is husband of the Plaintiff, 
to be witness in the office of Sub-Registrar. He further stated that he was 
requested to sign as witness and after putting his signature he returned. 
DW-2 further stated that he did not see the testator put his thumb 
impression. In Cross-examination DW-2 stated that he saw the testator 
sitting under a tree and that the testator told him that he was writing the 
Will in favour of his heirs. 

12. 
 
It is the admitted case of the appellants that the testator left 
behind about 8 acres of land and three houses. What has been 
bequeathed to the respondent is merely a part of testator’s entire 
property i.e. land measuring approximately 3.5 Acres. Meaning thereby 
the balance property of the testator is in possession of widow and 
daughter. This is how the interest of the natural legal heirs has been taken 
care of. 
12.1 
The reason to bequeath a part of the property in favour of the 
respondent is also evident from the material available on record. It has 
come in evidence that the testator was not keeping good heath as he was 
suffering from asthma and cough. The appellants were not living with him 
for quite sometime as it is the admitted case of DW-1 in her cross-
examination that she had gone to her paternal home on account of 
marriage of her brother and was not living with the testator at the time of 
execution of Will. It has also come on record that she was not present 
when the testator died. Expenses for his last rites were borne by the 
husband of the respondent who was taking care of the land of the testator. 
12.2 
There is nothing on record to suggest that the appellants were 
taking care of the property left by the testator immediately after his death 

or that any steps were taken by them to get the same mutated in their 
favour. 
13. 
 
From the aforesaid evidence on record, in our opinion, no 
error has been committed by the High Court in holding that the Will was 
not surrounded by the suspicious circumstances as the scribe and one of 
the witnesses were unison. The testator was conscious of the fact that he 
had a wife and a minor child whose interest had been taken care of by 
leaving part of the property for them. It came in response to a specific 
question asked by PW-4 to the testator at the time of execution of the Will. 
It was so stated by PW-4 in his cross-examination. Even in para 14 of the 
written statement, the appellants stated that they are enjoying the suit 
properties and other properties left by the testator. This clearly shows 
that certain part of the properties was left by the testator for his widow 
and minor daughter. 
14. 
 
Before we part with the judgment we are constraint to observe 
the manner in which the pleadings have been filed in the Trial Courts or 
may be in some cases in the High Courts. 
14.1 
A perusal of the plaint filed by the respondent shows that it 
contains ten paragraphs besides the prayer. In the written statement filed 

by the appellants, no specific para-wise reply was given. It was the own 
story of the respondent containing fifteen paragraphs besides the prayer 
in para 16. 
15. 
 
In the absence of para-wise reply to the plaint, it becomes a 
roving inquiry for the Court to find out as to which line in some paragraph 
in the plaint is either admitted or denied in the written statement filed, as 
there is no specific admission or denial with reference to the allegation in 
different paras. 
15.1 
Order VIII Rules 3 and 5 CPC clearly provides for specific 
admission and denial of the pleadings in the plaint. A general or evasive 
denial is not treated as sufficient. Proviso to Order VIII Rule 5 CPC 
provides that even the admitted facts may not be treated to be admitted, 
still in its discretion the Court may require those facts to be proved. This 
is an exception to the general rule. General rule is that the facts admitted, 
are not required to be proved. 
15.2 
The requirement of Order VIII Rules 3 and 5 CPC are specific 
admission and denial of the pleadings in the plaint. The same would 
necessarily mean dealing with the allegations in the plaint para-wise. In 
the absence thereof, the respondent can always try to read one line from 

one paragraph and another from different paragraph in the written 
statement to make out his case of denial of the allegations in the plaint 
resulting in utter confusion. 
15.3 
In case, the defendant/respondent wishes to take any 
preliminary objections, the same can be taken in a separate set of 
paragraphs specifically so as to enable the plaintiff/petitioner to respond 
to the same in the replication/rejoinder, if need be. The additional 
pleadings can also be raised in the written statement, if required. These 
facts specifically stated in a set of paragraphs will always give an 
opportunity to the plaintiff/petitioner to respond to the same. This in turn 
will enable the Court to properly comprehend the pleadings of the parties 
instead of digging the facts from the various paragraphs of the plaint and 
the written statement. 
15.4 
The issue regarding specific admission and denial of the 
pleadings was considered by this Court in Badat and Co. Bombay Vs. 
East India Trading Co7. While referring to Order VIII Rules 3 to 5 of the 
CPC it was opined that the aforesaid Rules formed an integrated Code 
 
 SC 538. dealing with the manner in which the pleadings are to be dealt with. 
Relevant parts of para ‘11’ thereof are extracted below: 
“11. 
 
Order 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure 
prescribes, among others, that the plaintiff shall give in the 
plaint the facts constituting the cause of action and when it 
arose, and the facts showing the court has jurisdiction. The 
object is to enable the defendant to ascertain from the plaint 
the necessary facts so that he may admit or deny them. Order 
VIII provides for the filing of a written-statement, the 
particulars to be contained therein and the manner of doing 
so; 
XXX 
XXX 
XXX 
These three rules form an integrated code dealing with the 
manner in which allegations of fact in the plaint should be 
traversed and the legal consequences flowing from its non- 
compliance. The written statement must deal specifically with 
each allegation of fact in the plaint and when a defendant 
denies any such fact, he must not do so evasively, but answer 
the point of substance. If his denial of a fact is not specific but 
evasive, the said fact shall be taken to be admitted. In such an 
event, the admission itself being proof, no other proof is 
necessary.” 

15.5 
The matter was further considered by this Court in Lohia 
Properties (P) Ltd., Tinsukia, Dibrugarh, Assam Vs. Atmaram 
Kumar8 after the 1976 Amendment Act in CPC whereby the existing Rule 
5 of Order VIII of the CPC was numbered as sub-rule (1) and three more 
sub-rules were added dealing with different situations where no written 
statement is filed. In paras 14 and 15 of the aforesaid judgment, the 
position of law as stated earlier was reiterated. The same are extracted 
below: 
“14. 
 
What is stated in the above is, what amount to 
admit a fact on pleading while Rule 3 of Order 8 requires that 
the defendant must deal specifically with each allegation of 
fact of which he does not admit the truth. 
15. 

Rule 5 provides that every allegation of fact 
in the plaint, if not denied in the written statement shall be 
taken to be admitted by the defendant. What this rule says is, 
that any allegation of fact must either be denied specifically or 
by a necessary implication or there should be at least a 
statement that the fact is not admitted. If the plea is not taken 
in that manner, then the allegation shall be taken to be 
admitted.” 
 
8 (1993). 

15.6 
We have made the aforesaid observations as regularly this 
Court is faced with the situation where there are no specific para-wise 
reply given in the written statement/counter affidavit filed by the 
defendant(s)/respondent(s). In our opinion, if the aforesaid correction is 
made, it may streamline the working. 
16. 

For the reasons mentioned above, we do not find any 
merit in the present appeal. The same is, accordingly, dismissed. 

……………….……………..J. 
 (C.T. RAVIKUMAR) 
 
……………….……………..J. 
(RAJESH BINDAL) 
 
New Delhi 
March 04, 2024.