IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

NAEEM 

VERSUS 
 
STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH 

WITH 

JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 

1. 
These appeals challenge the judgment and order dated 
17th December 2019, passed by the Division Bench of the 
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal Appeal 
Nos. 1589 of 2018 and 7393 of 2017, whereby the Division 
Bench dismissed both the criminal appeals preferred by the 
appellants, namely, Pappi ashkoor (accused No.1), 
Naeema (accused No.2) and Naeem (accused No.3) and 
upheld the order of conviction and sentence dated 24th 
October 2017 as recorded by the learned Sessions Judge, 

Moradabad (hereinafter referred to as the ‘trial court’) in 
Sessions Trial No. 260 of 2017. 
2. 
Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeals 
are as under: 
2.1. On 1st December 2016, the Police Station Katghar, 
District Moradabad received a written report at 08:15 pm 
which was a transcription of the complaint made by Shahin 
Parveen (deceased) who had been admitted in the District 
Hospital, Moradabad on 1st December 2016, at 02:20 pm 
with 80% deep thermal and facial burns. In her complaint, 
the deceased had alleged that she had been set ablaze by the 
accused/appellants who had been pressuring her into 
entering 
the 
profession 
of 
immoral 
trafficking 
and 
prostitution. On the basis of the written report (Ext. Ka-3), a 
First Information Report (“FIR” for short) was registered at 
Police Station Katghar, District Moradabad vide Case Crime 
Number 1332 of 2016 for the offence punishable under 
Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter 
referred to as “IPC”). On the same day, Raj Kumar Bhaskar 
(PW-5), the then Naib Tehsildar, Sadar, Moradabad was 
telephonically summoned by the Tehsildar to record the 

statement of Shahin Parveen (deceased), after she was 
admitted in the hospital. Between the hours of 08:48 pm and 
09:15 pm, dying declaration of Shahin Parveen (deceased) 
(Ext. Ka-6) came to be recorded by PW-5. Subsequently, the 
victim was admitted in Safdarjang Hospital, New Delhi on 2nd 
December 2016, where she eventually succumbed to her 
injuries at 07:55 pm. Consequently, the Case Crime No. 1332 
of 2016 was altered to the offence punishable under Section 
302 of IPC. According to the Post-Mortem Report (Ext. Ka-
11), the cause of death was shock as a result of ante-mortem 
burn injuries. 
2.2. After the death of the husband of the deceased two 
years prior to the incident, she had been residing at her 
matrimonial house with her two children along with Pappi ashkoor (accused No. 1) who was her brother-in-law (devar) 
and his wife Naeema (accused No.2). Naeem (accused No.3) is 
Naeema’s brother. The prosecution case is that, after the 
death 
of 
the 
husband 
of 
the 
deceased, 
the 
accused/appellants started pressuring her into entering the 
profession of immoral trafficking and prostitution. As the 
deceased did not concede to the same, she was physically 

and sexually assaulted and asked to vacate the house. On 
the 
day 
of 
the 
incident 
at 
about 
01:30 
pm, 
the 
accused/appellants caught hold of the deceased and poured 
kerosene on her. Pappi ashkoor (accused No.1) and 
Naeema (accused No.2) ignited the matchstick and threw it at 
her. Thereafter, the accused/appellants surrounded her so 
that she could not escape. On being set ablaze, the deceased 
ran out of the house whereafter her neighbours put out the 
fire and informed her mother and brother namely, Islam abli (PW-2) who took her to the hospital. This version of 
events was brought out in the complaint made by the 
deceased which was transcribed by Faisal Zamal (PW-3). On 
the basis of PW-3’s written report, bearing the thumb 
impression of the deceased, the FIR came to be registered at 
08:15 pm on 1st December 2016. Thereafter, on the same 
day, between 08:48 pm and 09:15 pm, PW-5 recorded the 
dying declaration of the deceased (Ext. Ka-6) wherein she 
stated that there was an outstanding dispute between her 
and Pappi ashkoor (accused No.1) with regards to the 
partition of their shared residence. On the date of the 
incident at about 12:30 pm, another quarrel broke out 

between the deceased and the accused/appellants, during 
which accused No.1 poured kerosene on the deceased and 
set her ablaze. He was accompanied and assisted by his wife 
Naeema (accused No.2) and Naeem, brother of Naeema 
(accused No.3). She was taken to the District Hospital, 
Moradabad by her brother Islam abli (PW-2) and 
thereafter shifted to Safdarjang Hospital, New Delhi, where 
she eventually succumbed to her injuries. 
2.3. After completion of the investigation, a charge-sheet 
came to be filed before the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, 
Moradabad. Since the case was exclusively triable by the 
Sessions Court, the same came to be committed to the 
learned Sessions Judge. 
2.4. Charges came to be framed by the learned Sessions 
Judge for the offences punishable under Sections 302 and 34 
of the IPC. The accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be 
tried. 
2.5. The prosecution examined 8 witnesses to bring home 
the guilt of the accused persons. While Papi ashkoor 
(accused No.1) took the defence that he was absent from the 
spot of the incident at the relevant time and that the 

deceased had committed suicide since she was depressed 
after the death of her husband, Naeema (accused No.2) and 
Naeem (accused No.3) set up the defence of bare denial. The 
defence did not lead any evidence. 
2.6. At the conclusion of the trial, the trial court found that 
the 
prosecution 
had 
proved 
the 
case 
against 
the 
accused/appellants 
beyond 
reasonable 
doubt 
and 
accordingly convicted them for offences punishable under 
Sections 302 and 34 of the IPC and sentenced them to 
undergo imprisonment for life along with fine. 
2.7. Being 
aggrieved 
thereby, 
the 
accused/appellants 
preferred appeals before the High Court. The High Court by 
the impugned judgment dismissed the same and affirmed the 
order of conviction and sentence awarded by the trial court. 
Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeals. 

3. 
We have heard Shri Mohd. Adeel Siddiqui, learned 
counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants and Shri 
Sharan Thakur, learned Additional Advocate General (AAG) 
appearing on behalf of the respondent-State. 
4. 
Shri Mohd. Siddiqui submits that the conviction is 

based only on the dying declaration of the deceased (Ex. Ka-
6). He submits that the dying declaration (Ext. Ka-6) is not 
free from doubt. It is submitted that the Discharge Slip (Ext. 
Ka-7) would show that the deceased was discharged from the 
District Hospital, Moradabad on 1st December 2016 at 05:00 
pm. It is therefore impossible that the dying declaration (Ext. 
Ka-6) could have been recorded between 08:48 pm and 09:15 
pm. The learned counsel therefore submits that the said 
dying declaration (Ext. Ka-6) cannot be said to be 
trustworthy, reliable and cogent so as to base the conviction 
solely on the basis of the same. 
5., Shri Thakur submits that, both the trial 
court and the High Court, on the correct appreciation of 
evidence, rightly convicted the accused/appellants and as 
such, no interference would be warranted with the 
concurrent findings of the trial court and the High Court. 
The learned AAG submits that Raj Kumar Bhaskar (PW-5), 
the then Naib Tehsildar, has deposed about the dying 
declaration (Ext. Ka-6). Shri Thakur submits that the dying 
declaration (Ext. Ka-6) also contains the certification by Dr. 
A.K. Singh, Emergency Medical Officer, District Hospital, 

Moradabad regarding the medical fitness of the victim both 
prior to and after recording the dying declaration (Ext. Ka-6). 
6. 
Undisputedly, in the present case, the conviction is 
based solely on the dying declaration (Ext. Ka-6). The law 
with regard to conviction on the sole basis of dying 
declaration has been considered by this Court in a catena of 
judgments. After considering the earlier judgments, this 
Court, in the case of Atbir v. Government of NCT of Delhi1, 
has laid down certain factors to be taken into consideration 
while resting the conviction on the basis of dying declaration. 
It will be apposite to refer to para (22) of the said judgment, 
which reads thus: 
“22. The analysis of the above decisions clearly 
shows that: 
(i) Dying declaration can be the sole basis 
of conviction if it inspires the full 
confidence of the court. 
(ii) The court should be satisfied that the 
deceased was in a fit state of mind at the 
time of making the statement and that it 
was not the result of tutoring, prompting 
or imagination. 
(iii) Where the court is satisfied that the 
declaration is true and voluntary, it can 
base its conviction without any further 
corroboration. 
 
1(2010): 2010 INSC 491 

(iv) It cannot be laid down as an absolute 
rule of law that the dying declaration 
cannot form the sole basis of conviction 
unless it is corroborated. The rule 
requiring corroboration is merely a rule of 
prudence. 

Where 
the 
dying 
declaration 
is 
suspicious, it should not be acted upon 
without corroborative evidence. 
(vi) A dying declaration which suffers 
from infirmity such as the deceased was 
unconscious and could never make any 
statement cannot form the basis of 
conviction. 
(vii) Merely because a dying declaration 
does not contain all the details as to the 
occurrence, it is not to be rejected. 
(viii) Even if it is a brief statement, it is 
not to be discarded. 
(ix) When the eyewitness affirms that the 
deceased was not in a fit and conscious 
state to make the dying declaration, 
medical opinion cannot prevail. 
(x) If after careful scrutiny, the court is 
satisfied that it is true and free from any 
effort to induce the deceased to make a 
false statement and if it is coherent and 
consistent, 
there 
shall 
be 
no 
legal 
impediment to make it the basis of 
conviction, 
even 
if 
there 
is 
no 
corroboration.” 
 
7. 
It can thus be seen that this Court has clearly held that 
dying declaration can be the sole basis of the conviction if it 
inspires the full confidence of the court. The Court is 

required to satisfy itself that the deceased was in a fit state of 
mind at the time of making the statement and that it was not 
the result of tutoring, prompting or imagination. It has 
further been held that, where the Court is satisfied about the 
dying declaration being true and voluntary, it can base its 
conviction without any further corroboration. It has further 
been held that there cannot be an absolute rule of law that 
the dying declaration cannot form the sole basis of conviction 
unless it is corroborated. It has been held that the rule 
requiring corroboration is merely a rule of prudence. The 
Court has observed that if after careful scrutiny, the court is 
satisfied that it is true and free from any effort to induce the 
deceased to make a false statement and if it is coherent and 
consistent, there shall be no legal impediment to make it the 
basis of conviction, even if there is no corroboration. 
8. 
A perusal of the material placed on record would reveal 
that Raj Kumar Bhaskar (PW-5), the then Naib Tehsildar has 
deposed that he was directed by the Tehsildar on phone to 
record the statement of the victim Shahin Parveen at the 
District Hospital, Moradabad. He came to the hospital and 
asked the Chief Medical Officer of the hospital about the 

condition of the victim Shahin Parveen, who informed that 
Shahin Parveen was in a sound condition and was also fit to 
give her statement. He further deposed about the certificate 
issued by the doctor. He also deposed that, after recording 
the statement, the deceased put her thumb impression. He 
has further deposed that the deceased answered in full sense 
and she was understanding the questions. The deposition of 
PW-5 would also reveal that he had taken care to ensure that 
none of the relatives of the deceased were present when the 
dying declaration (Ext. Ka-6) was being recorded. 
9. 
Insofar as the contention of the learned counsel for the 
appellants that the dying declaration (Ext. Ka-6) was 
recorded between 08:48 pm and 09:15 pm and the Discharge 
Slip (Ext. Ka-7) was issued at 05:00 pm is concerned, no 
question was put to that effect in the cross-examination of 
Raj Kumar Bhaskar (PW-5), the then Naib Tehsildar. As 
such, his testimony, in spite of cross-examination, has gone 
unchallenged on the material aspect of recording of the dying 
declaration. 
10. A perusal of the dying declaration (Ext. Ka-6) would 
reveal that before recording the dying declaration (Ext. Ka-6), 

the victim was examined by Dr. A.K. Singh, Emergency 
Medical Officer at District Hospital, Moradabad on 1st 
December 2016 at 08:45 pm, who has certified her to be fully 
conscious and fit to give the statement. After the dying 
declaration (Ext. Ka-6) was recorded, a certification by Dr. 
A.K. Singh, Emergency Medical Officer at District Hospital, 
Moradabad is recorded once again to the effect that the 
deceased was fully conscious while giving the statement (Ext. 
Ka-6). It can thus clearly be seen that the material placed on 
record would reveal that the deceased was in a fit state of 
mind at the time of making the statement and that it was not 
the result of tutoring, prompting or imagination. 
11. We have no reason to interfere with the concurrent 
findings of fact that the dying declaration (Ext. Ka-6) is true 
and free from any effort to induce the deceased to make a 
false statement. The dying declaration (Ext. Ka-6) is coherent 
and consistent and as such, there should be no legal 
impediment to make it the basis of conviction without there 
being any independent corroboration. We find that the dying 
declaration (Ext. Ka-6) is cogent, trustworthy and reliable to 
base the conviction on the same. 

12. That leaves us with the question as to whether the 
conviction of all the three accused is tenable or not. 
13. It will be apposite to refer to the relevant part of the 
dying declaration (Ext. Ka-6), which reads thus: 
“Answer: I had been into a dispute with my devar 
(husband’s younger brother) Mashkoor Hussain s/o 
Maqdoom Hussain over partition of the house for 
many days. Today i.e. 01.12.2016 at 12:30 O’clock 
I had a quarrel with my devar over partition of the 
house, during which he poured kerosene on me and 
set me ablaze. In commission of the act, my devrani 
(husband’s younger brother’s wife) Naeema Parveen 
and her brother Naeem aided my devar (husband’s 
younger brother). When they set my body ablaze, I 
ran 
outside 
the 
house. 
 
People 
from 
the 
neighbourhood doused fire engulfing my body and 
saved me. Residents of the locality informed my 
mother and brother, thereafter, my brother and 
mother brought and admitted me to the hospital.” 
 
14. The statement of the victim would therefore reveal that 
the motive attributed by the deceased is to accused No. 1 
Pappi ashkoor. She stated that she had a quarrel with 
her devar Pappi ashkoor over partition of the house. It 
can further be seen that the role of pouring kerosene on the 
victim and setting her ablaze is also attributed to accused No. 
1 Pappi ashkoor. 
15. Insofar as other two accused i.e. Naeema (wife of 
accused No.1 Pappi ashkoor) and her brother Naeem are 

concerned, the statement of the victim only states that they 
aided her devar Pappi ashkoor. However, no specific role 
of how they assisted accused No. 1 Pappi ashkoor could 
be found in the dying declaration (Ext. Ka-6). We therefore 
find that, though the said dying declaration can be the sole 
basis of maintaining the conviction of accused No. 1 Pappi ashkoor, in the absence of any specific role attributed to 
accused No. 2 Naeema and accused No. 3 Naeem, they are 
entitled to the benefit of doubt. 
16. In the result, we pass the following order: 

 qua appellant 
Naeem and qua 
appellant Naeema are allowed. The order of 
conviction and sentence dated 24th October 2017 
passed by the trial court and maintained by the 
High Court vide impugned judgment and order 
dated 17th December 2019 in respect of the 
aforesaid appellants is quashed and set aside. 
They are acquitted of all the charges charged with 
and are directed to be released forthwith if not 
required in any other case 

 qua appellant 
Pappi ashkoor is dismissed. 
 
17. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

… 

…