IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 

CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

 ( SLP(Crl.) No(s). 9591 of 2022) 

PRABHAT KUMAR MISHRA ….APPELLANT(S) 

VERSUS 

THE STATE OF U.P. & ANR. 
 
….RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
This appeal is directed against the judgment dated 26th July, 
2022 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad 
rejecting the filed by 
the accused appellant herein under Section 482 of Court of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being referred to as ‘CrPC’). 

3. 
By way of the said application, the accused appellant sought 
quashing of proceeding of the 
pending against him in the Court of learned Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, Farrukhabad for the offences punishable under 
Section 306 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860(hereinafter being 
referred to as the ‘IPC’) and Section 3(2)(v) of the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 
(hereinafter being referred to as ‘SC/ST Act’). 
 
4. 
The case aforesaid came to be registered on the basis of a 
charge-sheet filed by the investigating agency pursuant to 
investigation of C.C. No. 516/2002 P.S. Kotwali, District 
Farrukhabad. 
5. 
The accused appellant herein was working as the District 
Savings Officer in Kannauj District. It is alleged that one Data 
Ram(deceased), posted as Senior Clerk, Child Welfare Board, 
Fatehgarh, committed suicide on 3rd October, 2002 by consuming 
a poisonous substance in his own house. The deceased wrote a 
suicide note before ending his life. 
6. 
The dead body of the Data Ram was recovered lying in his 
house, i.e. Mohalla Gwal Toli, Fatehgarh, District-Farrukhabad. 
FIR No. 249/2002 came to be registered at P.S. Kotwali, Fatehgarh 

on the basis of the suicide note left behind by the deceased for the 
offences punishable under Section 306 IPC and Section 3(2)(v) of 
the SC/ST Act. 
7. 
The Investigating Officer conducted the investigation and 
filed a closure report. Later on, investigation was re-opened and 
Charge-sheet No. 253 of 2002 came to be filed against the accused 
appellant for the offences punishable under Section 306 IPC and 
Section 3(2)(v) of the SC/ST Act. 
8. 
The suicide note written by the deceased which forms the 
basis of the FIR and the charge-sheet is reproduced hereinbelow 
for the sake of ready reference: - 
“The learned District Magistrate 
 
It is hereby informed that on 1.10.2002 in night time 
at 8 ‘O’ Clock, the District Savings Officer Kannauj Shri 
Prabhat Mishra made telephonic call to me and even got 
my conversations done from Chief Development Officer, 
Kannauj and told that you come to Kannauj on 2.10.2002 
in morning at 11 O’ Clock and meet me and some 
information has to be prepared. On 2.10.2002, at 10 
O’Clock, I went to District Social Welfare Officer for 
obtaining permission to go to Kannauj, then he directed 
me to not go to Kannauj. When, it has already been written 
to the District Savings Officer that you call your record, 
then, you do not need to go there. Thereafter, I returning 
back to the Office, started performing official work. In noon 
time at 12.30 O’ Clock, the Chief Development Officer, gave 
me information on telephone that you leave all your work 
and go to Kannauj and meet the learned District 
Magistrate. I immediately reached Kannauj by Scooter, 
where, at 2:15 O’ Clock, I went the bungalow of District 
Magistrate, where, it was told that the learned District 
Magistrate has departed and you please meet the District 

Savings Officer Prabhat Mishra, then, I went to Shri 
Mishra at 2:45 O’ Clock, then, he continued sitting me in 
his Office till 5:30 O’ Clock and told me that the learned 
District Magistrate has not sit till now and we will go from 
here at 5 O’clock. At 5:30 O’ Clock, Shri Mishra had taken 
me to the Chief Development Officer Shri Shashidhar 
Dwivedi. Conversation of Shri Mishra had already taken 
place previously with CDO Sahab. The CDO Sahab asked 
that why the pension of 327 widows has not been 
distributed yet, then I replied that due to non-availability 
of their bank accounts, it could not have been distributed. 
On this, he, while using very indecent words, used odd 
words against me very much and that I am unable to give 
full particulars of above. He told me that even after my call, 
you did not come to me, have you become a very big 
governor. Further says that DM Sahab has refused to go 
there and thereat, he keeps filling the Officers a lot and 
does not want to perform work and even everything was 
told about Suspension and other things. Thereafter, Shri 
Mishra had taken me at the residence of learned District 
Magistrate from where, I was called at 7:30 O’clock. After 
making me aware about the information, the respected sir 
asked me reason for not coming to Kannauj, then, I made 
him aware about the situation. 
 
Sir, it is requested that I, even after the fact that the 
post of District Probation Officer is lying vacant, am 
executing, and discharging my duties diligently with 
honesty and full devotion. Due to non-availability of my 
Officers in two districts, now, it is beyond my control to 
perform work with two different Officers. Sir, it was told by 
you that to not go to Kannauj and discharge your duty of 
Farrukhabad smoothly, but, I was suddenly given order to 
go to Kannauj that you leave all the work and come to 
Kannauj and then, I have already sent the information on 
1.10.2002, to the District Economics and Statistics 
Officer, Kannauj, where it was available, but, I was called 
only for insulting me. 
 
Even I also understand this fact that during my 
lifetime, duties of both the Districts will not be discharged 
and I will continuously grinding in between two Officers 
equally. So, for avoiding from the torture of Shri Prabhat 
Mishra and Shri Shashidhar Dwivedi, Chief Development 
Officer, I am sacrificing my life, so that, I, while visiting 
Kannauj, may not be compelled to be harassed till now, I 
have not been insulted and harassed by any learned 
District Magistrate/ Chief Development Officer, in this 
manner and all the Officers have appreciated my duties 

and work. With touching feet with respect, please forgive 
me. With best regards.” 
 
9. 
It is not in dispute that the aforesaid suicide note is the only 
foundation of the charge-sheet filed against the accused appellant. 
The accused appellant approached the High Court by filing an 
application under Section 482 CrPC for quashing of the charge-
sheet and proceedings of the criminal case registered against him. 
The said application was rejected vide order dated 26th July 2022 
which is challenged in this appeal. 
10. Mr. Pallav Shishodia, learned senior counsel appearing for 
the accused appellant contended that even if the allegations as set 
out in the suicide note are taken to be true on their face value, the 
same do not constitute the necessary ingredients of the offences 
alleged and hence, it is a fit case wherein the charge-sheet deserves 
to be quashed. 
11. Learned senior counsel contended that from the admitted 
allegations as set out in the aforesaid suicide note (supra), no 
inference can be drawn that the appellant in any manner, 
instigated or abetted the deceased to commit suicide. At best, what 
can be inferred from the suicide note (supra) is that the deceased 

was frustrated and bothered by the style of functioning of the 
appellant herein and of Shashidhar Dwivedi, CDO, and thus he 
felt that he was left with no option but to end his life. He also 
seems to have been bothered by the pressure of working in two 
districts and took the extreme step of ending his life being unable 
to withstand the pressure. 
12. Learned senior counsel further urged that all proceedings 
sought to be taken against the appellant as a consequence of the 
charge sheet, deserve to be quashed as the same amount to an 
abuse of process of the Court. 
13., Mr. Ankit Goel, learned standing counsel for the 
State of Uttar Pradesh has opposed the submissions advanced by 
the learned senior counsel representing the accused appellant. 
14. Learned counsel for the State urged that the appellant and 
Shashidar Dwivedi, CDO being the superior officers of the 
deceased, harassed and humiliated him to such an extent that he 
was left with no option but to end his life. The allegations set out 
in the suicide note constitute the necessary ingredients of 
abetment to commit suicide. Thus, it is not a fit case warranting 
interference in the well-reasoned order passed by the High Court 

refusing to interfere and quash the proceedings of the criminal 
case registered against the appellant. 
15. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the material 
placed on record. 
16. At the outset, we may take note of the fact that the 
prosecution of the appellant herein for the offence under Section 
3(2)(v) of the SC/ST Act is ex facie illegal and unwarranted because 
it is nowhere the case of the prosecution in the entire charge-sheet 
that the offence under IPC was committed by the appellant upon 
the deceased on the basis of his caste. 
17. This Court in the case of Masumsha Hasanasha Musalman 
v. State of Maharashtra1 considered this issue and held as 
under:- 
“9. Section 3(2)(v) of the Act provides that whoever, not 
being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled 
Tribe, commits any offence under the Penal Code, 1860 
punishable with imprisonment for a term of ten years or 
more against a person or property on the ground that such 
person is a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled 
Tribe or such property belongs to such member, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for life and with fine. In the 
present case, there is no evidence at all to the effect that 
the appellant committed the offence alleged against him on 
the ground that the deceased is a member of a Scheduled 
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe. To attract the provisions of 
 
1 (2000) 

Section 3(2)(v) of the Act, the sine qua non is that the 
victim should be a person who belongs to a Scheduled 
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe and that the offence under the 
Penal Code, 1860 is committed against him on the basis 
that such a person belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a 
Scheduled Tribe. In the absence of such ingredients, no 
offence under Section 3(2)(v) of the Act arises. In that view 
of the matter, we think, both the trial court and the High 
Court missed the essence of this aspect. In these 
circumstances, the conviction under the aforesaid 
provision by the trial court as well as by the High Court 
ought to be set aside.” 
 
18. Thus, from the admitted allegations of the prosecution, the 
necessary ingredients of the offence under Section 3(2)(v) of the 
SC/ST Act are not made out so as to justify prosecution of the 
accused appellant for the said offence. 
19. The parameters required to bring an act or omission by the 
person charged within the purview of the offence under Section 
306 IPC have been elaborated by this Court time and again and a 
few of these judgments are quoted below for ready reference. 
20. In the case of Netai Dutta v. State of W.B.2 in almost similar 
circumstances, this Court quashed the proceedings sought to be 
taken against the petitioner under Section 306 IPC. The relevant 
observations from the said judgment are reproduced as under:- 
“4. One Pranab Kumar Nag was an employee of M/s M.L. 
Dalmiya & Co. Ltd. During the course of his employment, 
he had been posted at various worksites of the Company 
 
2 (2005) 

and on 11-9-1999 he was transferred to the worksite of the 
Company's stores located at 160, B.L. Saha Road, Kolkata. 
It seems that pursuant to the transfer order, Pranab 
Kumar Nag did not join duty and after a period of about 
two years he sent in a letter of resignation written in his 
own hand wherein he expressed his grievance of stagnancy 
of salary and also alleged that he was a victim of 
unfortunate circumstances. The Company accepted his 
resignation with immediate effect. On 16-2-2001, a dead 
body was found at the railway tracks near Ballygunge 
Railway Station and it was revealed that it was the body of 
Pranab Kumar Nag. His brother went to the office where 
Pranab Kumar Nag had worked and made enquiries. The 
dead body of Pranab Kumar Nag was released to his 
brother after the post-mortem examination on 19-2-2001. 
After a period of two months, a complaint was lodged 
before the police post on the basis of a suicide note 
allegedly recovered from the dead body of Pranab Kumar 
Nag. Based on the complaint, a case was registered against 
the appellant and some others. A translated copy of the 
suicide note is produced before us by the appellant. We 
have carefully read the alleged suicide note. The substance 
of this suicide note is that deceased Pranab Kumar Nag 
alleged that appellant Netai Dutta and one Paramesh 
Chatterjee engaged him in several wrongdoings (he has 
shown as a type of torture) and at the end of the letter, a 
reference is also made to Paramesh Chatterjee and Netai 
Dutta alleging that he reported certain incidents to them. 
A reading of the letter would show that deceased Pranab 
Kumar Nag was not very much satisfied with the working 
conditions in the office. In the letter he has stated that he 
had to be at the workplace sometimes throughout the day 
and night and he had to remain in the company of some 
drivers who had been sometimes in drunken condition at 
about one o'clock or two o'clock in the night. It is also 
alleged that the drivers who had been present at the 
workplace had been having non-vegetarian food. He also 
complained that he had to work even on Sundays. He 
further stated that one day he could leave the workplace 
at 8 o'clock in the evening and all the restaurants were 
closed and that he reported the matter to the present 
appellant. 
 
5. There is absolutely no averment in the alleged suicide 
note that the present appellant had caused any harm to 
him or was in any way responsible for delay in paying 
salary to deceased Pranab Kumar Nag. It seems that the 
deceased was very much dissatisfied with the working 
conditions at the workplace. But, it may also be noticed 

that the deceased after his transfer in 1999 had never 
joined the office at 160, B.L. Saha Road, Kolkata and had 
absented himself for a period of two years and that the 
suicide took place on 16-2-2001. It cannot be said that the 
present appellant had in any way instigated the deceased 
to commit suicide or he was responsible for the suicide of 
Pranab Kumar Nag. An offence under Section 306 IPC 
would stand only if there is an abetment for the 
commission of the crime. The parameters of “abetment” 
have been stated in Section 107 of the Penal Code, 1860. 
Section 107 says that a person abets the doing of a thing, 
who instigates any person to do that thing; or engages with 
one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for 
the doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission takes 
place in pursuance of that conspiracy, or the person 
should have intentionally aided any act or illegal omission. 
The Explanation to Section 107 says that any wilful 
misrepresentation or wilful concealment of a material fact 
which he is bound to disclose, may also come within the 
contours of “abetment”. 
 
6. In the suicide note, except referring to the name of the 
appellant at two places, there is no reference of any act or 
incidence whereby the appellant herein is alleged to have 
committed any wilful act or omission or intentionally aided 
or instigated the deceased Pranab Kumar Nag in 
committing the act of suicide. There is no case that the 
appellant has played any part or any role in any 
conspiracy, which ultimately instigated or resulted in the 
commission of suicide by deceased Pranab Kumar Nag. 
7. Apart from the suicide note, there is no allegation made 
by the complainant that the appellant herein in any way 
was harassing his brother, Pranab Kumar Nag. The case 
registered against the appellant is without any factual 
foundation. The contents of the alleged suicide note do not 
in any way make out the offence against the appellant. The 
prosecution initiated against the appellant would only 
result in sheer harassment to the appellant without any 
fruitful result. In our opinion, the learned Single Judge 
seriously erred in holding that the first information report 
against the appellant disclosed the elements of a 
cognizable offence. There was absolutely no ground to 
proceed against the appellant herein. We find that this is 
a fit case where the extraordinary power under Section 482 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure is to be invoked. We 
quash the criminal proceedings initiated against the 
appellant and accordingly allow the appeal.” 

21. In the case of M. Mohan v. State represented by the Deputy 
Superintendent of Police3, this Court held as below:- 
“36. We would like to deal with the concept of “abetment”. 
Section 306 of the Code deals with “abetment of suicide” 
which reads as under: 
“306.Abetment of suicide. —If any person commits 
suicide, whoever abets the commission of such 
suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to 
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
37. The word “suicide” in itself is nowhere defined in the 
Penal Code, however, its meaning and import is well 
known and requires no explanation. “Sui” means “self” and 
“cide” means “killing”, thus implying an act of self-killing. 
In short, a person committing suicide must commit it by 
himself, irrespective of the means employed by him in 
achieving his object of killing himself. 
38. In our country, while suicide itself is not an offence 
considering that the successful offender is beyond the 
reach of law, attempt to suicide is an offence under Section 
309 IPC. 
39. “Abetment of a thing” has been defined under Section 
107 of the Code. We deem it appropriate to reproduce 
Section 107, which reads as under: 
“107.Abetment of a thing.—A person abets the 
doing of a thing, who— 
First.—Instigates any person to do that thing; or 
Secondly.—Engages with one or more other person 
or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that 
thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in 
pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the 
doing of that thing; or 
Thirdly.—Intentionally aides, by any act or illegal 
omission, the doing of that thing.” 
Explanation 2 which has been inserted along with 
Section 107 reads as under: 
Explanation 2.—Whoever, either prior to or at the 
time of the commission of an act, does anything in 
 
3 (2011) 

order to facilitate the commission of that act, and 
thereby facilitates the commission thereof, is said 
to aid the doing of that act. 
40. The learned counsel also placed reliance on yet 
another judgment of this Court in Ramesh Kumar v. State 
of Chhattisgarh [(2001) ], in which a three-
Judge Bench of this Court had an occasion to deal with 
the case of a similar nature. In a dispute between the 
husband and wife, the appellant husband uttered “you are 
free to do whatever you wish and go wherever you like”. 
Thereafter, the wife of the appellant Ramesh Kumar 
committed suicide. 
41. This Court in SCC para 20 of Ramesh Kumar [(2001) 
 has examined different shades of the meaning 
of “instigation”. Para 20 reads as under: (SCC p. 629) 
“20. Instigation is to goad, urge forward, provoke, 
incite or encourage to do ‘an act’. To satisfy the 
requirement of instigation though it is not 
necessary that actual words must be used to that 
effect 
or 
what 
constitutes 
instigation 
must 
necessarily and specifically be suggestive of the 
consequence. Yet a reasonable certainty to incite 
the consequence must be capable of being spelt 
out. The present one is not a case where the 
accused had by his acts or omission or by a 
continued 
course 
of 
conduct 
created 
such 
circumstances that the deceased was left with no 
other option except to commit suicide in which case 
an instigation may have been inferred. A word 
uttered in the fit of anger or emotion without 
intending the consequences to actually follow 
cannot be said to be instigation. 
In the said case this Court came to the conclusion 
that there is no evidence and material available on 
record wherefrom an inference of the appellant-
accused having abetted commission of suicide by 
Seema 
(the 
appellant's 
wife 
therein) 
may 
necessarily be drawn. 
42. In State of W.B. v. Orilal Jaiswal [(1994) ], 
this Court has cautioned that (SCC p. 90, para 17) the 
Court should be extremely careful in assessing the facts 
and circumstances of each case and the evidence adduced 
in the trial for the purpose of finding whether the cruelty 
meted out to the victim had in fact induced her to end her 
life by committing suicide. If it appears to the Court that a 
victim committing suicide was hypersensitive to ordinary 

petulance, discord and difference in domestic life, quite 
common to the society, to which the victim belonged and 
such petulance, discord and difference were not expected 
to induce a similarly circumstanced individual in a given 
society to commit suicide, the conscience of the Court 
should not be satisfied for basing a finding that the 
accused charged of abetting the offence of suicide should 
be found guilty. 
43. This Court in Chitresh Kumar Chopra v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi) [(2009) ] had an occasion to 
deal with this aspect of abetment. The Court dealt with the 
dictionary meaning of the word “instigation” and 
“goading”. The Court opined that there should be intention 
to provoke, incite or encourage the doing of an act by the 
latter. Each person's suicidability pattern is different from 
the others. Each person has his own idea of self-esteem 
and self-respect. Therefore, it is impossible to lay down any 
straitjacket formula in dealing with such cases. Each case 
has to be decided on the basis of its own facts and 
circumstances. 
44. Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a 
person or intentionally aiding a person in doing of a thing. 
Without a positive act on the part of the accused to 
instigate or aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot 
be sustained. 
45. The intention of the legislature and the ratio of the 
cases decided by this Court are clear that in order to 
convict a person under Section 306 IPC there has to be a 
clear mens rea to commit the offence. It also requires an 
active act or direct act which led the deceased to commit 
suicide seeing no option and this act must have been 
intended to push the deceased into such a position that 
he/she committed suicide. 
46. In V.P. Shrivastava v. Indian Explosives Ltd. [(2010) 
] this Court has held that when prima facie no 
case is made out against the accused, then the High Court 
ought to have exercised the jurisdiction under Section 482 
CrPC and quashed the complaint. 
47. In a recent judgment of this Court in Madan Mohan 
Singh v. State of Gujarat [(2010) ], this Court 
quashed the conviction under Section 306 IPC on the 
ground that the allegations were irrelevant and baseless 
and observed that the High Court was in error in not 
quashing the proceedings. 
48. In the instant case, what to talk of instances of 
instigation, there are even no allegations against the 

appellants. There is also no proximate link between the 
incident of 14-1-2005 when the deceased was denied 
permission to use the Qualis car with the factum of suicide 
which had taken place on 18-1-2005. Undoubtedly, the 
deceased had died because of hanging. The deceased was 
undoubtedly hypersensitive to ordinary petulance, discord 
and differences which happen in our day-to-day life. In a 
joint family, instances of this kind are not very uncommon. 
Human sensitivity of each individual differs from person to 
person. Each individual has his own idea of self-esteem 
and self-respect. Different people behave differently in the 
same situation. It is unfortunate that such an episode of 
suicide had taken place in the family. But the question 
that remains to be answered is whether the appellants can 
be connected with that unfortunate incident in any 
manner? 
49. On a careful perusal of the entire material on record 
and the law, which has been declared by this Court, we 
can safely arrive at the conclusion that the appellants are 
not even remotely connected with the offence under 
Section 306 IPC. It may be relevant to mention that 
criminal proceedings against the husband of the deceased 
Anandraj 
(A-1) 
and 
Easwari 
(A-3) 
are 
pending 
adjudication. 
****** 
62. In State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal [1992 Supp (1) SCC 
335] this Court in the backdrop of interpretation of various 
relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated 
by this Court in a series of decisions relating to the exercise 
of the extraordinary power under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India or the inherent powers under Section 
482 CrPC, gave the following categories of cases by way of 
illustration wherein such power could be exercised either 
to prevent abuse of the process of the court or otherwise 
to secure the ends of justice. Thus, this Court made it clear 
that it may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly 
defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible 
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list 
to myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be 
exercised: (SCC pp. 378-79, para 102) 
“(1) Where the allegations made in the first 
information report or the complaint, even if they are 
taken at their face value and accepted in their 
entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence 
or make out a case against the accused. 

(2) Where the allegations in the first information 
report and other materials, if any, accompanying 
the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, 
justifying an investigation by police officers under 
Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of 
a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of 
the Code. 
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in 
the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in 
support of the same do not disclose the commission 
of any offence and make out a case against the 
accused. 
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not 
constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only 
a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is 
permitted by a police officer without an order of a 
Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) 
of the Code. 
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or 
complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable 
on the basis of which no prudent person can ever 
reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient 
ground for proceeding against the accused. 
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in 
any of the provisions of the Code or the Act 
concerned (under which a criminal proceeding is 
instituted) to the institution and continuance of the 
proceedings and/or where there is a specific 
provision in the Code or the Act concerned, 
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of 
the aggrieved party. 
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly 
attended with mala fide and/or where the 
proceeding is maliciously instituted with an 
ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the 
accused and with a view to spite him due to private 
and personal grudge.” 
***** 
65. This Court in Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. v. 
Mohd. Sharaful Haque [(2005) ] observed thus: 
(SCC p. 128, para 8) 
“8. … It would be an abuse of process of the court 
to allow any action which would result in injustice 
and prevent promotion of justice. In exercise of the 
powers, court would be justified to quash any 

proceeding if it finds that initiation/continuance of 
it amounts to abuse of the process of court or 
quashing of these proceedings would otherwise 
serve the ends of justice. When no offence is 
disclosed by the complaint, the court may examine 
the question of fact. When a complaint is sought to 
be quashed, it is permissible to look into the 
materials to assess what the complainant has 
alleged and whether any offence is made out even 
if the allegations are accepted in toto.” 

***** 
68. In the light of the settled legal position, in our 
considered opinion, the High Court was not justified in 
rejecting the petition filed by the appellants under Section 
482 CrPC for quashing the charges under Section 306 IPC 
against them. The High Court ought to have quashed the 
proceedings so that the appellants who were not remotely 
connected with the offence under Section 306 IPC should 
not have been compelled to face the rigmaroles of a 
criminal trial. As a result, the charges under Section 306 
IPC against the appellants are quashed.” 
 
22. It is not in dispute that the prosecution case is entirely based 
on the suicide note left behind by the deceased before committing 
suicide. On a minute perusal of the suicide note, we do not find 
that the contents thereof indicate any act or omission on the part 
of the accused appellant which could make him responsible for 
abetment as defined under Section 107 IPC. 
23. We have minutely perused the suicide note (reproduced 
supra) which clearly shows that the deceased was frustrated on 
account of work pressure and was apprehensive of various random 
factors unconnected to his official duties. He was also feeling the 
pressure of working in two different districts. However, such 

apprehensions expressed in the suicide note, by no stretch of 
imagination, can be considered sufficient to attribute to the 
appellant, an act or omission constituting the elements of 
abetment to commit suicide. The facts of the case at hand are 
almost identical to the case of Netai Dutta (supra). Thus, we have 
no hesitation in holding that the necessary ingredients of the 
offence of abetment to commit suicide are not made out from the 
chargesheet and hence allowing prosecution of the appellant is 
grossly illegal for the offences punishable under Section 306 IPC 
and Section 3(2)(v) of the SC/ST Act tantamounts to gross abuse 
of process to law. 
24. It may be noted that in the first instance, the investigating 
agency itself proposed a closure report in the matter after 
conducting thorough investigation. In this background, we are of 
the opinion that there do not exist any justifiable ground so as to 
permit the prosecution of the appellant for the offences under 
Section 306 IPC and Section 3(2)(v) of the SC/ST Act. 
25. Thus, the impugned order passed by the High Court and all 
proceedings sought to be taken against the appellant in the 
criminal case pending for the offences punishable under Section 

306 IPC and Section 3(2)(v) of the SC/ST Act are hereby quashed 
and set aside. 
26. The appeal is allowed accordingly. 
27. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

……..……………………J. 

 (B.R. GAVAI) 

……..……………………J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
NEW DELHI; 
MARCH 05, 2024