IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024
 ( SLP(C) No. 12063 OF 2018)
SNEHADEEP STRUCTURES PVT. LIMITED...
APPELLANT(S)
 VERSUS
MAHARASHTRA SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES 
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LTD....
RESPONDENT(S)
JUDGMENT
Leave granted. 
2.
We have heard learned Senior Advocate appearing for the
appellant – Snehadeep Structures Pvt. Limited1 and the Respondent -
Maharashtra Small Scale Industries Development Corporation Ltd.2 
3.
During the course of the hearing, our attention was drawn to
Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Interest on Delayed Payments to Small
Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act, 19933. For the
sake of convenience, the said Sections are reproduced below: -
“3.
Liability of buyer to make payment.- Where any
supplier supplies any goods or renders any services to
any buyer, the buyer shall make payment therefor on or
before the date agreed upon between him and the supplier
in writing or, where there is no agreement in this
behalf, before the appointed day: 
Provided that in no case the period agreed upon
between the supplier and the buyer in writing shall
1 For short, “SSPL”.
2 For short, “MSSIDCL”.
3 For short, “1993 Act”.
CA (C) No. 12063/2018

exceed one hundred and twenty days from the day of
acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance.
4. Date from which and rate at which interest is
payable.- Where any buyer fails to make payment of the
amount to the supplier, as required under section 3, the
buyer shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any
agreement between the buyer and the supplier or in any
law for the time being in force, be liable to pay
interest to the supplier on that amount from the
appointed day or, as the case may be, from the date
immediately following the date agreed upon, at one-and-
half time of Prime Lending Rate charged by the State
Bank of India.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section,
"Prime Lending Rate" means the Prime Lending Rate of the
State Bank of India which is available to the best
borrowers of the bank.
5. Liability of buyer to pay compound interest.-
Notwithstanding anything contained in any agreement
between a supplier and a buyer or in any law for the
time being in force, the buyer shall be liable to pay
compound interest (with monthly interest) at the rate
mentioned in section 4 on the amount due to the
supplier.”
4.
We would also reproduce the definition clauses (b), (c) and
(f) to Section 2, which are applicable, unless the context
otherwise requires. The same read thus: -
(b) "appointed day" means the day following immediately
after the expiry of the period of thirty days from the
day of acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance of any
goods or any services by a buyer from a supplier;
CA (C) No. 12063/2018

Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause,-
(i) "the day of acceptance" means,-

the day of the actual delivery
of goods or the rendering of
services; or

where any objection is made in
writing by the buyer regarding,
acceptance of goods or services
within thirty days from the day of
the delivery, of goods or the
rendering of services, the day on
which such objection is removed by
the supplier;
(ii) "the day of deemed acceptance" means,
where no objection is made in writing by the
buyer regarding acceptance of goods or
services within thirty days from the day of
the delivery of goods or the rendering of
services, the day of the actual delivery of
goods or the rendering of services;
(c) "buyer" means whoever buys any goods or receives any
services from a supplier for consideration;
xxx
xxx
/xxx
(f) "supplier" means an ancillary industrial undertaking
or a small scale industrial undertaking holding a
permanent registration certificate issued by the
Directorate of Industries of a State or Union territory
and includes,-

the
 
National
 
Small
 
Industries
Corporation, being a company, registered under
the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
(ii) the Small Industries Development
Corporation of a State or a Union territory,
CA (C) No. 12063/2018

by whatever name called, being a company
registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of
1956).”
5.
The proviso to Section 3, and the amendment to Section 2(f)
to include the addition of National Small Industries Corporation
and the Small Industries Development Corporation of a State or a
Union Territory to the definition of “supplier”, were incorporated
by Act No. 23 of 1998 with effect from 10.08.1998. 
6.
On a reading of Section 3 of the 1993 Act, as it stood before
the enactment of the proviso, the buyer and the supplier could
agree upon the date of payment. In case of absence of stipulation
with regard to the date of payment, the “appointed day” in terms of
Section 2(b) of the 1993 Act, would be the date, on which the
payment is due. This is also clear from reading Section 4, which
states the date from which interest is payable. As per Section 4,
the buyer is liable to pay interest if he fails to pay the amount
to the supplier as required by Section 3. Non-obstante part of
Section 4 only deals with the stipulation in a contract whereby
liability to pay interest is barred/prohibited. It does not, in any
way, override the contractual clause with regard to the date of
payment. In other words, in case the contract states that interest
will not be payable even in the case of belated payment, then
Section 4 of the Act will come into operation, overriding the
negative contractual clause.
7.
The effect of the proviso to Section 3, made applicable with
effect from 10.08.1998, is that the supplier and the buyer may
CA (C) No. 12063/2018

agree by contract on the date of payment, but in no case can the
date of payment exceed 120 days from the day of acceptance or the
day of deemed acceptance. The terms ‘the appointed date’, ‘the
acceptance date’ and ‘the deemed date of acceptance’ have been
defined vide clause (b) to Section 2 of the 1993 Act. 
8.
After enactment of the proviso to Section 3, the contractual
rights of the parties to agree to the date of payment, have been
restricted in terms of the said proviso. In other words, if the
contractual date of payment exceeds 120 days from the day of
acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance, interest would be
payable for the period beyond 120 days from the day of acceptance
or the date of deemed acceptance.
9.
When we turn to the facts of the present case, the
supply/purchase order dated 30.03.1995 issued by MSSIDCL to SSPL,
had stated as under: -
“25.
The price of the goods delivered and accepted by
the consignee and when received from the consignee
will be paid to the supplier by the Corporation
subject to deductions of advances, if any, paid by the
Corporation and the service changes [sic] and other
moneys payable to the Corporation by the supplier. No
advance payment will be made for any supply of the
goods unless otherwise agreed by the Corporation.”
10.
The contract had, therefore, postulated and the parties had
agreed that MSSIDCL would be liable to pay SSPL only after the
goods are delivered and accepted by the consignee, namely,
CA (C) No. 12063/2018

Maharashtra State Electricity Board4 and on the payment being
received by MSSIDCL from the MSEB.
11.
If the proviso to Section 3 applies, this contractual clause
will get modified in terms of the proviso to Section 3, which has
fixed the upper time limit for payment to 120 days from the day of
acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance. However, the question
would arise as to whether the said proviso would be applicable to
the agreement in question, which was entered into between the
parties on 30.03.1995, albeit the proviso was enacted and enforced
with effect from 10.08.1998. 
12. Even if, for the sake of argument, it is to be accepted that
the proviso to Section 3 would be applicable in respect of supplies
or payments due or payable after 10.08.1998, the issue with regard
to calculation and computation of interest requires examination and
determination of the day of acceptance or the day of deemed
acceptance, as interest would be payable only after a period of 120
days from such date.
13.
In these circumstances and in view of the aforesaid position,
we do not find any good ground and reason to interfere with the
conclusion in the impugned judgment passed by the Division Bench of
the High Court, setting aside the arbitral award dated 30.06.2003.
We would, however, record that the award having been set aside, the
provisions of Section 43(4) of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996 would come into operation and would accordingly apply.
14.
We clarify that MSEB need not be a party to the proceedings,
4 For short, “MSEB”.
CA (C) No. 12063/2018

if any, which may be initiated by SSPL or MSSIDCL. However, any
adjudication for payment of interest under Sections 3 to 5 of 1993
Act, including the question relating to application of the proviso,
would require ascertainment of the appointed date, the date of
acceptance or the deemed date of acceptance. To this limited
extent, ascertainment of facts with reference to the consignee –
MSEB, to whom the goods were supplied by SSPL, is required. By way
of Act No.23 of 1998, which came in effect from 10.08.1998,
amending clause 2(f), MSSIDCL is to be treated or deemed to be a
supplier to MSEB. However, this will not deviate from the fact that
MSSIDCL was the buyer under the supply/purchase order dated
30.03.1995 issued by MSSIDCL to SSPL. Equally, the G.O. 2(1)/A/93-
SSI Bd. and Policy dated 05.05.1993 issued by the Ministry of
Industry, Department of SSI, Agro and Rural Industries, Office of
the Development Commissioner (Small Scale Industries), has an
effect of treating MSSIDCL as a supplier for the purpose of
claiming interest from the buyer, that is MSEB, with whom they have
entered into a contract for the purpose of the 1993 Act. The
liability to pay and the privity of contract in terms of the
supply/purchase order dated 30.03.1995 is between MSSIDCL and SSPL.
The contractual relationship, rights and obligations inter se
MSSIDCL and SSPL do not undergo any change.
15.
On the question of liability under Section 5 as well, there
is a dispute as it is accepted that the principal amount has been
paid. A question would arise whether under Section 5, interest as
compounded is to be treated as a principal amount. This aspect has
CA (C) No. 12063/2018

not been considered in the award passed by the sole arbitrator,
which has awarded compound interest on the interest element with
monthly rest at 1.5 times the Prime Lending Rate charged by the
State Bank of India.
16.
We are informed that certain payments were made by MSSIDCL
and a substantial amount of over Rs.1.30 crores has been paid
to/withdrawn by SSPL. It will be open to MSSIDCL to move an
application under Section 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
for restitution or execution, as it may be advised. MSSIDCL would
be entitled to enforce the security in case SSPL does not pay or
refund the said amount.
 
17.
The appeal is dismissed in the above terms. However, there
shall be no order as to costs.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

CA (C) No. 12063/2018