IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
ORIGINAL CIVIL/CRIMINAL JURISDICTION 

Vishal Tiwari 

…Petitioner 
Versus 
Union of India & Ors. 

 …Respondents 
With 
 
With 
 
And with 

JUDGMENT 
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 
Table of Contents 
A. Factual background and submissions... 3 
B. The scope of judicial review over SEBI’s regulatory domain... 11 
C. There is no apparent regulatory failure attributable to SEBI... 17 
D. The plea to transfer the investigation from SEBI to another agency or to 
an SIT... 23 
i. 
The power to transfer an investigation is exercised in extraordinary 
situations... 23 
ii. 
SEBI has prime facie conducted a comprehensive investigation... 25 
iii. Reliance on the OCCRP report and the letter by DRI is misconceived

E. Allegations of conflict of interest against members of the Expert 
Committee... 30 
F. Other recommendations by the Expert Committee... 32 
i. 
Volatility and short selling... 32 
ii. 
Investor Awareness... 36 
iii. Recommendations of the Expert Committee to strengthen regulatory 
framework and secure compliance to protect investors... 39 
G. Conclusion... 43 

PART A 

1. A batch of writ petitions filed before this Court under Article 32 of the 
Constitution in February 2023, raised concerns over the precipitate decline in 
investor wealth and volatility in the share market due to a fall in the share prices 
of the Adani Group of Companies.1 The situation was purportedly caused by a 
report which was published on 24 January 2023 by an “activist short seller”, 
Hindenburg Research about the financial transactions of the Adani group. The 
report inter alia alleged that the Adani group manipulated its share prices and 
failed to disclose transactions with related parties and other relevant information 
in violation of the regulations framed by SEBI and provisions of securities’ 
legislation. Significantly, the report expressly states that Hindenburg Research 
took a short position in the Adani group through US-traded bonds and non-
Indian traded derivative instruments. 
A. Factual background and submissions 
2. A brief overview of the petitions follows: 
 
a. The petitioner in WP(C) No. 162 of 2023, raises concerns about the drastic 
fall in the securities market, the impact on investors, the purported lack of 
redressal available and the disbursement of loans to the Adani group 
allegedly without due procedure. The petitioner inter alia seeks the 
constitution of a committee monitored by a retired judge of this Court to 
investigate the Hindenburg Report; 

1 “Adani group” 

PART A 

b. The petitioner in WP (C) No. 201 of 2023 submits that the Adani group is in 
violation of Rule 19A of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Rules, 1957 
by “surreptitiously controlling more than 75% of the shares of publicly listed 
Adani group companies, thereby manipulating the price of its shares in the 
market.” The petitioner inter alia seeks a court-monitored investigation by a 
Special Investigation Team2 or by the CBI into the allegations of fraud and 
the purported role played by top officials of public sector banks and lender 
institutions; 
 
c. The petitioner in WP (Crl.) No. 57 of 2023 seeks directions to the competent 
investigative agencies to (i) investigate the transactions of the Adani group 
under the supervision of a sitting judge of this Court; and (ii) investigate the 
role of the Life Insurance Corporation of India and the State Bank of India 
in such transactions; 
 
d. The petitioner in WP (Crl.) No. 39 of 2023 seeks the registration of an FIR 
against a certain Mr Nathan Anderson (the founder of Hindenburg 
Research) and his associates for short-selling and directions to recover the 
profits yielded by short-selling, to compensate the investors. 
 
3. When the batch came up for hearing on 10 February 2023, this Court noted that 
there was a need to review the existing regulatory mechanisms in the financial 
sector to ensure that they are strengthened with a view to protect Indian 
investors from market volatility. This Court sought inputs from the Solicitor 
 
2 “SIT” 

PART A 

General on the proposed constitution of an Expert Committee for the purpose. 
This Court observed: 
“4 We have suggested to the Solicitor General that he 
may seek instructions on whether the Government of 
India would facilitate the constitution of an expert 
committee for an overall assessment of the situation, 
and if so, to place its suggestions on the constitution 
and remit of the committee on the next date. Meantime 
the Solicitor General shall place on the record a brief 
note on factual and legal aspects so as to further the 
deliberations during the course of the next hearing.” 
 
4. The batch of cases came up for hearing on 17 February 2023. This Court heard 
detailed submissions on behalf of the parties and reserved further orders. In its 
order dated 2 March 2023, this Court took note of the loss of investor wealth in 
the aftermath of the report by Hindenburg Research and recognized the dire 
need to protect Indian investors from unanticipated volatility in the market. This 
Court observed that SEBI is already seized of the investigation into the Adani 
group and inter alia directed: 
 
a. SEBI to continue with its investigation and examine the following non-
exhaustive issues raised in the petitions: 
“a. 
Whether there has been a violation of Rule 
19A of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) 
Rules 1957; 
b. 
Whether there has been a failure to disclose 
transactions with related parties and other 
relevant information which concerns related 
parties to SEBI, in accordance with law; and 
c. 
Whether there was any manipulation of stock 
prices in contravention of existing laws;” 
 
b. SEBI to conclude its investigation within two months and file a status report 
before this Court; 

PART A 

c. The constitution of an Expert Committee chaired by Justice Abhay Manohar 
Sapre, former judge of this Court. Besides its Chairperson, the Committee 
was to compose of the following members: 
a. Mr OP Bhatt; 
b. Justice JP Devadhar; 
c. Mr KV Kamath; 
d. Mr Nandan Nilekani; 
e. Mr Somasekhar Sundaresan 
 
d. The remit of the Expert Committee was: 
“a. 
To provide an overall assessment of the 
situation including the relevant causal factors 
which have led to the volatility in the 
securities market in the recent past; 
b. 
To suggest measures to strengthen investor 
awareness; 
c. 
To investigate whether there has been 
regulatory failure in dealing with the alleged 
contravention of laws pertaining to the 
securities market in relation to the Adani 
Group or other companies; and 
d. 
To suggest measures to (i) strengthen the 
statutory and/or regulatory framework; and 
(ii) secure compliance with the existing 
framework for the protection of investors.” 
 
The Expert Committee was directed to furnish its report to this Court within two 
months. 
 
5. This Court clarified that the Expert Committee and SEBI would work in 
collaboration with each other. The appointment of the Committee would, in 
other words, not affect the investigation by SEBI which would proceed 
simultaneously. The constitution of the Expert Committee was not to divest 

PART A 

SEBI of its powers or responsibilities in continuing with its investigation. The 
Court observed: 
“12. 
…SEBI shall apprise the expert committee 
(constituted in paragraph 14 of this order) of 
the action that it has taken in furtherance of 
the directions of this Court as well as the 
steps that it has taken in furtherance of its 
ongoing investigation. The constitution of the 
expert committee does not divest SEBI of its 
powers or responsibilities in continuing with 
its investigation into the recent volatility in the 
securities market.” 
 
6. On 6 May 2023, in compliance with the above interim order, the Expert 
Committee submitted its report to this Court. In its order dated 17 May 2023, 
this Court directed that copies of the report shall be made available to the 
parties and their counsel to enable them to assist the Court in the course of 
further deliberations. This Court also granted SEBI an extension of time till 14 
August 2023 to submit its status report about its investigation. 
 
7. SEBI filed an interlocutory application on 14 August 2023 intimating this Court 
about the status of the twenty-four investigations which were undertaken by 
them. Further, SEBI submitted a status report dated 25 August 2023 providing 
details about the twenty-four investigations. Both SEBI and the counsel for the 
petitioners have also filed their responses to the Expert Committee’s report. 
 
8. In the above background, this matter came up for hearing before this Court on 
24 November 2023. We heard Mr Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel and 
other counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners and Mr Tushar Mehta, 
learned Solicitor General appearing on behalf of SEBI. 

PART A 

9. Mr Prashant Bhushan, appearing on behalf of the petitioner broadly pressed his 
case for two directions: firstly, a direction to constitute an SIT to oversee the 
SEBI investigation into the Adani group and that all such investigations be court-
monitored; and second, a direction to SEBI to revoke certain amendments 
made to the SEBI (Foreign Portfolio Investments) Regulations, 20143 and the 
SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015.4 
Mr Bhushan made the following submissions: 
 
a. The Hindenburg Report and certain newspaper reports allege that some 
Foreign Portfolio Investments5 in Adani group stocks in the Indian stock 
market are owned by shell companies based outside India, which have 
close connections with the Adani group. Such investments in Adani stocks 
allow the Adani group to maintain financial health and artificially boost the 
value of stocks in the market, in violation of Indian law; 
 
b. The investments by FPIs violate Rule 19A of the Securities Contracts 
(Regulations) Rules, 1957 which requires a minimum 25% public 
shareholding in all public-listed companies; 
 
c. The investigative findings of the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting 
Project6, published by two newspapers, indicate price manipulation by the 
Adani group through two Mauritius-based funds. However, SEBI has not 
acted on such reports; 
 
3 “FPI Regulations” 
4 “LODR Regulations” 
5 “FPIs” 
6 “OCCRP” 

PART A 

d. The Directorate of Revenue Intelligence7 had addressed a letter dated 31 
January 2014 to the then SEBI Chairperson alerting them about possible 
stock market manipulation being committed by the Adani group by over-
valuation of the import of power equipment. However, SEBI did not take 
adequate action based on this letter; 
 
e. SEBI must be directed to revoke amendments to the FPI Regulations which 
have done away with restrictions on opaque structures. As a result of these 
amendments, SEBI, the Enforcement Directorate8 and the CBDT have not 
been able to give any clear findings with regard to price manipulation and 
insider trading. SEBI has tied its own hands; 
 
f. SEBI must be directed to revoke the amendment made to its LODR 
Regulations which have altered the definition of "related party"; 
 
g. SEBI's inability to establish a prima facie case of regulatory non-compliance 
and legal violations by the Adani group promoters despite starting an 
investigation in November 2020, appears to be prima facie self-inflicted. 
The unprecedented rise in the price of the Adani scrips occurred between 
January 2021 and December 2022, over a period when the Adani group 
was already under SEBI investigation; 
 
h. A few members of the Expert Committee may have a conflict of interest and 
there is a likelihood of bias, which was not brought to the notice of the Court 
by the concerned members; and 
 
7 “DRI” 
8 “ED” 

PART A 

i. SEBI has willfully delayed the submission of its status report on the 
investigation into the Adani group within the time granted by this Court. 
 
10. On the other hand, the learned Solicitor General, appearing on behalf of SEBI 
made the following submissions: 
 
a. Twenty-two out of twenty-four investigations being conducted by SEBI are 
complete. In these investigations, enforcement actions/ quasi-judicial 
proceedings would be initiated, wherever applicable; 
 
b. The delay by SEBI in filing the report is only ten days which is unintentional 
and not willful, given that twenty-four investigations were to be carried out; 
 
c. SEBI has been taking various steps on the areas identified by the Expert 
Committee and will also take into consideration the suggestions of the 
Expert Committee to improve its practices and procedures; 
 
d. The events pertaining to the present batch of petitions relate to only one set 
of entities in the market without any significant impact at the systemic level. 
While the shares of the Adani group saw a significant decline on account of 
the selling pressure, the “wider Indian market has shown full resilience”; 
 
e. The petitioner’s reliance on the letter by the DRI is misconceived. After 
having received DRI’s letter, SEBI sought information from DRI on the 
subject and received a response. Further, while SEBI’s examination was in 

PART B 

process, the Additional Director, DRI (Adjudication) found the allegations of 
over-valuation to be incorrect. The CESTAT and this Court also dismissed 
appeals against the order; 
 
f. The OCCRP report relied on by the petitioner lacks documentary support 
and certain important facts with regard to the source of the report have been 
concealed; and 
 
g. The FPI Regulations, initially, had allowed “opaque structures” under 
certain conditions, inter alia, that they undertake to disclose the details of 
beneficial owners on being sought. The subsequent amendment required 
upfront mandatory disclosure of beneficial owners by FPIs. This made the 
disclosure clause redundant which led to its omission in 2019. The 
amendments have tightened the regulatory framework by making 
disclosure requirements mandatory and removing the requirement of 
disclosure only when sought. 
B. The scope of judicial review over SEBI’s regulatory domain 
11. The petitioners in the present case are inter alia seeking directions with regard 
to (i) investigations being carried out by SEBI; and (ii) regulations/policies 
adopted by SEBI. In other words, directions in relation to both the regulatory 
and delegated legislative powers of SEBI are being sought by the petitioners. 
At the outset, therefore, this Court’s power to enter the domain of a specialized 
regulator, such as SEBI must be delineated. 

PART B 

12. SEBI was established as India’s principal capital markets regulator with the aim 
to protect the interest of investors in securities and promote the development 
and regulation of the securities market in India. SEBI is empowered to regulate 
the securities market in India by the SEBI Act 1992, the SCRA and the 
Depositories Act 1996. SEBI’s powers to regulate the securities market are wide 
and include delegated legislative, administrative, and adjudicatory powers to 
enforce SEBI’s regulations. SEBI exercises its delegated legislative power by 
inter alia framing regulations and appropriately amending them to keep up with 
the dynamic nature of the securities’ market. SEBI has issued a number of 
regulations on various areas of security regulation which form the backbone of 
the framework governing the securities market in India. 
 
13. Section 11 of the SEBI Act lays down the functions of SEBI and expressly states 
that it “shall be the duty of the Board to protect the interests of investors in 
securities and to promote the development of, and to regulate the securities 
market, by such measures as it thinks fit”. Further, Section 30 of the SEBI Act 
empowers SEBI to make regulations consistent with the Act. Significantly, while 
framing these regulations, SEBI consults its advisory committees consisting of 
domain experts, including market experts, leading market players, legal 
experts, technology experts, retired Judges of this Court or the High Courts, 
academicians, representatives of industry associations and investor 
associations. During the consultative process, SEBI also invites and duly 
considers comments from the public on their proposed regulations. SEBI 
follows similar consultative processes while reviewing and amending its 
regulations. 

PART B 

14. This Court in IFB Agro Industries Ltd v. SICGIL India Ltd,9 examined the role 
of independent regulatory bodies such as SEBI in public administration and 
upheld the primacy of SEBI as the forum to adjudicate violations of its 
regulations. Further, the Court detailed the delegated legislative, administrative, 
and adjudicatory powers of SEBI arising from the SEBI Act. The court held: 
“30. Public administration is dynamic and ever-
evolving. It is now established that governance of 
certain sectors through independent regulatory bodies 
will be far more effective than being under the direct 
control and supervision of Ministries or Departments of 
the Government. Regulatory control by an independent 
body composed of domain experts enables a 
consistent, transparent, independent, proportionate, 
and accountable administration and development of 
the sector. All this is achieved by way of legislative 
enactments which establish independent regulatory 
bodies with specified powers and functions. They 
exercise powers and functions, which have a 
combination of legislative, executive, and judicial 
features. 
31. Another feature of these regulators is that they are 
impressed with a statutory duty to safeguard the 
interest of the consumers and the real stakeholders of 
the sector. 
… 
33. The statutory provisions contained in Chapters IV, 
VI-A, read with Section 30, delineate the legislative, 
administrative, and adjudicatory functions of the Board. 
In its normative or legislative functions, SEBI can 
formulate regulations encompassing various aspects 
having a bearing on the securities market. It should be 
noted that the SEBI Act, Rules, Regulations and 
Circulars made or issued under the legislation, are 
constantly evolving with a concerted aim to enforce 
order in the securities market and promote its healthy 
growth while protecting investor wealth. Insofar as its 
administrative/executive power goes, it has the power 
to regulate the business of stock exchanges and 
securities market. The Board provides for the 
registration and regulation of stock brokers, share 
transfer agents, depositories, venture capital funds, 
collective investment schemes, etc. It also has the 
 
9 (2023) 

PART B 

power to prohibit various transactions which interfere 
with the health of the securities market. 
34. In the exercise of its adjudicatory powers under 
Section 15-I, SEBI has the power to appoint officers for 
holding an inquiry, give a reasonable opportunity to the 
person concerned and determine if there is any 
transgression of the Rules prescribed. The Board has 
the power to impose penalties for violations and also 
restitute the parties. The adjudicatory power also 
includes the power to settle administrative and civil 
proceedings under Section 15-JB of the SEBI Act. 
35. The regulatory jurisdiction of the Board also 
includes ex-ante powers to predict a possible violation 
and take preventive measures. The exercise of ex-ante 
jurisdiction necessitates the calling of information as 
provided in Sections 11(2)(i), 11(2)(ia) and 11(2)(ib) of 
the SEBI Act. Where the Board has a reasonable 
ground to believe that a transaction in the securities 
market is going to take place in a manner detrimental 
to the interests of the stakeholders or that any 
intermediary has violated the provisions of the Act, it 
may investigate into the matter under Section 11(C) of 
the SEBI Act. In other words, being the real-time 
security market regulator, the Board is entitled to keep 
a watch, predict and even act before a violation occurs. 
… 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
15. In a consistent line of precedent, this Court has held that when technical 
questions arise particularly in the financial or economic realm; experts with 
domain knowledge in the field have expressed their views; and such views are 
duly considered by the expert regulator in designing policies and implementing 
them in the exercise of its power to frame subordinate legislation, the court 
ought not to substitute its own view by supplanting the role of the expert. Courts 
do not act as appellate authorities over policies framed by the statutory 
regulator and may interfere only when it is found that the actions are arbitrary 
or violative of constitutional or statutory mandates. The court cannot examine 
the correctness, suitability, or appropriateness of the policy, particularly when it 

PART B 

is framed by a specialized regulatory agency in collaboration with experts. The 
court cannot interfere merely because in its opinion a better alternative is 
available. 
 
16. In Prakash Gupta v. SEBI,10 this Court speaking through one of us (DY 
Chandrachud, J), observed that the Court must be mindful of the public interest 
that guides the functioning of SEBI and should refrain from substituting its own 
wisdom over the actions of SEBI. The Court held: 
“101. Therefore, the SEBI Act and the rules, 
regulations and circulars made or issued under the 
legislation, are constantly evolving with a concerted 
aim to enforce order in the securities market and 
promote its healthy growth while protecting investor 
wealth 
 
[…] 
 
102. In a consistent line of precedent, this Court has 
been mindful of the public interest that guides the 
functioning of SEBI and has refrained from 
substituting its own wisdom over the actions of 
SEBI. Its wide regulatory and adjudicatory powers, 
coupled with its expertise and information 
gathering mechanisms, imprints its decisions with 
a degree of credibility. The powers of the SAT and 
the Court would necessarily have to align with SEBI's 
larger existential purpose.” 
 
17. From the above exposition of law, the following principles emerge: 
a. Courts do not and cannot act as appellate authorities examining the 
correctness, suitability, and appropriateness of a policy, nor are courts 
advisors to expert regulatory agencies on matters of policy which they are 
entitled to formulate; 
 
10. 

PART B 

b. The scope of judicial review, when examining a policy framed by a 
specialized regulator, is to scrutinize whether it (i) violates the fundamental 
rights of the citizens; (ii) is contrary to the provisions of the Constitution; (iii) 
is opposed to a statutory provision; or (iv) is manifestly arbitrary. The legality 
of the policy, and not the wisdom or soundness of the policy, is the subject 
of judicial review; 
 
c. When technical questions arise – particularly in the domain of economic or 
financial matters – and experts in the field have expressed their views and 
such views are duly considered by the statutory regulator, the resultant 
policies or subordinate legislative framework ought not to be interfered with; 
 
d. SEBI’s wide powers, coupled with its expertise and robust information-
gathering mechanism, lend a high level of credibility to its decisions as a 
regulatory, adjudicatory and prosecuting agency; and 
 
e. This Court must be mindful of the public interest that guides the functioning 
of SEBI and refrain from substituting its own wisdom in place of the actions 
of SEBI. 
 
We have made a conscious effort to keep the above principles in mind while 
adjudicating the petitions, which contain several prayers that require the Court 
to enter SEBI’s domain. 

PART C 

C. There is no apparent regulatory failure attributable to SEBI 
 
18. The petitioners have submitted, based on the Hindenburg Report and other 
newspaper reports, that the FPIs investing in Adani group stocks in the Indian 
stock market are shell companies outside India owed by the brother of the 
Chairperson of the Adani group. These shell companies have, it is urged, an 
unclear ownership pattern and seem to only trade in Adani stocks which 
allegedly allows the Adani group to maintain an appearance of financial health 
and solvency. The petitioners allege that this would artificially boost the value 
of Adani stocks in the market and expose the Indian market and investors to 
huge losses. 
 
19. Additionally, the petitioners contend that after accounting for these shell 
companies which allegedly belong to a member of the Adani family, the 
promotor shareholding would surpass 75%. This, it is alleged, would be in 
contravention of Rule 19A of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Rules 1957 
which mandates a minimum of 25% public shareholding. The alleged 
contravention would according to the petitioners entail the delisting of the Adani 
group as a consequence. According to the petitioners, the disclosure of the 
ownership of the FPIs investing in the Adani stocks lies at the heart of the 
alleged violation of Rule 19A. In its order dated 10 March 2023, this Court noted 
that SEBI was already seized of investigations into the Adani group since 2020. 
This Court further directed SEBI to investigate the alleged violation of Rule 19A 
of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Rules 1957. 

PART C 

20. The FPI Regulations, 2014 had mandated the disclosure of the ultimate 
beneficial ownership by natural persons of the FPI under the provisions 
concerning "opaque structures" in ownership of FPIs. The declaration of the 
"ultimate beneficial owner" under SEBI Regulations was required to conform to 
the disclosure of "beneficial owner" under the Prevention of Money Laundering 
Act, 200211 and thereby under Rule 9 of the Prevention of Money Laundering 
Maintenance of Records Rules, 2004. These requirements were amended by 
SEBI in 2018 and 2019 by removing the requirement of disclosing ownership of 
the FPIs by a natural person. The petitioner submits that this amounts to a 
regulatory failure on the part of SEBI. 
 
21. The petitioner further argues that the LODR Regulations, 2015 defined a 
"related party transaction" in Regulation 2(1)(zb) as a transaction involving a 
transfer of resources between a listed entity and a "related party", regardless of 
whether a price is charged. The term "related party", in Regulation 2(1)(zc) had 
the same meaning that is ascribed to “related party” under Section 2(76) of the 
Companies Act, 2013. Based on a report of the Committee on Corporate 
Governance dated 5 October 2017 the definition was amended on 1 April 2019 
to provide that any person or entity belonging to the "promoter" or "promoter 
group" of a listed entity that held 20% or more of the shareholding in the listed 
entity shall be deemed to be a related party. 
 
22. On 21 November 2021, substantial amendments were made to the definition of 
“related party” with deferred prospective effect from 1 April 2022 and 1 April 
 
11 PMLA 

PART C 

2023. In these amendments, the definition of "related party" was amended to 
include persons holding 20% or more in the listed company whether directly or 
indirectly or on a beneficial interest basis under Section 89 of the Companies 
Act, 2013 with effect from 1 April 2022. However, with effect from 1 April 2023, 
the deemed inclusion would bring within the scope of the term "related party" 
persons who hold 10% or more of the listed company. The Expert Committee 
report has opined that these amendments were necessitated to address the 
mischief or contrivance of effecting a transaction involving a transfer of 
resources between a listed company and a third party which is not a related 
party, only to technically escape the rigours of compliance applicable to a 
related party transaction, to thereafter transfer the resources from the unrelated 
party to a related party. The Committee further opined that deferred prospective 
application of regulations is not bad practice in commercial law, as it allows the 
market to adjust to the proposed changes and avoid uncertainty. 
 
23. However, the petitioner argues that these amendments to the LODR 
Regulations have facilitated the mischief or contravention with regard to related 
party transactions by the Adani group. This, as the petitioner argues, is because 
the series of amendments have made it difficult to establish contravention of 
law by first opening a loophole and then plugging the loophole with deferred 
effect. The petitioner has also argued that while initially the director, their 
relative, or a relative of a key managerial person was considered a related party, 
the amendments have changed this position to hold that a person/entity be 
deemed ‘related party’ only if the shareholding of that person/entity is at least 

PART C 

20%. These amendments have allegedly made it difficult to investigate the 
acquisition against the Adani group for flouting minimum public shareholding 
regulations by engaging in related party transactions through FPIs. It has also 
made it difficult to assign the specific contravention of a regulation to the Adani 
group. 
 
24. In essence, the petitioners have argued that the amendments to the two 
regulations amount to regulatory failure on the part of SEBI and have 
accordingly prayed that SEBI be directed to revoke the amendments to the FPI 
Regulations and LODR Regulations or make suitable changes. It may be 
pointed out that these arguments and prayers were not present in the initial 
petitions. They have only propped after the report of the Expert Committee 
dated 6 May 2023. The Report stated that in view of the amendments to the 
regulations, it cannot return a finding of regulatory failure by SEBI. Thereafter, 
the petitioners have made arguments to belie the finding of the Expert 
Committee Report. 
 
25. SEBI in its affidavit dated 10 July 2023 has submitted that the entire rouse 
around regulatory failure caused by amendments to FPI Regulations and LODR 
Regulations was initiated because of SEBI’s submissions before the Expert 
Committee in the context of challenges faced in obtaining information regarding 
holders of economic interest. SEBI had used the term “opaque” to describe the 
FPIs which it submits was mistaken by the Expert Committee to imply the rules 
on “opaque structures” under the FPI Regulations, 2014. 

PART C 

26. SEBI claims no disability in its investigation into the Adani group on account of 
the amendments to the FPI Regulations. On merits, SEBI has argued that the 
FPI Regulations, 2014 in fact did not prohibit opaque structures. They were 
permitted upon meeting certain conditions including the condition that they 
provide details of their beneficial ownership as and when called upon to do so. 
The 2018 amendment required mandatory disclosures by all FPIs with a few 
exceptions. It marked a shift towards tightening the regulations with mandatory 
disclosure of beneficial owner details. This new mandate rendered the previous 
provision on disclosure upon demand otiose. Mandatory upfront disclosure 
meant that the undertaking to disclose beneficial ownership by FPIs was a 
vestige. This led to provisions on “opaque structures” being omitted in 2019 
upon the recommendation of the Working Group headed by a former Deputy 
Governor of RBI. 
 
27. In essence, SEBI argues that the difficulty it faces in obtaining information 
regarding holders of economic interest in FPIs does not change regardless of 
the amendments in the FPI Regulations. SEBI contends that a challenge arises 
due to differing regulations in jurisdictions where entities with economic interest 
in an FPI operate. The ambiguity lies in beneficial ownership identification, 
which is based on control or ownership in some jurisdictions, potentially 
overlooking entities with economic interest but no apparent control. 
Consequently, investment managers or trustees, utilizing arrangements like 
voting shares, may be recognized as beneficial owners, leading to a potential 
failure in identifying the actual investing entities with economic interest, 
especially when holdings are distributed across multiple FPIs. 

PART C 

28. We find merit in SEBI’s arguments and do not find any reason to interfere with 
the regulations made by SEBI in the exercise of its delegated legislative powers. 
SEBI has traced the evolution of its regulatory framework, as noticed above, 
and explained the reasons for the changes in its regulations. The procedure 
followed in arriving at the current shape of the regulations is not tainted with any 
illegality. Neither has it been argued that the regulations are unreasonable, 
capricious, arbitrary, or violative of the Constitution. The petitioners have not 
challenged the vires of the Regulations but have contended that there is 
regulatory failure based on SEBI’s alleged inability to investigate which is 
attributed to changes in the regulations. Such a ground is unknown to this 
Court’s jurisprudence. In effect, this Court is being asked to replace the powers 
given to SEBI by Parliament as a delegate of the legislature with the petitioners’ 
better judgment. The critique of the regulations made as an afterthought and 
based on a value judgment of economic policy is impermissible. Additionally, 
we find no merit in the argument that the FPI Regulations, 2014 have been 
diluted to facilitate mischief. The amendments far from diluting, have tightened 
the regulatory framework by making the disclosure requirements mandatory 
and removing the requirement of it being disclosed only when sought. The 
disclosure requirement therefore is now at par with PMLA. 
 
29. We do not see any valid grounds raised for this Court to interfere by directing 
SEBI to revoke its amendments to regulations which were made in the exercise 
of its legislative power. A regulation may be subject to judicial review based on 
it being ultra vires the parent legislation or the Constitution. None of these 

PART D 

grounds have been pressed before the Court. Therefore, we find that the prayer 
seeking directions to SEBI to revoke its amendments to the FPI Regulations 
and LODR Regulations must fail. 
 
30. SEBI has completed twenty-two out of the twenty-four investigations into the 
Adani group. It submits that the remaining two are pending due to inputs being 
awaited from foreign regulators. We also record the assurance given by the 
Solicitor General on behalf of SEBI that the investigations would be concluded 
expeditiously. SEBI cannot keep the investigation open-ended and 
indeterminate in time. Hence, SEBI shall complete the pending investigations 
preferably within three months. 
 
D. The plea to transfer the investigation from SEBI to another agency or to 
an SIT 
i. 
The power to transfer an investigation is exercised in extraordinary 
situations 
31. The petitioners seek the transfer of the investigation from SEBI to the CBI or an 
SIT. The question that falls for decision is whether a case has been established 
by the petitioners for the court to issue such a direction. 
 
32. This Court does have the power under Article 32 and Article 142 of the 
Constitution to transfer an investigation from the authorized agency to the CBI 
or constitute an SIT. However, such powers must be exercised sparingly and in 
extraordinary circumstances. Unless the authority statutorily entrusted with the 

PART D 

power to investigate portrays a glaring, willful and deliberate inaction in carrying 
out the investigation the court will ordinarily not supplant the authority which has 
been vested with the power to investigate. Such powers must not be exercised 
by the court in the absence of cogent justification indicative of a likely failure of 
justice in the absence of the exercise of the power to transfer. The petitioner 
must place on record strong evidence indicating that the investigating agency 
has portrayed inadequacy in the investigation or prima facie appears to be 
biased. 
 
33. Recently, in Himanshu Kumar v. State of Chhattisgarh12, this Court, 
speaking through one of us (JB Pardiwala, J) relying on a judgement of a three 
judge Bench of this Court in K.V. Rajendran v. Superintendent of Police 
CBCID South Zone, Chennai13 reiterated the principle that the power to 
transfer an investigation to investigating agencies such as the CBI must be 
invoked only in rare and exceptional cases. Further, no person can insist that 
the offence be investigated by a specific agency since the plea can only be that 
the offence be investigated properly. The Court held as follows: 
 
“49. Elaborating on this principle, this Court further 
observed: 
 
“17. … the Court could exercise its constitutional 
powers for transferring an investigation from the State 
investigating agency to any other independent 
investigating agency like CBI only in rare and 
exceptional cases. Such as where high officials of State 
authorities are involved, or the accusation itself is 
against the top officials of the investigating agency 
thereby allowing them to influence the investigation, 
and further that it is so necessary to do justice and to 

13 (2013) 

PART D 

instil confidence in the investigation or where the 
investigation is prima facie found to be tainted/biased.” 
 
50. The Court reiterated that an investigation may be 
transferred to the CBI only in “rare and exceptional 
cases”. One factor that courts may consider is that such 
transfer is “imperative” to retain “public confidence in 
the impartial working of the State agencies.” This 
observation must be read with the observations made 
by the Constitution Bench in the case of Committee for 
Protection of Democratic Rights, West Bengal (supra), 
that mere allegations against the police do not 
constitute a sufficient basis to transfer the investigation. 
 
… 
 
52. It has been held by this Court in CBI v. Rajesh 
Gandhi, 1997 Cri LJ 63, that no one can insist that an 
offence be investigated by a particular agency. We fully 
agree with the view in the aforesaid decision. An 
aggrieved person can only claim that the offence he 
alleges be investigated properly, but he has no right to 
claim that it be investigated by any particular agency of 
his choice. 
 
53. The principle of law that emerges from the 
precedents of this Court is that the power to transfer an 
investigation must be used “sparingly” and only “in 
exceptional circumstances”. In assessing the plea 
urged by the petitioner that the investigation must be 
transferred to the CBI, we are guided by the 
parameters laid down by this Court for the exercise of 
that extraordinary power.” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
34. Given the above position of law, the question that arises before the Court is 
whether, in the facts of the present case, the transfer of investigation from SEBI 
to another agency is warranted. ii. 
SEBI has prime facie conducted a comprehensive investigation 
35. As noted above, out of the twenty-four investigations carried out by SEBI, 
twenty-two are concluded. Twenty-two final investigation reports and one 
interim investigation report have been approved by the competent authority 

PART D 

under SEBI’s procedures. With respect to the interim investigation reports SEBI 
has submitted that it has sought information from external agencies/entities and 
upon receipt of such information will determine the future course of action. 
 
36. Further, in its status report, SEBI has provided the current status of each of the 
investigations conducted by it and the reasons for interim findings in two of the 
investigations. SEBI has also provided details such as the number of emails 
issued, summons for personal appearance, pages of documents examined, 
statements recorded on oath, etc. for each investigation. An overview of twenty-
four investigations conducted by SEBI is as follows: 
Sr. 
No. 
Issues 
No. of 
Investigations 

Minimum Public Shareholding- alleged violation of 
Rule 19A of Securities Contracts (Regulation) 
Rules, 1957 

Alleged 
manipulation 
of 
stock 
prices 
in 
contravention of existing laws 

Alleged related Party Transactions (RPT)-Failure 
to disclose transactions with Related Parties and 
other relevant information 

Other Issues: 

Possible violation of SEBI (Foreign Portfolio 
Investors) Regulations, 2014 and 2019 

Possible violation of SEBI (Substantial 
Acquisition of Shares and Takeovers) 
Regulations, 2011 

Trading-Pre-post Hindenburg Report 

Possible violation of SEBI (Prohibition of 
Insider Trading) Regulations, 2015 

Total 

PART D 

SEBI’s status report and the details of the twenty-four investigations does not 
indicate inaction by SEBI. In fact, to the contrary, the course of conduct by SEBI 
inspires confidence that SEBI is conducting a comprehensive investigation. 
 
37. The petitioners have also raised questions about the delay by SEBI in 
submitting the status report before this Court. As noted earlier, by an order 
dated 2 March 2023, this Court directed SEBI to conclude its investigation within 
two months and file a status report before this Court. This Court by its order 
dated 17 May 2023, granted SEBI an extension of time till 14 August 2023 to 
submit its status report about its investigation. Eventually, SEBI filed an 
interlocutory application intimating this Court about the status of the twenty-four 
investigations undertaken by SEBI on 14 August 2023. SEBI submitted a status 
report dated 25 August 2023 providing comprehensive details about all the 
investigations carried out by SEBI. Therefore, there is a delay of only ten days 
in filing the report. Such a delay does not prima facie indicate deliberate inaction 
by SEBI, particularly, as the issue involved a complex investigation in 
coordination with various agencies, both domestic and foreign. 
 
38. Further, as noted in part C of this judgment, no apparent regulatory failure can 
be attributed to SEBI based on the material before this Court. Therefore, there 
is prima facie no deliberate inaction or inadequacy in the investigation by SEBI. 

PART D 

iii. 
Reliance on the OCCRP report and the letter by DRI is misconceived 
39. To assail the adequacy of SEBI’s investigation thus far, the petitioner has 
sought to rely on a report published by OCCRP and various newspapers 
referring to the report. The petitioner’s case appears to rest solely on inferences 
from the report by the OCCRP, a third-party organization involved in 
“investigative reporting”. The petitioners have made no effort to verify the 
authenticity of the claims. 
 
40. The reliance on newspaper articles or reports by third-party organizations to 
question a comprehensive investigation by a specialized regulator does not 
inspire confidence. Such reports by “independent” groups or investigative 
pieces by newspapers may act as inputs before SEBI or the Expert Committee. 
However, they cannot be relied on as conclusive proof of the inadequacy of the 
investigation by SEBI. Nor, as the petitioners state, can such inputs be regarded 
as “credible evidence”. The veracity of the inputs and their sources must be 
demonstrated to be unimpeachable. The petitioners cannot assert that an 
unsubstantiated report in the newspapers should have credence over an 
investigation by a statutory regulator whose investigation has not been cast into 
doubt on the basis of cogent material or evidence. 
 
41. In addition to the OCCRP report, the petitioners have also relied on a letter 
dated 31 January 2014 sent by the DRI to the then SEBI Chairperson. The letter 
purportedly alerted SEBI about inter alia potential stock market manipulation by 
the Adani group through over-valuation of the import of power equipment from 

PART D 

a UAE-based subsidiary. According to the petitioner, SEBI did not disclose the 
receipt of the letter and did not take adequate action based on it. 
 
42. SEBI has submitted that after receiving the above letter, it sought information 
from the DRI on the issue and received the requisite inputs. Further, while SEBI 
examined the preliminary alerts by the DRI, the Additional Director General 
(Adjudication), DRI concluded their examination and held that the allegations 
were not established. The order of the Additional Director General was assailed 
by the Commissioner of Customs before the Customs, Excise and Service Tax 
Tribunal.14 The CESTAT passed an order on 8 November 2022 dismissing the 
appeal and concluding that the allegation of overvaluation was not proved. The 
order of the CESTAT was upheld by this Court on 27 March 2023. Further, SEBI 
has also submitted that its investigation based on the DRI alerts was concluded 
and the related findings were also placed before the Expert Committee. 
 
43. None of the above facts have been disputed by the counsel for the petitioners. 
The petitioner is re-agitating an issue that has already been settled by 
concurrent findings of the DRI’s Additional Director General, the CESTAT and 
this Court. Therefore, the petitioner’s assertion that SEBI was lackadaisical in 
its investigation is not borne out from the reference to the letter sent by the DRI 
in 2014. 

14 “CESTAT” 

PART E 

44. Additionally, it must be noted that in the present case, this Court has already 
exercised its extraordinary powers by setting up an Expert Committee to assess 
the situation in the market, suggest regulatory measures, and investigate 
whether there has been a regulatory failure. To expect the Court to monitor the 
investigation indefinitely, even after the committee has submitted its report and 
SEBI has completed its investigation in twenty-two out of twenty-four enquiries 
is not warranted. 
E. Allegations of conflict of interest against members of the Expert 
Committee 
45. The petitioners have raised allegations against some of the members of the 
Expert Committee alleging that there was a conflict of interest which was not 
revealed to the Court. 
 
46. On 2 March 2023, this Court constituted the Expert Committee comprising of 
domain experts and headed by a former judge of this Court. The allegations 
against certain members of the committee were raised by the petitioner for the 
first time only on 18 September 2023 almost six months after the constitution of 
the committee and several months after the Committee had submitted its report 
in May 2023. All the purported facts and documents relied on by the petitioner 
in this regard were available in the public domain well before the allegations 
were raised by the petitioner for the first time in September 2023. The belated 
allegations by the petitioner prima facie indicate that they have not been made 
in good faith. 

PART E 

47. In any event, the allegation against Mr Somasekhar Sundaresan is that he had 
represented the Adani group before various fora including the SEBI Board, as 
a lawyer. To buttress the submission, the petitioner has merely averred to one 
order of the SEBI Board dated 25 May 2007 which indicates that Mr 
Sundaresan has appeared for Adani Exports Ltd on an unconnected issue. On 
a specific query by the Court during the hearing, counsel appearing on behalf 
of the petitioner did not present any additional evidence. The acceptance of a 
professional brief by a lawyer in 2007 cannot be construed to reflect “bias” or 
even a “likelihood of bias” in 2023. There is an absence of proximity both in 
terms of time (the alleged appearance was sixteen years ago) and subject 
matter. There was also no justifiable reason for the petitioners to wait until the 
expert committee submitted its report. 
 
48. Similarly, the allegations against Mr OP Bhatt and Mr Kamath have not been 
adequately substantiated by the petitioner. With regard to Mr OP Bhatt, the 
petitioner has alleged that he is presently working as the Chairman of a leading 
renewable energy company, which is working in partnership with the Adani 
group on certain projects. Additionally, the petitioner has also raised vague 
accusations against Mr OP Bhatt and Mr Kamath in relation to unconnected 
misconduct by Mr Vijay Mallya and the ICICI Bank, respectively. 
 
49. The petitioner has not established the link between these unsubstantiated 
allegations and the appointment of Mr Bhatt and Mr Kamath to the committee. 
Here too, the petitioner has only annexed newspaper reports published after 

PART F 

the appointment of the committee by this Court, without any attempts to verify 
their authenticity or supplement them with independent research. 
 
50. Therefore, the allegations of conflict of interest against members of the Expert 
Committee are unsubstantiated and do not warrant this Court’s serious 
consideration. 
F. Other recommendations by the Expert Committee 
51. The Expert Committee met on 17 March 2023 and noted that it would require 
specific factual briefings from SEBI on all four aspects within the remit of the 
Committee. It further sought inputs from market participants with regard to (i) 
suggestions and measures to strengthen investor awareness; (ii) strengthen 
the statutory and regulatory framework; and (iii) secure compliance with the 
existing framework. We have discussed the committee’s analysis on the issue 
of whether there was a regulatory failure above. The other observations and 
recommendations of the Expert Committee report are discussed below. i. 
Volatility and short selling 
52. The Court in its order dated 10 March 2023 expressed concern over the impact 
of volatility in the securities market on Indian investors. It therefore empowered 
the Expert Committee with the remit to enquire into and assess the volatility in 
the market. The enquiry was to give a sense of direction to increase investor 
awareness, address deficiencies in the regulatory framework and enable the 
Committee to make any other suggestions to avoid unanticipated volatility 
which would adversely impact the interests of investors. 

PART F 

53. Market forces act on the assessment of available information and its anticipated 
impact. This behaviour creates volatility in the market. However, such volatility 
is an inherent feature of the market and becomes a matter of concern when it 
has wide ramifications. The stocks of the Adani group witnessed volatility in the 
aftermath of the publication of the Hindenburg Report. This volatility was 
examined by the Expert Committee, which after examining the facts presented 
by SEBI and engaging with market participants, opined that the impact of the 
Adani group-related events on the overall market was low. 
 
54. The report of the Committee indicates that the Indian securities’ market showed 
resilience and the impact of the fluctuations in the Adani stocks was not 
deleterious to the economic ecosystem as a whole. The volatility in Adani stocks 
in the aftermath of the Hindenburg Report was stabilised due to market forces 
and mitigatory measures. While shares of the group fluctuated, it did not pose 
any systemic market-level risk. According to the Expert Committee the trend 
observed in volatility in the Indian market in comparison with the global volatility 
index has been consistent since the COVID-19 pandemic and was maintained 
even during the period when volatility was observed in the Adani stocks. 
Therefore, according to the Committee, while events related to Adani stocks 
had an impact at an individual scale, it did not result in volatility in the market. 
 
55. After drawing the above conclusion, the Expert Committee has additionally 
made the following recommendation upon considering the submissions of SEBI 
and other market participants: 

PART F 

“47.⁠ 
⁠SEBI has submitted that only recently, it has 
made a regulatory intervention in terms of 
supervising the construction of stock indices. 
SEBI must consider directing index writers to 
construct indices to compute volatility of 
stocks that are constituents of indices so that 
volatility in these stocks can be compared 
with volatility in the indices. The availability of 
such data on a real time basis would enable 
the market to be more informed in making its 
investment and divestment decisions. SEBI 
must ensure that there are secular norms and 
periodic reviews for construction and design 
changes in indices.” 
 
In its note filed in compliance with this Court’s order dated 10 February 2023, 
SEBI had submitted that it has implemented measures to deal with issues which 
may impact sudden and unusual price movements, excessive volatility, etc. by 
measures like Market Wide Circuit Breakers, Circuit Filters/Price bands on 
individual shares, additional surveillance measures15, and Market Wide Position 
Limits. SEBI has inter alia reiterated these submissions before the Expert 
Committee and has further, in its affidavit dated 10 July 2023 placed on record 
the existing ASM and graded surveillance measure16 framework. We are 
inclined to direct SEBI to further consider the recommendations and take 
appropriate measures. 
 
56. The chain of events which triggered the Adani group-related events and 
eventually the petitions filed before this Court were attributable to the report by 
short-seller Hindenburg Research. The Expert Committee also points to the 
publication of the report to explain the volatility observed. The petitioner on the 
other hand has argued that the real cause of the loss of investor money was 
 
15 ASM 
16 GSM 

PART F 

the alleged unchecked violations of law and artificial boosting of share prices 
which would always entail the risk of volatility upon being discovered in one way 
or the other. These allegations have been investigated by SEBI including some 
investigations which were directed by this Court. SEBI as the statutory regulator 
has stated that it would complete the process in accordance with law. 
 
57. However, this Court had sought inputs as to the role of short sellers, like 
Hindenburg, and the rules governing their actions as well as measures which 
may be taken to regulate them. Hindenburg Research describes itself as a 
research firm that specialises in "forensic financial research". The firm purports 
to seek out situations where companies may have accounting irregularities, bad 
actors in management, undisclosed related party transactions, illegal/unethical 
business or financial reporting practices and undisclosed regulatory, product or 
financial issues. 
 
58. Short selling is a sale of securities which the seller does not own but borrows 
from another entity, with the hope of repurchasing them at a later date with a 
lower price, thus, attempting to profit from an anticipated decline in the price of 
the securities. In its report, Hindenburg Research admits to taking a short 
position in the Adani group through US-traded bonds and non-Indian traded 
derivative instruments. SEBI has submitted that short selling is a desirable and 
essential feature to provide liquidity and to help price correction in over-valued 
stocks and hence, short selling is recognised as a legitimate investment activity 
by securities market regulators in most countries. Short selling is regulated by 

PART F 

a circular notified by SEBI on 20 December 2007. SEBI submits that any 
restrictions on short selling, may distort efficient price discovery, provide 
promoters unfettered freedom to manipulate prices, and favour manipulators 
rather than rational investors. Therefore, the International Organisation of 
Securities Commission recommends that short selling be regulated but not 
prohibited with an aim to increase transparency. We record the statement made 
by the Solicitor General before this Court that measures to regulate short selling 
will be considered by the Government of India and SEBI. SEBI and the 
investigative agencies of the Union Government shall also enquire into whether 
there was any infraction of law by the entities, which engaged in short-selling 
on this occasion. The loss which has been sustained by Indian investors as a 
result of the volatility caused by the short positions taken by Hindenburg 
Research and any other entities acting in concert with Hindenburg Research 
should be probed. ii. 
Investor Awareness 
59. Informed decisions made by an aware investor population are a pre-requisite 
to an efficient market. The data from 2019 to 2022 provided by SEBI shows that 
there is an increase in the number of investors in the Indian economy in the 
‘future and options segment’ of the stock market.17 This requires specialized 
knowledge. The creation of a framework for this knowledge to percolate to 
investors lies in the policy domain. However, this Court sought an assessment 
 
17 SEBI, Analysis of Profit and Los of Individual Traders dealing in Equity F&O Segment, 25 January 2023, available 
at 
<https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-statistics/research/jan-2023/study-analysis-of-profit-and-loss-of-
individual-traders-dealing-in-equity-fando-segment_67525.html#> 

PART F 

of the existing framework to aid a determination of whether the regulatory 
framework suffers from infirmities which would lead to an adverse impact on the 
Indian investors. The Court also sought inputs on measures which may be 
taken to increase investor awareness thereby creating a conducive 
environment for a more efficient market. The Expert Committee solicited views 
and perspectives from SEBI and various market participants. 
 
60. Before the Expert Committee, SEBI submitted that there has been no market 
default owing to price movements due to the measures taken by SEBI. These 
measures include an index-based market-wide "circuit breaker" system, limit of 
20% in movement of prices in individual shares, price bands at 10% of the 
previous day's closing price for the future and options segment, stock specific 
surveillance mechanisms like ASM and GSM, and cautionary messages 
displayed to brokers placing orders for stocks under ASM or GSM. 
 
61. The Expert Committee has concluded that having systems like ASM and GSM 
is not sufficient and that there must be a real prospect of investors being aware 
of heightened surveillance by measures, such as clients being alerted when 
stocks are under ASM or GSM at the point of entry of orders. The Expert 
Committee also highlighted the possibility of there being a surfeit of information 
in which investors find themselves drowned. Measures to communicate 
relevant information in a comprehensive manner to the investors are therefore 
imperative for informed decision making. 

PART F 

62. The Committee also explored investor awareness with respect to unclaimed 
securities, dividends and bank deposits of deceased next of kin which may be 
lost due to the legal framework. The Committee invited the Investor Education 
and Protection Fund Authority18 to present its workings and manner of 
administration. Based on its findings, the Committee recommended that the 
Government of India establish a centralised authority to handle and process 
unclaimed private assets. It suggested creating the Central Authority for 
Unclaimed Property which must aim to reunite assets of deceased persons with 
their next of kin. The Committee also made some suggestions in the context of 
IEPFA which state: 
 
“a. 
The integrated portal announced in the Finance 
Minister Budget Speech should be expedited 
and process re-engineering delegation to the 
issuer companies based upon type and 
threshold of the claims must be considered; 
b. 
The same may be reviewed on incremental 
basis from time to time considering the benefits 
on reducing the timeline for disposal of claims 
vis-à-vis the risks of fraud. c. 
Pilot projects such as taking up names from the 
death registry in a given area to map it with the 
database of the IEPFA and proactively 
attempting to reach out to the next of kin should 
be considered; 
d. 
Registered market intermediaries who are 
answerable to the regulatory regime of financial 
sector regulators could be identified and 
recognized as agents for service delivery to 
enable release of unclaimed dividend and 
securities; 
e. 
An officer strength of a dozen personnel is 
evidently disproportionate. The IEPFA would 
need a full time Chief Executive Officer who 
would have specific key performance indicia 
that would be fixed by the governance 
oversight of the Authority.” 
 
18 IEPFA 

PART F 

The Committee made further recommendation to induce financial literacy and 
make it a fundamental part of pedagogy right from school curricula. 
 
63. SEBI has submitted that while it is open to considering some of the above 
suggestions, it is not empowered to implement others as they lie outside its 
prescribed sphere of competence and expertise. In particular, SEBI has 
submitted that the recommendations on creation of a financial redressal 
agency, central unclaimed property authority, and framework to set up a multi-
agency committee would require multiple regulators and the Government may 
need to look into these recommendations. We find it appropriate to direct both 
the Government of India and SEBI to consider the recommendations of the 
Expert Committee with respect to investor awareness and create an appropriate 
legal framework to implement the recommendations. iii. 
Recommendations of the Expert Committee to strengthen regulatory 
framework and secure compliance to protect investors 
64. The Expert Committee was also directed to suggest measures to (i) strengthen 
the statutory and/or regulatory framework; and (ii) secure compliance with the 
existing framework for the protection of investors. Pursuant to its remit, the 
Committee in its report dated 6 May 2023 has made the following suggestions: 
a. Structural Reform: SEBI must perform its complex functions in a 
structured form by ensuring greater transparency in law-making, and 

PART F 

greater societal involvement in contributing to the law. This will lead to 
greater compliance with the laws; 
b. Effective Enforcement Policy: SEBI must optimize its resources and lay 
down policies for effective enforcement of its law by stipulating the criteria 
by which it may use its powers to initiate measures. This must be 
consistent with the legislative policy of SEBI and an attempt must be 
made to apply the law prospectively; 
c. Judicial Discipline: Adjudicating Officers and Whole Time Members must 
show consistency and not take differing views in similar circumstances. 
Judicial discipline must be followed in applying ratios of previous 
decisions as well as following the decisions made at the appellate stage; 
d. Settlement Policy: SEBI must have a robust settlement policy and 
formulate objective criteria to regulate it. It must not be hesitant to enter 
settlements whereby financial injury commensurate with the alleged 
violation may be inflicted on the party; 
e. Timelines: SEBI must lay down and adhere to strict timelines for initiation 
of investigations, completion of investigations, initiation of proceedings, 
disposal of settlement, and disposal of proceedings; 
f. Surveillance and Market Administration Measures: The element of 
human discretion must be done away with as far as possible. It must be 
saved for extraordinary circumstances that would not have been factored 
in already. With regard to disclosures, all provision of data should be in 
machine-readable format and inter-operable across electronic platforms; 

PART F 

g. The suggestions made on structural reforms by committees in the past 
should be followed. These include (i) the creation of a Financial Redress 
Agency that handles investor grievances across sectors; (ii) easing and 
centralizing the process for recovering unclaimed private property, which 
is currently spread across agencies, either through the aegis of the 
Financial Stability and Development Council or even by appropriate 
legislation; (iii) creation of a framework for a multi-agency committee to 
investigate complex enforcement matters. The same must have a 
temporary shelf life which ends upon initiation of prosecution. It may only 
be used in cases involving serious cross-sectoral repercussions which 
would need multi-disciplinary skill sets to act in coordination; and (iv) 
following the doctrine of separation within SEBI in its quasi-judicial, and 
executive arm. 
 
65. SEBI has addressed these recommendations in its affidavit dated 10 July 2023. 
SEBI has inter alia submitted that its existing framework already accounts for 
the recommendations of the Expert Committee on effective enforcement policy, 
judicial discipline, settlement policy, and surveillance & market administration 
measures. SEBI has opposed the recommendations with respect to laying 
down timelines on the ground that the time taken to form a prima facie opinion 
and conduct an investigation is contingent on many variable factors which 
render the process and time taken subjective. SEBI submits that they cannot 
be uniformly bound to a time limit. Further, as noted above, SEBI has submitted 
that creation of financial redressal agency, central unclaimed property authority, 

PART F 

and framework to set up a multi-agency committee would require multiple 
regulators and the Government may need to look into these recommendations. 
SEBI argues that it is not competent to enforce the same and requires the 
Government of India to consider them. 
 
66. The Expert Committee has made the above suggestions after applying its mind 
to the wealth of information collected from SEBI, market participants, invitees 
and from their own expertise. These suggestions merit favourable consideration 
with a positive intent. We direct the Government of India and SEBI to consider 
these suggestions and to take the benefit of the efforts put in by the Expert 
Committee. We may add that the approach in considering these suggestions 
must not be defensive but constructive. The Committee has favourably noted 
some of the measures that SEBI has taken in reaction to the events and 
learnings from the market. The same attitude of advantaging from the 
perspectives should be taken by the Government of India and SEBI. The Union 
Government and SEBI would be at liberty to interact with the Committee so as 
to take this forward. Since a member of the Bar who was a member of the 
Committee has been appointed to the Bench since the submission of the report, 
the Chairperson of the Committee will be at liberty to nominate a member with 
legal expertise and domain knowledge for the purpose of interacting with the 
Union Government and SEBI. 

PART G 

G. Conclusion 
67. In a nutshell, the conclusions reached in this judgement are summarized below: 
 
a. The power of this Court to enter the regulatory domain of SEBI in framing 
delegated legislation is limited. The court must refrain from substituting its 
own wisdom over the regulatory policies of SEBI. The scope of judicial 
review when examining a policy framed by a specialized regulator is to 
scrutinise whether it violates fundamental rights, any provision of the 
Constitution, any statutory provision or is manifestly arbitrary; 
 
b. No valid grounds have been raised for this Court to direct SEBI to revoke 
its amendments to the FPI Regulations and the LODR Regulations which 
were made in exercise of its delegated legislative power. The procedure 
followed in arriving at the current shape of the regulations does not suffer 
from irregularity or illegality. The FPI Regulations and LODR Regulations 
have been tightened by the amendments in question; 
 
c. SEBI has completed twenty-two out of the twenty-four investigations into 
the allegations levelled against the Adani group. Noting the assurance given 
by the Solicitor General on behalf of SEBI we direct SEBI to complete the 
two pending investigations expeditiously preferably within three months; 
 
d. This Court has not interfered with the outcome of the investigations by SEBI. 
SEBI should take its investigations to their logical conclusion in accordance 
with law; 

PART G 

e. The facts of this case do not warrant a transfer of investigation from SEBI. 
In an appropriate case, this Court does have the power to transfer an 
investigation being carried out by the authorized agency to an SIT or CBI. 
Such a power is exercised in extraordinary circumstances when the 
competent authority portrays a glaring, willful and deliberate inaction in 
carrying out the investigation. The threshold for the transfer of investigation 
has not been demonstrated to exist; 
 
f. The reliance placed by the petitioner on the OCCPR report to suggest that 
SEBI was lackadaisical in conducting the investigation is rejected. A report 
by a third-party organization without any attempt to verify the authenticity of 
its allegations cannot be regarded as conclusive proof. Further, the 
petitioner’s reliance on the letter by the DRI is misconceived as the issue 
has already been settled by concurrent findings of DRI’s Additional Director 
General, the CESTAT and this Court; 
 
g. The allegations of conflict of interest against members of the Expert 
Committee are unsubstantiated and are rejected; 
 
h. The Union Government and SEBI shall constructively consider the 
suggestions of the Expert Committee in its report detailed in Part F of the 
judgment. These may be treated as a non-exhaustive list of 
recommendations and the Government of India and SEBI will peruse the 
report of the Expert Committee and take any further actions as are 

PART G 

necessary to strengthen the regulatory framework, protect investors and 
ensure the orderly functioning of the securities market; and 
 
i. SEBI and the investigative agencies of the Union Government shall probe 
into whether the loss suffered by Indian investors due to the conduct of 
Hindenburg Research and any other entities in taking short positions 
involved any infraction of the law and if so, suitable action shall be taken. 
 
68. Before concluding, we must observe that public interest jurisprudence under 
Article 32 of the Constitution was expanded by this Court to secure access to 
justice and provide ordinary citizens with the opportunity to highlight legitimate 
causes before this Court. It has served as a tool to secure justice and ensure 
accountability on many occasions, where ordinary citizens have approached 
the Court with well-researched petitions that highlight a clear cause of action. 
However, petitions that lack adequate research and rely on unverified and 
unrelated material tend to, in fact, be counterproductive. This word of caution 
must be kept in mind by lawyers and members of civil society alike. 
 
69. We are grateful to all the members and the Chairperson of the Expert 
Committee for their time, efforts, and dedication in preparing their erudite, 
comprehensive, and detailed report in a time-bound manner. Subject to the 
consent and availability of the members and Chairperson of the Expert 
Committee, SEBI and the Government of India may draw upon their expertise 
and knowledge while taking necessary measures pursuant to the 
recommendations of the Committee. 

PART G 

70. The Petitions shall accordingly stand disposed of in the above terms. 
 
71. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 

….…..…...…...……………….…...CJI. 
 [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]..…..…..…...…...……………….… 
 [J B Pardiwala]..…..…..…...…...……………….… 
 [Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
January 03, 2024