IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).4577 OF 2011 

SUMAN L. SHAH 

 ….APPELLANT(S) Civil Appeal No. 4583 of 

VERSUS 

THE CUSTODIAN & ORS. 

 …..RESPONDENT(S) 

WITH 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).4583 OF 2011 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 

1. 
The factual and legal issues involved in these appeals are 
common and hence the same have been heard together and are 
being decided by this common judgment. 
2. 
The instant appeals under Section 10 of the Special Court 
(Trial of Offences relating to transactions in Securities) Act, 1992 
(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘Act of 1992’) arise out of the 
final judgments passed by the Special Court, Bombay constituted 

under the Act of 1992 of even date i.e. 11th March, 2011, in MA 
Nos. 162 and 184 of 2008 in MA No.343 of 1994 in MA No. 193 of 
1993. 
3. 
Before proceeding to consider the appeals on merits, it would 
be apposite to consider the broad scheme of the Act of 1992. 
4. 
The Act was promulgated as large-scale irregularities 
committed by some share brokers in collusion with the employees 
of Banks and Financial Institutions(in short ‘FIs’) came to light in 
relation to transaction in Government/other securities leading to 
diversion of funds from the banks/FIs to the individual accounts 
of certain brokers. 
5. 
The Act provided a mechanism to deal with the above 
situations and in particular, to ensure speedy recovery of the huge 
amounts illegally diverted, punish the guilty and restore the 
confidence of public at large in the security transactions and also 
to uphold and maintain the basic integrity and credibility of banks 
and FIs. The period of transactions in securities under the purview 
was from 1st April, 1991 to 6th June, 1992. A Special Court headed 
by a sitting Judge of the High Court was established for speedy 
trial of offences relating to transactions in securities and disposal 
of properties attached. The Act also provided for appointment of 

one or more custodians under Section 3 so as to attach the 
property/properties of the offenders with a view to preventing 
diversion of such properties by the offenders. 
6. 
Section 3(2) stipulates that the Custodian may, on being 
satisfied on information received that any person has been found 
involved in any offence relating to transactions in securities after 
1st April, 1991 and on or before 6th June, 1992, notify the name of 
such person in Official Gazette. 
7. 
Section 3(3) provides that any property, movable or 
immovable or both, belonging to the notified persons would stand 
attached simultaneously with the date of issuance of the 
notification. 
8. 
Section 3(4) mandates the Custodian to deal with the 
attached properties in such manner as the Special Court may 
direct. 
9. 
Section 11(1) empowers the Special Court to pass appropriate 
order(s) directing the Custodian for disposal of the attached 
property. 

10. Under Section 11(2), liabilities of notified persons are 
required to be paid or discharged in full by distributing monies so 
realized after disposal of the attached assets. 
11. Having taken into account the relevant provisions of the 
statute, the brief facts arising for consideration in the present 
appeals may be noted as below:- 

On 2nd July, 1992, Fairgrowth Financial Services 
Limited (hereinafter being referred to as the ‘FFSL’) was 
notified under Section 3(2) of the Act and all its properties 
stood attached. In 1993, the Custodian filed Miscellaneous 
Application No. 193 of 93 in the Special Court for the 
recovery of various sums of money belonging to FFSL from 
respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth. 
(ii) The Special Court passed a consent decree on 24th 
February, 1994 directing respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth to 
pay a sum of Rs.51,49,07,417.92/- to the Custodian on 
behalf of FFSL. Respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth committed 
default and as a consequence, the Custodian initiated 
attachment of his assets to recover the decretal amount. 
(iii) During the years 1996-1997, the appellant-Suman L. 
Shah had borrowed a sum of Rs.50 lakhs from respondent 

No. 6-Klar Chemicals(P) Ltd. and a sum of Rs. 25 lakhs from 
respondent No. 7-Malika Foods (P) Ltd. (original respondent 
Nos. 5 and 6 before the Special Court) whereas appellant-
Laxmichand Shah had borrowed Rs.45 lakhs from 
respondent No. 8-Jainam Securities(P) Ltd. (original 
respondent No.7 before the Special Court). As per the case 
set up by the Custodian before the Special Court, these were 
the benami companies of respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth who 
had illegally parked the tainted money received from FFSL, 
the 
notified 
company 
in 
these 
benami 
companies 
(respondent Nos.6, 7 and 8) created by himself. 
(iv) The Custodian notified respondent No.2-Pallav Sheth 
under Section 3(2) of the Act on 6th October, 2001. He was 
declared insolvent on 5th November, 2003 and as a 
consequence, all his assets and properties got vested in the 
Official Assignee i.e. respondent No.9 herein. As respondent 
No. 2-Pallav Sheth failed to pay the decretal amount, the 
Custodian sought information from respondent No. 3-
Income Tax Department regarding the assets of respondent 
No. 2-Pallav Sheth. In turn, the Income Tax Department, 
vide letter dated 5th May, 1998 informed the Custodian 

about respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth being the benami 
owner of the companies (respondent Nos. 4 to 8 herein). 
(v) The Special Court, by an order passed in miscellaneous 
application registered for initiating contempt proceedings 
against respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth observed that 
respondent Nos. 4 to 8 were benami companies of respondent 
No.2-Pallav Sheth. 
12. The 
Custodian 
claims 
to 
have 
acquired 
knowledge/information that the appellant Suman L. Shah had 
received an amount of Rs. 50 lakhs from respondent No. 6(out of 
which Rs. 25 lakhs were repaid by cheque and the entry dated 5th 
May, 1997 is available in the passbook) and Rs. 25 lakhs from 
respondent No.7 and that the appellant-Laxmichand Shah had 
received an amount of Rs.25 lakhs from respondent No.8. 
13. Accordingly, Miscellaneous Application Nos. 162 of 2008 and 
184 of 2008 were filed by the Custodian before the Special Court 
for recovery of Rs. Rs. 50 lakhs from the appellant Suman L. Shah 
 and for recovery of Rs. 25 lakhs 
from the appellant/Laxmichand Shah, both being garnishees of respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth i.e. the owner of the benami companies (respondent Nos.4 to 8). 

14. The Special Court, vide judgment dated 11th March, 2011 
passed in Miscellaneous Application No. 162 of 2008 directed the 
appellant Suman L. Shah to pay a sum of Rs. 50 lakhs(Rs. 25 lakhs 
each due to respondent Nos. 6 and 7) being benami companies of 
respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth, to the Custodian with interest @ 
12% per annum from 1st April, 1997 till realisation of the amount. 
15. Vide another judgment of even date passed in Miscellaneous 
Application No. 184 of 2008, the Special Court directed appellant-
Laxmichand Shah to pay a sum of Rs. 25 lakhs due to respondent 
No. 8, benami company of respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth, to the 
Custodian with interest @ 12% per annum from 1st April, 1997 till 
realisation of the amount. 
16. The Special Court further directed that the appellants shall 
deposit the amounts with the Custodian within a period of two 
months from the date of the judgment failing which the Custodian 
would be free to execute the orders as decrees of the Civil Court. 
Upon recovery, the amounts were directed to be paid to respondent 
No. 9-Official Assignee whereafter the appellants would stand 
discharged of their liabilities towards the benami companies of 
respondent No.2 Pallav Sheth. 

17. Aggrieved by the judgments dated 11th March, 2011, Suman 
L. Shah and Laxmichand Shah have instituted Civil Appeal Nos. 
4577 of 2011 and 4583 of 2011 before this Court. 
18. While entertaining the appeals, vide order dated 13th May, 
2011, this Court directed appellant-Suman L. Shah to deposit 
Rs.50 lakhs and appellant-Laxmichand Shah to deposit Rs. 25 
lakhs with the Officer on Special Duty attached with the Special 
Court and to furnish a bank guarantee to the Custodian towards 
the balance amount, i.e., interest. 
19. Both the appeals were dismissed by this Court vide order 
dated 23rd April, 2012 on account of non-compliance of the order 
dated 13th May, 2011. 
20. The IAs seeking restoration of these Civil Appeals were 
accepted vide order dated 14th March, 2014, subject to deposit of 
a total sum to the tune of Rs. 2.20 crores by the appellants with 
the Officer on Special Duty, Special Court. The amount has been 
deposited and accordingly the appeals were taken on board. 
21. Learned counsel representing the appellants contended that 
the Special Court committed manifest error in facts as well as in 
law in holding that the appellants herein were the garnishees of 

respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth. It was contended that the 
questionable transactions between the appellants and respondent 
Nos. 6, 7 and 8, the alleged benami companies of respondent No. 
2-Pallav 
Sheth 
(notified 
party) 
and 
judgment 
debtor 
of 
FFSL(notified party) were 13-14 years old and as no documentary 
proof relating to these transactions was provided by the Custodian 
on the record of the proceedings before the Special Court, the 
statement of appellants that the entire amounts of loan taken from 
respondent Nos. 6, 7 and 8 were repaid ought not to have been 
brushed aside. 
22. It was contended that the appellants herein had taken the 
loans from respondent Nos. 6, 7 and 8 in the years 1996-1997, 
i.e., long before respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth came to be notified 
under Section 3(2) of the Act of 1992, i.e., 6th October, 2001 and 
thus, the burden of proof regarding the existence of liability could 
not have been shifted on to the appellants and the onus essentially 
lay upon the Custodian to prove that these amounts had not been 
repaid and were still recoverable. 
23. It was contended that the specific assertion made by the 
appellants in their deposition affidavits that the amounts in 
question borrowed from respondent Nos. 6, 7 and 8 had been 

repaid partly by cheque and partly by material supplied to these 
respondents could not be unsettled by the Custodian in cross-
examination. Only a bald suggestion was given to the appellants 
in cross-examination that they did not have any document in the 
form of vouchers, receipts, invoices or entries in the book accounts 
to show the adjustment of the remaining amount. 
24. It was urged that the letter dated 5th May, 1998 issued by 
respondent No. 3-Income Tax Department was referred to in the 
cross-examination of the appellants. However, the said letter was 
not proved by exhibiting the same in the proceeding before the 
Special Court. Learned counsel urged that the since the 
Custodian failed to bring the letter of the Income Tax Department 
on record, either by summoning the income tax officials or by 
producing any other admissible evidence, the Special Court 
committed a grave error on placing implicit reliance on such 
communication. 
25. It was contended that the appellants herein being respondent 
Nos. 8 before the Special Court were not cross-examined either by 
respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth or on behalf of the benami 
companies i.e. respondent Nos. 6, 7 and 8 and thus it could not be 

said with any degree of certainty that the amounts borrowed 
remained unpaid. 
26. The pertinent assertion of learned counsel for the appellants 
was that since the appellants were never notified under the Act of 
1992, the burden of proof could not have been shifted upon them 
so as to require them to disprove the case set up by the Custodian 
in the applications for recovery. In this regard, learned counsel for 
the appellants referred to the following observations made by the 
Special Court in the impugned order:- 
 “7. It is true that oral evidence cannot be ignored, but at the 
same time, it has to be borne in mind that the Official Assignee 
- respondent No.9 has to recover the properties and assets of 
respondent No.1 for satisfaction of the decree against him. For 
the reasons best known to respondent No.1 or respondent Nos. 
5 and 6, neither they filed any reply nor cross-examined 
respondent No.8. At the same time, it cannot be forgotten that 
the respondent No.8 is a businessman and he was expected to 
maintain accounts of his business. It is impossible to believe 
that he would not have maintained accounts of his business. 
According to him, he had partly repaid these amounts to 
respondent Nos. 5 and 6 by cheques and partly the amounts 
were adjusted against the purchases made by respondent Nos. 
5 and 6 from Shree Jalaram Timber Depot Pvt. Ltd. He has 
shown payment of Rs.25 lakh by cheque to respondent No.5 
and that is reflected in his passbook. Whenever any payment is 
made by cheque and the cheque is encashed, naturally the 
debit entry is taken in the account of the person, who has 
issued the cheque. For a moment, if it is believed that other 
documents were not available, at least respondent No.8 could 
produce the passbook of his account showing the debit entries 
indicating payment by cheque to respondent Nos. 5 and 6. 
However, respondent No.8 did not produce any such passbook 
to show that certain payments were made by cheque and those 
cheques were encashed and the amounts were debited in his 

account. If Shree Jalaram Timber Depot Pvt. Ltd belonging to 
respondent No.8 had supplied certain material to respondents 
Nos. 5 and 6 and that amount was adjusted against the dues 
payable to respondents Nos. 5 and 6, there must have been 
some documents in the form of bill books, vouchers, receipts, 
entries in the account books. However, no such document was 
produced. It is true that respondent No.8 was not cross-
examined by respondent No.1 or respondent Nos.5 and 6. Still, 
it is to be noted that best evidence in the form of documentary 
evidence was available with the respondent No.8, but he chose 
not to produce the best evidence and relied only on his oral 
testimony. Even though respondent No.8 contended that the 
documents are not traceable he has nowhere stated that the 
records were lost or destroyed. There is no satisfactory 
clarification as to why the records are not traceable. When the 
best evidence, which is expected to be available with him, has 
not been produced, the Court may draw an inference that if 
such record would be produced, it would go against his claim. 
Therefore, his contention that the amount of Rs.25 lakh each 
payable to respondent Nos. 5 and 6 has been actually repaid 
partly by cheque and partly by adjustment of the price of 
material supplied to them cannot be accepted. Therefore, I hold 
that the respondent No.8 is liable to pay amount of Rs.25 lakh 
to respondent No.5 and Rs.25 lakh to respondent No.6. 
 
27. It was fervently contended by learned counsel for the 
appellants that the impugned judgments do not stand to scrutiny 
inasmuch as the onus of proof has been shifted on to the 
appellants without any justification and contrary to the principles 
enshrined in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872(hereinafter being 
referred to as the ‘Evidence Act’). He thus, implored the Court to 
accept the appeals and set aside the judgments passed by the 
Special Court. 

28., learned counsel for the respondents submitted 
that the bald statements of the appellants herein in their affidavits 
that the amount borrowed from respondent Nos. 6, 7 and 8 i.e. the 
benami companies of the notified person i.e. respondent No.2-
Pallav Sheth had been returned by way of adjustment towards 
material supplied was rightly discarded by the Special Court 
because such statements were not supported by any tangible 
proof, either oral or documentary. He urged that the appellants 
claim to be reputed businessmen and thus, it is wholly 
unbelievable that accounts of business had not been maintained 
by them so as to substantiate the plea of repayment being made to 
respondent Nos. 6, 7 and 8 by way of adjustment of material 
supplied. He thus, implored the Court to affirm the impugned 
judgments and dismiss the instant appeals. 
29. We have given our anxious consideration to the submissions 
advanced at the bar and have perused the material available on 
record. 
30. For adjudicating the issues raised in these appeals, few 
admitted facts need to be noted. The miscellaneous applications 
were filed by the respondent-Custodian in the year 2008 seeking 
to recover the amounts of Rs.50 lakhs from appellant Suman L. 

Shah towards the dues of respondent Nos. 6 and 7 and amount of 
Rs.25 lakhs from appellant Laxmichand Shah towards the dues of 
respondent No.8. The respondent Nos.6, 7 and 8 are alleged to be 
the benami companies of the respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth. 
31. Respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth is the judgment debtor of 
FFSL which was a company notified under the provisions of the 
Act of 1992. Respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth was notified under 
the Act of 1992 on 6th October, 2001 and thus, by virtue of Section 
3(3) of the Act of 1992, all properties belonging to him stood 
automatically attached from the date of such notification. The 
appellants herein had borrowed the amounts in question from 
respondent Nos. 6, 7 and 8, way back in the years 1996-1997. By 
that date, there could not have existed any justifiable reason for 
the appellants herein to have entertained a belief that these were 
the benami companies of respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth or that 
there was any breach of the provisions of the Act of 1992 by Pallav 
Sheth or the respondent companies. 
32. Even if it is assumed for the sake of arguments that 
respondent Nos. 4 to 8 were the benami companies of respondent 
No. 2-Pallav Sheth, he not having been notified under the Act of 
1992 by the time the amounts were borrowed, the appellants could 

not be expected to entertain any doubt regarding the operation of 
the Act of 1992 either against these companies or even against 
respondent No. 2-Pallav Sheth or that the companies were the 
benami companies of Pallav Sheth. 
33. The foundation behind the assertion made by the Custodian 
that the appellants herein were garnishees of respondent No. 2-
Pallav Sheth through respondent Nos. 6, 7 and 8 is based entirely 
on a communication dated 5th May, 1998 purportedly issued by 
the Income Tax Department. An affidavit was filed on behalf of the 
Department in the proceedings before the Special Court but in 
such affidavit, there is no reference whatsoever to the outstanding 
dues of respondent Nos. 6, 7 and 8 or that the appellants were its 
debtors. Furthermore, there is no reference whatsoever in this 
affidavit with regard to letter dated 5th May, 1998 which was 
annexed with the affidavit filed on behalf of the Custodian and was 
heavily relied upon by the Special Court. No witness from the 
Income Tax Department was examined in evidence before the 
Special Court in miscellaneous applications for recovery. 
34. While initiating recoveries, the Custodian relied upon the 
provisions of Sections 3 and 9A of the Act of 1992 which are 
reproduced hereinbelow:- 

“3. Appointment and functions of Custodian. — 
(1) The Central Government may appoint one or more 
Custodians as it may deem fit for the purposes of this 
Act. 
(2) The Custodian may, on being satisfied on 
information received that any person has been 
involved in any offence relating to transactions 
insecurities after the 1st day of April, 1991 and on 
and before the 6th June, 1992, notify the name of 
such person in the Official Gazette. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
and any other law for the time being in force, on and 
from the date of notification under sub-section (2), 
any property, movable or immovable, or both, 
belonging to any person notified under that sub-
section shall stand attached simultaneously with the 
issue of the notification. 
(4) The property attached under sub-section (3) shall 
be dealt with by the Custodian in such manner as the 
Special Court may direct. 
(5) The Custodian may take assistance of any person 
while exercising his powers or for discharging his 
duties under this section and section 4. 
 9A. Jurisdiction, powers, authority and procedure of Special 
Court in civil matters. — 
(1) On and from the commencement of the Special 
Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in 
Securities) Amendment Act, 1994 (24 of 1994) the 
Special Court shall exercise all such jurisdiction, 
powers 
and 
authority 
as 
were 
exercisable, 
immediately before such commencement, by any civil 
court in relation to any matter or claim— 
(a) relating to any property standing 
attached under sub-section (3) of section 3; 
(b) transactions in securities 
entered into after the 1st day of April, 1991, 
and on or before the 6th day of June, 1992, 
in which a person notified under sub-
section (2) of section 3 is involved as a party, 
broker, intermediary or in any other 
manner. 

(2) Every suit, claim or other legal proceeding (other 
than an appeal) pending before any court immediately 
before the commencement of the Special Court (Trial 
of 
Offences 
Relating 
to 
Transactions 
in 
Securities)Amendment Act, 1994 (24 of 1994), being 
a suit, claim or proceeding, the cause of action 
whereon it is based is such that it would have been, 
if it had arisen after such commencement, within the 
jurisdiction of the Special Court under sub-section 
(1), shall stand transferred on such commencement 
to the Special Court and the Special Court may, on 
receipt of the records of such suit, claim or other legal 
proceeding, proceed to deal with it, so far as may be, 
in the same manner as a suit, claim or legal 
proceeding from the stage which was reached before 
such transfer or from any earlier stage or de novo as 
the Special Court may deem fit. 
(3) On and from the commencement of the Special 
Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in 
Securities) Amendment Act, 1994 (24 of 1994), no 
court other than the Special Court shall have, or be 
entitled to exercise, any jurisdiction, power or 
authority in relation to any matter or claim referred 
to in sub-section (1). 
(4) While dealing with cases relating to any matter or 
claim under this section, the Special Court shall not 
be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided 
by the principles of natural justice, and subject to the 
other provisions of this Act and of any rules, the 
Special Court shall have power to regulate its own 
procedure. 
(5) Without prejudice to the other powers conferred 
under this Act, the Special Court shall have, for the 
purposes of discharging its functions under this 
section, the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), 
while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, 
namely: — 

summoning 
and 
enforcing 
the 
attendance of any person and examining 
him on oath; 

(b) requiring the discovery and production 
of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 
and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 
of 1872), requisitioning any public record or 
document or copy of such record or 
document from any office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination 
of witnesses or documents; 
(f) reviewing its decisions; 
(g) dismissing a case for default or deciding 
it ex parte; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of 
any case for default or any order passed by 
it ex parte; and 
(i) any other matter which may be 
prescribed by the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) of section 14.” 
35. From a bare perusal of these provisions, it would become 
clear that the properties of the person notified under Section 3(2) 
would stand attached automatically with effect from the date of 
notification by virtue of Section 3(3). Since respondent No.2-
Pallav Sheth was notified (as being a debtor of the originally 
notified company FFSL) with effect from 6th October, 2001, a 
fortiori, his properties would be deemed to be attached with effect 
from that date and not prior thereto. 
36. The appellants herein took a pertinent plea before the Special 
Court that the dues towards respondent Nos. 6, 7 and 8, generated 

from borrowings made in the years 1996-1997 stood repaid and 
closed because the amounts had been repaid by cheque(s) and by 
way of adjustments towards materials supplied. The applications 
for recovery having been filed by the Custodian with the allegation 
that the appellants herein were the debtors of the benami 
companies of the notified person, the primary onus of proving this 
assertion would be on the Custodian by virtue of Section 101 of 
Evidence Act. It is only after the Custodian discharged this 
primary burden and established the existence of the debt, then by 
virtue of Section 102 of the Evidence Act, perhaps, the onus could 
be shifted on to the appellants to rebut the same. 
37. The entire case of the Custodian regarding subsisting debts 
of the appellant towards respondent Nos. 6, 7 and 8 was based on 
a communication received from the Income Tax Department. The 
appropriate witness to prove such communication would be the 
official concerned from the Income Tax Department. However, as 
has been mentioned above, no witness from the Income Tax 
Department was examined in support of the recovery application. 
Even the communication forwarded by the Income Tax 
Department and relied upon by the Custodian was not proved by 
proper evidence. 

38. The appellants herein took a categoric stand in their 
depositions that they had returned the amounts borrowed from 
respondent Nos. 6, 7 and 8, but the books of accounts were not 
available because of lapse of time. The said plea of the appellants 
herein could not be treated as unnatural or an afterthought 
because once the transactions were completed and the loans were 
repaid, there was no reason for the appellants to have entertained 
a belief that after a period of about 13 years, they would be 
required to present the account books pertaining to transactions. 
It was neither a requirement in law nor could it be expected from 
the appellants herein to retain the books of accounts after more 
than a decade of the alleged suspicious transactions. 
39. Resultantly, the conclusions drawn and the findings recorded 
in the impugned judgments passed by the Special Court that the 
appellants herein failed to prove the fact that the amounts had 
been repaid to the benami companies of the notified person, 
namely, Pallav Sheth do not stand to scrutiny and cannot be 
sustained as being contrary to facts and law. 
40. As an upshot of the above discussion, the impugned 
judgments are hereby quashed and set aside. 
41. The appeals are allowed accordingly. 

42. The amounts deposited by the appellants in furtherance of 
the order dated 14th March, 2014 shall be reimbursed to them 
forthwith. 
43. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

…………………...………………………….J. 

(PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA) 

……………………………………………….J. 

(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
March 05, 2024.