IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. OF 2024 
[ SLP (C) Nos. 16134-16135 of 2022] 

THE TELANGANA RESIDENTIAL EDUCATIONAL 
INSTITUTIONS RECRUITMENT BOARD 
… APPELLANT(S) 

VERSUS 

SALUVADI SUMALATHA & ANR. 
 
 … RESPONDENT(S)

JUDGMENT 

M. M. Sundresh, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
By the impugned order, the Division Bench of the High Court of 
Telangana confirmed the decision of the Learned Single Judge by allowing 
the writ petition filed by respondent no.1, setting aside the recruitment made 
by the appellant in favour of respondent no.2 and ordered for redrawing of the 
merit list. 
3. 
Heard learned senior counsel appearing for the parties. 

BRIEF FACTS 
4. 
The Andhra Pradesh Public Employment (Organisation of Local 
Cadres and Regulation of Direct Recruitment) Order 1975 came into existence 
vide GOMs No. 674 dated 20.10.1975 in exercise of the powers conferred by 
Clauses (1) and (2) of Article 371D of the Constitution of India, 1950 upon 
the President of India. The aforesaid Government Order confers discretion to 
the State Government in respect of different departments and categories of 
posts to constitute committees for rendering adequate advice to it on the 
allotment of persons to State, Zonal and District cadres. 
5. 
The Government of Andhra Pradesh issued instructions vide G.O.P No. 
763 dated 15.11.1975 highlighting the methodology for filling up the 
vacancies. Annexure II of the said instructions which is relevant for the 
purpose of deciding the lis underwent an amendment vide GOMs No. 124 
dated 07.03.2002 which reads as follows: 
“In the said Government, orders. 

In the Annexure-II 

For paragraphs 3 and 4, the following shall be substituted, namely, 
“3: The Provisional list shall be divided into two parts. The first part shall 
comprise 30% of the posts consisting of combined merit lists of locals as 
well as non-locals and the remaining second part shall comprise the balance 
70% of the posts consisting of locals only and the posts shall be filled duly 
following the rule of reservation.” 

Thus, as per the amendment to instructions in G.O.P No. 763 dated 
15.11.1975, 30% of the posts are to be filled up first on the basis of merit by 
both locals and non-locals constituting the first part, and the remaining 70% 
is to be filled up with local reservation, subject to Rule of Reservation as per 
the Roster Point. 
6. 
Rule 22 of the Telangana State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1996 
mandates that appointments shall be made in the order of rotation on the basis 
of a 100 Point Roster. The category of Scheduled Castes (Women) comes 
under Roster Point No.2. 
7. 
The appellant being the recruitment agency issued a Notification No. 
03/2018 dated 31.07.2018 inviting applications from eligible candidates for 
the recruitment to the post of junior lecturers in Residential Educational 
Institutions Societies. As per paragraph V sub-paragraph 4 of the said 
notification, the zonal and local reservations shall be followed as per 
paragraph 8 of Andhra Pradesh Public Employment (Organisation of Local 
Cadres and Regulation of Direct Recruitment) Order 1975 (GOM No. 674, 
dated 20.10.1975) read with GOMs No. 124 dated 07.03.2002. Paragraph VIII 
concerns itself with the procedure of selection of which sub-paragraph 4 is of 
relevance: 

“4. The candidates will be selected and allotted to the Residential 
Educational Institutions Societies in Telangana State as per the option 
exercised and as per their rank in the merit list and as per zonal preference 
for allotment of candidates against available vacancies after verification of 
Certificates, Community and Category wise for the vacancies available as 
required.” 
8. 
Thus, the candidates were duty bound to exercise their options and the 
allotment would accordingly be made as per their rank in the merit list, based 
upon zonal preference. In other words, no candidate will be considered to any 
other zone not opted for and therefore such consideration is confined among 
the ones preferred. For the sake of clarity, if a candidate could not get 
allotment in their first preferred zone for want of merit in the zone that they 
belong to, they shall be considered in the second preferred option. 
9. 
Respondent nos.1 and 2 belong to Roster Point No.2 (Scheduled Caste 
Women). Respondent no.1, being a local, sought her first preference for Zone 
VI, while it was the second choice for respondent no.2, after Zone V. 
Respondent no.2 on merit obtained 35th rank while respondent no.1 stood at 
49th rank. 
10. 
Respondent no.1 filed a writ petition inter alia contending that the ratio 
has to be at 40:60, and she being a local with her first preference under Zone 
VI ought to have been recruited as against respondent no. 2. The learned 
Single Judge proceeded to allow the writ petition by fixing the ratio at 40:60 
and held that there was no basis for fixing the reservation, while respondent 

no. 2 ought not to have been permitted to be considered under Zone VI, that 
being her second preference. Incidentally, it was held that out of the 7 
vacancies, 4 vacancies had to be filled by following the rule of reservation, 
leaving 3 remaining vacancies for the unreserved category. This view of the 
learned Single Judge was approved by the Division Bench forcing the 
appellant to approach this Court. 
SUBMISSIONS 
11. 
Learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant submits that both 
the Courts have not taken into consideration the amendment made to G.O.P 
No. 763 dated 15.11.1975 vide GOMs No. 124 dated 07.03.2002. There were 
actually 7 posts out of which 5 were earmarked for local reservation. Out of 
the remaining two vacancies, one was to be filled up by Scheduled Caste 
Women. Respondent no.1 being ranked below respondent no.2 was not 
considered. In any case, there is absolutely no bar for a candidate to be 
considered in a different zone, provided that such option is duly exercised. 
The said submission is reiterated by the learned counsel appearing for 
respondent no.2. 
12., learned counsel appearing for respondent no.1 submitted 
that no fair procedure was adopted. The High Court has rightly considered the 
ratio and granted the relief. It has not been demonstrated clearly before the 

High Court as to the logic and reasoning behind the application of 30:70, apart 
from earmarking only 2 posts out of 7 for both local and non-local candidates. 
DISCUSSION 
13. 
The amendment made to G.O.P No. 763 dated 15.11.1975 vide GOMs 
No. 124 dated 07.03.2002 does not leave any room for doubt. 30% of the posts 
meant for both locals and non-locals have to be mandatorily filled up first 
before going for the remaining 70%. Similarly, the Government clarified vide 
GOMs No. 924 dated 12.12.2007 that all the departments are duty bound to 
complete recruitment process by adopting the 30:70 ratio which reads as 
follows: 
“All the Departments are hereby direct to maintain 70% of reservation in 
direct Recruitment to Locals in respect of posts Gazetted after 1975, after 
the implementation of the provision of Presidential Order, as per the list 
appended, so as to protect the interests of locals” 
 
Therefore, the High Court fell into an error in not only adopting a wrong ratio 
but also fixing 70% first. On a reading of the notification, it is amply clear that 
a candidate is not non-suited from being considered in another zone subject to 
the only condition that it should form part of the option that she has exercised. 
This is exactly what respondent no.2 did. 
14. Courts will have to be cautious and therefore slow in dealing with 
recruitment process adopted by the recruitment agency. A lot of thought 

process has gone into applying the rules and regulations. Merely because a 
recruitment agency is not in a position to satisfy the Court, a relief cannot be 
extended to a candidate deprived as it will have a cascading effect not only on 
the said recruitment of respondent no.2, but also to numerous others as well. 
In such view of the matter, courts are duty bound to take into consideration 
the relevant orders, rules and enactments before finally deciding the case. In 
this regard, reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in Dalpat 
Abasaheb Solunke v. B.S. Mahajan, (1990) where it was held: 
“12. It will thus appear that apart from the fact that the High Court has rolled 
the cases of the two appointees in one, though their appointments are not 
assailable on the same grounds, the court has also found it necessary to sit 
in appeal over the decision of the Selection Committee and to embark upon 
deciding the relative merits of the candidates. It is needless to emphasise 
that it is not the function of the court to hear appeals over the decisions 
of the Selection Committees and to scrutinize the relative merits of the 
candidates. Whether a candidate is fit for a particular post or not has 
to be decided by the duly constituted Selection Committee which has 
the expertise on the subject. The court has no such expertise. The 
decision of the Selection Committee can be interfered with only on 
limited grounds, such as illegality or patent material irregularity in the 
constitution of the Committee or its procedure vitiating the selection, 
or proved mala fides affecting the selection etc. It is not disputed that in 
the present case the University had constituted the Committee in due 
compliance with the relevant statutes. The Committee consisted of experts 
and it selected the candidates after going through all the relevant material 
before it. In sitting in appeal over the selection so made and in setting it 
aside on the ground of the so called comparative merits of the candidates as 
assessed by the court, the High Court went wrong and exceeded its 
jurisdiction.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

15. 
In the case on hand, we have no iota of doubt that the appellant has 
correctly followed the mandate of law. Therefore, we are inclined to set aside 
the impugned order passed by the Division Bench and that of the learned 
Single Judge of the Telangana High Court. Accordingly, the impugned order 
is set aside and the appeals stand allowed by restoring the recruitment made 
in favour of respondent no. 2. 
16. 
No order as to costs...………………………..J. 
(A. S. BOPANNA ) 

…………………………..J. 
(M. M. SUNDRESH) 
NEW DELHI; 
MARCH 05, 2024