IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 

CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
 WRIT PETITION(CRL.) NO(S). 121 OF 2022 
 
VINOD KATARA 

…PETITIONER(S) Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6048 
of 2016

VERSUS 
 
STATE OF U.P. 

JUDGMENT 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
This writ petition arises from a very peculiar set of facts and 
circumstances. 
2. 
The petitioner herein was arraigned as an accused for the 
offence of murder committed on 10th September, 1982. The 
petitioner along with three co-accused was convicted by the trial 
Court for the offence punishable under Section 302 read with 
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860(hereinafter being 

referred to as ‘IPC’) vide judgment dated 6th January, 1986 and 
were sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life. 
3. 
The convicts including the petitioner herein preferred 
 before the Allahabad High Court. 
During the pendency of appeal, the sentence awarded to the 
petitioner by the trial Court was suspended and he was released 
on bail. The said appeal came to be rejected vide judgment dated 
4th March, 2016 and the conviction of the petitioner and the 
sentence awarded to him by the trial Court were affirmed. The 
petitioner was taken into custody after the dismissal of the appeal 
by the High Court. 
4. 
The petitioner preferred assailing the judgment rendered by the Allahabad High 
Court. The said Special Leave Petition was dismissed by this Court 
vide order dated 16th August, 2016. 
5. 
The High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, while considering 
a PIL bearing Crl.(PIL) Misc. W.P. No. 855 of 2012, vide order dated 
24th May, 2012 directed the Juvenile Justice Board(s) (hereinafter 
being referred to as the ‘Board’) in the State of Uttar Pradesh to 
hold enquiries for determination of age of the convicts who were 
languishing in jail wherein the possibility was felt that the convict 

might have been a juvenile at the time of incident. Pursuant to the 
said order of the High Court, the petitioner herein who was at the 
relevant point of time lodged in District Jail, Mathura was 
subjected to examination by a Medical Board on 10th December, 
2021. The Medical Board conducted X-rays of the skull and 
sternum of the petitioner and gave an opinion that on the date of 
the report, the petitioner herein was around 56 years of age. Based 
on the said report of the Medical Board, the petitioner has 
preferred the instant writ petition claiming that he was around 15 
years of age on the date of the incident i.e. 10th September, 1982 
and has sought the following substantive relief:- 
“In the light of the abovementioned facts and circumstances, the 
petitioner through this instant petition prays before this Hon’ble 
Court as under:- 
 
A. issue a writ of mandamus or any other similar writ, order or 
direction thereby directing the respondent State to verify the claim 
of juvenility and thereafter pass necessary orders as it deems fit 
in the facts and circumstances of the case.” 
 
6. 
The matter was heard at length on 12th September, 2022, and 
this Court passed an order with the following pertinent directions:- 
“(i) We direct the Sessions Court, Agra to examine the claim of the 
writ applicant to juvenility in regard with law within one month 
from the date of communication of this order; 
 
(ii) The concerned Sessions Court shall also examine the 
authenticity and genuineness of the Family Register sought to be 
relied upon by the writ applicant convict considering that the 
document does not appear to be contemporaneous. This 
document assumes importance, more particularly in light of the 

fact that the ossification test report may not be absolutely helpful 
in determining the exact age of the writ applicant on the date of 
the incident. If the Family Register on record is ultimately found 
to be authentic and genuine, then we may not have to fall upon 
the ossification test report. In such circumstances, the Presiding 
Officer concerned shall pay adequate attention towards this 
document and try to ascertain the authenticity and genuineness 
of the same. If need be, the statements of the persons concerned 
i.e. from the concerned government department may also be 
recorded; 
 
(iii) The Sessions Court shall ensure that the writ applicant 
convict is medically examined by taking an ossification test or any 
other modern recognized method of age determination; 
 
(iv) The Sessions Court concerned shall submit its report as 
regards the aforesaid to this Court within one month from the date 
of communication of this order; 
 
(v) The Registry is directed to forward one copy of this order to 
Sessions Court, Agra; 
 
(vi) We request the learned counsel appearing for the State to take 
appropriate steps to facilitate the Sessions Court to complete the 
enquiry.” 
 
7. 
The inquiry in pursuance to the said direction was conducted 
by the learned Additional District and Sessions Judge, Court No. 
5, Agra who has forwarded a report dated 21st October, 2022 
opining that from the contemporaneous evidence placed during 
the inquiry, the date of birth of the petitioner was 2nd July, 1960 
and he was major on the date of the incident. The learned 
Additional District and Sessions Judge took note of the fact that 
medical examination of the convict Vinod Katara was conducted 
by Medical Board in compliance of the directions given by this 
Court and the Chairman of the Board had given an opinion that 

the probable age of accused Vinod Katara was between 55 to 60 
years with a remark that estimation of age based on X-ray 
examination becomes uncertain after the age of 25 years. 
8. 
After receiving the report, this Court permitted learned 
counsel for the petitioner as well as learned counsel for the 
respondent to submit their response thereto. Final arguments 
were heard on 17th January, 2024. 
9. 
Mr. Rishi Malhotra, learned counsel appearing for the 
petitioner 
vehemently 
and 
fervently 
contended 
that 
the 
conclusions drawn by the learned Additional District and Sessions 
Judge in the report dated 21st October, 2022 that it would not be 
possible to determine the age of the accused accurately based on 
the X-ray examination is unsustainable in light of the earlier 
medical report dated 10th December, 2021 wherein the Medical 
Board has given a pertinent opinion that the age of the petitioner 
as on the said date was around 56 years. 
10. As per the learned counsel, if the entries made in the 
contemporaneous documents relied upon by the Additional 
District and Sessions Judge are perused, it would become evident 
that the petitioner was born in the same year as his brother Ashok 
Kumar, i.e., 1960 which would lead to a situation of serious 

anomaly. He urged that the documentary evidence presented by 
the convict petitioner in the inquiry held by the learned Additional 
District and Sessions Judge conclusively establishes that after the 
birth of Ashok Kumar and before the birth of the petitioner, two 
other sons were born to the petitioner’s parents in the intervening 
years. However, both these children expired because of medical 
complications. He vehemently contended that the attendance 
register/school record on which the learned Additional District 
and Sessions Judge placed implicit reliance is not a reliable piece 
of evidence because the concerned Principal of the school neither 
verified the documents nor was he examined in evidence. 
11. Learned counsel further urged that the assumption drawn by 
the learned Additional District & Sessions Judge that there has 
been an overwriting in the family register wherein numerical ‘0’ 
has been changed to numerical ‘8’ is without any foundation. He 
contended that as per Section 94 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (hereinafter being referred to as 
the ‘JJ Act’), where contemporaneous reliable school record is not 
available, the Court can place reliance either on other 
documentary evidence or in absence thereof, the Medical Board’s 

opinion based on X-ray examination can be taken into account to 
determine the age of the person claiming juvenility. 
12. Learned counsel urged that school record produced during 
inquiry is not a reliable piece of evidence and the family register 
wherein the year of birth of the petitioner is shown to be 1968 as 
well as the medical report dated 10th December, 2021 deserve to 
be given precedence and accepted for extending the prayer made 
by the petitioner that he was a juvenile on the date of the incident. 
He thus, submitted that the petitioner is entitled to consequential 
relief of being released from prison. 
13., Mr. Ardhendumauli Kumar Prasad, learned AAG 
vehemently opposed the submissions advanced by the learned 
counsel for the petitioner and urged that the inquiry report has 
been submitted by the learned Additional District and Sessions 
Judge, as a consequence of direction given by this Court. Such 
inquiry report is based on detailed process of collection of evidence 
and analysis thereof. 
14. He submitted that the inquiry officer, i.e., the learned 
Additional District and Sessions Judge, after minute appreciation 
and evaluation of the evidence has categorically found that the 
date of birth of the petitioner as entered in the contemporaneous 

school record was 2nd July, 1960, which is the actual date of birth 
of the petitioner and as a consequence, the petitioner does not 
deserve the relief claimed for. 
15. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced by learned counsel for the parties and have 
carefully perused the order dated 16th August, 2016 passed by this 
Court and so also the enquiry report dated 21st October, 2022 
forwarded by the learned Additional District and Sessions Judge. 
16. The learned Additional District and Sessions Judge recorded 
evidence during the course of the inquiry and gave detailed 
findings holding that the family register brought on record by the 
petitioner was a forged document and was unreliable. It may be 
stated that a copy of the family register issued on 2nd March, 2022 
was placed on record by the petitioner during the course of inquiry. 
The inquiry officer issued a notice to the Assistant Block 
Development Officer, Panchayat, Fatehpur Sikri, Agra and in his 
examination, the officer clearly stated that the original register on 
the basis of which said family register has been prepared was not 
available in the record of the Panchayat, Aulenda. 

17. The learned Additional District and Sessions Judge gave the 
following opinion doubting the veracity of the family register relied 
upon by the petitioner:- 
“…This is also getting confirmed from Page No.133 of the Family 
Register because probable date of birth of petitioner Shashi w/o 
Vinod Kumar, is mentioned as 1965 on the said page. Generally, 
age of wife is some years less than husband. In the instant 
matter, in the family register, year of birth of wife of petitioner in 
the family register is 1965 whereas year of birth of her husband 
is mentioned as 1968 which is forged by which age of wife Shashi 
is becoming 3 years more than her husband Vinod Kumar. In 
general circumstances, it is not possible. It is clear from aforesaid 
appreciation that family register produced by petitioner is not 
authentic but a document doubtful in nature which does not 
appear to be a credible document.” 
 
18. The learned Additional District and Sessions Judge also 
summoned the record from the Pre-Secondary School, Dabar, 
Fatehpur Sikri and recorded the evidence of school officials. From 
these documents which are admission register and the transfer 
certificate, it transpired that the date of birth of the petitioner 
recorded in the school is 2nd July, 1960. 
19. Having minutely perused the inquiry report and the evidence 
led during the inquiry, we are of the opinion that the conclusions 
drawn by the learned Additional District and Sessions Judge that 
the actual date of birth of the accused petitioner is 2nd July, 1960 
and the opinion of the Medical Board that estimation of age based 
on X-ray examination becomes uncertain after 25 years is apropos 
and deserves to be accepted. 

20. Section 94(2) of the JJ Act provides for the mode of 
determination of age. In the order of priorities, the date of birth 
certificate from the school stands at the highest pedestal whereas 
ossification test has been kept at the last rung to be considered, 
only in the absence of the criteria Nos. 1 and 2, i.e. in absence of 
both certificate from school and birth certificate issued by a 
Corporation/Municipal Authority/Panchayat. 
21. In the wake of above discussion, we find no merit in the writ 
petition which is dismissed as such. 
22. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of..……………………….J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………..J. 

(SANDEEP MEHTA)