IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 

M/S SHAH ENTERPRISES THR. PADMABEN 
MANSUKHBHAI MODI...APPELLANT (S) Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.2159 of 

VERSUS 
VAIJAYANTIBEN RANJITSINGH SAWANT 
& ORS....RESPONDENT (S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeal arises out of the order dated 9th 
December 2015 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court 
of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in Misc. Civil Application (For 
Contempt) No. 3364 of 2015, thereby dismissing the said 
Contempt Petition filed by the present appellant. 

FACTS 
3. 
The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeal are as 
under: 
3.1 In the years 1953-54, the land bearing Survey Nos. 505, 
506, and 507 was given on lease to one Bapusaheb Bajirao 
Sawant by one Nawab Mir Fakruddin Hussein Khan Vigore and 
three others (“the Original Owners”) for 99 years. 
3.2 In the year 1956, the said lease deed was cancelled by the 
Original Owners by way of a notice. 
3.3 In the year 1969, the land in question was bought by 67 
persons. However, the sale deed was originally executed in the 
name of four persons. The land in question was subsequently 
divided into 67 divisions. 
3.4 In the year 1972, after the death of Bapusaheb Bajirao 
Sawant, his legal heirs including one Ranjitsingh Bapusaheb 
Sawant filed Special Civil Suit bearing Nos. 23, 24, and 25 of 
1972 in the Court of the Civil Judge (S.D.), Surat, claiming 
possession over the land in question based on the lease deed. 

3.5 In the said suits, a compromise agreement was entered into 
between the heirs of Bapusaheb Bajirao Sawant and the Original 
Owners of the subject property, whereby it was agreed that the 
lease issued in the year 1953 had been cancelled in the year 1956 
and after the cancellation of the lease deed, the legal heirs had 
no right, title, and interest in the subject property based on 
heirship. The said compromise agreement was recorded as 
consent decree by the learned Civil Judge (S.D.) Surat, vide order 
dated 18th September 1972. 
3.6 In the year 1986, the appellant herein bought land 
admeasuring 20 acres out of the land bearing Survey No. 506 
vide a registered sale deed. 
3.7 In the year 2008, Ranjitsingh Bapusaheb Sawant expired. 
3.8 In the year 2014, i.e., after the death of Ranjitsingh 
Bapusaheb Sawant, who was the legal heir of Bapusaheb Bajirao 
Sawant, his legal heirs filed Regular in 
the Court of learned Principal Civil Judge, Surat against 264 
defendants, including the appellant herein, for declaration and 
permanent injunction. 

3.9 In the year 2015, the appellant sent legal notices to all the 
respondents herein and brought to their attention the consent 
decree passed in the year 1972 and, therefore, requested them to 
withdraw the suit filed before the Principal Civil Judge, Surat. 
3.10 Since the respondents did not withdraw the suit, the 
appellant filed a Contempt Petition being Misc. Civil Application 
(For Contempt) No. 3364 of 2015 before the High Court of Gujarat 
at Ahmedabad. The said petition came to be dismissed vide the 
impugned judgment. 
3.11 Hence the present appeal. 
4. 
This Court vide order dated 22nd February 2016 had issued 
notice. We have heard Shri Amar Dave, learned Senior Counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellant and Mr. Nachiket Anil Dave, 
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents. 
SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
Shri Amar Dave, learned Senior Counsel submitted that the 
finding of the High Court that mere filing of a suit cannot be 
construed to be within the scope of Contempt jurisdiction is 
erroneous and contrary to the law laid down by this Court in the 

case 
of 
Delhi 
Development 
Authority 
vs. 
Skipper 
Construction and another1. It is submitted that, in the present 
case, a lis between the parties had culminated into a compromise 
agreement leading to passing of a consent decree in a judicial 
proceeding. It is, therefore, submitted that filing of the suit 
contrary to the consent decree, which has received the 
imprimatur of the Court, would amount to contempt of the Court. 
Learned Senior Counsel submitted that the filing of the suit was 
nothing else but a brazen act to undermine the judicial process 
by filing multiple proceedings and that too after a period of four 
decades. 
6., Shri Nachiket Anil Dave, learned counsel for the 
respondents submitted that the appellant herein was not a party 
to the consent decree in question dated 18th September 1972. It 
is, therefore, submitted that the appellant cannot be permitted to 
allege contempt of the consent decree to which it was not a party. 
7. 
Shri Nachiket Anil Dave submitted that various disputed 
questions of fact and law are pending adjudication in the civil 
 
1 (1995) =1995 INSC 105 

suit i.e. RCS No. 645 of 2014. He submitted that filing the 
contempt petition was nothing else but an attempt to preempt 
RCS No. 645 of 2014. It is further submitted that the civil suit 
filed is for asserting the rights of the plaintiffs/respondents over 
the ancestral agricultural land admeasuring about 2082 acres in 
relation to Survey Nos. 505, 506 and 507, whereas the claim of 
the appellant herein is only restricted to its purchase of 20 acres 
in Survey No. 506. It is submitted that there are 264 defendants 
in RCS No. 645 of 2014 filed by the respondents herein and the 
Contempt Petition in question was filed only by one of them i.e., 
the present appellant. 
8. 
Shri Nachiket Anil Dave further submitted that the 
appellant had also filed an application under Section 11 read 
with Order XIV Rule 2 and Section 151 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as “CPC”) for framing 
preliminary issues of limitation and res judicata in the subject 
suit. It is submitted that the learned trial judge vide Order Below 
Exh. 337 dated 22nd December 2017 had allowed the said 
application and preliminary issues had been framed. 

9. 
It is further submitted that an application had also been 
filed under Order VII Rule 11(d) of the CPC for dismissal of the 
subject suit. However, the learned trial judge vide order dated 
31st December 2018 had rejected the said application. It is, 
therefore, submitted that the said order has not been challenged 
and the same has attained finality. 
CONSIDERATION 
10. The High Court while rejecting the petition of the present 
appellant vide the impugned order has observed that though 
there cannot be a dispute with the proposition that even consent 
terms incorporated in the Court’s order when breached would 
give rise to allegations of contempt, in the present case, by mere 
filing of a civil suit asserting certain legal rights over the lands in 
question, it cannot be stated that the plaintiffs have breached the 
consent terms. The High Court held that the act of the 
respondents in filing the said civil suit may be one of annoyance 
or nuisance to the contempt petitioner (appellant herein), 
however, mere filing of the suit would not amount to contempt. 

11. Undisputedly, the suit filed by the respondents is against 
264 defendants. The claim of the respondents is over a vast 
stretch of lands admeasuring about 2082 acres in relation to 
Survey Nos. 505, 506, and 507. The claim of the appellant is 
only about 20 acres in Survey No. 506. Out of 264 defendants, 
only the appellant herein has filed the contempt petition. 
12. It is further to be noted that after being summoned in the 
Regular, the appellant has 
filed an application under Section 11 read with Order XIV Rule 2 
and Section 151 of the CPC for framing preliminary issues of 
limitation and res judicata. The said application was heavily 
contested by the respondents. After hearing the parties, the 
learned Principal Civil Judge, Surat has passed the following 
order: 
“1. 
This 
present 
application 
of 
the 
defendant No.155 is hereby allowed. 
 
2. 
The following issues have been framed 
as preliminary issues: 

Whether defendant No. 155 proves 
that above suit is barred by law of 
limitation? 

(II) Whether defendant No.155 proves 
that above suit is barred by principal of Res 
judicata? 
 
(III) What orders.” 
 
13. It could thus be seen that in the said suit, the preliminary 
issues have been framed at the instance of the present appellant. 
Not only that, but an application was filed under Order VII Rule 
11(d) of the CPC for rejection of the plaint. The learned Principal 
Sr. Civil Judge, Surat vide order dated 31st December 2018 
passed the following order: 
“That considering all the above facts and 
read the record plaintiff has filed the suit 
against so many other defendants except 
these defendants who are the necessary 
parties in this suit while deciding any 
application when entirely seen then it could 
be decided. In this case whatever relief 
claimed by the plaintiff wherein the present 
defendants are like a link whatever reliefs 
are 
claimed 
by 
the 
plaintiff 
against 
defendants as under this plaint to protect 
their right share they have claimed, and 
wherein the present defendants should also 
be there as the party in the suit it is 
necessary. Moreover whatever there is bar 
of limitation to a suit or not? That is mixed 
question of law and facts that could not be 
decided without recording the evidence that 

could not be decided. The judgments relied 
upon by the defendants are read and not 
applicable to present case because this suit 
is not against present defendants but also 
as against other defendants. Under these 
circumstances 
present 
application 
not 
deserved just to allowed so the order is 
passed as under- 
Order 
 
This application is rejected cost to be 
as according final order. “ 
 
14. It can thus clearly be seen that the present appellant has 
not only participated in the proceedings before the Principal Civil 
Judge, Surat, but has also made an application for framing 
preliminary issues. The application for framing preliminary 
issues has been allowed, whereas the application for rejection of 
the plaint has been rejected. 
15. Insofar as the reliance placed by the learned Senior Counsel 
for the appellant on the judgment of this Court in the case of 
Skipper Construction (supra) is concerned, in the said case, 
there was a dispute between the Delhi Development Authority 
(“DDA”) and M/s Skipper Construction Co. (P) Ltd. (“Skipper 
Construction”), leading to the filing of various proceedings and 
finally reaching this Court. 

16. After failing in various suits, Skipper Construction filed a 
 before the Delhi High 
Court. The said CWP No.2371 of 1989 was dismissed by a 
Division Bench of the Delhi High Court vide judgment and order 
dated 21st December 1990, directing Skipper Construction to pay 
to the DDA by cash or demand draft a sum of Rs.8,12,68,789/- 
within 30 days and to stop construction till payment is made. It 
further directed that in the event of non-payment by Skipper 
Construction, DDA would be entitled to enter upon the property 
and forfeit the monies received by it. 
17. Against the dismissal of the CWP No. 2371 of 1989, Skipper 
Construction filed the before this Court. On 29th January 1991, an interim order 
came to be passed by this Court, which reads as under: 
“(i) That the petitioners herein shall deposit a 
sum of Rs 2.5 crores (Rupees two crores 
and fifty lakhs only) in cash/bank draft 
with the Delhi Development Authority 
within one month from today and the 
petitioners will further deposit similar 
amount by cash/bank draft by 8-4-1991. 

(ii) That the petitioners shall be permitted to 
resume the construction of the building in 
question only after making the first deposit 
as stated in clause (i) above. 
 
(iii) That if the petitioners fail to deposit the 
amounts 
as 
aforesaid, 
the 
Delhi 
Development Authority will be free to act in 
accordance with the impugned order dated 
21-12-1990 of High Court in CWP No. 2371 
of 1980. 
 
(iv) That the petitioners shall not induct any 
person in the building or create any right in 
favour of any third party. 
(v) That the matter be listed for further orders 
before this Court on 9-4-1991.” 
 
18. In utter disregard to the interim order passed by this Court, 
Skipper Construction issued advertisements in the leading 
newspapers seeking to create third party rights. Consequently, 
vide order dated 25th January 1993, the Special Leave Petition 
( filed by the Skipper Construction came to 
be dismissed. By virtue of the dismissal of the SLP, DDA on 10th 
February 1993 re-entered and took physical possession of the 
said property, free from all encumbrances. The monies paid by 
Skipper Construction were also forfeited. 

19. Notwithstanding all these, Skipper Construction filed yet 
another suit on the original side of the High Court of Delhi, being 
Suit No. 770 of 1993 for the reliefs of— 
(i) permanent injunction restraining the DDA from interfering 
with the title and possession of the property; 
(ii) for mandatory injunction directing the DDA to recompute 
the principal amount and interest payable by Skipper 
Construction; 
(iii) for a declaration that the present calculations are wrong; 
(iv) for a declaration that re-entry/re-possession and 
determination of the rights of Skipper Construction are bad 
in law and non est; 
(v) for a declaration that all dues have been paid by Skipper 
Construction to the DDA; and 
(vi) a declaration that clause 15 of the licence agreement dated 
11-8-1987 is non est and bad in law. 
20. The observations of this Court in paragraph 35 in the case 
of Skipper Construction (supra), which read as under, and 

which are heavily relied on by Shri Amar Dave, learned Senior 
Counsel have to be read in this factual background. 
“35. Mr Arun Jaitley, learned counsel for the 
DDA would submit that the filing of Suit No. 
770 of 1993 is nothing but an abuse of 
process of court. The matter had reached 
finality by orders of this Court. Yet to say the 
suit was filed to protect the rights of the 
contemners is ingenious. By filing a suit (No. 
770 of 1993) and obstructing the course of 
justice after this Court dismissed SLP (C) No. 
186 of 1991, is a clear case of criminal 
contempt as laid down in Advocate General, 
State of Bihar v. Madhya Pradesh Khair 
Industries [(1980), 315: 1980 SCC 
(Cri) 688]. This Court had come down heavily 
upon persons who indulge in obstructionist 
methods to defeat or delay justice as laid 
down 
in Bloom 
Dekor 
Ltd. v. Subhash 
Himatlal Desai [(1994), 327].” 
 
21. It could thus be seen that after the matter reached finality 
by the orders of this Court, the suit was filed to protect the rights 
of the contemners. This Court found such a conduct to be 
ingenious. This Court found that filing a suit and obstructing 
the course of justice after this Court dismissed Special Leave 
Petition (, was a clear case of criminal 
contempt. 

22. Similarly, the observations made by this Court in 
paragraphs 54 to 57, which read as under, have to be construed 
in the background of the aforesaid factual scenario. 
“54. The filing of the Suit No. 770 of 1993 is 
nothing but a wilful action on the part of the 
contemners to undermine the dignity of this 
Court and the majesty of law. The conduct of 
the contemners tends to bring the authority 
and administration of law into disrespect or 
even disregard. It equally tends to interfere 
with or prejudice the litigants during the 
litigation. Abuse of the process of court 
calculated to hamper the due course of 
judicial 
proceeding 
or 
the 
orderly 
administration of justice is a contempt of 
court. 
In Advocate 
General, 
State 
of 
Bihar v. Madhya 
Pradesh 
Khair 
Industries [AIR 1962 SC 1089: 1962 Supp (3) 
SCR 127] at page 315, this Court observed: 
(SCC para 7) 
“While we are conscious that every abuse 
of the process of the court may not 
necessarily amount to contempt of court, 
abuse of the process of the court calculated 
to hamper the due course of a judicial 
proceeding or the orderly administration of 
justice, we must say, is a contempt of court. 
It may be that certain minor abuses of the 
process of the court may be suitably dealt 
with as between the parties, by striking out 
pleadings under the provisions of Order 6, 
Rule 16 or in some other manner. But, on 

the other hand, it may be necessary to 
punish as a contempt, a course of conduct 
which abuses and makes a mockery of the 
judicial process and which thus extends its 
pernicious influence beyond the parties to 
the action and effects the interest of the 
public in the administration of justice.” 
 
55. Again as stated by Sir John Donaldson 
in Attorney General v. Newspaper Publishing 
plc [(1987) 3 All ER 276], C.J. Miller Contempt 
of Court, 1989, Clarendon Press, Oxford: 
“An action for contempt of court arose— 
‘where the conduct complained of is 
specifically intended to impede or prejudice 
the administration of justice. Such an 
intent cannot be expressly avowed or 
admitted, but can be inferred from all the 
circumstances including the foreseeability 
of the consequences of the conduct’.” 
 
56. At this stage, it is worthwhile for us to 
quote Lord Hardwicke, L.C. in St. James's 
Evening Post [(1742) 2 Atk 469, 471: 26 ER 
683]: 
“There cannot be anything of greater 
consequence, than to keep the streams of 
justice clear and pure, that parties may 
proceed with safety both to themselves and 
their characters.” 

57. Thus, we are clearly of the opinion that the 
contemners are guilty of criminal contempt as 
defined under Section 2(c) of the Act.” 
 
CONCLUSION 
23. It can thus be seen that the facts in the case of Skipper 
Construction (supra) are totally different from the facts of the 
present case. 
24. In the present case, there is no adjudication. No doubt that 
the consent terms entered into between one of the predecessors-
in-title of the respondents and the Original Owners have received 
the imprimatur of the Court. However, the respondents claiming 
their ancestral rights over more than 2000 acres of land and also 
claiming that the said consent decree was obtained in collusion, 
had filed the suit in question. Not only this, but the appellant 
has participated in the said proceedings. At his instance, 
preliminary issues have been framed with regard to limitation 
and res judicata. Further, the application for rejection of the 
plaint under Order VII Rule 11(d) of the CPC has also been 
rejected. 

25. We find that, by no stretch of imagination, it could be said 
that the filing of the suit for asserting the rights of the 
plaintiffs/respondents could be said to be amounting to 
contempt of the Court. 
26. In that view of the matter, we find that no interference is 
warranted in the impugned order. The appeal is accordingly 
dismissed. There will be no order as to costs. 
27. Needless to state that the observations made hereinabove 
are only restricted to the maintainability of the contempt 
proceedings. They shall have no bearing on the proceedings of 
the suit which will be decided on its own merits. 
28. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
…… 
[B.R. GAVAI] 

…… 
[RAJESH BINDAL] 

…… 
[SANDEEP MEHTA] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
MARCH 06, 2024