IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3866-3867 OF 2024 
 SLP (C) NOS. 10361-10362 OF 2023 
THE TRAVANCORE DEVASWOM BOARD...APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
AYYAPPA SPICES & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
Tirth and prasad offered at places of worship are regarded as 
sacred and bond the worshiper with the worshipped. While in 
temples and gurudwaras, prasad or bhog may be an essential part 
of their religion, it is not uncommon for other places of worship to 
serve some food, toast or drink as a religious offering. 
3. 
As of 2019, it is believed that India has a place of worship for 
every 400 people. While in most of these religious places, food is 
prepared and served at a large scale on special occasions, there 
are hundreds of temples and gurudwaras, which serve tens of 

thousands of devotees twice every day. Several temples and 
gurudwaras have their own unique and traditional way of 
preparing the prasad or bhog like the Laddu of Tirupati and Karah 
Prasad of the Golden Temple at Amritsar1. Though somewhat 
connected with divine blessing in the form of prasad or bhog, this 
case draws us back to aggressive competing business interests - 
for supply of 7000 kilograms of cardamom for making Aravana 
Prasadam. 
4. 
Travancore Devaswom Board is in appeal challenging the 
decision of the High Court of Kerala2 allowing the writ petition 
filed as a public interest litigation by respondent company in a 
contract by tender for sourcing raw material for preparation of 
Aravana Prasadam in the Sabarimala Temple. By the first 
impugned order dated 27.03.2023, the High Court confirmed the 
order restraining distribution of Aravana Prasadam and by the 
second impugned order dated 11.04.2023, the High Court finally 
allowed the writ petition and directed – (i) prosecution of the 
appellant board for violation of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 
 
1 Guidance Document for Maintaining Food Safety & Hygiene in Places of Worship, Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India, 1st Edition, January 2018. 
 
2 order dated 27.03.2023 in I.A. No. 3 of 2023 and judgment and final order 
dated 11.04.2023 passed by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in W.P. No. 41743 of 
2022. 

20063; (ii) that the appellant board is a ‘food business operator’ as 
per Section 3(1)(j) of the Act; and (iii) that the seized stock shall be 
destroyed in accordance with law. 
Facts: 
5. 
The appellant-Board is a statutory and an autonomous body 
which manages certain temples in the southern part of India, 
including the Sabarimala Temple. One of the many functions of 
the appellant-Board, in so far as the Sabarimala Temple is 
concerned, is the preparation and distribution of the Aravana 
Prasadam. The appellant-Board is also tasked with procuring the 
raw material necessary for its preparation. One such raw material 
is cardamom. In order to procure the same, the appellant-Board 
issues tenders in frequent intervals. Respondent no. 1 was the 
successful bidder in 2021 and it supplied 9000 kilograms of 
cardamom to the appellant-Board for the years 2021-2022. 
6. 
In order to procure cardamoms for the period from 
01.11.2022 to 30.09.2023, the appellant-Board issued a tender on 
16.06.2022. However, this tender was cancelled as all the bidders 
supplied cardamom which contained pesticides beyond the 
 
3 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’. permissible limit. A fresh tender came to be issued on 24.08.2022 
and this was also cancelled for the same reason. It is an admitted 
position that respondent no. 1 has participated in these tenders. 
7. 
Since the first two tenders had failed to fetch an appropriate 
bid, the appellant-Board issued a third tender on 12.10.2022. 
However, as the festive season was fast-approaching, the 
appellant-Board was constrained to invoke the urgency clause and 
authorise the Executive Officer of Sabarimala Temple to procure 
cardamom from local sources. Accordingly, on 04.11.2022, since 
a decent number of cardamom traders were present in the temple 
premises, a notice inviting quotations along with samples was 
published on the notice board of the Sabarimala Temple. 
8. 
Pursuant to the above notice, four bids were received. 
Respondent no. 1 was not one of them. The cardamom samples 
submitted by these four bidders was subjected to testing at the 
Quality Testing Laboratory at Pamba, a place located close to the 
Temple. Two out of the four samples failed to meet the minimum 
standards. Subsequent to price negotiations with the remaining 
two bidders, respondent no. 2 was given supply orders aggregating 
to 7000 kilograms of cardamom. However, at the instance of the 
other bidders, the samples submitted by respondent no. 2 were 

sent 
for 
re-examination 
to 
Government 
Analysts 
Lab, 
Thiruvananthapuram, and the report dated 03.12.2022 said that 
the cardamom samples submitted by respondent no. 2 contained 
pesticides above the permissible threshold. 
9. 
It is at this stage that respondent no. 1 filed a writ petition 
before the High Court seeking the following two reliefs: 
“Issue a writ of mandamus or appropriate writ, direction 
or order to the respondents to conduct an analysis of the 
cardamom which was purchased after cancellation of 
Ext. 
P9 
tender 
at 
Government 
Analytical 
Lab 
Thiruvananthapuram under the supervision of this 
Court. 
Issue a writ of Certiorari or appropriate writ, direction to 
the respondents to cancel the local purchase of 
cardamom as it was done without competition and 
newspaper advertisement.” 
10. After taking cognizance of the matter, the High Court passed 
an order dated 23.12.2022 directing the sample to be subjected to 
re-examination 
at 
the 
Government 
Analyst 
Laboratory, 
Thiruvananthapuram. The resultant report dated 28.12.2022 was 
nothing different from the previous report, labelling the cardamom 
as ‘unsafe’. In fact, even the Commissioner of Food Safety through 
his report dated 05.01.2023 termed the product as ‘unsafe’. 
Further, the High Court through its order dated 06.01.2023 
directed the samples to be sent to the FSSAI Office at Kochi for re-

examination. Even FSSAI, Kochi, termed the product as ‘unsafe’ 
through its report dated 11.01.2023. Therefore, placing reliance on 
these developments, the High Court of Kerala by its order dated 
11.01.2023 restrained the appellant-Board from distributing the 
Aravana Prasadam and directed the sealing of the warehouse 
where the Aravana Prasadam was stored. 
11. Pending disposal of the writ petition, the appellant-Board filed 
I.A. No. 3 of 2023 on 17.01.2023 before the High Court. Through 
this application, it sought the following relief: 
“[…] permit the petitioners to draw sample, from the 
stock of Aravana kept sealed, through the food safety 
officers and to send the same for analysis to any 
laboratory accredited by FSSAI to test whether the 
Aravana prasadam confirms to the food standards 
prescribed by FSSAI and is safe for human consumption, 
in the interest of justice, pending disposal of the writ 
petition.” 
In this application, it was asserted that the sale of prasadam was 
stopped on 11.01.2023. It stated that the available stock of 
6,65,159 cans of prasadam, balance stock of 800 grams of 
cardamom, and 43.92 kilograms of cardamom powder were sealed. 
While this was to be sampled by the Government Analyst’s 
Laboratory, Thiruvananthapuram, the appellant-Board sought 
that the same be sampled by another laboratory in parallel. 

12. The writ petition itself came to be partly disposed of by the 
High Court through the impugned interim order dated 27.03.2023, 
where the High Court dismissed the I.A. No. 3 of 2023. The High 
Court relied on the tests conducted previously to dismiss the said 
application. It further held that the appellant-Board falls under the 
definition of “food business operator”, for the purposes of section 
3(1)(j) of the Act, with a co-relative obligation to ensure that the 
food sold / distributed, and the raw material used for its 
preparation are safe and pure. Eventually, the final impugned 
order came to be passed on 11.04.2023 where the High Court 
allowed the writ petition, and the impugned interim order dated 
27.03.2023 was affirmed. It further ordered the destruction of the 
seized stock and directed that appropriate criminal proceedings be 
initiated. The appellant-Board has filed the instant appeals against 
the above-referred two orders. 
Before this Court: 
13. This Court issued notice on 15.05.2023, and stayed the 
orders impugned herein. By the same order FSSAI was directed to 
get an analysis of the Aravana Prasadam and file a report before 
this Court. The relevant portion of this direction is as follows: 
“Further, the competent authority under the Food 
Safety and Standards of India (FSSAI) shall, in the 

meanwhile, take random samples for the stock of 
Aravanam Prasadam available and get an 
analysis done with regard to the quality and as to 
whether the same is fit for human consumption.” 
14. Pursuant to our direction, the FSSAI got the sample analysed 
and filed a report of its opinion before this Court on 12.06.2023. 
The relevant portion of the opinion is as follows: 
“Opinion: 
1. Pesticides mentioned in the analytical report are 
below limit of quantification and is satisfactory. 
2. Microbiological parameters conforms to ready to 
eat grain products and is not substandard. Based 
on the above analytical report it is fit for 
consumption.” 
Submissions: 
15. At the outset, Sri V. Giri, learned senior counsel appearing 
for the appellant-Board, submitted that even though the report of 
FSSAI called by this Court clarifies that the Aravana Prasadam is 
fit for human consumption, the appellant-Board is no longer 
desirous to distribute the Prasadam in view of the long lapse of 
time. We had taken note of the statement and proceeded to hear 
the submission of the parties. 
15.1 On merits, Sri Giri submitted that the writ petition was a 
motivated one. It was submitted that respondent no. 1 had 
concealed the fact that he had supplied cardamom in the past and 
also that he had contested the earlier two tenders which later came 

to be cancelled. It was further submitted that the filing of the writ 
petition suggests unresolved business conflicts and underlying 
rivalry. In this light, it was contended that the High Court should 
not have entertained the writ petition and should have dismissed 
it at the very threshold. He relied on the decisions of this Court in 
S.P. Gupta v. Union of India, 1981 Supp SCC 87 and Ashok 
Kumar Pandey v. State of West Bengal, (2004) for 
this purpose. 
15.2 The second leg of Mr. Giri’s submission is against the 
determination of appellant-Board as a “food business operator”. It 
is contended that Aravana Prasadam is not a sale for revenue or 
profits, but considered as an offering to devotees. It was submitted 
that the Aravana Prasadam holds religious significance to 
devotees, and is treated as an offering from the deity itself. 
Therefore, subjecting it to stringent regulations under the Act 
would hinder its object, purpose and functions. He also submitted 
that the Board itself takes all measures to ensure that the health 
of the devotees is never compromised. As a matter of principle, it 
is submitted that Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and 
Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011, do not 

contemplate regulating religious offerings integral to religious and 
cultural practices. 
16. Learned counsel appearing for respondent no. 1 made 
submissions regarding their bonafide action in initiating the PIL in 
this case. It asserted that its primary intent was not to hinder the 
distribution of Aravana Prasadam but to highlight malpractices 
within the administration of the Sabarimala Temple, one such 
issue is the opaque manner in which the supply order was issued 
to respondent no. 2 i.e., without open tenders. The respondent no. 
1 also raised an issue regarding the supply order being issued 
without a proper quality check. 
17. Sri Natraj, learned ASG, representing the Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare and FSSAI, submitted that he is not concerned 
with the factual matrix of the case but confined his arguments to 
the legal issue. He submitted that prasadam is understood as 
offerings made to a deity and returned to devotees. It is considered 
sacred. While it is sacred and symbolical, it is not meant for 
appetite satiation. He also submitted that there is no fundamental 
or statutory right to enforce a specific form or standard of 
prasadam. He would submit that judicial review based on an 

individual’s claim of quality is not permissible, and therefore, the 
High Court should not have interfered in the matter. 
18. Two questions emerge for our consideration – (i) whether the 
writ petition at the behest of respondent no. 1 should have been 
entertained by the High Court; and (ii) whether the appellant-
Board qualifies as a “food business operator” as defined under 
Section 3(1)(j) of the Act. 
Re: Whether the writ petition at the behest of Respondent No. 
1 should have been entertained by the High Court? 
 
19. The principle that in matters of public tenders for 
procurement, judicial review is restrained is well established4. In 
cases where a party invoking writ jurisdiction has been a 
participant in the tender process, courts should be slow and 
cautious in exercising the power of judicial review. In a recent 
decision, UFLEX Ltd. v. Government of Tamil Nadu, Civil 
Appeal Nos. 4862-63 of 2021, this Court has held that 
constitutional courts should exercise caution while interfering in 
contractual and tender matters, disguised as public interest 
litigations. The following observations are important for the 
purpose of this case: 
 
4 Tata Cellular v. Union of India, (1994), Michigan Rubber v. State of Karnataka, 
(2012), Caretel Infotech Ltd. v. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited & Ors., 
(2019). 

“1. The enlarged role of the Government in economic 
activity and its corresponding ability to give economic 
“largesse” was the bedrock of creating what is 
commonly called the “tender jurisdiction”. The objective 
was to have greater transparency and the consequent 
right of an aggrieved party to invoke the jurisdiction of 
the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of 
India, beyond the issue of strict enforcement of 
contractual rights under the civil jurisdiction. However, 
the ground reality today is that almost no tender remains 
unchallenged. Unsuccessful parties or parties not even 
participating in the tender seek to invoke the jurisdiction 
of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution. 
The public interest litigation (PIL) jurisdiction is also 
invoked towards the same objective, an aspect normally 
deterred by the Court because this causes proxy 
litigation in purely contractual matters. 
2. The judicial review of such contractual matters has its 
own limitations. It is in this context of judicial review of 
administrative actions that this Court has opined that it 
is intended to prevent arbitrariness, irrationality, 
unreasonableness, bias, and mala fides. The purpose is 
to check whether the choice of decision is made lawfully 
and not to check whether the choice of decision is sound. 
In evaluating tenders and awarding contracts, the 
parties are to be governed by principles of commercial 
prudence. To that extent, principles of equity and natural 
justice have to stay at a distance. 
3. We cannot lose sight of the fact that a tenderer or 
contractor with a grievance can always seek damages 
in a civil court and thus, “attempts by unsuccessful 
tenderers with imaginary grievances, wounded pride 
and business rivalry, to make mountains out of molehills 
of some technical/procedural violation or some prejudice 
to self, and persuade courts to interfere by exercising 
power of judicial review, should be resisted.” 
20. We find merit in the argument of the appellant-Board that 
respondent no. 1 could not have invoked the jurisdiction of the 

High Court, being an interested party. The reliance placed by the 
appellant-Board on the precedent of this Court in Ashok Kumar 
Pandey (supra) is apposite. In a similar context, this Court held: 
“4. When there is material to show that a petition styled 
as a public interest litigation is nothing but a camouflage 
to foster personal disputes, the said petition is to be 
thrown out. Before we grapple with the issue involved in 
the present case, we feel it necessary to consider the 
issue regarding public interest aspect. Public interest 
litigation which has now come to occupy an important 
field in the administration of law should not be “publicity 
interest litigation” or “private interest litigation” or 
“politics interest litigation” or the latest trend “paise 
income litigation”. If not properly regulated and abuse 
averted it also becomes a tool in unscrupulous hands to 
release vendetta and wreak vengeance as well. There 
must be real and genuine public interest involved in the 
litigation and not merely an adventure of a knight errant 
or poke one's nose into for a probe. It cannot also be 
invoked by a person or a body of persons to further his 
or their personal causes or satisfy his or their personal 
grudge and enmity. Courts of justice should not be 
allowed to be polluted by unscrupulous litigants by 
resorting to the extraordinary jurisdiction. A person 
acting bona fide and having sufficient interest in the 
proceeding of public interest litigation will alone have a 
locus standi and can approach the court to wipe out 
violation of fundamental rights and genuine infraction of 
statutory provisions, but not for personal gain or private 
profit or political motive or any oblique consideration. 
These aspects were highlighted by this Court in Janata 
Dal case [(1992): 1993 SCC (Cri) 36] and Kazi 
Lhendup Dorji v. Central Bureau of Investigation [1994 
Supp (2) SCC 116: 1994 SCC (Cri) 873]. A writ petitioner 
who comes to the court for relief in public interest must 
come not only with clean hands like any other writ 
petitioner but also with a clean heart, clean mind and 
clean objective. See Ramjas Foundation v. Union of India 

[1993 Supp (2) SCC 20: AIR 1993 SC 852] and K.R. 
Srinivas v. R.M. Premchand [(1994) ]. 
12. Public interest litigation is a weapon which has to be 
used with great care and circumspection and the 
judiciary has to be extremely careful to see that behind 
the beautiful veil of public interest an ugly private malice, 
vested interest and/or publicity-seeking is not lurking. It 
is to be used as an effective weapon in the armoury of 
law for delivering social justice to citizens. The attractive 
brand name of public interest litigation should not be 
used for suspicious products of mischief. It should be 
aimed at redressal of genuine public wrong or public 
injury and not publicity-oriented or founded on personal 
vendetta. As indicated above, court must be careful to 
see that a body of persons or a member of the public, 
who approaches the court is acting bona fide and not for 
personal gain or private motive or political motivation or 
other oblique consideration....” 
21. In the present case, respondent no. 1, the writ petitioner, is 
an interested party. It had supplied cardamom to the appellant-
Board for the year 2021-2022. It had also participated in the two 
tenders released by the appellant-Board, which later came to be 
cancelled. Although this information has not been concealed, it is 
quite evident that the writ petitioner was interested in the outcome 
of the writ petition. The second prayer in the writ petition, which 
has been extracted before, is for cancellation of the purchase of 
cardamom from respondent no. 2. This prayer makes it clear that 
the real grievance is about the grant of contract in favour of 
respondent no. 2. The High Court should not have entertained the 

writ petition on behalf of an interested person who sought to 
convert a judicial review proceeding for enhancing personal gain. 
22. This writ petition also challenged the manner in which the 
cardamom was sourced. We cannot lose sight of the fact that the 
appellant-Board initially tried to purchase cardamom by issuing 
tenders and calling for bids, not just once, but twice over. However, 
these tenders were cancelled since none of the bidder’s supplied 
cardamom of appropriate quality. It is in these compelling 
circumstances, considering the impending festive season and the 
imminent need to prepare a humungous quantity of Aravana 
Prasadam, that the appellant-Board invoked the urgency clause in 
its regulations and authorised the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Sabarimala Temple to procure cardamom from local sources. 
Thus, it cannot be said that the decision is arbitrary, irrational or 
unreasonable. There is neither arbitrariness nor malice in the 
decision of the appellant-Board as all the prospective bidders were 
given a fair chance as the notice to purchase cardamom was 
published on the notice board. The cardamom samples submitted 
by the bidders were then tested in a nearby lab, which was also 
established by the Commissioner of Food Safety as per an order of 
the High Court. Thereafter, price negotiations were conducted, and 

respondent no. 2 was given supply orders after quoting the lowest 
rates. We are of the opinion that the decision of the appellant-
Board is legal, fair and transparent. For the above reasons, we are 
of the view that the High Court committed an error in entertaining 
the writ petition filed by respondent no. 1. 
23. In view of the above discussion we are of the opinion that the 
High Court should have dismissed the Writ Petition on the 
question of maintainability itself. In this view of the matter, issue 
no. 2 relating to applicability of the Act to the appellant Board does 
not arise for consideration in this case. 
24. After hearing the parties and at the time of reserving the 
judgment on 03.11.2023, we passed the following order:- 
“… 
At this stage, the learned senior counsel for the 
petitioner(s) would submit that the stock of Aravanam 
Prasadam, which was to be distributed earlier, but 
prevented pursuant to the interim and final orders of 
the High Court, is still lying in the premises but the 
petitioner-Board is not intending of using the same. 
In that regard, we take note of the report filed on 
behalf of the Food Safety and Standard Authority of 
India (FSSAI) which would indicate that Aravanam 
Prasadam is fit for human consumption. 
 However, as the petitioner-Board itself has taken 
a decision that the Aravanam Prasadam will not be 
distributed, the stock presently existing will have to be 
destroyed as per the appropriate procedure as 
indicated by the State Government. 

Under these circumstances, we direct the State 
Government to destroy/dispose of the existing stock of 
Aravanam Prasadam in an appropriate manner by 
following the necessary procedure. For this purpose, we 
also direct the Travancore Devaswom Board to extend 
complete co-operation and ensure that the stock is 
destroyed/disposed as it is stated that the next season 
for opening of the temple is due and fresh Aravanam 
Prasadam will have to be stored. 
All necessary steps may be taken by the State 
Government and the Travancore Devaswom Board as 
expeditiously as possible.” 
 
25. In conclusion, we allow the appeals and set aside the 
Impugned Interim Order dated 27.03.2023 in I.A. No. 3 of 2023 
and the impugned final judgment dated 11.04.2023 passed by a 
Division Bench of the High Court in W.P. No. 41743 of 2022, and 
hold that there was no illegality or arbitrariness in awarding the 
contract to respondent no. 2. 
26. Pending application(s) shall be disposed of accordingly. 
27. There shall be no order as to costs. 
 
……..……………………………….J. 
 [A.S. Bopanna] 

…………….………………………….J. 
 [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha] 
New Delhi. 
March 06, 2024.