IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

XXXX 

… Appellant(s) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH 
& ANOTHER 

 … Respondent(s) 
 
JUDGMENT 
Rajesh Bindal, J. 
 
1. 
 
The appellant in the present case is aggrieved of the order1 
passed by the High Court2 whereby a petition3 filed by him under Section 
482 Cr.P.C. for quashing of FIR4 was dismissed. 
2. 
 
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the FIR in the 
case in hand, which was got registered by respondent No.2/complainant 
 
1 Order dated 01.08.2022 
2 High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur 
3 M.CR.C. No. 15992 of 2021 
4 FIR No. 52 dated 11.12.2020 registered at P.S. Mahila Thana, Dist. Satna, (M.P.) 
 under Sections 376(2)(n) and 506 IPC 

is nothing else but an abuse of process of law. The complainant was a 
married lady having a grown up daughter of 15 years of age living with 
her parents. Claiming that in the same house, the appellant was having 
physical relations with her with the consent of her parents and daughter 
will be hard to believe that too when she was already married. There 
could not be any question of promise to marry given by the appellant to 
her at that stage. There are large discrepancies in the complaint made to 
the police on the basis of which the FIR was registered if considered in 
the light of the statement which the complainant got recorded under 
Section 164 Cr.P.C. The relations between the parties are shown to be 
consensual, if any. The mis-statement by the complainant is evident from 
the fact that she claimed to have got divorce from the earlier marriage on 
10.12. 2018 and married with the appellant in a temple in January 2019 but 
it is belied from the fact that decree of divorce from the earlier marriage 
of the complainant was passed only on 13.01.2021. There was no question 
of any marriage prior thereto. The initiation of proceedings against the 
appellant being an abuse of process of law deserve to be quashed. In 
support of the arguments, reliance was placed upon the decisions of this 

Court in Naim Ahamed v. State (NCT of Delhi)5 and Prashant Bharti v. 
State (NCT of Delhi)6. 
3. 
 
Learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
State 
submitted 
that 
after 
investigation, charge-sheet has already been filed. The Courts are 
normally slow to quash the FIR at that stage. In the case in hand, allegation 
of rape on false promise to marry is clearly made out. At the stage of 
quashing, only the contents in the FIR could be seen. On a perusal thereof, 
a clear case is made out against the appellant. 
4. 
 
Learned counsel for the complainant submitted that on 
account of dispute with her husband from the earlier marriage, the 
complainant was living with her parents. She, at that time, was having a 
grown up daughter aged 15 years. The appellant was living in their house 
as a tenant. Finding that the complainant in disturbed matrimonial life, 
from the advances made by the appellant, the complainant fell in the trap. 
On a false promise to marry, both had started having physical relations. 
They had even solemnized marriage in a temple in January 2019. Even 
her family also knew about their relations and marriage. It was all in good 
faith on the promise made by the appellant as the appellant had even 

6 (2013) 

shown the complainant as a nominee in an insurance policy purchased by 
him. With these facts on record, a clear case of rape on false promise to 
marry is made out against the appellant. The FIR does not deserve to be 
quashed at the initial stage. 
5. 
 
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper 
book. 
6. 
 
Firstly, we refer to the stand taken by the complainant in the 
FIR and the statement she got recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. There 
are discrepancies therein. 
6.1 
In the FIR, she stated that she was managing her own cloth 
shop. As there was a dispute with her husband, she was living separately. 
On 10.12.2018, she got divorce from her husband. She has a daughter 
aged 15 years. In 2017, Sadbhav Company had taken first floor of their 
house on rent in which the appellant, who was working with the company, 
stayed. During spare time, he would come and sit on her shop. Gradually, 
the relations developed. As she was living separate from her husband, 
the appellant proposed that in case she takes divorce, he will marry her. 
After the divorce of the complainant, on 10.01.2019, at about 11.00 PM, the 
appellant came to her room and had physical relations. He did not stop 

even when she said that they were yet to be married. Further, on a 
promise to marry, he had relations with her on 06.06.2020. When she 
insisted for marriage, the appellant said that his family was not agreeing. 
Finally, he refused on 11.12.2020. Thereafter, the FIR was got recorded on 
11.12.2020. 
6.2 
While getting her statement recorded under Section 164 
Cr.P.C., she admitted that she knew the appellant since 2017. On account 
of dispute with her husband, she was living with her parents. As she got 
acquainted with the appellant, they fell in love. In 2018, the appellant went 
to Maharashtra for job. However, he used to visit her home and take care 
of the complainant as well as her daughter. In 2019, the appellant assured 
the complainant that he will marry her in case she takes divorce from her 
husband who used to harass and beat her. For this reason, she divorced 
her husband and solemnized marriage with the appellant in a temple in 
January 2019. Thereafter, they started living together with her daughter 
born from the previous marriage. Despite assurance, the appellant did 
not solemnize court marriage. After marriage was solemnized in temple, 
treating the appellant as her husband, they both started leading a married 
life having physical relations from January 2019 till June 2020. The 

appellant treated the complainant as his wife. Thereafter, the appellant 
refused to respond to her calls and even marry her. 
6.3 
There was complete change in the stand of the complainant in 
her statement recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. The fact remains that 
the parties admittedly were in relations from 2017 onwards. Some alleged 
promise to marry came in January 2019, from where they started having 
physical relations. It has also come on record that it is not only the consent 
of the complainant which is clearly evident but also of the parents and 
daughter of the complainant as they were living in the same house, where 
allegedly the appellant and the complainant were having physical 
relations. 
7. 
 
Further, in the FIR the complainant stated that she got divorce 
from her earlier husband on 10.12.2018. In the statement under Section 
164 Cr.P.C., she stated that marriage between the appellant and the 
complainant was solemnized in a temple in January 2019. However, the 
date of divorce as claimed by the complainant is belied from the copy of 
the decree annexed with the appeal as Annexure P-9, where divorce by 
mutual consent was granted to the complainant and her husband vide 
judgment dated 13.01.2021. The aforesaid fact could not be disputed. 

Meaning thereby, the complainant besides the facts in the FIR and also in 
the statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. regarding her divorce from the 
earlier marriage, sought to claim that she had re-married with the 
appellant during subsistence of her earlier marriage. 
8. 
 
From the contents of the complaint, on the basis of which FIR 
was got registered and the statement got recorded by the complainant, it 
is evident that there was no promise to marry initially when the relations 
between the parties started in the year 2017. In any case, even on the 
dates when the complainant alleges that the parties had physical 
relations, she was already married. She falsely claimed that divorce from 
her earlier marriage took place on 10.12.2018. However, the fact remains 
that decree of divorce was passed only on 13.01.2021. It is not a case 
where the complainant was of an immature age who could not foresee her 
welfare and take right decision. She was a grown up lady about ten years 
elder to the appellant. She was matured and intelligent enough to 
understand the consequences of the moral and immoral acts for which she 
consented during subsistence of her earlier marriage. In fact, it was a case 
of betraying her husband. It is the admitted case of the prosecutrix that 
even after the appellant shifted to Maharashtra for his job, he used to 

come and stay with the family and they were living as husband and wife. 
It was also the stand taken by the appellant that he had advanced loan of 
₹1,00,000/- to the prosecutrix through banking channel which was not 
returned back. 
9. 
 
 Similar issue was considered by this Court in Naim 
Ahamed’s case (supra) on almost identical facts where the prosecutrix 
herself was already a married woman having three children. The 
complaint of alleged rape on false promise of marriage was made five 
years after they had started having relations. She even got pregnant from 
the loins of the accused. Therein she got divorce from her existing 
marriage much after the relations between the parties started. This Court 
found that there cannot be any stretch of imagination that the prosecutrix 
had given her consent for sexual relationship under misconception. The 
accused was not held to be guilty. Relevant paragraph 21 thereof is 
extracted below: 
“21. 
In the instant case, the prosecutrix who 
herself was a married woman having three children, 
could not be said to have acted under the alleged false 
promise given by the appellant or under the 

misconception of fact while giving the consent to have 
sexual relationship with the appellant. Undisputedly, 
she continued to have such relationship with him at least 
for about five years till she gave complaint in the year 
2015. Even if the allegations made by her in her 
deposition before the court, are taken on their face 
value, then also to construe such allegations as ‘rape’ 
by the appellant, would be stretching the case too far. 
The prosecutrix being a married woman and the mother 
of three children was matured and intelligent enough to 
understand the significance and the consequences of 
the moral or immoral quality of act she was consenting 
to. Even otherwise, if her entire conduct during the 
course of such relationship with the accused, is closely 
seen, it appears that she had betrayed her husband and 
three children by having relationship with the accused, 
for whom she had developed liking for him. She had 
gone to stay with him during the subsistence of her 
marriage with her husband, to live a better life with the 
accused. Till the time she was impregnated by the 

accused in the year 2011, and she gave birth to a male 
child through the loin of the accused, she did not have 
any complaint against the accused of he having given 
false promise to marry her or having cheated her. She 
also visited the native place of the accused in the year 
2012 and came to know that he was a married man 
having children also, still she continued to live with the 
accused at another premises without any grievance. 
She even obtained divorce from her husband by mutual 
consent in 2014, leaving her three children with her 
husband. It was only in the year 2015 when some 
disputes must have taken place between them, that she 
filed the present complaint. The accused in his further 
statement recorded under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. had 
stated that she had filed the complaint as he refused to 
fulfill her demand to pay her huge amount. Thus, having 
regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, it 
could not be said by any stretch of imagination that the 
prosecutrix had given her consent for the sexual 
relationship with the appellant under the misconception 

of fact, so as to hold the appellant guilty of having 
committed rape within the meaning of Section 375 of 
IPC.” 
9.1 
 
The aforesaid arguments squarely cover the legal issue raised 
by the appellant. 
10. 
 
For the reasons mentioned above, the impugned order passed 
by the High Court is set aside. FIR No.52 dated 11.12.2020, registered 
under Section 376(2)(n) and 506 IPC at Police Station, Mahila Thana, 
District Satna (M.P.) and all subsequent proceedings thereto are quashed. 
11. 
 
The appeal is accordingly allowed. 

……………….……………..J. 
 (C.T. RAVIKUMAR) 
 
……………….……………..J. 
(RAJESH BINDAL) 
 
New Delhi 
March 6, 2024.