IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Javed Ahmad Hajam 

 … Appellant 
 
versus 
 
State of Maharashtra & Anr. 
 
 … Respondents 

JUDGMENT 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
A First Information Report (for short, ‘the impugned FIR’) 
was registered against the appellant for the offence punishable 
under Section 153-A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, 
‘the IPC’). The appellant filed a writ petition before the High 
Court of Judicature at Bombay for quashing the FIR. By the 
impugned judgment dated 10th April 2023, the High Court has 
dismissed the writ petition. 
2. 
The appellant was a Professor at Sanjay Ghodawat 
College in District Kolhapur, Maharashtra. He came to 
Kolhapur for employment. Earlier, he was a permanent 
resident of District Baramulla, Kashmir. The appellant was a 
member of a WhatsApp group. The allegation of commission of 

offence is based on what was seen on his WhatsApp status. 
The State Government has set out the precise text appearing 
on the WhatsApp status of the appellant in its counter affidavit. 
Clauses (c) and (d) of paragraph 3 of the counter affidavit read 
thus: 
 
“3....................... a....................... b....................... c. During the incident, the Petitioner 
was employed as a Professor at 
Sanjay 
Ghodavat 
College. 
 
The 
Petitioner 
was 
a 
member 
of 
a 
WhatsApp group that consisted of 
parents and teachers. Between 
August 13, 2022, and August 15, 
2022, while being part of this 
WhatsApp 
group, 
the 
Petitioner 
posted two messages as their status: 
1. “August 5 – Black Day Jammu & 
Kashmir.” 
2. 
“14th 
August 
– 
Happy 
Independence Day Pakistan.” 
d. Furthermore, after aforementioned 
status, 
the 
Petitioner 
WhatsApp 
status on their mobile included the 
message: 
“Article 

was 
abrogated, we are not happy.” 
Based on these allegations, the 
present FIR was registered under 
Section 153-A of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860, by the Hatkanangale 
Police Station in Kolhapur...........................” 

3. 
By the impugned judgment, the Division Bench of the 
High Court held that what was stated by the appellant 
regarding celebrating Independence Day of Pakistan will not 
come within the purview of Section 153-A of the IPC. However, 
the other objectionable part can attract the offence punishable 
under Section 153-A of the IPC. 
SUBMISSIONS 
4. 
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant 
submitted that by no stretch of the imagination, the words 
written on WhatsApp status by the appellant will promote 
disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between 
different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes 
or communities. He relied upon a decision of this Court in the 
case of Manzar Sayeed Khan v. State of Maharashtra & 
Anr1. He submitted that the prosecution of the appellant was 
a complete abuse of the process of law. The learned counsel 
representing the respondent-State of Maharashtra submitted 
that whether the words or signs of the appellant on his 
WhatsApp status promoted disharmony or feelings of enmity, 
hatred or ill-will between different religious, racial, language or 
regional groups or castes or communities or not, is a matter of 
evidence. He submitted that it is only after examining the 
witnesses that the prosecution can establish the effect of these 
writings or signs on the minds of people. He submitted that at 
this stage, no conclusion regarding the impact of what is 
written by the appellant on the minds of the members of the 
 
1 (2007) 

public can be drawn. He would, therefore, submit that no 
interference is called for with the impugned judgment, and the 
trial may be allowed to proceed. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
The only offence alleged against the appellant is the one 
punishable under Section 153-A of the IPC. Section 153-A of 
the IPC, as it exists with effect from 4th September 1969, reads 
thus: 
“153-A. Promoting enmity between 
different 
groups 
on 
grounds 
of 
religion, 
race, 
place 
of 
birth, 
residence, language, etc., and doing 
acts prejudicial to maintenance of 
harmony.—(1) Whoever— 
(a) by words, either spoken or 
written, or by signs or by visible 
representations 
or 
otherwise, 
promotes or attempts to promote, on 
grounds of religion, race, place of 
birth, residence, language, caste or 
community or any other ground 
whatsoever, disharmony or feelings 
of enmity, hatred or ill-will between 
different religious, racial, language 
or regional groups or castes or 
communities, or 
(b) commits any act which is 
prejudicial to the maintenance of 
harmony 
between 
different 
religious, 
racial, 
language 
or 
regional 
groups 
or 
castes 
or 
communities, and which disturbs or 
is likely to disturb the public 
tranquillity, 

organizes 
any 
exercise, 
movement, drill or other similar 
activity 
intending 
that 
the 
participants in such activity shall 
use or be trained to use criminal 
force or violence or knowing it to be 
likely that the participants in such 
activity will use or be trained to use 
criminal 
force 
or 
violence, 
or 
participates 
in 
such 
activity 
intending to use or be trained to use 
criminal force or violence or knowing 
it to be likely that the participants in 
such activity will use or be trained 
to use criminal force or violence, 
against 
any 
religious, 
racial, 
language or regional group or caste 
or community and such activity for 
any reason whatsoever causes or is 
likely to cause fear or alarm or a 
feeling 
of 
insecurity 
amongst 
members of such religious, racial, 
language or regional group or caste 
or community, 
shall be punished with imprisonment 
which may extend to three years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
(2) Offence committed in place of 
worship, etc.—Whoever commits an 
offence specified in sub-section (1) in 
any place of worship or in any assembly 
engaged in the performance of religious 
worship or religious ceremonies, shall 
be punished with imprisonment which 
may extend to five years and shall also 
be liable to fine.” 
In this case, clause (c) of sub-section (1) of Section 153-A of the 
IPC is admittedly not attracted. 

6. 
In the case of Manzar Sayeed Khan1, while interpreting 
Section 153-A, in paragraph 16, this Court held thus: 
“16. Section 153-A IPC, as extracted 
hereinabove, covers a case where a 
person by words, either spoken or 
written, or by signs or by visible 
representations or otherwise, promotes 
or attempts to promote, disharmony or 
feelings of enmity, hatred or ill will 
between 
different 
religious, 
racial, 
language or regional groups or castes or 
communities or acts prejudicial to the 
maintenance of harmony or is likely to 
disturb the public tranquillity. The gist 
of the offence is the intention to 
promote feelings of enmity or hatred 
between different classes of people. 
The intention to cause disorder or 
incite the people to violence is the 
sine qua non of the offence under 
Section 
153-A 
IPC 
and 
the 
prosecution has to prove prima facie 
the existence of mens rea on the part 
of the accused. The intention has to 
be judged primarily by the language 
of the book and the circumstances in 
which the book was written and 
published. The matter complained of 
within the ambit of Section 153-A 
must be read as a whole. One cannot 
rely on strongly worded and isolated 
passages for proving the charge nor 
indeed can one take a sentence here 
and a sentence there and connect 
them by a meticulous process of 
inferential reasoning.” 
 
(emphasis added) 
 
This Court referred to the view taken by Vivian Bose, J., as a 
Judge of the erstwhile Nagpur High Court in the case of 

Bhagwati Charan Shukla v. Provincial Government2. A 
Division Bench of the High Court dealt with the offence of 
sedition under Section 124-A of the IPC and Section 4(1) of the 
Press (Emergency Powers) Act, 1931. The issue was whether a 
particular article in the press tends, directly or indirectly, to 
bring hatred or contempt to the Government established in law. 
This Court has approved this view in its decision in the case of 
Ramesh v. Union of India3. In the said case, this Court dealt 
with the issue of applicability of Section 153-A of IPC. In 
paragraph 13, it was held thus: 
“the effect of the words must be 
judged 
from 
the 
standards 
of 
reasonable, strong-minded, firm and 
courageous men, and not those of 
weak and vacillating minds, nor of 
those who scent danger in every 
hostile point of view. … It is the 
standard of ordinary reasonable man or 
as they say in English law ‘the man on 
the top of a Clapham omnibus’.” 
(emphasis added) 
Therefore, the yardstick laid down by Vivian Bose, J, will have 
to be applied while judging the effect of the words, spoken or 
written, in the context of Section 153-A of IPC. 
7. 
We may also make a useful reference to a decision of this 
Court in the case of Patricia Mukhim v. State of Meghalaya 
& Ors4. Paragraphs 8 to 10 of the said decision read thus: 
 
 Nag 1 
3 (1988) 
4 (2021) 

8. “It is of utmost importance to keep all 
speech free in order for the truth to 
emerge and have a civil society.”—
Thomas Jefferson. Freedom of speech 
and expression guaranteed by Article 
19(1)(a) of the Constitution is a very 
valuable fundamental right. However, 
the right is not absolute. Reasonable 
restrictions can be placed on the right 
of free speech and expression in the 
interest of sovereignty and integrity of 
India, security of the State, friendly 
relations with foreign States, public 
order, decency or morality or in relation 
to contempt of Court, defamation or 
incitement to an offence. Speech crime 
is punishable under Section 153-A IPC. 
Promotion of enmity between different 
groups on grounds of religion, race, 
place of birth, residence, language, etc. and 
doing 
acts 
prejudicial 
to 
maintenance of harmony is punishable 
with imprisonment which may extend 
to three years or with fine or with both 
under Section 153-A. As we are called 
upon to decide whether a prima facie 
case is made out against the appellant 
for committing offences under Sections 
153-A and 505(1)(c), it is relevant to 
reproduce the provisions which are as 
follows: 
…………………………………………………
…………………………………………………
…………………………………………………
………………………………………………… 
9. Only where the written or spoken 
words have the tendency of creating 
public disorder or disturbance of law 
and 
order 
or 
affecting 
public 
tranquility, the law needs to step in to 
prevent such an activity. The intention 

to cause disorder or incite people to 
violence is the sine qua non of the 
offence under Section 153-A IPC and 
the prosecution has to prove the 
existence of mens rea in order to 
succeed. [Balwant Singh v. State of 
Punjab, (1995): 1995 SCC 
(Cri) 432] 
10. The gist of the offence under 
Section 153-A IPC is the intention to 
promote feelings of enmity or hatred 
between different classes of people. 
The intention has to be judged primarily 
by the language of the piece of writing 
and the circumstances in which it was 
written and published. The matter 
complained of within the ambit of 
Section 153-A must be read as a whole. 
One cannot rely on strongly worded and 
isolated passages for proving the charge 
nor indeed can one take a sentence here 
and a sentence there and connect them 
by a meticulous process of inferential 
reasoning 
[Manzar 
Sayeed 
Khan v. State of Maharashtra, (2007):(2007) 2 SCC (Cri) 417].” 
 (emphasis added) 
8. 
Now, coming back to Section 153-A, clause (a) of sub-
section (1) of Section 153-A of the IPC is attracted when by 
words, either spoken or written or by signs or by visible 
representations or otherwise, an attempt is made to promote 
disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between 
different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes 
or communities. The promotion of disharmony, enmity, hatred 
or ill will must be on the grounds of religion, race, place of birth, 
residence, language, caste, community or any other analogous 

grounds. Clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 153-A of the 
IPC will apply only when an act is committed which is 
prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between different 
religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or 
communities and which disturbs or is likely to disturb the 
public tranquility. 
9. 
Now, coming to the words used by the appellant on his 
WhatsApp status, we may note here that the first statement is 
that August 5 is a Black Day for Jammu and Kashmir. 5th 
August 2019 is the day on which Article 370 of the Constitution 
of India was abrogated, and two separate Union territories of 
Jammu and Kashmir were formed. Further, the appellant has 
posted that “Article 370 was abrogated, we are not happy”. On 
a plain reading, the appellant intended to criticise the action of 
the abrogation of Article 370 of the Constitution of India. He 
has expressed unhappiness over the said act of abrogation. 
The aforesaid words do not refer to any religion, race, place of 
birth, residence, language, caste or community. It is a simple 
protest by the appellant against the decision to abrogate Article 
370 of the Constitution of India and the further steps taken 
based on that decision. The Constitution of India, under Article 
19(1)(a), guarantees freedom of speech and expression. Under 
the said guarantee, every citizen has the right to offer criticism 
of the action of abrogation of Article 370 or, for that matter, 
every decision of the State. He has the right to say he is 
unhappy with any decision of the State. 

10. 
In the case of Manzar Sayeed Khan1, this Court has read 
“intention” as an essential ingredient of the said offence. The 
alleged objectionable words or expressions used by the 
appellant, on its plain reading, cannot promote disharmony or 
feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between different religious, 
racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities. 
The WhatsApp status of the appellant has a photograph of two 
barbed wires, below which it is mentioned that “AUGUST 5 – 
BLACK DAY – JAMMU & KASHMIR”. This is an expression of 
his individual view and his reaction to the abrogation of Article 
370 of the Constitution of India. It does not reflect any intention 
to do something which is prohibited under Section 153-A. At 
best, it is a protest, which is a part of his freedom of speech 
and expression guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a). Every citizen of 
India has a right to be critical of the action of abrogation of 
Article 370 and the change of status of Jammu and Kashmir. 
Describing the day the abrogation happened as a “Black Day” 
is an expression of protest and anguish. If every criticism or 
protest of the actions of the State is to be held as an offence 
under Section 153-A, democracy, which is an essential feature 
of the Constitution of India, will not survive. The right to 
dissent in a legitimate and lawful manner is an integral part of 
the rights guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a). Every individual 
must respect the right of others to dissent. An opportunity to 
peacefully protest against the decisions of the Government is 
an essential part of democracy. The right to dissent in a lawful 
manner must be treated as a part of the right to lead a dignified 
and meaningful life guaranteed by Article 21. But the protest 

or dissent must be within four corners of the modes permissible 
in a democratic set-up. It is subject to reasonable restrictions 
imposed in accordance with clause (2) of Article 19. In the 
present case, the appellant has not at all crossed the line. 
11. 
The High Court has held that the possibility of stirring up 
the emotions of a group of people cannot be ruled out. The 
appellant’s college teachers, students, and parents were 
allegedly members of the WhatsApp group. As held by Vivian 
Bose, J, the effect of the words used by the appellant on his 
WhatsApp status will have to be judged from the standards of 
reasonable women and men. We cannot apply the standards 
of people with weak and vacillating minds. Our country has 
been a democratic republic for more than 75 years. The people 
of our country know the importance of democratic values. 
Therefore, it is not possible to conclude that the words will 
promote disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will 
between different religious groups. The test to be applied is not 
the effect of the words on some individuals with weak minds or 
who see a danger in every hostile point of view. The test is of 
the general impact of the utterances on reasonable people who 
are significant in numbers. Merely because a few individuals 
may develop hatred or ill will, it will not be sufficient to attract 
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 153-A of the IPC. 
12. 
As regards the picture containing “Chand” and below that 
the words “14th August–Happy Independence Day Pakistan”, 
we are of the view that it will not attract clause (a) of sub-
section (1) of Section 153-A of the IPC. Every citizen has the 

right to extend good wishes to the citizens of the other countries 
on their respective independence days. If a citizen of India 
extends good wishes to the citizens of Pakistan on 14th August, 
which is their Independence Day, there is nothing wrong with 
it. It’s a gesture of goodwill. In such a case, it cannot be said 
that such acts will tend to create disharmony or feelings of 
enmity, hatred or ill-will between different religious groups. 
Motives cannot be attributed to the appellant only because he 
belongs to a particular religion. 
13. 
Now, the time has come to enlighten and educate our 
police machinery on the concept of freedom of speech and 
expression guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution 
and the extent of reasonable restraint on their free speech and 
expression. They must be sensitised about the democratic 
values enshrined in our Constitution. 
14. 
For the same reasons, clause (b) of sub-section (1) of 
Section 153-A of the IPC will not be attracted as what is 
depicted on the WhatsApp status of the appellant cannot be 
said to be prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony among 
various groups as stated therein. Thus, continuation of the 
prosecution of the appellant for the offence punishable under 
Section 153-A of the IPC will be a gross abuse of the process of 
law. 
15. 
Accordingly, we set aside the impugned judgment dated 
10th April 2023 of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay and 
quash the impugned FIR bearing no. 295 of 2022 registered at 

PS Hatkanangle, District Kolhapur, Maharashtra and the 
proceedings based on the impugned FIR. 
16. 
The Appeal is, accordingly, allowed. 

….…………………….J. 
 
 (Abhay S. Oka) 

…..…………………...J. 

 (Ujjal Bhuyan) 
New Delhi; 
March 7, 2024.