IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. of 2024 

M/S A.K. SARKAR & CO. & ANR....APPELLANTS 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ORS. …RESPONDENTS 

SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J. 

Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeal arises out of a proceeding under the 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (for short ‘the Act’) 
where the present appellant no.1, its partners appellant no.2 
and Amit Kumar Sarkar, were charged under Section 
16(1)(a)(i) read with Section 7 of the Act and were convicted 
by the Trial court. Appellant no.2 and Amit Kumar Sarkar 
were sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for a period 
of six months along with a fine of Rs.1,000/- each, whereas 
appellant no.1 was directed to pay a fine of Rs.2,000/-. 

3. 
The appeal of the appellants against the order of conviction 
and sentence by the Trial Court was dismissed by the 
District and Sessions Judge but the conviction of Amit 
Kumar Sarkar, the third accused in the case, was set aside 
and he was acquitted. In Revision proceedings, the High 
Court of Calcutta though upheld the concurrent findings of 
conviction but reduced the sentence of appellant no.2 from 
6 months to 3 months simple imprisonment. 
4. 
Brief facts leading to this appeal are that on 06.12.2000, a 
food inspector while inspecting the shop/godown of the 
appellants at 71, Biplabi Rash Behari Basu Road, Calcutta 
took samples of some sugar boiled confectionaries, which 
were kept for sale and for human consumption. After 
payment, the food inspector purchased 1500 grams of sugar 
boiled confectionery contained in three packets of 500 grams 
each, and as per due process sent the samples for 
examination in a laboratory. The public analysis/Lab report 
shows that the food articles were not adulterated, but it said 
that the packets did not show the prescribed particulars 
such as complete address of the manufacturer and the date 
of manufacturing. Thus, there was violation of Rule 32(c) 

and (f) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 
(for short ‘Rules’). In view of these findings, the inspector 
filed a complaint before the Trial Court under Section 
16(1)(a)(i) read with Section 7 of the Act. 
5. 
The plea of the appellants before the Trial Court was that 
they had not manufactured the food articles, instead Bose 
Confectionary, Calcutta had manufactured these items. All 
the same, the appellants could not show any valid proof of 
their contention and thus, the Trial Court and the Appellate 
Court (as well as the Revisional Court) did not accept this 
contention raised by the appellants. The appellant stood 
convicted of the offence under Section 16(1)(a)(i) read with 
Section 7 of the Act and appellant no.2 was sentenced to 
undergo 3 months simple imprisonment along with fine. 
While appellant no.1 was sentenced to pay a fine of 
Rs.2,000/-. 
6. 
Before this Court, learned Counsel for the appellants would 
argue that the entire case of the prosecution is liable to be 
dismissed for the simple reason that the appellants were 
charged under Rule 32 (c) and (f) of the Rules but these 

provisions were not related to misbranding and were 
regarding something else. 
7. 
All the same, this contention is totally misconceived 
inasmuch on the date of occurrence i.e., 06.12.2000 when 
the samples were taken, the provisions which were 
applicable were Rule 32 (c) and (f) only (as the Rules had 
been amended vide G.S.R 422(E) dated 29.04.1987), and 
Rule 32 as per the Gazette Notification reads as under:- 
“32. Package of food to carry a label: -- 
(a) ………… 
(b) ………… 
(c) The name and complete address of 
the manufacturer or importer or 
vendor or packer. 
(d) ……….. 
(e) ……….. 
(f) The month and year in which the 
commodity 
is 
manufactured 
or 
prepacked.” 
 
Therefore, this contention of the learned counsel for the 
appellant regarding non-applicability of the provision is not 
correct. There are concurrent findings of three Courts below 
and there is absolutely no question of us having any 
measure of doubt as to the findings, inasmuch as that the 
packets which were taken from shop/godown of the 

appellants were misbranded as defined under Section 
2(ix)(k) of the Act, as they were not labelled in accordance 
with the requirements of the Act or the Rules made 
thereunder. The only question which now remains is of 
sentence. The plea here is of reduction of sentence and if 
only fine can be imposed, which is permissible as per the 
law currently applicable. 
8. 
Article 20(1) of the Constitution of India reads as under: 
“(1) No person shall be convicted of any 
offence except for violation of a law in 
force at the time of the commission of the 
act charged as an offence, nor be 
subjected to a penalty greater than that 
which might have been inflicted under 
the law in force at the time of the 
commission of the offence. 
(2) ………. 
(3) ……….” 
The above provision has been interpretated several times by 
this Court and broadly the mandate here is that a person 
cannot be punished for an offence which was not an offence 
at the time it was committed, nor can he be subjected to a 
sentence which is greater than the sentence which was 
applicable at the relevant point of time. All the same, the 
above provision does not prohibit this Court, to award a 

lesser punishment in a befitting case, when this Court is of 
the opinion that a lesser punishment may be awarded since 
the new law on the penal provision provides a lesser 
punishment i.e. lesser than what was actually applicable at 
the relevant time. The prohibition contained in Article 20 of 
the Constitution of India is on subjecting a person to a 
higher punishment than which was applicable for that crime 
at the time of the commission of the crime. There is no 
prohibition, for this Court to impose a lesser punishment 
which is now applicable for the same crime. 
9. 
The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 was repealed 
by the introduction of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 
2006 where Section 52 provides a maximum penalty of 
Rs.3,00,000/- for misbranded food. There is no provision for 
imprisonment. 
 
The provision, which is presently applicable, is as follows: 
 “52. Penalty for misbranded food. (1) 
Any person who whether by himself or by 
any 
other 
person 
on 
his 
behalf 
manufactures for sale or stores or sells or 
distributes or imports any article of food for 
human consumption which is misbranded, 
shall be liable to a penalty which may 
extend to three lakh rupees. (2) The 
Adjudicating Officer may issue a direction 

to the person found guilty of an offence 
under this section, for taking corrective 
action to rectify the mistake or such article 
of food shall be destroyed.” 

Whether the appellant can be granted the benefit of the 
new legislation and be awarded a lesser punishment as is 
presently prescribed under the new law? This Court in 
T. Barai v. Henry Ah Hoe (1983), had held that 
when an amendment is beneficial to the accused it can be 
applied even to cases pending in Courts where such a 
provision did not exist at the time of the commission of 
offence. It was said as under:- 
“22. It is only retroactive criminal legislation 
that is prohibited under Article 20(1). The 
prohibition contained in Article 20(1) is that 
no person shall be convicted of any offence 
except for violation of a law in force at the 
time of the commission of the act charged as 
an offence prohibits nor shall he be 
subjected to a penalty greater than that 
which might have been inflicted under the 
law in force at the time of the commission of 
the offence. It is quite clear that insofar as 
the Central Amendment Act creates new 
offences or enhances punishment for a 
particular type of offence no person can be 
convicted by such ex post facto law nor can 
the enhanced punishment prescribed by the 
amendment be applicable. But insofar as 
the Central Amendment Act reduces the 
punishment for an offence punishable 
under Section 16(1)(a) of the Act, there is no 

reason why the accused should not have 
the benefit of such reduced punishment. 
The rule of beneficial construction requires 
that even ex post facto law of such a type 
should be applied to mitigate the rigour of 
the law. The principle is based both on 
sound reason and common sense.” 
 
A reference to the above case was given by this Court in 
Nemi Chand v. State of Rajasthan (2018) 
where six months of imprisonment awarded under the Act 
was modified to only a fine of Rs.50,000/-. 
 The above principle was applied by this Court again 
in Trilok Chand v. State of Himachal Pradesh, (2020) and the sentence of three months of imprisonment 
and Rs.500/- of fine for misbranding under the Act, 1954 
was modified to that of only a fine of Rs.5,000/-. 
 
10. 
The present appellant no.2, at this stage, is about 60 years 
of age and the crime itself is of the year 2000, and twenty-
four years have elapsed since the commission of the crime. 
Vide Order dated 06.08.2018, this Court had granted 
exemption from surrendering to appellant no.2. Considering 
all aspects, more particularly the nature of offence, though 
we uphold the findings of the Courts below regarding the 

offence, but we hereby convert the sentence of appellant 
no.2 from three months of simple imprisonment along with 
fine of Rs.1,000/- to a fine of Rs.50,000/- (Rupees Fifty 
Thousand only). The sentence of appellant no.1 which is for 
a fine of Rs. 2000/- is upheld. The amount shall be 
deposited with the concerned Court within a period of three 
weeks from today. Accordingly, the appeal is partly allowed. 
 
 …...……………………………J. 
 (SUDHANSHU DHULIA) 

 …...……………………………J. 
 (PRASANNA B. VARALE) 
New Delhi 
March 7, 2024.