IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

DARSHAN SINGH 

 …APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF PUNJAB …RESPONDENT 

JUDGMENT 

Aravind Kumar, J. 
 
1. 
This appeal by special leave arises out of judgment and order dated 
23.07.2009 passed in by the High 
Court of Punjab & Haryana. The High Court has upheld the order of 
conviction and sentence, as against Darshan Singh (the appellant) and has 
allowed the appeal of Rani Kaur (Accused No. 2), thereby acquitting her of 

all charges. The State of Punjab has not challenged the acquittal of Rani 
Kaur by filing any special leave petition. It is in this background that 
Darshan Singh had sought special leave to appeal before us and leave came 
to be granted by order dated 22.01.2010. 
 
Case of the Prosecution: 

2. 
The facts can be summed up in brief as follows: 
 
The deceased, Amrik Kaur was married to Darshan Singh, the 
appellant, some time in 1988. The marriage was arranged through Melo 
Kaur (PW-3), the cousin sister of the deceased. The prosecution alleges that 
their marital relationship was strained owing largely to the fact that Darshan 
Singh had developed an illicit partnership with Rani Kaur (A2). Several 
relatives had prevailed on the appellant to put an end to his relationship with 
Rani Kaur, but to no avail. The illicit relationship between Darshan Singh 
and Rani Kaur is said to have lasted for at least three years before the fateful 
day. It is the case of the prosecution that on the intervening night of 
18.05.1999 and 19.05.1999, Darshan Singh and Rani Kaur, with the motive 
of eliminating the deceased, administered poison and intentionally caused 
the death of Amrik Kaur. 

3. 
On these allegations, Darshan Singh and Rani Kaur were prosecuted 
for charges under Section 302 r/w Section 34 IPC. The Trial Court convicted 
both the accused persons for the offence under Section 302 r/w Section 34 
and sentenced them to undergo imprisonment for life. 
 
Findings of the Trial Court and High Court: 

4. 
The Trial Court has concluded that it was a case of homicide and not 
suicide. It has found that the appellant had a strong motive to commit the 
murder of his wife. It further held that the appellant and Rani Kaur were 
present in the house on the intervening night of 18.05.1999 and 19.05.1999 
and therefore, the burden lay on them to explain as to ‘how the body of Amrik 
Kaur who was alive on the night of 18.05.1999 turned into a corpse’ the next 
morning. The Court has completely disbelieved the theory of suicide sought 
to be advanced on behalf of appellant. It was noted that merely because there 
were no injuries on the body of the deceased, that by itself would not obviate 
the possibility of forceful administration of the poisonous substance. On the 
basis of the above circumstances taken together, the Trial Court held that the 
prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt against the 
appellant and Rani Kaur. 

5. 
In appeal, the High Court has agreed with the findings of the Trial 
Court in so far as the appellant is concerned and has acquitted Rani Kaur by 
extending her the benefit of doubt. It has found that there is no other 
evidence except the testimony of PW3 and PW4, to prove the presence of 
Rani Kaur on the intervening night of 18.05.1999 and 19.05.1999 at the 
appellant’s house. 
 
ARGUMENTS OF MR. ABHIMANYU TEWARI, COUNSEL 
APPEARING FOR APPELLANT: 

6. 
PW3, Melo Kaur, is not a reliable witness. The presence of the 
appellant, Darshan Singh, at the house on the intervening night of 
18.05.1999 and 19.05.1999 is sought to be established based on her 
testimony. She has made several improvements in her version, and her 
testimony suffers from several contradictions, and therefore, it is not safe to 
rely on such a witnesses’ uncorroborated testimony. It would be prejudicial 
to the appellant to rely on only a part of her testimony and exclude the rest. 
If her testimony is ignored in toto, there is no other evidence to establish the 
key circumstance of appellant’s presence at the spot of crime. 
 
6.1 
That aluminium phosphide is rather impossible to administer in a 
deceitful manner owing to its pungent smell and odour. No injury marks 
have been found on the deceased, which further establishes that there could 
not have been any forceful administration of the poison. Therefore, it is 

submitted that it is nothing but a case of suicide, the driving force for which, 
was the confrontation with Melo Kaur. It is the appellants’ case that Amrik 
Kaur was having an illicit affair with Melo Kaur’s husband, Gurmel Singh 
PW4, and embarrassed with her sister finding out, she self-administered the 
poisonous substance and committed suicide. Counsel has submitted 
judgments to support the proposition that aluminium phosphide has a 
pungent smell similar to garlic. 

6.2 
Reliance has been placed on Jaipal V. State of Haryana – (2003) wherein the Apex Court discussed the nature of aluminium 
phosphide. The relevant paragraphs have been extracted below for 
reference: 
“16. According to Modi, symptoms and signs of poisoning by 
aluminium phosphide are similar to poisoning by zinc phosphide 
(p. 197, ibid.). The chief symptoms after the administration of zinc 
phosphide are a vacant look, frequent vomiting with retching, 
tremors and drowsiness followed by respiratory distress at death. 
Zinc phosphide acts as a slow poison and is decomposed by 
hydrochloric acid in the stomach with the liberation of phosphine 
which acts as a respiratory poison. Being a very fine powder zinc 
phosphide adheres firmly to the crypts in the mucous membrane 
of the stomach, and a very small quantity only in the stomach even 
after vomiting is sufficient to cause death by slow absorption. 
 
17. Phosphine released from zinc phosphide (rat poison) and from 
aluminium phosphide, is mainly used as a fumigant to control 
insects and rodents in foodgrains and fields. Liberated from the 
metal phosphides by the action of water or acids, gaseous 
phosphine exerts more potent pesticidal action, for it penetrates 
to all areas otherwise inaccessible for pesticide application. 
Pathological findings from phosphine inhalation are pulmonary 
hyperaemia and oedema. It causes both fatty degeneration and 
necrosis of liver (p. 174, ibid.). 

18. Our attention was invited, as was done in the High Court and 
the trial court, to a paper entitled “Toxicology — Acute 
Aluminium Phosphide Poisoning in Northern India” written by 
Dr Mitra Basu and Prof. S.B. Siwach, Head, Department of 
Medicine, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Rohtak 
and published in Current Medical Journal, Vol. I, No. 5, July 
1995. The authenticity of this article has not been doubted by the 
High Court nor questioned either in the High Court or in this 
Court. The learned authors have noticed the aluminium 
phosphide having emerged as a major health problem in northern 
India when these cases first started coming in 1984 and hardly 
any literature being available earlier on this malady. In 
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Rohtak about 2000 
cases were reported which were all suicidal. 
 
19. We may briefly sum up the opinion of the learned authors from 
their published paper. Phosphine gas (active ingredient of ALP) 
causes sudden cardiovascular collapse; most patients die of 
shock, cardiac arrhythmia, acidosis and adult respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS). Aluminium phosphide is available in the form 
of chalky-white tablets. When these tablets are taken out of the 
sealed container, they come in contact with atmospheric moisture 
and the chemical reaction takes place liberating Phosphine gas 
(PH3) which is the active ingredient of ALP. This gas is highly 
toxic and effectively kills all insects and thus preserves the stored 
grains. When these tablets are swallowed, the chemical reaction 
is accelerated by the presence of hydrochloric acid in the stomach 
and within minutes phosphine gas dissipates and spreads into the 
whole body. The gas is highly toxic and damages almost every 
organ but maximal damage is caused to heart and lungs. Sudden 
cardiovascular collapse is the hallmark of acute poisoning. 
Patients come with fast, thready or impalpable arterial pulses, 
unrecordable or low blood pressure and icy-cold skin. Somehow 
these patients remain conscious till the end and continue to pass 
urine despite unrecordable blood pressure. Vomiting is a 
prominent feature associated with epigastric burning sensation. 
The patients will be smelling foul (garlic-like) from their breath 
and vomitus. Many of them will die within a few hours. Those who 
survive for some time will show elevated jugular venous pressure, 
may develop tender hepatomegaly and still later adult respiratory 
distress syndrome (ARDS), renal shutdown and in a very few 
cases, toxic hepatic jaundice. The active ingredient of ALP is 
phosphine gas which causes extensive tissue damage. A spot 
clinical diagnosis is possible in majority of cases of ALP 
poisoning. However, ALP on account of its very pungent smell 
(which can drive out all inmates from the house if left open) 
cannot be taken accidentally.” 

6.3 
It was also argued that the courts below have failed to give sufficient 
weight to the evidence led on behalf of the defence, in particular, the 
testimony of DW3 and DW4. 
 
6.4 
Lastly, it was argued that Rani Kaur (A2) having been extended 
benefit of doubt, it was rather anomalous to exclude such benefit to A1- the 
appellant, when the case of the prosecution was that both of them were 
present at the scene of crime. 

Arguments of Mr. Prateek Chaddha, learned counsel on behalf of State 
of Punjab: 

7. 
Melo Kaur was an illiterate person who cannot be expected to be 
aware of the intricacies of law and cross examination and therefore, it was 
rather natural for minor inconsistencies to creep into the testimony of such 
a witness. The Trial Court has rightly appreciated her testimony by 
excluding the uncorroborated parts from the corroborated parts of her 
testimony. In that sense, the Trial Court has separated the chaff from the 
grain, as is expected to be done when it has to appreciate the evidence of a 
partly reliable and partly unreliable witness. Moreover, the accused himself 
has never denied his presence at the scene of crime. In his statement recorded 
under Section 313 of Cr.P.C., he has admitted his presence. This, coupled 

with the testimony of PW3, 4 and 5, is sufficient to prove the presence of 
the accused at the spot of crime. 
 
7.1 
The case rests on circumstantial evidence, the prosecution has 
proved the circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought to be 
drawn, cogently and convincingly. The circumstances relied on include -– 
(1) Motive; (2) Presence of the appellant at the scene of crime; (3) Cause of 
Death: By Poisoning (4) Opportunity to administer poison; (5) Conduct (6) 
False explanation in 313 Statement. 
 
7.2 
He has further relied on the principle laid down in Trimukh Maroti 
Kirkan v. State of Maharashtra1 to contend that the degree of evidence 
needed to prove the case resting on circumstantial evidence in the given facts 
cannot be as high as is normally the case. In view of Section 106 of the 
Evidence Act, the appellant was under a burden to explain the circumstances 
leading to the death of the deceased. Merely remaining quiet or offering a 
false explanation would provide an additional link in the chain of 
circumstances to make it complete. Remaining quiet, or offering a false 
explanation would therefore provide an additional link in the chain of 
circumstances to make it complete. He has also sought to distinguish the 
cases relied on behalf of the appellant. 

1 (2006) 

ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS: 
 
8. 
We have heard the learned Counsel for the appellant and respondent 
and perused the materials on record. 

9. 
There is no eye-witness to the incident. The case of the prosecution 
rests on circumstantial evidence. The normal approach in a case based on 
circumstantial evidence is that the circumstances from which an inference 
of guilt is sought to be drawn must be cogently and firmly established; that 
those circumstances should be of a definite tendency unerringly pointing 
towards the guilt of the accused; that the circumstances taken cumulatively 
should form a chain so complete that there is no escape from the conclusion, 
that within all human probability, the crime was committed by the accused 
and they should be incapable of explanation on any hypothesis other than 
that of the guilt of the accused and inconsistent with his innocence. [See 
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra2] 
 
10. 
Let us, therefore, examine whether the prosecution had proved 
beyond reasonable doubt, the entire chain of circumstances, not leaving any 
link missing for the appellant to escape from the clutches of law. The 
 
2 (1984) 

circumstances which are said to have been proved on behalf of the 
prosecution is as follows: 
1. 
Motive 
2. 
Presence at the spot 
3. 
False explanation in 313 statement 
4. 
Death by Poisoning – Doctor’s opinion on cause of death 
5. 
Conduct of the Appellant 
6. 
Opportunity to administer poison. 
 
11. 
According to the case of the prosecution, the illicit relationship that 
existed between Darshan Singh and Rani Kaur served as the key motive for 
them to jointly eliminate the deceased. The fact that they were in an illicit 
relationship has been sufficiently proved from the testimony of PW 2, PW 3 
and PW 4. This circumstance, therefore, has been cogently established. 
 
12. 
The most important circumstance, among all, must be the 
circumstance of the appellant and Rani Kaur having been present in the 
appellant’s house on the intervening night of 18.05.99 and 19.05.99 and they 
having been seen leaving the house in the early hours of the day. For, the 
proof of presence has the effect of triggering into operation, Section 106 of 
the Evidence Act and the principle laid down in the case of Trimukh Maroti 
Kirkan v. State of Maharashtra. Even the circumstance that the appellant 

had the ‘opportunity’ to administer poison was strongly linked to aspect of 
proving the presence of the appellant and Rani Kaur in the appellants house. 
 
13. 
In Trimukh’s case, it has been held: 
i.“If an offence takes place inside the privacy of a house and in such 
circumstances where the assailants have all the opportunity to plan 
and commit the offence at the time and in circumstances of their 
choice, it will be extremely difficult for the prosecution to lead 
evidence to establish the guilt of the accused if the strict principle 
of circumstantial evidence, as noticed above, is insisted upon by 
the Courts……………………Where an offence like murder is 
committed in secrecy inside a house, the initial burden to establish 
the case would undoubtedly be upon the prosecution, but the nature 
and amount of evidence to be led by it to establish the charge 
cannot be of the same degree as is required in other cases of 
circumstantial evidence. The burden would be of a comparatively 
lighter character. In view of Section 106 of the Evidence Act there 
will be a corresponding burden on the inmates of the house to give 
a cogent explanation as to how the crime was committed. The 
inmates of the house cannot get away by simply keeping quiet and 
offering no explanation on the supposed premise that the burden 
to establish its case lies entirely upon the prosecution and there 
is no duty at all on an accused to offer any explanation” 
 
14. 
In Trimukh (supra), this Court has pointed out that there are two 
important consequences that play out when an offence is said to have taken 
place in the privacy of a house, where the accused is said to have been 
present. Firstly, the standard of proof expected to prove such a case based 
on circumstantial evidence is lesser than other cases of circumstantial 
evidence. Secondly, the appellant would be under a duty to explain as to the 
circumstances that led to the death of the deceased. In that sense, there is a 
limited shifting of the onus of proof. If he remains quiet or offers a false 

explanation, then such a response would become an additional link in the 
chain of circumstances. 
 
15. 
Both the Courts below have in fact applied the principle referred to 
in Trimukh’s case. Their presence having been held to be proved, the Court 
relied on Section 106 of the Evidence Act and shifted the onus of proof on 
the accused to explain the circumstances which led to the unnatural death of 
the deceased. 

16. 
Whereas the Trial Court found both the accused guilty, the High 
Court has confirmed the order of conviction only against the appellant and 
extended benefit of doubt to Rani Kaur. The appellant having failed to give 
a proper and believable explanation was, in fact, used as an additional link 
in the chain of circumstances. The proof of presence in that sense triggered 
the two consequences as laid down in Trimukh’s case (supra) 
 
17. 
In this case, the presence was sought to be proved by the prosecution 
on the basis of the testimony of PW-3, PW-4, PW-5 and the statements of 
the accused at the 313 stage. The Courts below had also relied on the 
testimony of PW 3 and PW 4 to conclude that the appellant was present in 
the house. Therefore, it becomes necessary to carefully evaluate this 
circumstance, given the consequences that flow from proof of this 
circumstance. 

18. 
PW-3 has deposed that her husband, Gurmel Singh (PW-4), on his 
return home from work around 8 pm on 18.05.99, had informed her that he 
saw the appellant along with Rani Kaur present in the appellant’s house. He 
further informed her that it would not be appropriate to visit their house at 
that time since he anticipated the possibility of a flare up among the family 
members. He told her that they could talk to the appellant in the morning. 
PW-3 stated that she visited the house of the appellant in the morning at 
around 4:45 am, only to find her sister lying dead. She states that she saw 
the appellant and Rani Kaur present in the house. She further states that both 
of them pushed her aside and left in a jeep, belonging to the appellant. She 
then states that she called her husband (PW-4) to the spot. 
 
19. 
In the cross examination of PW-3 on behalf of the appellant, several 
omissions have been brought on record by drawing her attention to her 
previous statement given to the police under Section 161 CrPC. For instance, 
it has come out in the evidence that PW-3 had omitted to state in her Section 
161 statement that: (a) her husband had informed her that he saw the 
appellant and Rani Kaur in the appellant’s house when he was returning back 
home from work around 8 pm; (b) she had seen the appellant and Rani Kaur 
in the early hours on 19.05.99 in the appellant’s house and they pushed her 
aside before escaping in a jeep. (c) her husband had advised her not to visit 

the deceased in the night. It had been specifically suggested to her that she 
was falsely deposing and that the appellant was being falsely implicated on 
account of him having strained relations with PW-4, the husband of PW3. 
 
20. 
In the cross examination of PW-3 on behalf of Rani Kaur, it was 
elicited that PW-3 had personally witnessed the appellant and Rani Kaur 
putting poison in the mouth of the deceased. This, according to PW-3, was 
seen by her through the chinks of the door. 
 
21. 
PW-4 has stated that he met the appellant and Rani Kaur on his way 
home, while he was returning from work around 7.00 PM on 18.05.99. He 
stated that both of them went to the appellant’s house. He informed his wife 
that it would not be appropriate to visit their house at this time since there 
was a possibility of a quarrel arising between Amrik Kaur and her husband, 
the appellant, since he had brought Rani Kaur home. Instead, he asked her 
to go and visit her sister on the next morning. In the morning, around 5.30 
am, his wife left to visit her sister at the appellant’s house after serving tea 
to him and his children. On having received a message from his wife, he set 
about to reach the appellant’s house and found Amrik Kaur lying dead and 
his wife, weeping and wailing. 
 
22. 
Similarly, in the cross examination of PW-4, it has been brought on 
record that PW-4 had omitted to state the following aspects in his statement 

recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. before the police – (a) that PW-4 had 
seen the appellant and Rani Kaur entering the house of the appellant in a 
jeep; (b) PW-4 had told PW-3 not to visit the appellant’s house since they 
were intoxicated and there was a strong possibility of some dispute arising. 
(c) PW-4’s statement that PW-3 had left for the appellant’s house at 5.00 am 
in the morning on 19.05.99 after serving him tea. It has been specifically 
suggested to this witness that he had strained relations with the appellant, 
and owing to this fact, he has falsely implicated the appellant. It was further 
suggested that on account of the quarrel that occurred in the night on 
18.05.99, the deceased had committed suicide by taking poison. 
 
23. 
PW 5 is an independent witness having no relationship with any of 
the persons involved, either as an accused or as witnesses, in this incident. 
He stated that on the morning of 19.05.99, at about 6.00 am, he had gone to 
answer the call of nature. At that time, he states that he saw the appellant and 
Rani Kaur were going in a jeep to Hiro Kalan and that jeep was covered with 
black cloth. He then returned to the bus stop and found a lot of persons 
having gathered and there, he heard the news that the appellant had murdered 
his wife. 
 
24. 
PW-5’s deposition that he had heard from persons at the bus stop 
that the appellant had murdered his wife, was an omission since he had not 
stated as such in his statement before the police. It has been elicited from 

him that the jeep came from behind and then passed by his side. It has been 
further elicited that the black cloth which was used to cover the jeep was 
opened on both sides. 
 
25. 
In the face of the above evidence on record, can it be said that the 
presence of the appellant and Rani Kaur in the appellant’s house in the 
intervening night of 18.05.99 and 19.05.99, has been firmly and cogently 
established? According to us, the answer must be in the negative. There are 
several omissions that have been brought out in the cross examination of 
PW-3 and PW-4, which seriously dent the credibility of their testimony. 
 
26. 
If the PWs had failed to mention in their statements u/s 161 CrPC 
about the involvement of an accused, their subsequent statement before 
court during trial regarding involvement of that particular accused cannot be 
relied upon. Prosecution cannot seek to prove a fact during trial through a 
witness which such witness had not stated to police during investigation. 
The evidence of that witness regarding the said improved fact is of no 
significance. [See: (i) Rohtash Vs. State of Haryana, (2012) (ii) 
Sunil Kumar Shambhu Dayal Gupta Vs. State of Maharashtra, 2011 (72) 
ACC 699 (SC). (iii) Rudrappa Ramappa Jainpur Vs. State of Karnataka, 
(2004) (iv) Vimal Suresh Kamble Vs. Chaluverapinake, (2003) 
] 

27. 
Of course, PW-3 claims to be an illiterate witness and therefore, her 
testimony must be interpreted in that light. We are cognizant that the 
appreciation of evidence led by such a witness has to be treated differently 
from other kinds of witnesses. It cannot be subjected to a hyper-technical 
inquiry and much emphasis ought not to be given to imprecise details that 
may have been brought out in the evidence. This Court has held that the 
evidence of a rustic/illiterate witness must not be disregarded if there were 
to be certain minor contradictions or inconsistencies in the deposition.3 
 
28. 
However, the testimony of PW-3 suffers not merely from technical 
imperfections, there are glaring omissions and improvements that have been 
brought out in the cross-examination, which cannot be attributed to the 
illiteracy of the individual deposition. If there were minor contradictions and 
inconsistencies, that could have been ignored since the recollection of exact 
details as to location and time can be attributed to the lack of literacy. 
However, such is not the case here. PW-3 had only heard from her husband 
that the appellant and Rani Kaur were seen together in the appellant’s house 
on 18.05.99. To that extent, it is merely hearsay. Moreover, PW-4 has 
omitted to state this fact to PW3 in his statement before the police. He has 
also omitted to state that he advised his wife (PW-3) against going to the 
 
3 State of U.P. Vs. Chhoteylal, AIR 2011 SC 697; 
Dimple Gupta (minor) Vs. Rajiv Gupta, AIR 2008 SC 239 

appellant’s house in the night since there may arise a quarrel between all of 
them. If these facts are ignored from consideration, we only wonder as to 
why PW-3 would visit the house of the appellant in the wee hours of the 
morning on 19.05.99. It seems quite unnatural for PW-3 to visit the house of 
the appellant at 430 am in the morning without any reason. If PW-3 was 
aware that the appellant and Rani Kaur were in an illicit relationship for a 
sufficiently long duration, there was no reason to suspect all of a sudden that 
the two of them would get together, administer poison and murder the 
deceased on 19.05.1999, which fact, prompted her to visit the house of the 
appellant at such odd hours in the morning. Both the Courts have failed to 
take notice of the several significant omissions and improvements in the 
evidence of PW 3 and PW 4. 
 
29. 
Further, PW-5 is a chance witness. He was in his village, answering 
the call of nature at 6 am, at which point he claimed to have seen the accused 
persons going in a jeep. It was elicited in his cross examination that he had 
a side-on view since he stated the jeep came from behind and he got a side-
on glimpse. The side-on view would have been only for a couple of seconds 
at best, since they were travelling in a jeep. Therefore, it is not safe to rely 
on this testimony solely to prove that the appellant was escaping along with 
Rani Kaur after having murdered his wife. 

30. 
The appellant had set up a defence that the deceased had committed 
suicide. The Trial Court has disbelieved it on the premise that the appellant 
and Rani Kaur were present in the house, and if the deceased were to have 
committed suicide, it was but natural for the appellant to take her to the 
hospital and inform concerned persons/authorities. However, we have come 
to the finding above that the circumstance of appellant and Rani Kaur being 
present in the house has not been convincingly proved beyond doubt. 
Therefore, the reasoning given by the Trial Court loses its legs to stand on. 
In any case, we believe that the appellant has raised a doubt in our minds as 
regards his defence that the deceased had committed suicide. There appears 
to be no dispute as to the fact that the death was caused by poisoning. The 
doctor’s testimony on the basis of the chemical examiner’s report that the 
cause of death was linked to aluminium phosphide poisoning remains 
unchallenged. In fact, in his 313 statement, even the appellant states that the 
deceased consumed poison (aluminum phosphide) and committed suicide. 
In Jaipal’s case, this Court has considered the characteristic features of death 
caused by poisoning through aluminum phosphide. Review of scholarly 
literature and research papers suggests that the nature of this substance 
(aluminum phosphide) is such that it is not conducive for deceitful 
administration since it carries a pungent garlic-like odour, which cannot go 
unmissed. It was suspected that the substance was mixed in tea and served 

to the deceased since 200ml brownish liquid was found in her stomach as 
per the PMR. We find it doubtful that the deceased would have been made 
to consume tea deceitfully given the nature of the substance. Forceful 
administration of this substance also seems doubtful since there are no injury 
marks suggestive of a scuffle. In light of the evidence on record, even 
assuming for a moment that the appellant and Rani Kaur were present, it still 
cannot be said with certainty that it was a case of homicide and not suicide. 
The main principle to be satisfied in a case of conviction based on 
circumstantial evidence is that the proved circumstances must be complete 
and incapable of explanation of any other hypothesis than that of the guilt of 
the accused but should be inconsistent with his innocence- in other words, 
the circumstances should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one 
to be proved. In this case, it cannot be said that the proved circumstances, 
even if presence was proved, taken with other circumstances would lead to 
an unfailing conclusion that the appellant and Rani Kaur were guilty of 
murdering his wife. There was alive a strong hypothesis that the deceased 
had committed suicide, which explanation was led by the appellant in his 
statement under Section 313 CrPC, and it is sufficient to create a doubt in 
our minds. 

31. 
This Court has held that the standard of proof to be met by an 
accused in support of the defence taken by him under Section 313 of Code 

of Criminal Procedure is not beyond all reasonable doubt, as such, a burden 
lies on the prosecution to prove the charge. The accused has merely to create 
a doubt and it is for the prosecution then to establish beyond reasonable 
doubt that no benefit can flow from the same to the accused. [See: Pramila 
vs State of Uttar Pradesh ] 

32. 
Learned Counsel for the respondent-State has argued that no specific 
plea of alibi was taken in the statement of the appellant recorded under 
Section 313 CrPC. In fact, it is submitted that there is an implicit admission 
as to his presence in the house. It is too well settled that the statement of an 
accused under Section 313 CrPC is no ‘evidence’ because, firstly, it is not 
on oath and, secondly, the other party i.e. the prosecution does not get an 
opportunity to cross examine the accused. [ Sidhartha Vashisht Vs. State of 
NCT of Delhi, AIR 2010 SC 2352] 
 
33. 
It is trite law that the statement recorded u/s. 313 CrPC cannot form 
the sole basis of conviction. Therefore, the presence of the appellant cannot 
be found solely based on his statement, notwithstanding the lack of 
independent evidence led by the prosecution. Further, this Court has 
previously considered the consequences when a particular defence plea was 
not taken by accused u/s 313 CrPC and held that mere omission to take a 
specific plea by accused when examined u/s 313 CrPC, is not enough to 

denude him of his right if the same can be made out otherwise. See: 
Periasami Vs. State of Tamil Nadu, (1996) 

34. 
The case of the prosecution has, from the very start, been that the 
appellant was seen jointly along with Rani Kaur in the appellant’s house on 
18.05.99 and they were seen leaving the house together on 19.05.99. They 
were both tried together on charges of having administered poison and 
killing the deceased on the intervening night of 18.05.99 & 19.05.99. 
Though the Trial Court has convicted both of them under Section 302, the 
High Court has extended the benefit of doubt to Rani Kaur and acquitted her 
of all criminal charges. According to the High Court, ‘apart from the 
evidence of Melo Kaur PW3 and Gurmel Singh PW4, there is no other 
evidence to show that she was present in the house on the fateful night’. 
However, even though it was the very same evidence that was sought to be 
used to prove the presence of the appellant in the house, the benefit of doubt 
has not been similarly extended to him. The High Court reasoned that the 
appellant, being the husband, it was only natural for him to be present in the 
house. 
 
35. 
It is important to notice that the respondent-State has not challenged 
the acquittal of Rani Kaur before this Court. It has accepted the verdict and 
therefore, the acquittal has reached finality. The State cannot on the one hand 

accept the verdict of the Court that the presence of Rani Kaur along with the 
appellant is doubtful and at the same time, maintain its case that the two of 
them were jointly present, committed the offence together and escaped 
together. 
 
36. 
According to us, if the evidence of PW 3 and PW 4 was not sufficient 
to prove presence of Rani Kaur at the appellant’s house, as a natural 
corollary, such evidence cannot be relied on to conclude that the appellant 
was present in the house. The manner in which the High Court has sought to 
distinguish the case of the appellant from Rani Kaur is perverse and does not 
seem to impress us. The case of the prosecution has consistently been that 
the accused persons were seen present together in the house on the night of 
18.05.99 and seen leaving together in the wee hours of the next morning. In 
fact, PW 5 has deposed that he had seen them together in the jeep travelling 
towards Hiro Kurd. If the presence of Rani Kaur in the house on the date of 
the alleged incident is doubtful, then, the testimony of PW 5 that he had seen 
her along with the appellant in the jeep, will also lose its strength. 
 
37. 
Seen in this background, we need not go further and consider the 
evidence qua other circumstances sought to be proved by the prosecution 
since the failure to prove a single circumstance cogently can cause a snap in 
the chain of circumstances. There cannot be a gap in the chain of 
circumstances. When the conviction is to be based on circumstantial 

evidence solely, then there should not be any snap in the chain of 
circumstances. If there is a snap in the chain, the accused is entitled to benefit 
of doubt. If some of the circumstances in the chain can be explained by any 
other reasonable hypothesis, then also the accused is entitled to the benefit 
of doubt. [See: Bhimsingh Vs. State of Uttarakhand, (2015).] 
 
38. 
Therefore, we allow this appeal and set aside the concurrent findings 
of conviction. 
 
……..……………………….J. 
(B. R. Gavai)..………..……………………J. 
(Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha) 

………………………………J. 
(Aravind Kumar) 
 
New Delhi, 
January 04, 2024