IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

(@ ) 
 
DABLU KUJUR 

VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF JHARKHAND 

JUDGMENT 
 
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
 
1. Leave granted. 
2. The appellant-accused, by way of the present appeal has challenged 
the impugned judgment and order dated 17.01.2023 passed by the 
High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi in B.A. No.11895 of 2022, 
whereby the High Court has dismissed the said application seeking 
his release on bail in respect of the FIR being Sukhdeonagar P.S. 
Case No.-238/2022 dated 30.05.2022 registered for the offences 
under Sections 302, 120-B/34 of IPC and Section 25(1-B) A/26/27/35 
of the Arms Act. 

3. During the course of arguments, it was apprised to the Court that the 
trial is at the fag end and almost all the witnesses have been 
examined by the prosecution except one witness. 
4. In view of the above, we are not inclined to release the appellant on 
bail, more particularly, when the trial is at the fag end. 
5. Before parting, it may be noted that on 17.07.2023, this Court 
(Coram- Mr. Justice Sanjiv Khanna and Ms. Justice Bela M. Trivedi) 
had passed the following order: - 
 
“The learned counsel for the State of Jharkhand states that 
Sections 34 and 120B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 have been 
SLP(Crl.) No. 2874/2023 invoked against the petitioner - Dablu 
Kujur. 
 Having gone through the chargesheet, we must observe that 
it is bereft of any details and particulars. The Director General of 
Police (DGP), State of Jharkhand will examine whether the said 
chargesheet is in accordance with law, and if such chargesheets 
are being filed, appropriate steps should be taken in compliance 
with the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973. The DGP, State of Jharkhand will file an action report within 
a period of four weeks from today. 
 We are told that similar chargesheets bereft of details and 
particulars are being filed in the States of Bihar and Uttar 
Pradesh. A copy of this order will also be sent to the relevant 
DGPs for the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, who will submit 
their respective reports on the steps taken by them within four 
weeks from today. 
 Keeping in view the facts of the present case, we are inclined 
to direct the trial court to examine the public witnesses within a 
period of four months from today, without fail. Status report along 
with copy of the order sheets will be filed immediately upon 
completion of four months. 
 List for consideration and orders in the first half of December 
2023”. 

6. In compliance with the said order, the affidavits are filed on behalf of 
the State of Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar with regard to the 
steps 
taken/being 
taken 
by 
them 
for 
submitting 
the 
Chargesheets/Police Reports in accordance with law. 
7. The Police Report submitted by the police under Section 173(2) being 
very important piece of document from the view point of the 
prosecution, the defence and the court, we deem it necessary to 
elaborately deal with the various aspects involved in the said 
provision. For the reasons stated hereinafter, we are of the opinion 
that it is incumbent on the part of the Investigating Officer to strictly 
comply with the requirements of the said provisions, as non-
compliance thereof gives rise to many legal issues in the court of law. 
8. As per Section 2(r) of Cr.P.C, “Police Report” means a report 
forwarded by a Police Officer to a Magistrate under sub-section (2) of 
Section 173. 
9. Section 173 reads as under: - 
 
“173. Report of police officer on completion of investigation. — 
 
(1) Every investigation under this Chapter shall be completed 
without unnecessary delay. 
 
[(1A) The investigation in relation to [an offence under sections 
376,376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB or 376E] 
from the date on which the information was recorded by the 
officer in charge of the police station.] 

(2) (i) As soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of the police 
station shall forward to a Magistrate empowered to take 
cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in the form 
prescribed by the State Government, stating— 

the names of the parties; 

the nature of the information; 

the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted 
with the circumstances of the case; 

whether any offence appears to have been committed 
and, if so, by whom; 

whether the accused has been arrested; 

whether he has been released on his bond and, if so, 
whether with or without sureties; 

whether he has been forwarded in custody under section 
170. 
 
(h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman has 
been attached where investigation relates to an offence under 2 
[ sections 376,376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB] 
or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)].] 
 
(ii) The officer shall also communicate, in such manner as may 
be prescribed by the State Government, the action taken by him, 
to the person, if any, by whom the information relating to the 
commission of the offence was first given. 
 
(3) Where a superior officer of police has been appointed under 
section 158, the report shall, in any case in which the State 
Government by general or special order so directs, be submitted 
through that officer, and he may, pending the orders of the 
Magistrate, direct the officer in charge of the police station to 
make further investigation. 
 
(4) Whenever it appears from a report forwarded under this 
section that the accused has been released on his bond, the 
Magistrate shall make such order for the discharge of such bond 
or otherwise as he thinks fit. 

(5) When such report is in respect of a case to which section 170 
applies, the police officer shall forward to the Magistrate along 
with the report— 
 
(a) all documents or relevant extracts thereof on which the 
prosecution proposes to rely other than those already sent to the 
Magistrate during investigation; 
 
(b) the statements recorded under section 161 of all the persons 
whom the prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses. 
 
(6) If the police officer is of opinion that any part of any such 
statement is not relevant to the subject-matter of the proceedings 
or that its disclosure to the accused is not essential in the 
interests of justice and is inexpedient in the public interest, he 
shall indicate that part of the statement and append a note 
requesting the Magistrate to exclude that part from the copies to 
be granted to the accused and stating his reasons for making 
such request. 
 
(7) Where the police officer investigating the case finds it 
convenient so to do, he may furnish to the accused copies of all 
or any of the documents referred to in sub-section (5). 
 
(8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further 
investigation in respect of an offence after a report under sub-
section (2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate and, where 
upon such investigation, the officer in charge of the police station 
obtains further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward 
to the Magistrate a further report or reports regarding such 
evidence in the form prescribed; and the provisions of sub- 
sections (2) to (6) shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such 
report or reports as they apply in relation to a report forwarded 
under sub-section (2)”. 

10. The procedure for investigation has been laid down in Section 157 of 
Cr.P.C. which states inter alia that if from the information received or 
otherwise, an officer in charge of a police station has reason to 

suspect the commission of an offence which he is empowered under 
Section 156 to investigate, he shall forthwith send a report of the same 
to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of such offence upon 
a police report and shall proceed in person, or shall depute one of his 
subordinate officers to proceed, to the spot, to investigate the facts 
and circumstances of the case, and, if necessary, to take measures 
for the discovery and arrest of the offender. Such report would be in 
the nature of preliminary report. As per Section 169, upon the 
completion of the investigation, if it appears to the officer in charge of 
the police station that there is not sufficient evidence or reasonable 
ground of suspicion to justify the forwarding of the accused to a 
Magistrate, such officer shall, if such person is in custody, release him 
on his executing a bond, with or without sureties, as such officer may 
direct, to appear, if and when so required, before the Magistrate 
empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, and 
to try the accused or commit him for trial. Section 170 deals with the 
cases to be sent to Magistrate when evidence is sufficient. The 
relevant part of Section 170(1) reads as under: - 
“170. Cases to be sent to Magistrate, when evidence is 
sufficient.—(1) If, upon an investigation under this Chapter, it 
appears to the officer in charge of the police station that there is 
sufficient evidence or reasonable ground as aforesaid, such 
officer shall forward the accused under custody to a Magistrate 
empowered to take cognizance of the offence upon a police 
report and to try the accused or commit him for trial, or, if the 

offence is bailable and the accused is able to give security, shall 
take security from him for his appearance before such Magistrate 
on a day fixed and for his attendance from day to day before such 
Magistrate until otherwise directed.” 
 
11. Section 172 pertains to the Diary of proceedings in investigation, 
which requires every police officer making an investigation under 
Chapter XII Cr.P.C. to enter his proceedings in the investigation in a 
diary day by day. Sub-section (IA) of Section 172 requires that the 
statements of the witnesses recorded during the course of 
investigation under section 161 have to be inserted in the case diary; 
and sub-section (1B) of Section 172 requires that such diary shall be 
a volume and duly paginated. 
12. We are more concerned with Section 173(2) as we have found that 
the investigating officers while submitting the chargesheet/Police 
Report do not comply with the requirements of the said provision. 
Though it is true that the form of the report to be submitted under 
Section 173(2) has to be prescribed by the State Government and 
each State Government has its own Police Manual to be followed by 
the police officers while discharging their duty, the mandatory 
requirements required to be complied with by such officers in the 
Police Report/Chargesheet are laid down in Section 173, more 
particularly sub-section (2) thereof. 

13. It may be noted that though there are various reports required to be 
submitted by the police in charge of the police station before, during 
and after the investigation as contemplated in Chapter XII of Cr.P.C., 
it is only the report forwarded by the police officer to the Magistrate 
under sub-section (2) of Section 173 Cr.P.C. that can form the basis 
for the competent court for taking cognizance thereupon. A 
chargesheet is nothing but a final report of the police officer under 
Section 173(2) of Cr.P.C. It is an opinion or intimation of the 
investigating officer to the concerned court that on the material 
collected during the course of investigation, an offence appears to 
have been committed by the particular person or persons, or that no 
offence appears to have been committed. 
14. When such a Police Report concludes that an offence appears to 
have been committed by a particular person or persons, the 
Magistrate has three options: (i) he may accept the report and take 
cognizance of the offence and issue process, (ii) he may direct further 
investigation under sub-section (3) of Section 156 and require the 
police to make a further report, or (iii) he may disagree with the report 
and discharge the accused or drop the proceedings. If such Police 
Report concludes that no offence appears to have been committed, 
the Magistrate again has three options: (i) he may accept the report 
and drop the proceedings, or (ii) he may disagree with the report and 

taking the view that there is sufficient ground for proceeding further, 
take cognizance of the offence and issue process, or (iii) he may 
direct further investigation to be made by the police under sub-section 
(3) of Section 1561. 
15. The issues with regard to the compliance of Section 173(2) Cr.P.C., 
may also arise, when the investigating officer submits Police Report 
only qua some of the persons-accused named in the FIR, keeping 
open the investigation qua the other persons-accused, or when all the 
documents as required under Section 173(5) are not submitted. In 
such a situation, the question that is often posed before the court is 
whether such a Police Report could be said to have been submitted 
in compliance with sub-section (2) of Section 173 Cr.P.C. In this 
regard, it may be noted that in Satya Narain Musadi & Ors. vs. State 
of Bihar2, this Court has observed that statutory requirement of the 
report under Section 173(2) would be complied with if various details 
prescribed therein are included in the report. The report is complete if 
it is accompanied with all the documents and statements of witnesses 
as required by Section 175(5). In Dinesh Dalmia vs. CBI3, however, 
it has been held that even if all the documents are not filed, by reason 
 
1 Bhagwant Singh vs. Commissioner of Police & Anr.; (1985) 
2 (1980) 
3 (2007) 

thereof the submission of the chargesheet itself would not be vitiated 
in law. Such issues often arise when the accused would make his 
claim for default bail under Section 167(2) of Cr.P.C. and contend that 
all the documents having not been submitted as required under 
Section 173(5), or the investigation qua some of the persons having 
been kept open while submitting Police Report under Section 173(2), 
the requirements under Section 173(2) could not be said to have been 
complied with. In this regard, this Court recently held in case of CBI 
vs. Kapil Wadhwan & Anr.4 that: - 
“Once from the material produced along with the chargesheet, 
the court is satisfied about the commission of an offence and 
takes cognizance of the offence allegedly committed by the 
accused, it is immaterial whether the further investigation in 
terms of Section 173(8) is pending or not. The pendency of the 
further investigation qua the other accused or for production of 
some documents not available at the time of filing of chargesheet 
would neither vitiate the chargesheet, nor would it entitle the 
accused to claim right to get default bail on the ground that the 
chargesheet was an incomplete chargesheet or that the 
chargesheet was not filed in terms of Section 173(2) of Cr.P.C.” 
 
16. The above referred discussion has been necessitated for highlighting 
the significance of the compliance of requirements of the provisions 
contained in Section 173(2) of Cr.P.C. 
 
4 ) 

17. Ergo, having regard to the provisions contained in Section 173 it is 
hereby directed that the Report of police officer on the completion of 
investigation shall contain the following: - 
(i) A report in the form prescribed by the State Government 
stating- 
(a) the names of the parties; 
(b) the nature of the information; 
(c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted with 
the circumstances of the case; 
(d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if 
so, by whom; 
(e) whether the accused has been arrested; 
(f) whether he has been released on his bond and, if so, whether 
with or without sureties; 
(g) whether he has been forwarded in custody under section 170. 
(h) Whether the report of medical examination of the woman has 
been attached where investigation relates to an offence under 
[sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB] 
or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)” 
(ii) If upon the completion of investigation, there is no sufficient 
evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion to justify the 
forwarding of the accused to a Magistrate, the Police officer in 
charge shall clearly state in the Report about the compliance of 
Section 169 Cr.PC. 
(iii) When the report in respect of a case to which Section 170 
applies, the police officer shall forward to the Magistrate along 
with the report, all the documents or relevant extracts thereof on 
which the prosecution proposes to rely other than those already 
sent to the Magistrate during investigation; and the statements 
recorded under Section 161 of all the persons whom the 
prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses. 
(iv) In case of further investigation, the Police officer in charge 
shall forward to the Magistrate a further report or reports 
regarding such evidence in the form prescribed and shall also 

comply with the details mentioned in the above sub para (i) to 
(iii). 
 
18. It is further directed that the officer in charge of the police stations in 
every State shall strictly comply with the afore-stated directions, and 
the non-compliance thereof shall be strictly viewed by the concerned 
courts in which the Police Reports are submitted. 
19. Copy of this order be sent to all the Chief Secretaries of the States/UTs 
as also to Registrar Generals of the High Courts for perusal and 
compliance. The appeal stands disposed of accordingly. 
 
 ……………………………………J. 
 [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 

 ……………..……………………. J. 
 
 [PANKAJ MITHAL] 

NEW DELHI; 

MARCH, 12th 2024.