IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. /2024 
 SLP (C) NO. 666 /2021 

THE STATE OF GUJARAT & ANR. 
 
 …. APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
PARESH NATHALAL CHAUHAN 

JUDGMENT 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
We are called upon to expunge a portion from the interim order of 
the High Court and dispose of the appeal as it is represented to us that 
the respondent is not interested in initiating proceedings against the 
officers in the present matter. We have accepted the request and hereby 
dispose of the appeal. 
3. 
The portion sought to be expunged is the observation of the High 
Court that the good faith clause in Section 157 of the GST Act1, may 
 
1 “157. Protection of action taken under this Act.—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceedings shall lie against the President, State President, Members, officers or other 
employees of the Appellate Tribunal or any other person authorised by the said Appellate 
Tribunal for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or 
the rules made thereunder. 
(2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer appointed 
or authorised under this Act for anything which is done or intended to be done in good 
faith under this Act or the rules made thereunder.” 

not be available to the officers of the State as their conduct, according 
to the High Court, “may not” justify protection. We have expunged that 
portion of the order because the context as well as the conclusions of 
the High Court are wrong. We will explain this after indicating the 
relevant facts. 
4. 
This civil appeal arises out of an interim order passed by the High 
Court of Gujarat2 in a writ petition filed by the respondent seeking a 
direction for protection from arrest under section 69 read with section 
132 of the GST Act. The High Court is still examining the writ petition, 
but by the interim order impugned herein, it criticised the prolonged 
stay of the search party at the residence of the respondents as 
unauthorized and illegal. We need not deal with the merits of the issue 
as the matter is still pending before the High Court, more so when the 
respondent has submitted that he is not interested in proceeding 
against the officers and seeks a quietus to the issue. 
5. 
In fact, while issuing notice in the appeal on 16.07.2021, this 
Court passed the following order. The order is indicative of the limited 
scrutiny sought to be made by this Court and it is evident from the 
following: 
“Without in any manner condoning the conduct of the officers which 
has been commented upon, what persuades us to issue notice is the 
fact that there are observations to the effect that the statutory 
protection available to the officers would not be a defence in case 
proceedings were to be initiated against those officers by the original 
 
2 In Special. petitioners or their family members and such an observation has been 
made in the absence of the officers. 
Issue notice limited to the aforesaid aspect returnable in six weeks.” 
 
6. 
The relevant portion in the order of the High Court that the 
statutory protection should not be made available to the officers is in 
paragraph 28 and it is relevant for us to extract the same. 
“28. 
Lastly the court may sound a word of caution to the authorities 
exercising powers under the GST Acts. Sub-section (2) of section 157 
of the GST Acts says that no suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceedings shall lie against any officer appointed or authorized under 
the Act for anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith 
under the Act or the rules made thereunder. An action like the present 
one which is not contemplated under any statutory provision and 
which infringes the fundamental rights’ of citizens under article 21 of 
the Constitution of India may not be protected under this section. An 
action taken may be said to be in good faith if the officer is otherwise 
so empowered and he exceeds the scope of his authority. However, in 
a case like the present one where the authorization was for search 
and seizure of goods liable to confiscation, documents, books or things 
and the concerned officer converted it into a search for a person and 
in investigation, which is not otherwise backed by any statutory 
provision, it may be difficult to accept that such action was in good 
faith. Protection of such action under section 157 of the GST Acts may 
unleash a regime of terror insofar as the taxable persons are 
concerned.” 
 
7. 
In the above-referred paragraph, the High Court was of the view 
that the protection contemplated under section 157 of the GST Act, 
which is in the nature of a good faith clause, “may not” be available to 
the officers. This is the issue with which we are concerned, and we will 
dwell upon it. 
8. 
A good faith clause, explained in the vocabulary of the rights and 
duties regime, can be said to be a provision of immunity to a statutory 
functionary. Such provisions are in recognition of public interest in 
protecting a statutory functionary against prosecution or legal 

proceedings. This immunity is limited. It is confined to acts done 
honestly and in furtherance of achieving the statutory purpose and 
objective. Section 3(22) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 best explains 
‘good faith’ as an act done honestly, whether it is done negligently or 
not.3 Good faith clauses in statutes providing immunity against suits, 
prosecution or other legal proceedings against officials exercising 
statutory power are therefore limited by their very nature, that far, and 
no further. The scope and ambit of good faith has been explained in a 
number of decisions of this Court,4 which need not be elaborated herein 
again. 
9. 
A good faith clause in a statute will therefore be a defense. If 
successfully pleaded, it not only legitimises the action but also protects 
the statutory functionary from any legal action. If a statutory 
functionary invokes the defence of good faith in a suit, prosecution or 
other legal proceedings initiated against him, it is for the court or a 
judicial body to consider, adjudicate, and determine whether the claim 
that the action was done in good faith is made out or not. Such a 
scrutiny, enquiry, or examination is done only in a proceeding against 
the statutory functionary. This Court has held that the scrutiny 
 
3 Section 3(22) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 defines ‘good faith’ as follows: 
“3. Definitions.—In this Act, and in all Central Acts and Regulations made after the 
commencement of this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,— 
(22) a thing shall be deemed to be done in “good faith” where it is in fact done honestly, 
whether it is done negligently or not;” 
4 See Goondla Venkateswarlu v. State of AP, (2008), paras 22 and 23; Army 
Headquarters v. CBI (2012), paras 69-78. whether the act is done in good faith or not would depend upon the 
facts and circumstances of each case.5 
10. It is in the above referred context that we have examined the 
observations made by the High Court in Paragraph 28 extracted 
hereinabove. The High Court was not conducting a suit, prosecution, 
or other legal proceeding against a statutory functionary. We have no 
doubt that the High Court was conscious of the principles governing 
good faith clauses and therefore couched its displeasure and distress 
by stating that such officials “may not” be protected or that it “may be 
difficult” to accept the contention of good faith. We are of the opinion 
that these observations are in the nature of advance rulings. This is 
because even before the initiation of a suit, prosecution or legal 
proceeding, the High Court expressed a tentative opinion. If such 
observations remain, they will affect the integrity and independence of 
that adjudication, compromising the prosecution and the defence 
equally. 
11. We say no more than reiterate that a citizen of this country has a 
right of accountability, for which he is entitled to initiate and adopt 
such legal remedies as are available to him, and in such proceedings 
the statutory functionary is equally entitled to take a defense of good 
faith. It is for the court to adjudicate and decide. 
 
5 See, for example, Army Headquarters (supra), paras 76-78. 

12. In view of the above, we expunge paragraph 28 and dispose of the 
appeal. 
 
……..……………………………….J. 
 [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha] 

 ……….………………………….J. 
[Aravind Kumar] 
 
New Delhi; 
March 12, 2024