Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal No. of 2024 
(@) 

Srikant Upadhyay & Ors. 

…Appellants 
Versus 
 
State of Bihar & Anr. 

 …Respondents 
JUDGMENT 
 
C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. 

Leave granted. 
1. 
This appeal is directed against the order dated 
04.04.2023 in CRLM No.67668 of 2022 passed by the High 
Court of Judicature at Patna whereby and whereunder 
the application for anticipatory bail filed by the appellant 
was dismissed. The pre-arrest bail application was 
moved in connection with FIR No.79 of 2020, registered 
against him and co-accused at Govidganj, Police Station, 
District East Champaran, Bihar, under Sections 341, 323, 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

354, 354 (B), 379, 504, 506 and 149 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (for short, ‘IPC’) and Section 3/4 of 
Prevention of Witch (Daain) Practices Act, 1999 (for 
short, ‘the Daain Act’). 
2. 
Heard, Mr. Basant R., learned Senior Counsel for 
the appellants and Mr. Anshul Narayan, learned counsel 
for the respondent-State. 
3. 
The question of seminal importance that arises for 
consideration can better be explained and understood 
by referring to a decision of this Court in Prem Shankar 
Prasad v. State of Bihar and Anr.1, which was rendered 
after referring to the earlier decisions of this Court in 
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Pradeep Sharma2 and 
Lavesh v. State (NCT of Delhi)3. In Lavesh’s case 
(supra), this Court held in paragraph 12 thus: - 
“12. From these materials and information, it is clear 
that the present appellant was not available for 
 
1 (2022) 
2 (2014) 
3 (2012) 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

interrogation and investigation and declared as 
“absconder”. 
Normally, 
when 
the 
accused 
is 
“absconding” and declared as a “proclaimed 
offender”, there is no question of granting anticipatory 
bail. We reiterate that when a person against whom a 
warrant had been issued and is absconding or 
concealing himself in order to avoid execution of 
warrant and declared as a proclaimed offender in 
terms of Section 82 of the Code he is not entitled to the 
relief of anticipatory bail.” 
(Underline supplied) 
 
4. 
In the decision in Pradeep Sharma’s case (supra) 
this Court held that if anyone is declared as an 
absconder/proclaimed offender in terms of Section 82 
Cr.PC., he is not entitled to relief of anticipatory bail. 
After extracting Section 438, Cr.PC., it was further held 
therein thus:- 
“The above provision makes it clear that the power 
exercisable under Section 438 of the Code is 
somewhat extraordinary in character and it is to be 
exercised only in exceptional cases where it appears 
that the person may be falsely implicated or where 
there are reasonable grounds for holding that a 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

person accused of an offence is not likely to otherwise 
misuse his liberty.” 
 
5. 
In Prem Shankar Prasad’s case (supra), this Court 
took note of the fact that the respondent-accused was 
absconding and concealing himself to avoid service of 
warrant of arrest and the proceedings under Sections 
82/83, Cr.PC have been initiated against him, set aside 
the order of the High Court granting anticipatory bail 
ignoring the proceedings under Sections 82/83, Cr.PC. 
Thus, it is obvious that the position of law, which was 
being followed with alacrity, is that in cases where an 
accused against whom non-bailable warrant is pending 
and the process of proclamation under Sections 82/83, 
Cr.PC is issued, is not entitled to the relief of anticipatory 
bail. 
6. 
The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 
appellants-accused would contend that the well-nigh 
settled position of law in respect of pre-arrest bail as 
above, is inapplicable in a case where a person 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

apprehending arrest has already filed an application 
seeking anticipatory bail and it is pending sans any 
interim orders and during its pendency if the Trial Court 
issues proclamation under Section 82, Cr.PC. In short, 
the proposition of law raised is – when an application 
seeking 
anticipatory 
bail 
filed 
by 
a 
person 
apprehending arrest is pending without any interim 
protection, whether initiation of proceeding for issuance 
of proclamation under Section 82, Cr. PC would make 
that application worthy for further consideration on its 
own merits? According to the learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the appellants even in such envisaged 
circumstances and despite the pendency of non-bailable 
warrant, the pending application for anticipatory bail is 
liable to be considered on its own merits and at any rate, 
on the aforesaid grounds the pending application of pre-
arrest bail could not be dismissed. 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

7., the learned counsel appearing for the 
State vehemently opposed the proposition(s) mooted on 
behalf of the appellants. It is submitted that the issuance 
of non-bailable warrant and initiation of the proceedings 
under Section 82, Cr.PC are justiciable. Certainly, in the 
absence of an interim protection, there can be no legal 
trammel for issuing non-bailable warrant or for initiating 
proceedings under Section 82, Cr. PC. merely because 
of the pendency of an application for anticipatory bail 
though more often than not, under such circumstances 
subordinate Courts would wait for orders of the High 
Court. It be so, existence of any such circumstance 
would disentitle a person to press for pre-arrest bail. 
Even a pending application is not maintainable, it is 
contended. 
8. 
It is thus obvious from the catena of decisions 
dealing with bail that even while clarifying that arrest 
should be the last option and it should be restricted to 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

cases where arrest is imperative in the facts and 
circumstances of a case, the consistent view is that the 
grant of anticipatory bail shall be restricted to 
exceptional circumstances. In other words, the position 
is that the power to grant anticipatory bail under Section 
438, Cr. PC is an exceptional power and should be 
exercised only in exceptional cases and not as a matter 
of course. Its object is to ensure that a person should not 
be harassed or humiliated in order to satisfy the grudge 
or personal vendetta of the complainant. (See the 
decision of this Court in HDFC Bank Ltd. v. J.J.Mannan 
& Anr.4). 
9. 
When a Court grants anticipatory bail what it 
actually does is only to make an order that in the event of 
arrest, the arrestee shall be released on bail, subject to 
the terms and conditions. Taking note of the fact the said 
power is to be exercised in exceptional circumstances 
 
4 2010 (1) SCC 679 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

and that it may cause some hinderance to the normal flow 
of investigation method when called upon to exercise the 
power under Section 438, Cr.PC, courts must keep 
reminded of the position that law aides only the abiding 
and certainly not its resistant. By saying so, we mean that 
a person, having subjected to investigation on a serious 
offence and upon making out a case, is included in a 
charge sheet or even after filing of a refer report, later, 
in accordance with law, the Court issues a summons to a 
person, he is bound to submit himself to the authority of 
law. It only means that though he will still be at liberty, 
rather, in his right, to take recourse to the legal remedies 
available only in accordance with law, but not in its 
defiance. We will dilate this discussion with reference 
to the factual matrix of this case. However, we think that 
before dealing with the same, a small deviation to have 
a glance at the scope and application of the provisions 
under Section 82, Cr.PC will not be inappropriate. 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

10. 
There can be little doubt with respect to the 
position that the sine qua non for initiation of an action 
under Section 82, Cr. PC is prior issuance of warrant of 
arrest by the Court concerned. In that regard it is 
relevant to refer to Section 82 (1), Cr. PC, which reads 
thus: - 
“82. Proclamation for person absconding. — (1) If 
any Court has reason to believe (whether after taking 
evidence or not) that any person against whom a 
warrant has been issued by it has absconded or is 
concealing himself so that such warrant cannot be 
executed, such Court may publish a written 
proclamation requiring him to appear at a specified 
place and at a specified time not less than thirty days 
from the date of publishing such proclamation.” 
 
11. 
The use of expression ‘reason to believe’ employed 
in Section 82 (1) Cr. PC would suggest that the Magistrate 
concerned must be subjectively satisfied that the person 
concerned has absconded or has concealed himself. In 
the context of Section 82, Cr. PC, we will have to 
understand the importance of the term ‘absconded’. Its 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

etymological and ordinary sense is that one who is 
hiding himself or concealing himself and avoiding 
arrest. Since the legality of the proceedings under 
Section 82, Cr. PC is not under challenge, we need not 
go into that question. As noticed above, the nub of the 
contentions is that pending the application for pre-arrest 
bail, proclamation under Section 82, Cr.P.C., should not 
have been issued and at any rate, its issuance shall not 
be a reason for declining to consider such application on 
merits. Bearing in mind the position of law revealed 
from the decisions referred to hereinbefore and the 
positions of law, we will briefly refer to the factual 
background of the case. 
12. 
For considering the aforesaid proposition of law, 
we think it absolutely unnecessary to deal with FIR No. 
37 of 2018 dated 28.03.2018 filed against Respondent 
No.2, Mr. Rajiv Kumar Upadhyay and four others, and 
also FIR No.66 of 2018 registered against appellant No.4 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

(first accused) and four other family members of the 
appellants. filed against the 
family 
members 
of 
the 
appellants 
for 
illegal 
encroachment is also not to be considered as nothing 
would turn out of it in relation to the question posed for 
consideration. We may hasten to add that if the question 
whether the appellants are entitled to anticipatory bail 
survives, even after answering the aforementioned 
question(s) posed for consideration, we may refer to the 
relevant aspects in relation to the said cases. 
13. 
As noticed hereinbefore, the appellants herein 
moved the application for anticipatory bail in connection 
with FIR No.79 of 2020 registered at Govindgunj Police 
Station. It is a fact that the subject FIR was registered 
pursuant to the directions of the learned Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, East Champaran, Motihari on complaint 
No.395 of 2020 filed by Respondent No.4 under Section 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

156 (3), Cr. PC. The allegations in the complaint are as 
follows: - 
On 22.02.2020, at about 8.00 am, when Jagmati 
Kunwar, the grandmother of respondent No.4 reached in 
front of the house of appellant No.2, Shashikant 
Upadhyay, he said that she is the witch who made his 
child sick and shall not be spared. Then, the appellants 
and eight other family members gathered around her 
and the 4th appellant caught hold of her hair and asked 
the others to bring dung. Thereupon, accused Paritosh 
Kumar brought dung and accused Rishu put dung into 
the mouth of Jagmati Kunwar. Consequently, she 
vomited and fell down. When respondent No.2/ 
complainant and other witnesses went for her help, the 
second appellant Shashikant Upadhayay assaulted and 
abused respondent No.2. Co-accused Paritosh Kumar 
and Jishu Kumar tore the blouse of Kiran Devi and she 
was disrobed. Another co-accused Soni Devi snatched a 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

gold chain from the complainant. The co-accused 
Ravikant and appellant No.5 tore the clothes of Jagmati 
Kunwar and made her half-naked. 
14. 
Later, after completing the investigation, charge 
sheet was filed on 08.08.2022 only for offences under 
Sections 341, 323 and 504 IPC, that too only against 
accused Lakhpati Kunwar (accused No.7). However, the 
learned Trial Court, on perusal of the FIR, charge sheet 
and case diary found that sufficient materials are 
available in the case diary to proceed against the other 
12 accused, including the appellants herein and 
accordingly 
vide 
order 
dated 
20.02.2021 
took 
cognizance of the offences under Sections 341, 323, 
354B, IPC and Section 3/4 of the Daain Act and issued 
summons to all accused including the appellants and 
fixed 12.04.2022 as the date for their appearance. The 
accused were absent on that day and hence on 
12.04.2022, the Trial Court issued bailable warrants. On 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

25.05.2022, the accused, other than the appellants 
herein, appeared and applied for regular bail before the 
Trial Court and the Trial Court granted them regular bail. 
Subsequently, the complainant/the second respondent 
herein, applied for cancellation of bail granted to them 
and as per the order dated 09.06.2022 the grantees of 
bail were issued with show cause notices. Upon 
receiving the notice for cancellation of bail, they 
unsuccessfully 
approached 
the 
Sessions 
Court 
challenging the order taking cognizance, in Criminal 
Revision Petition No.94 of 2022. Pursuant to the dismissal 
of the Revision Petition, the Trial Court posted the 
application for cancellation of bail on different dates. 
The fact is that despite such developments, the 
appellants herein neither appeared before the Trial 
Court nor sought for regular bail. In the meanwhile, the 
appellants 
herein 
moved 
a 
bail-cum-surrender 
application (described as such by them), before the Trial 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

Court. However, it was withdrawn on 23.08.2022 on the 
fear of arrest. Thereupon, the Trial Court fixed the date 
for appearance of the appellants on 30.08.2022. Before 
the date fixed for their appearance, the appellants filed 
application for anticipatory bail before the Sessions 
Court and, thereafter on 06.09.2022, informed the Trial 
Court about its listing before the Sessions Court on 
27.09.2022 for final hearing. The Trial Court thereupon 
posted the matter for appearance of the appellants to 
11.10.2022. The anticipatory bail moved by the 
appellants was dismissed on 27.09.2022 and thereupon, 
the Trial Court took up the matter on 03.11.2022. Since 
the appellants remained absent, the Trial Court issued 
non-bailable warrants and listed the matter to 04.11.2022 
for their production. Meanwhile, the appellants herein 
approached the High Court by filing CRLM No.67668 of 
2022 seeking anticipatory bail. It is to be noted that non-
bailable warrants were pending against them when they 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

moved the said application for anticipatory bail. On 
04.12.2022, on behalf of the appellants, the Trial Court 
was informed about the filing of anticipatory bail 
application before the High Court. Consequently, the 
matter was listed on 04.01.2023. On 04.01.2023, pursuant 
to the non-appearance of the appellants despite the 
earlier order for their appearance and the issuance of 
non-bailable 
warrants, 
the 
Trial 
Court 
issued 
proclamation under Section 82(1), Cr. PC. Later, 
proceedings under Section 83, Cr.PC were also initiated. 
On 15.03.2023, on behalf of the appellants it was prayed 
to postpone the process under Section 82/83, Cr. PC. 
However, the Trial Court proceeded to issue the process 
under Section 83, Cr. PC, based on the proclamation 
under Section 82(1) Cr.PC. On 04.04.2023, the 
application for anticipatory bail filed by the appellants 
was dismissed, obviously taking note of the proceedings 
under Sections 82/83, Cr. PC and observing that owing 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

to such developments the application for pre-arrest bail 
could not be maintained. 
15. 
The core contention of the appellants is that the 
rejection of the application for anticipatory bail without 
considering the application on merits for the reason of 
issuance of proclamation under Section 82, Cr. PC, is 
unsustainable. It is the further contended that at no 
stage, the appellants were “evading the arrest” or 
“absconding” but were only exercising their legal right 
to seek anticipatory bail. It is in the aforesaid 
circumstances 
that 
the 
learned 
Senior 
Counsel 
appearing for the appellants raised the contention that 
when an application for anticipatory bail is pending, the 
issuance of proclamation, following issuance of non-
bailable warrant could not be a reason for non-
considering the application for anticipatory bail on 
merits. 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

16. 
For a proper consideration of the aforesaid 
contentions and allied questions, it is only appropriate to 
refer to certain provisions of law as also certain relevant 
decisions. From the chronology of events narrated 
hereinbefore, it is evident that for reasons best known to 
the appellants, subsequent to the filing of the final report 
in terms of the provisions under Section 173 (2), Cr.P.C 
in FIR No.79/2020 and issuance of summons, issuance of 
bailable warrants and issuance of non-bailable warrants; 
pursuant to the failure of the appellants to appear before 
the Court on the date fixed for their appearance based 
on bailable warrants, they did not care to take any action 
in accordance with law except moving applications for 
bail. Same was the position even after the issuance of the 
proclamation under Section 82, Cr.PC. As noted earlier, 
in the case of similarly situated co-accused of the 
appellants, they appeared and obtained regular bail 
pursuant to the issuance of bailable warrants. Thus, a 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

scanning of the acts and omissions of the appellants, it 
can only be seen that virtually, the appellants were 
defying the authority of law and moving applications for 
bail when they apprehended arrest owing to their non-
attendance and dis-obedience. It is in the context of the 
aforesaid facts revealed from the materials on record 
that the contention of the appellants that they were only 
pursuing their right to file application for anticipatory 
bail and, therefore, they were not either evading the 
arrest or absconding, has to be appreciated. 
17. 
Section 70 (2), Cr. PC mandates that every warrant 
issued under Section 70 (1), Cr. PC shall remain in force 
until it is cancelled by the Court which issued it, or until 
it is executed. In this case, as noticed hereinbefore, the 
bailable warrants and thereafter the non-bailable 
warrants, were issued against the appellants. They were 
neither cancelled by the Trial Court nor they were 
executed. It is not their case that they have successfully 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

challenged them. Sections 19, 20, 21, 174 and 174 A, IPC 
assume relevance in this context. They, insofar as 
relevant read thus: 
19. “Judge”. —The word “Judge” denotes not only 
every person who is officially designated as a Judge, 
but also every person 
who is empowered by law to give, in any legal 
proceeding, civil or criminal, a definitive judgment, or 
a judgment which, if not appealed against, would be 
definitive, or a judgment which, if confirmed by some 
other authority, would be definitive, or who is one of a 
body or persons, which body of persons is empowered 
by law to give such a judgment. 
20. “Court of Justice”.—The words “Court of Justice” 
denote a Judge who is empowered by law to act 
judicially alone, or a body of Judges which is 
empowered by law to act judicially as a body, when 
such Judge or body of Judges is acting judicially. 
21. “Public servant”.—The words “public servant” 
denote a person falling under any of the descriptions 
hereinafter following, namely:— 
… 
[Third.—Every 
Judge 
including 
any 
person 
empowered by law to discharge, whether by himself 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

or as a member of any body of persons, any 
adjudicatory functions;] 
174. Non-attendance in obedience to an order from 
public servant.—Whoever, being legally bound to 
attend in person or by an agent at a certain place and 
time in obedience to a summons, notice, order, or 
proclamation proceeding from any public servant 
legally competent, as such public servant, to issue the 
same, 
intentionally omits to attend at that place or time, or 
departs from the place where he is bound to attend 
before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart, 
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one month, or with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both, 
or, if the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to 
attend in person or by agent in a Court of Justice, with 
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
174A.Non-appearance 
in 
response 
to 
a 
proclamation under section 82 of Act 2 of 1974.— 
Whoever fails to appear at the specified place and the 
specified time as required by a proclamation 
published under sub-section (1) of section 82 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall be punished 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years or with fine or with both, and where a 
declaration has been made under sub-section (4) of 
that section pronouncing him as a proclaimed 
offender, he shall be punished with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to seven years and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
 
18. 
Taking note of the aforesaid facts with respect to 
the issuance of summons, warrants and subsequently the 
proclamation, a conjoint reading of Sections 19, 20 and 
21, IPC containing the terms “Judge”, “Court of Justice” 
and “Public Servant” and Sections 174 and 174A, IPC can 
make them liable even to face further proceedings. 
Same is the position in case of non-attendance in 
obedience to proclamation under Section 82, Cr. PC. 
19. 
Bearing in mind the aforesaid provisions and 
position, we will refer to certain relevant decisions. In 
Savitaben Govindbhai Patel & Ors. v. State of Gujarat5, 
the High Court of Gujarat observed thus: - 
 
5 2004 SCC OnLine Guj 345 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

“9. Filing of an Anticipatory Bail Application by the 
petitioners-accused through their advocate cannot be 
said to be an appearance of the petitioners-accused in 
a competent Court, so far as proceeding initiated 
under Section 82/83 of the Code is concerned; 
otherwise each absconding accused would try to 
create shelter by filing an Anticipatory Bail Application 
to avoid obligation to appear before the court and 
raises the proceeding under Section 83 of the Code 
claiming that he cannot be termed as an absconder in 
the eye of law. Physical appearance before the Court 
is most important, if relevant scheme of Sections 82 
and 83, is read closely.” 
(underline supplied) 
 
20. 
We are in full agreement with the view taken by the 
Gujarat High Court that filing of an anticipatory bail 
through an advocate would not and could not be treated 
as appearance before a court by a person against whom 
such proceedings, as mentioned above are instituted. 
The meaning of the term “absconded” has been dealt by 
us hereinbefore. We found that its etymological and 
original sense is that the accused is hiding himself. What 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

is required as proof for absconding is the evidence to the 
effect that the person concerned was knowing that he 
was wanted and also about pendency of warrant of 
arrest. A detailed discussion is not warranted in this case 
to understand that the appellants were actually 
absconding. It is not in dispute that they were served 
with the “summons”. The fact that bailable warrants 
were issued against them on 12.04.2022 is also not 
disputed, as the appellants themselves have produced 
the order whereunder bailable warrants were issued 
against them. We have already referred to Section 70 
(2), Cr. PC which would reveal the position that once a 
warrant is issued it would remain in force until it is 
cancelled by the Court which issued it or until its 
execution. There is no case for the appellants that either 
of such events had occurred in this case to make the 
warrants unenforceable. They also got no case that their 
application was interfered with by a higher Court. That 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

apart, it is a fact that the appellants themselves on 
23.08.2022, moved a bail-cum-surrender application 
before the Trial Court but withdrew the same fearing 
arrest. It is also relevant to note that in the case on hand 
even while contending that they were before a Court, the 
appellants got no case that in terms of the provisions 
under Section 438 (1-B), Cr. PC an order for their 
presence before the Court was ordered either suo motu 
by the Court or on an application by the public 
prosecutor. When that be the circumstance, the 
appellants cannot be allowed to contend that they were 
not hiding or concealing themselves from arrest or that 
they were not knowing that they were wanted in a Court 
of law. 
21. 
To understand and consider another contention of 
the appellants it is worthy to extract ground No.3 raised 
by the appellants in SLP which reads thus: 
“III. Because the Hon'ble High Court has failed to 
appreciate that proclamation under section 82 Cr.P.C. 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

was issued on 04.01.2023 by the Ld. Trial Court and 
thereafter process under section 83 Cr.P.C. have been 
initiated on 15.03.2023 whereas the application for 
anticipatory bail by the petitioner before the Hon'ble 
High Court was filed in November, 2022, however, the 
same was came for hearing on 04.04.2023. It is, 
therefore, evident that when the petitioners preferred 
filing of anticipatory bail before the Hon'ble High 
Court then none of the petitioner was declared 
absconder and process under section 82/83 Cr.P.C. were not initiated against them.” 
 
22. 
The above extracted ground taken by the appellant 
constrains us to consider the question whether there 
could be any bar on the Trial Court for proceeding under 
Section 82 Cr.PC, merely because an anticipatory 
application for bail has been filed or because such an 
application was adjourned without passing any interim 
order. We may hasten to add here that it is always 
preferable to pass orders, either way, at the earliest. In 
the case on hand, application for anticipatory bail was 
filed by the appellants before the High Court in 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

November, 2022 and brought up for hearing on 
04.04.2023, on which day it was dismissed as per the 
impugned order. The very ground, extracted above, 
would reveal that in the meanwhile, proclamation under 
Section 82 Cr.PC, was issued on 04.01.2023 and 
thereafter process under Section 83 Cr.PC was initiated 
on 15.03.2023. 
23. 
There can be no room for raising a contention that 
when an application is filed for anticipatory bail, it cannot 
be adjourned without passing an order of interim 
protection. A bare perusal of Section 438 (1), Cr.PC, 
would reveal that taking into consideration the factors 
enumerated thereunder the Court may either reject the 
application forthwith or issue an interim order for the 
grant of anticipatory bail. The proviso thereunder would 
reveal that if the High Court or, the Court of Sessions, as 
the case may be, did not pass an interim order under this 
Section or has rejected the application for grant of 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

anticipatory bail, it shall be open to an officer in-charge 
of a police station to arrest the person concerned without 
warrant, on the basis of the accusation apprehended in 
such application. In view of the proviso under Section 
438(1), Cr.PC, it cannot be contended that if, at the stage 
of taking up the matter for consideration, the Court is not 
rejecting the application, it is bound to pass an interim 
order for the grant of anticipatory bail. In short, nothing 
prevents the court from adjourning such an application 
without passing an interim order. This question was 
considered in detail by a Single Bench of the High Court 
of Bombay, in the decision in Shrenik Jayantilal Jain and 
Anr. v. State of Maharashtra Through EOW Unit II, 
Mumbai6 and answered as above and we are in 
agreement with the view that in such cases, there will be 
no statutory inhibition for arrest. Hence, the appellants 
cannot be heard to contend that the application for 
 
6 [2014 SCC Online Bom 549] 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

anticipatory bail filed in November, 2022 could not have 
been adjourned without passing interim order. At any 
rate, the said application was rejected on 04.04.2023. 
Pending the application for anticipatory bail, in the 
absence of an interim protection, if a police officer can 
arrest the accused concerned how can it be contented 
that the court which issued summons on account of non-
obedience to comply with its order for appearance and 
then issuing warrant of arrest cannot proceed further in 
terms of the provisions under Section 82, Cr.PC, merely 
because of the pendency of an application for 
anticipatory bail. If the said position is accepted the 
same would be adopted as a ruse to escape from the 
impact and consequences of issuance of warrant for 
arrest and also from the issuance of proclamation under 
Section 82, Cr.PC, by filing successive applications for 
anticipatory bail. In such circumstances, and in the 
absence of any statutory prohibition and further, taking 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

note of the position of law which enables a police officer 
to arrest the applicant for anticipatory bail if pending an 
application for anticipatory bail the matter is adjourned 
but no interim order was passed. We have no hesitation 
to answer the question posed for consideration in the 
negative. In other words, it is made clear that in the 
absence of any interim order, pendency of an 
application for anticipatory bail shall not bar the Trial 
Court in issuing/proceeding with steps for proclamation 
and in taking steps under Section 83, Cr.PC, in 
accordance with law. 
24. 
We have already held that the power to grant 
anticipatory bail is an extraordinary power. Though in 
many cases it was held that bail is said to be a rule, it 
cannot, by any stretch of imagination, be said that 
anticipatory bail is the rule. It cannot be the rule and the 
question of its grant should be left to the cautious and 
judicious discretion by the Court depending on the facts 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

and circumstances of each case. While called upon to 
exercise the said power, the Court concerned has to be 
very cautious as the grant of interim protection or 
protection to the accused in serious cases may lead to 
miscarriage of justice and may hamper the investigation 
to a great extent as it may sometimes lead to tampering 
or distraction of the evidence. We shall not be 
understood to have held that the Court shall not pass an 
interim protection pending consideration of such 
application as the Section is destined to safeguard the 
freedom of an individual against unwarranted arrest and 
we say that such orders shall be passed in eminently fit 
cases. At any rate, when warrant of arrest or 
proclamation is issued, the applicant is not entitled to 
invoke the extraordinary power. Certainly, this will not 
deprive the power of the Court to grant pre-arrest bail in 
extreme, exceptional cases in the interest of justice. But 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

then, person(s) continuously, defying orders and keep 
absconding is not entitled to such grant. 
25. 
The factual narration made hereinbefore would 
reveal the consistent disobedience of the appellants to 
comply with the orders of the trial Court. They failed to 
appear before the Trial Court after the receipt of the 
summons, and then after the issuance of bailable 
warrants even when their co-accused, after the issuance 
of bailable warrants, applied and obtained regular bail. 
Though the appellants filed an application, which they 
themselves 
described 
as 
“bail-cum-surrender 
application” on 23.08.2022, they got it withdrawn on the 
fear of being arrested. Even after the issuance of non-
bailable warrants on 03.11.2022 they did not care to 
appear before the Trial Court and did not apply for 
regular bail after its recalling. It is a fact that even after 
coming to know about the proclamation under Section 82 
Cr.PC., they did not take any steps to challenge the same 

Special Leave Petition (Crl.) 7940 of 2023 

or to enter appearance before the Trial Court to avert the 
consequences. Such conduct of the appellants in the 
light of the aforesaid circumstances, leaves us with no 
hesitation to hold that they are not entitled to seek the 
benefit of pre-arrest bail. 
26. 
The upshot of the discussion is that there is no 
ground for interfering with the order of the High Court 
rejecting the application for anticipatory bail rather not 
considering application on merits. Since their action is 
nothing short of defying the lawful orders of the Court 
and attempting to delay the proceedings, this appeal 
must fail. Consequently, it is dismissed. 
 
……………………, J. 
(C.T. Ravikumar) 

……………………, J. 
 (Sanjay Kumar) 
New Delhi; 
March 14, 2024