1| 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

S.V. SAMUDRAM 

VERSUS 

STATE OF KARNATAKA & ANR 

JUDGMENT 

SANJAY KAROL J. 
 
1. 
The issue arising for consideration in this Civil Appeal, which 
lays challenge to a judgment and order dated 7th February, 2017 
passed by the High Court of Karnataka (Dharwad Bench) in MFA 
No. 24507 of 2010 (AA) under Section 37(1) of the Arbitration and 

2| 
 
Conciliation Act, 19961, is whether the High Court was justified in 
confirming the order dated 22nd April, 2010 under Section 34 of the 
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 passed by the Senior Civil 
Judge, Sirsi, in, whereby the award passed 
by the learned Arbitrator was modified and the amount awarded 
was reduced. 
 
FACTS 
2. 
As borne out from the judgments rendered by the Courts 
below, the facts, are:- 
2.1 Mr. S.V. Samudram2 is a registered Class II Civil Engineering 
Contractor and had secured a contract from the Karnataka State 
Public Works Department to construct the office and residence of 
the Chief Conservator of Forests at Sirsi for an amount of Rs. 14.86 
Lakhs. 
2.2 The said contract was entered into between the parties on 29th 
January, 1990 with the stipulation that the possession of the 
construction site would be handed over to the Claimant-Appellant 
on 8th March, 1990 and the work allotted was to be completed on or 
 
1 A&C Act, for short. 
2 Hereinafter, the Claimant-Appellant 

3| 
 
before 6th May 1992 i.e., 18 months from the date of the agreement 
excluding the monsoon season. 
2.3 It is undisputed that the work as allotted could not be 
completed by the Claimant-Appellant, for which, he held the 
authorities of the State responsible as they allegedly did not clear 
his bills, repeatedly at every stage and also due to delays caused by 
change of site and in delivery of material for such construction. 
2.4 For settlement and adjudication of disputes, the parties to the 
contract resorted to the arbitral mechanism and resultantly, in 
Arbitration Petition dated 31st May, 2002, Mr. S.K Angadi, Chief 
Engineer (Retd.) stood appointed as the Arbitrator on 30th July, 
2002. 
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE LEARNED ARBITRATOR 
3. 
 Pursuant thereto, the Claimant-Appellant herein filed his 
claim before the learned Arbitrator totalling to Rs.18,06,439/- along 
with an interest payable thereupon @ 18% per annum, payable 
from 9th March, 1994 till date of payment. 
4. 
Having heard both sides, the three primary issues identified 
were:- 

4| 
 
(a) inordinate delay in handing over of site for performance 
of contract; 
(b) non-supply of working drawings and designs; and 
(c) delay in supply of materials. 
5. 
For each of these issues, the learned Arbitrator, upon 
examination of the evidence before him found the Respondents 
liable. A précis of the reasoning adopted, is as under:- 
 
S.No. 
Point of 
Consideration 
Reasoning 

Delay 
in 
handing 
over 
the entire site 
for 
total 
performance of 
the contract. 
1) Non handling over the entire site in time is 
one of the reasons which resulted in non-
completion of the work within the stipulated 
time of 18 months. 
 
There is a delay of 9 months in handing over 
possession of complete site. 
 
Possession of office building was handed over 
on 07.03.1990 
 
Possession of quarters building was handed 
over on December 1990. 

Delay in supply 
of 
working 
drawings, 
designs, etc. 
1) Drawing showing typical excavation plan 
for footings, details of columns were issued to 
claimant during September 1990, with a delay 
of 6 months 
 
2) The drawing of R28 was not supplied by 
April 1991 but on 1st July 1991. There was a 
delay of 3 months. 
 
3) Drawing showing the details of 1st floor slab 
of the office of the Conservator of Forest was 
found to be prepared by 13.10.1992 but 

5| 
 
supplied on 01.11.1992 i.e. after expiration of 
contract on 06.05.1992. 
 
4) The drawings with details of lintel beams, 
roof beams, slab, etc of quarters was prepared 
by 05.10.1991 & supplied on 15.10.1991 but 
the changed site for construction was handed 
over to claimant on 14.02.1991. 

In the matter of 
delay in supply 
of materials 
On study of documentary evidence, he found 
adequate steel & cement required for the work 
was not supplied by the respondent in time. 

6. 
As such, against a total of 11 claims, amounts were awarded 
against 9 claims. The summary of the award is extracted as under:- 
SUMMARY OF THE AWARD 
 
S.No. 
Description of Claim 
Amount of 
Claim 
Award 
Amount 

Payment on loss of Oh. and 
incidentals 
Rs. 83,300/- 
Rs. 83,300/- 

Payment on loss of Profit 
Rs. 83,300/- 
Rs. 83,300/- 

Payment on Idle labour 
Rs. 1,77,300/- 
Rs. 1,77,300/- 

Payment on idle machinery 
Rs.98,500/- 
Rejected 

Payment of extra expenses on 
procurement of water at the 
changed site of work 
Rs.24,000/- 
Rejected 

Payment of extra expenses on 
shuttering, centring, fabrication 
done 
earlier 
subsequently 
dismantled. 
Rs.15,800/- 
Rs.15,800/- 

Payment on revised rates on the 
work 
executed 
beyond 
the 
originally stipulated time 
Rs.11,33,000/- 
Rs.9,67,300/- 

Payment on refund of freek rates 
recovered in work bills 
Rs.33,469/- 
Rs.33,469/- 

Payment on refund of security 
deposit 
Rs.57,770/- 
Rs.57,770/- 

Payment 
of 
interest, 
pre 
arbitration, pendente lite and 
@18% p.a. on all 
amounts 
due 
Payment 
of 
interest @ 18% 

6| 
 
future interest 
from claim No.1 
to 

from, 
09.03.94 till the 
date of payment 
p.a. on 
all 
amounts 
due 
from 09.3.94 till 
the 
date 
of 
payment 

Cost of Arbitration 
Rs.1,00,000/- 
Rs.50,000/- 
 
PROCEEDINGS UNDER SECTION 34 OF THE A&C ACT 
 
7. 
Assailing the same, the Respondent preferred a petition under 
Section 34 of the A&C Act in which the learned Civil Judge, Sirsi, 
found 2 points to be arising for his consideration which he recorded 
as: – 
“1. Whether the petitioner made out the proper grounds that 
the award passed by the arbitrator is not supported by sound 
reasonings and it is in arbitrary nature and it is liable to be 
set aside? 
 
2. What order?” 
 
8. The award passed by the learned Arbitrator was modified and 
the Respondents were directed to pay Rs.3,71,564 (25% of tender 
amount) along with Rs.10,000/- as costs towards the arbitration @ 
9% interest. The reasons supplied for such modification, as they 
come forth upon a perusal of the judgement are:- 
8.1 The change in site of the residential quarters was barely at the 
distance of 200m from the earlier site. Even if there was a change in 
site, the work of constructing the office building could have begun 
as there was no change in that regard but he had not even started 

7| 
 
excavation in order to lay down a foundation. Therefore, the 
question of loss of payment to the labourers and materials collected 
for construction, does not arise and the losses allegedly suffered by 
the Claimant-Appellant were “only at his imagination”. 
8.2 On the machinery being idle, it was not explained as to how 
many days the same was idle. It is “for his whims and fancies the 
petitioner is claiming as if he has sustained loss”. 
8.3 So far as the claim for water facilities, the contention of the 
Respondents has been accepted that per the agreement, the 
Claimant-Appellant was to look after the same and therefore, 
Respondents would not be liable therefor. 
8.4 Since it is the Claimant-Appellant who did not complete the 
construction in time, he could not make a claim for the rates for the 
year 1989–90 and cannot claim interest thereupon. 
8.5 No evidence to lend support to the contention of the Claimant-
Appellant that there was a delay in supplying the material. On 
which material being supplied, was there a delay, is unexplained. 
Counter allegation, instead is that even after clearing all bills, the 
Claimant-Appellant had not picked up speed on the work. All the 
correspondence is only to escape payment of penalty. 

8| 
 
8.6 The only delay is of handing over of the site of the residential 
house. The same was done on 7th March, 1990. The Claimant-
Appellant has not explained that despite such handing over of 
possession by August 1990, no excavation work for the foundation 
had commenced. 
8.7 For the changes in design, it is observed that since the 
changes were minor it does not require any extra payment. The 
same would only be payable if there was duplication of 
work/removal of earlier construction as per the alteration. 
8.8 The cost of arbitration being awarded at Rs.50,000/- is “at 
exorbitant rate.” Even if the argument of delay and laches on part of 
the Department is accepted, “it cannot be ruled out that the 
Department always in right path” and the extent of the same cannot 
be accepted. 
8.9 It was also observed that there was a justification for the 
learned Arbitrator to award an amount which is almost equal to the 
amount of tender, that too on such a high rate of interest which 
causes an undue encumbrance on the exchequer. 
8.10 The 
remaining 
critical 
observations 
stand 
dealt 
with 
subsequently. 

9| 
 
PROCEEDINGS UNDER SECTION 37 OF THE A&C ACT 
9. 
The High Court, vide its judgement under challenge before us, 
has confirmed the modification of the arbitral award as has been 
done by the learned Civil Judge, Sirsi, dismissing the application on 
part of the Claimant-Appellant. 
9.1 It has been observed that the primary dispute is in respect of 
claim No. 7 which is the grant of revised rates of the escalated cost 
of work. The High Court has held that the view of the Arbitrator that 
the Department is solely responsible for the breach of the contract, 
cannot be accepted as the shift in venue was only in respect of the 
residential quarters and not for the office complex. 
9.2 The estimation of cost is based on the tender notification 
relating to the year 1989-90. Costs in the year 1992 could not be 
expected to have risen hundred percent as claimed. Nothing is 
reflected on record to show, what precluded the Claimant-Appellant 
from commencing the work of the office building. It is on this 
ground that the claim of escalation of the Claimant-Appellant be 
allowed by the learned Arbitrator, has been termed as perverse and 
contrary to the public policy. 

10| 
 
9.3 Findings of delay being solely on account of the Department, 
cannot be countenanced and the quantification of damages in 
respect thereto is unreasonable. “It would be a case of misconduct 
on the part of the arbitrator amenable to Section 34 of the Act” 
9.4 Claim No. 3 in respect of idle labour being allowed to the tune 
of Rs.1,77,300/- “shocks the conscience of the court.” It is so 
because there was no basis for the labour to be idle. 
9.5 The award of Rs.50,000/- towards cost of arbitration is 
excessive. It was further observed that escalation of costs cannot be 
granted on “assumptions and presumptions” and, therefore, 
awarding the claims, that too almost equal to the tender amount, 
cannot be sustained. 
10. The learned Civil Judge, Sirsi, to restate, modified the award 
passed by the learned Arbitrator reducing the amount awarded as 
also interest thereupon, i.e., Rs.14,68,239/- @ 18% to only 25% of 
the tender amount which equals to Rs.3,71,564/- and the interest 
percentage thereon was reduced to 9%. This was found to be 
justified by the learned Single Judge. 
CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSION 

11| 
 
11. It is in this background, that we are required to consider 
whether the modification of the arbitral award as carried out by the 
learned Civil Judge as confirmed by the High Court, was justified 
within law? 
12. It would be useful to examine the expositions of this Court on 
the scope to interfere with arbitral awards under Sections 34 & 37 
of the A&C Act. 
13. The Judgment and Order of the learned Civil Judge was dated 
22nd April 2010. 
14. The position as to whether an arbitral award can be modified 
in the proceedings initiated under Sections 34/37 of the A&C Act is 
no longer res integra. While noting the provisions, more 
specifically, Section 34(4) of the A&C Act; the decisions rendered by 
this Court, including the principles of international law enunciated 
in several decisions recorded in the treatise “Redfern and Hunter on 
International Arbitration, 6th Edition”, this Court in National 
Highways Authority of India v. M. Hakeen and Another3, 
categorically held that any court under Section 34 would have no 
jurisdiction to modify the arbitral award, which at best, given the 
same to be in conflict with the grounds specified under Section 34 
 
3 (2021) (2-Judge Bench) 

12| 
 
would be wholly unsustainable in law. The Court categorically 
observed that any attempt to “modify an award” under Section 34 
would amount to “crossing the Lakshman Rekha”. 
15. On the exact same issue we may also note another opinion 
rendered by this Court in Dakshin Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam 
Limited v. Navigant Technologies Private Limited4 in the 
following terms:- 
“44. In law, where the court sets aside the award passed by 
the majority members of the Tribunal, the underlying disputes 
would require to be decided afresh in an appropriate 
proceeding. Under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act, the court 
may either dismiss the objections filed, and uphold the award, 
or set aside the award if the grounds contained in sub-
sections (2) and (2-A) are made out. There is no power to 
modify 
an 
arbitral 
award. 
In McDermott 
International 
Inc. v. Burn 
Standard 
Co. 
Ltd. [McDermott 
International 
Inc. v. Burn Standard Co. Ltd., (2006) ], this Court 
held as under: (SCC p. 208, para 52) 
 
“52. The 1996 Act makes provision for the supervisory role of 
courts, for the review of the arbitral award only to ensure 
fairness. Intervention of the court is envisaged in few 
circumstances only, like, in case of fraud or bias by the 
arbitrators, violation of natural justice, etc. The court cannot 
correct errors of the arbitrators. It can only quash the award 
leaving the parties free to begin the arbitration again if it is 
desired. So, the scheme of the provision aims at keeping the 
supervisory role of the court at minimum level and this can be 
justified as parties to the agreement make a conscious 
decision to exclude the court's jurisdiction by opting for 
arbitration as they prefer the expediency and finality offered 
by it.” 
 (Emphasis Supplied) 

4 (2021) (2-Judge Bench) 

13| 
 
16. The principle stands reiterated as late as 2023 in Larsen Air 
Conditioning and Refrigration Company v. Union of India & 
Others5. 
17. We may notice certain principles to be considered in 
adjudication of challenges to arbitration proceedings of this nature. 
It is a settled principle of law that arbitral proceedings are per se 
not comparable to judicial proceedings before the Court (Dyna 
Technologies Private Limited v. Crompton Greaves Limited6). 
The Arbitrator’s view, generally is considered to be binding upon the 
parties unless it is set aside on certain specified grounds. In the 
very same decision taking note of the opinion as is in “Russel on 
Arbitration”, reiterated the need for the Court to look at the 
substance of the findings, rather than its form, stood reiterated and 
the need for adopting an approach of reading the award in a fair 
and just manner, and not in what is termed as “an unduly literal 
way”. All that is required is as to whether the reasons borne out 
are intelligible or not for adequacy of reasons cannot stand in the 
way of making the award to be intelligibly readable. 
 
5 2023 SCC On Line 982 (2-Judge Bench) 
6 (2019) (3-Judge Bench) 

14| 
 
18. Emphasizingly, it is reiterated that if the view taken by the 
Arbitrator is a plausible view, no interference on the specified 
grounds is warranted (Konkan Railway Corpn. Ltd. v. Chenab 
Bridge Project 7). 
19. It is also a settled principle of law that an award passed by a 
technical expert is not meant to be scrutinised in the same manner 
as is the one prepared by a legally trained mind (Delhi Airport 
Metro Express Private Limited v. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation 
Limited8). 
20. We are dealing with an award passed on 18th February, 2003, 
prior to the amendment brought in Section 34 by virtue of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015. For the 
purpose of ready reference the relevant portion of the amended and 
the unamended provisions are extracted as under:- 
“Prior to 2015 Amendment 
 
34. Application for setting aside arbitral award. - 
(1) Recourse to a court against an arbitral awärd may be made 
only by an application for setting aside such award in 
accordance with sub-section (2) and sub-section (3). 
 
(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the court only if- 
… 
(v) the composition of the Arbitral Tribunal or the arbitral 
procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the 
 
7 (2023) (Three Judge Bench) 
8 (2022) (Two Judges Bench) 

15| 
 
parties, unless such agreement was in conflict with a 
provision of this Part from which the parties cannot derogate, 
or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance with this 
Part; or 
(b) the court finds that— 
(i) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of 
settlement by arbitration under the law for the time being in 
force, or 
(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of 
India. 
 
Explanation.-Without prejudice to the generality of sub-
clause (ii), it is hereby declared, for the avoidance of any 
doubt, that an award is in conflict with the public policy of 
India if the making of the award was induced or affected by 
fraud or corruption or was in violation of Section 75 or Section 
81. 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
Post 2015 Amendment 
 
34. Application for setting aside arbitral award.—(1) 
Recourse to a Court against an arbitral award may be made 
only by an application for setting aside such award in 
accordance with sub-section (2) and sub-section (3). 
(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the Court only if— 
… 
(b) the Court finds that— 
(i) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of 
settlement by arbitration under the law for the time being in 
force, or 
(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of 
India. 
 
 [Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified 
that an award is in conflict with the public policy of India, 
only if,— 
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud 
or corruption or was in violation of Section 75 or Section 81; 
or 
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian 
law; or 
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or 
justice. 
 
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to 
whether there is a contravention with the fundamental policy 

16| 
 
of Indian law shall not entail a review on the merits of the 
dispute.] 
 [(2-A) An arbitral award arbitrations other than 
international commercial arbitrations, may also be set aside 
by the court, if the court finds that the award is vitiated by 
patent illegality appearing on the face of the award: 
Provided that an award shall not be set aside merely on the 
ground of an erroneous application of the law or by 
reappreciation of evidence.]” 
 
21. In so far as the state of the law prior to such Amendment is 
concerned, the situation stands encapsulated by this Court, in DDA 
v. R.S Sharma9 where the grounds whereby courts may intervene 
against arbitral award, were listed. 
22. Observations of this Court in Associate Builders v. DDA10 are 
also of note. It was held: 
“15. This section in conjunction with Section 5 makes it clear 
that an arbitration award that is governed by Part I of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 can be set aside only 
on grounds mentioned under Sections 34(2) and (3), and not 
otherwise. Section 5 reads as follows: 
 
“5. 
Extent 
of 
judicial 
intervention.—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, in matters governed by this Part, no judicial authority 
shall intervene except where so provided in this Part.” 
 
16. It is important to note that the 1996 Act was enacted to 
replace the 1940 Arbitration Act in order to provide for an 
arbitral procedure which is fair, efficient and capable of 
meeting the needs of arbitration; also to provide that the 
tribunal gives reasons for an arbitral award; to ensure that 
the tribunal remains within the limits of its jurisdiction; and 
to minimise the supervisory roles of courts in the arbitral 
process. 
 
9 (2008) (2 Judge Bench) 
10 (2015) (2 Judge Bench) 

17| 
 
17. It will be seen that none of the grounds contained in sub-
section (2)(a) of Section 34 deal with the merits of the decision 
rendered by an arbitral award. It is only when we come to the 
award being in conflict with the public policy of India that the 
merits of an arbitral award are to be looked into under certain 
specified circumstances.” 
 (Emphasis Supplied) 
 
23. As it is evident from the extracted provisions, as above that 
prior to the Amending Act, it was open for the Court to examine the 
award as to whether it was in conflict with, (a) public policy of 
India; (b) induced or affected by fraud; (c) corruption; and (d) any 
violation of the provisions of Section 75 and 81 of the A&C Act. 
24. In the instant case, the only provision under which the award 
could have been assailed was for it to have been in conflict with the 
public policy of India. This concept has been elaborately considered 
by 
this 
Court 
in 
Associate 
Builders 
(supra); 
Ssangyong 
Engineering and Construction Company Limited v. National 
Highways Authority of India11, in the following terms:- 
25. In Associate Builders (supra) the Court observed- 
“19. When it came to construing the expression “the public 
policy of India” contained in Section 34(2)(b)(ii) of the 
Arbitration Act, 1996, this Court in ONGC Ltd. v. Saw Pipes 
Ltd. [(2003): AIR 2003 SC 2629] held: (SCC pp. 
727-28 & 744-45, paras 31 & 74) 
“31. Therefore, in our view, the phrase ‘public policy of India’ 
used in Section 34 in context is required to be given a wider 
meaning. It can be stated that the concept of public policy 
 
11 (2019) (Two Judges Bench) 

18| 
 
connotes some matter which concerns public good and the 
public interest. What is for public good or in public interest or 
what would be injurious or harmful to the public good or 
public interest has varied from time to time. However, the 
award which is, on the face of it, patently in violation of 
statutory provisions cannot be said to be in public interest. 
Such award/judgment/decision is likely to adversely affect the 
administration of justice. Hence, in our view in addition to 
narrower 
meaning 
given 
to 
the 
term 
‘public 
policy’ 
in Renusagar 
case [Renusagar 
Power 
Co. 
Ltd. v. General 
Electric Co., 1994 Supp (1) SCC 644] it is required to be held 
that the award could be set aside if it is patently illegal. The 
result would be—award could be set aside if it is contrary to: 
(a) fundamental policy of Indian law; or 
(b) the interest of India; or 
(c) justice or morality, or 
(d) in addition, if it is patently illegal. 
Illegality must go to the root of the matter and if the 
illegality is of trivial nature it cannot be held that award is 
against the public policy. Award could also be set aside if it 
is so unfair and unreasonable that it shocks the conscience 
of the court. Such award is opposed to public policy and is 
required to be adjudged void.” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
26. 
 Ssangyong Engineering (supra) followed the observations of 
Associate Builders (supra). To efficiently encapsulate the extent 
thereof particularly in the context of Indian awards, we may refer 
only to para 37 where it has been held:- 
“37. Insofar as domestic awards made in India are 
concerned, an additional ground is now available under 
sub-section (2-A), added by the Amendment Act, 2015, to 
Section 34. Here, there must be patent illegality appearing 
on the face of the award, which refers to such illegality as 
goes to the root of the matter but which does not amount to 
mere erroneous application of the law. In short, what is not 
subsumed within “the fundamental policy of Indian law”, 
namely, the contravention of a statute not linked to public 
policy or public interest, cannot be brought in by the 

19| 
 
backdoor when it comes to setting aside an award on the 
ground of patent illegality.” 
27. The position in Associate Builders (supra) was recently 
summarised as hereinbelow recorded by Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. v. 
Shree Ganesh Petroleum12 
“42. In Associate Builders, this Court held that an award 
could be said to be against the public policy of India in, inter 
alia, the following circumstances: 
42.1. When an award is, on its face, in patent violation of a 
statutory provision. 
42.2. When the arbitrator/Arbitral Tribunal has failed to 
adopt a judicial approach in deciding the dispute. 
42.3. When an award is in violation of the principles of 
natural justice. 
42.4. When an award is unreasonable or perverse. 
42.5. When an award is patently illegal, which would include 
an award in patent contravention of any substantive law of 
India or in patent breach of the 1996 Act. 
42.6. When an award is contrary to the interest of India, or 
against justice or morality, in the sense that it shocks the 
conscience of the Court.” 
 
JUDGMENT PASSED UNDER SECTION 34 A&C ACT 
 
28. A perusal of the judgment and order of the learned Civil 
Judge, in the considered view of this Court, does not reflect fidelity 
to the text of the statute. Nowhere does it stand explained, as to, 
under which ground(s) mentioned under Section 34 of the A&C Act, 
did the Court find sufficient reason to intervene. In fact, quite 
 
12 (2022) (2-Judge Bench) 

20| 
 
opposite thereto, the Court undertook a re-appreciation of the 
matter, and upon its own view of the evidence, modified the order. 
29. As the above extracted judgment shows, merits of the award 
are only to be gone into, if the award is demonstrated to be contrary 
to the public policy of India. The reasons recorded by the learned 
Civil Judge for modifying the arbitral award, as reflected from a 
perusal thereof, have been recorded in an earlier section of the 
judgment. None of those reasons even so much as allude to the 
award being contrary to the public policy of India, which would 
enable the court to look into the merits of the award. 
30. We have carefully perused the award passed by the Arbitrator 
in which he has not only referred to and considered the materials 
on record in their entirety but also, after due application of mind, 
assigned reasons for arriving at this conclusion, either rejecting, 
accepting or reducing the claim set out by the Claimant-Appellant. 
Noticeably, during the arbitral proceedings none of the parties 
raised any objection to the Arbitrator adjudicating the dispute, be it 
on any ground, including bias. Each one of the claims stands 
separately considered and dealt with. 
31. We find that the view taken by the Arbitrator is a plausible 
view and could not have been substituted for its own by the Court. 

21| 
 
32. The reasons assigned by the Court under Section 34 of the A 
&C Act, to our mind, are totally extraneous to the controversy, to 
the lis between the parties and not borne out from the record. In 
fact, they are mutually contradictory. 
32.1 In awarding an amount of 25% of the tender amount 
(incorrectly recorded as “over the tender amount” in some parts of 
the judgment of the learned Civil Judge, Sirsi) in favour of the 
Claimant-Appellant, the Court has ipso facto accepted that the 
Claimant-Appellant had not breached the terms of the contract. In 
fact, the Court appears to have accepted the Claimant’s contention 
of delay in handing over the site drawings and supply of materials. 
The Court while noticing the change in the drawings, resorted to, a 
misadventure by observing that the changes in the drawings were 
“only minor” in the dimension of beam which as we find the Court 
have contradicted itself by recording the same to have been “noticed 
as essential in the execution of the contract”. The Court, in our 
considered view had no business to state that the Claimant is 
claiming the amount is from the pocket of the concerned engineer 
or his property. 
 
“…Whether the claimant is claiming the such amount is 
from the pocket of concerned Engineers or from his property, 
whey should so much amount be paid from exchequer 

22| 
 
amount, it is heavily cast on the tax payer, that has to be 
consider by the court…” 
 
32.2 Further observations as we extract hereunder, justifying the 
interference in the award, in our considered opinion, are totally 
scandalous: - 
 
“…Admittedly the arbitrator who is retired Engineer after 
retirement there will be no holding on the department, when 
the claimant is going to benefit so much amount there will be 
benefit to the arbitrator…” 
 
32.3 The Court imputed its personal knowledge in assigning 
reasons by observing:- 
 
“…Even in this case also if the report of the arbitrator is 
accepted as it is, it is heavy burden on the exchequer not on 
the department…” 
 
32.4 The reasoning given by the Court in interfering with the award 
which is extracted immediately hereafter, in our view, is 
preposterous: - 
“…It is the common sense and the general observation, 
whenever the work is entrusted to any contractor to put up 
the construction what they do is, they use to start excavation 
to lay a foundation. It is not the case of the 2nd opponent 
regarding digging at original spot or laying any foundation for 
construction of the residential house. So, under such 
circumstances the alleged loss pleaded by the opponent No.2 
is only at his imagination.” 

23| 
 
32.5 For it is no business of the Court to consider the burden on 
the exchequer. All that is required by the Court is to see as to 
whether the contracting parties have agreed to bind themselves to 
the terms with the only supervisory jurisdiction of the Court to 
consider breach thereof, in the light of the grounds specified under 
Section 34. 
32.6 To our mind, the court lost sight of the fact that the civil 
contract was composite in nature that is having contracted both of 
the building of the office and residence together. In these 
circumstances, the contractor could not have commenced work of 
part of the project when the complete site and the drawings were 
not handed over to him. In the absence of the parties have agreed 
otherwise, work could not have commenced. Hence, observation of 
the court, advisory in nature, for the contractor to have commenced 
the work for one part of the contract is unwarranted and uncalled 
for, in fact perverse. 
32.7 The other observation that there was a delay on the part of the 
contractor in completing the work or speeding up the work does not 
reflect in the record. They are nothing short of mere conjectures. 
This is more so in view of the absence of invocation of the 

24| 
 
arbitration clause or initiation of the proceedings thereunder on the 
part of the Respondent against the contractor as also not raising 
any counter claims for adjudication by the Arbitrator. 
32.8 Accounting for the legal position, the court could have at best 
set aside the award and could not modify the same. 
32.9 We also notice the learned Arbitrator, to have accepted the 
contention of the Claimant-Appellant that there was a delay in 
supply of drawings, which in turn caused delay in placing the 
orders for steel and other such requirements. The Civil Judge had 
disagreed therewith on a mere reference to “Ex. R 38 to 95” showing 
prompt supply. There is no discussion whatsoever. Another 
instance is noteworthy. It was observed that the question of 
idleness of the labour does not arise if there was another building to 
be constructed, and therefore, such claim cannot be paid. This is a 
clear instance of the court supplanting its view in place of the 
Arbitrator, which is not a permissible exercise, and is completely 
de-hors to the jurisdiction under Section 34. 
33. As such, the modification of the arbitral award by the learned 
Civil Judge, Sirsi, does not stand scrutiny, and must be set aside. 
JUDGMENT UNDER SECTION 37 A&C ACT 

25| 
 
34. Moving further, we now consider the judgment impugned before 
us, i.e., the order of the High Court upholding such modification, 
under the jurisdiction of Section 37 of the A&C Act. 
35. It has been observed by this Court in MMTC Ltd. v. Vedanta 
Ltd.13 
“14. As far as interference with an order made under Section 
34, as per Section 37, is concerned, it cannot be disputed that 
such interference under Section 37 cannot travel beyond the 
restrictions laid down under Section 34. In other words, the 
court cannot undertake an independent assessment of the 
merits of the award, and must only ascertain that the exercise 
of power by the court under Section 34 has not exceeded the 
scope of the provision. Thus, it is evident that in case an 
arbitral award has been confirmed by the court under Section 
34 and by the court in an appeal under Section 37, this Court 
must be extremely cautious and slow to disturb such 
concurrent findings.” 
(Emphasis Supplied) 

36. This view has been referred to with approval by a bench of 
three learned Judges in UHL Power Company Ltd v. State of 
Himachal Pradesh14. In respect of Section 37, this court observed:- 
 
“16. As it is, the jurisdiction conferred on courts under 
Section 34 of the Arbitration Act is fairly narrow, when it 
comes to the scope of an appeal under Section 37 of the 
Arbitration Act, the jurisdiction of an appellate court in 
examining an order, setting aside or refusing to set aside an 
award, is all the more circumscribed.” 

13 (2019) (2 Judge Bench) 
14 (2022) (3-Judge Bench) 

26| 
 
37. This Court has not lost sight of the fact that, as a consequence 
to our discussion as aforesaid, holding that the judgment and order 
under Section 34 of the A&C Act does not stand judicial scrutiny, 
an independent evaluation of the impugned judgment may not be 
required in view of the holding referred to supra in MMTC Ltd. 
However, we proceed to examine the same. 
38. We may also notice that the circumscribed nature of the 
exercise of power under Sections 34 and 37 i.e., interference with 
an arbitral award, is clearly demonstrated by legislative intent. The 
Arbitration Act of 1940 had a provision (Section 15) which allowed 
for a court to interfere in awards, however, under the current 
legislation, that provision has been omitted.15 
39. The learned Single Judge, similar to the learned Civil Judge 
under Section 34, appears to have not concerned themselves with 
the contours of Section 37 of the A&C Act. The impugned judgment 
reads like a judgment rendered by an appellate court, for whom re-
examination of merits is open to be taken as the course of action. 
40. We find the Court to have held the award to be perverse and 
contrary to public policy. The basis for such a finding being the 
 
15 Larsen Air Conditioning and Refrigration Company v. Union of India and Others 2023 SCC 
OnLine 982 (2-Judge Bench) 

27| 
 
delay on the part of the contractor in completion of the work which 
“could have been avoided”. Significantly, as we have observed 
earlier such a finding is not backed by any material on record. 
41. What appears to have weighed with the court is that the 
factoring of the cost escalation between the years 1989-90 and 
1992 by 100% was exaggerated. But then equally, there is no 
justification in granting lump sum escalation by 25% of the 
contract value. Well, this cannot be a reason to modify the award 
for the parties are governed by the terms and conditions and the 
price escalation stood justified by the petitioner based on cogent 
and reliable material as was so counted by the Arbitrator in partly 
accepting and/or rejecting the claims. 
42. In our considered opinion, the court while confirming the 
modification of the award committed the very same mistake which 
the Court under Section 34 of the A&C Act, made. 
The Court under Section 37 had only three options:- 
(a) Confirming the award of the Arbitrator; 
(b) Setting aside the award as modified under Section 34; and 
(c) Rejecting the application(s) under Section 34 and 37. 

28| 
 
43. The learned single Judge has examined the reasoning adopted 
by the learned Arbitrator in respect of certain claims (claims 3 and 
7, particularly) and held that allowing a claim for escalation of 
cost, was without satisfactory material having been placed on 
record and is “perverse and contrary to the public policy”. 
However, it appears that such a holding on part of the Judge is 
without giving reasons therefor. It has not been discussed as to 
what the evidence was before the learned single Judge to arrive at 
such conclusion. This is of course, entirely without reference to the 
scope delineated by various judgements of this Court as also, the 
statutory scheme of the A & C Act. 
44. Having referred to J.G Engineers (P) Ltd. v. UOI16 and more 
particularly para 27 thereof, it has been held that the award 
passed by the learned Arbitrator is “patently illegal, unreasonable, 
contrary to public policy.” There is no reason forthcoming as to 
how the holding of the learned Arbitrator flies in the face of public 
policy. 
ON INTEREST 
45. On the issue of interest, we notice that the Arbitrator has 
awarded interest @ 18% p.a., w.e.f. 09 March 1994 which stood 
 
16 (2011) (2 Judge Bench) 

29| 
 
reduced to 9%. The transaction being commercial in nature, we see 
no reason as to why the claimant could not be entitled to interest in 
terms of the rate quantified by the Arbitrator which includes the 
period of pre-arbitration, pendante lite and future. We notice this 
Court to have stated in Hyder Consulting (UK) Ltd. v. State of 
Orissa17, through S.A. Bobde, J. (as His Lordship then was) 
speaking for the majority as under: 
 
“4. Clause (a) of sub-section (7) provides that where an award 
is made for the payment of money, the Arbitral Tribunal may 
include interest in the sum for which the award is made. In 
plain terms, this provision confers a power upon the Arbitral 
Tribunal while making an award for payment of money, to 
include interest in the sum for which the award is made on 
either the whole or any part of the money and for the whole or 
any part of the period for the entire pre-award period between 
the date on which the cause of action arose and the date on 
which the award is made... The significant words occurring in 
clause (a) of sub-section (7) of Section 31 of the Act are “the 
sum for which the award is made”. On a plain reading, this 
expression refers to the total amount or sum for the payment 
for which the award is made. Parliament has not added a 
qualification like “principal” to the word “sum”, and therefore, 
the word “sum” here simply means “a particular amount of 
money”. In Section 31(7), this particular amount of money 
may include interest from the date of cause of action to the 
date of the award. 
 
… …. 
 
7. Thus, when used as a noun, as it seems to have been used 
in this provision, the word “sum” simply means “an amount of 
money”; whatever it may include — “principal” and “interest” 
or one of the two. Once the meaning of the word “sum” is 
clear, the same meaning must be ascribed to the word in 
clause (b) of sub-section (7) of Section 31 of the Act, where it 
provides that a sum directed to be paid by an arbitral award 
 
17 (2015) (3-Judge Bench) 

30| 
 
“shall … carry interest …” from the date of the award to the 
date of the payment i.e. post-award. In other words, what 
clause (b) of sub-section (7) of Section 31 of the Act directs is 
that the “sum”, which is directed to be paid by the award, 
whether inclusive or exclusive of interest, shall carry interest 
at the rate of eighteen per cent per annum for the post-award 
period, unless otherwise ordered. 
… 
9. The purpose of enacting this provision is clear, namely, to 
encourage early payment of the awarded sum and to 
discourage the usual delay, which accompanies the execution 
of the award in the same manner as if it were a decree of the 
court vide Section 36 of the Act.” 
(Emphasis Supplied) 
 
46. Keeping in view the aforesaid observations of this Court, it 
cannot be doubted that the Claimant-Appellant is entitled to 
interest. We find that the learned Arbitrator, as hitherto observed, 
has awarded 18% interest and the same stood reduced by the 
Courts below to 9% without any legal basis therefor. In exercise of 
our powers under Article 142, we deem it appropriate to, in order to 
ensure substantial justice, inter se the parties, of awarding interest 
@ 9 % p.a. from the date of award pendante lite and future, till date 
of payment. 
 
CONCLUSION 
47. In the absence of compliance with the well laid out parameters 
and contours of both Section 34 and Section 37 of the A&C Act, the 
impugned judgement(s) referred to in Para 1 (supra) are required to 

31| 
 
be set aside. Consequently, the award dated 18th February 2003 of 
the learned Arbitrator is restored, for any challenge thereto has 
failed. 
48. The appeal is allowed with a direction to the State of 
Karnataka to expeditiously pay the amount. No costs. 

…………….……..J. 
(ABHAY S. OKA) 

 …………………….J. 
(SANJAY KAROL) 
Place: New Delhi; 
Dated: 4th January 2024.