IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

( SLP (C) No 7246 of 2019)
Union of India, Ministry of Law & Justice

…Appellant

VERSUS

Justice (Retd) Raj Rahul Garg (Raj Rani Jain)
…Respondents
and Others
JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI

Leave granted.

This appeal arises from a judgment dated 14 August 2018 of a Division Bench of
the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.

The first respondent was appointed as a Judicial Magistrate in the State of
Haryana on 11 May 1981. She was appointed as an Additional District Judge on 26
August 1997 and later, as a District Judge on 19 July 2010. In December 2013, she
was recommended for appointment as a Judge of the High Court. Sometime
before her appointment as a Judge of the High Court, she retired as a District

Judge on 31 July 2014. On 25 September 2014, the first respondent assumed
office as a Judge of the Punjab and Haryana High Court. She attained the age of
superannuation and retired from service on 4 July 2016.

As a former Judge of the High Court, the first respondent instituted proceedings
under Article 226 of the Constitution, aggrieved by the determination of her
pensionary benefits. She sought that notwithstanding the gap between her
superannuation as a District judge and appointment as a Judge of the High Court,
the entire period of service as from 11 May 1981 to 31 July 2014 as well as service
rendered from 25 September 2014 to 04 July 2016, be reckoned for pensionary
and other retirement benefits. The Union of India contested the petition on the
ground that the gap ought to be considered as a break in service. 

By its judgment dated 14 August 2018, the Division Bench of the High Court held
that the entire period of service rendered by the first respondent from 25
September 2014 to 4 July 2016 as a Judge of the High Court shall be blended with
the years of her service from 11 May 1981 till 31 July 2014 as a Judge of the
district judiciary for the purpose of computing her pension as a Judge of the High
Court. The Union of India is in appeal against the judgment of the High Court.
Constitutional and Statutory Framework 

Article 217 of the Constitution provides for the appointment and conditions of the
office of a Judge of a High Court. Clause (2) of Article 217 stipulates that a person
shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court unless such a
person has: 
(a) held a judicial office for a period of ten years in the territory of India;
and 

(b) been an Advocate of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in
succession for at least ten years. 

Sub-clause (a) of clause (2) of Article 217 deals with persons who have held
judicial office before appointment as a Judge of the High Court, while clause (b)
essentially sets out conditions of eligibility for the appointment of Advocates to
the Bench of the High Court. 

Article 221 of the Constitution provides for salaries, allowances and pensions to be
paid to the Judges of the High Courts. Clause 2 of Article 221 states that 
“(2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such al-
lowances and to such rights in respect of leave of
absence and pension as may be from time to time
be determined by or under law made by Parlia-
ment and, until so determined, to such allowances
and rights as are specified in the Second Sched-
ule.”

The High Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act 19541 has been
enacted by Parliament “to regulate salaries and certain conditions of service of
the Judges of the High Court”. Section 2(1)(g) of the Act defines the expression
‘Judge’ to mean a Judge of a High Court and to include the Chief Justice, an acting
Chief Justice, an Additional Judge and an acting Judge of the High Court. Chapter III
of the statute deals with salaries and pensions. Section 14 stipulates that subject
to the provisions of the Act, every Judge would, on retirement be paid a pension in
accordance with the scale and provisions in Part I of the Schedule. The proviso,
however, qualifies the entitlement to pension by stipulating that “no such pension
shall be payable to a Judge unless”: 

he has completed not less than twelve years of service for pension;
or

he has attained the age of superannuation; or 
1 ‘The Act’

his retirement is medically certified to be necessitated by ill health.

The proviso to Section 14 stipulates that if a Judge is in receipt of a pension at the
time of their appointment in respect of any previous service in the Union or a
State, other than a disability or wound pension, the pension payable under the Act
shall be in lieu of and not in addition to that pension. The Explanation to Section
14, however, is in the following terms:
“Explanation.— In this section “Judge” means a
Judge who has not held any other pensionable
post under the Union or a State and includes a
Judge who having held any other pensionable
post under the Union or a State has elected to
receive the pension payable under Part I of the
First Schedule.”

In terms of the Explanation, an artificial meaning is ascribed to the expression
‘Judge’ for the purpose of Section 14. The meaning ascribed to the expression, for
the purposes of Section 14, is a Judge who has not held any other pensionable
post under the Union or a State and includes a Judge who, having held any other
pensionable post under the Union or a State, elects to receive the pension payable
under Part I of the First Schedule. At this stage, it would be, therefore, material to
emphasize that while Section 2(1)(g) contains a broad and all-encompassing
definition of the expression ‘Judge’, the same expression for the purposes of
Section 14 has a more restricted meaning as described in the Explanation. 

Section 15 contains a special provision for the payment of pension to Judges who
are members of the service. Section 15 is in the following terms:
“15. Special provision for pension in respect
of Judges who are members of service.—[(1)]
Every Judge—

*
*
*
*
(b) who * * * has held any other pensionable post
under the Union or a State, shall, on his
retirement, be paid a pension in accordance with
the scale and provisions in Part III of the First
Schedule:

Provided that every such Judge shall elect to
receive the pension payable to him either under
Part I of the First Schedule or, * * * Part III of the
First Schedule, and the pension payable to him
shall be calculated accordingly.
[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1), any Judge to whom that sub-section
applies and who is in service on or after the 1st
day of October, 1974, may, if he has elected
under the proviso to that sub-section to receive
the pension payable to him under * * * Part III of
the First Schedule before the date on which the
High Court Judges (Conditions of Service)
Amendment Act, 1976, receives the assent of the
President, cancel such election and elect afresh to
receive the pension payable to him under Part I of
the First Schedule and any such Judge who dies
before the date of such assent shall be deemed to
have elected afresh to be governed by the
provisions of the said Part I if the provisions of
that Part are more favourable in his case.]”

Clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 15 indicates that every Judge who has held
any other pensionable post under the Union or a State would be paid a pension in
terms of Part III of the First Schedule, subject to the condition (set out in the
proviso) that the Judge elects to receive the pension payable either under Part I
or, as the case may be, Part III of the First Schedule. Under Section 15(1)(b), upon
electing for the payment of a pension under Part III of the First Schedule, the Judge
would be entitled to pensionary benefits in the terms set out in Part III. Part III of
the First Schedule is in the following terms:
“PART III
1. The provisions of this Part apply to a Judge who
has held any pensionable post under the Union or
a State (but is not a member of the Indian Civil
Service) and who has not elected to receive the
pension payable under Part I.
2. The pension payable to such a Judge shall be—
(a) the pension to which he is entitled under the
ordinary rules of his service if he had not been
appointed a Judge, his service as a Judge being
treated as service therein for the purpose of
calculating that pension; and

(b) a special additional pension of [Rs.45,016] per
annum in respect of each completed year of
service for pension, * * *
[Provided that the pension under clause (a) and
the additional pension under (b) together shall in
no case exceed [Rs. 15,00,000] per annum in the
case of a Chief Justice and [Rs. 13,50,000] per
annum in the case of any other Judge.]”
Decision of the High Court

In the present case a communication dated 04 May 2016 addressed by the
Under Secretary to the Government of India to the Deputy Accountant
General (Pension) stated that since there was a break in the service of the
first respondent, and the same could not be condoned and the period of her
service as a Judge of the High Court could not be considered for calculating
her pension. 

The High Court noted that paragraph 2 of Part III was applicable to the first
respondent. The High Court held that reading paragraph 2 harmoniously
would entail a ‘blending of the period of both the services’; and that if the
services were not so blended, the service of the first respondent as a Judge
of the High Court would slip into oblivion. Hence, it was held that in
accordance with the definition of ‘service’ in Section 2(1)(h) of the 1954 Act,
the first respondent’s service as a Judge of the High Court was ‘actual
service’:. The High Court observed:
“To conclude, it is manifestly clear that what is to
be blended is the ‘actual service’ rendered as a
Judge of the High Court to the service rendered by
the petitioner from 1981 till 31 July 2014 as ser-
vice, for pension and accordingly, the pension will
have to be calculated as judge of High Court” 

The High Court directed that the service of the first respondent as a Judge of
the High Court had to be blended with her services as a Judge of the District
Judiciary and pension was to be calculated as for a Judge of the High Court. 

Submissions 

The Union of India has adopted the position that: 

The computation of the retiral benefits has been done correctly, taking into
account the thirty-three years of her service as a member of the District Judi-
ciary and the special additional pension. The High Court has erred in includ-
ing her service as a Judge of the High Court, condoning the break in service
of 54 days; 

The first respondent had not completed twelve years of pensionable service
as a Judge of the High Court within the meaning of Section 14;

There was a break in service between the date on which the first respondent
retired as a District Judge (31 July 2014) and assumed the office of a Judge of
the High Court (25 September 2014). This break could not be condoned un-
der the 1954 Act by the High Court or by this Court;

The first respondent having opted to receive her pensionary payments under
Part III of the First Schedule, the years of service which were rendered by her
as a Judge of the High Court would be cumulated with her service as a mem-
ber of the district judiciary;

The pension payable to the first respondent would then be computed on the
basis of last drawn salary as a District Judge; and

Since paragraph 2(b) of Part III of the First Schedule provides for a special ad-
ditional pension in respect of each completed year of service, the first re-
spondent would be entitled to that as well. 

The essence of the contest in these proceedings relates to the correctness of the
interpretation which has been placed by the Union of India. 

Mr Shailesh Madiyal, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the Union of India has
adopted the above submissions. It has been urged that though the first
respondent had not completed twelve years as a Judge of the High Court for the
eligibility for pension in terms of Section 14, in view of the provisions of Section
15, she would be entitled to the computation of pension in terms of Part III of the
First Schedule. Mr Madiyal urged that in terms of paragraph 2(a) of Part III, the
total length of service rendered as a Judge of the High Court would have to be
added to the length of service as a Judge of the district judiciary, to which a
special additional pension would be added. Hence, it is urged that the Union was
correct in computing the pensionary payment on the basis of the salary last drawn
by the first respondent as a Judge of the High Court.

Mr P S Patwalia, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, has, on the
other hand, urged that the Division Bench of the High Court was justified in
holding that the years of service as a member of the district judiciary would have
to be blended with the years of service as a Judge of the High Court. Adverting to
the provisions of Section 14A of the Act, which were introduced to provide an
addition of ten years of service to a member of the Bar who is appointed as a
Judge of the High Court, it was urged that it would be entirely discriminatory if a
similar principle were not applied to the members of district judiciary appointed as
a Judge of the High Court.
Analysis

Section 14(1) of the Act provides that the pension payable to a Judge shall be
computed in accordance with Part I of the First Schedule. Among the three
conditions prescribed for eligibility to receive pension, is the requirement of
completing twelve years of service for pension. At the same time, the Explanation
to Section 14 which was inserted by Act 13 of 2016, provides meaning to the

expression ‘Judge’ for the purposes of Section 14. In its first part, the Explanation
indicates that the expression means a Judge who has not held any other
pensionable post either under the Union or a State. In the second part, the
expression includes a Judge who has held a pensionable post under the Union or a
State and has elected to receive pension under Part I of the First Schedule. The
first part of the Explanation would encompass members of the Bar who would not
have held any other pensionable post under the Union or a State. The latter part
encompasses Judges falling within the description contained in Article 217(2)(a) of
the Constitution, who have held a pensionable post under the Union or the State
and who have opted to receive pension under Part I of the Schedule. The latter
part thus covers only a person who has opted for pension under Part I of the First
Schedule.

Section 15, on the other hand, is a special provision as its marginal note indicates,
for Judges who are members of the service meaning the judicial service. Clause
(b) of Section 15(1) indicates that a person who has held a pensionable post under
the Union or a State may elect to receive the pension payable either under Part I
or Part III. In the case of a Judge, such as the first respondent, who elects to
receive pension under Part III of the First Schedule, the pension payable has to be
computed in terms of the provisions contained in paragraph 2 of Part III.. For the
purpose of clause (a), the pension which is payable to the Judge is the pension to
which they are entitled under the ordinary rules of service if they had not been
appointed as a Judge and their service as a Judge is treated “as service therein for
the purpose of calculating that pension”. In other words, the service which is
rendered as a Judge of the High Court has to be cumulated with the service
rendered as a member of the district judiciary by treating it as service therein for
computing the pension. To this, would be added a special additional pension in
terms of clause (b) of paragraph 2. 

As a result of Section 14A, a period of ten years is added and is deemed to have
been added from 1 April 2004 for the purpose of pension to the service of a Judge
who is appointed under clause (2)(b) of Article 217. Section 14A, is in other words,
a special provision which was introduced for Judges of the High Court who have
been appointed from the Bar. The introduction of Section 14A in 2016 was
preceded by three judgments of this Court. The first of them in Kuldip Singh vs
Union of India,2 dealt with the appointment of a Judge of the Supreme Court
from the Bar. This Court held that a member of the Bar who was appointed as a
Judge of the Supreme Court would be entitled to the addition of ten years of
service for the purpose of computing pension. This principle was similarly applied
in Government of NCT of Delhi vs All India Young Lawyers Association
(Registered)3 in the case of the district judges. Eventually, the same principle
was extended by this Court in P Ramakrishnam Raju vs Union of India4 in
dealing with the pension payable to High Court Judges who are appointed from the
Bar under Article 217(2)(b) of the Constitution. A three-Judge Bench of this Court,
speaking through Sathasivam, CJ noted that Judges who are appointed under
Article 217(2)(a) being members of the judicial service obtain full pensionary
benefits even if they serve as a Judge of the High Court for a bare period of a year
or two because of their earlier entry into judicial service, but such a benefit is not
extended to members of the Bar who become Judges of the High Court. This Court
while laying down the principle of non-discrimination between High Court judges
elevated from the bar on the one hand and from the district judiciary on the other,
observed:
“19. When persons who occupied the constitutional
office of Judge, High Court retire, there should not
be any discrimination with regard to the fixation of
their pension. Irrespective of the source from where
the Judges are drawn, they must be paid the same
pension just as they have been paid same salaries
and allowances and perks as serving Judges. Only
2(2002) 
3(2009) 
4(2014) 

practising advocates who have attained eminence are
invited to accept Judgeship of the High Court. Because of
the status of the office of High Court Judge, the
responsibilities and duties attached to the office, hardly
any advocate of distinction declines the offer.
Though it may be a great financial sacrifice to a successful
lawyer to accept Judgeship, it is the desire to serve the
society and the high prestige attached to the office and
the respect the office commands that propel a successful
lawyer to accept Judgeship. The experience and knowledge
gained by a successful lawyer at the Bar can never be
considered to be lessimportant from any point of view vis-
à-vis the experience gained by a judicial officer. If the
service of a judicial officer is counted for fixation of
pension, there is no valid reason as to why the
experience at Bar cannot be treated as equivalent
for the same purpose.
20. The fixation of higher pension to the Judges drawn
from the subordinate judiciary who have served for shorter
period in contradistinction to Judges drawn from the Bar
who have served for longer period with less pension is
highly discriminatory and breach of Article 14 of the
Constitution. The classification itself is unreasonable
without any legally acceptable nexus with the object
sought to be achieved.”
(emphasis supplied)

The principles which have been laid down by the three-Judge Bench decision in P
Ramakrishnam Raju (supra) provide guidance to this Court in resolving the
controversy in the present case. 

Pensionary payments to Judges constitute a vital element in the independence of
the judiciary. As a consequence of long years of judicial office, Judges on demitting
office do not necessarily have the options which are open to members from other
services. The reason why the State assumes the obligation to pay pension to
Judges is to ensure that the protection of the benefits which are available after
retirement would ensure their ability to discharge their duties without “fear or
favour” during the years of judgeship. The purpose of creating dignified conditions
of existence for Judges both during their tenure as Judges and thereafter has,
therefore, a vital element of public interest. Courts and the Judges are vital
components of the rule of law. Independence of the judiciary is hence a vital
doctrine which is recognized in the constitutional scheme. The payment of salaries

and dignified pensions serves precisely that purpose. Hence, any interpretation
which is placed on the provisions of the Act must comport with the object and
purpose underlying the enactment of the provision. 

The contention of the Union of India is that the first respondent did not fulfill the
requirement of twelve years of service and was, therefore, not entitled to the
benefit of Section 14. This submission clearly misses the plain consequence of the
Explanation to Section 14. The Explanation is exhaustive in terms of the
categories of Judges to which it applies since it uses both the expression ‘means’
and ‘includes’. In other words, Section 14 applies to a Judge who has not held any
pensionable post either in the Union or the State or a person who having held a
pensionable post has opted to receive pension under Part I of the Schedule. A
Judge such as the first respondent who has not opted to receive the benefits of
pension under Part I of the First Schedule would fall outside the purview of the
Explanation and, hence Section 14 would have no application.

The post-retiral pension to such a Judge would, therefore, be governed by Section
15 read with paragraph 2 of Part III of the Act. Upon electing to receive pension
under Part III of the First Schedule, the first respondent was entitled to have the
years of service which were rendered by her as a Judge of the High Court
cumulated with the years of service rendered as a member of the district judiciary.
This is in accordance with clause (a) which stipulates that the pension payable to
a Judge shall be first, the pension they would be entitled to under the ordinary
rules of ‘service’ if they had not been appointed as a Judge of the High Court, that
is if they continued their service as a District Judge; second, their service as a
Judge of the High Court would be treated as service therein for the purpose of
calculating their pension. Paragraph 2 (a) or any other provision of the Act does
not indicate that a break in service such as the one in the service of the first
respondent would make paragraph 2 inapplicable and disentitle such a Judge from

adding their service as a High Court Judge to their service as a District Judge for
the purpose of calculating their pension. The Union of India has failed to establish
such a disentitlement. Further, the break in service was attributable to the time
taken in processing the recommendation made in her favor. In any case, it was not
attributable to anything that the first respondent had done, and it could not be
used to prejudice her by rendering her service as a Judge of the High Court
inconsequential to the calculation of pension. 

The Union has sought to urge that the pension was correctly calculated on the
basis of the last drawn salary as a District Judge. To accept this position would be
contrary to established precedent and would result in a clear discrimination
between a member of the Bar who becomes a Judge of the High Court and a
member of the district judiciary who is appointed as a Judge of the High Court. 

In M L Jain vs Union of India,5 this Court was deciding upon the validity of a
letter issued by Ministry of Law and Justice which stated that the pension under
para 2(a) of Schedule I of the 1954 Act would be in accordance with the pay that
they drew in the parent department, preceding their elevation to the High Court.
Quashing the said letter as contrary to the para 2(a) of Schedule I of the Act, a
three-judge bench of this Court, speaking through Justice O Chinnappa Reddy,
observed as follows: 
“We are of the opinion that para 2(ii) of the letter dated
September 19, 1984 is a clear departure from para 2
clause (a) of Schedule I to the High Courts Judges (Condi-
tions of Service) Act. Under clause (a) of para 2 of the
Schedule I to the High Courts Judges' (Conditions of
Service) Act the retiring Judge’s entire service as a
Judge has to be reckoned for the purpose of calcu-
lating his pension and for that purpose the last pay
drawn by him has to be the pay drawn by him as a
Judge of the High Court and not the pay that would
have been drawn by him as a District Judge, had he
not been appointed a High Court Judge.”
5 1985, 357

Acceptance of the submission of the Union of India would discriminate against
Judges of the High Court based on the source from which they are drawn. A
member of the Bar is entitled to the addition of ten years of service by virtue of
the provisions of Section 14A. On the addition of the years of service, their
pensionary benefits would be computed on the basis of the last drawn salary as a
Judge of the High Court. However, if the argument of the Union of India is
accepted, the pension of a Judge who was a former District Judge would be
computed on the basis of their salary as a District Judge. A similar principle, as
applicable to Judges appointed from the Bar, must be applied for computing the
pension of a member of the district judiciary who is appointed to the High Court.
Any other interpretation would result in a plain discrimination between the Judges
of the High Court based on the source from which they have been drawn. Such an
interpretation would do disservice to the importance of the district judiciary in
contributing to the judiciary of the nation, and would be contrary to the overall
scheme and intendment of Chapter III of the statute. It would go against the anti-
discriminatory principles stipulated by this Court in so far as Judges drawn from
various sources are concerned.
Conclusion

We are, therefore, clearly of the view that the first respondent was entitled to the
addition of the period during which she served as a Judge of the High Court to be
added to the length of her service as a member of the district judiciary from 11
May 1981 to 31 July 2014. The break in her service must necessarily have no
adverse implications in computing her pension for the simple reason that her
service upon appointment as a High Court Judge was in pursuance of a
recommendation which was made during her tenure as a Judge of the district
judiciary. 

The pensionary payments shall be computed on the basis of her last drawn salary
as a Judge of the High Court. The arrears of pension shall be payable to the first
respondent on or before 31 March 2024 together with interest at the rate of 6%
per annum.

The appeal is accordingly disposed of. 

Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.

……...…...…...…………………..CJI.
 [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]
 
……..…...…...……………….…
 
 [J B Pardiwala]
……..…...…...……………….…
 
 [Manoj Misra]
 
New Delhi;
March 15, 2024
CKB