IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION DIARY NO. 21994 OF 2022 
IN 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8625-8626 OF 2019 
 
JAIPUR VIDYUT VITRAN 
NIGAM LTD. & ORS. 

VERSUS 
 
ADANI POWER RAJASTHAN 
LTD. & ANR....RESPONDENT(S)/APPLICANT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J. 
 
The applicant, Adani Power Rajasthan Limited (APRL), is a 
generating company as per Section 2(28) of the Electricity Act, 
2003 (“2003 Act”). It operates a thermal power plant in the State of 
Rajasthan. There were three appellants (1 to 3) in the main set of 
appeals, in connection with which the present application has been 
taken out, being the distribution licensees of the State of Rajasthan 
as per the provisions of the 2003 Act. They shall, henceforth in this 
judgment, be collectively referred to as “Rajasthan Discoms”. 
Rajasthan Urja Vikas Nigam Limited was the 4th appellant in the 
main set of appeals. It appears to have been formed by the 

Government of Rajasthan for the purpose of coordination among 
the aforesaid three Discoms, as also other distribution licensees of 
the State. 
2. 
Through this miscellaneous application, the applicant seeks 
a direction upon the Rajasthan Discoms for making payment of 
Rs.1376.35 crore towards Late Payment Surcharge (“LPS”). This 
claim has been raised by the applicant citing Article 8.3.5 of the 
Power Purchase Agreement dated 28.01.2010 (“PPA-2010”) entered 
into between the Rajasthan Discoms and the applicant. The 
present application has been captioned as “APPLICATION FOR 
DIRECTIONS 
ON 
BEHALF 
OF 
THE 
RESPONDENT 
NO.1/APPLICANT (ADANI POWER RAJASTHAN LIMITED)” in the 
said appeals which stood disposed of by a common judgment of a 
three-Judge Bench of this Court delivered on 31.08.2020. Review 
petitions filed against this judgment by the Rajasthan Discoms 
stood dismissed on 02.03.2021. 
3. 
The appeals arose out of a dispute involving certain additional 
payments claimed by the applicant as per the PPA-2010. Under the 
agreement, the applicant was to supply electricity to the Rajasthan 
Discoms, which had to be generated by the applicant. For this 
purpose, the PPA-2010 postulated domestic coal as the primary 

source of energy, while imported coal was to be used as a backup 
option. The applicant’s complaint was that, due to non-availability 
of sufficient domestic coal, it could not be allocated a domestic coal 
linkage by the Government of India and it was compelled to rely on 
imported coal from Indonesia, which had a higher cost. Claim for 
compensation of loss, caused on account of non-supply of domestic 
coal, was raised by the applicant before the Rajasthan Electricity 
Regulatory Commission (“RERC”), invoking the change in law 
clause of the PPA-2010. Change in law was one of the conditions 
under the PPA-2010, for which tariff adjustment payment could be 
made by the seller of electricity following the procedure stipulated 
in the aforesaid agreement. By an order dated 17.05.2018, RERC 
held that the applicant would be entitled to relief on account of 
change in law, which was held to be the difference between actual 
landed cost of alternative/imported coal (as certified by the auditor) 
and actual landed cost of domestic linkage coal. This was recorded 
in an order passed on 25.02.2022 by a Coordinate Bench of this 
Court in a contempt action brought by the applicant [Contempt 
Petition (Civil) No(s) 877-878 of 2021]. We shall refer to the said 
proceeding later in this judgment. We also need not delve into the 
question of eligibility of the applicant to get additional sum on 

account of change in law, as that question stands finally decided 
in the main judgment. 
4. 
The applicant had also raised another claim for additional 
payment before the RERC, under the head of carrying cost which 
was disallowed by the RERC. Rajasthan Discoms, being aggrieved 
by the grant of change-in-law compensation, as also the applicant, 
being aggrieved by rejection of the claim for carrying costs appealed 
against the order of the RERC before the Appellate Tribunal for 
Electricity (“APTEL”). By a common decision dated 14.09.2019, the 
APTEL found that the applicant’s claim based on “change in law” 
was valid and opined that the applicant was entitled to 
compensation for the loss caused to it because of change in law 
under a subsequent coal supply scheme, termed as the SHAKTI 
scheme, which failed to provide domestic coal linkage. The APTEL 
further found that the applicant would also be entitled for payment 
towards applicable carrying cost. The Rajasthan Discoms had 
appealed against the common decision of APTEL before this Court. 
The three-Judge Bench of this Court, by the judgement dated 
31.08.2020, dismissed the appeals with the following observations 
and directions: - 
“66. Considering the facts of this case and keeping in view 
that the RERC and APTEL have given concurrent findings in 

favour of the respondent with regard to change in law, with 
which we also concur, we may now deal with the question 
of liability of appellants-Rajasthan Discoms with regard to 
late payment surcharge. In this regard, the following 
Articles 8.3.5 and 8.8 of PPA, which are relevant for the 
present purpose, are extracted hereunder: 
"8.3.5. In the event of delay in payment of a Monthly Bill 
by the Procurers beyond its Due Date, a Late Payment 
Surcharge shall be payable by such Procurers to the Seller 
at the rate of two percent (2%) in excess of the applicable 
SBAR per annum, on the amount of outstanding payment, 
calculated on a day to day basis (and compounded with 
monthly rest), for each day of the delay. The Late Payment 
Surcharge shall be claimed by the Seller through the 
Supplementary Bill. 
8.8 Payment of Supplementary Bill 
8.8.1 Either Party may raise a bill on the other Party 
(supplementary bill) for payment on account of: 
 i) Adjustments required by the Regional Energy 
Account (if applicable): 
ii) Tariff Payment for change in parameters, pursuant 
to provisions in Schedule 4; or 
 iii)Change in Law as provided in Article 10, and such 
Supplementary Bill shall be paid by the others party. 
8.8.2 The Procurers shall remit all amounts due under 
a Supplementary Bill raised by the Seller to the Seller's 
Designated Account by the Due Date and notify the Seller 
of such remittance on the same day or the Seller shall be 
eligible to draw such amounts through the Letter of 
Credit. Similarly, the Seller shall pay all amounts due 
under a Supplementary Bill raised by Procurer(s) by the 
Due Date to concerned Procurer's designated bank 
account and notify such Procurer(s) of such payment on 
the same day. For such payments by the Procurer(s), 
Rebate as applicable to Monthly Bills pursuant to Article 
8.3.6 shall equally apply. 
8.8.3 In the event of delay in payment of a 
Supplementary Bill by either Party beyond its Due Date, 
a Late Payment Surcharge shall be payable at the same 
terms applicable to the Monthly Bill in Article 8.3.5. 
8.9 The copies of all; notices/offers which are required 
to be sent as per the provisions of this Article 8, shall be 
sent by a party, simultaneously to all parties." 
Liability of the Late Payment Surcharge which has been 
saddled upon the appellants is at the rate of 2% in excess 

of applicable SBAR per annum, on the amount of 
outstanding payment, calculated on a day to day basis (and 
compounded with monthly rest) for each day of the delay. 
Therefore, there shall be huge liability of payment of Late 
Payment 
Surcharge 
upon 
the 
appellants-Rajasthan 
Discoms. 
67. With regard to the question of interest/late payment 
surcharge, we notice that the plea of change in law was 
initially raised by APRL in the year 2013. A case was also 
filed by APRL in the year 2013 itself raising its claim on such 
basis. However, the appellants-Rajasthan Discoms did not 
allow the claim regarding change in law, because of which 
APRL was deprived of raising the bills with effect from the 
date of change in law in the year 2013. We are, thus, of the 
opinion that considering the totality of the facts of this case 
and in order to do complete justice and to reduce the liability 
of the appellants-Rajasthan Discoms, payment of 2 per cent 
in excess of the applicable SBAR per annum with monthly 
rest would be on higher side. In our opinion, it would be 
appropriate to direct the appellants-Rajasthan Discoms to 
pay interest/late payment surcharge as per applicable 
SBAR for the relevant years, which should not exceed 9 per 
cent per annum. It is also provided that instead of monthly 
rest, the interest would be compounded per annum. 
68. We accordingly direct that the rate of interest/late 
payment surcharge would be at SBAR, not exceeding 9 per 
cent per annum, to be compounded annually, and the 2 per 
cent above the SBAR (as provided in Article 8.3.5 of PPA) 
would not be charged in the present case. 
69. Before we part with the case, we may notice that Shri 
Prashant Bhushan, raised the submission with respect to 
over-invoicing. 
He 
attracted 
our 
attention 
to 
the 
investigation pending before the DRI. He has submitted that 
40 importers of coal are under investigation by the DRI 
concerning alleged over-invoicing. The letter of rogatory was 
issued. However, leamed counsel conceded that there is no 
ultimate conclusion in the investigation reached so far. 
Thus, we are of the opinion that until and unless there is a 
finding recorded by the competent court as to invoicing, the 
submission cannot be accepted. At this stage, it cannot be 
said that there is over-invoicing. We have examined the case 
on merits with abundant caution, and we find that there are 
concurrent findings of facts recorded by the RERC and the 
APTEL. With respect to the aspect that bid was premised on 
domestic coal, we find that findings recorded do not call for 
any interference.” 

5. 
The applicant had filed contempt proceedings alleging 
disobedience of the said judgment and order, which were registered 
as Contempt Petition (C) Nos. 877-878 of 2021. We have already 
referred to this proceeding. In the contempt proceeding, the 
applicant’s position gets reflected in the submissions of its learned 
senior counsel, recorded in paragraph 6 of the order passed on 
25.02.2022 (One of us, Aniruddha Bose, J., was a party to this 
order). The relevant portion of that order is reproduced below:- 
“6. Shri Abhishek Manu Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the petitioner has submitted that the only 
dispute which was to be resolved by RERC, APTEL and this 
Court was with regard to the payment due because of 
"change in law", which was held to be the actual landed 
cost of alternate coal/imported coal as certified by the 
auditor minus landed cost of domestic linkage coal. There 
was no other dispute which was to be resolved by this 
Court. Learned Senior Counsel has submitted that it is now 
contended by the respondents that certain payments have 
been made by the respondents which, according to the 
learned Senior Counsel, was towards regular payment on 
the basis of domestic linkage coal and nothing else. Since, 
the "change in law" ground of the petitioner has been 
accepted by all the authorities i.e. RERC, APTEL and this 
Court and also confirmed by the dismissal of the Review 
Petition filed before this Court, the question cannot now be 
reopened at this stage. It is, thus, submitted that since the 
actual landed cost of alternate coal/imported coal as was 
submitted by the petitioner has been duly certified by the 
auditors, which has not been disputed by the respondents, 
the payment, as claimed, ought to have been made and 
since the same has not been paid, the respondents are 
liable for contempt. The further contention of the learned 
Senior Counsel of the petitioner is that the claim of the 
respondents that they had paid certain amount towards 
energy charges regularly month by month, which included 
certain amount of price of alternate coal/imported coal 
charges cannot be accepted, as at that stage i.e. in the year 
2013, the respondents had not accepted the claim of the 

petitioner with regard to "change in law", and the assertion 
now being made by the respondents that they had paid 
certain amount after partially accepting the "change in law" 
theory cannot be accepted, as this issue had never been 
raised by respondents in any proceedings earlier, as the 
respondents had, in fact, throughout contested that the 
petitioner is not entitled to the "change in law" benefit.” 
 
6. 
The allegations of non-compliance with the judgment of the 
three-Judge Bench were dealt with by the Coordinate Bench in the 
aforesaid order passed on 25.02.2022. It was, inter-alia, observed 
and directed in the said order:- 
“9. Firstly, what we have to consider is only the effect of 
"change in law", which as per RERC, API'EL and this Court 
would be the actual landed cost of alternate coal/ imported 
coal minus the landed cost of domestic linkage coal. The 
question of any claim which the respondents may have 
against the petitioner, is not an issue before us. As per the 
principle laid down by RERC and affirmed up till this Court, 
the petitioner has claimed an amount of Rs.5344. 75 crores 
up to March, 2021. The said principle having been affirmed 
by the APTEL as well as by this Court and even in Review 
Petition, cannot be reopened now. It cannot be disputed that 
after March, 2021 also, the petitioner would be entitled to 
payment on the basis of the same calculation, which up to 
November, 2021 comes to Rs.130.69 crores. As such, the 
due amount up to November 2021 would be Rs.5344. 75 + 
Rs.130.69 = 54 75.44 crores. Out of this amount of Rs.54 
75.44 crores, the petitioner has been paid a sum of 
Rs.2426.81 crores in terms of the interim order passed by 
this Court. Hence, as per the petitioner, the balance amount 
of Rs.3048.63 crores would remain due to be paid up to 
November, 2021. The interest at the maximum rate of 9% 
per annum, as capped by this Court vide its judgment and 
order dated 31.08.2020, is to be applied on the said 
amount, from the date the amount became due, till the date 
of actual payment. The further claim of late payment 
surcharge, amounting to Rs.2477.70 crores, as per the 
petitioner, would be a subject matter which the petitioner, if 
so advised, can claim before the appropriate forum, as the 
same is not the subject in question in the present 

proceedings, regarding which no directions have also been 
issued by this Court. 
10. As such, considering the totality of facts and 
circumstances of this case, prima face we are of the opinion 
that the respondents are liable for contempt for not 
complying this Court's order dated 31.08.2020. We, thus, 
direct the respondents to pay to the petitioner, the principal 
amount (as per the terms/norms laid down in the judgment 
of this Court dated 31.08.2020) minus Rs.2426.81 crores 
deposited by the respondents in terms of the interim order 
dated 29.10.2018 (which, as per the petitioner, the balance 
payable amount would be Rs.3048.63 crores) along with 
interest as per the applicable SBAR for the relevant years, 
which should not exceed 9% per annum (to be compounded 
annually), from the date the amount became due till the date 
of actual payment, within four weeks from today, failing 
which the respondents shall appear before this Court in 
person, on the next date, so as to enable this Court to frame 
charges.” 
 
7. 
The contempt petitions were subsequently directed to be 
closed by another Coordinate Bench of this Court and order to that 
effect was passed on 19.04.2022. In this order, it was, inter-alia, 
observed:- 
“With regard to the first question it may only be observed 
that by order dated 25.02.2022 passed in these contempt 
petitions, this court, in paragraph no. 9, has observed as 
under: 
"The further claim of late payment surcharge, 
amounting to Rs.2477.70 crores, as per the 
petitioner, would be a subject matter which the 
petitioner, if so advised, can claim before the 
appropriate forum, as the same is not the subject in 
question in the present proceedings, regarding 
which no directions have also been issued by this 
Court." 
As such, since according to the respondent(s) the payment 
made is only towards the principal amount plus 9% interest 
per annum, we are not inclined to pass any further orders 
as we have already left the question of late payment 

surcharge open, which the petitioner, if so advised, can 
claim before the appropriate forum. 
As regards the second question of the alleged non-
compliance, by the respondents after November, 2021 of the 
judgment and order dated 31.08.2020, we would not like to 
make any observation as there is neither. any material 
before us with regard to that nor the same was in question 
when the contempt petitions were filed. As such, we leave 
this question open to be agitated by the petitioner, of it is so 
advised. 
With regard to the last issue raised by the respondents, 
which is to the effect that the claim of the Rajasthan Utilities 
against the petitioner outside the judgment dated 
31.08.2020 be permitted to be made, we would only like to 
observe that the same cannot be a matter to be considered 
in a contempt petition and as such neither we are inclined 
to grant any such relief nor stop them from raising any such 
issue, if the respondents are so advised and found entitled 
under the law. With the aforesaid observations, we close 
these contempt petitions.” 
 
8. 
After institution of the present application on 19.07.2022, it 
was heard from time to time and finally on 24.01.2024, when this 
matter was called on for hearing, Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, 
learned senior counsel, appearing for the applicant, sought leave 
to withdraw the application. Mr. Dushyant Dave, learned senior 
counsel appearing for the Rajasthan Discoms, however, opposed 
such prayer and his case was that the present application, having 
been taken out in an appeal which stood disposed of, did not lie 
and it should be dismissed on the ground that it is not 
maintainable. Mr. Dave drew our attention to paragraph 67 of the 
judgment of the three-Judge Bench, which we have quoted above. 

The issue of LPS has been dealt with by the three-Judge Bench in 
the said passage. 
9. 
In the course of hearing, it was projected as an application for 
clarification, though the same was registered as a miscellaneous 
application. The reliefs asked for in this application do not refer to 
any clarification. We have referred to the substance of the reliefs 
prayed for in this application earlier in this judgment. 
10. Order XII Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules, 2013 (“2013 
Rules”) framed in pursuance of Article 145 of the Constitution of 
India, stipulates:- 
“3. Subject to the provisions contained in Order XLVII of 
these rules, a judgment pronounced by the Court or by a 
majority of the Court or by a dissenting Judge in open Court 
shall not afterwards be altered or added to, save for the 
purpose of correcting a clerical or arithmetical mistake or an 
error arising from any accidental slip or omission.” 
 
There are, however, two chapters in the 2013 Rules which permit 
review of a judgment or order of this Court, being Order XLVII and 
XLVIII. The former Order, contained in Part IV of the 2013 Rules 
relates to “Review of a Judgment” and the latter relates to “Curative 
Petition”. There is no other provision in the 2013 Rules, whereby a 
litigant can apply for modification of a judgment or an order of this 
Court in a matter which stands finally concluded. On rare 

occasions, a litigant may apply for clarification of an order if the 
same is ex-facie incomprehensible, but we do not expect any 
judgment or order to bear such a character. So far as the applicant 
is concerned, it did not apply for review of the judgment delivered 
by the three-Judge Bench. Neither in the contempt action initiated 
by the applicant, did this Court find that any case of willful 
disobedience of the judgment of the three-Judge Bench was made 
out on the question of LPS. This would be apparent from the orders 
passed by this Court in the contempt petitions which have been 
reproduced earlier in this judgement. The judgment of the three-
Judge Bench has already examined the question of LPS and by 
taking out a Miscellaneous Application, the applicant cannot ask 
for reliefs which were not granted in the main judgment itself. 
11. In the case of Ghanashyam Mishra & Sons Private Limited 
-vs- Edelweiss Asset Reconstruction Company Limited [M.A. 
No. 1166 of 2021 in CA No. 8129 of 2019], a two-Judge Bench of 
this Court in its judgment delivered on 17th August 2022 observed 
and held:- 
“4. Having heard learned senior counsel for the parties and 
having perused the relevant materials placed on record, we 
are of the considered view that the present applications are 
nothing else but an attempt to seek review of the judgment 
and order passed by this Court on 13th April 2021 under 
the garb of miscellaneous application. 

5. We find that there is a growing tendency of 
indirectly seeking review of the orders of this Court 
by filing applications either seeking modifications or 
clarifications of the orders passed by this Court. 
6. In our view, such applications are a total abuse of 
process of law. The valuable time of Court is spent in 
deciding 
such 
application 
which 
time 
would 
otherwise be utilized for attending litigations of the 
litigants who are waiting in the corridors of justice 
for decades together.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
12. Subsequently in the judgment of this Court in the case of 
Supertech Limited-vs- Emerald Court Owner Resident Welfare 
Association & Others [(2023) ], a two-Judge Bench of 
this Court examined the maintainability of miscellaneous 
applications “for clarification, modification or recall” and was 
pleased to observe the following in the context of that case:- 
“12. The attempt in the present miscellaneous application is 
clearly to seek a substantive modification of the judgment 
of this Court. Such an attempt is not permissible in a 
miscellaneous application. While Mr Mukul Rohatgi, learned 
Senior Counsel has relied upon the provisions of Order LV 
Rule 6 of the Supreme Court Rules, 2013, what is 
contemplated therein is a saving of the inherent powers of 
the Court to make such orders as may be necessary for the 
ends of justice or to prevent an abuse of the process of the 
Court. Order LV Rule 6 cannot be inverted to bypass the 
provisions for review in Order XLVII of the Supreme Court 
Rules, 2013. The miscellaneous application is an abuse of 
the process.” 
 
The authorities which were cited in the said Judgment by the 
Coordinate Bench are the cases of State (UT of Delhi) -vs- Gurdip 
Singh Uban and Others [(2000) ], Sone Lal and Others 

-vs- State of Uttar Pradesh [(1982) ], Ram Chandra 
Singh -vs- Savitri Devi and Others [(2004 ], Common 
Cause -vs- Union of India and Others [(2004) ], Zahira 
Habibullah Sheikh and Another -vs- State of Gujarat and 
Others [(2004) ], P.N. Eswara Iyer and Others -vs- 
Registrar, Supreme Court of India [(1980) ], 
Suthendraraja alias Suthenthira Raja alias Santhan and Others 
-vs- State through DSP/CBI, SIT, Chennai [(1999) ], 
Ramdeo Chauhan alias Raj Nath -vs- State of Assam [(2001) ], Devendra Pal Singh -vs- State (NCT of Delhi) and 
Another [(2003) ] and Rashid Khan Pathan in re, 
[(2021) ]. These authorities broadly stipulate that 
multiple attempts to reopen a judgment of this Court should not 
be permitted. Hence, we do not consider it necessary to deal with 
these authorities individually. 
13. Rule 6 of Order LV of the 2013 Rules stipulates: - 
“6. Nothing in these rules shall be deemed to limit or 
otherwise affect the inherent powers of the Court to make 
such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or 
to prevent abuse of the process of the Court.” 
 
The maintainability of the present application cannot be explained 
by invoking the inherent power of this Court either. The applicant 

has not applied for review of the main judgment. In the contempt 
action, it failed to establish any willful disobedience of the main 
judgment and order on account of non-payment of LPS. Now the 
applicant cannot continue to hitchhike on the same judgment by 
relying on the inherent power or jurisdiction of this Court. 
14. Appearing on behalf of the applicant, Dr. Singhvi, learned 
Senior Counsel, relied on five orders of this Court in which post-
disposal applications were entertained. The first one was an order 
dated 29.10.2018 in the case of Energy Watchdog -vs- Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission and Others, [MA Nos.2705-
2706 of 2018 in Civil Appeal Nos.5399-5400 of 2016]. In that case, 
an application for impleadment on behalf of the State of Gujarat 
was allowed, upon going through a High Power Committee’s report, 
which was given after the judgment was delivered. The judgment 
disposing of the Civil Appeal was delivered on 11.04.2017, but in 
the miscellaneous application, the applicant was given liberty to 
approach the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission for 
approval of the proposed amendments to be made to a power 
purchase agreement. That was a case where this Court, after the 
judgment was delivered, considered certain events which accrued 
subsequently and had a bearing on the main decision. The 

subsequent event was taken into account for modifying the order 
but there was no substantive change in the judgment itself. 
15. The next order, on which Dr. Singhvi placed reliance, was 
passed on 04.05.2023 in the case of Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran 
Nigam Ltd. & Anr. -vs- Adani Power (Mundra) Limited [MA (D) 
No. 18461 of 2023 in ]. The 
substantive part of the order is contained in Paragraph 2 thereof 
and this paragraph reads:- 
“2. As agreed by the learned counsel for the parties, the 
words “As per the details given in the PPA, the mode of 
transportation is through railway” shown in paragraph 32 
of the judgment dated 20.04.2023 passed in C.A. No. 2908 
of 2022 be read as “As per the details given in the FSA, the 
mode of transportation is through railway”. 
 
But this order appears to be in the nature of correcting an error 
which was clerical in nature and the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(“the Code”) itself provides for such correction under Section 152 
thereof, as also Order XII Rule 3 of the 2013 Rules. 
16. The third order relied on by Dr. Singhvi was passed on 
09.12.2022 in the case of Kalpataru Properties Pvt. Ltd. -vs- 
Indiabulls Housing Finance Ltd. [MA No.2064 of 2022 in Civil 
Appeal No.7050 of 2022]. The applicant therein had approached 
this Court contending that he was not heard when the civil appeal 

was decided. In that case, the appellant had approached this Court 
against an Order passed by NCLAT in Company Appeal 
(AT)(Insolvency) No. 880/2021 and the said appellant sought to 
withdraw the appeal on deposit of certain amount by the first 
respondent in the said appeal. The request was accepted by this 
Court and by the Order passed on 26.09.2022, the appeal pending 
before the NCLAT was also disposed of by this Court. The applicant 
was an intervenor before the NCLAT and his submission was that 
in the appeal before the NCLAT which was disposed of, he also 
sought to raise some grievances before the NCLAT, in his capacity 
as an intervenor. His case was that he should have been given the 
liberty to be heard as an intervenor before the NCLAT. A Coordinate 
Bench of this Court entertained that application and held: - 
“We do believe that this controversy should be resolved by 
the NCLAT itself i.e. whether on the appellants seeking to 
withdraw the appeal, there can be any impediment in 
withdrawal of the appeal and is the NCLAT really required 
to comment on the merits of the order of the NCLT at the 
behest of an intervener. We further make it clear that we are 
not expanding the array of parties before the NCLAT as a 
number of entities seems to have jumped into the picture as 
the matter has gone on before the Court. We make it clear 
that only the parties/existing interventionist before the 
NCLAT will have the right of hearing. 
In view of the orders passed in, 
this appeal will also to be listed before the Bench presided 
over by the Chairman. 
In view thereof, the final picture which would emerge would 
be before the NCLAT and to that extent the order passed by 

us on 14.11.2022 would be kept in abeyance till the NCLAT 
resolves the issue.” 
 
Again, this Order was in the nature of a review order by the 
applicant who was a party to the proceeding before the NCLAT. All 
the appeals before the NCLAT were disposed of without hearing 
him. The context is entirely different from the one in which the 
applicant has presently approached this Court. 
17. The fourth order on which the present applicant relied was 
passed on 12.08.2022 in the case of Supertech Limited -vs- 
Emerald Court Owner Resident Welfare Association & Ors. [MA 
No.1918 of 2021 in ]. The Coordinate 
Bench of this Court granted extension of time, as sought by the 
applicant therein, in effecting demolition of two building towers 
which were approved by the Court while disposing of the civil 
appeal. The power to extend time beyond that fixed by a Court on 
a legitimate ground is incorporated in Section 148 of the Code. If 
the time to do something requires to be extended, it would be 
within the inherent jurisdiction of this Court to go beyond the 
maximum period of 30 days prescribed in the aforesaid Section, 
after sufficient reason is shown. Section 112 of the Code itself 
provides that nothing contained in the Code shall affect the 

inherent powers of the Supreme Court under Article 136 or any 
other provision of the Constitution. 
18. The fifth order referred to by the applicant was passed on 
23.07.2021 in the case of Union of India -vs- Association of 
Unified Telecom Service Providers of India and Ors. [MA No.83 
of 2021 in MA (D) No. 9887 of 2020 in 
of 2015]. A miscellaneous application had been filed for 
modification of the content of judgment dated 1st September 2020 
passed in M.A. (D) No. 9887 of 2020 in Civil Appeal Nos. 6328-6399 
of 2015. In the said proceeding, clarification was also sought on 
the aspect that the judgment did not bar the Union of India from 
considering and rectifying the clerical/arithmetical errors in 
computation of certain dues. This was again an Order, in 
substance, permitting rectification of an arithmetic error, which is 
implicit in Section 152 of the Code read with Order XII Rule 3 of 
the 2013 Rules. 
19. We have indicated in the earlier part of this judgment that Dr. 
Singhvi had expressed his desire to withdraw the present 
application on the last date of hearing, i.e., 24.01.2024. Ordinarily, 
we would not have had set out the background leading to the filing 
of the present application and the course of the application that 

was taken before this Court in view of such submission. Any 
plaintiff would be entitled to abandon a suit or abandon part of the 
claim made in the suit at any time after institution of the suit, as 
provided in Rule 1 of Order XXIII of the Code. We, however, decided 
not to permit such simpliciter withdrawal, as the Rajasthan 
Discoms sought imposition of costs. Secondly, in our opinion, the 
provision which pertains to a suit would not ipso facto apply to a 
miscellaneous application invoking inherent powers of this Court, 
instituted in a set of statutory appeals which stood disposed of. 
Even if an applicant applies for withdrawal of an application, in 
exceptional cases, it would be within the jurisdiction of the Court 
to examine the application and pass appropriate orders. So far as 
the present proceeding is concerned, an important question of law 
has arisen as regards jurisdiction of the Court to entertain an 
application taken out in connection with a set of statutory appeals 
which stood disposed of. Judgment of this Court in Supertech 
Limited (supra) deals with this question and in our opinion, the 
ratio of the said judgment would apply to the present proceeding 
as well. 
20. We felt it necessary to examine the question about 
maintainability of the present application as we are of the view that 

it was necessary to spell out the position of law as to when such 
post-disposal miscellaneous applications can be entertained after 
a matter is disposed of. This Court has become functus officio and 
does not retain jurisdiction to entertain an application after the 
appeal was disposed of by the judgment of a three-Judge Bench of 
this Court on 31.08.2020 through a course beyond that specified 
in the statute. This is not an application for correcting any clerical 
or arithmetical error. Neither it is an application for extension of 
time. A post disposal application for modification and clarification 
of the order of disposal shall lie only in rare cases, where the order 
passed by this Court is executory in nature and the directions of 
the Court may become impossible to be implemented because of 
subsequent events or developments. The factual background of 
this Application does not fit into that description. 
21. Our attention was drawn to an order passed on 14.12.2022 
in which a Coordinate Bench was of the prima facie opinion 
that the applicant may be entitled to LPS as per Article 8.3.5 of 
PPA-2010, at least from 31.08.2020, till the actual payment 
was made pursuant to the order passed by this Court in the 
contempt proceedings. This prima facie view was expressed in the 

course of hearing of the present application only. We have 
examined the issue in greater detail. As we have already indicated, 
the applicant, after the three-Judge Bench decision was delivered, 
did not file any petition for review. On the other hand, it was the 
Rajasthan Discoms that had filed the review petitions which stood 
dismissed. In the contempt action instituted by the applicant, the 
question concerning payment of LPS was raised, but the Bench of 
this Court found that the same was not the subject in question in 
the contempt proceedings regarding which no direction had been 
issued by this Court. Hence the Coordinate Bench decided not to 
address that question in the contempt proceedings. In this 
judgement, we have already quoted the observations regarding the 
question of LPS made by the Contempt Court on 25.02.2022 and 
19.04.2022. Despite that question being left open by the Contempt 
Court, we are of the view that a miscellaneous application is not 
the proper legal course to make demand on that count. A relief of 
this nature cannot be asked for in a miscellaneous application 
which was described in the course of hearing as an application for 
clarification. 
22. So far as the observations made in the order passed in the 
present proceedings on 14.12.2022 are concerned, they were made 

only at a prima facie stage and do not have binding effect at the 
hearing stage. Moreover, the question whether such a prayer could 
be made in an application labeled as a “Miscellaneous Application” 
taken out in connection with a set of appeals which have been 
finally decided, does not appear to have been considered by this 
Court at the time of making of the order dated 14.12.2022. The 
order of this Court does not reflect any discussion on the issue of 
maintainability of the present application. It also does not appear 
to us that the maintainability issue was raised at that stage. Thus, 
mere making of such observations cannot be construed to mean 
that this Court found such application to be maintainable. 
23. We, accordingly, dismiss the present application. This 
application was listed before us on several occasions and for that 
reason we impose costs of Rs. 50,000/- to be paid by the applicant 
to be remitted to the Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee. 
 
…………………………J. 
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE).………………………..J. 
(SANJAY KUMAR) 
 
NEW DELHI 
March 18, 2024