IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS.4322 – 4324 OF 2024 
( SLP (C) Nos. 19059-19061 of 2014) 

M. Radheshyamlal 
 … Appellant 

versus 

V Sandhya and Anr. Etc. 
 
 … Respondents 

JUDGMENT 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
2. 
These appeals arise out of three separate suits. For 
convenience, we are referring to the parties with reference to 
their status in Original Suit No. 12091 of 2010. The appellant is the plaintiff in the said suit. The 
respondents in are 
the defendants in the said suit. 
3. 
It is not in dispute that one Sungani Bai (Sukri Bai) was 
the original owner of the suit property who died in the year 
1947. Sungani Bai (the original owner) executed a registered 
settlement deed dated 1st December 1945. She settled the suit 

property by the said settlement deed in favour of three persons: 
Gopu Bai, Abbey Karan Joshi and Vijay Kishan Bohra. It is not 
in dispute that the original owner died intestate without leaving 
any legal representatives. As per the settlement deed, it was 
provided that 1/3rd share in the suit property was given to 
Gobu Bai for her life and then to her two daughters for their 
lifetime. It was provided that after their demise, 1/3rd of the 
share would pass on to their male children. The daughters of 
Gobu Bai died, leaving behind them Radhe Shyam, Rajendra 
Purohit and Omprakash Purohit. As per the settlement deed, 
1/3rd share was given to Abbey Karan Joshi during his lifetime 
and after his demise to his male children. The 2nd defendant – 
Sailesh Joshi, is his only son. The remaining 1/3rd share was 
settled on Vijay Kishan Bohra during his lifetime. It was 
provided that it would go to his male children after his lifetime. 
The said Vijay Kishan Bohra died, leaving behind his son 
Chandrasekar Bohra. Vasantha Kumar (original 3rd defendant) 
and his wife V. Sandhya (4th defendant) purchased the suit 
property by a registered sale deed dated 29th January 2001 
from the 2nd defendant – Sailesh Joshi, and the successors of 
two other sharers who were entitled to 1/3rd share each under 
the said deed of settlement. The 3rd defendant died during the 
pendency of the proceedings, and the 5th defendant is the son 
of the 3rd and 4th defendants. 
4. 
Original Suit No. 12091 of 2010, as stated earlier, was 
filed by the appellant/plaintiff. The suit was filed on 17th 
November 1995, in which the plaintiff claimed that he was in 

open, uninterrupted and continuous possession of the suit 
property for 45 years. He claimed that he had perfected his title 
to the suit property by adverse possession along with his father 
and other family members. In the plaint, it is stated that the 
original owner died in 1947. The plaintiff relied upon several 
documents to show his possession. As the defendants 
threatened to dispossess him and trespass upon the suit 
property, the suit was filed for a declaration that he had 
become the owner of the suit property by adverse possession 
and for permanent injunction. 
5. 
The 2nd defendant contested the suit by contending that 
the plaintiff was well aware of the said deed of settlement, but 
he had not disclosed the same in the plaint. He submitted that 
the three persons on whom the suit property was settled by the 
original owner in the year 1945 became the owners of the suit 
property on the demise of the original owner. The 4th and the 
5th defendants also filed a written statement contending that 
the plaintiff was in unlawful possession of a small portion of 
the suit property to the extent of 250 sq. ft. The 4th and 5th 
defendants denied the claim of adverse possession made by the 
plaintiff. 
6. 
Original Suit no. 12092 of 2010 was filed by the 3rd, 4th 
and 5th defendants against the plaintiff. The suit was filed for 
possession based on the title acquired by the 3rd, 4th and 5th 
defendants on the basis of the sale deed dated 29th January 
2001. 

7. 
The 2nd defendant had filed a suit for eviction against the 
tenants in the suit property, being EP No. 28 of 1996, in which 
an order of eviction was passed. The plaintiff/appellant filed 
Original Suit No. 973 of 1996, inter alia, for a declaration that 
he was not bound by any order of eviction in EP No. 28 of 1996. 
The City filed by 
the plaintiff and decreed Suit No. 12092 of 2010 filed by 3rd to 
5th defendants and passed a decree for possession. Suit No. 973 
of 1996, filed by the plaintiff, was decreed. Therefore, two 
appeals were preferred by the plaintiff before the High Court for 
challenging the decrees in the first two suits. The 2nd 
defendant preferred an appeal against the decree passed in 
Suit No. 973 of 1996. The appeal filed against the decree 
passed in Suit No. 973 of 1996 was dismissed by the First 
Appellate Court. However, the finding of the Trial Court that 
the plaintiff had perfected his title by adverse possession was 
set aside. The plaintiff filed a second appeal before the High 
Court. By the impugned judgment dated 25th April 2014, the 
High Court dismissed all three appeals preferred by the 
plaintiff. 
SUBMISSIONS 
8. 
The 
learned 
senior 
counsel 
appearing 
for 
the 
appellant/original plaintiff submitted that what was executed 
on 1st December 1945 by the original owner was a will. He 
submitted that as the suit property is in Chennai, rights can 
be claimed based on the will only if a probate or letters of 
administration is obtained. The learned counsel submitted that 

in the absence of probate or letters of administration, no right 
could be claimed based on the so-called settlement deed dated 
1st December 1945. Consequently, no right, title or interest in 
the suit property has been passed on to the 3rd and 4th 
defendants by the sale deed dated 29th January 2001. He 
submitted that the continuous possession of the plaintiff is at 
least from 1951, and on facts, the plaintiff had established the 
plea of adverse possession. He submitted that the defendants 
have no right concerning the suit property, and hence, the 
impugned judgment is entirely erroneous. The learned counsel 
appearing for the respondents supported the impugned 
decision of the High Court. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
9. 
As far as the suit filed by the plaintiff for the declaration 
of ownership based on adverse possession is concerned, the 
plaintiff can never succeed unless he proves the plea of adverse 
possession. There is a concurrent finding of fact on this issue 
against the plaintiff. 
10. 
As far as the plea of adverse possession is concerned, a 
Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of M. Siddiq (Ram 
Janmabhumi Temple-5 J.) v. Suresh Das1, in paragraph 
1142 and 1143 has held thus: 
“1142. A plea of adverse possession is 
founded on the acceptance that ownership 
of the property vests in another against 
whom the claimant asserts a possession 
 
1 (2020) 

adverse to the title of the other. Possession 
is adverse in the sense that it is contrary to 
the acknowledged title in the other person 
against whom it is claimed. Evidently, 
therefore, the plaintiffs in Suit No. 4 ought 
to be cognizant of the fact that any claim of 
adverse possession against the Hindus or 
the temple would amount to an acceptance 
of a title in the latter. Dr Dhavan has 
submitted that this plea is a subsidiary or 
alternate plea upon which it is not 
necessary for the plaintiffs to stand in the 
event that their main plea on title is held to 
be established on evidence. It becomes 
then necessary to assess as to whether the 
claim of adverse possession has been 
established. 
1143. A person who sets up a plea of 
adverse possession must establish both 
possession which is peaceful, open and 
continuous possession which meets the 
requirement 
of 
being nec 
vi 
nec 
claim and nec precario. To substantiate a 
plea of adverse possession, the character of 
the possession must be adequate in 
continuity and in the public because the 
possession has to be to the knowledge of 
the true owner in order for it to be adverse. 
These requirements have to be duly 
established first by adequate pleadings and 
second by leading sufficient evidence. 
Evidence, it is well settled, can only be 
adduced with reference to matters which 
are pleaded in a civil suit and in the 
absence of an adequate pleading, evidence 
by itself cannot supply the deficiency of a 

pleaded case. Reading Para 11(a), it 
becomes evident that beyond stating that 
the Muslims have been in long, exclusive 
and continuous possession beginning from 
the time when the Mosque was built and 
until it was desecrated, no factual basis 
has been furnished. This is not merely a 
matter of details or evidence. A plea of 
adverse possession seeks to defeat the 
rights of the true owner and the law is not 
readily accepting of such a case unless a 
clear and cogent basis has been made out 
in the pleadings and established in the 
evidence.” 
(underline supplied) 
11. 
In the case of Karnataka Board of Wakf v. Govt. of 
India and Ors.2, in paragraph 11, this Court has laid down 
the law regarding the plea of adverse possession. Paragraph 
11 reads thus: 
“11. In the eye of the law, an owner would 
be deemed to be in possession of a property 
so long as there is no intrusion. Non-use of 
the property by the owner even for a long 
time won't affect his title. But the position 
will be altered when another person takes 
possession of the property and asserts a 
right over it. Adverse possession is a hostile 
possession by clearly asserting hostile title 
in denial of the title of the true owner. It is 
a well-settled principle that a party 
claiming adverse possession must prove 
that his possession is “nec vi, nec clam, nec 
precario”, that is, peaceful, open and 
 
2 (2004) 

continuous. The possession must be 
adequate in continuity, in publicity and in 
extent to show that their possession is 
adverse to the true owner. It must start 
with a wrongful disposition of the rightful 
owner and be actual, visible, exclusive, 
hostile and continued over the statutory 
period. (See S.M. Karim v. Bibi Sakina [AIR 
1964 SC 1254], Parsinni v. Sukhi [(1993) ] 
and D.N. 
Venkatarayappa v. State 
of 
Karnataka [(1997) ].) Physical 
fact 
of 
exclusive 
possession 
and 
the animus possidendi to hold as owner in 
exclusion to the actual owner are the most 
important factors that are to be accounted 
in cases of this nature. Plea of adverse 
possession is not a pure question of law 
but a blended one of fact and law. 
Therefore, a person who claims adverse 
possession should show: (a) on what date 
he came into possession, (b) what was the 
nature of his possession, (c) whether the 
factum of possession was known to the 
other party, (d) how long his possession 
has continued, and (e) his possession was 
open and undisturbed. A person pleading 
adverse possession has no equities in his 
favour. Since he is trying to defeat the 
rights of the true owner, it is for him to 
clearly plead and establish all facts 
necessary 
to 
establish 
his 
adverse 
possession. 
[Mahesh 
Chand 
Sharma 
(Dr.) v. Raj Kumari Sharma [(1996) ]” 
(underline supplied) 

12. 
Therefore, to prove the plea of adverse possession:- 
(a) The plaintiff must plead and prove that he was 
claiming possession adverse to the true owner; 
(b) The plaintiff must plead and establish that the factum 
of his long and continuous possession was known to 
the true owner; 
(c) The plaintiff must also plead and establish when he 
came into possession; and 
(d) The plaintiff must establish that his possession was 
open and undisturbed. 
It is a settled law that by pleading adverse possession, a party 
seeks to defeat the rights of the true owner, and therefore, there 
is no equity in his favour. After all, the plea is based on 
continuous wrongful possession for a period of more than 12 
years. Therefore, the facts constituting the ingredients of 
adverse possession must be pleaded and proved by the 
plaintiff. 
13. 
Therefore, it is necessary to consider the averments made 
in Original Suit No. 12091 of 2010. A plea of adverse 
possession can be found in paragraph 3 of the plaint, which 
reads thus: 
“3. The plaintiff is for the last 45 years in 
open 
uninterrupted 
and 
continuous 
possession and enjoyment of the premises 
being land and building bearing Old Door 
no. 14, New No. 18, Peria Neikaran Street, 

Sowcarpet, Madras-600079, more fully 
described in the schedule hereunder and 
he has thus perfected his title by adverse 
possession from before 1951, alongwith his 
father, J. mangilal Radhakishen Joshi, 
other members of his family. In proof 
thereof, the plaintiff has filed several 
documents to establish his said possession 
adverse to the interests of anyone else 
including 
the 
defendants. 
The 
said 
documents may be treated as part and 
parcel hereof. Several years prior to 1951, 
the said property had been owned by on 
Sukri Bai who died in or about 1947, she 
died leaving no issues. The father of the 
plaintiff and later the plaintiff have been 
paying taxes only in her name. The 
mutation in the Corporation and other 
registries remain unchanged.” 
(underline supplied) 
As stated earlier, the suit was filed on 17th November 1995. 
Therefore, going by the averments in paragraph 3 of the plaint, 
the plaintiff can, at the highest, claim to be in possession from 
the year 1950. In the same paragraph, the plaintiff stated that 
the original owner died in 1947. It is not pleaded that even 
before the year 1947, the plaintiff or his father were in hostile 
possession to the knowledge of the original owner. When a 
party claims adverse possession, he must know who the actual 
owner of the property is. Secondly, he must plead that he was 
in open and uninterrupted possession for more than 12 years 
to the original owner's knowledge. These material averments 
are completely absent in the plaint. Therefore, there is no 

proper foundation for the plea of adverse possession in the 
plaint. 
14. 
The Trial Court and the High Court have recorded 
findings of fact on the plea of adverse possession. The High 
Court has noted the admitted position that all along, the 
property tax and water tax bills stood in the name of the 
original owner. The High Court confirmed the finding of the 
Trial Court that the plaintiff was not able to produce even a 
single document to show that he had paid house tax before 
1995. 
The 
High 
Court 
has 
referred 
to 
the 
Court 
Commissioner’s Report, which records that the building 
forming a part of the suit property was in a completely 
dilapidated condition. The High Court has noted that the 
plaintiff took no steps to repair the portion in the dilapidated 
condition. The High Court has recorded a finding that water 
tax and sewage tax were not paid for years together. 
15. 
The High Court has referred to a complaint dated 25th 
August 1995 submitted by the plaintiff to the police. In the 
complaint, firstly, the plaintiff asserted that he was in 
possession of only the front portion of the suit property. 
Secondly, he specifically asserted that he had been in 
possession of the suit property for 35 years before filing the 
complaint. It is pointed out that this complaint was filed one 
year before the institution of the suit. Thus, he claimed to have 
been in possession since 1960. In the plaint, the plaintiff 
claimed to have been in possession since 1950. The plaintiff’s 
own complaint defeats the case made out in the plaint. 

16. 
Therefore, the High Court held that the plaintiff could 
not establish that his adverse possession commenced from a 
particular date. The Trial Court and High Court rightly held 
that the plaintiff failed to prove his plea of adverse possession. 
In fact, as stated earlier, there was no foundation for the plea 
of adverse possession in the plant itself. Therefore, the suit for 
declaration of ownership by the plaintiff must fail. On one 
hand, the plaintiff is claiming only on the basis of the plea of 
the adverse possession. On the other hand, the defendants are 
claiming through the person who was admittedly the original 
owner. Even considering the failure to obtain probate or a 
letter of administration, it is obvious that the defendants have 
a better title to the suit property than the plaintiff, a 
trespasser. Therefore, it is not possible to find fault with the 
concurrent judgments recording a finding of fact that the 
plaintiff failed to prove his adverse possession. Thus, the 
appeals must fail. 
17. 
During the submissions, the learned senior counsel 
appearing for the appellant/plaintiff submitted that the 
plaintiff is more than 80 years old. The plaintiff was in 
possession of at least a part of the suit property almost from 
1995. Therefore, notwithstanding the dismissal of the appeals, 
we propose to grant the plaintiff a longer time to vacate the 
suit property. 
18. 
Accordingly, we dismiss the appeals with no orders as to 
costs. Notwithstanding the dismissal of the appeals and 
confirmation of the decree for possession against the plaintiff, 

we direct that the decree of possession shall not be executed 
till 31st March 2025, subject to the condition of the appellant 
and all adult members of his family filing unconditional 
undertakings on oath to vacate and handover the peaceful 
possession of the suit property to the defendant nos. 4 and 5 
(plaintiffs in Original Suit No. 10292 of 2010). The 
undertakings on oath shall be filed within one month from 
today. The advocate for the appellant shall provide copies of 
the undertakings to the advocate for the respondents. On the 
failure of the appellant and his adult family members to file 
undertakings as above within the stipulated time, the decree 
for possession shall forthwith become executable. 
 
……………………..J. 

 (Abhay S. Oka) 

……………………..J. 

 (Ujjal Bhuyan) 
New Delhi; 
March 18, 2024