IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL 
 
 APPEAL NO. 
 
 OF 2024
( @ 
 
 )
SOMNATH 
 … APPELLANT

VERSUS

THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ORS. 
 … RESPONDENTS
R1:
State of Maharashtra, through the Secretary
R2:
C.P. Kakade, Police Inspector, Police Station, 
Paithan
 
R3: Commissioner of Police, Aurangabad
R4: Superintendent of Police (Rural), Aurangabad
R5: S.D.P.O., Paithan
JUDGMENT
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
 Leave granted. 
2.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.

3.
The present appeal is directed against the
Final Judgment and Order dated 08.10.2018
(hereinafter referred to as the “Impugned Judgment”)
passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay,
Bench at Aurangabad (hereinafter referred to as the
“High Court”) in Criminal Writ Petition No.215 of
2017 by which the writ petition filed by the
appellant was partly allowed and the respondent no.2
was directed to pay a sum of Rs.75,000/- (Rupees
Seventy Five Thousand only) from his own pocket to
the appellant.
BRIEF FACTS:
4.
A First Information Report1 bearing Crime No.1-
117 of 2015 for an offence punishable under Section
3792 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter
referred to as the “IPC”) was filed by one Mr.
Madhukar Vikram Gayake on 14.06.2015 with Paithan
Police Station, Taluka Paithan, District Aurangabad,
1 FIR.
2 ‘379. Punishment for theft.—Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.’

State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as the
“PS”) alleging that on 12.06.2015 the complainant
had come to attend the last rites of his brother-in-
law and was standing in a queue in the holy Nath
Temple when some unknown persons took away
Rs.30,000/- (Rupees Thirty Thousand only), which he
was carrying in his pocket, which he realized only
after coming out from the temple. The appellant was
arrested at 08:30PM in connection with the said
crime on 14.06.2015 on the basis of CCTV3 footage
showing the involvement of the appellant in the said
crime.
5.
On 15.06.2015, the appellant was produced
before the Magistrate at 4PM and the investigating
agency sought police remand on the ground that
recovery had been made from the appellant. The
request was granted by the Magistrate and he was
remanded to police custody till 18.06.2015.
3 Closed-Circuit Television.

6.
On 17.06.2015, the investigating agency
prepared a memorandum under Section 27 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 showing recovery of Rs.30,000/-
(Rupees Thirty Thousand) from the house of the
appellant.
7.
On 18.06.2015, the investigating agency
produced the appellant before the Magistrate praying
for further extension of police custody for two days
and the same was granted till 20.06.2015. On
19.06.2015, the appellant was allegedly taken out of
the lock-up by the respondent no.2, the then
officiating Inspector of PS, in handcuffs and
paraded half-naked with garland of footwear around
his neck and is said to have been verbally abused
with reference to his caste as also physically
assaulted by the respondent no.2.
8.
On 20.06.2015, the investigating agency did not
ask for any further extension of police remand and
thus the appellant was remanded to judicial custody

till 04.07.2015. On the same day, the appellant
filed an application for bail in the Court of
Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Paithan, which was
allowed on the condition that he would visit Police
Station on every alternate day between 1000hrs to
1300hrs till filing of the Final Report. The
appellant was not released pursuant to the order due
to the respondent no.2 not allowing him to be
released and instead had taken the appellant to the
PS.
9.
Mr. Rahul Raju Kamble, relative of the
appellant filed application before the Judicial
Magistrate, First Class, Paithan, narrating the
chain of events and praying for directions to
release the appellant and, inter alia, praying for
issuance of Show-Cause Notice to the concerned
police officer. Thereon, the Magistrate had directed
the prosecution to file its reply. However, the
appellant was finally released on 20.06.2015.

10.
The Superintendent of Police, Aurangabad
(Rural), on complaint made by the appellant and
others, directed the Sub Divisional Police Officer,
Paithan on 07.07.2015 to initiate inquiry on the
entire issue and submit report. The Sub Divisional
Police Officer, Paithan conducted inquiry relating
to the complaint made against the respondent no.2,
directing both the appellant and respondent no.2 and
other Police officers/constables to appear and
submit their statements. In his report dated
11.09.2015, it was recorded that on 19.06.2015 the
appellant was taken out from the lock-up by the
respondent no.2 and paraded on the streets of the
city of Paithan and was also physically assaulted
during the said procession and held respondent no.2
responsible for this. It further narrated that
despite grant of bail to the appellant he was
illegally detained by respondent no.2 for four
hours.

11.
On 08.10.2015 and 09.10.2015, the sister of the
appellant complained to various authorities
including the Superintendent of Police, Aurangabad
(Rural) and the President [read 
Chairperson],
National Human Rights Commission (hereinafter
referred to as the “Commission”) seeking initiation
of departmental enquiry and criminal prosecution
under the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (hereinafter
referred to as the “SC/ST Act”). 
12.
On 25.12.2015, the appellant was charge-sheeted
in connection with another FIR bearing Crime No.1-
192/2015 punishable under Section 3944, IPC and he
was sought to be declared a Proclaimed Offender
despite him being available in town and co-operating
with the investigating agency. However, the
appellant was arrested on 24.05.2016 and
subsequently released on bail. 
4 ‘394. Voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery.—If any person, in committing or in attempting to commit
robbery, voluntarily causes hurt, such person, and any other person jointly concerned in committing or attempting
to commit such robbery, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.’

13.
The Special Inspector General of Police,
Aurangabad Range, Aurangabad, after perusing the
Inquiry Report of the Sub Divisional Police Officer
dated 11.09.2015 and not finding the explanation of
respondent no.2 to be satisfactory, imposed
punishment of “strict warning”. 
14.
The appellant on 02.02.2017, approached the
High Court by way of filing Writ Petition, inter
alia, praying for initiation of departmental inquiry
and criminal proceedings against respondent no.2 and
also sought compensation. The writ petition was
partly allowed by the Impugned Judgment by awarding
Rs.75,000/- (Rupees Seventy Five Thousand only) to
be payable to the appellant by respondent no.2 from
his own pocket but declining to give any direction
for initiating criminal action under the SC/ST Act. 
SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPELLANT:
15.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted
that it would be a travesty of justice if for such

blatant violation of the personal liberty of the
appellant and abuse of authority, the respondent
no.2 is let off with just “strict warning” without
any real effective punishment. It was submitted that
the conduct of the respondent no.2 besides being
unprovoked was also in the teeth of the judgments of
this Court in D K Basu v State of West Bengal,
(1997) and Sube Singh v State of Haryana,
(2006), which have laid down the
guidelines of how a detenu has to be treated when in
custody.
16.
Learned counsel submitted that one of the
grounds for not directing criminal prosecution of
respondent no.2 by the High Court was that Section
1615, Maharashtra Police Act, 1951 (hereinafter
5 ‘161. Suits or prosecutions in respect of acts done under colour of duty as aforesaid not to be entertained or to be
dismissed if not instituted within the prescribed period.—(1) In any case of alleged offence by the Revenue Commis-
sioner, the Commissioner, a Magistrate, Police officer or other person, or of a wrong alleged to have been done
by such Revenue Commissioner, Commissioner, Magistrate, Police officer or other person, by any act done under
colour or in excess of any such duty or authority as aforesaid, or wherein, it shall appear to the Court that the of-
fence or wrong if committed or done was of the character aforesaid, the prosecution or suit shall not be entertained,
or shall be dismissed, if instituted, more than six months after the date of the act complained of:
Provided that, any such prosecution against a Police Officer may be entertained by the Court, if instituted
with the previous sanction of the State Government within two years from the date of the offence.
(2) In suits as Aforesaid one month's notice of suit to be given with sufficient description of wrong com-
plained of. In the case of an intended suit on account of such a wrong as aforesaid, the person intending to sue shall
be bound to give to the alleged wrong-doer one month's notice at least of the intended suit with sufficient description
of the wrong complained of, failing which such suit shall be dismissed. referred to as the “Police Act”) gives protection to
a police officer from any belated prosecution, the
period being six months. It was submitted the same
should not be so enforced particularly in the facts
of the present case where the appellant belongs to a
weaker section and is without the wherewithal to
pursue prosecution of a police officer. It was
submitted that respondent no.2 has in fact been let
off without any punishment as “strict warning” does
not translate into any effective punishment which is
also one of the minimum/minor punishments
contemplated, whereas the conduct of the respondent
no.2 required inflicting major punishment upon him.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE STATE:
17.
Learned counsel for the State submitted that it
has initiated departmental proceeding against
respondent no.2 and punishment has also been awarded
to him pursuant thereto.
(3) Plaint to set forth service of notice and tender of amends. The plaint shall set forth that a notice art
aforesaid has been served on the defendant and the date of such service, and shall state whether any, and if any
what tender of amends has been made by the defendant. A copy of the mid notice shall be annexed to the plaint en-
dorsed or accompanied with a declaration by the plaintiff of the time and manner of service thereof.’

SUBMISSIONS BY THE RESPONDENT NO.2:
18.
Learned counsel for respondent no.2 submitted
that the incident is totally without any truth and
only to browbeat, and to demoralise the police, the
appellant, who is habitual offender, has lodged a
false complaint, that too, much after the time
prescribed under the Police Act. It was further
submitted that respondent no.2 has already paid
Rs.1,75,000/- (Rupees One Lakh Seventy Five Thousand
only) to the appellant i.e., Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees
One Lakh only) beyond what was directed by the High
Court and in terms of the order passed by this Court
on 07.07.20236. It was submitted that the appellant
having been found committing the offence for which
6 ‘Learned counsel for respondent No.2, on instructions, states that he will further compensate the petitioner by an
amount of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees one lakh only) within a period of four weeks from today.
Learned counsel for the petitioner may provide the bank details of the petitioner to the learned counsel for
respondent No.2 within a week from today. 
List the matter again on 22.08.2023.
If by the said date, the said amount is paid to the petitioner and the counsel for the parties make a state-
ment, the matter may be considered for closure on the next date. ’

his prosecution began, from the CCTV footage, cannot
claim innocence.
19.
Learned counsel submitted that on 20.06.2015
at 3PM when he was produced before the Magistrate,
the appellant did not allege any ill-treatment much
less spoke about him having been subjected to
parade in handcuffs and in a half-naked state with
a garland of footwear around his neck. Even when
relatives of the appellant had filed a complaint
before the Magistrate on 20.06.2015, due to delay
in release of the appellant despite grant of bail,
there was no reference of any alleged instance of
the appellant being paraded half-naked on
19.06.2015. Further, the report of the Sub
Divisional Police Officer does not refer to the
appellant having been paraded half-naked with a
garland of shoes. It was submitted that due to the
strained relationship of the respondent no.2 with
the then Sub Divisional Police Officer, who had
submitted the Report, adverse findings were

recorded against the respondent no.2. Thus, it was
submitted that the Special Inspector General of
Police found the clarification submitted by the
respondent no.2 to be satisfactory and that was the
reason why a punishment of only “strict warning”
was awarded. He submitted that pursuant to FIR
bearing Crime No.1-192 of 2015, the appellant could
not be traced and was declared a proclaimed
offender under Section 82(4) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 on 25.12.2015. It was
further contended that only on 03.02.2017, the
appellant had filed the underlying Writ Petition
before the High Court and for the first time
agitating that the respondent no.2 paraded him
half-naked with a garland of shoes.
20.
Learned counsel submitted that in terms of
Section 161 of the Police Act, prosecution against
a police officer acting under colour of official
duty after six months of the alleged act cannot be

entertained and rightly the High Court has declined
to direct any action on such prosecution.
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
21.
Having considered the facts and circumstances
of the case, this Court finds that there is enough
material to indicate that respondent no.2 did
commit excesses against the appellant, as the same
has also been found in an enquiry by the Commission
as also relied upon by the High Court and such
finding has not been varied or interfered with.
Thus, the Court has no hesitation in strongly
denouncing such high-handed action by the
respondent no.2, who being in a position of power,
totally abused his official position. However, in
view of the fact that the respondent no.2 has
superannuated and during the course of the present
proceedings Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lakh only),
apart from what was ordered by the High Court, has
also been paid by the respondent no.2 from his own
pocket to the appellant, which the appellant

accepted, the Court finds that the matter now
requires to be finally given a quietus. Be it
noted, the appellant has additionally received
Rs.25,000/- (Rupees Twenty Five Thousand only) as
ordered by the Commission. We only add that the
power of the High Court under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India to award compensation is
undoubtable, reference whereof can be made to
Nilabati Behera v State of Orissa, (1993). 
22.
Accordingly, the appeal stands disposed of by
upholding the Impugned Judgment, with the
modification that the respondent no.2 is held liable
to pay a further sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One
Lakh only) to the appellant. However, as the same
stands already complied with, no further steps are
required to be taken by the respondent no.2.
23. Before parting, the Court would indicate that
in such matters the Courts need to take a very

strict view. A zero-tolerance approach towards such
high-handed acts needs to be adopted as such acts,
committed by persons in power against an ordinary
citizen, who is in a non-bargaining position, bring
shame to the entire justice delivery system. As
such, we were considering resorting to Article 142
of the Constitution of India to direct initiation of
criminal proceedings, but only because of the fact
that respondent no.2 has retired and has already
paid a sum of Rs.1,75,000/- (Rupees One Lakh Seventy
Five Thousand)[Rs.75,000/- (Rupees Seventy Five
Thousand) as per the Impugned Judgment and
Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees one lakh) as per this Court’s
order dated 07.07.2023] in total to the appellant,
who has also been paid Rs. 25,000/- (Rupees Twenty
Five Thousand) as per the Commission’s order, we
refrain from so directing, in these peculiar facts
and circumstances. We hold back noting that justice
ought to be tempered with mercy.

POST-SCRIPT:
24. It is sad that even today, this Court is forced
to restate the principles and directions in D K Basu
(supra). Before D K Basu (supra), this Court had
expressed its concern as to how best to safeguard
the dignity of the individual and balance the same
with interests of the State or investigative agency
in Prem Shankar Shukla v Delhi Administration,
(1980). In Bhim Singh, MLA v State of
Jammu and Kashmir, (1985), this Court
noted that police officers are to exhibit greatest
regard for personal liberty of citizens and restated
the sentiment in Sunil Gupta v State of Madhya
Pradesh, (1990). The scenario in Delhi
Judicial Service Association v State of Gujarat,
(1991) prompted this Court to come down
heavily on excess use of force by the police. As
such, there will be a general direction to the
police forces in all States and Union Territories as
also all agencies endowed with the power of arrest

and custody to scrupulously adhere to all
Constitutional and statutory safeguards and the
additional guidelines laid down by this Court when a
person is arrested by them and/or remanded to their
custody.

[VIKRAM NATH] 

[AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI
MARCH 18, 2024