IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
( SLP 

MS. X 

VERSUS 
 
MR. A AND OTHERS 

JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present criminal appeal challenges the order dated 
3rd September 2022, passed by the learned Single Judge of 
the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru in Criminal 
Petition No. 8468 of 2021, whereby the High Court allowed 
the petition filed under Section 482 of the Criminal 
Procedure Code, 1973 (‘Cr.P.C.’ for short) preferred by the 
accused persons and quashed the entire proceedings 
pending against them before the 2nd Additional District and 
Sessions Judge, Chitradurga (hereinafter referred to as ‘trial 
court’) in Special Case (SC/ST) No. 1 of 2021. 

3. 
Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeal 
are as under: 
3.1. The prosecution case is that in the year 2016, while the 
complainant/appellant was still a minor, having been born 
on 12th September 1998, accused No.1 after becoming 
acquainted with the complainant/appellant while they both 
were preparing for the competitive examination, made her fall 
in love with him. Thereafter, they entered into a relationship 
and were intimate with each other. Subsequently, in the year 
2019, accused No. 1 took the complainant/appellant to his 
aunty’s house in Chitradurga whereupon he had sexual 
intercourse with her, after leading her to believe that he 
would marry her. A few days thereafter, accused No. 1 took 
the complainant/appellant to his house near the Gate of 
Siddapura Village in order to introduce her to his parents. In 
his family’s absence, accused No. 1 forcibly engaged in 
sexual intercourse with the complainant/appellant on 
multiple 
occasions. 
As 
a 
consequence, 
the 
complainant/appellant got pregnant. Six months into the 
pregnancy, upon gaining knowledge of the same, accused 
No.1 and his brother accused No.2 forcibly took her to 

Krishna Nursing Home, Challakere and compelled her to 
undergo an abortion. 
3.2. Subsequently, accused No. 1 reiterated his promise to 
marry her, however, he stated that such marriage would take 
place only after he finished his preparation for the Karnataka 
Administrative Service Examination. He further compelled 
her to maintain silence by threatening her that if she 
discloses any information about the termination of her 
pregnancy to her parents, he would kill her and would also 
kill himself by consuming poison. Accused No.3 and accused 
No.4, 
parents 
of 
accused 
No. also 
assured 
the 
complainant/appellant that she and accused No. 1 would get 
married after the latter finished with his studies. 
3.3. On 
22nd 
September 
2020, 
after 
the 
complainant/appellant’s parents became aware of her 
relationship with accused No. 1 and the termination of her 
pregnancy, the complainant/appellant along with her 
parents visited the house of the accused persons with the 
request that the complainant/appellant and accused No. 1 
be married to each other. However, the accused persons 
turned down the request and asserted that no such marriage 

would be possible since the complainant/appellant was a 
prostitute belonging to the Scheduled Caste, Madigha. 
3.4. While this version of events was brought out in her 
original complaint, which was the basis of the First 
Information Report (“FIR” for short) being Case Crime No. 
456 of 2020, lodged on 1st October 2020 at Police Station 
Challakere, District Chitradurga, the complainant/appellant 
in her restatement (Annexure P-6) made before the Dy. S.P., 
Challakere, changed the narrative with respect to the manner 
in which the termination of pregnancy had been carried out. 
She clarified that she had not been taken to Krishna Nursing 
Home. She stated, instead, that accused No. 1 upon gaining 
knowledge of her pregnancy, had informed her that he would 
like to continue with his studies and had thereafter brought 
her Ayurvedic medicine which would cause the termination 
of her pregnancy. Upon the said medicine being administered 
to 
the 
complainant/appellant 
by 
accused 
No.1, 
her 
pregnancy was terminated. The complainant/appellant 
requested that the restatement be made a part of her original 
complaint. Accordingly, the relevant alteration was made in 
the original complaint, which fact is reflected in the brief 

summary of the case contained in the charge-sheet, 
subsequently filed. 
3.5. After the conclusion of the investigation, a charge-sheet 
came to be filed before the trial court on 22nd December 2020 
against all the accused persons for the offences punishable 
under Sections 354D, 376(2)(n), 504 and 506 read with 34 of 
the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“IPC” for short) and Sections 
3(1)(r), 3(1)(s), 3(1)(w)(i), 3(2)(v) and 3(2)(v-a) of The Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 
1989 (“SC/ST Act” for short). 
3.6. On the charge-sheet being filed, the trial court took 
cognizance of the charges and initiated criminal proceedings 
against the accused persons vide Special Case (SC/ST) No. 
01 of 2021. 
3.7. Being aggrieved thereby, the accused persons preferred 
a petition under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. before the High 
Court, praying for quashing of the proceedings pending 
before the trial court. The High Court, by the impugned 
order, allowed the petition and quashed the afore-stated 
proceedings in respect of all the accused persons. 

4. 
Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal has been 
filed by the original complainant. 
5. 
We have heard Shri Naman Dwivedi, learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellant and Shri M. Yogesh 
Kanna, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondents. 
6. 
Shri Dwivedi submitted that the learned Single Judge of 
the High Court has grossly erred in quashing the 
proceedings. It is submitted that the learned Single Judge 
almost conducted a mini-trial while considering a petition 
filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. It is submitted that the 
learned Single Judge of the High Court ought to have taken 
into consideration that the exercise of powers under Section 
482 Cr.P.C. was permissible only when the material placed 
on record along with the charge-sheet was sufficient enough 
to come to a conclusion that the case, even if it went to trial, 
would not culminate into conviction. It is submitted that 
from the statement of the prosecutrix as well as the 
witnesses, the prosecution has prima facie shown that 
accused No.1, on the false promise of marriage, had entered 
into a forcible relationship with the victim. It is submitted 

that the material placed on record was also sufficient to 
prima facie point out that accused No. 1 had forced the 
complainant to undergo abortion when the complainant had 
become pregnant. 
7., Shri Kanna submitted that the learned 
Single Judge of the High Court has considered the material 
placed on record to come to a conclusion that the 
prosecution case, even if taken at its face value, does not 
constitute the ingredients of the offences charged with. The 
learned counsel submitted that the learned Single Judge of 
the High Court, relying on the judgments of this Court in the 
cases of Dr. Dhruvaram Murlidhar Sonar v. State of 
Maharashtra and Others1 and Shambhu Kharwar v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh and Another2, has rightly held that 
there was no material placed on record to constitute the 
offences punishable under Section 376 of IPC. He submitted 
that no error could be found with the finding of the High 
Court that permitting the continuation of the proceedings 
would become an abuse of process of law and result in 
miscarriage of justice. It is submitted that the prosecutrix 
 
1 (2019) 

has gone to the extent of dragging the entire family only in 
order to harass the accused persons. 
8. 
The High Court, in the impugned order, has referred to 
the original complaint filed by the appellant, the restatement 
of the appellant (Annexure P-6) made before the Dy. S.P., 
Challakere and the statement of the doctor/Head of the 
Krishna Nursing Home. After considering the material placed 
on record, the High Court found that the complainant has 
totally changed her version of events in her restatement 
(Annexure P-6) made before the Dy. S.P., Challakere from the 
statement given in the original complaint filed by her. The 
learned Single Judge of the High Court has also referred to 
the report of the medical examination of the prosecutrix 
dated 19th December 2020. 
9. 
We have also perused the material placed on record 
along with the charge-sheet. It can be seen that though the 
initial version of the complainant is that after she became 
pregnant, she was taken to the Krishna Nursing Home 
wherein she was compelled to undergo abortion, however, 
the statement of the doctor/Head of Krishna Nursing Home 
would show that the version of the complainant that she was 

brought to the Krishna Nursing Home on 17th August 2020 
to abort her six months pregnancy, was completely false. 
The doctor/Head of Krishna Nursing Home has denied any 
acquaintance with the prosecutrix or the accused persons. 
The doctor/Head of Krishna Nursing Home has also stated 
that during the relevant period, on account of lockdown due 
to COVID virus, no patient was admitted in the hospital. It is 
further to be noted that the complainant, in her restatement 
(Annexure P-6) made before the Dy. S.P., Challakere, has 
changed her version and stated that she was not taken to the 
Krishna Nursing Home. The prosecutrix has stated that she 
was administered some medicine which was not allopathy 
which led to the termination of her pregnancy. 
10. Even the statement of Anitha (CW-6) would reveal that 
both the prosecutrix and accused No. 1 had come together to 
her house and accused No. 1 informed her that the 
prosecutrix was his relative. According to the statement of 
Anitha (CW-6), six months prior to the date of recording her 
statement, accused No. 1 along with the prosecutrix had 
come to her house in the morning and had taken breakfast. 
After that, Anitha (CW-6) had left the house leaving both of 

them in the house. Anitha (CW-6) stated that when she 
came back in the room at around 02.00 pm, accused No. 1 
and the prosecutrix took their meals and in the evening, they 
went to Challakere. 
11. The issue similar to the one which arises for 
consideration 
in 
the 
present 
matter 
also 
arose 
for 
consideration before this Court in the case of Pramod 
Suryabhan 
Pawar 
v. 
State 
of 
Maharashtra 
and 
Another3, wherein this Court observed thus: 
“18. To summarise the legal position that emerges 
from the above cases, the “consent” of a woman 
with respect to Section 375 must involve an active 
and reasoned deliberation towards the proposed act. 
To establish whether the “consent” was vitiated by a 
“misconception of fact” a promise to 
marry, two propositions must be established. The 
promise of marriage must have been a false 
promise, given in bad faith and with no intention of 
being adhered to at the time it was given. The false 
promise itself must be of immediate relevance, or 
bear a direct nexus to the woman's decision to 
engage in the sexual act. 
19. The allegations in the FIR indicate that in 
November 2009 the complainant initially refused to 
engage in sexual relations with the accused, but on 
the promise of marriage, he established sexual 
relations. However, the FIR includes a reference to 
several other allegations that are relevant for the 
present purpose. They are as follows: 
19.1. The complainant and the appellant knew each 
other since 1998 and were intimate since 2004. 
 
3 (2019) 

19.2. The complainant and the appellant met 
regularly, travelled great distances to meet each 
other, resided in each other's houses on multiple 
occasions, engaged in sexual intercourse regularly 
over a course of five years and on multiple 
occasions visited the hospital jointly to check 
whether the complainant was pregnant. 
19.3. The appellant expressed his reservations 
about marrying the complainant on 31-1-2014. This 
led to arguments between them. Despite this, the 
appellant and the complainant continued to engage 
in sexual intercourse until March 2015.” 
 
12. This Court, in the facts of the said case, set aside the 
judgment of the High Court which refused to exercise its 
jurisdiction under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. to quash the 
proceedings. The Court found that this was a fit case 
wherein the High Court ought to have invoked its jurisdiction 
under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. to quash the proceedings. 
13. In the present case also, the facts are almost similar. 
Even as per the version of the complainant, the following 
facts have been emerged: 

4 years prior to the FIR being lodged on 1st October 
2020, accused No. 1 followed the prosecutrix and 
told her that he loved her and she should also love 
him; 

After a period of 2 years, she agreed to love him and 
both were intimate with each other; 
(iii) One year prior to the date of the incident, accused 
No. 1 took the prosecutrix to his aunty’s house in 
Chitradurga and they stayed there. On that day at 
about 09.00 am, in his aunty’s house, by giving trust 
and belief that he would marry her, accused No. 1 
forcibly made sexual contact with the prosecutrix; 

Thereafter, accused No. 1 took the prosecutrix to 
various 
places 
including 
his 
own 
house and 
committed sexual intercourse with her; and 

As per the version of the prosecutrix, the first 
incident has taken place in the year 2019. As per 
Karnataka Secondary Education Examination Board 
Certificate, her date of birth is 12th September 1998. 
Even if it is assumed that the incident has taken 
place in January 2019, she would have been over the 
age of 18. 
14. After the prosecutrix became pregnant, accused No. 1 
caused her abortion on 17th August 2020. Though her initial 
version was that she was admitted in the hospital for two 

days, it is falsified by the statement of the doctor/Head of 
Krishna Nursing Home. After this incident, she discussed 
the matter with her elders in the family and decided to lodge 
the complaint. 
15. We find that, in the present case also like the case of 
Pramod Suryabhan Pawar (supra), the allegations in the 
FIR so also in the restatement (Annexure P-6) made before 
the Dy. S.P., Challakere, do not, on their face, indicate that 
the promise by accused No. 1 was false or that the 
complainant engaged in the sexual relationship on the basis 
of such false promise. This apart from the fact that the 
prosecutrix has changed her version. The version of events 
given by the prosecutrix in the restatement (Annexure P-6) 
made before the Dy. S.P., Challakere is totally contrary to the 
one given in the FIR. 
16. Similar facts arose for consideration before this Court in 
the case of Shambhu Kharwar (supra). In the said case, 
the prosecutrix had filed a complaint that there was love 
affair between her and the accused for a period of three 
years. The accused had given an assurance to her regarding 
solemnization of marriage. They started living under the 

same roof and also made sexual relationship. Thereafter, the 
accused entered into a ring ceremony with someone else. In 
this background, the prosecutrix had lodged the complaint 
that the accused had forcible sexual intercourse with her on 
the false promise of marriage. After considering the material 
placed on record, the Court observed thus: 
“13. …..Taking the allegations in the FIR and the 
charge-sheet as they stand, the crucial ingredients 
of the offence under Section 375 IPC are absent. 
The relationship between the parties was purely of a 
consensual nature. The relationship, as noted 
above, was in existence prior to the marriage of the 
second respondent and continued to subsist during 
the term of the marriage and after the second 
respondent was granted a divorce by mutual 
consent.” 
 
17. This Court, in the case of State of Haryana and 
Others v. Bhajan Lal and Others4, has observed thus: 
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the 
various relevant provisions of the Code under 
Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated 
by this Court in a series of decisions relating to the 
exercise of the extraordinary power under Article 
226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the 
Code which we have extracted and reproduced 
above, we give the following categories of cases by 
way of illustration wherein such power could be 
exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of 
any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, 
though it may not be possible to lay down any 
precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised 
 
4 1992 Supp (1) 335 

and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to 
give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases 
wherein such power should be exercised. 
(1) Where the allegations made in the first 
information report or the complaint, even if 
they are taken at their face value and accepted 
in their entirety do not prima facie constitute 
any offence or make out a case against the 
accused. 

Where 
the 
allegations 
in 
the 
first 
information report and other materials, if any, 
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a 
cognizable offence, justifying an investigation 
by police officers under Section 156(1) of the 
Code except under an order of a Magistrate 
within the purview of Section 155(2) of the 
Code. 
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made 
in the FIR or complaint and the evidence 
collected in support of the same do not 
disclose the commission of any offence and 
make out a case against the accused. 
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not 
constitute a cognizable offence but constitute 
only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation 
is permitted by a police officer without an 
order of a Magistrate as contemplated under 
Section 155(2) of the Code. 
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or 
complaint are so absurd and inherently 
improbable on the basis of which no prudent 
person can ever reach a just conclusion that 
there is sufficient ground for proceeding 
against the accused. 
(6) Where there is an express legal bar 
engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code 
or the concerned Act (under which a criminal 
proceeding is instituted) to the institution and 
continuance of the proceedings and/or where 
there is a specific provision in the Code or the 
concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for 
the grievance of the aggrieved party. 

(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly 
attended with mala fide and/or where the 
proceeding is maliciously instituted with an 
ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the 
accused and with a view to spite him due to 
private and personal grudge.” 
 
18. We find that the present case would squarely fall under 
categories (1), (3) and (5) as reproduced hereinabove for the 
reasons which we have already recorded in the earlier 
paragraphs. No doubt, that the power of quashing the 
criminal proceedings should be exercised very sparingly and 
with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases, 
it is also equally settled that the Court will not be justified in 
embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliability or 
genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the FIR 
or the complaint. However, in the present case, even if the 
allegations made in the FIR and the material on which the 
prosecution relies, are taken at its face value, we find that 
there are no sufficient grounds for proceeding against the 
accused. We find that no error has been committed by the 
learned Single Judge of the High Court by holding that 
permitting further proceedings to continue would be an 
abuse of process of law and result in miscarriage of justice. 

The High Court has correctly applied the law on the issue 
and come to a just finding warranting no interference. 
19. In the result, the appeal is dismissed. 
20. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

… 

… 

…