IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). /2024 
( SLP (CRL.) NO(S). 5463-5464/2023 
 
APOORVA ARORA & ANR. ETC. 
 
 …. APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE (GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI) & ANR. 
WITH 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). /2024 
( SLP (Crl.) No. 6786/2023 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). /2024 
( SLP (Crl.) No. 5532/2023 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). /2024 
( SLP (Crl.) No. 8385-8387/2023 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The appellants/accused are the actors, casting director, 
script writers, creator of the web-series ‘College Romance’1, and 
the media company that owns the YouTube channel on which the 
 
1 TVF Media Labs Private Ltd. web-series was hosted2. They are sought to be investigated and 
prosecuted for production, transmission, and online publication of 
obscene and sexually-explicit material under Sections 67 and 67A 
of the Information Technology Act, 20003. The appellants’ petition 
under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19734 for 
quashing the orders of the Additional Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate and Additional Sessions Judge directing registration of 
FIR against them was dismissed by the High Court by the order 
impugned before us.5 Having considered the matter in detail and 
for the reasons to follow, we have allowed the appeal, set aside the 
judgment of the High Court, and quashed the FIR bearing number 
403/2023 dated 16.04.2023 at PS Mukherjee Nagar, Delhi against 
the appellants under Sections 67 and 67A of the IT Act. 
3. 
Facts: The short facts leading to filing of the present appeal 
are as follows: 
3.1 A complaint was filed by respondent no. 2 before the 
Assistant Commissioner of Police that Season 1, Episode 5 
of the web-series, titled ‘Happily F****d Up’, has vulgar and 
obscene language in its title and various portions of the 
 
2 Contagious Online Media Network Pvt Ltd. 
3 ‘IT Act’ hereinafter. 
4 ‘CrPC’ hereinafter. 
5 In and Criminal 
Miscellaneous Case No. 2214 of 2020, judgment dated 06.03.2023 (‘Impugned judgment’ hereinafter). episode, constituting an offence under Sections 292, 294 
and 509 of the Indian Penal Code6, Sections 67 and 67A of 
the IT Act, and Sections 2(c) and 3 of the Indecent 
Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 19867. On 
13.03.2019, the complainant filed an application under 
Section 200 read with Section 156(3) of the CrPC before 
the ACMM seeking registration of FIR. The Investigating 
Officer conducted an enquiry and filed an Action Taken 
Report on 09.04.2019 stating that no cognisable offence is 
made out and in fact, there is no obscenity in the allegedly 
offending content. 
3.2 However, the ACMM, by order dated 17.09.2019, allowed 
the complainant’s application and directed the registration 
of an FIR against the appellants under Sections 292 and 
294 of the IPC and Sections 67 and 67A of the IT Act as 
the vulgar language used is prima facie capable of 
appealing to prurient interests of the audience and is 
hence obscene. 
3.3 The appellants filed a revision petition before the 
Additional Sessions Judge, who by order dated 10.11.2020 
 
6 ‘IPC’ hereinafter. 
7 ‘IRWP Act’ hereinafter. partially modified the order of the ACMM and directed the 
registration of FIR only under Sections 67 and 67A of the 
IT Act by relying on the decision of this Court in Sharat 
Babu Digumarti v. Government (NCT of Delhi)8. 
3.4 The appellants then filed a petition under Section 482 
CrPC before the High Court for quashing the above-
mentioned orders, which came to be dismissed by the 
judgment dated 06.03.2023, impugned herein. Against the 
dismissal and the consequent direction to register FIR 
under Sections 67 and 67A of the IT Act, the present 
appeals are filed by all the accused/appellants. 
3.5 Pursuant to the directions of the High Court, an FIR was 
registered under Sections 67 and 67A of the IT Act against 
the appellants on 16.04.2023. 
4. 
Reasoning of the High Court: The High Court, while 
dismissing the petition for quashing, held that the object of 
Sections 67 and 67A of the IT Act is to punish the publication and 
transmission of obscene and sexually explicit material in the cyber 
space. It relied on the ‘community standard test’ to determine 
whether the material is obscene, as laid down by this Court in 
 
8 (2017), 2016 INSC 1131. 

Aveek Sarkar v. State of West Bengal 9 and followed in decisions of 
various High Courts10. By applying this test, the High Court held 
as follows: First, applying the standard of a common prudent man, 
it found that the episode did not use civil language and there was 
excessive use of profanities and vulgar expletives, and a clear 
description and 
reference 
to 
sexually explicit 
acts. 
The 
determination of how the content impacts a common man must be 
determined in the Indian context, as per Indian morality, keeping 
in mind contemporary standards of civility and morality.11 In the 
allegedly offending portion (in Season 1, episode 5 from 5:24 to 
6:40 minutes and 25:28 to 25:46 minutes), the male protagonist 
in a conversation with the female protagonist uses terms 
describing male and female genitalia and sexual acts, thereby 
making them sexually explicit and arousing prurient feelings. 
While the female protagonist is heard objecting to the language 
and expressing disgust over it, she does so by repeating the same 
to the male protagonist. The male protagonist then uses more 
vulgar expletives and indecent language, which is repeated by the 
 
9 (2014), 2014 INSC 75. 
10 G. Venkateswara Rao v. State of AP in Writ Petition 1420 of 2020; Jaykumar Bhagwanrao Gore v. State of 
Maharashtra 2017 SCC OnLine Bom 7283; Pramod Anand Dhumal v. State of Maharashtra 2021 SCC OnLine 
Bom 34; Ekta Kapoor v. State of MP, as cited in paras 23-26 of the impugned 
judgment. 
11 In para 37 of the impugned judgment, the High Court relied on Samaresh Bose v. Amal Mitra (1985), 1985 INSC 205 where it was held that the regard must be given to contemporary morals and national 
standards in judging whether content is obscene. female protagonist in a later part of the episode. The High Court 
held that the depiction of a sexually explicit act is not necessarily 
through filming but can also be through spoken language. It was 
found that the persons who are likely to be affected or persons 
whom such content can deprave or corrupt are impressionable 
minds in the present case, as there is no disclaimer or warning 
that classifies the web-series as being suitable only for persons 
who are 18 years or above. The content crossed the threshold of 
decency considering its availability to the public, including 
children. Further, the Court felt that the episode could not be 
heard in the courtroom without shocking or alarming the people 
and to maintain the decorum of language. 
5. 
Second, a representation that the language used in the 
episode is the one used in the country and by its youth in 
educational institutions is not protected under the guarantee of 
freedom of speech under Article 19(1)(a). Third, that the online 
content curator and the intermediaries are in violation of the 
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital 
Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 as the content has not been 
correctly classified as ‘A-rated’ and there is no warning regarding 
the use of profanities and expletives. Lastly, the Court took note 

that vulgar language, profanities, and swear words must be 
regulated in the public domain and on social media platforms as 
they are a threat to impressionable minds like children of tender 
age. Further, a representation that the use of such language in 
general parlance is the “new normal” is a distortion of facts as it is 
still not spoken in the presence of the elderly, women and children, 
or at religious places. To maintain linguistic morality, the sanctity 
and reverence of languages must be protected. 
6. 
The High Court also rejected the appellants’ contention that 
the mandatory procedure under Section 154(3) of the CrPC, which 
is an important procedural safeguard, was not followed before 
resort to Section 156(3). The High Court preliminarily negatived 
this submission by holding that Section 154(3) only uses the term 
“may” and not “shall”, and that the complainant anyways 
approached the ACP, Cyber Cell, North District, who is the 
authority higher to the SHO. 
7. 
Submissions of the Appellants: We heard Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, 
Mr. Harish Salve, Ms. Madhavi Divan, Mr. Sajan Poovayya, Sr. 
Advocates. Learned senior counsels for the appellants have argued 
that the allegedly offending portions of Season 1, Episode 5 of the 
web-series do not meet the threshold for obscenity and that the 

High Court has erred in characterising the material as obscene. 
Further, these portions do not contain any sexually explicit act and 
as such no offence under Sections 67 or 67A of the IT Act is made 
out. Elaborating their submissions, the appellants’ argued: 
7.1 Section 67 of the IT Act, that criminalises the publication 
and transmission of obscene material in electronic form, 
covers material which is lascivious or appeals to the 
prurient interest or if its effect is such as to tend to deprave 
and corrupt persons who are likely, having regard to all 
relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter 
contained or embodied in it. As per Aveek Sarkar (supra), 
the determination of whether some material is obscene 
must be made by the ‘community standard test’ by 
considering the work as a whole and then looking at the 
specific material that has been alleged to be obscene in the 
context of the whole work. The web-series is a romantic 
comedy that traces the life of a group of friends who are in 
college. Its intention is to paint a relatable picture of college 
life in a cosmopolitan urban setting. There are two specific 
portions that have been alleged to be obscene. The first 
segment is where the male protagonist, named Bagga, 

indiscriminately uses expletives that are heard by the 
female protagonist, named Naira. Naira objects to the use 
of such language and points out that the literal meaning 
of the terms is absurd. Bagga states that these terms are 
not meant to be taken literally and are a part of common 
parlance. Naira reiterates her disapproval and threatens 
Bagga with consequences if he continues to speak in such 
a manner. Bagga ‘inadvertently’ uses another expletive, 
due to which Naira leaves from there. In the second 
segment, Naira and Bagga are with a wider group of friends 
where Naira is incensed by the statements of another 
friend and angrily uses the same expletives as Bagga, at 
which Bagga is delighted. Learned senior counsel has 
argued that when these scenes are considered individually 
and in the context of the web-series as a whole, they are 
not obscene. They only portray the absurdity of the literal 
meaning of these terms and show their inevitable presence 
in common language, including by those who disapprove 
of their use. 

7.2 Relying on Samaresh Bose v. Amal Mitra12 and Bobby Art 
International v. Om Pal Singh Hoon13, learned senior 
counsel has argued that while the alleged portions are 
vulgar, vulgarity does not equate to obscenity. Mere words 
cannot amount to obscenity unless they involve lascivious 
elements that arouse sexual thoughts and feelings, which 
is not the effect of the scenes in the present case. 
7.3 The effect of the words must be tested from the standard 
of an “ordinary man of common sense and prudence”14, 
“reasonable, strong-minded, firm and courageous” person 
and not from the perspective of a hypersensitive person or 
a weak and vacillating mind15. The terms used in the 
allegedly offending portions do not refer to any sexually 
explicit act and are not obscene as per the community 
standard test. Therefore, no offence of obscenity is made 
out under Section 67 of the IT Act. 
7.4 Learned senior counsel has also argued that the scenes do 
not contain any sexually explicit act or conduct, as is 
required for an offence under Section 67A. Relying on 
 
12 (1985), 1985 INSC 205. 
13 (1996), 1996 INSC 595. 
14 K.A. Abbas v. Union of India (1970), 1970 INSC 200. 
15 Ramesh s/o Chotalal Dalal v. Union of India (1988), 1988 INSC 44. various cases by this Court,16 they argue that the words in 
a penal provision must be strictly interpreted. The term 
‘sexually explicit act or conduct’ does not cover 
profanities/ expletives/ swear words, even if the literal 
meaning of these terms refers to sexual acts. The literal 
meaning is not intended through the common usage of 
these words. Rather, they are an expression of emotions 
such as frustration, rage, and anger. 
7.5 Learned senior counsel has also relied on the 50th Standing 
Committee Report on the 2006 Amendment Bill to the IT 
Act that introduced the provision, and various High Court 
decisions,17 to argue that the intention of Section 67A is to 
criminalise 
the 
publication 
and 
transmission 
of 
pornographic material that depicts sexual acts or contains 
sexually explicit conduct that falls short of actual depiction 
of sexual acts. Since the alleged segments in this case only 
contain expletives and do not contain any explicit visual or 
 
16 Sakshi v. Union of India, (2004), 2004 INSC 383; Sanjay Dutt v. State through CBI, Bombay (II), 
(1994), 1994 INSC 371; Girdhari Lal Gupta v. D.H. Mehta, (1971), 1970 INSC 164; Union 
of India v. Rajiv Kumar, (2003), 2003 INSC 320; US Technologies International (P) Ltd. v. 
Commissioner of Income Tax, (2023), 2023 INSC 329. 
17 Vijesh v. State of Kerala, 2021 SCC OnLine Ker 854; Pramod Anand Dhumal v. State of Maharashtra, (2021) 
SCC OnLine Bom 34; Majeesh K. Mathew v. State of Kerala, 2018 SCC OnLine Ker 23374; Ritesh Sidhwani v. 
State of U.P., 2021 SCC OnLine All 856; Jaykumar Bhagwanrao Gore v. State of Maharashtra, 2017 SCC OnLine 
Bom 7283. verbal depiction of sexual activity, there is no offence 
under Section 67A. 
7.6 It is of course rightly argued that the right to freedom of 
speech under Article 19(1)(a) protects artistic creativity 
and expression. 
7.7 Lastly, the learned senior counsel has argued that a higher 
threshold of tolerance must apply in the present case as 
the web-series is a form of “pull media”. In pull media, the 
consumer has more choice in deciding whether or not they 
wish to view some particular content. Unlike television or 
radio, 
where 
obscene 
material 
may 
be 
publicly 
broadcasted and there is little to no choice to the users in 
terms of what content is made available, the consumption 
of pull media over the internet gives the viewer complete 
control and decision-making over what they watch. 
Therefore, the web-series is only available and accessible 
to those persons who wish to view it, and hence a higher 
threshold of obscenity must be applied to “pull content”. 
8. 
Submissions of the complainant: We have heard learned 
counsel Mr. Arvind Singh, advocate-in-person, who is the 
complainant (respondent no. 2). He has argued that the present 

case is not fit for quashing. The alleged content of the web-series 
falls within the purview of Sections 67 and 67A of the IT Act and 
also offends Sections 3 and 4 of the Indecent Representation of 
Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986, which the High Court has failed to 
consider. Relying on the community standard test and the 
judgments of this Court in Aveek Sarkar (supra) and Devidas 
Ramachandra Tuljapurkar v. State of Maharashtra18, learned 
counsel has argued that the abovementioned portions of the web-
series are obscene and sexually explicit. First, the material appeals 
to prurient interest in sex, as determined by the average person 
applying contemporary community standards. The titles of the 
episodes and the plot revolves around college students engaging in 
sexual activity. The content of the episodes also uses sexually 
explicit language and expletives, which cannot be termed as the 
“new normal”. Second, the material portrays sexual conduct in a 
patently offensive way. Third, the material lacks serious literary, 
artistic, political or scientific value. Fourth, the material tends to 
arouse sexually impure thoughts. Fifth, the material is not in the 
larger interest of public good or in the interest of art, literature, 
science and therefore, the obscenity is not justified. Learned 
 
18 (2015), 2015 INSC 414. counsel has also pointed out that the material in the present case 
is freely available on the internet and is accessible to any person, 
including children and hence must be regulated in the interests of 
public order, morality, and decency. 
9. 
Analysis: The central issue is whether the use of expletives 
and profane language in the titles and content of the episodes of 
the web-series ‘College Romance’ constitutes an offence of 
publication and transmission of obscene and sexually explicit 
content under Sections 67 and 67A of the IT Act. We will examine 
each of these provisions in the context of ‘obscenity’ for the 
purpose of Section 67 and ‘sexually explicit material’ for the 
purpose of Section 67A. 
 
A. 
Whether the material is ‘obscene’: 
10. We will first deal with the contention that the material is 
obscene. Section 67 of the IT Act is as follows: 
“67. Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene 
material in electronic form.–Whoever publishes or transmits or 
causes to be published or transmitted in the electronic form, any 
material which is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if its 
effect is such as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are 
likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or 
hear the matter contained or embodied in it, shall be punished on first 
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to five 
lakh rupees and in the event of second or subsequent conviction with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five 
years and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.” 

11. This Court has laid down the meaning, test, standard, and 
method for determining whether some material is obscene in the 
context of Section 292 of the IPC. 
12. Section 292 defines ‘obscene’ as a book, pamphlet, paper, 
writing, drawing, painting, representation, figure or any other 
object that is lascivious, appeals to the prurient interest, or has 
such effect, if taken as a whole, that tends to deprave and corrupt 
persons who are likely to read, see or hear the matter contained in 
it. The provision criminalises the sale, distribution, public 
exhibition, circulation, import, export, etc of obscene material. The 
provision excludes such material when the publication is justified 
as being for public good on the ground that it is in the interest of 
science, art, literature, or learning or other objects of general 
concern; such material is kept or used for bona fide religious 
purposes; it is sculptured, engraved, painted or represented on or 
in ancient monuments and temples. The relevant portion of 
Section 292 has been extracted for reference: 
“292. Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.—(1) For the purposes of 
sub-section (2), a book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, 
representation, figure or any other object, shall be deemed to be 
obscene if it is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if its 
effect, or (where it comprises two or more distinct items) the effect of 
any one of its items, is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave 
and corrupt persons, who are likely, having regard to all relevant 
circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied 
in it.” 

It is evident that “obscenity” has been similarly defined in Section 
292 and Section 67 as material which is: 
i. lascivious; or 
ii. appeals to the prurient interest; or 
iii. its effect tends to deprave and corrupt persons who are 
likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, 
see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it. 
However, the difference between them is only that Section 67 is a 
special provision that applies when the obscene material is 
published or transmitted in the electronic form.19 Since the alleged 
offending material is a web-series, the case must be considered 
under Section 67 of the IT Act20 but the same test for obscenity as 
laid down under Section 292 will apply since the provisions are 
similarly worded in that respect. In this context we will examine 
how obscenity is understood. 
13. Recounting the development through judicial precedents: This 
Court upheld the constitutional validity of Section 292 as a 
reasonable restriction on free speech and applied the Hicklin test21 
to determine whether the book ‘Lady Chatterley’s Lover’ was 
 
19 Sharat Babu Digumarti (supra). 
20 ibid. 
21 (1868) LR 3 QB 360. obscene in the decision of Ranjit D. Udeshi v. State of 
Maharashtra.22 As per the Hicklin test, a material is obscene if it 
has the tendency to deprave and corrupt the minds of those who 
are open to such immoral influences and into whose hands the 
publication is likely to fall:23 
“… I think the test of obscenity is this, whether the tendency of the 
matter charged as obscenity is to deprave and corrupt those whose 
minds are open to such immoral influences, and into whose hands a 
publication of this sort may fall … it is quite certain that it would 
suggest to the minds of the young of either sex, or even to persons of 
more advanced years, thoughts of a most impure and libidinous 
character.” 
 
14. This test lays emphasis on the potentiality of the material to 
deprave and corrupt by immoral influences.24 To determine this, 
the Court must apply itself to consider each work at a time. It must 
take an overall view of the obscene matter in the setting of the 
whole work but also consider the obscene matter by itself and 
separately to find out whether it is so grossly obscene and it is 
likely to deprave and corrupt. A mere stray word or insignificant 
passage would not suffice to qualify the material as obscene.25 The 
Court also clarified that sex and nudity in art and literature cannot 
in and of themselves be regarded as evidence of obscenity without 
 
 SC 881, 1964 INSC 171. 
23 ibid, para 14. 
24 ibid, para 19. 
25 ibid, 20, 21. something more.26 Sex must be treated in manner that is offensive 
to public decency and morality, when judged by our national 
standards, and must be likely to pander to lascivious, prurient, 
sexually precocious minds, and appeal to or have the tendency to 
appeal to the “carnal side of human nature” for it to be obscene.27 
15. The Court also emphasised its role in maintaining a delicate 
balance between protecting freedom of speech and artistic freedom 
on the one hand, and public decency and morality on the other. It 
held that when art and obscenity are mixed, the art must be so 
preponderating that the obscenity is pushed into the shadows or 
is trivial and insignificant and can be overlooked.28 Similarly, if the 
matter has a preponderating social purpose and gain that 
overweighs the obscenity of the content (such as medical 
textbooks), then such material is constitutionally protected by 
freedom of speech and cannot be criminalised as obscene.29 
16. The Court followed the Hicklin test and Ranjit Udeshi (supra) 
in 
Shri 
Chandrakant 
Kalyandas 
Kakodkar 
v. 
State 
of 
Maharashtra30 but it also introduced certain caveats and refined 
the test to some extent. Considering the material in that case, a 
 
26 ibid, para 16. 
27 ibid, paras 21 and 22. 
28 ibid, para 21. 
29 ibid, paras 9, 22, and 29. 
30 (1969), 1969 INSC 202. 

Marathi short story Shama, the Court held that the story read as 
a whole does not amount to pornography or pander to the prurient 
interest. Even if the work is not of high literary quality and is 
immature and of bad taste, there was nothing that could deprave 
or corrupt those in whose hands it is likely to fall, including 
adolescents.31 The Court also cautioned that the standard for the 
artist or the writer is not that the adolescent mind must not be 
brought in contact with sex or that the work must be expunged of 
all references to sex, irrespective of whether it is the dominant 
theme.32 The test for obscenity was stated as: “What we have to 
see is that whether a class, not an isolated case, into whose hands 
the book, article or story falls suffer in their moral outlook or become 
depraved by reading it or might have impure and lecherous thoughts 
aroused in their minds.”33 
17. In KA Abbas v. Union of India34 the Court summarised the 
test and process to determine obscenity as follows: 
“(1) Treating with sex and nudity in art and literature cannot be 
regarded as evidence of obscenity without something more. 
 
(2) Comparison of one book with another to find the extent of 
permissible action is not necessary. 

31 ibid, paras 9 and 10. 
32 ibid, para 12. 
33 ibid, para 12. 
34 (1970), para 48. 

(3) The delicate task of deciding what is artistic and what is obscene 
has to be performed by courts and in the last resort, by the Supreme 
Court and so, oral evidence of men of literature or others on the 
question of obscenity is not relevant. 
 
(4) An overall view of the obscene matter in the setting of the whole 
work would of course be necessary but the obscene matter must be 
considered by itself and separately to find out whether it is so gross 
and its obscenity is so decided that it is likely to deprave or corrupt 
those whose minds are open to influence of this sort and into whose 
hands the book is likely to fall. 
 
(5) The interests of contemporary society and particularly the 
influence of the book, etc., on it must not be overlooked. 
 
(6) Where obscenity and art are mixed, art must be so preponderating 
as to throw obscenity into shadow or render the obscenity so trivial 
and insignificant that it can have no effect and can be overlooked. 
 
(7) Treating with sex in a manner offensive to public decency or 
morality which are the words of our Fundamental Law judged by our 
national standards and considered likely to pender to lescivious, 
pourlent or sexually precocious minds must determine the result. 
 
(8) When there is propagation of ideas, opinions and informations or 
public interests or profits, the interests of society may tilt the scales 
in favour of free speech and expression. Thus books on medical 
science with intimate illustrations and photographs though in a sense 
immodest, are not to be considered obscene, but the same 
illustrations and photographs collected in a book form without the 
medical text would certainly be considered to be obscene. 
 
(9) Obscenity without a preponderating social purpose or profit cannot 
have the constitutional protection of free speech or expression. 
Obscenity is treating with sex in a manner appealing to the carnal 
side of human nature or having that tendency. Such a treating with 
sex is offensive to modesty and decency. 
 
(10) Knowledge is not a part of the guilty act. The offender's 
knowledge of the obscenity of the book is not required under the law 
and it is a case of strict liability.” 

18. In Samaresh Bose (supra), which has been relied on by the 
appellants, this Court differentiated vulgarity from obscenity. The 
material in question in this case was a Bengali novel titled 

‘Prajapati’. The Court noted that while slang and unconventional 
words had been used in the book along with suggestions of sexual 
acts, there was no description of any overt act of sex. The words 
are vulgar and create a feeling of disgust and revulsion and may 
shock the reader but this does not necessarily amount to 
obscenity, which is the tendency to deprave and corrupt.35 It held 
that the use of slang and unconventional words; an emphasis on 
sex; a description of female bodies; and narrations of feelings, 
thoughts and actions in vulgar language in the novel do not render 
the material obscene.36 Further, a mere reference to sex is 
insufficient for obscenity and does not make a material unsuitable 
for adolescents.37 
19. The Court also summarised the process that must be followed 
to objectively assess whether some material is obscene. It held that 
the judge must first place himself in the position of the author to 
understand his perspective and what he seeks to convey and 
whether it has any literary or artistic value. The judge must then 
place himself in the position of a reader of every age group in whose 
hands the book (or material) is likely to fall and determine the 
 
35 Samaresh Bose (supra), para 35. 
36 ibid, para 35. 
37 ibid, para 35. possible effect or influence of the material on the minds of such 
persons. The relevant portion reads: 
“29. …As laid down in both the decisions of this Court earlier referred 
to, “the question whether a particular article or story or book is 
obscene or not does not altogether depend on oral evidence, because 
it is the duty of the court to ascertain whether the book or story or any 
passage or passages therein offend the provisions of Section 292 
IPC”. In deciding the question of obscenity of any book, story or article 
the court whose responsibility it is to adjudge the question may, if the 
court considers it necessary, rely to an extent on evidence and views 
of leading literary personage, if available, for its own appreciation 
and assessment and for satisfaction of its own conscience. The 
decision of the court must necessarily be on an objective assessment 
of the book or story or article as a whole and with particular reference 
to the passages complained of in the book, story or article. The court 
must take an overall view of the matter complained of as obscene in 
the setting of the whole work, but the matter charged as obscene must 
also be considered by itself and separately to find out whether it is 
so gross and its obscenity so pronounced that it is likely to deprave 
and corrupt those whose minds are open to influence of this sort and 
into whose hands the book is likely to fall. Though the court must 
consider the question objectively with an open mind, yet in the matter 
of objective assessment the subjective attitude of the Judge hearing 
the matter is likely to influence, even though unconsciously, his mind 
and his decision on the question. A Judge with a puritan and prudish 
outlook may on the basis of an objective assessment of any book or 
story or article, consider the same to be obscene. It is possible that 
another Judge with a different kind of outlook may not consider the 
same book to be obscene on his objective assessment of the very 
same book. The concept of obscenity is moulded to a very great extent 
by the social outlook of the people who are generally expected to read 
the book. It is beyond dispute that the concept of obscenity usually 
differs from country to country depending on the standards of 
morality of contemporary society in different countries. In our opinion, 
in judging the question of obscenity, the Judge in the first place 
should try to place himself in the position of the author and from the 
viewpoint of the author the Judge should try to understand what is it 
that the author seeks to convey and whether what the author conveys 
has any literary and artistic value. The Judge should thereafter place 
himself in the position of a reader of every age group in whose hands 
the book is likely to fall and should try to appreciate what kind of 
possible influence the book is likely to have in the minds of the 
readers. A Judge should thereafter apply his judicial mind 
dispassionately to decide whether the book in question can be said 
to be obscene within the meaning of Section 292 IPC by an objective 
assessment of the book as a whole and also of the passages 

complained of as obscene separately. In appropriate cases, the court, 
for eliminating any subjective element or personal preference which 
may remain hidden in the subconscious mind and may unconsciously 
affect a proper objective assessment, may draw upon the evidence on 
record and also consider the views expressed by reputed or 
recognised authors of literature on such questions if there be any for 
his own consideration and satisfaction to enable the court to 
discharge the duty of making a proper assessment.” 
20. The Court then applied this test to the novel in question. By 
placing themselves in the position of the author and judging the 
work from his perspective, the Court found that his intention was 
to expose social evils and ills, for which the author has used his 
own technique. Similarly, the Court placed itself in the position of 
the readers who are likely to read the book. It held that the book 
was likely to be read by readers of “both sexes and all ages between 
teenagers and the aged” and found that while it may create a sense 
of shock and disgust, no reader would be depraved, debased, or 
encouraged to lasciviousness by reading the book.38 
21. In Bobby Art International (supra) the question before the 
Court was whether certain scenes from the film ‘Bandit Queen’ 
that depicted rape and nudity were obscene. Here, obscenity was 
not considered under Section 292 but under the 1991 Guidelines 
for Censor Board certification under the Cinematograph Act, 
1952.39 The Court did not cite or follow the Hicklin test as laid down 
 
38 ibid. 
39 The relevant guidelines, as extracted in Bobby Art International (supra), are as follows: 
“15. The guidelines earlier issued were revised in 1991. Clause (1) thereof reads thus: 

in Ranjit Udeshi (supra) and Chandrakant Kalyandas (supra). 
Instead, it relied on the Guidelines and laid down the test for 
obscenity as follows: 
“22. The guidelines aforementioned have been carefully drawn. They 
require the authorities concerned with film certification to be 
responsive to the values and standards of society and take note of 
social change. They are required to ensure that “artistic expression 
and creative freedom are not unduly curbed”. The film must be 
“judged in its entirety from the point of view of its overall impact”. It 
must also be judged in the light of the period depicted and the 
contemporary standards of the people to whom it relates, but it must 
not deprave the morality of the audience. Clause 2 requires that 
human sensibilities are not offended by vulgarity, obscenity or 
depravity, that scenes degrading or denigrating women are not 
presented and scenes of sexual violence against women are avoided, 
but if such scenes are germane to the theme, they be reduced to a 
minimum and not particularised.” 

22. The Court first considered the plot and theme of the film as a 
whole and then considered the individual scenes of nudity and 
 
“1. The objectives of film certification will be to ensure that— 
(a) the medium of film remains responsible and sensitive to the values and standards of society; 
(b) artistic expression and creative freedom are not unduly curbed; 
(c) certification is responsive to social change; 
(d) the medium of film provides clean and healthy entertainment; and 
(e) as far as possible, the film is of aesthetic value and cinematically of a good standard.” 
Clause (2) states that the Board of Film Censors shall ensure that— 
“2. (vii) human sensibilities are not offended by vulgarity, obscenity or depravity; 
*** 
(ix) scenes degrading or denigrating women in any manner are not presented; 
(x) scenes involving sexual violence against women like attempt to rape, rape or any form of 
molestation or scenes of a similar nature are avoided, and if any such incident is germane to 
the theme, they shall be reduced to the minimum and no details are shown; 
***” 
Clause (3) reads thus: 
“3. The Board of Film Certification shall also ensure that the film— 
(i) is judged in its entirety from the point of view of the overall impact; and 
(ii) is examined in the light of the period depicted in the film and the contemporary standards 
of the country and the people to which the film relates, provided that the film does not deprave 
the morality of the audience.” 

rape. Judging the work as a whole and the alleged offending 
material specifically, the Court held that the scenes are likely to 
evoke tears, pity, horror, and shame. Only a perverted mind might 
be aroused in such a situation, and the purpose of censorship is 
not to protect the pervert or assuage the susceptibilities of the 
over-sensitive.40 Further, the use of swear words and expletives 
that are heard everyday was also held to be harmless.41 The Court 
rather emphasised the overarching social purpose and message of 
the film – to condemn rape and violence against women by showing 
the trauma and emotional turmoil of a victim of rape and to evoke 
sympathy for her and disgust for the rapist.42 Thus, the material 
was held as not being obscene. 
23. Similarly, in Director General, Directorate General of 
Doordarshan v. Anand Patwardhan43, the Court applied the test of 
‘contemporary community standards’ to determine whether a 
documentary is obscene for the purpose of certification and 
telecast on Doordarshan. A three-prong test for obscenity was 
formulated as follows: 
 
40 ibid, paras 27 and 28. 
41 ibid, para 29. 
42 ibid, paras 28, 31, 33. 
43 (2006), 2006 INSC 558. 

“(a) whether “the average person, applying contemporary community 
standards” would find that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to 
the prurient interest; 
(b) whether the work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, 
sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law; and 
(c) whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, 
political, or scientific value.”44 
 
24. The Court relied on Ramesh v. Union of India,45 where it was 
held that the effect of the words must be judged from the standards 
of a reasonable, strong-minded, firm and courageous person, and 
not from the perspective of weak and vacillating minds or those 
who sense danger in every hostile point of view.46 Considering the 
documentary as a whole to determine its message, which cannot 
be conveyed by watching only certain bits, it was held that the film 
portrays social evils and does not seek to cater to the prurient 
interests of any person.47 
25. The law on determining obscenity has been summarised and 
reiterated in Ajay Goswami v. Union of India48 where the Court 
cited both Indian precedent and American jurisprudence. The 
principles that can be culled out from the judgment are as follows: 
 
44 ibid, para 32. 
45 (1988), 1988 INSC 44. 
46 Directorate General of Doordarshan (supra), para 37. 
47 ibid, para 38. 
48 (2007), 2006 INSC 995. i. 
Obscenity must be judged with regard to contemporary 
mores and national standards.49 
ii. 
The work must be judged as a whole and the alleged 
offending material must also be separately examined to 
judge whether they are so grossly obscene that they are 
likely to deprave and corrupt the reader or viewer.50 There 
must be a clear and present danger that has proximate 
and direct nexus with the material.51 
iii. 
All sex-oriented material and nudity per se are not always 
obscene.52 
iv. 
The effect of the work must be judged from the standard of 
an average adult human being.53 Content cannot be 
regulated from the benchmark of what is appropriate for 
children as then the adult population would be restricted 
to read and see only what is fit for children.54 Likewise, 
regulation of material cannot be as per the standard of a 
hypersensitive man and must be judged as per an 
“ordinary man of common sense and prudence”.55 
 
49 ibid, para 67. 
50 ibid, para 68. 
51 ibid, para 70. 
52 ibid, paras 7 and 61. 
53 ibid, para 7. 
54 ibid, para 62. 
55 ibid, para 71. v. 
Where art and obscenity are mixed, it must be seen 
whether the artistic, literary or social merit of the work 
overweighs its obscenity and makes the obscene content 
insignificant or trivial. In other words, there must be a 
preponderating social purpose or profit for the work to be 
constitutionally protected as free speech. Similarly, a 
different approach may have to be used when the material 
propagates ideas, opinions, and information of public 
interest as then the interest of society will tilt the balance 
in favour of protecting the freedom of speech (for example, 
with medical textbooks).56 
vi. 
The Court must perform the task of balancing what is 
artistic and what is obscene. To perform this delicate 
exercise, it can rely on the evidence of men of literature, 
reputed and recognised authors to assess whether there is 
obscenity.57 
26. In S. Khushboo v. Kanniammal,58 the issue pertained to 
quashing of FIR filed against the appellant, inter alia under Section 
292 of the IPC, for an interview in a magazine where she called for 
 
56 ibid, para 66. 
57 ibid, para 69. 
58 (2010), 2010 INSC 247. the social acceptance of premarital sex, especially in live-in 
relationships, and cautioned women to take adequate protection 
to prevent unwanted pregnancies and sexually transmitted 
infections. The Court held that no offence was made out under 
Section 292 as the content is not lascivious (i.e., expressing or 
causing sexual desire); does not appeal to the prurient interest 
(i.e., excessive interest in sexual matters); and does not have the 
effect of tending to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely to 
read, hear, or see the material.59 It was reiterated that mere 
reference to sex does not make the material obscene without 
examining the context of such reference.60 The Court held that 
obscenity must be gauged with respect to “contemporary 
community standards that reflect the sensibilities as well as the 
tolerance levels of an average reasonable person.”61 In this case, 
the appellant had not described any sexual act or said anything 
that arouses sexual desire in the mind of a reasonable and prudent 
reader to make the content obscene.62 Hence the FIR was quashed 
by this Court. 
 
59 ibid, para 24. 
60 ibid, para 25. 
61 ibid, para 27. 
62 ibid, para 28. 

27. A Division Bench of this Court in Aveek Sarkar (supra) also 
quashed an FIR under Section 292 against the magazine cover of 
Sports World and Anandbazar Patrika that carried the image of 
Boris Becker, a tennis player, posing nude with his fiancée, who 
are an interracial couple. The Court held that while judging a 
photograph, article or book to be obscene, “regard must be had to 
the contemporary mores and national standards and not the 
standard of a group of susceptible or sensitive persons”.63 The Court 
held that the Hicklin test must not be applied as it “judged for 
obscenity based on isolated passages of a work considered out of 
context and judged by their apparent influence on most susceptible 
readers, such as children or weak-minded adults.”64 Even in the 
United States, where the test was first formulated, the courts no 
longer apply the Hicklin test and instead apply the test formulated 
in Roth v. United States65 where the US Supreme Court held that 
sex-related material is obscene only when it has the tendency of 
exciting lustful thoughts when judged from the perspective of an 
average person by applying the community standards test. 
Similarly, in Canada, the dominant test is the ‘community 
 
63 Aveek Sarkar (supra), para 18. 
64 ibid, para 20. 
65 354 US 476 (1957). standards problem test’ as per which a work qualifies as obscene 
when the exploitation of sex is its dominant characteristic and 
such exploitation is undue.66 Taking note of these jurisprudential 
developments, the Court in Aveek Sarkar markedly moved away 
from the Hicklin test to the “community standard test” where the 
material is considered as a whole to determine whether the specific 
portions have the tendency to deprave and corrupt.67 
28. Applying this test, it was held that a picture of a nude/semi-
nude woman is not per se obscene unless it arouses sexual desire 
or overtly reveals sexual desire or has the tendency of exciting 
lustful thoughts.68 In the present case, the posture and the 
background of the woman posing with her fiancée, whose 
photograph was taken by her father, does not have the tendency 
to deprave or corrupt those in whose hands the magazine would 
fall when considered in light of the broader social message of the 
picture against apartheid, racism, and to promote love and 
marriage across race.69 We may note that this Court followed the 
community standards test in Devidas Ramachandra Tuljapurkar 
(supra). 
 
66 R v. Butler, (1992) (Can SC) as cited in Aveek Sarkar (supra), para 22. 
67 Aveek Sarkar (supra), para 23. 
68 ibid, para 23. 
69 ibid, paras 27 and 28. 

29. Lastly, in N. Radhakrishnan v. Union of India,70 it was again 
held that the Court must not be guided by the sensitivity of a 
pervert viewer and the setting of the whole work, its purpose, and 
the constituent elements of the character must be kept in mind 
while judging for obscenity.71 
30. Application of the principles in the above-referred precedents 
to the facts of the present case: The purpose of elaborately tracing 
the precedents on Section 292 is to identify the essential content 
of the offence of obscenity, the test and the standard by which the 
allegedly offending material must be judged, and the oral and 
documentary evidences and the process that the court must rely 
on and follow for arriving at its conclusion. 
31. For applying the test for obscenity to the allegedly offending 
portions of the web-series, it is important to take note of the 
approach adopted by the High Court. 
32. The High Court purportedly applied the community standard 
test as laid down in Aveek Sarkar (supra) to arrive at its 
conclusion.72 It correctly states the position of law that to 
determine whether certain content is obscene, the standard of 
 
70 (2018), 2018 INSC 784. 
71 ibid, para 33. 
72 Impugned judgment, paras 21 and 22. determination is that of an ordinary common person and not a 
hypersensitive person.73 
33. Wrong question, wrong answer: However, the High Court has 
incorrectly framed the question for inquiry. The issue framed by 
the High Court is whether the language employed in the episode is 
contemporarily used by the youth and whether it meets the 
threshold of decency. The High Court has framed the question for 
inquiry in the following terms: 
“29. As stated above, this Court had watched a few episodes of the 
web series “College Romance” and the episode in question to decide 
the case more effectively and fairly. The intent behind watching the 
said web series was to analyze fairly as to whether the contention 
raised on behalf of the petitioners that the language used in the web 
series is “in language”, or is “language used by new generation in 
colleges”, or “the students in law colleges and the younger generation 
in colleges uses this language only”, is without merit or not. 
30. This Court also wanted to test/examine the test of a common 
prudent man in practicality, acting itself as a common prudent 
person, so as to check as to whether such language, in fact, can be 
heard by a common prudent man without being embarrassed or 
finding it against decency or against the concept of decency…” 
 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
34. From a plain reading of Section 67 and the material that is 
characterised as ‘obscene’ therein, it is clear that the High Court 
posed the wrong question, and it has naturally arrived at a wrong 
answer. At the outset, the enquiry under Section 292 of the IPC or 
under Section 67 of the IT Act does not hinge on whether the 
 
73 ibid, para 28. language or words are decent, or whether they are commonly used 
in the country. Rather, from the plain language of the provision, 
the inquiry is to determine whether the content is lascivious, 
appeals to prurient interests, or tends to deprave and corrupt the 
minds of those in whose hands it is likely to fall.74 The High Court 
embarked on a wrong journey and arrived at the wrong 
destination. 
35. Profanity is not per se obscene: The second threshold error is 
in the finding of the High Court that the language is full of swear 
words, profanities, and vulgar expletives that could not be heard 
in open court and also that it is not the language of the youth. 
Based on this finding, the High Court has held that the content is 
obscene as it “will affect and will tend to deprave and corrupt 
impressionable minds”. In its own words, the High Court held: 
“30. …this Court found that the actors/protagonists in the web series 
are not using the language used in our country i.e. civil language. The 
Court not only found excessive use of “swear words”, “profane 
language” and “vulgar expletives” being used, it rather found that the 
web series had a series of such words in one sentence with few Hindi 
sentences here and there. In the episode in question, there is clear 
description and reference to a sexually explicit act. The Court had to 
watch the episodes with the aid of earphones, in the chamber, as the 
profanity of language used was of the extent that it could not have 
been heard without shocking or alarming the people around and 
keeping in mind the decorum of language which is maintained by a 
common prudent man whether in professional or public domain or 
even with family members at home. Most certainly, this Court notes 
that this is not the language that nation’s youth or otherwise citizens 
 
74 Section 67, IT Act; Ranjit Udeshi (supra). of this country use, and this language cannot be called the frequently 
spoken language used in our country. 
36. When the entire content of the series is seen in the light of above, 
it would lead any common person to a conclusion that the language 
used in the web series is foul, indecent and profane to the extent that 
it will affect and will tend to deprave and corrupt impressionable 
minds. Therefore, on the basis of this finding it can be held that the 
content of the web series will certainly attract the criminality as 
envisaged under Section 67 of the Information Technology Act.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
The specific material which the High Court found to be obscene, 
i.e., that which tends to deprave and corrupt impressionable 
minds, was “foul, indecent and profane” language. Nothing more. 
The High Court has equated profanities and vulgarity with 
obscenity, without undertaking a proper or detailed analysis into 
how such language, by itself, could be sexual, lascivious, prurient, 
or depraving and corrupting. It is well-established from the 
precedents cited that vulgarity and profanities do not per se 
amount to obscenity.75 While a person may find vulgar and 
expletive-filled language to be distasteful, unpalatable, uncivil, and 
improper, that by itself is not sufficient to be ‘obscene’. Obscenity 
relates to material that arouses sexual and lustful thoughts, which 
is not at all the effect of the abusive language or profanities that 
have been employed in the episode. Rather, such language may 
 
75 Samaresh Bose (supra), para 35; Bobby Art International (supra), para 29; NS Madhanagopal v. K. Lalitha,, 2022 INSC 1323. evoke disgust, revulsion, or shock.76 The reality of the High Court’s 
finding is that once it found the language to be profane and vulgar, 
it has in fact moved away from the requirements of obscenity under 
Section 67 of the IT Act. The High Court failed to notice the 
inherent contradiction in its conclusions. 
36. No objective consideration: Third, the High Court has erred in 
the legal approach followed by it while assessing whether the 
material is obscene. In Samaresh Bose (supra), this Court has laid 
down, in great depth and detail, the process and method that must 
be followed to objectively judge whether the material is obscene.77 
The court must consider the work as a whole and then the specific 
portions that have been alleged to be obscene in the context of the 
whole work to arrive at its conclusion.78 Further, the court must 
first step into the position of the creator to understand what he 
intends to convey from the work and whether it has any literary or 
artistic value. It must then step into the position of the reader or 
viewer who is likely to consume the work and appreciate the 
possible influence on the minds of such reader.79 However, the 
 
76 Samaresh Bose (supra), para 35. 
77 Samaresh Bose (supra), para 29. 
78 ibid; Ranjit Udeshi (supra), paras 20 and 21. 
79 Samaresh Bose (supra), para 29. 

High Court has not followed this judicial process before arriving at 
its conclusion, which is as follows: 
“43. Coming back to case at hand, the specific complaint of petitioner 
is that in Episode 05 of Season 01, airtime starting from 5 minutes 
and 24 seconds onwards upto 6 minutes and 40 seconds as well as 
from 25 minutes and 28 seconds upto 25 minutes and 46 seconds, 
the language of male and female protagonist is full of obscenity, 
vulgar words and expletives, without there being any warning or filter 
imposing restriction of age of viewers to whom the content should be 
visible. The language used in Episode 05 of Season 01 was heard by 
this Court, and the level of obscenity of the language and sentences 
used was such that this Court cannot reproduce it in the judgment 
itself for the purpose of adjudication. The language used in the web 
series at the abovementioned time referred to a sexually explicit act 
in spoken language. It is not just an expletive, but is profane and 
vulgar language being used referring to a sexually explicit act which 
certainly cannot be termed common or commonly accepted language. 
Rather the female protagonist in the series itself is heard objecting to 
the male protagonist and expressing her disgust over use of this 
language by repeating the same language herself to the male 
protagonist. In answer to that, the male protagonist further uses more 
vulgar expletives and indecent language which is bound to disgust a 
normal prudent man, if heard in public. Later in the said episode, the 
female protagonist uses the same obscene, sexually explicit language 
to others and the male protagonist is seen enjoying and appreciating 
her conduct. The male protagonist uses words describing male and 
female genitalia and sexual act, thus by words, painting pictures of 
sexually explicit act which brings it under ambit of arousing prurient 
feelings by so doing. There’s no escape from the same by saying that 
the said act was not done, shown or filmed. Depiction does not 
connote filming alone but conveying by a medium, which in this case 
is spoken language. Therefore, the content as discussed above will 
attract the criminality as laid down under Section 67 as well as 67A 
of IT Act.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
37. It is evident from the above passages that the High Court has 
taken the meaning of the language in its literal sense, outside the 
context in which such expletives have been spoken. While the 
literal meaning of the terms used may be sexual in nature and they 

may refer to sexual acts, their usage does not arouse sexual 
feelings or lust in any viewer of ordinary prudence and common 
sense. Rather, the common usage of these words is reflective of 
emotions of anger, rage, frustration, grief, or perhaps excitement. 
By taking the literal meaning of these words, the High Court failed 
to consider the specific material (profane language) in the context 
of the larger web-series and by the standard of an “ordinary man 
of common sense and prudence”. When we notice the use of such 
language in the context of the plot and theme of the web-series, 
which is a light-hearted show on the college lives of young 
students, it is clear that the use of these terms is not related to sex 
and does not have any sexual connotation. Neither did the creator 
of the web-series intend for the language to be taken in its literal 
sense nor is that the impact on a reasonable viewer who will watch 
the material. Therefore, there is a clear error in the legal approach 
adopted by the High Court in analysing and examining the 
material to determine obscenity. 
38. Furthermore, the objectivity with which a judicial mind is 
expected to examine the work in question was completely lost 
when the High Court evidently could not extricate itself from the 

courtroom atmosphere. The sensitivity and discomfort of the High 
Court is evident when it held: 
“29. …The Court had to watch the episodes with the aid of earphones, 
in the chamber, as the profanity of language used was of the extent 
that it could not have been heard without shocking or alarming the 
people around and keeping in mind the decorum of language which 
is maintained by a common prudent man whether in professional or 
public domain or even with family members at home…” 

39. Application of wrong standard: The last issue is that of the 
standard or perspective used by the High Court to determine 
obscenity. It is well-settled that the standard for determination 
cannot be an adolescent’s or child’s mind, or a hypersensitive 
person who is susceptible to such influences.80 However, the High 
Court has incorrectly used the standard of “impressionable minds” 
to gauge the effect of the material and has therefore erred in 
applying the test for obscenity correctly.81 
40. The High Court has made several remarks on the need to 
maintain linguistic purity, civility, and morality by retaining the 
purity of language and deprecating the representation of 
expletives-filled language as the “new normal”. The real test is to 
examine if the language is in anyway obscene under Section 67 of 
 
80 Chandrakant Kalyandas (supra), para 12; Samaresh Bose (supra), para 35; Ajay Goswami (supra); Aveek Sarkar 
(supra), para 20. 
81 Impugned judgment, paras 35, 36 and 74. the IT Act. The approach adopted by the High Court, as explained 
earlier, is based on irrelevant considerations. 
41. Similarly, the metric to assess obscenity and legality of any 
content cannot be that it must be appropriate to play in the 
courtroom while maintaining the court’s decorum and integrity. 
Such an approach unduly curtails the freedom of expression that 
can be exercised and compels the maker of the content to meet the 
requirements of judicial propriety, formality, and official language. 
Here again, the High Court committed a serious error in decision-
making. 
42. The High Court has also expressed concern and anxiety 
about the free availability of the web-series on the internet to the 
youth and that it was not classified as being restricted to those 
above the age of 18 years. While such anxiety is not misplaced, the 
availability of content that contains profanities and swear words 
cannot be regulated by criminalising it as obscene. Apart from 
being a non-sequitur, it is a disproportionate and excessive 
measure that violates freedom of speech, expression, and artistic 
creativity. 
43. For the reasons stated above, we are of the opinion that the 
High Court was not correct in its conclusion that the web-series 

has obscene content and that therefore the provisions of Section 
67 of the IT Act are attracted. 
B. 
Whether the material is ‘sexually explicit’ for the 
purpose of Section 67A: 
44. Section 67A of the IT Act criminalises the publication and 
transmission of sexually explicit content. The provision is as 
follows: 
“67A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material 
containing sexually explicit act, etc., in electronic form.–
Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or 
transmitted in the electronic form any material which contains 
sexually explicit act or conduct shall be punished on first conviction 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and 
in the event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and 
also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.” 
 
45. The High Court has not given any reason whatsoever on how 
Section 67A is attracted to the facts of the present case. In our 
opinion, the offence of Section 67A is not at all made out. 
46. The facts of the present case certainly do not attract 
Section 67A as the complainant’s grievance is about excessive 
usage of vulgar expletives, swear words, and profanities. There is 
no allegation of any ‘sexually explicit act or conduct’ in the 
complaint and as such, Section 67A does not get attracted. 
47. Section 67A criminalises publication, transmission, causing 
to publish or transmit – in electronic form – any material that 

contains sexually explicit act or conduct. Though the three 
expressions “explicit”, “act”, and “conduct” are open-textured and 
are capable of encompassing wide meaning, the phrase may have 
to be seen in the context of ‘obscenity’ as provided in Section 67. 
Thus, there could be a connect between Section 67A and Section 
67 itself. For example, there could be sexually explicit act or 
conduct which may not be lascivious. Equally, such act or conduct 
might not appeal to prurient interests. On the contrary, a sexually 
explicit act or conduct presented in an artistic or a devotional form 
may have exactly the opposite effect, rather than tending to 
deprave and corrupt a person. 
C. 
Quashing the FIR: 
48. No offence of publication or transmission of any material in 
electronic form, which is obscene, lascivious, or appealing to 
prurient interest, and/or having the effect of tending to deprave 
and corrupt persons, as provided under Section 67 of the IT act, is 
made out. Equally, no case of publication or transmission of 
material containing sexually explicit act or conduct, as provided 
under Section 67A, is made out from the bare reading of the 
complaint. It is settled that a court must exercise its jurisdiction 
to quash an FIR or criminal complaint when the allegations made 

therein, taken prima facie, do not disclose the commission of any 
offence.82 
49. In view of the above, we allow the appeals against the 
judgment of the High Court dated 06.03.2023 in Criminal 
Miscellaneous Case No. 2399 of 2020, Criminal Miscellaneous 
Case No. 2215 of 2020 and Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 2214 
of 2020, and set aside the judgment of the High Court, and quash 
FIR 403/2023 registered at Police Station Mukherjee Nagar, Delhi 
dated 16.04.2023 under Sections 67 and 67A of the IT Act against 
the appellants herein. 
50. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
……..……………………………….J. 
 [A.S. Bopanna].………….………………………….J. 
 [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha] 
 
New Delhi; 
March 19, 2024 
 
82 State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal, (1992) SCC Supp (1) 335, 1992 INSC 357; State of AP v. Golconda Linga 
Swamy, (2004), 2004 INSC 404; Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd v. Mohd Sharaful Haque, (2005), 2004 INSC 628.