IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL 
 
 APPEAL NO.1591 
 
 OF 2020

JUGAL KISHORE KHANNA(D) THR LRS & ANR. … APPELLANTS
 A1: JUGAL KISHORE KHANNA (D) THR. LRs
 A1.1: PRABHAT KHANNA
 A1.2: ROHIT KHANNA
 A2: MANMOHAN KHANNACivil Appeal No.1592
of 2020

VERSUS

SUDHIR KHANNA & ORS.
 … RESPONDENTS
 R1: SUDHIR KHANNA
 R2: RAMAN KHANNA
 R3: SHYAMA KHANNA (D) THR. LRs
R3.1: SUDHIR KHANNA
R3.2: RAMAN KHANNA
 R3.3: GEETA SETHI
WITH

JUGAL KISHORE KHANNA(D) THR LRS & ANR. … APPELLANTS
 A1: JUGAL KISHORE KHANNA (D) THR. LRs
 A1.1: PRABHAT KHANNA

 A1.2: ROHIT KHANNA
 A2: MANMOHAN KHANNA

VERSUS

SUDHIR KHANNA & ORS.
 … RESPONDENTS
 R1: SUDHIR KHANNA
 R2: RAMAN KHANNA
 R3: SHYAMA KHANNA (D) THR. LRs
R3.1: SUDHIR KHANNA
R3.2: RAMAN KHANNA
R3.3: GEETA SETHI
JUDGMENT
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
2.
The challenge in the present appeals is to the
common Judgment and Order dated 06.12.2013
(hereinafter referred to as the “Impugned Judgment”)1
passed by a learned Single Judge of the High Court of
Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the “High Court”),
wherein the appeal filed by the respondent no.1 in
1 2013:DHC:6299 | 2013 SCC OnLine Del 4916. respect of the Kamla Nagar property2, i.e., RFA No.439
of 2008, has been allowed and the appeal filed by the
appellants in respect of the Malcha Marg property3,
i.e., RFA No.483 of 2008, has been dismissed.
FACTS IN BRIEF:
3.
The parties are common descendants of Late Shri
Tek Chand Khanna (hereinafter referred to as “TCK”),
who had two sons, Shri Roop Kishore Khanna
(hereinafter referred to as “RKK”) and Shri Attar
Chand Khanna (hereinafter referred to as “ACK”). The
appellants are descendants of RKK whereas the
respondents are the successors of ACK. In the year
1941, RKK purchased a piece of land admeasuring 344
square yards and bearing No.15-D, Kamla Nagar, Delhi
- 110007 (hereinafter referred to as the “Kamla Nagar
property”) in the name of his father TCK and a
residential house was constructed thereupon in 1950.
Another property admeasuring 375 square yards bearing
No.D-56, Malcha Marg, Chanakyapuri, New Delhi -
2 Defined infra.
3 Defined infra.

110021 (hereinafter referred to as the “Malcha Marg
property”) was also acquired by RKK and constructed
by the family in the name of Smt. Shyama Khanna, wife
of ACK. The claim of the appellants is that the
purchase and construction of the Malcha Marg property
was out of the funds provided by RKK and the income
of the family generated from Regal Cinema Business.
RKK died in the year 1978 and after that ACK claimed
share in the Kamla Nagar property claiming it to be
joint family property. The appellants claim that in
1979, in terms of an oral settlement between the
parties a sum of Rs.55,000/- (Rupees Fifty-Five
Thousand) was paid through cheques by the LRs of RKK
in favour of ACK for the purchase of the share of ACK
in the Kamla Nagar property. In 1983, upon ACK having
expired, his LRs filed two suits. One claiming
partition of the properties at Shimla and another
claiming partition of the Kamla Nagar property. The
Trial Court by order dated 28.07.2008 dismissed the
suit of the Respondent No.1 with regard to the claim
over the Kamla Nagar property. However, insofar as

the Malcha Marg property is concerned, the Trial
Court decided the issue of the suit being bad on
account of partial partition against the appellants,
on the ground that circumstances given by the
appellants are not sufficient to prove that the
Malcha Marg property was purchased out of joint
family funds. The Respondent No.1 challenged the
Trial Court order, so far as the same pertained to
the Kamla Nagar property, by filing RFA No.439 of
2008 before the High Court whereas the appellants
challenged the decision of the Trial Court pertaining
to the Malcha Marg property by preferring RFA No.483
of 2008.
4.
By the common Impugned Judgement dated
06.12.2013, the High Court allowed the appeal filed
by the Respondent No.1 [RFA No.439 of 2008] and
dismissed the appeal filed by the appellants [RFA
No.483 of 2008]. The instant Civil Appeals emanate
therefrom.

SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPELLANTS:
Re 
 Kamla Nagar:
5.
Learned senior counsel for the appellants
submitted that the judgment of the Trial Court [the
Additional District Judge, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi]
dated 28.07.2008 held that Kamla Nagar property
belongs solely to the appellants on very cogent
grounds i.e., the same was originally joint/ancestral
property between RKK and ACK having been bought in
the name of TCK and later the 50% share of ACK being
bought by the appellants in a family settlement. It
was pointed out that when suggestion was put to DW1
and DW2 being Defendant No.2 and LRs of deceased
Defendant No.1 respectively, in cross-examination,
payment of Rs. 55,000/- (Rupees Fifty-Five Thousand)
for betterment of Hindu Undivided Family (hereinafter
referred to as “HUF”) was admitted. Further, the
Trial Court had noted in its judgment that the
plaintiff (Respondent No.1) in his cross-examination

had admitted that the Kamla Nagar property was the
only joint family property.
6.
Learned counsel submitted that the appellants,
who were defendants in the suit pertaining to the
Kamla Nagar property, had proved that there was an
oral settlement in the year 1979 after the demise of
RKK and in terms thereof, the LRs of RKK being
Defendants No.1, 2 and 3, being sons of RKK, as also
Ms. Lakshmi Khanna, wife of late RKK, had by 6
cheques paid an amount of Rs. 55,000/- (Rupees Fifty-
Five Thousand) towards the share of ACK in the Kamla
Nagar property.
7.
Thus, it was contended that rightly the Trial
Court had held in favour of the appellants that the
the Kamla Nagar property no more remained joint
family property, as the 50% share of the ACK branch
was already bought by paying Rs. 55,000/- (Rupees
Fifty-Five Thousand) to the LRs. In support of his
contention, learned counsel further submitted that

ACK in his Wealth Tax Return of the year 1965-1967
had shown the value of the Kamla Nagar property at
around Rs.38,000/- (Rupees Thirty-Eight Thousand) and
thus, in the year 1979, the value being Rs.1,10,000/-
(Rupees One Lakh and Ten Thousand) was most
reasonable and 50% of their share being Rs.55,000/-
(Rupees Fifty-Five Thousand) having been paid, the
entire property belonged to the share of the LRs of
RKK.
8.
However, it was contended that even the Trial
Court has held that in family settlements, it is
normal for the value to be slightly on the upper or
the lower side.
9.
Learned counsel submitted that though ACK has
filed his Wealth Tax Returns for the years 1964-1965,
1965-66 and 1966-67, his Wealth Tax Returns from 1979
till his demise in 1983 were not brought before any
forum or Court nor any witness was called from the
Income-Tax Department to show the same, which is
another indicator that ACK had not claimed any part

of the Kamla Nagar property to be his so as to
require disclosure in his Wealth Tax Returns from
1979 till his death in 1983, which also proves the
fact with regard to the payment of Rs.55,000/-
(Rupees Fifty-Five Thousand) as per the family
settlement for buying the 50% share of ACK in the
Kamla Nagar property by the appellants, who were LRs
of RKK.
10.
Learned counsel submitted that the High Court in
the Impugned Judgment in RFA No.439 of 2008 has taken
a view that the payment of Rs.55,000/- (Rupees Fifty-
Five Thousand) was “on some other account” and not
towards any claim against the Kamla Nagar property.
It was held by the High Court that the LRs of ACK had
50% share in the same and further the aspect of
benami was specifically not pressed at the time the
RFA was heard by the High Court, as noted in
Paragraph 12 of the Impugned Judgment. Even the
finding that the payment of Rs.55,000/- (Rupees
Fifty-Five Thousand) was “on some other account” is

totally erroneous and presumptuous since it is based
only on surmises without there being any discussion
to show as to what was the other purpose and in the
absence of such “other account”, there was no
material to prove its authenticity and genuineness.
11.
Learned counsel submitted that right from 1979
till his demise in 1983, ACK never raised any claim
with respect to the Kamla Nagar property which was in
the exclusive possession of the appellants.
12.
Learned counsel also contended that the payment
of Rs.55,000/- (Rupees Fifty-Five Thousand) was
received by ACK in his personal account and not his
business account, which would clearly show that it
was in terms of the family settlement and not for
some other account/purpose.
Re 
 Malcha Marg:
13.
On the Malcha Marg property, learned counsel
submitted that though both the Courts below have
given concurrent findings that it was not joint

family property, the appellants who were Defendants
had only taken a preliminary objection in the Written
Statement to the suit being bad for partial partition
as the Malcha Marg property was not part of the said
suit. However, no serious effort was made to claim
partition/ownership of full or part of the Malcha
Marg property.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE RESPONDENTS:
14., learned counsel for the respondents
submitted that the Trial Court had rightly decided
the issue
 qua 
the Malcha Marg property being
exclusively that of the respondents but had erred in
accepting the story of family settlement and payment
of Rs.55,000/- (Rupees Fifty-Five Thousand) for the
share of the respondents in the Kamla Nagar property
and the wrong has rightly been corrected by the High
Court vide the Impugned Judgment. It was submitted
that the Trial Court findings re the Malcha Marg
property was rightly upheld.

15.
Learned counsel drew the attention of the Court
to the cross-examination of DW1, in which he has
stated that no valuation was done from any valuer and
there were no documents to show that Rs.55,000/-
(Rupees Fifty-Five Thousand) paid to ACK was towards
a full and final settlement of his share in the Kamla
Nagar property. Thus, it was submitted that in the
absence of there being any proof of either settlement
or payment in lieu of the share of the respondents,
rightly the High Court has held that the appellants
have only 50% share in the property.
16.
On the legal aspect, it was submitted that
Section 17 of the Registration Act, 19084 provides
4‘17. Documents of which registration is compulsory.—(1) The following documents shall be registered, if the
property to which they relate is situate in a district in which, and if they have been examined on or after the date
on which, Act XVI of 1864, or the Indian Registration Act, 1866 (20 of 1866), or the Indian Registration Act,
1871 (8 of 1871), or the Indian Registration Act, 1877 (3 of 1877), or this Act came or comes into force, namely
—
(a) instruments of gift of immovable property;
(b) other non-testamentary instruments which purport or operate to create, declare, assign, limit or
extinguish, whether in present or in future, any right, title or interest, whether vested or contingent,
of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards, to or in immovable property;
(c) non-testamentary instruments which acknowledge the receipt or payment of any consideration on
account of the creation, declaration, assignment, limitation or extinction of any such right, title or
interest; and
(d) lease of immovable property from year to year, or for any term exceeding one year, or reserving a
yearly rent;

that any document or transfer or assigning any right
or extinguishing any right regarding title and
interest in an immovable property valued at more than
Rs.100/- (One Hundred) has to be done through a
document which requires registration and the same not
(e) non-testamentary instruments transferring or assigning any decree or order of a Court or any award
when such decree or order or award purports or operates to create, declare, assign, limit or
extinguish, whether in present or in future, any right, title or interest, whether vested or contingent,
of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards, to or in immovable property:
Provided that the State Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, exempt, from the
operation of this sub-section any leases executed in any district, or part of a district, the terms granted by which
do not exceed five years and the annual rents reserved by which do not exceed fifty rupees.
(1-A) The documents containing contracts to transfer for consideration, any immovable property for the
purpose of Section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882), shall be registered if they have been
executed on or after the commencement of the Registration and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2001 and,
if such documents are not registered on or after such commencement, then, they shall have no effect for the
purposes of the said Section 53-A.
(2) Nothing in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) applies to—
(i) any composition-deed; or
(ii) any instrument relating to shares in a Joint Stock Company, notwithstanding that the assets of such
Company consist in whole or in part of immovable property; or
(iii) any debenture issued by any such Company and not creating, declaring, assigning, limiting or
extinguishing any right, title or interest, to or in immovable property except in so far as it entitles
the holder to the security afforded by a registered instrument whereby the Company has mortgaged,
conveyed or otherwise transferred the whole or part of its immovable property or any interest
therein to trustees upon trust for the benefit of the holders of such debentures; or
(iv) any endorsement upon or transfer of any debenture issued by any such Company; or
(v) any document other than the documents specified in sub-section (1-A) not itself creating, declaring,
assigning, limiting or extinguishing any right, title or interest of the value of one hundred rupees
and upwards to or in immovable property, but merely creating a right to obtain another document
which will, when executed, create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish any such right, title or
interest; or
(vi) any decree or order of a Court except a decree or order expressed to be made on a compromise and
comprising immovable property other than that which is the subject-matter of the suit or
proceeding; or
(vii) any grant of immovable property by the Government; or
(viii) any instrument of partition made by a Revenue Officer; or

having been done, the presumption in law would be
that no such settlement existed between the
appellants’ side and the respondents’ side.
17. On the aspect of the Malcha Marg property, it
was submitted that both the Courts below have
concurrently held in favour of the respondents and
thus, there being absolutely no evidence whatsoever
to show the same to have been bought by joint family
funds, no interference was required with such
finding(s).
 ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
(ix) any order granting a loan or instrument of collateral security granted under the Land Improvement
Act, 1871 (26 of 1871), or the Land Improvement Loans Act, 1883 (19 of 1883); or
(x) any order granting a loan under the Agriculturists Loans Act, 1884 (12 of 1884), or instrument for
securing the repayment of a loan made under that Act; or
(x-a) any order made under the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890 (6 of 1890), vesting any property in a
Treasurer of Charitable Endowments of divesting any such Treasurer of any property; or
(xi) any endorsement on a mortgage-deed acknowledging the payment of the whole or any part of the
mortgage-money, and any other receipt for payment of money due under a mortgage when the
receipt does not purport to extinguish the mortgage; or
(xii) any certificate of sale granted to the purchaser of any property sold by public auction by a Civil or
Revenue Officer.
Explanation.—A document purporting or operating to effect a contract for the sale of immovable property
shall not be deemed to require or ever to have required registration by reason only of the fact that such
document contains a recital of the payment of any earnest money or of the whole or any part of the purchase
money.
(3) Authorities to adopt a son, executed after the 1st day of January, 1872, and not conferred by a will, shall
also be registered.’

18.
Having considered the matter, the Court finds
that the Impugned Judgment of the High Court needs
interference. As far as the Malcha Marg property is
concerned, the Court has no hesitation to uphold the
concurrent findings of the Trial Court and the High
Court that there is nothing, even remotely, to
indicate that the said property was bought out of
joint family funds, and thus, rightly it has been
held to be the exclusive property of the
respondents. As such, it has to rightly devolve on
the LRs of ACK exclusively. 
19.
Moving on to the Kamla Nagar property, the
Court finds that the findings, unearthed during
trial indicate that Rs.55,000/- (Rupees Fifty-Five
Thousand) was paid by the appellants’ side to the
respondents’ side. There is nothing on record to
indicate that it was paid for the upkeep of the HUF
or on some other account or to fulfil some other
purpose.

20.
The plea of the respondents that the said
amount was for the upkeep of the HUF does not stand
to reason for it is the admitted position that the
respondents or their ancestors were never living in
the Kamla Nagar property. Hence, there was no
occasion for the appellants to contribute a heavy
amount of Rs.55,000/- (Rupees Fifty-Five Thousand)
in the year 1979 for the upkeep and/or maintenance
of the said property to the respondents, when the
same was exclusively being enjoyed by the
appellants, who alone would be liable for its
maintenance. Moreover, there being disclosure by ACK
in his Wealth Tax Returns of the years 1964-1967
showing the valuation of the property to be around
Rs.38,000/- (Rupees Thirty-Eight Thousand) and
payment having been made in 1979 of Rs.55,000/-
(Rupees Fifty-Five Thousand) does not indicate that
it was undervalued as there has been a marked
increase in the valuation from Rs.38,000/- (Rupees
Thirty-Eight Thousand) to Rs.1,10,000/- (Rupees One
Lakh Ten Thousand) and payment made of 50% i.e.,

Rs.55,000/- (Rupees Fifty Five Thousand), in 1979,
that too in a family settlement between ACK and RKK
cannot be labelled a totally sham consideration.
21.
Further, the appellants having enjoyed
possession right from the time the property was
purchased and even letting out the premises to
tenants and collecting/taking rent from the tenants
without any claim raised at any point of time, would
also support the claim that ACK had not claimed any
right or title over any portion of the Kamla Nagar
property during his lifetime. Had that been the
case, there was no occasion for him not to take or
lay a claim to a 50% share in the rent given by the
tenants, which is clear from the finding recorded by
the High Court that there were tenants also in the
Kamla Nagar property; but the respondents never
claimed any share in such proceeds/ rent from the
tenants. The issue was agitated for the very first
time only by filing the suit before the Trial Court
in 1983.

22.
Thus, on an overall circumspection of the facts
and circumstances and upon going through the records
and submissions with the aid of learned counsel
appearing for the respective parties, the Impugned
Judgment inasmuch as it relates to the Kamla Nagar
property viz. RFA No.439 of 2008 stands set aside
and the Judgment and Decree passed by the the
Additional District Judge, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi
in Suit No.70/06/83 dated 28.07.2008 relating to the
Kamla Nagar property stands restored. It is further
held that the appellants are the exclusive owners of
the Kamla Nagar property described hereinbefore. The
Impugned Judgment insofar as it relates to RFA
No.483 of 2008 is upheld. Accordingly, Civil Appeal
No.1591 of 2020 is allowed and is dismissed. Interim order(s) of status quo
stand vacated. Registry to draw up the Decree Sheet
accordingly.
23.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.

24.
IA No.59678 of 2023 for Early Hearing preferred
by the appellants in 
does not subsist for consideration in view of the
aforesaid and is dismissed as infructuous.

[VIKRAM NATH]

[AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI
MARCH 19,2024