IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
(@ ) 
 
PUNEET SABHARWAL 

…Appellant (s) 
 
Versus 
 
CBI...Respondent(s) 
 
WITH 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
(@ ) 
 
R.C. SABHARWAL 

…Appellant (s) 
 
Versus 
 
CBI...Respondent(s) 
 
JUDGMENT 

K.V. Viswanathan, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 

2. 
The present appeals call in question the correctness of the 
judgment of the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi dated 
01.12.2020 in and. These proceedings 
in the High Court, in turn, challenged the Order on charge 
dated 21.02.2006, as well as the charges framed on 
28.02.2006, by the Special Judge, Delhi. While the charge 
against the appellant Puneet Sabharwal was under Section 109 
IPC read with Section 13(1)(e) and 13(2) of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988, the charge against appellant R.C. 
Sabharwal was under Section 13(1)(e) read with 13(2) of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. In substance, the charge 
was 
that 
appellant 
R.C. 
Sabharwal 
owned 
assets 
disproportionate to known sources of income and the appellant 
Puneet Sabharwal, son of R.C. Sabharwal, has abetted him in 
the commission of the said offence. The High Court, by the 
impugned order, dismissed the petitions. Aggrieved, the 
appellants are before us. 

Brief Facts: 
3. 
On 23.08.1995, based on source information, the Anti-
Corruption Bureau, New Delhi, District New Delhi registered 
a First Information Report in Crime No.RC-74(A)/95-DLI. 
4. 
On 28.08.1995, a charge-sheet was filed against both the 
appellants. In substance, the allegations, as set out in the 
charge-sheet, were as follows: 

That the appellant R.C. Sabharwal was Additional 
Chief Architect in New Delhi Municipal Corporation; 

That while being posted in various capacities from the 
year 1968 onwards, he had amassed huge assets which 
are disproportionate to his known sources of income; 

That the assets were acquired by R.C. Sabharwal 
either in his name or in the name of his family 
members. Details of the assets were set out. 

The check period was taken from the date when the 
appellant R.C. Sabharwal joined as an Assistant 

Architect in NDMC i.e. 20.08.1968 to the date of the 
search i.e. 23.08.1995. 

That the total income of the appellant R.C. Sabharwal 
from salary was Rs. 10,00,042/-. Detailed breakup of 
salary for the years was given. The income from the 
salary of his spouse was Rs. 8,72,249.42 

Apart from the above salaried income, income 
accruing to the accused R.C. Sabharwal from several 
enterprises, companies and trusts was also set out. 
Rental income was also mentioned as well as income 
from insurance policies and income 
interest. After computing all the income, it was 
mentioned that the total income was of Rs. 
1,23,18,091/- 

Expenditure was provided to the extent of Rs. 
18,23,108/-. Movable assets to the tune of Rs. 
4,25,450/- was mentioned. It was also alleged that 
there were bank balances in the name of appellant 

R.C. Sabharwal and in the name of his family 
members to the tune of Rs. 82,63,417/-. 

As far as the immovable assets are concerned, a set of 
twenty-four properties were set out which were in all 
valued at Rs. 2,27,94,907/-. 

That the appellant R.C. Sabharwal could not 
satisfactorily account for the assets disproportionate 
to his known sources of income. 

That the appellant R.C. Sabharwal was a party to the 
criminal conspiracy with his son, being appellant 
Puneet Sabharwal, who had received Rs. 79 lakhs 
through encashment of Special Bearer Bonds and he 
facilitated commission of the offence as a conspirator. 

That in furtherance of the said criminal conspiracy, 
assets were acquired by R.C. Sabharwal in the name 
of M/s Morni Devi Brij Lal Trust, M/s Morni 
Merchants and other firms in which the sole 
beneficiary was appellant Puneet Sabharwal, his son. 

It was further alleged that appellant R.C. Sabharwal 
dealt with all the financial matters of the said 
trusts/firms. 

It was concluded that a criminal case was made out 
against appellant R.C. Sabharwal and Puneet 
Sabharwal for offence punishable under 120-B IPC 
r/w 5(2) r/w 5(1)(e) of PC Act, 1947 corresponding to 
13(2) r/w 13(1)(e) of PC Act, 1988. 

Further, it was concluded that against R.C. Sabharwal 
a case under Section 5(2) r/w 5(1)(e) of PC Act, 1947 
corresponding to 13(2) r/w 13(1)(e) of PC Act, 1988 
was made out for possession of assets worth Rs. 
2,05,63,341/- disproportionate to his known sources 
of income. 
Order on Charge: 
5. 
On 21.02.2006, the Special Judge pronounced an order on 
charge after elaborately discussing the principles governing 

discharge. The learned Judge rendered the following findings 
in the order on charge: 

The expression “known sources of income” can only 
have reference to the sources known to the 
prosecution; 

The prosecution cannot be expected to know the firms 
of the accused persons; 

The income from firms of the accused persons would 
be within the special knowledge of the accused, under 
Section 106 of the Evidence Act and it was for the 
accused to ‘satisfactorily account’ for the charge of 
owing disproportionate assets, which can only be 
discharged at trial; 

Insofar as the appellant Puneet Sabharwal is 
concerned, reliance was placed on the statement of 
Chartered Accountant Anil Mehta to the effect that 
the properties were purchased benami by appellant 
R.C. Sabharwal in the name of his son and sister; 

The learned judge relied upon P. Nallamal v. State, 
(1996), wherein this Court held that a non-
public servant can be tried in the same trial along with 
the public servant for abetment of offence under 
Section 13(1)(e) r/w 13(2) of the PC Act. 

There was sufficient material to show the existence of 
grave suspicion the material placed 
before the Court regarding involvement of both the 
appellants for commission of offences under Section 
109 IPC read with Section 13(1)(e) r/w 13(2) of the 
PC Act as far as the appellant Puneet Sabharwal was 
concerned and under Section 13(1)(e) read with 13(2) 
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 as far as 
R.C. Sabharwal was concerned. 
Charges: 
6. 
Thereafter, by order dated 28.2.2006, charges were also 
framed. For the sake of convenience, the charges against both 
the appellants are set out hereinbelow: 

“CHARGE NO. 1 
That you being a public servant employed as Additional 
Chief Architect, NDMC, New Delhi, during the period 
20.8.1968 to 23.08.1995 were found in possession of assets 
to the tune of Rs. 3,10,58,324/- as against your income and 
that of your family members Income, to the tune of Rs. 
1,23,18,091/- and expenditure of Rs. 18,23,108/-and you 
were found in possession of total assets to the tune of Rs. 
2,05,63,341/- which were disproportionate to your known 
sources of income and which you could not satisfactorily 
account for and thereby you committed an offence U/s. 
13(1)(e) punishable U/s. 13(2) of the PC Act, 1988 and 
within my cognizance. 
And I hereby direct you to be tried by this court for the said 
offence. 
 
CHARGE NO. 2 
That while your father Shri R.C. Sabharwal being a public 
servant employed as Additional Chief Architect, NDMC, 
New Delhi during the period 20.08.1968 to 23.08.1995 you 
intentionally aided him in commission of the offence U/s 
13(1)(e) read with 13(2) of the PC Act as he was found in 
possession of assets to the tune of Rs. 3,10,58,324/- as 
against his income and that of his family members income, 
to the tune of Rs. 1,23,18,091/- and expenditure of Rs. 
18,23,108/- and he was found in possession of total assets 
of 
the 
tune 
of 
Rs. 
2,05,63,341/, 
which 
were 
disproportionate to his known sources of income and 
which he could not satisfactorily account for and thereby 
you committed an offence, of abetment U/s 109 IPC read 
with 13(1)(e) and Sec. 13(2) of the PC Act, 1988 and 
within my cognizance. 
And hereby direct you to be tried by this court for the said 
offence.” 
[emphasis supplied] 

Orders on the income tax front: 
7. 
After the order of the Trial Court, both with regard to the order 
on charge and the framing of charges, and before the High 
Court disposed of the Petitions before it, leading up to the 
impugned order, certain developments took place on the 
income tax front. 
8. 
The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal pronounced its judgment 
on 31.08.2007 in appeals and cross appeals filed by the 
assessees [which included the Appellants herein] and the 
department, with regard to the reopening of the assessments 
for the years 1989-1990 to 1995-1996 and 1997-1998 to 2001-
2002. 
9. 
Earlier, the Assessing Officer had reopened the assessment for 
Assessment Year 1996-1997 and made certain additions and 
deletions in the hands of the Appellants herein and other 
assessees. Thereafter, the CIT (Appeals) had upheld the 
validity of the reopening while approving or disapproving 
some of the additions and deletions made by the Assessing 

Officer. However, the Tribunal had, on 07.03.2005, held that 
the reopening of the assessment for the Assessment Year 
1996-1997 was not justified since the conditions precedent for 
reopening the assessment were not fulfilled. Consequently, the 
issues regarding the merits of additions or deletions were not 
adjudicated by the Tribunal in the said Order. 
10. However, the Tribunal in its order dated 31.08.2007, while 
hearing appeals and cross-appeals concerning the reopening of 
assessment for the years 1989-1990 to 1995-1996 and 1997-
1998 to 2001-2002, found that materials did exist for 
reopening the assessment for the said assessment years. 
Thereafter, it examined the merits of the additions made on 
substantive basis and additions denied, in the years under 
consideration in the hands of appellant R.C. Sabharwal. It 
noted that the Tribunal was required to examine the additions 
and deletions carried out by the Assessing Officer and the CIT 
(Appeals) in the assessment year 1996-1997 because, in the 
view of the Tribunal, the issue of additions in all the other 

years under consideration flowed from the base assessment 
year of 1996-1997. 
11. While considering the various additions and deletions, the 
Tribunal inter alia considered the addition carried out by the 
Assessing Officer [which was thereafter deleted by the CIT 
(Appeals)] in the hands of the appellant R.C. Sabharwal herein 
with respect to income of M/s Morni Devi Brij Lal Trust. The 
Assessing Officer had justified these additions on the grounds 
that: 

The source of investment made by the founders of the 
said trust being Smt. Morni Devi and Sh. Brij Lal was 
not explained. 

The special bearer bonds which were encashed in the 
account of the said Trust were not out of investments 
from the Trust since the said bonds were purchased 
prior to the formation of the Trust itself. Some other 
person had invested the amount and encashed it in the 
hands of the trust. 

The founder of the trust was not shown to have the 
income necessary to purchase the said bonds. 
12. The CIT (Appeals) had deleted these additions. In examining 
this issue and approving the said deletion, the Tribunal 
rendered the following findings: 

The Appellant R.C. Sabharwal had no obligation to 
explain the source of investment of the founders of the 
trust being Smt. Morni Devi and Sh. Brij Lal. 

The Trust itself had been filing its return of income 
since it came into existence and had been assessed 
separately. No evidence was produced to show that 
the assessee was the benami owner of the trust. 

As regards the credits representing deposits of Special 
Bearer Bonds, relying upon Section 3 of the Special 
Bearer Bonds (Immunities and Exemptions) Act, 
1981 it was held that no person who has subscribed to 
or has otherwise acquired Special Bearer Bonds shall 
be required to disclose, for any purpose whatsoever, 

the nature and source of acquisition of such bonds and 
that complete immunity has been granted to the bond 
holders. The presumption of the Assessing Officer 
that the bearer bonds were acquired by the trust was 
held to be not correct; 

Reference is made by the Tribunal to the findings of 
the CIT (Appeals) that the special bearer bonds were 
tendered for encashment by the trust and that 
Assessing Officer exceeded his jurisdiction in making 
an enquiry and calling upon the trust to explain the 
nature and source of acquisition of such bonds. 

Reference is made by the Tribunal to the findings of 
the CIT (Appeals) that the trust would be a person 
within the meaning of the Special Bearer Bonds 
(Immunities and Exemptions) Act, 1981. 

The Tribunal then quotes the findings of the CIT 
(Appeals) whereunder it was held that once the 
assessment has been made and the department has 

accepted the existence of the trust it could not be 
reversed without bringing on record any adverse 
material. The onus was on the department to show that 
the trust was benami and there was no evidence in that 
regard. 

The Tribunal then quotes the findings of the CIT 
(Appeals) whereunder it was concluded that the 
Assessing Officer had not been able to prove that the 
Trust was benami and that the income of the trust 
belonged to R.C. Sabharwal. Holding so, the additions 
to the tune of Rs. 8,14,230/- was deleted. No further 
comments were given by the Tribunal in regard to this 
addition/deletion. 
13. Thereafter, on the issue of appellant Puneet Sabharwal having 
received funds from the Morni Devi Brij Lal Trust which was 
held to belong to appellant R.C. Sabharwal, it was found that 
since Morni Devi Brij Lal Trust was a separate entity and since 
the appellant Puneet Sabharwal was running its business, its 

income could not be added in the hands of the appellant R.C. 
Sabharwal. 
The 
Tribunal 
also 
considered 
the 
additions/deletions with regard to various other firms and 
assessees which we do not seek to set out herein for the 
purposes of brevity. 
14. Ultimately, only on the aspect of deposits in the joint bank 
accounts of minors, so far as it fell within the limitation period, 
the Tribunal restored the matter back to the Assessing Officer 
for deciding the issue afresh and the appeal of the revenue was 
allowed to that limited extent. Holding so, the appeals were 
disposed of. Consequently, on 30.12.2009, the Assessing 
Officer passed an assessment order accepting the explanation 
of the assessee on the aspect remitted and the income of the 
assessee Puneet Sabharwal was fixed at Rs. 67,550/-. 
Proceedings in the High Court: 
15. These orders which came subsequent to the orders of the Trial 
Court were placed before the High Court. It was contended 
that in view of the orders made by the Income Tax Appellate 

Tribunal in the reopening proceedings, which reopening was 
based on the search conducted by the CBI, there is absolutely 
no ground to proceed with the criminal trial. It was further 
argued, with respect to the appellant Puneet Sabharwal, that he 
was a minor for a large portion of the check period and 
therefore could not be made an accused. 
16. Repelling the contentions, the High Court held as follows: 

Simply because for a large part of the period of 
investigation, the appellant Puneet Sabharwal was a 
minor, would not by itself be a reason to disregard the 
fact that at least for the seven years of the 
investigation period he was a major; 

Under Section 3(2) of Special Bearer Bonds 
(Immunities and Exemptions) Act, 1981, the 
immunities under the Act are inapplicable to offences 
committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act or 
similar offences; 

Prosecution has sought to rely upon statements of 
several witnesses; 

In State of Karnataka v. Selvi J. Jayalalitha & Ors. 
(2017), this Court had held that income tax 
assessment orders are apropos tax liability on income 
and they do not necessarily attest to the lawfulness of 
the sources of income; 

That what was relevant was whether there was a 
strong suspicion that the accused has committed the 
offence and that in the view of the High Court there 
was indeed a case for trial. Holding so, the Writ 
Petitions were dismissed. 
Contentions: 
17. Before us Mr. Mukul Rohatgi and Mr. Siddharth Agarwal, 
learned senior counsel for the appellants reiterated the 
contentions raised before the High Court. 
18. Insofar as the appellant Puneet Sabharwal was concerned, it 
was contended as follows: 

That the High Court erred in holding that merely 
because for a large part of the period of investigation, 
the appellant was a minor, it would not be by itself a 
reason to disregard the fact that for at least seven years 
of the investigation period he was a major; 

That the courts below erred in, without more, 
endorsing the allegations against the appellant(s) 
solely on account of being named as a beneficiary in 
the trust deed of M/s Morni Devi Brij Lal Trust. 
Further, the Court erred in endorsing the allegation 
that the trust was holding benami properties of which 
appellant R.C. Sabharwal was a beneficial owner; 

That since out of the twenty years of the check period 
except 7 years of the said period the appellant Puneet 
Sabharwal was a minor, it belied logic as to how the 
said appellant could have conspired with his father. 
This indicated gross abuse of process of law. 

That the charge as framed indicates that criminal 
proceedings have been saddled against appellant 
Puneet Sabharwal merely by virtue of being his 
father’s son and none of the ingredients under Section 
109 of the Indian Penal Code were attracted; 

That the High Court erred in not taking into account 
the exoneration of the appellant’s father by the 
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal; that the Income Tax 
Appellate Tribunal, by its order of 31.08.2007, 
rendered a categorical finding that the father did not 
hold the properties of the said trust as benami and 
even the limited issue on which the Income Tax 
Appellate Tribunal remanded the matter, by the order 
of 30.12.2009, the assessment officer found the 
deposits to be income of the son. 
19. Insofar as the appellant R.C. Sabharwal is concerned, the 
argument was substantially on the basis of the Income Tax 

Appellate Tribunal order of 31.08.2007. The contentions were 
as follows: 

The order of Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 
categorically held that income arising from properties 
of various entities were wrongly added to the income 
of the appellant; 

The appellant was not the owner of those entities and 
consequently the properties and money held by those 
entities could not be held to be under the ownership 
of the appellant R.C. Sabharwal; 

The reassessment for thirteen years was carried out on 
the complaint of CBI itself; 

The courts below misapplied the judgment of this 
Court in Selvi J. Jayalalitha (supra) and failed to 
notice the distinguishing feature namely that, in the 
present case, it was not a case of reliance on income 
tax return but the returns which were subjected to an 
inquisition. 

The High Court exercising power under Article 226, 
227 of the Constitution of India and Section 482 of 
Cr.P.C. has power to look into material placed by the 
accused in arriving at its conclusion for discharge. 
20. For both the appellants, reliance was placed on Radheshyam 
Kejriwal v. State of West Bengal & Anr., (2011), 
Ashoo Surendranath Tewari v. CBI & Anr. (2020) and J. Sekar v. Directorate of Enforcement, (2022) to contend that where there is exoneration on merits 
in a civil adjudication, criminal prosecution on the same set of 
facts and circumstances cannot be allowed to continue since 
the underlying principle is that the standard of proof in 
criminal cases is higher. 
21. The submissions of the appellants were strongly refuted by 
Mr. K.M. Nataraj, learned Additional Solicitor General. 
Learned ASG contended as follows: 

 That at the stage of framing of charges what is 
relevant is material as is available on the date of 
framing of the charge; 

That a court of law is not required to appreciate 
evidence at the stage of framing of charges to 
conclude whether the materials produced are 
sufficient or not for convicting the accused; 

That it was settled law that probative value of material 
on record cannot be gone into at the stage of framing 
of charges since the court was not conducting a mini 
trial; 

Relying on Sheoraj Singh Ahlawat & Ors. v. State of 
U.P. & Anr., (2013), it was contended 
that all that has to be seen is whether there is a ground 
for presuming that the offence has been committed 
and not whether there was ground for convicting the 
accused; 

That even a strong suspicion founded on material 
which leads the court to form a presumptive opinion 
as to the existence of the factual ingredients 
constituting the offence would justify the framing of 
the charge. 

Reliance placed on the order of the Income Tax 
Appellate Tribunal dated 21.08.2007 is subsequent to 
the framing of charges and even otherwise cannot be 
the basis for the discharge of the accused; 

That the criminal prosecution does not depend upon 
the order passed by the Income Tax Appellate 
Tribunal and, most importantly, the prosecution was 
not and could not have been a party before the Income 
Tax Authorities and the ITAT; 

That the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal order can be 
at best, if permissible in law, used as a piece of 
evidence and the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 
order will not have the effect of nullifying the order 

framing charges by a criminal court. Reliance has 
been placed on Selvi J. Jayalalitha (supra), 
Vishwanath Chaturvedi (3) v. Union of India & Ors., 
(2007) and State of T.N. v. N. Suresh 
Rajan & Ors., (2014) to contend that the 
findings of the Income Tax Authorities are not 
binding on a criminal court to readily accept the 
legality or lawfulness of the source of income. 

The power to quash a proceeding and nip the same in 
the bud has to be exercised with great caution and 
circumspection. 
So contending, the learned ASG prayed that no case has been 
made out to set aside the order on charge and the charges and 
the appeals deserve to be dismissed. 
Question: 
22. Under the above circumstances, the question that arises for 
consideration is: Whether the courts below were justified in 

refusing to quash and set aside the order on charge dated 
21.02.2006 and the charges as framed on 28.02.2006? 
Analysis:- 
23. Having heard learned counsels for the parties and perused the 
records, we are of the opinion that the appellants have not 
made out a case for interference with the order on charge 
dated 21.02.2006 and the order of framing charge dated 
28.02.2006. We say so for the following reasons. 
24. The case of the prosecution is that the appellant R.C. 
Sabharwal, the father of appellant Puneet Sabharwal, owned 
assets to the tune of Rs. 2,05,63,341/- and that this was 
disproportionate to his known sources of income which was 
computed at Rs. 1,23,18,091/-. The allegation against the son 
Puneet Sabharwal was that he had received Rs. 79 lakhs 
through encashment of Special Bearer Bonds and he facilitated 
commission of offence inasmuch as assets were acquired by 
appellant R.C. Sabharwal in the name of M/s Morni Devi Brij 
Lal Trust, M/s Morni Merchants and other firms in which the 

sole beneficiary was appellant Puneet Sabharwal. The order 
framing charge invokes Section 109 IPC to be read with 
Section 13(1)(e) read with Section 13(2) of the PC Act against 
Puneet Sabharwal. 
25. The main plank of the arguments of the appellants is that the 
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal order dated 31.08.2007, has, 
while allowing the appeals of the assessees and dismissing the 
cross appeals of the department (except to a small extent which 
too got settled with the assessment order of 30.12.2009), held 
that no case was made out to justify that the income and assets 
of the entities such as the Morni Lal Brij Trust were to be 
added to the income of R.C. Sabharwal. In view of the same, 
it is argued that there is no case for prosecuting them for own-
ing disproportionate assets. 
26. It is argued that per se the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 
order should result in quashment of proceedings and the 
discharge of the accused. Additionally, it is argued that on the 
ground that analogous tax proceedings have ended in favour of 

the appellants, a criminal prosecution on identical facts cannot 
continue. For this, reliance is placed on the judgments 
mentioned hereinabove. 
27. We have already discussed the substance of the Income Tax 
Appellate Tribunal order of 31.08.2007. In law, the 
submissions of the appellants ought to fail on both the counts 
as there is no basis to nip the criminal prosecution in this case 
in its bud. 
28. As far as the first argument about the criminal proceedings 
losing its efficacy in view of the Income Tax Appellate 
Tribunal order of 31.08.2007 is concerned, we accept the 
submission of the respondent CBI that the prior rulings of the 
court ending with the judgment in Selvi J. Jayalalitha (supra) 
have clearly concluded the issue against the appellants. 
29. This 
Court, 
in 
Selvi 
J. 
Jayalalitha 
(supra), 
was 
concerned with an appeal against an order of acquittal passed 
in a case of disproportionate assets under Section 13 of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act. The accused persons therein had 

sought to place reliance on income tax returns and income tax 
assessment orders. In that context the Court had concluded 
that income tax returns and orders are not by themselves 
conclusive proof that they are lawful sources of income under 
Section 13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act and that 
independent evidence to corroborate the same would be 
required. The Court held: 
“188. In Anantharam Veerasinghaiah & Co. v. CIT, 1980 
Supp SCC 13: 1980 SCC (Tax) 274], the return filed by 
the petitioner assessee, who was an Abkari contractor, was 
not accepted by the ITO as amongst others, excess 
expenditure over the disclosed available cash was 
noticeable and further several deposits had been made 
in the names of others. The assessee's explanation that the 
excess expenditure was met from the amounts deposited 
with him by other shopkeepers but were not entered in his 
book, was not accepted and penalty proceedings were 
taken out against him holding that the items of cash deficit 
and cash deposit represented concealed income resulting 
from suppressed yield and low selling rates mentioned in 
the books. The Appellate Tribunal, however, allowed 
the appeal of the assessee and set aside the penalty order. 
The High Court reversed [CIT v. Anantharam 
Veerasingaiah & Co.,: (1975) 
99 ITR 544] the decision of the Appellate Tribunal and the 
matter reached the Supreme Court. 
189. It was held that as per Section 271(1)(c) of the Income 
Tax Act, 1961, penalty can be imposed in case where any 

person has concealed the particulars of his income or has 
deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars of such 
income. The related proceeding was quasi-criminal in 
nature and the burden lay on the Revenue to establish that 
the disputed amount represented income and that the 
assessee had consciously concealed the particulars of 
his income or had deliberately furnished inaccurate 
particulars. The burden of proof in penalty proceedings 
varied from that involved in assessment proceedings and 
a finding in assessment proceedings that a particular 
receipt was income cannot automatically be adopted as a 
finding to that effect in the penalty proceedings. In the 
penalty proceedings, the taxing authority was bound to 
consider the matter afresh on the materials before it, to 
ascertain that whether a particular amount is a revenue 
receipt. It was observed that no doubt the fact that the 
assessment year contains a finding that the disputed 
amount represents income constitutes good evidence in the 
penalty proceedings, but the finding in the assessment 
proceedings cannot be regarded as conclusive for the 
purpose of penalty proceedings. Before a penalty can be 
imposed, the entirety of the circumstances must be taken 
into account and must lead to the conclusion that the 
disputed amount represented income and that the assessee 
had consciously concealed the particulars of his income or 
had deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars. 
190. The decision is to convey that though the IT returns 
and the orders passed in the IT proceedings in the instant 
case recorded the income of the accused concerned as 
disclosed in their returns, in view of the charge levelled 
against them, such returns and the orders in the IT 
proceedings would not by themselves establish that such 
income had been from lawful source as contemplated in 
the Explanation to Section 13(1)(e) of the PC Act, 1988 
and that independent evidence would be required to 
account for the same. 
191. Though considerable exchanges had been made in 
course of the arguments, centring around Section 43 of the 

Evidence Act, 1872, we are of the comprehension that 
those need not be expatiated in details. Suffice it to state 
that even assuming that the income tax returns, the 
proceedings in connection therewith and the decisions 
rendered therein are relevant and admissible in evidence 
as well, nothing as such, turns thereon definitively as those 
do not furnish any guarantee or authentication of the 
lawfulness of the source(s) of income, the pith of the 
charge levelled against the respondents. It is the plea of 
the defence that the income tax returns and orders, 
while proved by the accused persons had not been 
objected to by the prosecution and further it (prosecution) 
as 
well 
had 
called 
in 
evidence 
the 
income 
tax returns/orders and thus, it cannot object to the 
admissibility of the records produced by the defence. To 
reiterate, even if such returns and orders are admissible, 
the probative value would depend on the nature of the 
information furnished, the findings recorded in the orders 
and having a bearing on the charge levelled. In any view 
of the matter, however, such returns and orders would not 
ipso facto either conclusively prove or disprove the charge 
and can at best be pieces of evidence which have to be 
evaluated along with the other materials on record. 
Noticeably, none of the respondents has been examined on 
oath in the case in hand. Further, the income tax returns 
relied upon by the defence as well as the orders passed in 
the proceedings pertaining thereto have been filed/passed 
after 
the 
charge-sheet 
had 
been 
submitted. 
Significantly, there is a charge of conspiracy and abetment 
against the accused persons. In the overall perspective 
therefore neither the income tax returns nor the 
orders passed in the proceedings relatable thereto, either 
definitively attest the lawfulness of the sources of income 
of the accused persons or are of any avail to them to 
satisfactorily account the disproportionateness of their 
pecuniary resources and properties as mandated by 
Section 13(1)(e) of the Act. 
 
199. The import of this decision is that in the tax regime, 
the legality or illegality of the transactions generating 

profit or loss is inconsequential qua the issue whether the 
income is from a lawful source or not. The scrutiny in an 
assessment proceeding is directed only to quantify the 
taxable income and the orders passed therein do not certify 
or authenticate that the source(s) thereof to be lawful and 
are thus of no significance vis-à-vis a charge 
under Section 13(1)(e) of the Act. 
200. In Vishwanath Chaturvedi (3) v. Union of India, 
(2007): (2007) 2 SCC (Cri) 302], a 
writ petition was filed under Article 32 of the Constitution 
of India seeking an appropriate writ for directing the 
Union of India to take appropriate action to prosecute R-2 
to R-5 under the 1988 Act for having amassed 
assets disproportionate to the known sources of income by 
misusing their power and authority. The respondents were 
the then sitting Chief Minister of U.P. and his relatives. 
Having noticed that the basic issue was with regard to 
alleged investments and sources of such investments, 
Respondents 2 to 5 were ordered by this Court to file 
copies of income tax and wealth tax returns of the relevant 
assessment years which was done. It was pointed out on 
behalf of the petitioner that the net assets of the family 
though were Rs 9,22,72,000, as per the calculation made 
by the official valuer, the then value of the net assets came 
to be Rs 24 crores. It was pleaded on behalf of the 
respondents that income tax returns had already been filed 
and the matters were pending before the authorities 
concerned and all the payments were made by 
cheques, and thus the allegation levelled against them 
were baseless. It was observed that the minuteness of the 
details furnished by the parties and the income tax returns 
and assessment orders, sale deeds, etc. were necessary to 
be carefully looked into and analysed only by an 
independent agency with the assistance of chartered 
accountants and other accredited engineers and valuers of 
the property.It was observed that the Income Tax 
Department was concerned only with the source of income 
and whether the tax was paid or not and, therefore, only 
an 
independent 
agency 
or 
CBI 
could, 

on 
court 
direction, 
determine 
the 
question 
of 
disproportionate assets. CBI was thus directed to conduct 
a preliminary enquiry into the assets of all the respondents 
and to take further action in the matter after scrutinising 
as to whether a case was made out or not. 
201. This decision is to emphasise that submission of 
income tax returns and the assessments orders passed 
thereon, would not constitute a foolproof defence against 
a charge of acquisition of assets disproportionate to 
the known lawful sources of income as contemplated 
under the PC Act and that further scrutiny/analysis thereof 
is imperative to determine as to whether the offence as 
contemplated by the PC Act is made out or not.” 
[Emphasis Supplied] 
 
30. The appellants herein have contended that the decision in J. 
Jayalalitha (supra) would not be applicable to the present 
case since, according to them, that decision involved only an 
assessment order, while the present case involves the findings 
by an Appellate Tribunal after an inquisition into the issues 
involved. The Appellants herein seek to rely on Paragraph 309 
of the decision in J. Jayalalitha (supra) in support of the 
same. Paragraph 309 is set-out hereunder: 
“309. In contradistinction, the High Court quantified the 
amount of gifts to be Rs 1.5 crores principally referring to the 
income tax returns and the orders of the authorities passed 
thereon. It did notice that there had been a delay in the 
submission of the income tax returns but accepted the plea of 

the defence acting on the orders of the Income Tax 
Authorities. It seems to have been convinced as well by the 
contention that there was a practice of offering gifts to 
political leaders on their birthdays in the State. Not only is 
the ultimate conclusion of the High Court, dehors any 
independent assessment of the evidence to overturn the 
categorical finding of the trial court to the contrary, no 
convincing or persuasive reason is also forthcoming. This 
assumes significance also in view of the state of law that the 
findings of the Income Tax Authorities/forums are not 
binding on a criminal court to readily accept the legality or 
lawfulness of the source of income as mentioned in the 
income tax returns by an assessee without any semblance of 
inquisition into the inherent merit of the materials on record 
relatable thereto. Not only this aspect was totally missed by 
the High Court, no attempt seems to have been made by it to 
appraise the evidence adduced by the parties in this regard, to 
come to a self-contained and consummate determination.” 
 
31. These submissions do not appeal to us for the following 
reasons: 

First of all, the inquisition mentioned in Paragraph 
309 of the said decision, is the inquisition to be made 
by the criminal court. That is clear from a complete 
reading of the above-said paragraph. In that case, the 
High Court, while acquitting the accused, had merely 
gone by the income tax records which were produced 
by the accused persons. However, the Trial Court had 

independently examined the issue and had not 
mechanically gone by the income tax records. It was 
while commenting on this that this Court said an 
inquisition ought to have been made on the material. 

Secondly, this Court in J. Jayalalitha (supra), before 
arriving at a conclusion regarding the probative value 
of the income tax returns, has examined in detail the 
previous decisions of this Court where there were not 
only assessment orders but also decisions of the 
Appellate Tribunal and the High Court. It is only after 
considering this aspect that the Court laid down that 
the Income Tax Returns and Orders passed in IT 
Proceedings are not conclusive proof. 

Thirdly, this Court has categorically held that while 
income tax returns/orders may be admissible as 
evidence, the probative value of the same would 
depend on the nature of the information furnished and 

findings recorded in the order, and would not ipso 
facto either conclusively prove or disprove a charge. 

Fourthly, it is important to note that the decision in J. 
Jayalalitha (supra) was in a matter involving a full-
fledged trial and the Court was hearing an appeal 
against an Order of acquittal passed by the High 
Court. The Court also noted that income tax returns or 
orders could at best be evidences which have to be 
evaluated along with the other materials on record. 

This Court, in cases involving either discharge 
[State of Tamil Nadu v. N. Suresh Rajan & Ors. 
(2014) Paragraph 32.3] or quash [CBI & 
Anr. v. Thommandru Hannah Vijayalakshmi & 
Anr. (2021) Paragraph 63-64] has noted 
that Income Tax Returns are not conclusive proof 
which can be relied upon either to quash the criminal 
proceeding or to discharge the accused persons. 

32. Therefore, in the present case, the probative value of the 
Orders of the Income Tax Authorities, including the Order of 
the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and the subsequent 
Assessment Orders, are not conclusive proof which can be 
relied upon for discharge of the accused persons. These 
orders, their findings, and their probative value, are a matter 
for a full-fledged trial. In view of the same, the High Court, 
in the present case, has rightly not discharged the appellants 
based on the Orders of the Income Tax Authorities. 
33. 
Insofar as the submission that where there is exoneration in a 
civil adjudication, criminal prosecution on the same set of 
facts and circumstances cannot be allowed to continue is 
concerned, the same is also without merit as far as the present 
case is concerned. 
34. 
The appellants herein have placed reliance on the decisions of 
this Court in Radheyshyam Kejriwal (supra), Ashoo Suren-
dranath Tewari (supra) and J. Sekar (supra) to argue that 
once there is an exoneration on merits in a civil adjudication, 

a criminal prosecution on the same set of facts and circum-
stances cannot be allowed to continue. In our opinion, none 
of the above-referred decisions are applicable to the facts of 
the present case. 
35. 
In Radheshyam Kejriwal (supra), this Court was concerned 
with a fact situation where the Petitioner therein was being 
prosecuted under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 
for payments made by him in Indian currency in exchange for 
foreign currency without any general or specific exemption 
from the Reserve Bank of India. The Enforcement Directorate 
had commenced both an adjudication proceeding and a 
prosecution under the provisions of the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act, 1973. It so transpired that the Adjudicating 
Officer found that no documentary evidence was available to 
prove the foundational factum of the Petitioner therein 
entering into the alleged transactions which fell foul of the Act 
and thereafter directed that the proceedings be dropped. The 
question which fell for the consideration before this Court was 

whether the result of this adjudication proceeding would lead 
to exoneration of the Petitioner in the criminal prosecution. 
36. 
In this background, this Court noticed that the adjudication 
proceedings under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 
1973 involved an adjudication on whether a person had 
committed a contravention of any provisions of the Act. It is 
in this context, that the Court went on to hold that where the 
allegation in an adjudication proceeding and proceeding for 
prosecution is identical and the exoneration in the former is on 
merits i.e. that there is no contravention of the provisions of 
the Act, then the trial of person concerned would be an abuse 
of process of the Court. 
37. 
The decision in Radheyshyam (supra) was in a fact situation 
where the adjudicatory and criminal proceedings were being 
commenced by the same authority in exercise of powers 
under the same Act. Further, as this Court had noted, the civil 
adjudication proceedings related to an adjudication as to 
whether there was contravention of provisions of the Act and 

the Rules thereunder, which had an impact on the prosecution 
under the Act. However, in the present case, the appellants 
herein are being prosecuted under the provisions of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act while they seek to rely on an 
exoneration under the Income Tax Act. The scope of 
adjudication in both of these proceedings are vastly different. 
The authority which conducted the income tax proceedings 
and the authority conducting the prosecution is completely 
different (CBI). The CBI was not and could not have been a 
party to the income tax proceeding. Given the said factual 
background, the decision in Radheyshyam (supra) is not 
applicable to the present case. 
38. 
In Ashoo Surendranath (supra), the Petitioner therein was 
working as a DGM at the Small Industries Development Bank 
of India while there was diversion of funds from the Bank. The 
allegation against the Petitioner therein was that he had shared 
the RTGS details for the account to which the amount was 
diverted, to another official who was the purported kingpin of 

the crime. The competent authority of the Bank had refused to 
provide a sanction for prosecution of the Petitioner therein, 
which was supported by the report of the Central Vigilance 
Commission. The question therefore posed before the Court 
was whether the report of the Central Vigilance Commission 
should lead to discharge of the Petitioner therein. 
39. 
In the above-mentioned factual background, this Court set-out 
the findings of the Central Vigilance Commission which had 
recorded that the e-mail sent by the Petitioner therein had 
clearly been sent to the principal accused for the purpose of 
verification since the latter was the officer for verification and 
that this showed that there was no role that the Petitioner 
played in perpetrating the offence. Thereafter, relying upon 
the decision in Radheyshyam (supra), the Court concluded 
that since the allegation has been found to be “not sustainable 
at all”, the criminal prosecution could not be continued. 
40. 
The decision in Ashoo Surendranath (supra) is not 
applicable to the present case because the decision in Ashoo 

Surendranath (supra) concerned a singular prosecution 
under the provisions of the Indian Penal Code where the 
sanctioning authority had, while denying sanction, recorded 
on merits that there was no evidence to support the 
prosecution case. In that context, the Court was of the opinion 
that a criminal proceeding could not be continued. However, 
in the present case, the charges were framed under the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, while the appellants seek to rely 
upon findings recorded by authorities under the Income Tax 
Act. The scope of adjudication in both the proceedings are 
markedly different and therefore the findings in the latter 
cannot be a ground for discharge of the Accused Persons in 
the former. The proceedings under the Income Tax Act and its 
evidentiary value remains a matter of trial and they cannot be 
considered as conclusive proof for discharge of an accused 
person. 
41. 
The appellants herein have further sought to place reliance on 
J. Sekar (supra) to argue that the letter of the Income-Tax 

Department was relied upon to quash prosecution under the 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002. In our opinion, 
this decision is again inapplicable to the present case. In J. 
Sekar (supra), the criminal proceedings had arisen based 
upon the information furnished by the Income Tax 
Department regarding recovery of unauthorized cash and 
other items during their search. It so transpired that the Income 
Tax Department accepted the explanation of the accused 
regarding the recovered cash which led to closure of the 
Income Tax proceedings. Thereafter, even the criminal 
proceedings led to filing of a closure report on the ground that 
no sufficient evidence was found for continuation of prosecu-
tion. The proceedings under the Prevention of Money Laun-
dering Act, being based on the Income Tax Department’s in-
formation after their search and the registration of FIR, were 
found to be unsustainable in view of no violation being found 
either by the Department or in the criminal proceeding. 

42. 
The decision in J. Sekar (supra) is therefore distinguishable 
on facts. In the abovementioned case, there was an 
exoneration by not only the Income Tax Department, to the 
effect that no case was made, there was also an exoneration in 
the criminal proceedings which involved the Scheduled 
Offence. In the present case, the proceedings under the Income 
Tax Act which are sought to be relied upon relate to the 
assessment of income of the assessee and not to the source of 
income and the allegation of disproportionate assets under the 
Prevention of Corruption Act. The said Orders cannot be the 
basis to abort the criminal proceeding in the present case. 
43. We are not to conduct a dress rehearsal of the trial at this stage. 
The tests applicable for a discharge are well settled by a catena 
of judgments passed by this Court. Even a strong suspicion 
founded on material on record which is ground for presuming 
the existence of factual ingredients of an offence would justify 
the framing of charge against an accused person [Onkar Nath 
Mishra & Ors. v. State (NCT of Delhi) & Anr. (2008) 
 
561 Paragraph 11]. The Court is only required to consider 
judicially whether the material warrants the framing of charge 
without blindly accepting the decision of the prosecution 
[State of Karnataka v. L. Muniswamy & Ors. (1977) Paragraph 10]. Applying these principles to the present 
case, we accept the submission of the learned ASG that the 
appellants have not made out the case to say that the charge is 
groundless. 
44. The other argument about the minority of the appellant Puneet 
Sabharwal also need not detain the Court since for the last 
seven years of the check period admittedly he was not a minor. 
All the defences are available for the appellants to be placed 
before the Trial Court. 
45. In view of what we have held hereinabove, we are not called 
upon to answer the argument raised by the learned ASG that 
the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal order being a document 
which has emerged subsequent to the framing of the charge, 
it cannot be taken into consideration at all. 

46. For all the above reasons, we find no merit in these appeals 
and the appeals are dismissed. The interim orders stand 
vacated. All pending applications stand closed. The trial has 
been pending for nearly 25 years. We direct that the trial be 
expeditiously concluded and, in any case, on or before 
31.12.2024. Needless to mention that the observations made 
herein are only in the context of the discharge proceedings. 

…...…………………J. 

 (Vikram Nath)..…………………J. 

 (K.V. Viswanathan) 
New Delhi; 
March 19, 2024.