IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Crl.) No(s). 3687 of 2020) 

SHIV PRASAD SEMWAL.….APPELLANT(S) 

VERSUS 

STATE OF UTTARAKHAND AND OTHERS …..RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. Leave granted. 
2. The appellant herein calls into question the order dated 20th 
July, 2020 passed by the learned Single Judge of High Court of 
Uttarakhand whereby 
preferred by the appellant for assailing FIR No. 31 of 2020 
registered for the offences punishable under Sections 153A, 500, 
501, 504, 34 and 120B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860(hereinafter 
being referred to as the ‘IPC’) at P.S. Muni Ki Reti, District Tehri 
Garhwal was dismissed. 

3. 
Shorn of details, the facts relevant and essential for disposal 
of the appeal are noted hereinbelow. 
4. 
The respondent No.3 Shri Rajeev Savara filed a complaint to 
the SHO P.S. Muni Ki Reti, District Tehri Garhwal alleging inter 
alia that he owns land admeasuring 1.196 hectares(approximately 
15.94 bighas) situated on National Highway No. 7 at village 
Singthali, Tehsil Narendra Nagar, District Tehri Garhwal, 
Uttarakhand. He had formed a trust by the name, Savara 
Foundation of which he is the founder and also Chairman of the 
Board of Trustees. He claimed to be an internationally recognised 
domain expert of pre-modern, modern visual and decorative Indian 
arts, having served on the advisory boards of various art galleries 
and museums. 
5. 
The complainant had planned a foundation stone laying 
ceremony of ‘Matra Ashraya-A collection museum’ on the said 
land/property to be done by the Hon’ble Chief Minister of 
Uttarakhand, namely, Mr. Trivendra Singh Rawat, in the presence 
of Juna Peethadheeshwar Acharya Mahamandaleshwar Swami 
Avdheshanand Ji Maharaj. The event was scheduled on 20th 
March, 2020. 

6. 
It was alleged in the complaint that in order to blackmail the 
complainant, the accused named in the aforesaid FIR, acting in 
collusion, got published a news article in the e-newspaper 
‘Parvatjan’, edition dated 17th March, 2020 wherein it was 
portrayed that the land on which the foundation stone was 
proposed to be laid was Government land which had been 
unlawfully occupied/encroached upon by the complainant. The 
complainant alleged that even his invitation was published in the 
defamatory news article. It was further alleged that the 
imputations were made in the news article with the intent and 
knowledge that the same would irreparably tarnish the reputation 
of the complainant and his standing in the public domain. 
7. 
The complainant asserted that the sole objective of the 
publication was to incite breach of peace. The article was 
published without undertaking proper fact-finding exercise which 
as per the complainant, would have conclusively and indisputably 
established that he had not encroached upon Government land 
and that the plot in question was lawfully owned and occupied by 
the complainant. In this manner, the accused caused serious 
damage to the goodwill, reputation and standing of the 
complainant in the society. As per the complainant, the act of 

publication of the mischievous and malicious news article by the 
accused invited invocation of the offences punishable under 
Sections 153A, 500, 501, 504 read with Sections 34 and 120B IPC. 
8. 
Based on the said complaint, FIR No. 31 of 2020 came to be 
registered at P.S. Muni Ki Reti, District Tehri Garhwal, 
Uttarakhand for the above offences. 
9. 
The appellant filed in 
the High Court of Uttarakhand for challenging the said FIR 
claiming to be completely innocent and taking a plea that the 
allegations made in the FIR did not disclose commission of any 
cognizable offence. It was averred in the petition that the news 
article which had been published in the e-newspaper Parvatjan of 
which the appellant herein was the Director, was entirely based on 
the Facebook post of a journalist named Gunanand Jakhmola and 
as such, the appellant herein was not liable to face prosecution for 
the said publication. 
10. As stated above, the High Court proceeded to dismiss the 
criminal writ petition filed by the appellant vide order dated 20th 
July, 2020 which is challenged in this appeal. 

11. Notice was served on the respondents. Whilst official 
respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have put in appearance, respondent No. 
3- complainant has chosen not to appear in the matter. 
12. Counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of the State 
wherein, it is stated that during the course of investigation, no 
offence has been found to be made out against the newspaper 
named Parvatjan as well as the Editor and Admin of Parvatjan 
Newspaper, 
Parvat 
Jan 
Media 
Pvt. 
Ltd. and 
Parvatjan 
Newspaper(e-paper), Parvat Jan Media Pvt. Ltd. respectively. 
Since the news item was published on the Parvatjan news portal, 
the name of Mr.Gajendra Singh Rawat, Director, Parvat Jan Media 
Pvt. Ltd. was also dropped from the investigation and the 
investigation agency has confined its focus upon the role of the 
appellant herein and Gunanand Jakhmola, the journalist whose 
Facebook post was allegedly the basis of the offending news article. 
13. It is further stated in the counter affidavit that the 
investigation has revealed that only offences punishable under 
Sections 153A, 504 IPC read with Sections 34 and 120B IPC are 
made out against the accused and the offences under Sections 500 
and 501 IPC have been dropped. 

14. Learned counsel for the appellant vehemently urged that 
admitted allegations as set out in the FIR do not disclose the 
necessary ingredients constituting the offences under Sections 
153A, 504 read with Sections 34 and 120B IPC and hence, the 
continued investigation of the impugned FIR is nothing short of 
gross abuse of process of law. He contended that the words 
‘spoken’ or ‘written’ attributed to the accused were not such which 
promoted or attempted to promote on the grounds of religion, race, 
place of birth, residence, language, caste or community or any 
other ground whatsoever, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred 
or ill-will between different religions, racial, language or regional 
groups or castes or communities, or committed any act which is 
prejudicial to maintenance of harmony between different religions, 
racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, and 
which disturbed or was likely to disturb the public tranquillity. 
15. It was also urged that there is no communal, caste, religion, 
race or place of birth based imputation in the news article 
published on the online news portal of Parvatjan. Thus, 
ingredients of the offence punishable under Section 153A IPC are 
not made out from the FIR. 

16. It was further submitted that the contents of the news article 
cannot be construed as promoting enmity or hatred between 
different groups. It was submitted that even if the allegations made 
in the FIR are taken to be true on the face of the record, apparently, 
no two or more groups were involved in the matter and it was 
simply a reporting about the proposed foundation stone ceremony 
by the Hon’ble Chief Minister being held on a disputed piece of 
land. 
17. Learned counsel submitted that if at all, the complainant was 
aggrieved that the news article had tarnished his image in the 
society or had defamed him in the eyes of the public at large, the 
appropriate remedy for him would have been to file a complaint for 
defamation. However, he has tried to misuse the process of 
criminal law by filing a totally frivolous FIR against the appellant. 
He thus, urged that the impugned FIR and the proceedings sought 
to be taken as a consequence thereof against the appellant deserve 
to be quashed. 
18., learned standing counsel for the State of 
Uttarakhand by referring to the counter affidavit filed on behalf of 
the State, vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions 
advanced by the appellant’s counsel. He urged that journalist 

Gunanand Jakhmola, during the course of investigation, has 
stated that his Facebook post had been manipulated. Thus, as per 
learned standing counsel, the investigation might not be limited to 
the offences for which the FIR has been registered. 
19. He further submitted that by allowing publication of totally 
false and malicious news article, the appellant generated imminent 
possibility of strife and discontent between the people belonging to 
the hill area (one group) and the people belonging to the plains (the 
other group) and thus, prima facie ingredients of offence under 
Section 153A IPC are made out from the allegations levelled in the 
FIR. 
20. He further submitted that in addition to the above offence, 
offence under Section 504 read with Sections 34 and 120B IPC has 
also been applied by the Investigating Officer. It was thus, 
contended that it is not a fit case warranting interference with the 
impugned order. 
21. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the 
impugned order and the material placed on record. 
22. It may be noted that the entire case as set out in the 
impugned FIR is based on the allegation that the Facebook news 

post uploaded by one journalist Mr. Gunanand Jakhmola was 
caused to be published on Parvatjan news portal being operated 
by the appellant. 
23. Thus, essentially, we are required to examine whether the 
contents of the news report constitute any cognizable offence so as 
to justify the investigation into the allegations made in the FIR 
against the appellant. 
24. For the sake of ready reference, the contents of the disputed 
news article are reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“Gunanand Jakhmola 
 
17th March 2020 at 30.05 
 
Trivender Uncle what amazing things you are doing? 
 
Uncle you are laying foundation stone of Art Gallery which is 
going to construct by acquiring government land. 
 
Uncle you are associating the mafias who are violating the 
decisions of Modi Government. 
 
Don’t trap yourself with mafias, have you forgot the problems 
arisen out of marriage of Gupta brother’s. 
 
Uncle you were not like this, what happened to you? Was the 
troubles arisen out of marriage of Gupta Brothers was not 
enough that you are now going to laying foundation stone of the 
Art Gallery which is going to construct by acquiring government 
land. Just think over it, or take report from LIU and other 
agencies about this Art Gallery which is going to construct on 
the acquired government land. This is a government land which 
is dismantled by mafias and your officers. Uncle you are 
innocent, anybody can use you. Advisers and officers 
surrounding you they are cunning. 
 
This cunning persons have brought you forward against the 
decisions of Modi Government. 

Uncle let I inform you for your knowledge that Modi 
Government means your honour has given sanction to planning 
for Singtali Project near Rishikesh. This project will reduce the 
distance between Kumau and Garhwal and also it will arrange 
sources of employment in mountains. World bank is also giving 
money, but the program of Mafias in which you are going to 
participate on 20 March, that is an enemy of mountains. It has 
no concern with the well being of mountains. It is against the 
proposed project of Modi Government and your officers and 
advisers are in collusion with that. Please inquire it and then 
only you go. 
 
Note: Kindly see the invitation card given by mafias.” 
 
25. As per the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the State, after 
investigation, two substantive offences were retained by the 
Investigating Officer against the appellant, which are Sections 
153A and 504 read with Sections 34 and 120B IPC. 
26. From a bare reading of the language of Section 153A IPC, it 
is clear that in order to constitute such offence, the prosecution 
must come out with a case that the words ‘spoken’ or ‘written’ 
attributed to the accused, created enmity or bad blood between 
different groups on the ground of religion, race, place of birth, 
residence, language, etc., or that the acts so alleged were 
prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony. 
27. Upon careful perusal of the offending news article, 
reproduced (supra), it is crystal clear that there is no reference to 
any group or groups of people in the said article. The publication 

focuses totally on the complainant imputing that he had 
encroached upon public land where the foundation stone laying 
ceremony was proposed at the hands of Hon’ble Chief Minister of 
Uttarakhand. Apparently, the post was aimed at frustrating the 
proposed foundation stone laying ceremony on the land, of which 
the complainant claims to be the true owner. The post also 
imputes that the person who was planning the foundation stone 
ceremony was an enemy of mountains and had no concern with 
the well-being of the mountains. 
28. Learned standing counsel for the State tried to draw much 
water from these lines alleging that this portion of the post tends 
to create a sense of enmity and disharmony amongst people of hill 
community and the people of plains. However, the interpretation 
sought to be given to these words is far-fetched and unconvincing. 
The lines referred to supra only refer to the complainant, imputing 
that his activities are prejudicial to the hills. These words have no 
connection whatsoever with a group or groups of people or 
communities. Hence, the foundational facts essential to constitute 
the offence under Section 153A IPC are totally lacking from the 
allegations as set out in the FIR. 

29. In the case of Manzar Sayeed Khan v. State of 
Maharashtra and Anr.1, this Court held that for applying Section 
153A IPC, the presence of two or more groups or communities is 
essential, whereas in the present case, no such groups or 
communities were referred to in the news article. 
30. The other substantive offence which has been applied by the 
investigating agency is Section 504 IPC. The said offence can be 
invoked when the insult of a person provokes him to break public 
peace or to commit any other offence. There is no such allegation 
in the FIR that owing to the alleged offensive post attributable to 
the appellant, the complainant was provoked to such an extent 
that he could indulge in disturbing the public peace or commit any 
other offence. Hence, the FIR lacks the necessary ingredients of 
the said offence as well. Since we have found that the foundational 
facts essential for constituting the substantive offences under 
Sections 153A and 504 IPC are not available from the admitted 
allegations of prosecution, the allegations qua the subsidiary 
offences under Sections 34 and 120B IPC would also be non est. 
31. The complainant has also alleged in the FIR that the accused 
intended to blackmail him by publishing the news article in 
 
1 (2007) 

question. However, there is no allegation in the FIR that the 
accused tried to extract any wrongful gain or valuable security 
from the complainant on the basis of the mischievous/malicious 
post. 
32. In the case of State of Haryana and Ors. v. Bhajan Lal 
and Ors.2, this Court examined the principles governing the scope 
of exercise of powers by the High Court in a petition under Article 
226 of the Constitution of India and under Section 482 CrPC 
seeking quashing of criminal proceedings and held as follows:- 
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant 
provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of 
law enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to the 
exercise of the extraordinary power under Article 226 or the 
inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have 
extracted and reproduced above, we give the following categories of 
cases by way of illustration wherein such power could be exercised 
either to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to 
secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay 
down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and 
inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list 
of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised. 
 
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report 
or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value 
and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute 
any offence or make out a case against the accused. 
 
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and 
other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not 
disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by 
police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except 
under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of 
Section 155(2) of the Code. 

2 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 

(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or 
complaint and the evidence collected in support of the 
same do not disclose the commission of any offence and 
make out a case against the accused. 
 
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a 
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable 
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer 
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under 
Section 155(2) of the Code. 
 
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so 
absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no 
prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there 
is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. 
 
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the 
provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which 
a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and 
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a 
specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, 
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the 
aggrieved party. 
 
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with 
mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously 
instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance 
on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private 
and personal grudge.” 

33. Tested on the touchstone of the above principles, we are of 
the firm view that allowing continuance of the proceedings 
pursuant to the impugned FIR bearing No. 31 of 2020 registered 
at P.S. Muni Ki Reti, District Tehri Garhwal against the appellant 
is nothing but gross abuse of process of law because the 
allegations as set out in the FIR do not disclose necessary 
ingredients of any cognizable offence. Hence, the impugned FIR 

and all proceedings sought to be taken against the appellant are 
hereby quashed and set aside. 
34. The appeal is allowed accordingly. 
35. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand(s) disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
March 19, 2024.