IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2032/2011 
 
M/S. DIVGI METAL WARES LTD. 
 
VERSUS 
 
M/S. DIVGI METAL WARES EMPLOYEES 
ASSOCIATION & ANR. 

WITH 
C.A. NO. 2035/2011 
C.A. NO. 2033/2011 
 
JUDGMENT 

B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
1. 
These appeals challenge the judgment and order passed 
by the Division Bench of the High Court of Karnataka, Circuit 
Bench at Dharwad dated 02.02.2009, vide which the appeal 
filed by the M/s. Divgi Metal Wares Employees Association, 
which is respondent No.1 herein, came to be allowed. 
Similarly, by the said order, the 

filed by Respondent No.1 was also allowed and the Writ Petition 
No.7993/2006 filed by M/s Divgi Metal Wares Ltd., the 
appellant herein, came to be dismissed. 
2. 
The facts leading to the filing of the present appeals are 
as under:- 
2.1 The appellant is a company which manufactures 
automobile gears at two factories, one in Pune, Maharashtra 
and the other at Sirsi, Karnataka. The Respondent No.1 is a 
Trade Union registered under the provisions of the Indian 
Trade Unions Act, 1926. The relations between the appellant 
and the respondents are governed by the Industrial 
Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 (for short, ‘the said 
Act’). It is also not in dispute that, it was at the instance of the 
employer that the Deputy Labour Commissioner and Certifying 
Officer passed an order on 03.07.1989 thereby certifying the 
Standing Order. Clause 20 of the Standing Orders reads thus:- 
 “20. Transfers: An employee shall be liable to 
be 
transferred 
at 
any 
time 
from 
the 
unit/factory/office/establishment 
of 
the 
company located anywhere in India or from 
one department to another within the same 
unit/factory/office/establishment or from 
one job of similar nature and capacity to 
another job of same nature and capacity from 
one job to another similar job or from one 
shift to another shift, provided such a 

transfer does not affect his normal wages. 
Any refusal to accept a transfer as above will 
be treated as mis-conduct as per Rule 
31.2.1949.” 
 
2.2 It will also be relevant to refer to Clause 31 of the Certified 
Standing Order. It reads thus: 
“Nothing contained in these standing Orders 
shall operate in derogation of any law for the 
time being in force or to the prejudice of any 
right under a contract of service, custom or 
usage, or an agreement settlement or award 
applicable to the establishment.” 
 
2.3 It is also not in dispute that Clause 5 of every letter of 
appointment and Clause 1 of every letter of confirmation in 
service issued to the workmen contains the following 
stipulation:- 
“Your services are transferable at short notice 
to any department or any works, offices 
belonging to the Company. In the event of 
transfer the terms and conditions stipulated in 
this letter shall continue to apply, and you will 
be governed by the rules and regulations of the 
establishment 
where 
your 
services 
are 
transferred.” 
 
2.4 The appeal challenging the Certified Standing Order 
dated 03.07.1989 came to be filed before the learned Industrial 
Tribunal which rejected the appeal as time barred vide order 
dated 06.04.1996. Indisputably, the same order has not been 
carried forward. 

2.5 In the months of April to September, 1998 on account of 
reduction in orders and lack of sufficient work, 66 workmen 
from the Sirsi Factory were transferred to Pune Factory. All 
the workmen were paid in advance for one week’s leave with 
pay s.1,000/- towards travel expenses. Though the 
employees collected the said amount, they did not report at the 
Pune Factory. 
2.6 These workmen, whose services were transferred raised 
Industrial Disputes vide Nos.42/1998, 2/1999 and 3/1999. 
2.7 On the application of the respondent, the Deputy Labour 
Commissioner and Certifying Officer modified the Certified 
Standing Orders and deleted the following words from Clause 
1 on 30.09.1999:- 
“from the unit/factory/office/establishment 
in which he is working to any other 
unit/factory 
/office/establishment 
of 
the 
Company located anywhere in India, or” 
 
2.8 The said deletion came to be challenged by way of an 
appeal by the appellant before the learned Industrial Tribunal. 
The learned Industrial Tribunal by the judgment and order 
dated 03.03.2001 partly allowed the appeal and set aside the 
modifications to the Standing Order of 3rd July, 1989. The 
same came to be challenged by the respondent by way of Writ 

Petition No.44810/2001. 
2.9 In the meanwhile, the learned Industrial Tribunal, Hubli 
vide its common award, rejected the aforesaid three references, 
viz., ID Nos. 2/1999, 3/1999 and 42/1998 filed by the 
workmen on 30.05.2002. The Tribunal also held that the 
 
was filed before the High Court by the respondents challenging 
the said award dated 30.05.2002. 
2.10 In parallel proceedings, 03 workmen who were similarly 
 
and 16 workmen who had been earlier transferred on 
27.04.1998 raised the Reference ID No.9/2002. 
2.11 These references were allowed by the learned Industrial 
Tribunal at Hubli vide award dated 28.02.2006 leading to filing 
of by the present appellant before 
the learned Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court. 
2.12 In the meanwhile, the learned Single Judge dismissed the 
 filed by the respondents vide 
order dated 20.03.2006, which led to filing of Writ Appeal 
No.877/2006 before the Division Bench of the High Court. The 
learned Judges of the Division Bench, while hearing the 

appeal, also called for the papers of the aforesaid two writ 
petitions which were pending before the learned Single Judge 
and passed the order as aforesaid. 
3. 
We have heard Shri C.U. Singh, learned senior counsel 
for the appellant and Shri S.G. Hasnen, learned senior counsel 
appearing for the respondents. 
4. 
Shri C.U. Singh submits that, the reasoning of the 
Division Bench to the effect that since the Schedule of the said 
Act does not contain provisions with regard to transfer and 
therefore the 1999 amendment itself was not tenable is without 
substance. He further submits that, as per Section 3 of the 
said Act, though for every item in the Schedule a provision has 
to be made in the Standing Order, there is no restriction for 
providing of additional items. He further submits that, in view 
of provisions of Section 7 read with Section 10(3), the modified 
Standing Order would have taken effect only after the period of 
seven days from the date on which the copies of the order of 
the Appellate Authority are sent to the employer and to the 
trade union or other prescribed representatives of the 
workmen under sub-Section (2) of Section 6 of the said Act. It 
is submitted that the 1999 modification was challenged by way 

of an appeal and the said appeal was dismissed. The writ 
petition challenging the said appellate order was also 
dismissed and therefore during the period in which the 
transfers were made, it was the Standing Orders certified on 
03.07.1989, which were in vogue. 
5. 
Shri Singh further submits that, even if the words from 
Clause 20 as were directed to be deleted by the amendment of 
30.09.1999; still, in view of the law laid down by this Court in 
the case of Cipla Ltd. vs Jayakumar R. and Another1, the 
transfer of workmen from Sirsi Factory to Pune Factory could 
not be interfered. 
6. 
Learned counsel for the respondents, on the contrary 
submits that, learned Judges of the Division Bench have 
rightly held that there was no power to provide stipulation for 
transfer in the Standing Order and therefore, the Division 
Bench of the Karnataka High Court has rightly held the 1999 
amendment to be unsustainable. 
7. 
We find that, for deciding the present appeal, it would not 
be necessary for us to address the first two issues raised by 
Shri C.U. Singh, inasmuch as, even for the sake of argument 
 
1 (1999) 

if it is accepted that the words directed to be deleted by the 
amendment of 30.09.1999 are deleted from Clause 20, still in 
view of the law laid down by this Court in the case of Cipla 
Ltd. (supra) the transfers could not have been held to be 
invalid. 
8. 
It will be relevant to refer to paragraph 3 of the judgment 
of this Court in the case of Cipla Ltd. (supra), which refers to 
Clause 3 and Clause 11 of the terms of appointment. It reads 
thus: 
“3. Briefly stated the facts are that the 
respondent was appointed as a mechanic by a 
letter of appointment dated 31-1-1983 in the 
appellant's establishment at Bangalore. Two of 
the terms of appointment which are relevant 
for the purposes of the present case namely 
clause 3 and clause 11 are as follows: 
Clause 3: 
You will be in full time employment 
with the Company. You are required to 
work at the Company's establishment at 
Bangalore or at any of its establishments 
in India as the Company may direct 
without being entitled to any extra 
remuneration. You shall have to carry 
out such duties as are assigned to you, 
diligently and during such hours as may 
be stipulated by the management from 
time to time. While you are in service, you 
shall not be employed elsewhere or have 
any interest in any trade or business. 
Clause 11: 

You will be governed by the Standing 
Orders applicable for workmen of the 
Company, a copy of which is attached for 
your reference.” 
 
9. 
It will also be relevant to refer to paragraph 9 of the 
judgment of this Court in the case of Cipla Ltd. (supra), 
wherein the argument on behalf of the employee and the 
relevant clause in the Standing Order applicable to the parties 
have been reproduced. It reads thus: 
“9. It was vehemently contended by the 
learned counsel for the respondent that 
notwithstanding the aforesaid clause 3 in the 
letter of appointment the position in law is that 
if there is any clause which is in conflict with 
the Standing Orders then the Standing Orders 
must prevail. It was submitted that clause 11 
of the letter of appointment clearly stipulated 
that the Standing Orders would be applicable. 
The learned counsel drew our attention to the 
relevant clause in the Standing Orders which 
reads as follows: 
“A workman may be transferred from one 
department to another, or from one section 
to another or from one shift to another 
within factory/Agricultural Research Farm, 
provided such transfers do not involve a 
reduction in his emoluments and grade. 
Worker who refuses such transfers are 
liable to be discharged.” 
 
10. In the said case, it was sought to be argued on behalf of 
the employees that when the Standing Order talks of transfer, 
it permits the transfer only in terms of the said clause and 

transfer de hors the same was not permissible. The argument 
was accepted by the learned Single Judge as well as the 
Division Bench of the High Court. While reversing the order of 
the learned Single Judge this Court observed thus:- 
“12. 
In 
our 
opinion, 
the 
aforesaid 
construction does not flow from the provisions 
of the Standing Orders when read along with 
the letter of appointment and, therefore, the 
conclusion arrived at by the High Court was 
not correct. As has already been noticed the 
letter of appointment contains both the terms 
namely for the respondent being transferable 
from Bangalore as well as with regard to the 
applicability of the Standing Orders. These 
clauses, namely, Clauses 3 and 11 have to be 
read along with the Standing Orders, the 
relevant portion of which has been quoted 
hereinabove. Reading the three together we do 
not find that there is any conflict as has been 
sought to be canvassed by the learned 
Counsel for the respondent. Whereas the 
Standing Orders provide for the department 
wherein a workman may be asked to work 
within the establishment itself at Bangalore, 
Clause 3 of the letter of appointment, on the 
other hand, gives the right to the appellant to 
transfer a workman from the establishment at 
Bangalore to any other establishment of the 
Company in India. Therefore, as long as the 
respondent was serving at Bangalore he could 
be transferred from one department to 
another 
only 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
provisions of the Standing Orders but the 
Standing Orders do not in any way refer to or 
prohibit the transfer of a workman from one 
establishment of the appellant to another. 
There is thus no conflict between the said 
clauses.” 

11. It could thus be seen that, this Court has clearly held 
that, when Clauses 3 and 11 of the appointment order are read 
alongwith the Standing Order, there is no conflict as was 
sought to be canvassed by the employee. It has been held that, 
whereas the Standing Orders provided for the department 
wherein a workman may be asked to work within the 
establishment itself in Bangalore, Clause 3 of the letter of 
appointment, on the other hand, gives the right to the employer 
to transfer a workman from the establishment at Bangalore to 
any other establishment of the Company in India. It has been 
held that the Standing Order does not in any way refer to or 
prohibit the transfer of a workman from one establishment of 
the appellant to another and thus, there is no conflict between 
the said clauses. 
12. The terms of appointment, which fell for consideration of 
this Court in the case of Cipla Ltd. (supra) are almost similar 
to the terms of the appointment in the appointment order as 
well as the confirmation order in the present case. They clearly 
stipulate that the services are transferable to any department 
or any work offices belonging to the company. It is further 

clarified that; upon transfer, the terms and conditions 
stipulated in the appointment order would continue to apply 
and the employees would be governed by the rules and 
regulations of the employment where his/her services are 
transferred. 
13. Even for a moment if it is accepted that the reasoning of 
the Division Bench that the amendment to clause 20 of the 
Standing Order by order dated 30.09.1999 is not permissible; 
still, in view of the law laid down by this Court in the case of 
Cipla Ltd. (supra), it would make no difference. If the 
reasoning of the Division Bench is accepted, Clause 20 would 
read as under:- 
“20. Transfers: An employee shall be liable to 
be transferred at any time from one department 
to 
another 
within 
the 
same 
unit/factory/office/establishment or from one 
job of similar nature and capacity to another 
job of same nature and capacity from one job 
to another similar job or from one shift to 
another shift, provided such a transfer does not 
affect his normal wages. Any refusal to accept 
a transfer as above will be treated as mis-
conduct as per Rule 31.2.1949.” 
 
14. If that be so, the clause in the Standing Order would be 
similar with the clause that fell for consideration before this 
Court in the case of Cipla Ltd. (supra), and as such, there 

would be no conflict between the Standing Order and the terms 
and 
conditions 
as 
stipulated 
in 
the 
order 
of 
appointment/confirmation. Whereas the Standing Order 
would cover the transfer from one department to another 
within the same unit/factory/office/establishment or from one 
job of similar nature and capacity to another job of same 
nature and capacity and also from one job to another similar 
job or from one shift to another shift., the terms of 
appointment and confirmation would permit the transfer of an 
employee to any department or any works or offices belonging 
to the company. Another aspect that needs to be taken into 
consideration is that clause 31 of the Schedule of the Standing 
Order, which is reproduced herein above specifically provides 
that nothing contained in the Standing Order shall operate in 
derogation of any law for the time being in force or cause 
prejudice to any right under contract of service, custom or 
usage or an agreement, settlement or award applicable to the 
establishment. It can thus be seen that nothing contained in 
the Standing Orders can operate in derogation or to the 
prejudice of the provisions as provided in the contract of 
service. 

15. In this view of the matter, we find that the Division Bench 
has erred in allowing the writ petition of the respondents, 
thereby holding the transfers to be illegal. Similarly, the 
learned Division Bench also erred in dismissing the writ 
petition filed by the appellants herein, which was filed 
challenging the award dated 28.02.2006. It is to be noted that 
the said award was totally contrary to the earlier award passed 
by the very same Tribunal on 30.05.2001. 
16. For the aforesaid reasons, we find that the impugned 
judgment and order is not sustainable. However, we clarify 
that we have not considered the larger issue with regard to 
power of modification of the standing order and leave it open 
to be adjudicated in an appropriate proceeding. We find that 
the learned Division Bench was in error in calling the writ 
petitions filed by the appellant as well as the respondent(s) and 
deciding them without even discussing the reasonings as were 
adopted by the learned Tribunal. It is to be noted that, in the 
first order dated 30.05.2002, the learned Industrial Tribunal 
apart from holding that in view of Clause 20 and in terms of 
appointment and confirmation orders, the challenge to the 
transfer orders was not sustainable, also after discussing the 

entire material on record, found that the transfers were not 
mala fide. 
17. The award dated 28.02.2006 only considers that Clause 
20 stood modified on 30.09.1999 and as such the transfer 
orders were not permissible. However, the award passed in 
2006 fails to take into consideration that on 03.03.2001, the 
appeal against the modification was partly allowed by the 
learned Industrial Tribunal setting aside the order dated 
30.09.1999. 
18. It will be relevant to refer to Section 7 of the said Act. It 
reads thus: 
“7. Date of operation of standing orders.- 
Standing orders shall, unless an appeal is 
preferred under Section 6, come into 
operation on the expiry of thirty days from 
the date on which authenticated copies 
thereof are sent under sub-section (3) of 
Section 5, or where an appeal as aforesaid 
is preferred, on the expiry of seven days 
from the date on which copies of the order 
of the appellate authority are sent under 
sub-section (2) of Section 6” 
 
19. It could thus be seen that, in view of the provisions of 
Section 7, the Standing Orders shall come into operation on 
the expiry of 30 days from the date on which the authenticated 
copies thereof are sent under sub-section (3) or Section 5. 

However, where an appeal, as provided under sub-section (2) 
of Section 6 is preferred, the same would come into operation 
only upon the expiry of seven days from the date on which 
copies of the order of the appellate authority are sent. Section 
10 of the said Act deals with the duration and modification of 
standing orders. 
20. It will also be relevant to refer to sub-section (3) of Section 
10 of the said Act, which reads thus: 
“10. Duration 
and 
modification 
of 
standing orders.- 
(3) The foregoing provisions of this Act shall 
apply in respect of an application under sub-
section (2) as they apply to the certification of 
the first standing orders.” 
 
21. It could be seen from the perusal thereof that all 
foregoing provisions including the provision in Section 7 of the 
said Act would also apply in respect of the application under 
sub-section (2) as they apply to certification of the first 
Standing Order. As such, in view of the order dated 
03.03.2001 passed by the learned Industrial Tribunal, the 
amendment made in the year 1999 had not come into effect in 
view of the appeal being allowed by the learned Tribunal. 
22. We therefore find that, on the date of the orders of 

transfer as well as the date on which the learned Industrial 
Tribunal passed the award dated 28.02.2006, it is the 
03.07.1989 Standing Order which would be in operation. More 
so when the appeal challenging the same by the respondents 
came to be dismissed on 06.04.1996 and which order was not 
carried further by the respondents. 
23. We further find that the learned Division Bench has also 
erred in not taking into consideration the law laid down by this 
Court in the case of Cipla Ltd. (supra) though the said 
judgment was specifically cited before it. 
24. In the result, the impugned judgment and order is 
quashed and set aside. filed by 
the respondent No.1 is dismissed. The order dated 20.03.2006 
passed by the learned single judge in 
of 2001 is upheld. filed by the 
respondent No.1 is dismissed. filed by the appellant is allowed. The order passed by the 
learned Tribunal dated 28.02.2006 is quashed and set aside. 
However, we clarify that we have not considered the larger 
issue with regard to the powers of the Certifying Officer to 
provide a clause in the Standing Orders, reserving the power 

of the employer to transfer its employees anywhere in India. 
25. In our view, in view of the law laid down by this Court in 
the case of Cipla Ltd. (supra), it was not necessary for the 
Division Bench to go into the said issue, inasmuch as the facts 
of the case at hand, are squarely covered by Cipla Ltd. (supra). 
26. The appeals are disposed of in the aforesaid terms. There 
shall be no orders as to costs. 
27. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of....J 
(B.R. GAVAI)...J 
(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
 
NEW DELHI; 

MARCH 21, 2024