IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1738-39 OF 2024 
( SLP(CRL.) NOS. 3390-91 OF 2024) 
 
NENAVATH BUJJI ETC. 

VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF TELANGANA AND ORS. 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
J. B. PARDIWALA, J.: - 
 
For the convenience of the exposition, this judgement is divided in the 
following parts: - 
INDEX 
A. FACTUAL MATRIX... 3 
B. IMPUGNED JUDGMENT OF THE HIGH COURT... 15 
C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS... 17 
D. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS... 20 
E. ANALYSIS... 21 

i. 
Extraneous Considerations that weighed with the Detaining Authority 
 
thereby vitiating the Order of Preventive Detention.... 34 
ii. Summary of the Findings.... 42 
iii. The Saga Continues... 45 
iv. Role of the Advisory Board... 47 
F. CONCLUSION... 54 
 
1. 
Leave granted in both the captioned appeals. 
 
2. 
Since, the issues raised in both the captioned appeals are the same; 
both the appellants are co-detenus and the challenge is also to the self-same 
judgment and order passed by the High Court those were taken up for 
hearing analogously and are being disposed of by this common judgment 
and order. 
 
3. 
For the sake of convenience, the Criminal Appeal No. ……. of 2024 
(Cri) No. 3390 of 2024 is treated as the lead matter. 
 
4. 
This appeal is at the instance of a detenu, preventively detained under 
Section 3(2) of the Telangana Prevention of Dangerous Activities of Boot-
Leggers, Dacoits, Drug-Offenders, Goondas, Immoral Traffic Offenders 
Land-Grabbers, Spurious Seed Offenders, Insecticide Offenders, Fertiliser 
Offenders, Food Adulteration Offenders, Fake Document Offenders, 
Scheduled Commodities Offenders, Forest Offenders, Gaming Offenders, 

Sexual Offenders, Explosive Substances Offenders, Arms Offenders, Cyber 
Crime Offenders and White Collar or Financial Offenders Act, 1986 (for 
short, the “Act 1986”) and is directed against the judgment and order passed 
by a Division Bench of the High Court for the State of Telangana at 
Hyderabad (Special Original Jurisdiction) dated 16.09.2023 in Writ Petition 
No. 26941 of 2023 filed by the appellant herein by which the Division Bench 
rejected the writ petition and thereby declined to interfere with the order of 
preventive detention passed by the Commissioner of Police Rachakonda 
Commissionerate, State of Telangana dated 12.09.2023 in exercise of his 
powers under Section 3(2) of the Act 1986. 
 
A. 
FACTUAL MATRIX 
5. 
The order of detention dated 12.09.2023 passed by the respondent No. 
2 herein reads thus: 
“ORDER OF DETENTION 
ORDER OF DETENTION UNDER SUB SECTION (2) OF 
SECTION 3 OF THE “TELANGANA PREVENTION OF 
DANGEROUS ACTIVITIES OF BOOTLEGGERS, DACOITS, 
DRUG-OFFENDERS, 
GOONDAS, 
IMMORAL 
TRAFFIC 
OFFENDERS, 
LAND-GRABBERS, 
SPURIOUS 
SEED 
OFFENDERS, 
INSECTICIDE 
OFFENDERS, 
FERTILISER 
OFFENDERS, FOOD ADULTERATION OFFENDERS, FAKE 
DOCUMENT OFFENDERS, SCHEDULED COMMODITIES 
OFFENDERS, FOREST OFFENDERS, GAMING OFFENDERS, 
SEXUAL 
OFFENDERS, 
EXPLOSIVE 
SUBSTANCES 
OFFENDERS, 
ARMS 
OFFENDERS, 
CYBER 
CRIME 

OFFENDERS AND WHITE COLLAR OR FINANCIAL 
OFFENDERS ACT, 1 OF 1986 (AMENDMENT ACT NO. 13 OF 
2018)”. 
 
WHEREAS, information has been placed before me that the 
offender “Nenavath Ravi S/o. Nenavath Jagan, Age: 23 years, 
Occ: Coolie, R/o. Indiranagar Colony, Chandrayanagutta, 
Hyderabad, N/o. Padamati Thanda village, Neredugumma 
Mandal, Nalongda Dist” is a “Goonda” as defined in clause (g) 
of Section 2 of the “Telangana prevention of dangerous activities 
of bootleggers, dacoits, drug-offenders, goondas, immoral traffic 
offenders, land-grabbers, spurious seed offenders, insecticide 
offenders, fertilizer offenders, food adulteration offenders, fake 
document offenders, scheduled commodities offenders, forest 
offenders, gaming offenders, sexual offenders, explosive 
substances offenders, arms offenders, cyber crime offenders and 
white collar or financial offenders Act, 1 of 1986 (Amendment Act 
No. 13 of 2018)” and that he has been habitually engaging himself 
in unlawful acts and indulging in committing of Robberies, 
Property theft offences and Gold Chain Snatchings including 
sacred Mangalsutras from women folk by using criminal force on 
Public roads in broad day light continuously, repeatedly in one 
Police Station limits of Madgul PS, Rachakonda Commissionerate 
& Other PSs of Nalgonda District, thereby creating large scale 
fear and panic among the General public especially women and 
thus his activities are prejudicial to the maintenance of Public 
Order and affected society adversely. 
 
In the recent past, during the year 2023, in quick succession, the 
proposed detenu along with his associates was involved in (04) 
offences under penal sections covered by Chapter-XVII of Indian 
Penal Code, 1860, vide Cr.Nos 1) 129/2023 U/s 379 IPC of PS 
Chinthapally, 2) 39/2023 U/s 394 IPC of Madgul P.S. 3) 106/2023 
U/s 356, 379 IPC of Chinthapally P.S. and 4) 107/2023 U/s 392 
IPC of Madgul P.S. of Rachakonda Commissionerate. 
 
Among the above offences, (02) offences vide Cr. Nos. 1) 129/2023 
and 2) 106/2023 were reported to be out of this Commissionerate 
limits and as above (02) offences committed by the proposed 

detenu are referred to as criminal history of the proposed detenu 
and not relied upon.. 
 
The remaining (02) offences pertaining to this Commissionerate 
vide Cr Nos: 1) 39/2023, 2) 107/2023 of Madgul P.S. are 
considered as grounds for his detention. 
 
The offender/proposed detenu committed all the above Property 
theft offences/gold chain snatching offences continuously, 
repeatedly in quick succession and fall within proximity period and 
committed in one police station limits i.e. Madgul PS. 
 
The offender/proposed detenu along with his associates has been 
committing offences continuously, and repeatedly in order to earn 
easy money to lead lavish life, which are punishable under chapter 
XVII of Indian Panel Code. He is also committing illegal acts 
(thefts) involving breach of peace and public tranquility. The 
continuous presence of the offender in the area is detrimental to 
the maintenance of Public Order, apart from disturbing the peace, 
tranquility and social harmony in the society. 
 
WHEREAS, I, D.S. Chauhan, IPS, Commissioner of Police, 
Rachakonda, am satisfied from the material placed before me that 
the offender Nenavath Ravi, is a Goonda as defined in clause (g) 
of Section 2 of the “Telengana prevention, detention Act, 1 of 1986 
(Amendment Act No. 13 of 2018)” 
 
As per the clause (g) of section 2 of the “Telangana prevention, 
detention Act, 1 of 1986 (Amendment Act No. 13 of 2018)” a 
“Goonda” means “a person, who either by himself or a member 
of or leader of gang, habitually commits or attempts to commit or 
abets the commission of offences, which are punishable under 
Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII or Chapter XXII of the Indian Penal 
Code”. 
 
All the offences committed by the offender punishable under penal 
sections of Chapter XVII of the Indian Penal Code, 1860”. As 
such, criminal activities of the offender fall within the ambit of sec. 
2(g) of the Act 1 of 1986 to term him as a “Goonda” from Madgul 
PS of Rachakonda Commissionerate. 

WHEREAS, I D.S. Chauhan, I.P.S., Commissioner of Police, 
Rachakonda, am aware that the Police Madgul arrested the 
offender/proposed detenu Nenavath Ravi on 12-18-2023 at 1230 
hours in Cr.No. 107/2023 of PS Madgul and produced before the 
Hon’ble JFCM at Amangal for judicial remand and lodged in 
Central Prison Cherlapally. In remaining ground case, he was 
produced before the Court by executing PT warrant on 
24.08.02023 and lodged in the jail. 
 
In pursuance of his confession, Police seized stolen booty i.e. 1) 
Honda Shine Motor Cycle Br No: TS 05 EZ 6413 pertaining to Cr 
No. 129/2023 of PS Chintapally from the house of his relative in 
Manneguda village at his instance in the presence of mediators. 
 
Further, the investigating Officer seized 1) One Auto bearing No: 
TS 12 UA 7860, 2) One Splendor Plus bike bearing No.: TS 05 FK 
9086 which were used for commission of offences have also been 
seized from the possession of his associates at his instance. In 
addition, Gold jewellery in all cases totaling 11.7 tolas was also 
seized from the possession of his associate Munavath Ramesh (A-
1) at the instance of this proposed detenu and other associates. 
 
WHEREAS, I am aware that the offender/proposed detenu field 1st 
bail petition in Cr No: 107/2023 of PS Madgul before the Hon’ble 
JFCM at Amangal on 17-08-2023 vide Crl MP No: 285/2023. 
Police filed counter and prosecution opposed not to grant bail to 
him. Accordingly, the bail petition was dismissed on 24-08-2023. 
 
The proposed detenue again filed fresh bail petition in two ground 
cases vide Cr Nos: 1) 39/2023 of PS Madgul, 2) 107/2023 of PS 
Madgul before the Hon’ble JFCM at Amangal. Police filed 
counters opposing to grant bail. Even though, both the bail 
petitions were allowed by granting conditional bail to the 
proposed detenu on 05-09-2023 vide Crl MP Nos: 1) 337/2023, 2) 
307/2023. Consequently, he was released in two ground cases vide 
release order Dis Nos: 1) 1741/2023, 2) 1742/2023 respectively. 
He was also granted bail in all other remaining history cases and 
consequently released from jail after furnishing sureties. 

The conditions imposed by the Court in two ground cases are i) 
The 
offender/proposed 
detenu 
shall 
not 
tamper 
the 
witnesses/victim during the course of further investigation, ii) he 
is directed to appear before the Court as and when directed 
without fail, iii) He is directed not to leave the State without 
permission of the Court. 
 
I have perused all the above conditions of the bail and however, 
those conditions do not affect of passing the order of detention on 
this proposed detenu. 
 
On account of his antecedents, bail orders granted therein and 
consequently released from jail, the way he was indulging in 
committing chain snatching offences including sacred mangal 
sutras (Nuptial Chains) continuously from the neck of women folk 
forcibly having felt that the cases registered against him under the 
ordinary law have no deterrent effect in curbing his prejudicial 
activities, and having believed strongly that he is not amenable to 
ordinary law and as such, having satisfied that there is an 
imminent possibility of the proposed detenu indulging in similar 
prejudicial activities against, which would be prejudicial to the 
maintenance of Public Order, unless he is prevented from doing so 
by an appropriate order of detention. 

Now therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred on me under 
sub section (2) of Section 3 of the “Telangana prevention, 
detention Act 1 of 1986 (Amendment Act No. 13 of 2018)” R/w 
G.O. Rt. No. 792, General Administration (Spl. Law & Order) 
Department, Dated: 29-05-2023, I do hereby order that the 
accused/proposed detenu Nenavath Ravi, who is a “Goonda” be 
detained from the date of service of this order on him and lodge in 
Central Prison, Cherlapally Medchal Dist.” 

6. 
The grounds of detention dated 12.09.2023 furnished to the appellant 
herein along with the order of detention referred to above read thus: - 

“GROUNDS FOR DETENTION IN RESPECT OF NENAVATH 
RAVI 
UNDER 
THE 
“TELANGANA 
PREVENTION 
OF 
DANGEROUS ACTIVITIES OF BOOTLEGGERS, DACOITS, 
DRUG-OFFENDERS, 
GOONDAS, 
IMMORAL 
TRAFFIC 
OFFENDERS, 
LAND-GRABBERS, 
SPURIOUS 
SEED 
OFFENDERS, 
INSECTICIDE 
OFFENDERS, 
FERTILISER 
OFFENDERS, FOOD ADULTERATION OFFENDERS, FAKE 
DOCUMENT OFFENDERS, SCHEDULED COMMODITIES 
OFFENDERS, FOREST OFFENDERS, GAMING OFFENDERS, 
SEXUAL 
OFFENDERS, 
EXPLOSIVE 
SUBSTANCES 
OFFENDERS, 
ARMS 
OFFENDERS, 
CYBER 
CRIME 
OFFENDERS AND WHITE COLLAR OR FINANCIAL 
OFFENDERS ACT, 1 OF 1986 (AMENDMENT ACT NO. 13 OF 
2018)” 
 
You, Nenavath Ravi S/o. Nenavath Jagan, Age: 23 years, Occ: 
Coolie, R/o Indiranagar Colony, Chandrayanagutta, Hyderabad, 
N/o. Padamati Thanda village, Neredugumma Mandal, Nalongda 
District are a “Goonda” as defined in clause (g) of section 2 of the 
“Telangana prevention of dangerous activities of bootleggers, 
dacoits, drug-offenders, goondas, immoral traffic offenders, land-
grabbers, spurious seed offenders, insecticide offenders, fertilizer 
offenders, food adulteration offenders, fake document offenders, 
scheduled commodities offenders, forest offenders, gaming 
offenders, sexual offenders, explosive substances offenders, arms 
offenders, cyber crime offenders and white collar or financial 
offenders Act 1 of 1986 (Amendment Act no. 13 of 2018)” and that 
you have been habitually engaging yourself in unlawful acts and 
indulging in committing of Property Offences, Robberies/Gold 
Chain Snatching offences including sacred Mangalasutras by 
using criminal force on women folk in Public streets continuously, 
repeatedly in one localised area in Madgul PS limits and thereby, 
creating widespread fear, panic among the general public and thus 
your activities are prejudicial to the maintenance of Public Order 
and adversely affecting the society. 
 
Thus, in the recent past, during the year 2023, in quick succession, 
you along with your associates were involved in (04) offences 
under penal sections covered by Chapter XVII of Indian Penal 
Code, 1860, vide Cr.Nos.) 129/2023 U/s 379 IPC of PS 

Chinthapally, 2) 39/2023 U/s 394 IPC of Madgul P.S. 3) 106/2023 
Us 356, 379 IPC of Chinthapally PS and 4) 107/2023 U/s 392 IPC 
of Madgul P.S. 
 
Among the above offences, (02) offences vide Cr Nos: 1) 129/2023, 
2) 106/2023 were reported to be out of this Commissionerate limits 
and as such the above (02) offences committed by you are referred 
to as criminal history and not relied upon.. 
 
The remaining (02) offences committed by in Rachakonda 
Commissionerate limits vide Cr Nos: 1) 39/2023, 2) 107/2023 of 
Madgul P.S. are considered as grounds for your detention. 
 
You had committed all the above property theft offences including 
gold chain snatching offences continuously, repeatedly and in 
quick succession which are falling within proximity period. 
 
Thus, you have been committing offences continuously, and 
repeatedly in order to earn easy money to lead lavish life, which 
are punishable under Chapter XVII of Indian penal Code. You are 
also committing illegal acts (thefts) involving breach of peace and 
public tranquility. Your continuous presence in the area is 
detrimental to the maintenance of public order apart from 
disturbing the peace, tranquility and social harmony in the society. 
 
THE FACTS OF THE FOLLOWING (02) ROBBERIES, 
THEFTS/CHAIN SNATCHING OFFENCES COMMITTED BY 
YOU IN THE RECENT PAST WHICH AMPLY DEMONSTRATE 
YOUR HABITUAL NATURE OF COMMITTING CRIME 
CREATING LARGE SCALE FEAR IN THE MINDS OF WOMEN 
COMMUNITY THEREBY RESTRAINING THEM FROM FREELY 
MOVING ON PUBLIC STREETS EVEN DURING BROAD DAY 
LIGHT AND YOUR ACTIVITIES ARE PREJUDICIAL TO THE 
MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER 
 
1) Cr.No. 39/2023 U/s 394 IPC of Madgul Police Station Dt: 20-03-

Facts of the case are that on 20.03.2023 at 19.45 hrs received a 
complaint from the complainant/victim Kuntala Laxmamma S/o 

Anjaiah, Age 55 years, Occ: Sweeper, R/o Kolkulapally (V), 
Madgul (M), R.R (D) in which she stated that on 20.03.2023 at 
about 1800 hrs, while the complainant was on her way laid from 
her work place in Sri Mahalaxmi Rice Mill at Kolkulapally Gate, 
en-route near Jaanam well, three unknown persons aged about 25-
30 years followed from her behind and started pretending as 
searching for Toddy, and thus, they suddenly pounced on her, 
pasted a plaster on her mouth and tried to remove her silver cups 
(vendi Kadiyalu) from her legs. But, they could not succeed and as 
such they robbed Rs. 7550/- from her tiffin carrier box and fled 
away from the place. Further, she added that she can identify them 
if she sees them again. Hence, she requested to take necessary 
action against the persons. 
 
Basing on the above contents, a case in Cr No: 39/2023 U/s 394 
IPC has been registered and taken up investigation. 
 
During the course of investigation, the IO visited the scene of 
offence and recorded the details of the scene of offence observation 
in Crime Details Form (CDF). IO examined the complainant, 
other witnesses who got panicked on seeing the incident in broad 
day light and recorded their detailed statements. 
 
While the investigation was in progress, it was detected by 
arresting the accused/proposed detenu in Cr No. 107/2023 u/s 392 
IPC of Madgul PS on 12-08-2023. During the examination, he 
confessed his guilt of offence of the above case and other offences 
as well. The offender/propose detenu confessed that they spent 
entire booty for their lavish expenses. 
 
Role & participation of this proposed detenu:- 
 
It was made out that the offender/proposed detenu Nenavath Ravi 
(A-3) was sitting in rear side seat of the auto along with A-4 and 
they noticed a lady near Kolakulapalli village outskirts, Madgul 
after passing some distance A-1 Ramesh was driving the auto they 
forcibly took her into the bushes and when A-4 Munavath Naresh 
caught her legs and then proposed detenu A-3 Nenavath Ravi 
caught her hands and A-1 tried to rob her silver anklets but A-1 
could not remove the same and as last resort, he committed theft of 

Rs. 7,550/- from the complainant tiffin box and fled away into the 
auto. They spend entire booty for their lavish expenses. 
 
As such, he was produced before the Hon’ble Court by executing 
PT warrant on 24-08-2023 and thus regularized his arrest in the 
case. The case is UI for collecting further evidence. 
 
2) Cr. No. 107/2023 U/s 392 of Madgul Police Station, Dt: 01-08-

Facts of the case are that on 01-08-2023 at 1700 hours received a 
complaint from the complainant Smt. Nutanaganti Pullama W/o 
late Rama Lingaiah Age: 80 years R/o Madgul (V) & (M), R.R (D) 
in which she stated that on 01.08.2023 at about 1430 hours when 
she was sitting in front of her house and in the meantime one 
unknown person age about 20-30 years came to her by foot and all 
of a sudden he robbed her two rows Gold Nuptial Chain weighing 
about 03 tolas and fled away on the bike on which another 
unknown person was already waiting and both of them escaped on 
the bike towards Mall route. The person who robbed her gold chain 
had worn yellow colour shirt and while she raised screams, her 
neighbour Gandikota Jangaiah came there, but at the time both the 
persons escaped away from there. The complainant further stated 
that she can identify them if she sees them again. Hence the 
complainant requested to take necessary action. 
 
Basing on the above contents, a case in CR No. 107/2023 U/s 356, 
379 IPC has been registered and subsequently altered to Section 
392 IPC. 
 
During the course of Investigation, Police visited the scene of 
offence and recorded the details of the scene of offence 
observations in Crime Details Form (CDF). The IO examined the 
complainant and other witnesses and recorded their detailed 
statements. 
 
 Further, collected CC footages from the vicinity of crime scene 
analysed the same and through which it was identified the offender 
Munavath Ramesh and his associate while they were having a 

recce. Upon that the IO setup informants and deputed search 
parties to locate the offenders. 
 
While the investigation was in progress, the police Madgul 
arrested the offender/proposed detenu Nenavath Ravi on 12-08-
2023 at 1230 hours Cr. No. 107/2023 of PS Madgul and produced 
before the Hon’ble JFCM at Amangal for judicial remand and 
lodged in Central Prison Cherlapally. 
 
In pursuance of his confession, police seized stolen booty i.e. 1) 
Honda Shine Motor Cycle BR No: TS 05 EZ 6413 pertaining to Cr 
No. 129/20232 of PS Chintapally from the house of his relative in 
Manneguda village at his instance in the presence of mediators. 
 
Further, the investigating Officer seized 1) One Auto bearing No: 
TS 12 UA 7860, 2) One Splendor Plus bike bearing No: TS 05 FK 
9086 which were used for commission of offences have also been 
seized from the possession of his associates at his instance. In 
addition, Gold jewellery in all cases totaling 11.7 tolas was also 
seized from the possession of his associate Munavath Ramesh (A-
1) at the instance of this proposed detenu and other associates. The 
case is UI for collecting further evidence. 
 
Linking Evidence: 
 
i) In pursuance of his confession, Police seized stolen booty i.e. Gold 
pusthelathadu weighing about (03) tolas from the position of his 
associate Munnavat Ramesh A-1 at his instance. ii) CC footages collected from the vicinity of crime scene. It can be 
seen his associates while they were having recce. The above 
evidence establishes the involvement of proposed detenu. 
 
Role & participation of this proposed detenu: 
 
In this case, while the proposed detenu along with A4 Munavath 
Naresh was waiting on Sagar Highway, the offenders A-1, A2 went 
near the victim and forcibly robed her gold nuptial chain weighing 
about (03) tolas from the neck of victim woman and reached to A-

3 (propose detenu) and A-4. They gave stolen booty to A-3 and A-
4 and disbursed from the spot on their vehicles. 
 
As per clause (g) of section 2 of the “Telangana prevention, 
detention Act 1 of 1986 (Amendment Act No. 13 of 2018)” a 
“Goonda” means “a person who either by himself or as a member 
of or leader of gang, habitually commits or attempts to commit or 
abets the commission of offences, which are punishable under 
Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII or Chapter XXII of the Indian Penal 
Code”. 
 
 You have been indulging in the offences falling under chapter XVII 
of IPC and you are habitually indulging in criminal activities in a 
manner prejudicial to the maintenance of Public Order and 
enforcement of ordinary penal laws could not prevent you from 
indulging in such activities. 
 
After having come to know about criminal activities of proposed 
detenu through media and on account of chain snatching 
offences that were taken place in a small village of Madgul in the 
Commissionerate limits in recent past, the General Public 
especially women folk those who are going for work on daily 
wages in the area got panicked and apprehended fear of coming 
out of their houses by wearing even their sacred Gold Nuptial 
Threads which is sentiment to large section of Indian women. 
Thus, the incidents created panic in the minds of general public 
living in Madgul village and thereby your criminal activities are 
adversely affecting the Public Order and leaving large section of 
people under the grip of fear and shock. Therefore, your 
activities are required to be prevented by an appropriate 
detention order. 
 
WHEREAS, I am aware that you have filed 1st bail petition in Cr 
No.: 107/2023 of PS Madgul before the Hon’ble JFCM at Amangal 
on 07-08-20 23 vide Crl MP No. 285/2023. Police filed counter 
and prosecution opposed not to grant bail to you. Accordingly, the 
bail petition was dismissed on 24-08-2023. 
 
You have again filed fresh bail petitions in two ground cases vide 
CR Nos: 1) 39/2023 of PS Madgul, 2) 107/2023 of PS Madgul 

before the Hon’ble JFCM at Amangal. Police filed counters 
opposing to grant bail. Even though, the bail petitions were 
allowed by granting conditional bail to you on 05-09-2023 vide 
Crl Mp Nos: 1) 337/2023, 2) 307/2023. Consequently, you were 
released in two ground cases vide release order Dis Nos: 1) 
1741/2023, 2) 1742/2023 respectively. You were also granted bail 
in all other remaining history cases and consequently released 
from jail after furnishing sureties. 
 
The conditions imposed by the Court in two ground cases are i) 
The 
offender/proposed 
detenu 
shall 
not 
tamper 
the 
witnesses/victim during the course of further investigation, ii) he 
is directed to appear before the court as and when directed without 
fail, iii) He is directed not to leave the state without permission of 
the Court. 
 
I have perused all the above conditions of the bail and however, 
those conditions do not affect of passing the order of detention 
 
On account of your antecedents, bail orders granted therein and 
consequently released from jail, the way you were indulging in 
committing chain snatching offences including sacred mangal 
sutras (nuptial chains) continuously from the neck of women folk 
forcibly, having felt that the cases registered against you under the 
ordinary law have no deterrent effect in curbing your prejudicial 
activities and having believed strongly that you are not amenable 
to ordinary law and as such, having satisfied that there is an 
imminent possibility of indulging in similar prejudicial activities 
again, which would be prejudicial to the maintenance of Public 
Order unless you are prevented from doing so by an appropriate 
order of detention. 
 
Hence, I am satisfied that a detention Order under the provisions 
of the “Telangana prevention, detention Act 1 of 1986 (Amendment 
Act no. 13 of 2018) should be invoked against you, and you should 
be detained under sub-section (2) of section 3 of Act No. 1 of 1986 
(Amendment Act No. 13 of 2018)” R/w G.O. Rt. No. 792, General 
Administration (Spl. Law & Order) Department, Dated 29-05-
2023 with a view to prevent you from acting in any manner 
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order 

You have a right to represent against this order of Detention to the 
1) Detaining authority i.e. the Commissioner of Police, 
Rachakonda, 2) The Principal Secretary to Government (Political) 
General Administration Dep. Telangana, Hyderabad and 3) The 
Advisory Board or if you choose to make any representation, you 
may submit your representation with sufficient number of copies to 
the Jail Superintendent for onward transmission. You also have a 
right to appear before the Advisory Board and also to avail the 
assistant of a person other than a lawyer to represent your case.” 

7. 
Thus, from the aforesaid it is evident that the respondent No. 2 herein 
was subjectively satisfied based on the materials on record that the activities 
of the appellant detenu were prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. 
According to the Detaining Authority, i.e., the respondent No. 2, the 
appellant is a “GOONDA” as defined under Section 2(g) of the Act 1986 
and with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to 
the maintenance of public order, it was felt necessary that the appellant be 
preventively detained. 
 
B. 
IMPUGNED JUDGMENT OF THE HIGH COURT 
 
8. 
The appellant detenu being aggrieved by the order of preventive 
detention preferred in the High Court for 
the State of Telangana at Hyderabad seeking a writ of Habeas Corpus. The 

High Court vide its impugned judgment and order declined to interfere and 
accordingly rejected the writ petition. 

9. 
The High Court while rejecting the writ application filed by the 
appellant detenu made the following observations: - 
“16. 
While passing the detention order, the detaining authority 
not only considered the commission of offences committed by the 
detenus and their associates, but also considered its impact 
disturbing ‘public order’ and also the modus operandi adapted by 
them in commission of offences. Therefore, in order to prevent the 
detenus from committing similar offences, the impugned detention 
order was passed. xxx 
 
xxx 

xxx 
21. 
As discussed above, the detenus have committed the 
aforesaid two (02) offences of robbery and chain snatchings and 
creating panic and scare among the public, especially in women 
folk. Thus, they have engaged in unlawful activities by committing 
the said bodily and property offences, which are serious and grave 
in nature, and thereby acting in a manner prejudicial to the 
maintenance of ‘public order’ as it disturbs peace and tranquility 
in the society. Further, the police also seized motorbikes used in 
commission of the offences. 
 
22. 
In view of the same, it is clear that the said acts committed 
by the detenus would certainly create large scale panic in general 
public, more particularly women folk. All the said aspects were 
considered by the detaining authority while passing detention 
order. The aspects of modus operandi and the acts committed by 
the detenus and their associates in commission of offences and 
filing of petitions by the police seeking cancellation of bail granted 
to the detenus were also considered by the detaining authority 
while passing detention order. Therefore, viewed from any angle, 
we are of the considered view that there is no error in impugned 

detention orders dated 12.09.2023 passed by the respondent No. 2 
and the consequential approval orders passed by respondent No. 1 
vide G.O.Rt. NOs. 1305 and 1306 dated 20.09.2023 respectively. 
Thus, the writ petitions fail and the same are liable to be 
dismissed.” 

10. 
Thus, the plain reading of the aforesaid line of reasoning adopted by 
the High Court would indicate that as the appellant detenu had engaged 
himself in unlawful activities of serious nature he could be said to have acted 
in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. The line of 
reasoning as above gives an impression that what weighed with the High 
Court are the allegations of chain snatching creating lot of fear and panic in 
the minds of the women folk. This according to the High Court was 
sufficient to reach to the conclusion that the alleged antisocial activities of 
the appellant detenu are prejudicial to the maintenance of the public order. 
 
11. 
In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant detenu is here 
before this Court with the present appeal. 
 
C. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS 
12. 
Mr. P. Mohith Rao, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant 
detenu made the following submissions: 
a. Mere registration of FIRs for the offences punishable under Chapter 
XVII of the Indian Penal Code (“IPC”) is not sufficient to label or brand 

any individual as a “GOONDA” as defined under Section 2(g) of the Act 
1986. In other words, mere registration of the FIRs for the offences of 
theft, robbery etc. is not sufficient to arrive at the subjective satisfaction 
that the alleged activities of the appellant detenu are prejudicial to the 
maintenance of public order. b. As per the explanation to Section 2(a) of the Act 1986, the activities in 
question must cause “harm, danger or alarm or a feeling of insecurity 
among the general public or any section thereof to be prejudicial to public 
order”. c. The criminal cases which have been registered against the appellant 
detenu involve the ordinary “law and order” problems or situations. The 
appellant detenu was granted bail in all the FIRs registered against him 
after giving an opportunity of hearing to the State. If it is the case of the 
State that the appellant detenu continued to indulge in the anti-social 
activities, the State ought to have approached the concerned court for 
cancellation of bail. Issuance of a preventive detention order which 
drastically curtails the appellant’s right to liberty under Article 21 of the 
Constitution is certainly neither the most suitable nor the least restrictive 
method of preventing the appellant from engaging in any further criminal 
activities. d. The impugned order of preventive detention suffers from the vice of total 
non-application of mind. The impugned order of detention could be said 
to have been vitiated on account of the extraneous matters being 
considered by the Detaining Authority. In the impugned order of 
detention the detaining authority has stated that the appellant detenu is a 
habitual offender as many FIRs have been registered against him, 
however, the Detaining Authority thought fit to take into consideration 
only two FIRs out of the four FIRs as the other two FIRs were registered 
outside the Commissionerate limits of the Detaining Authority. In other 
words, the offences alleged with respect to the two FIRs (not taken into 
consideration) were not committed within the Commissionerate limits of 
the Detaining Authority. This is suggestive of the fact that the detaining 
authority took into consideration the “history-sheet” of the detenu 
without recording any subjective satisfaction that such habituality has 
created a “public disorder”. Merely, because the appellant detenu has 
been charged for multiple offences it cannot be said that he is in the habit 
of committing such offences. Habituality of committing offences cannot, 
in isolation, be taken as a basis of any detention order; rather it has to be 
tested on the matrices of public order. 

13. 
In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel prayed 
that the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court be set side 
and as a consequence, the impugned order of preventive detention may also 
be quashed and set aside and the authorities concerned may be directed to 
release the appellant detenu forthwith from the detention. 
 
D. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS 
14. 
Mr. Kumar Vaibhav, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent 
made the following submissions: 
 
a. No error much less an error of law could be said to have been committed 
by the High Court in passing the impugned judgment and order. b. The order of preventive detention came to be passed by the Detaining 
Authority after due consideration of the entire material placed before him 
in the form of FIRs, CCTV camera footage, statements of various 
witnesses recorded in the course of the investigations, confessions of the 
appellant detenu before the police as regards the alleged crime, etc. It 
cannot be said that there was no material worth the name before the 
Detaining Authority to arrive at the subjective satisfaction that the 
activities of the appellant detenu are prejudicial. c. Indulging repeatedly, in the activity of snatching of gold chains from the 
necks of women folk has created an atmosphere of panic and scare in the 
locality. 
 
15. 
In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel prayed 
that there being no merit in this appeal, the same may be dismissed. 
 
E. 
ANALYSIS 
16. 
 Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and 
having gone through the materials on record the only question that falls for 
our consideration is whether the High Court committed any error in rejecting 
the writ petition filed by the appellant detenu and thereby affirming the order 
of preventive detention passed by the Detaining Authority? 
 
17. 
Section 2(a) of the Act 1986 reads thus: 
“(a) “acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of 
public order” means when a boot-legger, a dacoit, a drug-
offender, a goonda, an immoral traffic offender, Land-Grabber, a 
Spurious Seed Offender, an Insecticide Offender, a Fertiliser 
Offender, a Food Adulteration Offender, a Fake Document 
Offender, a Scheduled Commodities Offender, a Forest Offender, a 
Gaming Offender, a Sexual Offender, an Explosive Substances 
Offender, an Arms Offender, a Cyber Crime Offender and a White 
Collar or Financial Offender is engaged or is making preparations 
for engaging, in any of his activities as such, which affect 
adversely, or are likely to affect adversely, the maintenance of 
public order: 

 Explanation:- For the purpose of this clause public order shall 
be deemed to have been affected adversely or shall be deemed 
likely to be affected adversely inter alia, if any of the activities of 
any of the persons referred to in this clause directly, or indirectly, 
is causing or calculated to cause any harm, danger or alarm or a 
feeling of insecurity among the general public or any section 
thereof or a grave wide-spread danger to life or public health” 

18. Section 2(g) of the Act 1986 defines the term “GOONDA”: 
 
“(g) “goonda” means a person, who either by himself or as a 
member of or leader of a gang, habitually commits, or attempts to 
commit or abets the commission of offences punishable under 
Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII or Chapter XXII of the Indian Penal 
Code;” 
 
19. 
The Act 1986, has been enacted with a clear object to prevent crime 
and to protect the society from the anti-social elements and dangerous 
characters by placing them under detention for such a duration as would 
disable them from resorting to undesirable criminal activities. The 
provisions of the Act 1986 are intended to deal with habitual criminals, 
dangerous and desperate outlaws, who are so hardened and incorrigible that 
the ordinary provisions of the penal laws and the mortal/moral fear of 
punishment for crime are not sufficient deterrence for them. 
 
20. 
The law is well settled that the power under any enactment relating to 
preventive detention has to be exercised with great care, caution & restraint. 
In order to pass an order of detention under the Act 1986 against any person, 

the Detaining Authority must be satisfied that he is a “GOONDA” within 
the meaning of Section 2(g) of the Act 1986, who either by himself or as a 
member of or a leader of a gang habitually commits or attempts to commit 
or abets the commission of offences punishable under Chapter XVI or 
Chapter XVII or Chapter XXII of the IPC as according to the explanation to 
Section 2(a) of the Act 1986, it is such a “GOONDA” who for the purpose 
of Section 2 of the Act 1986 shall be deemed to be a person “acting in any 
manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order” and against whom 
an order of detention may lawfully be made. 
 
21. 
Further, sub-section (1) of Section 3 confers power on the State 
Government and a District Magistrate or a Commissioner of Police as the 
case may be under the direction of the State Government to detain a person 
on being satisfied that it is necessary to do so with a view to prevent him 
from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of “public order”. 
 
22. 
In the aforesaid context, we may refer to a decision of this Court in 
Pushkar Mukherjee v. State of West Bengal reported in (1969): 
“13. …Does the expression “public order” take in every kind of 
infraction of order or only some categories thereof. It is manifest 
that every act of assault or injury to specific persons does not lead 
to public disorder. When two people quarrel and fight and assault 

each other inside a house or in a street, it may be said that there is 
disorder but not public disorder. Such cases are dealt with under 
the powers vested in the executive authorities under the provisions 
of ordinary criminal law but the culprits cannot be detained on the 
ground that they were disturbing public order. The contravention 
of any law always affects order but before it can be said to affect 
public order, it must affect the community or the public at large. In 
this connection we must draw a line of demarcation between 
serious and aggravated forms of disorder which directly affect the 
community or injure the public interest and the relatively minor 
breaches of peace of a purely local significance which primarily 
injure specific individuals and only in a secondary sense public 
interest. A mere disturbance of law and order leading to disorder 
is thus not necessarily sufficient for action under the Preventive 
Detention Act but a disturbance which will affect public order 
comes within the scope of the Act. …” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
23. 
The explanation attached to Section 2(a) of the Act 1986 reproduced 
above contemplates that ‘public order’ shall be deemed to have been affected 
adversely or shall be deemed likely to be affected adversely, inter alia if any 
of the activities of any person referred to in Section 2(a) directly or 
indirectly, are causing or is likely to cause any harm, danger or alarm or 
feeling of insecurity among the general public or any section thereof or a 
grave or widespread danger to life, property or public health. The 
Explanation to Section 2(a) also provides that for the purpose of Section 2, 
a person shall be deemed to be “acting in any manner prejudicial to the 
maintenance of public order” when such person is a “GOONDA” and 
engaged in activities which affect adversely or are likely to affect adversely 

the maintenance of public order. It, therefore, becomes necessary to 
determine whether besides the person being a “GOONDA” his alleged 
activities are such which adversely affected the public order or are likely to 
affect the maintenance of public order. 
 
24. 
The essential concept of preventive detention is that the detention of 
a person is not to punish him for something he has done but to prevent him 
from doing it. The basis of detention is the satisfaction of the executive about 
the likelihood of the detenu acting in a manner, similar to his past acts, which 
is likely to affect adversely the maintenance of public order and, thereby 
prevent him, by an order of detention, from doing the same. A criminal 
conviction on the other hand is for an act already done which can only be 
possible by a trial and legal evidence. There is no parallel between the 
prosecution in a Court of law and a detention order under the Act 1986. One 
is a punitive action and the other is a preventive act. In one case a person is 
punished on proof of his guilt, and the standard is proof beyond the 
reasonable doubt, whereas in the other a person is detained with a view to 
prevent him from doing such act(s) as may be specified in the Act 
authorizing preventive detention. 

25. 
The power of preventive detention is qualitatively different from 
punitive detention. The power of preventive detention is a precautionary 
power exercised in reasonable anticipation. It may or may not relate to an 
offence. It is not a parallel proceeding. It does not overlap with prosecution 
even if it relies on certain facts for which prosecution may be launched or 
may have been launched. An order of preventive detention, may be made 
before or during prosecution. An order of preventive detention may be made 
with or without prosecution and in anticipation or after discharge or even 
acquittal. The pendency of prosecution is no bar to an order of preventive 
detention. An order of preventive detention is also not a bar to prosecution. 
(See: Haradhan Saha v. The State of W.B., 1974 Cri LJ 1479] 

26. 
In Halsbury's Laws Of England, it is stated thus:— 
“The writ of habeas corpus ad subjiciendum” unlike other writs, 
is a prerogative writ, that is to say, it is an extraordinary remedy, 
which is issued upon cause shown in cases where the ordinary 
legal remedies are inapplicable or inadequate. This writ is a writ 
of right and is granted ex debito justitiate. It is not, however, a writ 
of course. Both at common law and by statute, the writ of habeas 
corpus may be granted only upon reasonable ground for its issue 
being shown. The writ may not in general be refused merely 
because an alternative remedy by which the validity of the 
detention can be questioned. “Any person is entitled to institute 
proceedings to obtain a writ of habeas corpus for the purpose of 
liberating another from an illegal imprisonment and any person 
who is legally entitled to the custody of another may apply for the 
writ in order to regain custody. In any case, where access is denied 
to a person alleged to be unjustifiably detained, so that there are 

no instructions from the prisoner, the application may be made by 
any relation or friend on an affidavit setting forth the reason for it 
being made.” 
 
27. 
In Corpus Juris Secundum, the nature of the writ of habeas corpus is 
summarized thus: — 
“The writ of habeas corpus is a writ directed to the person 
detaining another, commanding him to produce the body of the 
prisoner at a designated time and place with the day and cause of 
his caption and detention to do, submit to, and receive whatsoever 
the court or judge awarding the writ shall consider in that behalf.” 
‘Habeas corpus’ literally means “have the body”. By this writ, the 
court can direct to have the body of the person detained to be 
brought before it in order to ascertain whether the detention is 
legal or illegal. Such is the predominant position of the writ in the 
Anglo-Saxon Jurisprudence.” 

28. 
In Constitutional and Administrative Law By Hood Phillips & 
Jackson, it is stated thus:— 
“The legality of any form of detention may be challenged at 
common law by an application for the writ of habeas corpus. 
Habeas corpus was a prerogative writ, that is, one issued by the 
King against his officers to compel them to exercise their functions 
properly. The practical importance of habeas corpus as providing 
a speedy judicial remedy for the determination of an applicant's 
claim for freedom has been asserted frequently by judies and 
writers. Nonetheless, the effectiveness of the remedy depends in 
many instances on the width of the statutory power under which a 
public authority may be acting and the willingness of the Courts 
to examine the legality of decision made in reliance on wide 
ranging statutory provision. It has been suggested that the need 
for the “blunt remedy” of habeas corpus has diminished as 
judicial review has developed into an ever more flexible 
jurisdiction. Procedural reform of the writ may be appropriate, but 

it is important not to lose sight of substantive differences between 
habeas corpus and remedies under judicial review. The latter are 
discretionary and the court may refuse relief on practical grounds; 
habeas corpus is a writ of right, granted ex debito justitiae.” 

29. 
The ancient prerogative writ of habeas corpus takes its name from the 
two mandatory words “habeas” and “corpus”. ‘Habeas Corpus’ literally 
means ‘have his body’. The general purpose of these writs as their name 
indicates was to obtain the production of the individual before a court or a 
judge. This is a prerogative process for securing the liberty of the subject by 
affording an effective relief of immediate release from unlawful or 
unjustifiable detention, whether in prison or in private custody. This is a writ 
of such a sovereign and transcendent authority that no privilege of power or 
place can stand against it. It is a very powerful safeguard of the subject 
against arbitrary acts not only of private individuals but also of the 
Executive, the greatest safeguard for personal liberty, according to all 
constitutional jurists. The writ is a prerogative one obtainable by its own 
procedure. In England, the jurisdiction to grant a writ existed in Common 
Law, but has been recognized and extended by statute. It is well established 
in England that the writ of habeas corpus is as of right and that the court has 
no discretion to refuse it. “Unlike certiorari or mandamus, a writ of habeas 
corpus is as of right” to every man who is unlawfully detained. In India, it is 

this prerogative writ which has been given a constitutional status under 
Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution. Therefore, it is an extraordinary 
remedy available to a citizen of this Country, which he can enforce under 
Article 226 or under Article 32 of the Constitution of India. 
 
30. 
It is the duty of the Court to issue this writ to safeguard the freedom 
of the citizen against arbitrary and illegal detention. Habeas corpus is a 
remedy designed to facilitate the release of persons detained unlawfully, not 
to punish the person detaining and it is not, therefore, issued after the 
detention complained of has come to an end. It is a remedy against unlawful 
detention. It is issued in the form of an order calling upon the person who 
has detained another, whether in prison or in private custody, to ‘have the 
body’ of that other before the Court in order to let the Court know on what 
ground the latter has been confined and thus to give the Court an opportunity 
of dealing with him as the law may require. By the writ of habeas corpus, 
the Court can cause any person who is imprisoned to be brought before the 
Court and obtain knowledge of the reason why he is imprisoned and then 
either set him free then and there if there is no legal justification for the 
imprisonment, or see that he is brought speedily to trial. Habeas Corpus is 
available against any person who is suspected of detaining another 

unlawfully and not merely against the police or other public officers whose 
duties normally include arrest and detention. The Court must issue it if it is 
shown that the person on whose behalf it is asked for is unlawfully deprived 
of his liberty. The writ may be addressed to any person whatsoever an 
official or a private individual-who has another in his custody. The claim 
(for habeas corpus) has been expressed and pressed in terms of concrete 
legal standards and procedures. Most notably, the right of personal liberty is 
connected in both the legal and popular sense with procedures upon the writ 
of habeas corpus. The writ is simply a judicial command directed to a 
specific jailer directing him or her to produce the named prisoner together 
with the legal cause of detention in order that this legal warrant of detention 
might be examined. The said detention may be legal or illegal. The right 
which is sought to be enforced by such a writ is a fundamental right of a 
citizen conferred under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, which 
provides:— 
“Article 21. Protection of life and personal liberty.— 
No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except 
according to the procedure established by law.” 

31. 
We are of the view that mere registration of the two FIRs for the 
alleged offences of robbery etc. could not have been made the basis to invoke 
the provisions of the Act 1986 for the purpose of preventively detaining the 

appellant herein on the assumption that he is a “GOONDA” as defined under 
Section 2(g) of the Act 1986. What has been alleged against the appellant 
detenu could be said to have raised the problems relating to law and order 
but we find it difficult to say that they impinged on public order. This Court 
has time and again, reiterated that in order to bring the activities of a person 
within the expression of “acting in any manner prejudicial to the 
maintenance of public order” the activities must be of such a nature that the 
ordinary laws cannot deal with them or prevent subversive activities 
affecting society. Inability on the part of the state’s police machinery to 
tackle the law and order situation should not be an excuse to invoke the 
jurisdiction of preventive detention. 
 
32. 
The crucial issue is whether the activities of the detenu were 
prejudicial to public order. While the expression 'law and order' is wider in 
scope inasmuch as contravention of law always affects order, 'Public order' 
has a narrower ambit, and could be affected by only such contravention, 
which affects the community or the public at large. Public order is the even 
tempo of life of the community taking the country as a whole or even a 
specified locality. The distinction between the areas of 'law and order' and 
'public order' is one of degree and extent of the reach, of the act in question 

on society. It is the potentiality of the act to disturb the even tempo of life of 
the community which makes it prejudicial to the maintenance of the public 
order. If a contravention in its effect is confined only to a few individuals 
directly involved as distinct from a wide spectrum of public, it could raise 
problem of law and order only. In other words, the true distinction between 
the areas of law and order and public order lies not merely in the nature or 
quality of the act, but in the degree and extent of its reach upon society. Acts 
similar in nature, but committed in different contexts and circumstances, 
might cause different reactions. In one case it might affect specific 
individuals only, and therefore touches the problem of law and order only, 
while in another it might affect public order. The act by itself, therefore, is 
not determinant of its own gravity. In its quality it may not differ from other 
similar acts, but in its potentiality, that is, in its impact on society, it may be 
very different. [See: Union of India v. Amrit Lal Manchanda, (2004).] 
 
33. 
We have noticed over a period of time that in reports sponsoring 
preventive detention the officers concerned rely on statements of few 
individuals residing in the concerned locality so as to project existence of an 
atmosphere of panic or fear in the minds of the people residing in that 
locality. While recording such statements, the individuals concerned are 

assured that their identity would not be disclosed so that the maker of the 
statement may not get into any difficulty. Some of the State enactments 
relating to preventive detention, for instance, Section 9 of the Gujarat 
Prevention of Anti-Social Activities Act, 1985, empower the Detaining 
Authority not to disclose facts which it considers to be against the public 
interest. In the case on hand, there is nothing to indicate that any such 
statements of people, more particularly the women of the concerned locality, 
were recorded so as to arrive at the subjective satisfaction that the nefarious 
activities of the detenu created an atmosphere of panic and fear in the minds 
of the people of the concerned locality. There is a good reason why we are 
saying so or rather touching upon this issue. It appears that in none of the 
FIRs the name of the detenu has been disclosed as one of the accused 
persons. This is but obvious because the victim from whose neck the chain 
is alleged to have been snatched would not know the detenu and the other 
associates of the detenu. In each of the FIRs, it has been stated by the victim 
that she would be in a position to identify the accused persons if shown to 
her. We wonder whether any identification parade was carried out by the 
police in this direction? There is nothing to indicate in this regard from the 
materials on record. It, prima facie, appears that the detenu might have been 
picked up by the police on suspicion and then all that has been relied upon 

to point a finger towards the detenu is his confessional statement before the 
police. We are conscious of the fact that ordinarily the court should not get 
into or look into the sufficiency of the materials on record on the basis of 
which the requisite subjective satisfaction is arrived at by the Detaining 
Authority. However, the facts of the present case are such that we had to go 
into such issues. 
 
34. 
The aforesaid gives rise to a neat question of law whether the 
confessional statement made by a detenu to the police officer is admissible 
in cases of detention under the Act 1986 or under any other enactment of 
any State relating to preventive detention. We do not propose to enter into 
any debate on this question as we have not put the counsel appearing for the 
parties to notice on this issue. We leave this question open to be looked into 
by this Court in any other appropriate matter in future. i. Extraneous Considerations that weighed with the Detaining 
Authority thereby vitiating the Order of Preventive Detention. 
 
35. 
We take notice of the fact that in the case on hand, the Detaining 
Authority has laid much stress on the fact that in the year 2023 in quick 
succession four FIRs came to be registered against the appellant for the 
offence of theft, robbery etc. However, the Detaining Authority took into 

consideration only two FIRs registered for the offences said to have 
committed within his territorial jurisdiction. The Detaining Authority in its 
order of detention has clearly stated that he has taken into consideration only 
the two FIRs registered for the alleged offence committed within his 
territorial jurisdiction. The Detaining Authority in clear terms has stated that 
he could not have made the other two FIRs referred to in the order of 
detention as the basis for arriving at the subjective satisfaction that the 
activities of the appellant detenu are prejudicial to the maintenance of the 
public order. However, after saying so, the Detaining Authority has in so 
many words stated that the other two FIRs have been considered to look into 
the criminal history of the appellant detenu. 
 
36. 
We are of the view that in the aforesaid context, the Detaining 
Authority is not correct and he could be said to have taken into consideration 
something extraneous. 
 
37. 
In the case of Ameena Begum v. State of Telangana and Others 
reported in (2023), a two-Judge Bench of this Court was 
confronted with almost an identical situation with which we are dealing 
with. In Ameena Begum (supra) this Court while considering whether there 
was proper application of mind to all the relevant circumstances or whether 

consideration of extraneous factors had vitiated the order of detention, 
observed thus: 
“50. Considering past criminal history, which is proximate, by 
itself would not render an order illegal. The Commissioner in the 
detention order made pointed reference to the detenu being a 
habitual offender by listing 10 (ten) criminal proceedings in which 
the detenu was involved during the years 2019-2020, consequent 
to which the detenu was preventively detained under the 
Act vide order of detention dated 4-3-2021, since quashed by the 
High Court by its order dated 16-8-2021 [Hakeem Khan v. State 
of Telangana, ]. It is then stated therein 
that the detenu had committed 9 (nine) offences in the years 2022-
2023, and these offences are again listed out in detail. However, 
the Commissioner states that the present order of detention is 
based only on 5 (five) out of these 9 (nine) crimes, which are 
alleged to show that the detenu's activities are “prejudicial to the 
maintenance of public order, apart from disturbing peace and 
tranquillity in the area”. 
 
51. Interestingly, even in Para 9-E of his counter-affidavit, the 
Commissioner has extracted a portion of the detention order which 
we have set out in para 4. The reiteration of considering past 
criminal history of the detenu is not without its effect, as we shall 
presently discuss. 
 
52. In Khudiram Das [Khudiram Das v. State of W.B., (1975): 1975 SCC (Cri) 435], while examining the “history 
sheet” of the detenu, this Court had, in express terms, clarified that 
a generalisation could not be made that the detenu was in the habit 
of committing those offences. Merely because the detenu was 
charged for multiple offences, it could not be said that he was in 
the habit of committing such offences. Further, habituality of 
committing offences cannot, in isolation, be taken as a basis of any 
detention order; rather it has to be tested on the metrics of “public 
order”, as discussed above. Therefore, cases where such 
habituality has created any “public disorder” could qualify as a 
ground to order detention. 

53. Although the Commissioner sought to project that he ordered 
detention based on the said 5 (five) FIRs, indication of the past 
offences allegedly committed by the detenu in the detention order 
having influenced his thought process is clear. With the quashing 
of the order of detention dated 4-3-2021 by the High Court and 
such direction having attained finality, it defies logic why the 
Commissioner embarked on an elaborate narration of past 
offences, which are not relevant to the grounds of the present order 
of detention. This is exactly what this Court in Khaja Bilal 
Ahmed [Khaja Bilal Ahmed v. State of Telangana, (2020): (2020) 4 SCC (Cri) 629] deprecated. Also, as noted above, 
this Court in Shibban Lal Saksena [Shibban Lal Saksena v. State 
of U.P., (1953): AIR 1954 SC 179] held that such an 
order would be a bad order, the reason being that it could not be 
said in what manner and to what extent the valid and invalid 
grounds operated on the mind of the authority concerned and 
contributed to his subjective satisfaction forming the basis of the 
order.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 
 
38. 
Ameena Begum (supra) has referred to and relied upon the decision 
of this Court in Khaja Bilal Ahmed v. State of Telangana and Others 
reported in (2020). Khaja Bilal (supra) has been authored by 
one of us (Hon’ble Chief Justice Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud). The Court 
observed thus: 
“23. In the present case, the order of detention states that the 
fourteen cases were referred to demonstrate the “antecedent 
criminal history and conduct of the appellant”. The order of 
detention records that a “rowdy sheet” is being maintained at PS 
Rain Bazar of Hyderabad City and the appellant “could not mend 
his criminal way of life” and continued to indulge in similar 
offences after being released on bail. In the counter-affidavit filed 
before the High Court, the detaining authority recorded that these 
cases were “referred by way of his criminal background … (and) 
are not relied upon”. The detaining authority stated that the cases 

which were registered against the appellant between 2009 and 
2016 “are not at all considered for passing the detention order” 
and were “referred by way of his criminal background only”. This 
averment is plainly contradictory. The order of detention does, as 
a matter of fact, refer to the criminal cases which were instituted 
between 2007 and 2016. In order to overcome the objection that 
these cases are stale and do not provide a live link with the order 
of detention, it was contended that they were not relied on but were 
referred to only to indicate the antecedent background of the 
detenu. If the pending cases were not considered for passing the 
order of detention, it defies logic as to why they were referred to in 
the first place in the order of detention. The purpose of the 
Telangana Offenders Act, 1986 is to prevent any person from 
acting in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. 
For this purpose, Section 3 prescribes that the detaining authority 
must be satisfied that the person to be detained is likely to indulge 
in illegal activities in the future and act in a manner prejudicial to 
the maintenance of public order. The satisfaction to be arrived at 
by the detaining authority must not be based on irrelevant or 
invalid grounds. It must be arrived at on the basis of relevant 
material; material which is not stale and has a live link with the 
satisfaction of the detaining authority. The order of detention may 
refer to the previous criminal antecedents only if they have a direct 
nexus or link with the immediate need to detain an individual. If 
the previous criminal activities of the appellant could indicate his 
tendency or inclination to act in a manner prejudicial to the 
maintenance of public order, then it may have a bearing on the 
subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority. However, in the 
absence of a clear indication of a causal connection, a mere 
reference to the pending criminal cases cannot account for the 
requirements of Section 3. It is not open to the detaining authority 
to simply refer to stale incidents and hold them as the basis of an 
order of detention. Such stale material will have no bearing on the 
probability of the detenu engaging in prejudicial activities in the 
future.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
39. 
Ameena Begum (supra) has also referred to in para 53 of its judgment 
to the decision of this Court in Shibban Lal Saksena v. State of Uttar 

Pradesh and Others reported in (1953), wherein Justice B.K. 
Mukherjea speaking for the Bench observed as under: 
“8. The first contention raised by the learned counsel raises, 
however, a somewhat important point which requires careful 
consideration. It has been repeatedly held by this Court that the 
power to issue a detention order under Section 3 of the Preventive 
Detention Act depends entirely upon the satisfaction of the 
appropriate authority specified in that section. The sufficiency of 
the grounds upon which such satisfaction purports to be based, 
provided they have a rational probative value and are not 
extraneous to the scope or purpose of the legislative provision 
cannot be challenged in a court of law, except on the ground of 
mala fides [State of Bombay v. Atma Ram Shridhar Vaidya,: ]. A court of law is not even competent to 
enquire into the truth or otherwise of the facts which are mentioned 
as grounds of detention in the communication to the detenue under 
Section 7 of the Act. What has happened, however, in this case is 
somewhat peculiar. The Government itself in its communication 
dated 13-3-1953, has plainly admitted that one of the grounds 
upon which the original order of detention was passed is 
unsubstantial or non-existent and cannot be made a ground of 
detention. The question is, whether in such circumstances the 
original order made under Section 3(1)(a)of the Act can be 
allowed to stand. The answer, in our opinion, can only be in the 
negative. The detaining authority gave here two grounds for 
detaining the petitioner. We can neither decide whether these 
grounds are good or bad, nor can we attempt to assess in what 
manner and to what extent each of these grounds operated on the 
mind of the appropriate authority and contributed to the creation 
of the satisfaction on the basis of which the detention order was 
made. To say that the other ground, which still remains, is quite 
sufficient to sustain the order, would be to substitute an objective 
judicial test for the subjective decision of the executive authority 
which is against the legislative policy underlying the statute. In 
such cases, we think, the position would be the same as if one of 
these two grounds was irrelevant for the purpose of the Act or was 
wholly illusory and this would vitiate the detention order as a 
whole. This principle, which was recognised by the Federal Court 

in Keshav Talpade v. King Emperor [Keshav Talpade v. King 
Emperor, (1943) 5 FCR 88: ] seems to 
us to be quite sound and applicable to the facts of this case.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
40. 
Thus, from the aforesaid, two propositions of law are discernible. 
First, in the case on hand if the Detaining Authority thought fit to eschew 
from its consideration the two FIRs registered outside his territorial 
jurisdiction then he could not have made such FIRs as the basis to arrive at 
the subjective satisfaction that the appellant detenu is a history sheeter. 
Secondly, if at all the Detaining Authority wanted to take into consideration 
the two FIRs registered with the police station not falling within his 
territorial jurisdiction then he should have recorded the subjective 
satisfaction that the incidence of the two FIRs created “public disorder”. In 
other words, as observed by this Court in Ameena Begum (supra) habituality 
of committing offence cannot, in isolation, be taken as a basis of any 
detention order; rather it has to be tested on the matrices of “public order”. 
It is only those cases where such habituality has created disturbance of 
public order that they could qualify as a ground to order detention. 
 
41. 
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant detenu is also right in 
his submission that if it is the case of the Detaining Authority that there was 
no other option but to pass an order of preventive detention as the appellant 

detenu came to be released by the regular criminal courts on bail then the 
State should have gone for cancellation of bail. Whenever, any accused is 
released on bail by any criminal court in connection with any offence, 
whether specifically said so in the order of bail while imposing conditions 
or not, it is implied that the bail is granted on the condition that the accused 
shall not indulge in any such offence or illegal activities in future. In some 
cases, courts do deem fit to impose one of such conditions for the grant of 
bail. However, even in those cases, where such a condition is not specifically 
imposed while granting bail it is implied that if such accused after his release 
on bail once again commits any offence or indulges in nefarious activities 
then his bail is liable to be cancelled. In the case on hand, the State instead 
of proceeding to pass an order of detention could have approached the courts 
concerned for cancellation of the bail on the ground that the appellant detenu 
had continued to indulge in nefarious activities and many more FIRs have 
been registered against him. 
 
42. 
In the aforesaid context, we may refer to the decision of this Court 
in the case of Shaik Nazeen v. State of Telangana and Others reported in 
(2023), wherein in paras 11 and 19 respectively, this Court 
observed as under: 

“11. The detention order was challenged by the wife of the detenu 
in a habeas corpus petition before the Division Bench of the 
Telangana High Court. The ground taken by the petitioner before 
the High Court was that reliance has been taken by the Authority 
of four cases of chain snatching, as already mentioned above. The 
admitted position is that in all these four cases the detenu has been 
released on bail by the Magistrate. Moreover, in any case, the 
nature of crime as alleged against the petitioner can at best be said 
to be a law and order situation and not the public order situation, 
which would have justified invoking the powers under the 
preventive detention law. This, however did not find favour with 
the Division Bench of the High Court, which dismissed the 
petition, upholding the validity of the detention order. xxx 
 
xxx 

xxx 
19. In any case, the State is not without a remedy, as in case the 
detenu is much a menace to the society as is being alleged, then 
the prosecution should seek for the cancellation of his bail and/or 
move an appeal to the Higher Court. But definitely seeking shelter 
under the preventive detention law is not the proper remedy under 
the facts and circumstances of the case.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
ii. 
Summary of the Findings. 
43. 
We summarize our conclusions as under: - 

The Detaining Authority should take into consideration only relevant 
and vital material to arrive at the requisite subjective satisfaction, 

It is an unwritten law, constitutional and administrative, that wherever 
a decision-making function is entrusted to the subjective satisfaction 
of the statutory functionary, there is an implicit duty to apply his mind 

to the pertinent and proximate matters and eschew those which are 
irrelevant & remote, 

(iii) There can be no dispute about the settled proposition that the 
detention order requires subjective satisfaction of the detaining 
authority which, ordinarily, cannot be questioned by the court for 
insufficiency of material. Nonetheless, if the detaining authority does 
not consider relevant circumstances or considers wholly unnecessary, 
immaterial and irrelevant circumstances, then such subjective 
satisfaction would be vitiated, 

In quashing the order of detention, the Court does not sit in judgment 
over the correctness of the subjective satisfaction. The anxiety of the 
Court should be to ascertain as to whether the decision-making 
process for reaching the subjective satisfaction is based on objective 
facts or influenced by any caprice, malice or irrelevant considerations 
or non-application of mind, 

While making a detention order, the authority should arrive at a proper 
satisfaction which should be reflected clearly, and in categorical 
terms, in the order of detention, 

The satisfaction cannot be inferred by mere statement in the order that 
“it was necessary to prevent the detenu from acting in a manner 
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order”. Rather the detaining 
authority will have to justify the detention order from the material that 
existed before him and the process of considering the said material 
should be reflected in the order of detention while expressing its 
satisfaction, 
 
(vii) Inability on the part of the state’s police machinery to tackle the law 
and order situation should not be an excuse to invoke the jurisdiction 
of preventive detention, 
 
(viii) Justification for such an order should exist in the ground(s) furnished 
to the detenu to reinforce the order of detention. It cannot be explained 
by reason(s) / grounds(s) not furnished to the detenu. The decision of 
the authority must be the natural culmination of the application of 
mind to the relevant and material facts available on the record, and 

To arrive at a proper satisfaction warranting an order of preventive 
detention, the detaining authority must, first examine the material 
adduced against the prospective detenu to satisfy itself whether his 
conduct or antecedent(s) reflect that he has been acting in a manner 

prejudicial to the maintenance of public order and, second, if the 
aforesaid satisfaction is arrived at, it must further consider whether it 
is likely that the said person would act in a manner prejudicial to the 
public order in near future unless he is prevented from doing so by 
passing an order of detention. For passing a detention order based on 
subjective satisfaction, the answer of the aforesaid aspects and points 
must be against the prospective detenu. The absence of application of 
mind to the pertinent and proximate material and vital matters would 
show lack of statutory satisfaction on the part of the detaining 
authority. iii. 
The Saga Continues 
 
44. 
We are dealing with a litigation arising from an order of preventive 
detention passed by the State of Telangana under the provisions of the Act 
1986. 
 
45. 
This is one more litigation going against the State of Telangana. We 
remind the State of Telangana of what has been observed by this Court in 
Mallada K. Sri Ram v. State of Telangana reported in (2023) 
in para 17: 

“17. It is also relevant to note, that in the last five years, this Court 
has quashed over five detention orders under the Telangana Act of 
1986 for inter alia incorrectly applying the standard for 
maintenance of public order and relying on stale materials while 
passing the orders of detention. At least ten detention orders under 
the Telangana Act of 1986 have been set aside by the High Court 
of Telangana in the last one year itself. These numbers evince a 
callous exercise of the exceptional power of preventive detention 
by the detaining authorities and the respondent-state. We direct the 
respondents to take stock of challenges to detention orders pending 
before the Advisory Board, High Court and Supreme Court and 
evaluate the fairness of the detention order against lawful 
standards.” 

46. 
Again, in one of the recent pronouncements of this Court in Ameena 
Begum (supra), this Court referring to Mallada K. Sri Ram (supra) observed 
in para 65 as under: 
“65. Interference by this Court with orders of detention, routinely 
issued under the Act, seems to continue unabated. Even 
after Mallada K. Sri Ram [Mallada K. Sri Ram v. State of 
Telangana, (2023): ], in 
another decision of fairly recent origin in Sk. Nazneen v. State of 
Telangana [Sk. Nazneen v. State of Telangana, (2023) ], this Court set aside the impugned order of detention dated 28-10-
2021 holding that seeking shelter under preventive detention law 
was not the proper remedy.” 
 
47. 
We hope that the State of Telangana takes what has fallen from this 
Court very seriously and sees to it that the orders of preventive detention are 
not passed in a routine manner without any application of mind. 
 
48. 
We hope that the State of Telangana does not give any good reason 
once again to this Court to observe anything further. iv. 
Role of the Advisory Board 
 
49. 
At this stage, it is also apposite to mention that in such scenarios as 
discussed above, where orders of preventive detention are being passed by 
the Detaining Authority in a routine and mechanical manner, the role and 
duty of the Advisory Board(s) becomes all the more imperative to put a 
check on such capricious exercise of powers and ensure that a bright-line is 
drawn whereby such illegal detentions are nipped in the bud and the detenu 
released forthwith. 
 
50. 
Advisory Board(s) under preventive detention legislations, are not a 
superficial creation but one of the primary constitutional safeguards 
available to the detenu against an order of detention. Article 22(4) mandates 
that, any law pertaining to preventive detention must provide for constitution 
of an Advisory Board consisting of persons who have been or qualified to 
be appointed as judges of the High Court. It further vests the Advisory Board 
with the pivotal role of reviewing an order of detention within three-months 
by forming an opinion as to whether there is a sufficient cause for such 
detention or not, after consideration of all the material on record including 
representation if any, of the detenu. 
 
51. 
In Telangana also, under the Act, 1986, Section 9 gives expression to 
this constitutional requirement, and provides for the constitution and 

composition of an Advisory Board for the purposes of the Act, the relevant 
provision reads as under: - 
“9. Constitution of Advisory Boards. 
(1) The Government shall, whenever necessary, constitute one or 
more Advisory Boards for the purposes of this Act. 
 
(2) Every such Board shall consist of a Chairman and two other 
members, who are, or have been Judges or are qualified to be 
appointed as Judges of a High Court.” 
 
52. 
 Section 10 of the Act, 1986 provides for the reference and review of 
an order of detention passed under the Act by the Advisory Board. It states 
that any order of detention that has been made under the Act shall be placed 
before an Advisory Board thereunder within three-weeks from the date of its 
passing, along with the grounds on which such an order was made, the 
representation of the detenu if any, and the report of the officer empowered 
under the Act. The relevant provision reads as under: - 
“10. Reference to Advisory Boards. 
In every case where a detention order has been made under this 
Act, the Government shall within three weeks from the date of 
detention of a person under the order, place before the Advisory 
Board constituted by them under section 9, the grounds on which 
the order has been made and the representation, if any, made by 
the person affected by the order, and in the case where the order 
has been made by an officer, also the report by such officer under 
sub-section (3) of section 3.” 
 
53. 
Section 11 of the Act, 1986 delineates the function to be discharged 
and the procedure to be adopted by the Advisory Board. It inter-alia states 

that the Advisory Board must form an opinion and specify as to whether 
there is sufficient cause warranting the detention of the detenu. The Advisory 
Board has to form this opinion by considering all the materials placed before 
it in terms of Section 10 of the Act, 1986. Section 11 further empowers the 
Advisory Board to call for any other information or to hear the detenu, 
wherever necessary so as to ascertain the sufficiency of cause for preventive 
detention. The relevant provision reads as under: - 
“11. Procedure of Advisory Boards. 
(1) The Advisory Board shall, after considering the materials 
placed before it and, after calling for such further information as 
it may deem necessary from the Government or from any person 
called for the purpose through the Government or from the person 
concerned, and if, in any particular case, the Advisory Board 
considers it essential so to do or if the person concerned desires to 
be heard, after hearing him in person, submit its report to the 
Government within seven weeks from the date of detention of the 
person concerned. 
 
(2) The report of the Advisory Board shall specify in a separate 
part thereof the opinion of the Advisory Board as to whether or not 
there is sufficient cause for the detention of the person concerned. 
 
(3) When there is a difference of opinion among the members 
forming the Advisory Board, the opinion of the majority of such 
members shall be deemed to be the opinion of the Board. 
 
(4) The proceedings of the Advisory Board and its report, 
excepting that part of the report in which the opinion of the 
Advisory Board is specified, shall be confidential. 
 
(5) Nothing in this section shall entitle any person against whom 
a detention order has been made to appear by any legal 
practitioner in any matter connected with the reference to the 
Advisory Board.” 

54. 
Section 12 of the Act, 1986 provides that where the Advisory Board 
in its report is of the opinion that sufficient cause exists warranting detention, 
the Government may confirm the detention i.e., it gives the appropriate 
Government the discretion to either confirm or revoke the order of detention. 
But where the Advisory Board in its report is of the opinion that no sufficient 
cause exists for the detention of the detenu, the same is binding on the 
Government, and the detenu is forthwith required to be released. The 
relevant observations read as under: - 
 
“12. Action upon report of Advisory Board. 
(1) In any case where the Advisory Board has reported that there 
is, in its opinion, sufficient cause for the detention of a person, the 
Government may confirm the detention order and continue the 
detention of the person concerned for such period, not exceeding 
the maximum period specified in section 13 as they think fit. 
 
(2) In any case, where the Advisory Board has reported that there 
is, in its opinion, no sufficient cause for the detention of the person 
concerned, the Government shall revoke the detention order and 
cause the person to be released forthwith. 

55. 
What can be discerned from a bare perusal of the abovementioned 
provisions is that the Advisory Board performs the most vital duty of 
independently reviewing the detention order, after considering all the 
materials placed before it, or any other material which it deems necessary. 
When reviewing the detention order along with the relevant materials, the 
Advisory Board must form an opinion as to the sufficiency of the cause for 

warranting detention. An order of detention passed under the Act, 1986 can 
only be confirmed if the Advisory Board is of the opinion that there exists 
sufficient cause for the detention of the detenu. 
 
56. 
The framers of the Constitution being in seisin of the draconian nature 
of an order of preventive detention and its adverse impact on individual 
liberty, have specifically put in place safeguards within Article 22 through 
the creation of an Advisory Board, to ensure that any order of preventive 
detention is only confirmed upon the evaluation and scrutiny of an 
independent authority which determines and finds that such an order for 
detention is necessary. 
 
57. 
The legislature in its wisdom has thought it fit, to entrust the Advisory 
Board and no one else, not even the Government, with the performance of 
this crucial and critical function which ultimately culminates into either the 
confirmation or revocation of a detention order. The Advisory Board setup 
under any preventive detention law in order to form its opinion is required 
to; (i) consider the material placed before it; (ii) to call for further 
information, if deemed necessary; (iii) to hear the detenu, if he desires to be 
heard and; (iv) to submit a report in writing as to whether there is sufficient 
cause for “such detention” or whether the detention is justified. 

58. 
An Advisory Board is not a mere rubber-stamping authority for an 
order of preventive detention. Whenever any order of detention is placed 
before it for review, it must play an active role in ascertaining whether the 
detention is justified under the law or not. Where it finds that such order of 
detention is against the spirit of the Act or in contravention of the law as laid 
down by the courts, it can definitely opine that the order of detention is not 
sustainable and should not shy away from expressing the same in its report. 
 
59. 
As stated by us above, preventive detention being a draconian 
measure, any order of detention as a result of a capricious or routine exercise 
of powers must be nipped in the bud. It must be struck down at the first 
available threshold and as such, it should be the Advisory Board that must 
take into consideration all aspects not just the subjective satisfaction of the 
detaining authorities but whether such satisfaction justifies detention of the 
detenu. The Advisory Board must consider whether the detention is 
necessary not just in the eyes of the detaining authority but also in the eyes 
of law. 
 
60. 
The requirement of having persons who have been or are qualified to 
be High Court judges in the Advisory Board is not an empty formality, it is 
there to ensure that, an order of detention is put to robust scrutiny and 

examined as it would have been by any ordinary court of law. Otherwise, the 
purpose of independent scrutiny could very well have been served by having 
any independent persons, and there would have been no need to have High 
Court judges or their equivalent. Thus, it is imperative that whenever an 
order of detention is placed before an Advisory Board, it duly considers each 
and every aspect, not just those confined to the satisfaction of the detaining 
authority but the overall legality as per the law that has been laid down by 
this court. 
 
61. 
An Advisory Board whilst dispensing its function of ascertaining the 
existence of a “sufficient cause” for detention, cannot keep itself 
unconcerned or oblivious to the developments that have taken place by a 
plethora of decisions of this Court delineating the criterion required to be 
fulfilled for passing an order of detention. The “independent scrutiny” as 
envisaged by Article 22 includes ascertaining whether the detention order 
would withstand the scrutiny a court of law. 
 
62. 
We fail to understand what other purpose the Advisory Board 
encompassing High Court judges or their equivalent as members would 
serve, if the extent of their scrutiny of the order of detention is confined just 

to the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority. The entire purpose 
behind creation of an Advisory Board is to ensure that no person is 
mechanically or illegally sent to preventive detention. In such 
circumstances, the Advisory Boards are expected to play a proactive role. 
The Advisory Board is a constitutional safeguard and a statutory authority. 
It functions as a safety valve between the detaining authority and the State 
on one hand and the rights of the detenu on the other. The Advisory Board 
should not just mechanically proceed to approve detention orders but is 
required to keep in mind the mandate contained in Article 22(4) of the 
Constitution of India. 
 
63. 
Thus, an Advisory Board setup under a preventive detention 
legislation is required to undertake a proper and thorough scrutiny of an 
order of detention placed before it, by appreciating all aspects and angles 
before expressing any definite opinion in its report. 
 
F. 
CONCLUSION 
64. 
In the result, this appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. The 
impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is set aside. 
Consequently, the order of detention is also quashed and set aside. The 
appellant detenu be set at liberty forthwith if not required in any other case. 

65. 
The connected Criminal Appeal No.... of 2024 (Cri) 
No. 3391 of 2024 of the co-detenu is also allowed for the very same reasons 
and is disposed of in the aforesaid terms. The order of detention passed 
against the co-detenu also stands quashed and set aside. He be set at liberty 
forthwith if not required in any other case. 
 
66. 
The Registry shall forward one copy each of this judgment to the 
Chief Secretary and the Principal Home Secretary of the State of Telangana 
at the earliest. 
67. 
Pending application(s) if any shall stand disposed of.... CJI. 
(Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud)... J. 
(J.B. Pardiwala)... J. 
(Manoj Misra) 
 
New Delhi 
21st March, 2024