IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Saree Sansar 

 … Appellant 
 
versus 
 
Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Ors. 

… Respondents 

JUDGMENT 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The appellant assessee has taken exception to the 
judgment dated 19th October 2006 passed by a Division Bench 
of Delhi High Court. In the exercise of powers under Section 
4(1) of the Delhi Sales Tax Act, 1975 (the DST Act), the 
Government of Delhi issued a notification on 31st March 1999 
stating that the rate of the State sales tax on silk fabrics was 
fixed at 3%. On 15th January 2000, another notification was 
issued by which silk fabric was included in Schedule I of the 
DST Act. Therefore, the State sales tax on silk fabric was 
increased to 12%. On 31st March 2000, silk fabric was shifted 
from Schedule I to Schedule II of the DST Act by amending the 

Schedules. Therefore, the sales tax became payable on silk 
fabric at 4%. An assessment order was issued to the appellant 
on 31st October 2001 for the levy of the State sales tax at the 
rate of 12% for the period from 15th January 2000 to 31st March 
2000. The amount demanded was Rs.4,22,095/-. 
2. 
The appellant filed a writ petition before the Delhi High 
Court to challenge the order of assessment. By the impugned 
judgment, the writ petition was dismissed. 
SUBMISSIONS 
3. 
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant invited 
our attention to the provisions of the Additional Duties of 
Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (the ADE Act). 
He submitted that the item “Silk Sarees” falls under item 
no.50.05 of the First Schedule to the ADE Act. Since “Silk 
Sarees” fall in the category of “declared goods” under the ADE 
Act, the Delhi Government was not empowered to levy State 
sales tax on the said goods. He submitted that under the 
scheme of the ADE Act, the additional duties are levied on 
declared goods in lieu of the sales tax and after deducting 
2.203% of the total proceeds for distribution to the Union 
Territories, the remaining proceeds are distributed among the 
States as per the prescribed percentage. He relied upon 
Articles 266 and 269 of the Constitution of India, containing 
the scheme of collection and distribution of net proceeds of 
taxes and duties received by the Government of India under the 
Consolidated Fund. He submitted that Article 269(2) makes it 
very clear that the proceeds attributable to the Union 

Territories are kept aside and would not form a part of the 
Consolidated Funds of India. He urged that Delhi was getting 
its share of ADE at the relevant time. Hence, the Delhi 
Government was debarred from levying sales tax on “Silk 
Sarees”. He submitted that the ADE Act has been brought on 
the statute book to bring uniformity in the duty/tax 
throughout the country on the “goods of special importance”. 
He relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of Godfrey 
Phillips India Ltd. v. State of U.P.1 and submitted that no 
State is entitled to levy sales tax when it is entitled to share 
proceeds under the ADE Act. He relied upon paragraph 6 of a 
decision of this Court in the case of State of Kerala v. 
Attesee2 to support his contention that the Delhi Government 
was not entitled to levy sales tax on silk sarees. He submitted 
that the fact that “silk fabric” was deleted from the list 
contained in Section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (the 
CST Act) is entirely irrelevant. In the alternative, the learned 
counsel submitted that in view of sub-section (1) of Section 15 
of the CST Act, the Government of Delhi cannot claim sales tax 
over 4%. Therefore, he would urge that the levy of the sales tax 
at the rate of 12% is certainly bad in law. 
4. 
The learned counsel appearing for the respondents 
submitted that the Item of silk fabric was deleted from the list 
of items in Section 14 with effect from 11th May 1968. 
Therefore, there was no embargo on levying sales tax at the rate 
 
1 (2005) 
2 (1989) Supp. above 4%. The learned counsel submitted that though the item 
of silk sarees is covered by clause 50.05 of the First Schedule 
to the ADE Act, the additional duty payable on the item is 
shown as nil. Therefore, the Government of Delhi was not 
getting any share in duty on silk fabric as ADE was not leviable 
on the said item. He would, thus, submit that the view taken 
by the Delhi High Court calls for no interference. 
OUR VIEW 
5. 
In this appeal, we are concerned with the demand made 
for the period between 15th January 2000 and 31st March 2000. 
During the said period, silk fabric was a part of Schedule I of 
the DST Act, on which sales tax was leviable at the rate of 12%. 
Sections 14 and 15 of the Central Sales Tax Act were deleted 
by Act No. 18 of 2017. Section 14, before its deletion, declared 
certain goods specified therein as of special importance in 
inter-state trade or commerce. Until 11th May 1968, item (xi) 
was incorporated in Section 14, which covered the item of “silk 
sarees”. However, with effect from 11th May 1968, the said item 
was deleted by Act No. 19 of 1968. 
6. 
Section 15(1) of the CST Act, as existed during the period 
for which the impugned assessment was made, provided that 
the local sales tax rate on declared goods should not exceed 4% 
of the sale or purchase price of such goods. So long as the silk 
fabric was a part of the list of declared goods under Section 14 
of the CST Act, the sales tax levy under the DST Act could not 
have exceeded 4% in view of Section 15(1) of the CST Act. 
However, silk fabric was deleted from the list contained in 

Section 14 of the CST Act, effective 11 May 1968. Therefore, 
during the relevant period for which the impugned assessment 
order was issued, as silk fabric was not a part of the list under 
Section 14, there was no embargo on levying sales tax on silk 
fabric at a rate exceeding 4%. Therefore, the argument based 
on Section 15(1) of the CST Act will not help the appellant. 
7. 
Now, we turn to the arguments based on the ADE Act. As 
stated earlier, silk sarees form part of item 50.05 of Schedule I 
of the ADE Act. However, the duty payable on the said item 
was shown as nil. The entire argument of the appellant is 
based on what is stated in the Second Schedule of the ADE Act, 
which reads thus:- 
“During each of the financial years 
commencing on and after the 1st day of 
April, 1995, there shall be paid to each 
of the States specified in column (1) of 
the Table below such percentage of the 
net proceeds of additional duties levied 
and collected during that financial 
year in respect of the goods described 
in column (3) of the First Schedule, 
after deducting therefrom a sum equal 
to 2.203 per cent, of the said proceeds 
as 
being 
attributable 
to 
Union 
territories, as is set out against it in 
column (2) of the said Table: 
 
Provided that if during that financial 
year there is levied and collected in 
any State a tax on the sale or purchase 
of the goods described in column (3) of 
the First Schedule, or one or more of 
them by or under any law of that State, 
no sums shall be payable to that State 
under this paragraph in respect of that 

financial year, unless the Central 
Government 
by 
special 
order 
otherwise directs.” 
 
8. 
In the State of Kerala v. Attesee2, the issue was the 
interconnection of the three Acts: the CST Act, the ADE Act and 
the State Sales Tax Act. The appellant relied upon what is held 
in paragraph 6 of the said decision of this Court. Paragraph 6 
of the said decision reads thus: 
“6. Article 286 of the Constitution of 
India imposed certain restrictions on 
the legislative powers of the States in 
the matter of levy of sales tax on sales 
taking place outside the State, sales 
in the course of import or export, 
sales in the course of interstate trade 
or commerce and sales of declared 
goods. The Sales Tax Acts in force in 
several States were not in conformity 
with 
the 
provisions 
of 
the 
Constitution and attempts to bring 
those laws to be in conformity with 
these provisions gave rise to a lot of 
litigation. This led to an amendment 
of Article 286. Clause (2) of the article, 
as 
it 
stands, 
since 
11-9-1956, 
authorised Parliament to formulate 
principles for determining when sale 
or purchase of goods can be said to 
take place in the course of import or 
export or in the course of inter-State 
trade or commerce. Clause (3) was 
amended, in terms already set out, to 
restrict the powers of a State to 

impose sales or purchase tax on 
declared goods. The CST Act, 1956 
which came into force on 5-1-1957 
formulated the principles referred to 
in 
Article 
286(2). 
As 
already 
mentioned, this Act was amended, 
inter alia, by Act 16 of 1957 w.e.f. 6-
6-1957 and by Act 31 of 1958 w.e.f. 1-
10-1958. Section 14 listed the goods 
which are considered to be of special 
importance in inter-State trade or 
commerce which included the six 
items set out earlier. Section 15 of the 
Act, 
as 
originally 
enacted, 
was 
brought into force only w.e.f. 1-10-
1958. It stipulated that levy of sales 
tax on declared goods should not be 
at a rate exceeding 2 per cent or be 
levied at more than one point in a 
State. Before this section came into 
force, it was amended by Act 16 of 

which 
retained 
the 
first 
restriction and, so far as the second is 
concerned, provided that the tax 
should be levied only on the last sale 
or purchase inside the State and even 
that should not be levied when that 
last sale or purchase is in the course 
of inter-State trade or commerce as 
defined. Act 31 of 1958 amended 
Section 15 to impose certain modified 
restrictions and conditions with the 
details of which we are not here 
concerned. 
These 
restrictions 
clearly entailed loss of revenue to 

the States and it was considered 
expedient 
and 
desirable 
to 
compensate the States for the 
proportionate loss of sales tax 
incurred by them. Thus, even 
before Section 15 was brought into 
force, the 
Central 
Government 
decided to pass an Act to provide 
for the levy and collection of 
additional duties of excise on 
certain 
goods 
and 
for 
the 
distribution of a part of the net 
proceeds thereof among the States 
in pursuance of the principles of 
distribution recommended by the 
Second Finance Commission in its 
report 
dated 
30-9-1957. 
This 
proposal to levy additional duties 
of excise on certain special goods 
was a part and parcel of an 
integrated scheme under which 
sales tax levied at different rates by 
the States on certain goods was 
ultimately substituted by the levy 
of additional duties of excise on 
such goods and the States were 
compensated by payment of a part 
of the net proceeds of the said 
additional levy on such goods. That 
this clearly was the genesis and 
object of the 1957 Act also appears 
from its objects and reasons set out 
earlier. Some of the items liable to 
excise duty were picked out from the 
Schedule to the 1944 Act. They were 

listed among the declared goods of 
Section 14 of the CST Act and also 
made liable to additional excise duty 
under the 1957 Act. A perusal of the 
lists under these three enactments 
show that out of the items listed in the 
schedule to the 1944 Act, sugar, 
tobacco, cotton fabrics, rayon or 
artificial fabrics and woollen fabrics 
were categorised as declared goods 
and subjected to additional excise 
duty. When the numerical order of 
these items in the 1944 Act (originally 
8, 9, 12, 12-A, 12-B) came to be 
changed in 1960 (as 1, 4, 19, 22, 21) 
a corresponding change was effected 
in the 1957 Act. Silk fabrics as 
defined in item 20 of the 1944 Act was 
included in 1961 in the CST Act and 
the 1957 Act. The fact that cotton 
fabrics though listed as item 12 in the 
Schedule to the 1944 Act was not 
brought into the list in Section 14 till 
1-10-1958 or that Silk fabrics was 
dropped from the list in Section 14 
w.e.f. 11-6-1968 though it continues 
in the schedule to the 1944 Act does 
not alter the position that these three 
acts are interconnected and that 
certain goods taken out from the 
Schedule to the 1944 Act were to be 
subjected to the special treatment 
outlined in the CST Act and the 1957 
Act.” 
(emphasis added) 

The second Schedule of the ADE Act provides that during 
each financial year, each State shall be paid a certain 
percentage of net proceeds of the additional duties levied 
and collected during the financial year in respect of the 
goods described in column (3) of Schedule I. However, 
no additional duty was made payable on silk fabric under 
the ADE Act. The proviso makes it clear that 
notwithstanding the ADE Act, there is no bar on the 
States levying sales tax. If the States do that, no part of 
the additional duty under the ADE Act will be payable to 
the concerned States. Therefore, the argument that as 
silk fabric formed a part of Schedule I of the ADE Act, it 
disentitled the State Government from levying sales tax 
is fallacious and cannot be accepted. 
9. 
The High Court has noted that its Co-ordinate 
Bench in the case of M.R. Tobacco Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of 
India and Ors.3 upheld the validity of notification dated 
31st March 2000 issued under the DST Act. We may note 
here that the view taken by the Delhi High Court in the 
said case has been affirmed by this Court by judgment 
dated 4th May 2023 in and 
other connected appeals. The decision in the case of 
Godfrey Phillips India Ltd. v. State of U.P. does not 
deal with the issue arising in this case. 
 
3 (2006) 145 STC 211 (Del) 

10. Therefore, we find no error in the view taken by the 
Delhi 
High 
Court 
in 
the 
impugned 
judgment. 
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed with no orders as to 
costs. 
 
….…………………….J. 

(Abhay S. Oka) 

…..…………………...J. 

 (Sanjay Karol) 
New Delhi; 
March 21, 2024.