NON­
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION 
AWUNGSHI CHIRMAYO AND ANR....APPELLANTS

VERSUS

GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI 
AND OTHERS                                               …RESPONDENTS
JUDGMENT 
Leave granted. 
2.
The appellants before this Court are the two cousins of the
deceased who was found dead in her rented accommodation in
House No.424­B, Ground Floor, Chirag Delhi on 29.05.2013. The
deceased was a 25 years old young girl who was a permanent
resident of Manipur and at the relevant time was working in a
call centre at Delhi. The post mortem was conducted next day on
30.05.2013 which recorded following observations: 

“a) Part of nose is missing over right
side and piece of it is attached on the
left side. b) Nibbling marks present over both
the upper eye lids
c) wound size of 5 cm is present over
dorsum   of   right   foot;   margins   are
irregular and show nibbling marks
d)   all   wounds   are   post   mortem   in
origin”
The cause of death could not be ascertained in the post
mortem report.  
3.
Some puzzling facts of this case leading to this appeal are
that   the   First   Information   Report   (for   short   ‘FIR’)   was   only
registered by the police on 31.05.2013, initially under Section
306   of   Indian   Penal   Code   (for   short   ‘IPC’),   against   unknown
persons, when there was blood spattered all over the room and
the   face   of   the   deceased   was   smashed,   as   we   are   given   to
understand.  It was only later converted to a case under Section
302 of IPC.  Initially, investigation was conducted by the Crime
Branch and a second post mortem report was submitted again
with no clear cause of death determined.  
4.
The body of the deceased was discovered on 29.05.2013 by
the landlord of the tenanted premises who alerted PCR at 11am

on the same day and this was recorded as DD No. 20A. The post­
mortem   of   the   deceased   was   conducted   on   30.05.2013   by   a
Senior   Resident   of   the   All  India  Institute   of   Medical  Sciences
(AIIMS) who recorded injuries on the body of deceased, while
opinion about the cause of death was not given and the viscera
analysis report and other reports from Central Forensic Science
Laboratory (CFSL), were yet to come. 
5.
The FIR No. 253 of 2013 was registered on 31.05.2013 at
Police Station, Malviya Nagar against unknown accused persons
under  Section   306   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code,   1860   (hereafter
“IPC”). The investigation was transferred to the Crime Branch,
Malviya Nagar the next day, i.e., 01.06.2013 and pursuant to
representations by the appellants, offence under Section 302 of
IPC   was   added.   On   04.06.2013   a   second   post­mortem   was
conducted by a Medical Board of three doctors from Maulana
Azad Medical College & Lok Nayak Hospital, and noted eleven
injuries on the person of deceased­victim, however, the opinion
regarding the cause of death was not given due to the pendency
of viscera chemical analysis and histopathology reports. 

6.
Meanwhile,   the   appellants   herein   had   filed   Writ   Petition
( before the Delhi High Court praying
for   direction   for   the   investigation   to   be   given   to   the   Central
Bureau of Investigation (for short ‘CBI’), who is also respondent
No. 3 in the present matter. During the pendency of this Writ
Petition, an order dated 11.04.2017 was passed recording the
submission made by the counsel for Government of NCT that the
final report which was submitted on 24.02.2015 under Section
173 of CrPC before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate (South),
has been agreed to be withdrawn and matter will be subjected to
further investigation.  
7.
The High Court ultimately dismissed this Writ Petition for
reasons which are four­fold. Firstly, it was noted that polygraph
test had been conducted on the suspects Raj Kumar and Amit
Sharma on 26.12.2013, however, no opinion could be formed
about   their   involvement.     Secondly,   the   DNA   of   the   semen
samples recovered from the undergarment of the deceased did
not match with the DNA samples of the accused.   Thirdly, the
boyfriend of the deceased had not joined investigation, he was
absconding and could not be traced.  Fourthly, despite the post

mortem   conducted   on   the   deceased,   there   was   no   conclusive
cause of death which could be ascertained.  
8.
While considering all these factors, the High Court was of
the opinion that simply because the premises of the landlord had
an access to the room of the deceased it could not be said that
they   were   guilty   of   committing   the   crime,   the   relevant
observations of 
the High Court are as follows: 
“19.   The   investigation   has   been
carried   out   by   the   investigating
agency seemingly without any bias.
Nothing has emerged on record if the
landlord Raj Kumar and his brother­
in­law   Amit   Sharma   were   having
strong connection with any politician
to   influence   the   investigation.   The
petitioners   have   not   furnished
clinching   evidence   to,   prima   facie,
infer the  involvement  of  Raj Kumar
and Amit Sharma in the crime. Their
suspicion   is   based   upon   ‘no
evidence’.
Merely because, the landlord and his
brother­   in­law   had   access   to   the
victim’s   room   by   scaling   the   7   feet
grill,   it   cannot   be   inferred   at   this
stage   that   it   was   they   who   had
committed the crime.

20. Since all efforts have been made
by   the   Crime   Branch   to   solve   the
case, handing over the investigation
to CBI, at this stage, would serve no
purpose. Investigation to CBI can be
ordered only in exceptional situation
and such an order is not to be passed
as a routine merely because, a party
has levelled vague allegations. [‘State
of West Bengal & Ors. vs. Committee
for Protection of Democratic Rights’,
2010 (3) SCC 571].”
9.
This order of the High Court is presently under challenge
before this Court, where the appellants pray that a thorough
investigation be done by CBI. Vide Order dated 05.02.2019, this
Court had constituted Special Investigation Team (SIT) to monitor
the investigation. The SIT so constituted submitted two status
reports   on   25.07.2019   and   21.10.2019.   All   the   same,   the
investigation which has been conducted by the police and later
by the SIT yielded no conclusive result. The SIT in its report has
reached the following conclusion:
“From   the   investigation   conducted   so   far,
circumstantial   evidences   suggest   that   Ms.   A.S.
Reingamphi.S.   Solam   D/o   Sh.   A.S.
Chihanpam  r/o   Village­Choithar, Ukhrul­District,
Manipur   had   committed   suicide   by   consuming
some poison/medicine, though the viscera reports
did   not   reveal   presence   of   any   common
posion/medicine in the exhibits. Till now there is

no evidence on record to support the allegation of
murder   or   abetment   of   suicide   or   foul   play   or
commission of any other offence in this case. 
­Sd­
Dy. Commissioner of Police
Crime (Cyber & FICN), Delhi
10.
The   present   appellants,   who   are   close   relatives   of   the
deceased and  are residents of the State of Manipur, have always
claimed that it is a case of rape and murder, and the police is
trying   to   shield   the   accused.     The   deceased   comes   from   a
“Ukhrul” District in the State of Manipur, which is far away from
Delhi.   The kith and kin of the deceased, who are before this
Court are only praying for an effective investigation so that the
culprits can be apprehended and brought to justice.     
11.
Apparently there seems to be no reason for a young girl of
25 years of age to commit suicide. Prima facie  it does not seem to
be  a case   of   suicide.   The   crime   scene   shows   that  blood   was
spattered on the floor and the bed sheet was completely drenched
in blood. It appears to be a homicidal death and therefore the
culprits must be apprehended.  

12.
Mr. K.M. Nataraj, learned Additional Solicitor General of this
Court, in his usual fairness submits that he has no objection, if
the investigation in the present case is handed over to the CBI.
13.
In a seminal judgment reported as   State of West Bengal
and   Others  vs  Committee   for   Protection   of   Democratic
Rights, West Bengal and others (2010), this Court
has discussed in detail inter alia the circumstances under which
the   Constitutional   Courts   would   be   empowered   to   issue
directions for CBI enquiry to be made. This Court noted that the
power   to   transfer   investigation   should   be   used   sparingly,
however, it could be used for doing complete justice and ensuring
there is no violation of fundamental rights. This is what the Court
said in Para 70:
“70…Insofar   as   the   question   of
issuing a direction to CBI to conduct
investigation in a case is concerned,
although no inflexible guidelines can
be laid down to decide whether or not
such power should be exercised but
time and again it has been reiterated
that   such   an   order   is   not   to   be
passed   as   a   matter   of   routine   or
merely because a party has levelled
some   allegations   against   the   local
police.
 This   extraordinary   power
must   be   exercised   sparingly,

cautiously   and   in   exceptional
situations   where   it
  becomes
necessary to provide credibility and
instil confidence in investigations or
where the incident may have national
and   international   ramifications   or
where   such   an   order   may   be
necessary for doing complete justice
and   enforcing   the   fundamental
rights…

  emphasis
supplied 
14.
The powers of this Court for directing further investigation
regardless of the stage of investigation are extremely wide. This
can be done even if the chargesheet has been submitted by the
prosecuting agency. In the case of Bharati Tamang v. Union of
India and Others (2013),  this Court allowed the
Writ Petition filed by the widow of late Madan Tamang who was
killed during a political clash and directed investigation by the
CBI which would be monitored by the Joint Director, CBI. The
following observations were made in Para 44:
“44…Whether   it   be   due   to   political
rivalry or personal vengeance or for
that   matter   for   any   other   motive   a
murder   takes   place,   it   is   the
responsibility of the police to come up
to   the   expectation   of   the   public   at
large and display that no stone will
remain unturned to book the culprits

and   bring   them   for   trial   for   being
dealt with under the provisions of the
criminal   law   of   prosecution.   Any
slackness displayed in that process
will not be in the interest of public at
large   and   therefore   as   has   been
pointed   out   by   this   Court   in   the
various   decisions,   which   we   have
referred to in the earlier paragraphs,
we find that it is our responsibility to
ensure that the prosecution agency is
reminded   of   its   responsibility   and
duties   in   the   discharge   of   its
functions   effectively   and   efficiently
and   ensure   that   the   criminal
prosecution   is   carried   on   effectively
and   the   perpetrators   of   crime   are
duly   punished   by   the   appropriate
court of law.”
15.
This Court has expressed its strong views about the need of
Courts to be alive to genuine grievances brought before it by
ordinary citizens as has  been held in   Zahira Habibulla H.
Sheikh v. State of Gujarat (2004).
16.
It is to observe that unresolved crimes tend to erode public
trust in institutions which have been established for maintaining
law   and   order.   Criminal   investigation   must   be   both   fair   and
effective.   We   say   nothing   on   the   fairness   of   the   investigation

appears to us, but the fact that it has been ineffective is self
evident. The kith and kin of the deceased who live far away in
Manipur   have   a   real   logistical   problem   while   approaching
authorities in Delhi, yet they have their hope alive, and have
shown trust and confidence in this system. We are therefore of
the considered view that this case needs to be handed over to
CBI, for a proper investigation and also to remove any doubts in
the minds of the appellants, and to bring the real culprits to
justice.
17.
In view of the discussion made above, the order of the Delhi
High   Court   dated   18.05.2018,   dismissing   the   prayer   of   the
present appellants to transfer the investigation to CBI is hereby
set aside. The appeal is hereby allowed and we direct that CBI to
hold enquiry in the matter. The case shall be transferred from SIT
to the CBI.  The SIT, which has so far conducted the investigation
in   the   matter,   will   hand   over   all   the   relevant   papers   and
documents   to   CBI   for   investigation.     After   a   thorough
investigation, CBI will submit its complete investigation report or

charge   sheet   before   the   concerned   court   as   expeditiously   as
possible. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.  
    ……...………………………….J. 
                         [J.K. MAHESHWARI]
………...……….………………….J.
           [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]
NEW DELHI;
MARCH 22, 2024.