IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

M/S ACME PAPERS LTD....PETITIONER(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
M/S. CHINTAMAN DEVELOPERS 
PVT. LTD. & ORS. 

 …RESPONDENTS(S) 
 
WITH 
TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO (s).499 OF 2024 
 
M/S. CHINTAMAN DEVELOPERS 
PVT. LTD....PETITIONER(S) 
 
VERSUS 
M/S ACME PAPERS LTD. 

 …RESPONDENTS(S) 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
PRASANNA B. VARALE, J. 
 
1. 
This transfer petition has been filed by the petitioner seeking, filed by respondent no.1, from 

the Court of District Judge, Sehore, Madhya Pradesh to the City 
Civil Court, Calcutta, West Bengal. 
2. 
The 
parties 
had 
entered 
into 
a 
Memorandum 
of 
Understanding (hereinafter referred to as “MoU”) on 10.11.2022 
whereby respondent no.1 had agreed to purchase land 
admeasuring an area of approx. 74.06 acres (“suit property”) on an 
“as is whatever there is” basis for a consideration of 
Rs.20,69,92,000/-. It was also agreed that the petitioner would 
obtain all necessary approvals/no objection certificates (“NOCs”) 
for the transfer of suit property and in case of unprecedented delay 
in obtaining the same, the petitioner would be at liberty to deal 
with suit property by treating the MoU as cancelled and/or 
terminated. 
3. 
Subsequently, the petitioner could not obtain the necessary 
approvals required for selling the suit property and thus, the 
respondents filed a suit for specific performance of the MoU, which 
the petitioner now seeks to transfer to Calcutta where they have 
already filed a suit for declaration that the MoU stands terminated 
and is incapable of being acted upon. 
Both the parties are before us with different Transfer Petitions, 
seeking transfer of the case filed by the opposite party. 

4. 
Counsel for the petitioner submits that the MoU was 
executed in Calcutta and the suit filed by them goes to the root of 
the matter, i.e., validity and enforceability of the MoU. It is 
contended that the respondent’s suit for specific performance 
would only arise if the agreement is valid. As such, the reliefs 
sought by the petitioner are required to be decided first and cannot 
be raised as an issue before the District Judge, Sehore as it is 
already an issue raised by them in their suit., counsel for respondent no.1 submits that the 
question of the existence of the MoU or the location where it was 
entered into has no nexus with the choice of jurisdiction. Whereas, 
the existence of the MoU and its specific performance are 
intrinsically connected and relate directly to the suit property, 
which is located in Sehore, Madhya Pradesh. Further, it is 
contended that the petitioner has filed other suits in Sehore and is 
also appearing in a matter before the Debt Recovery Tribunal, 
Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh in connection with the suit property. 
5. 
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have 
perused the material on record. 
6. 
It is an admitted fact that the suit property is situated in 
Sehore, Madhya Pradesh. Section 16, CPC inter alia provides that 

suits for the determination of any other right to or interest in 
immovable property shall be instituted in the Court within the 
local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate. Thus, the 
petitioner’s reliance on the cause of action arising in Calcutta due 
to the MoU being executed at Calcutta is completely erroneous in 
view of Section 20, CPC, which provides that a suit can be initiated 
where the defendant resides or cause of action arises is a residuary 
provision only applicable to cases beyond those in Section 15 to 
19, CPC. Thus, this Section has no application in this case as 
when the subject matter of the MoU is the suit property located at 
Sehore. This Court in Harshad Chiman Lal Modi v. DLF 
Universal Ltd., (2005) held the following: 
“21. A plain reading of Section 20 of the Code 
leaves no room for doubt that it is a residuary 
provision and covers those cases not falling 
within the limitations of Sections 15 to 19. The 
opening words of the section, “subject to the 
limitations aforesaid” are significant and make 
it abundantly clear that the section takes 
within its sweep all personal actions…” 
 
7. 
All the same, the suit filed at Sehore, Madhya Pradesh was 
earlier in time. A perusal of the materials placed before us would 
show that respondent no.1 filed its suit on 12.05.2023 at Sehore, 
Madhya Pradesh and the petitioner filed its vakalatnama therein 

on 28.06.2023. Thereafter, on 20.07.2023 the petitioner filed its 
suit in Calcutta and two days later the petitioner filed its written 
statement in Sehore. 
Section 10, CPC inter alia mandates that no Court shall 
proceed with the trial of any suit in which the matter in issue is 
also directly and substantially in issue between the parties, 
litigating under the same title, where such suit is pending in the 
same or any other Court in India having jurisdiction to grant the 
relief claimed. It has been incorporated to avoid multiplicity of 
proceedings on issues which are directly and substantially in issue 
in the previously filed suit. 
In Gupte Cardiac Care Centre and Hospital v. Olympic 
Pharma Care (P) Ltd., (2004) this Court has held that 
while considering a Transfer Petition under Section 25, CPC regard 
must be had for Section 10, CPC. This is what was said: 
“5. The suit at Nashik has been instituted first 
in point of time. By reference to Section 10 CPC, 
the trial of the suit at Delhi, being the latter suit, 
shall be liable to be stayed. For the exercise of 
its discretionary jurisdiction under Section 25 
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 the only 
consideration which is relevant is “expediency 
for ends of justice”. The court will have regard 
to and respect for the rule enacted in Section 
10 of the Code. Of course, the considerations 
such as which is the place where most of the 

evidence is available, convenience of the 
parties and witnesses, which one of the two 
places is more convenient to access and attend 
and so on are also the factors to be kept in view 
and may in an appropriate case persuade this 
Court to direct a transfer of case in departure 
from the rule underlying Section 10 of the Code. 
All 
would 
depend 
on 
the 
facts 
and 
circumstances of a given case.” 
 
It is also of relevance that since the suit property is located 
in Sehore, all property records and government documents would 
be present in the vicinity, including most witnesses. Further, it 
appears from the counter affidavit that the suit property is 
mortgaged to Bank of Baroda, through its Bhopal branch and an 
auction has taken place on the strength of which the Bank, as well 
as the auction purchasers have been impleaded in the suit filed at 
Sehore vide Order dated 01.11.2023. 
8. 
Under these circumstances, we dismiss Transfer Petition 
No.2664 of 2023. 
9. 
Resultantly, is 
allowed and hence TS No.1346 of 2023 pending before the City 
Civil Court at Calcutta, West Bengal is hereby transferred to the 
Court of Principle Judge, Sehore, Madhya Pradesh. 

The petitioners (in T.P.(c) No.2664/2023) are at liberty to 
withdraw the suit that has been transferred and file a counter 
claim in RCS No.128/A/2023 before the Court of Principle Judge, 
Sehore, Madhya Pradesh in accordance with law. 
10. After the matter is transferred to Court of Principle Judge, 
Sehore, Madhya Pradesh, the transferee Court shall give fresh 
notice to all the parties by fixing a date and the aforesaid matter 
shall proceed at the transferee Court from the stage it was left at 
the City Civil Court, Calcutta, West Bengal. 
11. The records of the case be transferred to the transferee Court 
forthwith. 
12. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 

……...……….………………….J. 
 [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]..…...………………………….J. 
 [PRASANNA B. VARALE] 

New Delhi. 
March 22, 2024.