1|SLP(Crl.)No.14053 of 2023 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO…………………….2024 
(@ ) 
 
SABITA PAUL … APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ANR. … RESPONDENT(S) 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
SANJAY KAROL, J. 
 
Leave granted. 
2. 
On the basis of complaint filed by Smt. “X” (hereinafter referred to as the 
complainant), and pursuant to the order passed by the Judicial Magistrate, 
Siliguri, West Bengal, FIR No.438 of 2022 dated 07.05.2022 was registered at 
Police Station, Siliguri, against two accused persons namely, Supratim Paul and 
his mother Sabita Paul. It is alleged that Supratim Paul, the neighbour of the 
complainant had discreetly taken photographs of the complainant without her 
knowledge or consent and that such photographs were obscene, indecent, 
salacious, and offensive and were threatened to be circulated on the social media 

2|SLP(Crl.)No.14053 of 2023 
 
platforms. Supratim Paul approached the complainant to extort money, but his 
demands were not met. Further, Supratim Paul shared the same on the phone of 
his mother (present appellant) who also in conspiracy with her son tried to 
blackmail the complainant to extort money. In a nutshell, this is the case set out 
by the complainant. 
3. 
The record reveals that the prime accused Supratim aged 23 years stands 
enlarged on bail and no challenge has been laid to the said bail order. 
4. 
It is also a matter of record that the instant appellant i.e. Sabita Paul, the 
mother of the prime accused moved an application seeking anticipatory bail, 
firstly before the Sessions Court and thereafter before the High Court which 
indisputably stood rejected. This was all before the filing of the charge sheet 
dated 07.05.2022. It is a matter of record that post dismissal of such applications, 
on 20.01.2023, the instant appellant again applied for anticipatory bail before the 
High Court which stood allowed vide order dated 12.06.2023 (Annexure P-9 page 
83). The complainant by filing an application under Section 439(2) of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 sought cancellation of such an order which stood 
allowed vide impugned order dated 20.09.2023 on the ground that the instant 
appellant had suppressed “material facts of” dismissal of her previous attempts 
to secure anticipatory bail. 
5. 
The appeal thus arises out of such order of cancellation of granting 
anticipatory bail. At this juncture, we may also note that this Court vide order 
dated 06.11.2023 had granted interim protection in favour of the accused subject 

3|SLP(Crl.)No.14053 of 2023 
 
to all cooperating in the investigation and trial. Before us, it is not in dispute that 
the instant appellant is in full compliance with such an order. It is not the case of 
the respondents that post the grant of interim protection the appellant, has, in any 
manner impeded the cause of justice. 
6. 
The concept of anticipatory bail came to be part of the criminal law 
landscape via the 41st Report of the Law Commission which recommended the 
inclusion of such a provision, which then stood incorporated in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973. Over the years, many judgments of this Court have 
considered that a Court must weigh while considering an application for 
anticipatory bail. In Dr. Naresh Kumar Mangla v. Anita Agarwal & Ors1., a 
three-Judge Bench laid down the following factors: 
“17. The facts which must be borne in mind while considering an application 
for the grant of anticipatory bail have been elucidated in the decision of this 
Court in Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra [Siddharam 
Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra, (2011): (2011) 1 
SCC (Cri) 514] and several other decisions. The factors to be considered 
include: (SCC pp. 736-37, paras 112-13) 
“112. … (i) the nature and gravity of the accusation and the exact 
role of the accused must be properly comprehended before arrest is 
made; 
 
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether 
the accused has previously undergone imprisonment on conviction 
by a court in respect of any cognizable offence; 
 
(iii) the possibility of the applicant fleeing from justice; 
 
(iv) the likelihood of the accused repeating similar or other offences; 
 
(v) whether the accusations have been made only with the object of 
injuring or humiliating the applicant by arresting them; 
 
(vi) the impact of the grant of anticipatory bail particularly in cases 
of large magnitude affecting a very large number of people; 
 
1 (2021) 

4|SLP(Crl.)No.14053 of 2023 

(vii) the courts must carefully evaluate the entire material against the 
accused. The court must also clearly comprehend the exact role of 
the accused in the case. The cases in which the accused is implicated 
with the help of Sections 34 and 149 of the Penal Code, 1860 the 
court should consider with even greater care and caution because 
over implication in such cases is a matter of common knowledge and 
concern; 
 
(viii) while considering the prayer for grant of anticipatory bail, a 
balance has to be struck between two factors, namely, no prejudice 
should be caused to the free, fair and full investigation and there 
should be prevention of harassment, humiliation and unjustified 
detention of the accused; 
 
(ix) the reasonable apprehension of tampering of the witnesses or 
apprehension of threat to the complainant; 
 
(x) frivolity in prosecution should always be considered and it is only 
the element of genuineness that shall have to be considered in the 
matter of grant of bail and in the event of there being some doubt as 
to the genuineness of the prosecution, in the normal course of events, 
the accused is entitled to an order of bail.” 
 
7. 
A perusal of the record reveals that the prime accused, namely, Supratim 
Paul has been charged under Section 376, 354, 389, 506, and 120-B IPC and he 
has been granted anticipatory bail. The present appellant has been charged under 
Section 120-B IPC and Section 67A of the Information & Technology Act, 2000. 
It can be seen that the alleged act of the instant appellant is inextricably bound to 
the acts of the prime accused. It is alleged that he had secured pictures of the 
complainant, that were compromising in nature, which then the instant appellant 
used to extort and to blackmail the complainant. 
8. 
While granting anticipatory bail to the prime accused, the learned District 
Judge had observed that it was not a fit case for custodial interrogation. It has not 
been brought to our notice that such an order of anticipatory bail has been 

5|SLP(Crl.)No.14053 of 2023 
 
challenged and if it has, what fate has it met? Then, it follows that the secondary 
accused would also be not required, in the attending facts to be interrogated in 
custody. 
9. 
Grant of bail based on parity is not a claim of right. The same is well-
established. While applying this principle of parity, the Court is required, as was 
recently observed in Tarun Kumar v. Assistant Director Directorate of 
Enforcement2, the Court is required to focus on the role attached to the accused 
whose application is under consideration. In the facts, the prime accused who is 
alleged to have initially conducted the blackmail, whom the complainant is said 
to have paid ‘hush-money’, has been granted bail and the role played by the 
instant appellant was only to further the alleged acts of her son. She has not acted 
independently, to further aggravate the situation. 
10. 
In that view of the matter, we find it fit to confirm the order dated 
12.06.2023 granting anticipatory bail to the instant appellant, setting aside the 
order of cancellation of bail passed by the Division Bench in the impugned 
judgment and order. We reiterate that the condition upon which this Court granted 
interim protection, which was that the appellant would extend all cooperation in 
the investigation and trial still accompanies. 

6|SLP(Crl.)No.14053 of 2023 
 
11. 
The appeal is allowed with the above observations. Pending application(s), 
if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………………………… J. 

[ VIKRAM NATH ] 

…………………………. J. 

[ SANJAY KAROL ] 

New Delhi; 
March 22, 2024