IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 

 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Crl.) No(s). 1936 of 2023) 
 
THIRUMOORTHY 

….APPELLANT(S) 

VERSUS 

STATE REPRESENTED BY 
THE INSPECTOR OF POLICE 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 

1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
This appeal takes exception to the judgment dated 15th April, 
2021, passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of 
Judicature at Madras dismissing the criminal appeal filed by the 
appellant herein under Section 374(2) of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter being referred to as ‘CrPC’) and 
affirming the conviction of the appellant and sentences awarded to 
him vide judgment and order dated 18th February, 2019, passed 
by the Court of Sessions Judge, Mahila Court, Salem (hereinafter 
being referred to as the ‘trial Court’) in Special Sessions Case No. 

79 of 2016. By the said judgment and order, learned trial Court 
convicted and sentenced the appellant as below: - 

3. 
The trial Court in para 96 of its judgment held as under: - 
 
“96. Accused is now 19 years 2 months old. Therefore, according 
to Section 20 Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children 
Act), Juvenile in conflict with law shall be kept in a safe place in 
Chengalpattu Juvenile Reform School till the age of 21 years. 
After that, the Probation Officer should evaluate the reformation 
of the said child and send a periodic report about it to this Court. 
After the completion of 21 years, the said child shall be produced 
in this Court and after evaluating whether the child has reformed, 
became a child who can contribute to the society, the remaining 
sentence may be reduced and released, or if the child is not 
reformed, the remaining sentence should be spent in jail after the 
child reaches the age of 21, considering the report of the Probation 
Officer and the progress records. The decision will be based on 
the discipline that the child has achieved and his behaviour.” 
 
4. 
Brief facts relevant and essential for disposal of the instant 
appeal are noted hereinbelow. 
5. 
The victim Ms. D, being the daughter of the first informant-
Mr. G(PW-1) aged 6 years went missing in the evening of 2nd July, 
2016. Mr. G (PW-1) lodged a complaint at P.S. Kolathur, District 
Provision under 
which convicted 
Sentence 
Section 363 IPC 
Sentenced to undergo 07 years 
rigorous imprisonment. 
Section 342 IPC 
Sentenced to undergo 01 years 
rigorous imprisonment. 
Section 6 POCSO Act 
Sentenced to undergo 10 years 
rigorous imprisonment. 
Section 302 IPC 
Sentenced to undergo 10 years 
rigorous imprisonment. 
Section 201 read with 302 
IPC 
Sentenced to undergo 07 years 
rigorous imprisonment. 

Salem on 3rd July, 2016 at 7 ‘o clock in the morning alleging, inter 
alia that he had taken his daughter(victim) to a shop on the 
previous evening at around 6 o’ clock and from there, he asked the 
child to return home. However, when he reached his house half 
an hour later and made an inquiry from his wife, he was told that 
the child had not returned by then. A search was made in the 
locality but the child could not be traced out. Based on the said 
complaint, Crime No. 174 of 2016 was registered and investigation 
was undertaken by S. Viswanathan, Inspector of Police (PW-25). 
6. 
The Investigating Officer (PW-25) recorded the statements of 
Mylaswamy (PW-10) and Irusappan (PW-11) who stated that they 
had seen the accused going into the compound of his house with 
the child victim being the daughter of the first informant-Mr. G 
(PW-1). On this, the needle of suspicion pointed towards the 
accused-appellant who was apprehended from his house by the 
Investigating Officer (PW-25) while he was trying to run away. The 
accused was interrogated in presence of Mr. Arivazhagan, Village 
Administrative Officer (PW-15) and his assistant Muthappan. 
7. 
It is alleged that the accused confessed to his guilt and his 
admission was recorded in memo (Ex. P-20) and acting in 
furtherance thereof, the dead body of Ms. D was found concealed 

in a wide-mouthed aluminium vessel lying in the prayer room of 
the house of the accused. The requisite spot inspection 
proceedings were undertaken and the dead body of the child victim 
was sent to the Salem Government Mohan Kumaramangalam 
Medical College Hospital for conducting post mortem. The post 
mortem report (Ex. P-7) and final opinion of Doctor (Ex. P-8) were 
received indicating that the death of the victim was homicidal in 
nature having being caused by asphyxiation due to compression 
of neck along with injuries to genitalia. Some incised wounds were 
also found on the body of the victim. Incriminating articles viz., 
clothes of the accused, a blade, etc. were recovered from the house 
of accused. 
8. 
Right at the inception of investigation, the Investigating 
Officer(PW-25) had gathered information to the effect that the 
accused was a juvenile since his date of birth recorded in school 
documents is 30th May, 2000. Thus indisputably, the accused was 
a Child in Conflict with Law(in short ‘CICL’) as provided under 
Section 2(13) of the Juvenile Justice(Care and Protection of 
Children) Act, 2015 (hereinafter being referred to as the ‘JJ Act’) 
and the proceedings were required to be conducted in accordance 
with the mandatory procedure prescribed under the JJ Act. Inspite 

thereof, charge sheet against the accused was filed directly before 
the Sessions Court (portrayed to be a designated Children’s Court, 
as per the counter affidavit filed by the State in the SLP). 
9. 
Charges were framed against the accused who pleaded not 
guilty and claimed trial. The prosecution examined 25 witnesses 
and exhibited 35 documents and 10 material objects to prove its 
case. The accused was questioned under Section 313(1)(b) of CrPC 
and was confronted with the circumstances appearing against him 
in the prosecution case. He denied the allegations levelled against 
him and claimed to be innocent. However, neither oral nor 
documentary evidence was led in defence. The trial Court 
proceeded to convict and sentence the accused as mentioned 
above, vide judgment and order dated 18th February, 2019. 
10. The mother of the accused appellant filed a petition before 
the Special Court, POCSO Act Cases, Salem praying that the 
sentence of her son may be reduced and he may be considered for 
early release in view of his good behaviour. 
11. The Special Court, POCSO Act Cases, Salem held an inquiry; 
conducted psychological evaluation of the accused; procured 
reports from the Vellore District Social Security Department 
Probation Officer and Probation Officer of Government Special 

Home as well as the individual evaluation report of the accused 
and after analysing the above reports, proceeded to dismiss the 
application filed by the mother of the accused appellant vide order 
dated 29th January, 2021. 
12. Being aggrieved by his conviction and the sentences awarded 
by the trial Court, the accused appellant preferred an appeal being 
CRLA No. 451 of 2019 before the High Court of Judicature at 
Madras which came to be rejected vide impugned judgment dated 
15th April, 2021. Hence this appeal by special leave. 
13. Ms. S. Janani, learned counsel representing the accused 
appellant vehemently urged that admittedly the accused appellant 
was a CICL on the date of the incident since his date of birth as 
recorded in the school documents is 30th May, 2000. She 
contended that the entire series of events commencing from the 
arrest of the accused appellant; the manner in which the 
investigation was conducted; the filing of the charge sheet in the 
Sessions Court; the procedure of trial right up to the conviction 
and sentencing of the accused appellant is vitiated as the 
mandatory procedure provided under the JJ Act was not followed 
and was rather blatantly flouted. It was submitted that the police 
official who filed the charge sheet was not having the authority to 

conduct investigation because investigation into an offence 
allegedly committed by CICL has to be undertaken by the Special 
Juvenile Police Unit(SJPU) constituted under Section 107(2) of the 
JJ Act by the concerned State Government. 
14. She urged that Section 3(1) provides for the principle of 
presumption of innocence, but the said provision was totally 
ignored in conducting the prosecution of the accused appellant 
and hence the entire trial is vitiated. 
15. It was further submitted that the Sessions Judge who 
conducted trial was not designated as a Children’s Court and thus, 
the trial of the accused appellant is vitiated. Without prejudice to 
this submission, learned counsel submitted that even assuming 
that the Sessions Court had been designated as a Children’s 
Court, the accused appellant could not have been tried by the said 
Court without preliminary assessment being conducted by the 
Juvenile Justice Board(hereinafter being referred to as ‘Board’) as 
postulated under Section 15 of the JJ Act. The section mandates 
an enquiry in form of preliminary assessment to be conducted by 
the Board wherein the CICL has a right to participate. Upon 
conclusion of enquiry, the Board has to pass an order under 
Section 18(3) to the effect that there is a need to try the child as an 

adult and only thereafter, the Board can transfer the case to the 
Children’s Court for trial. The CICL has been given a right to appeal 
against such order by virtue of Section 101(2) of the JJ Act. Even 
after the transfer of case under Section 15, the Children’s Court is 
required to apply its own independent mind to find out whether 
there is a genuine need for trial of the CICL as an adult as provided 
by Section 19(1)(i) of the JJ Act. However, none of these mandatory 
requirements were complied with and thus, the trial is vitiated. 
16. Referring to the alleged confession of the accused appellant, 
the learned counsel criticised the manner in which the 
investigation was conducted and submitted that the confession 
recorded in presence of the police officer could not have been 
allowed to be exhibited and admitted in evidence. She submitted 
that the trial Court, not only allowed the confession to be exhibited 
but also placed implicit reliance upon it basing the conviction of 
the accused appellant on such inadmissible piece of evidence. The 
recording of confession of a CICL and placing implicit reliance 
thereupon is contrary to the general principles laid out under 
Section 3 of the JJ Act which provides the general principles to be 
followed in the administration of the Act. 

17. It was further urged that (PW-10) and (PW-11) whose 
depositions have been relied upon to constitute the circumstance 
of last seen are as a matter of fact, totally unreliable witnesses. 
Had these witnesses seen the child being taken away by the 
accused, then their natural reaction would have been to promptly 
inform the child’s father, the informant Mr. G. (PW-1) about this 
important circumstance and the same would definitely have been 
incorporated in the FIR which was lodged on the next day of the 
incident. 
18. It was also contended that the factum of recovery of the dead 
body from the aluminium vessel preceded by the disclosure 
statement of the accused appellant has not been proved by reliable 
evidence and hence, there does not exist cogent and convincing 
circumstantial evidence on the record so as to establish the guilt 
of the accused appellant. 
19. On these counts, learned counsel for the appellant implored 
the Court to accept the appeal and set aside the impugned 
judgment and sought acquittal for the accused appellant. 
20. Learned counsel representing the State, vehemently and 
fervently opposed the submissions advanced by the appellant’s 
counsel. It was submitted that looking to the gruesome nature of 

the crime, the entire investigation and trial cannot be held to be 
vitiated simply on account of irregularity in the procedure of 
conducting investigation and trial. The Sessions Court which 
conducted the trial had been designated as a Children’s Court. 
The trial Court as well as the High Court have given due 
consideration to the fact that the accused appellant was a juvenile 
on the date of commission of the crime and accordingly, the 
sentence which has been awarded to the accused appellant is 
commensurate with the provisions of the JJ Act. Not only this, the 
trial Court undertook an exhaustive exercise for mental and 
psychological assessment of the accused appellant after recording 
his conviction and only after receiving an individual care plan had 
quantified the sentences to be awarded to the accused which are 
strictly within the framework of the JJ Act. 
21. In support of his contentions, learned counsel for the State 
placed reliance on judgments rendered by this Court in the cases 
of Karan alias Fatiya v. State of Madhya Pradesh1 and Pawan 
Kumar v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors2. He contended that the 
 
1 (2023) 

impugned judgment does not warrant any interference by this 
Court. 
22. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the 
judgments on record. 
23. The fact regarding the accused appellant being a CICL on the 
date of the incident, i.e., 2nd July, 2016 is not in dispute because 
the date of birth of the accused as entered in the contemporaneous 
school record is 30th May, 2000. 
24. We shall thus first take up the issue whether the trial is 
vitiated on the account of non-adherence to the mandatory 
requirements of the JJ Act. 
25. At the outset, we may note that the fact regarding the accused 
appellant being juvenile and thus a CICL on the date of 
commission of the incident was known to the Investigating 
Officer(PW-25) right at inception of the proceedings. The 
Investigating Officer(PW-25) categorically stated in his deposition 
that after completing the investigation and preparing the final 
report against the “juvenile in conflict with law”, he took opinion 
from the Salem TTP, prepared a model charge sheet and filed the 
same in the trial Court. 

26. The trial Court was also cognizant of this important aspect as 
can be clearly discerned from the opening lines of para 2 of the 
judgment of the trial Court wherein it is mentioned that 
“Thirumoorthy’, a 17 year old juvenile in conflict with law, 
lives with his mother in Telanganaur”. It has also been recorded 
by the trial Court that on the date of passing of the judgment, i.e., 
18th February, 2019, the accused was 19 years and 2 months old 
and accordingly, he was required to be sent to a place of safety as 
per Section 20 of the JJ Act. The judgment passed by the Sessions 
Court also records the fact that during the course of the trial, the 
accused was kept in a child protection home. Further at para 32 
of the judgment, the trial Court also noted that the Public 
Prosecutor himself argued that Thirumoorthy was a CICL who 
committed the offence upon the child victim. 
27. Thus, there is no escape from the conclusion that even before 
the result of investigation was filed, the fact regarding the accused 
being a CICL was well known to the Investigating Officer(PW-25), 
the prosecution and the trial Court as well. 
28. Before dealing with the rival contentions, we would now refer 
to some of the relevant provisions of the JJ Act which are required 
to be followed in a case involving prosecution of a CICL:- 

“3. General principles to be followed in administration of 
Act. ––The Central Government, the State Governments, the 
Board, and other agencies, as the case may be, while 
implementing the provisions of this Act shall be guided by the 
following fundamental principles, namely: –– 
 
(i) Principle of presumption of innocence: Any child 
shall be presumed to be an innocent of any mala fide 
or criminal intent up to the age of eighteen years. 
 
(ii) Principle of dignity and worth: All human beings 
shall be treated with equal dignity and rights. 
 
(iii) Principle of participation: Every child shall have a 
right to be heard and to participate in all processes 
and decisions affecting his interest and the child’s 
views shall be taken into consideration with due 
regard to the age and maturity of the child. 
 
(iv) Principle of best interest: All decisions regarding 
the child shall be based on the primary consideration 
that they are in the best interest of the child and to 
help the child to develop full potential. 
 
(v) Principle of family responsibility: The primary 
responsibility of care, nurture and protection of the 
child shall be that of the biological family or adoptive 
or foster parents, as the case may be. 
 
(vi) Principle of safety: All measures shall be taken to 
ensure that the child is safe and is not subjected to 
any harm, abuse or maltreatment while in contact 
with the care and protection system, and thereafter. 
 
(vii) Positive measures: All resources are to be 
mobilised including those of family and community, 
for promoting the well-being, facilitating development 
of identity and providing an inclusive and enabling 
environment, to reduce vulnerabilities of children and 
the need for intervention under this Act. 

Principle 
of 
non-stigmatising 
semantics: 
Adversarial or accusatory words are not to be used in 
the processes pertaining to a child. 
 
(ix) Principle of non-waiver of rights: No waiver of any 
of the right of the child is permissible or valid, 
whether sought by the child or person acting on 
behalf of the child, or a Board or a Committee and any 

non-exercise of a fundamental right shall not amount 
to waiver. 
 
(x) Principle of equality and non-discrimination: There 
shall be no discrimination against a child on any 
grounds including sex, caste, ethnicity, place of birth, 
disability and equality of access, opportunity and 
treatment shall be provided to every child. 
 
(xi) Principle of right to privacy and confidentiality: 
Every child shall have a right to protection of his 
privacy and confidentiality, by all means and 
throughout the judicial process. 
 
(xii) Principle of institutionalisation as a measure of 
last resort: A child shall be placed in institutional care 
as a step of last resort after making a reasonable 
inquiry. 
 
(xiii) Principle of repatriation and restoration: Every 
child in the juvenile justice system shall have the 
right to be re-united with his family at the earliest and 
to be restored to the same socio-economic and 
cultural status that he was in, before coming under 
the purview of this Act, unless such restoration and 
repatriation is not in his best interest. 
 
(xiv) Principle of fresh start: All past records of any 
child under the Juvenile Justice system should be 
erased except in special circumstances. 
 
(xv) Principle of diversion: Measures for dealing with 
children in conflict with law without resorting to 
judicial proceedings shall be promoted unless it is in 
the best interest of the child or the society as a whole. 
 
(xvi) Principles of natural justice: Basic procedural 
standards of fairness shall be adhered to, including 
the right to a fair hearing, rule against bias and the 
right to review, by all persons or bodies, acting in a 
judicial capacity under this Act. 
 
 9. Procedure to be followed by a Magistrate who has not been 
empowered under this Act. –– (1) When a Magistrate, not empowered 
to exercise the powers of the Board under this Act is of the opinion 
that the person alleged to have committed the offence and brought 
before him is a child, he shall, without any delay, record such opinion 
and forward the child immediately along with the record of such 
proceedings to the Board having jurisdiction. 

(2) In case a person alleged to have committed an offence claims 
before a court other than a Board, that the person is a child or was a 
child on the date of commission of the offence, or if the court itself is 
of the opinion that the person was a child on the date of commission 
of the offence, the said court shall make an inquiry, take such evidence 
as may be necessary (but not an affidavit) to determine the age of such 
person, and shall record a finding on the matter, stating the age of the 
person as nearly as may be: 
 
Provided that such a claim may be raised before any 
court and it shall be recognised at any stage, even 
after final disposal of the case, and such a claim shall 
be determined in accordance with the provisions 
contained in this Act and the rules made thereunder 
even if the person has ceased to be a child on or before 
the date of commencement of this Act. 
 
(3) If the court finds that a person has committed an 
offence and was a child on the date of commission of such 
offence, it shall forward the child to the Board for passing 
appropriate orders and the sentence, if any, passed by the court 
shall be deemed to have no effect. 
 
(4) In case a person under this section is required to be 
kept in protective custody, while the person’s claim of being a 
child is being inquired into, such person may be placed, in the 
intervening period in a place of safety. 

(emphasis supplied) 
 
15. Preliminary assessment into heinous offences by Board. 
–– (1) In case of a heinous offence alleged to have been 
committed by a child, who has completed or is above the age of 
sixteen years, the Board shall conduct a preliminary 
assessment with regard to his mental and physical capacity to 
commit such offence, ability to understand the consequences 
of the offence and the circumstances in which he allegedly 
committed the offence, and may pass an order in accordance 
with the provisions of subsection (3) of section 18: 
 
Provided that for such an assessment, the Board may 
take the assistance of experienced psychologists or 
psycho-social workers or other experts. 
 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, it is 
clarified that preliminary assessment is not a trial, 
but is to assess the capacity of such child to commit 
and understand the consequences of the alleged 
offence. 

(2) Where the Board is satisfied on preliminary assessment 
that the matter should be disposed of by the Board, then the 
Board shall follow the procedure, as far as may be, for trial in 
summons case under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973: 
 
Provided that the order of the Board to dispose of the 
matter shall be appealable under sub-section (2) of 
section 101: 
 
Provided further that the assessment under this 
section shall be completed within the period specified 
in section 14.” 
 
18. Orders regarding child found to be in conflict with law. 
––(1) Where a Board is satisfied on inquiry that a child 
irrespective of age has committed a petty offence, or a serious 
offence, or a child below the age of sixteen years has committed 
a heinous offence, then, notwithstanding anything contrary 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, and based 
on the nature of offence, specific need for supervision or 
intervention, circumstances as brought out in the social 
investigation report and past conduct of the child, the Board 
may, if it so thinks fit,— 
 
(a) allow the child to go home after advice or 
admonition by following appropriate inquiry and 
counselling to such child and to his parents or the 
guardian; 
 
(b) direct the child to participate in group counselling 
and similar activities; 
 
(c) order the child to perform community service 
under the supervision of an organisation or 
institution, or a specified person, persons or group of 
persons identified by the Board; 
 
(d) order the child or parents or the guardian of the 
child to pay fine: 
 
Provided that, in case the child is working, it may be 
ensured that the provisions of any labour law for the 
time being in force are not violated; 
 
(e) direct the child to be released on probation of good 
conduct and placed under the care of any parent, 
guardian or fit person, on such parent, guardian or fit 
person executing a bond, with or without surety, as 

the Board may require, for the good behaviour and 
child’s well-being for any period not exceeding three 
years; 
 
(f) direct the child to be released on probation of good 
conduct and placed under the care and supervision 
of any fit facility for ensuring the good behaviour and 
child’s well-being for any period not exceeding three 
years; 
 
(g) direct the child to be sent to a special home, for 
such period, not exceeding three years, as it thinks 
fit, for providing reformative services including 
education, skill development, counselling, behaviour 
modification therapy, and psychiatric support during 
the period of stay in the special home: 
 
Provided that if the conduct and behaviour of the 
child has been such that, it would not be in the child’s 
interest, or in the interest of other children housed in 
a special home, the Board may send such child to the 
place of safety. 
 
(2) If an order is passed under clauses (a) to (g) of sub-section 
(1), the Board may, in addition pass orders to— 
 
(i) attend school; or 
(ii) attend a vocational training centre; or 
(iii) attend a therapeutic centre; or 
(iv) prohibit the child from visiting, frequenting or 
appearing at a specified place; or 
(v) undergo a de-addiction programme. 
 
(3) Where the Board after preliminary assessment under 
section 15 pass an order that there is a need for trial of the said 
child as an adult, then the Board may order transfer of the trial 
of the case to the Children’s Court having jurisdiction to try 
such offences. 
 
19. Powers of Children's Court.—(1) After the receipt of 
preliminary assessment from the Board under Section 15, the 
Children's Court may decide that— 
(i) there is a need for trial of the child as an adult as per the 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) 
and pass appropriate orders after trial subject to the provisions 
of this section and Section 21, considering the special needs of 
the child, the tenets of fair trial and maintaining a child friendly 
atmosphere; 

(ii) there is no need for trial of the child as an adult and may 
conduct an inquiry as a Board and pass appropriate orders in 
accordance with the provisions of Section 18. 
(2)-(5)..……..” 

29. The provisions contained in Section 9(1) stipulate that when 
a Magistrate not empowered to exercise the power of the Board 
under the Act is of the opinion that the person alleged to have 
committed the offence and brought before him is a child, he shall, 
without any delay, record such opinion and forward the child 
immediately along with the record of such proceedings to the 
Board having jurisdiction. 
30. Sections 9(2) and 9(3) cast a burden that where the Court 
itself is of the opinion that the person was a child on the date of 
commission of the offence, it shall conduct an inquiry so as to 
determine the age of such person and upon finding that the person 
alleged to have committed the offence was a child on date of 
commission of such offence, forward such person to the Board for 
passing appropriate orders and sentence, if any, passed by the 
Court shall be deemed to have no effect. 
31. In the present case, the situation is very stark inasmuch as, 
even when the charge sheet was filed, the Investigating Officer had 
clearly recorded that the date of birth of the accused was 30th May, 

2000, and hence, even assuming that Sessions Court at Salem had 
been designated as a Children’s Court, there was no option for the 
said Court but to forward the child to the concerned Board for 
further directions. 
 
32. There is no dispute on the aspect that the offences of which 
the accused appellant was charged with, fall within the category of 
‘heinous offences’ as defined under Section 2(33) of the JJ Act. 
Section 15(1) provides that in case where a heinous offence/s are 
alleged to have been committed by a child who has completed or is 
above the age of sixteen years, the Board shall conduct a 
preliminary assessment with regard to his mental and physical 
capacity to commit such offence, ability to understand the 
consequences of the offence and the circumstances in which he 
committed the offence. The Board, after conducting such 
assessment, may pass an order in accordance with the provisions 
of sub-section (3) of Section 18 of the JJ Act. Section 15(2) 
provides that where the Board is satisfied on preliminary 
assessment that the matter should be disposed of by the Board, 
then the Board shall follow the procedure, as far as may be, for 
trial of summons case under CrPC. Under first proviso to this sub-

section, the order passed by the Board is appealable under Section 
101(2) of the JJ Act. 
33. Section 18(3) provides that where the Board after preliminary 
assessment under Section 15 opines that there is a need for the 
said child to be tried as an adult, then the Board may order 
transfer of the trial of the case to the Children’s Court having 
jurisdiction to try such offences. 
34. By virtue of Section 19(1), the Children’s Court, upon 
receiving such report of preliminary assessment undertaken by the 
Board under Section 15 may further decide as to whether there is 
a need for trial of the child as an adult or not. 
35. The procedure provided under Sections 15 and 19 has been 
held to be mandatory by this Court in the case of Ajeet Gurjar v. 
State of Madhya Pradesh3. In the said case, this Court 
considered the import of Section 19(1) of the JJ Act and held that 
the word ‘may’ used in the said provision be read as ‘shall’. It was 
also held that holding of an inquiry under 19(1)(i) is not an empty 
formality. Section 19)(1)(ii) provides that after examining the 
matter, if the Children’s Court comes to the conclusion that there 
is no need for trial of the child as an adult, instead of sending back 
 
3 2023 SCC Online SC 1255 

the matter to the Board, the Court itself is empowered to conduct 
an inquiry and pass appropriate orders in accordance with 
provisions of Section 18 of the JJ Act. The trial of a child as an 
adult and his trial as a juvenile by the Children’s Court have 
different consequences. 
36. It was further held that the Children’s Court cannot brush 
aside the requirement of holding an inquiry under Section 19(1)(i) 
of the JJ Act. Thus, all actions provided under Section 19 are 
mandatorily required to be undertaken by the Children’s Court. 
37. As can be seen from the facts of the present case, there has 
been a flagrant violation of the mandatory requirements of 
Sections 15 and 19 of the JJ Act. Neither was the charge sheet 
against the accused appellant filed before the Board nor was any 
preliminary assessment conducted under Section 15, so as to find 
out whether the accused appellant was required to be tried as an 
adult. 
38. In absence of a preliminary assessment being conducted by 
the Board under Section 15, and without an order being passed by 
the Board under Section 15(1) read with Section 18(3), it was 
impermissible for the trial Court to have accepted the charge sheet 
and to have proceeded with the trial of the accused. 

39. Thus, it is evident that the procedure adopted by the Sessions 
Court in conducting the trial of the accused appellant is de hors 
the mandatory requirements of JJ Act. 
40. Thus, on the face of the record, the proceedings undertaken 
by the Sessions Court in conducting trial of the CICL, convicting 
and sentencing him as above are in gross violation of the mandate 
of the Act and thus, the entire proceedings stand vitiated. 
41. It seems that pursuant to the trial being concluded, the trial 
Court realized the gross illegality in the proceedings and thus, in 
an attempt to give a vestige of validity to the grossly illegal 
proceedings conducted earlier, an exercise was undertaken to deal 
with the accused appellant as per the provisions of the JJ Act on 
the aspect of sentencing. However, ex facie, the said action which 
seems to be taken by way of providing an ex post facto imprimatur 
to the grossly illegal trial does not stand to scrutiny because the 
very foundation of the prosecution case is illegal to the core. 
42. All the proceedings taken against the accused appellant are 
vitiated as being in total violation of the mandatory procedure 
prescribed under the JJ Act. 
43. In the case of Karan Alias Fatiya(supra) relied upon by 
learned counsel for the State, this Court interpreted Section 9(3) 

and held that this sub-section does not specifically or impliedly 
provide that the conviction recorded by any Court with respect to 
a person who has been subsequently, after the disposal of the case 
found to be juvenile or a child, would lose its effect, rather it is only 
the sentence if any passed by the Court would be deemed to have 
no effect. The said judgment is clearly distinguishable because in 
the present case, the fact that the accused was a child on the date 
of the incident was clearly known to the Investigating Officer, the 
prosecution and the trial Court and thus, there is no possibility of 
saving the illegal proceedings by giving them an ex post facto 
approval. 
44. In the case of Pawan Kumar(supra), the plea of juvenility 
raised by the accused did not find favour of the Sessions Court as 
well as the High Court. However, in the appeal before this Court, 
a report was submitted by the Additional Sessions Judge, wherein 
it was opined that the appellant was a juvenile at the time of 
commission of alleged offences. The incident in the said case 
occurred on 1st December, 1995 and the age of juvenility was 16 
years as provided in the then prevailing Juvenile Justice Act, 1986. 
In the peculiar facts of the said case, this Court held that by virtue 
of subsequent amendments, the age of juvenility had been raised 

to 18 years and thus, the accused was entitled to be treated as a 
juvenile by virtue of the provisions of the JJ Act prevailing when 
the appeal was taken up. Since the accused had already 
undergone the maximum punishment of detention provided under 
the said Act, i.e., three years, it was directed that the accused 
therein be released forthwith. 
45. In the above two referred cases, the situation presented was 
that the factum regarding the accused being a child within the 
meaning of the JJ Act came to light at a very late stage i.e. after 
final decision of the cases and hence both these cases are clearly 
distinguishable from the case at hand. 
46. In the case of Ajeet Gurjar(supra), this Court remitted back 
the matter to the Sessions Court for complying with the 
requirements of Section 19(1) of the JJ Act. However, in the 
present case, there is yet another hurdle which convinces us that 
it is not a fit case warranting de novo proceedings against the 
accused appellant by taking recourse to the provisions of the JJ 
Act. At the cost of repetition, it may be reiterated that the charge 
sheet was filed against the accused appellant directly before the 
Sessions Court (statedly designated as a Children’s Court) and he 

was never presented before the Juvenile Justice Board as per the 
mandate of the JJ Act. 
47. The accused appellant being a CICL was never subjected to 
preliminary assessment by the Board so as to find out whether he 
should be tried as an adult. Directing such an exercise at this 
stage would be sheer futility because now the appellant is nearly 
23 years of age. 
48. At this stage, there remains no realistic possibility of finding 
out the mental and physical capacity of the accused appellant to 
commit the offence or to assess his ability to understand the 
consequences of the offence and circumstances in which he 
committed the offence in the year 2016. 
49. Since we have held that the entire proceedings taken against 
the appellant right from the stage of investigation and the 
completion of trial stand vitiated as having been undertaken in 
gross violation of the mandatory requirements of the JJ Act, we 
need not dwell into the merits of the matter or to reappreciate the 
evidence available on record for finding out whether the 
prosecution has been able to prove the guilt of the appellant by 
reliable circumstantial evidence. 

50. Thus, we are left with no option but to quash and set aside 
the impugned judgment and direct that the appellant who is 
presently lodged in jail shall be released forthwith, if not required 
in any other case. 
51. The appeal is allowed accordingly. 
52. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………………………….J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

………………………….J. 

(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
March 22, 2024.