IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2741­2743 OF 2024 
Navneet Kaur Harbhajansing Kundles
 …..Appellant
avneet Kaur Ravi Rana

VERSUS

State of Maharashtra and Others.
   …..Respondents
JUDGMENT
J.K. Maheshwari J.
1.
The   present   appeals   arise   out   of   impugned   common
judgment and final order dated 08.06.2021 passed by Division
Bench   of   High   Court   of   Judicature   at   Bombay   in   three   Writ
Petitions. Out of the said three petitions, Writ Petition No. 3370
of 2018 and  were preferred by
Anandra Vithoba Adsul and Raju Shamrao Mankar (Respondents
herein), inter­alia seeking identical reliefs, i.e., issuance of writ of
certiorari for quashing and setting aside order dated 03.11.2017
passed by District Caste Scrutiny Committee, Mumbai Suburban
(hereinafter   referred   to   as  ‘Scrutiny   Committee’)   which
validated   the   caste   claim   of   Appellant   herein   as  ‘Mochi   –

Scheduled   Caste’  in   Maharashtra.   Conversely,   Writ   Petition
(Lodging) No. 9426 of 2020 was filed by Appellant herein seeking
writ   of   certiorari   and   setting   aside   the   findings   of   Scrutiny
Committee, particularly in para 4 of order dated 03.11.2017 to
the extent of ‘non­consideration’ of oldest documents submitted
by her, which as contended by her sustained and established her
caste   claim.   The   Division   Bench   vide   common   impugned
judgment allowed the petitions of Anandra Vithoba Adsul and
Raju Shamrao Mankar and dismissed the petition preferred by
Appellant. The High Court quashed and set­aside the order dated
03.11.2017   passed   by   Scrutiny   Committee   primarily   on   the
ground that the same was obtained fraudulently and cancelled
the caste certificate issued in favour of Appellant. The Division
Bench further imposed a cost of Rs. 2,00,000/­ on the Appellant
and   directed   to   surrender   her   caste   certificate.   Hence,   the
present appeals.
FACTS IN BRIEF
2.
The   entire   controversy   revolves   around   the   validation   of
caste claim in favour of Appellant, on the anvil of which, the
Appellant   contested   the   2019   Parliamentary   election   from

Amravati   constituency   in   Maharashtra   as   an   independent
candidate on a seat reserved for Scheduled Caste and emerged as
winning   candidate   while   defeating   the   other   contesting
candidates   including   Anandra   Vithoba   Adsul   (Respondent
herein). Aggrieved, Appellant’s candidature on the reserved seat
was   assailed   by   other   contesting   candidates   primarily   on   the
ground that she obtained the ‘Mochi­Scheduled Caste’ certificate
from   the   authorities   concerned   by   submitting   forged   and
fabricated documents.  The genesis  of the  dispute is traceable
from year 2013, when various complaints were submitted against
Appellant before the Scrutiny Committee seeking cancellation of
the   caste   validity   certificate   issued   in   her   favour   by   Deputy
Collector vide order dated 30.08.2013. From 2013 to 2017, the
proceedings   continued   and   eventually,   when   the   matter   was
seized before High Court in 
preferred by one Raju Mankar, the High Court vide order dated
28.06.2017 set­aside the caste validity certificate issued in favour
of  Appellant   and   remanded   the   matter   with   directions   to   the
Scrutiny   Committee   to   give   opportunity   of   hearing   to   all   the
parties and take decision in accordance with law. 

3.
In furtherance of remand by High Court vide order dated
28.06.2017, the matter was taken up by Scrutiny Committee,
and   the   parties   duly   contested   their   case.   After   hearing   the
parties at length and having considered all the documents placed
on record, the Scrutiny Committee accepted the caste claim of
Appellant vide order 03.11.2017 predominantly on the basis of
two   documents,   i.e.,   (i)  bona­fide   certificate   dated   11.02.2014
issued by Khalsa College of Arts, Science and Commerce in the
name of Appellant’s grandfather mentioning his caste as ‘Sikh­
Chamar’;   and   (ii)   the   Indenture   of   Tenancy   of   1932   which
corroborated   the   Appellant’s   claim   of   her   forefathers   having
migrated to Maharashtra from Punjab back in 1932 itself along
with proof of residence. Aggrieved from above, the parties filed
respective Writ Petitions and hence, the instant appeals. 
ARGUMENTS ADVANCED BY APPELLANT
4.
Learned   Senior   Counsel   Mr.   Dhruv   Mehta   at   the   outset
contended   that   High   Court   erred   in   upsetting   the   detailed
findings of Scrutiny Committee in exercise of jurisdiction under
Article 226 of Constitution of India. High Court by invoking its
jurisdiction   to   issue   a   writ   of   certiorari   ought   not   to   have

interfered   in  the   matter   since   the   Committee   arrived   at  such
conclusion after having conducted extensive fact­finding exercise.
He further submitted that the scope of exercise of jurisdiction in
such cases is limited to examination of orders passed by the
Courts/Forums below to see if such orders have been passed
without jurisdiction, or in excess of the jurisdiction or due to
failure   of   exercise   of   jurisdiction.   Undisputedly,   Scrutiny
Committee in the instant case, being a quasi­judicial authority
exercised its jurisdiction under ‘Maharashtra Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled   Tribes,   De­Notified   Tribes   (Vimukta   Jatis),   Nomadic
Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Category
(Regulation of Issuance and Verification of) Caste Certificate Act,
2000’, (hereinafter referred to as ‘2000 Act’) and adjudicated the
claim. The fact­finding exercise and assessment of documents fell
within the exclusive domain of the Scrutiny Committee and High
Court in supervisory jurisdiction dealt with the petitions akin a
statutory appeal. The roving inquiry conducted by High Court
was uncalled for, particularly when in the instant case there is no
allegation   to   the   effect   that   Scrutiny   Committee   lacked
jurisdiction. The procedure as prescribed was duly followed by
the Scrutiny Committee and after due application of mind, the

claim of Appellant was validated. [See ‘Nagendra Nath Bora Vs.
The Commissioner of Hills Division and Appeals, Assam and
Others., AIR 1958 SC 398’ – Para 30 to 39 and 41; ‘Rajendra
Diwan Vs. Pradeep Kumar Ranibala, (2019) ’ –
Para 85 to 87; ‘Indian Overseas Bank Vs. I.O.B. Staff Canteen
Workers’ Union and Another, 2000 (4) SCC 245’ –  Para 17;
Mah. Adiwasi Thakur Jamat Swarakshan Samiti Vs. State
of Maharashtra and Others, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 326 – Para
28]  
5.
So   far   as   question   of   inadmissibility   of   documents
submitted by Appellant before Scrutiny Committee is concerned,
it   was   argued   by   the   learned   Senior   Counsel   that   those
documents   carried   a   statutory   presumption   under   Indian
Evidence Act as they were related to forefathers of Appellant and
belonged from pre­independence era. Unless any adverse findings
were returned on those documents by Vigilance Cell, the Scrutiny
Committee erred in not considering them and holding them as
inadmissible.  [See  ‘Anand   Vs.   Committee   for   Scrutiny   and
Verification of Tribal Claims, (2012) ’ –  Para 22;

‘Priya Pramod Gajbe Vs. State of Maharashtra and Others,
2023 SCC OnLine SC 909’ – Para 8 to 12]
ARGUMENTS ADVANCED BY RESPONDENTS
6.
The   learned   Senior   Counsel   Mr.   Kapil   Sibal   mainly
contested   the   case   on   the   scope   of   interference   with   the
Scheduled   Castes   Order,   1950   (hereinafter   referred   to   as
‘Presidential Order’) issued by President under Article 341 of
Constitution   of   India   and   argued   that   it   is   constitutionally
impossible to grant the caste certificate in favour of Appellant. He
submitted that in absence of specific caste (‘Ravidasia Mochi’ or
‘Sikh Chamar’) being originally mentioned in the said Presidential
Order for Maharashtra State, no caste certificate could have been
conferred at the first instance in favour of Appellant. He further
submitted that the issue of interfering with the Presidential Order
is no more res­integra and has been long back well settled by
catena of judgments passed by this Court including Constitution
Bench judgments  [See  ‘Marri Chandra Sekhar Rao Vs. Seth
G.S. Medical College, (1990) ’; ‘Action Committee
on   Issue   of   Caste   Certificate   to   Scheduled   Castes   and
Scheduled Tribes in the State of Maharashtra and Another

Vs. Union of India and Another, (1994) ’; ‘State of
Maharashtra   Vs.   Milind   and   Others,   (2001)   ’],
wherein it has been categorically held that the Presidential Order
is to be read as it is and no further interpretation is permissible
by  any  authority   to such order.  The  terminology  used  in the
Presidential   Order   is   to   be   read   verbatim   and   if   a   caste   is
mentioned   in   the   original   Order,   then   only   benefit   of   caste
certificate can be issued in favour of an applicant belonging from
one State and migrated to another. No kind of ‘prefix’ or ‘suffix’
can   be   taken   into   consideration   to   expand   the   ambit   of
Presidential Order by any authority, and it is only the Parliament
which is competent by law to include or exclude a caste/tribe
from the list of notified Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
He   further   drew   our   attention   to   the   extracts   of   Presidential
Order and  submitted that  neither ‘Ravidasia Mochi’  nor  ‘Sikh
Chamar’ is mentioned or recognized therein. In such case, if a
caste has not been particularly mentioned or notified for a State,
then the benefit of recognition to an applicant belonging to a
caste notified for that particular State cannot be granted. What
cannot   be   done   directly,   cannot   be   done   indirectly.   Lastly,
learned Senior Counsel concluded his arguments on the note

that, once  such is the  situation where the Presidential Order
itself is a self­speaking document, nothing survives in the case
for adjudication and no interference of this Court is called for. 
7.
The assisting learned counsel Mr. Shadan Farasat mainly
contended on the entirety of the facts and argued in support of
the observations made by High Court by demonstrating as to how
the Appellant obtained the caste claim certificate by submitting
multiple forged and fabricated documents. He submitted that a
fraud has been played by the Appellant on the authorities to get
her caste certificate by using ‘trial and error’ method by creating
multiple forged documents and submitting them to sustain her
claim,   specifically   when   her   initial   documents   in   support   of
‘Mochi’ caste were found to be forged and fabricated. He further
urged that, even for the sake of argument if it is assumed that
the documents are genuine in nature, then also the Appellant
cannot be granted the caste certificate for the reason that the
documents on the basis of which the Appellant sought benefit of
caste  certificate   are   self­contradictory   in   nature.   He   drew   the
attention   of   this   Court   to   the   first   claim   submitted   by   the
Appellant   where   she   claimed   herself   belonging   to   ‘Ravidasia
Mochi’ from Punjab State. Although the said documents were not

admitted by the Scrutiny Committee, however, the documents
showing the Appellant to be ‘Sikh Chamar’ were admitted and
intriguingly, she was granted a ‘Mochi’ caste certificate which had
cascading   effect   of   tinkering   with   the   Presidential   Order   as
neither   ‘Sikh   Chamar’   nor   ‘Ravidasia   Mochi’   is   recognized   as
Scheduled Caste for Maharashtra State therein. Hence, such an
exercise carried out by Scrutiny Committee by considering the
Appellant’s case as ‘Sikh­Chamar’ or ‘Ravidasia Mochi’ even on
the   surface   of   it   as   true   for   validating   her   caste   claim,   was
impermissible in law since neither ‘Sikh­Chamar’ nor ‘Ravidasia
Mochi’ are present in the original Presidential Order of 1950 for
Maharashtra State. 
8.
To   substantiate   the   above   argument,   he   further   placed
reliance   primarily   on   the   three   documents   submitted   by
Appellant   before   the   Scrutiny   Committee,   i.e.,   (i)   her   father’s
school leaving certificate; (ii) her father’s caste certificate; and (iii)
her   self­school   leaving   certificate.   It   is   submitted   that   all  the
above three documents were interpolated, forged and fabricated
to procure the caste validity certificate. So far as first document,
i.e., Appellant’s father school leaving certificate is concerned, the
Vigilance   Cell   submitted   its   report   that   on   inspection   it   was

found that the concerned school never issued the said certificate.
Secondly,   the   Appellant’s   father   caste   certificate   itself   stood
cancelled and confiscated by the Scrutiny Committee vide order
dated 03.11.2017. Though on the very same date, the Scrutiny
Committee validated the caste claim in favour of Appellant and
rejected the benefit of same caste to her father. Thirdly, the last
document, i.e., Appellant’s self­school leaving certificate issued
by Kartikeya High School and Junior College, New Hall Road,
Kurla   West,   Mumbai,   mentioning   ‘Mochi’   under   the   religion
column   in   favour   of   Appellant,   it   is   submitted   that   the   said
change was done on 23.08.2013 under the political influence on
letter sent by Appellant’s husband who is a sitting Member of
Legislative   Assembly   from   Badnera   constituency   in   Amravati
district.
ANALYSIS
9.
Before adverting to the merits of the case, it is relevant to
highlight   that   the   issue   of   procurement   of   caste   certificate
through   fraudulent   means   has   been   a   longtime   menace.   In
absence   of   any   mechanism   prescribing   the   procedure,   the
discretionary powers vested with authorities concerned have been

subject   matter   of   multiple   layers   of   litigation   before   Courts
throughout India. Eventually, the issue concerning the procedure
to be followed for adjudication of caste claims was considered in
detail by Constitution Bench of this Court in ‘Kumari Madhuri
Patil   and   Another   Vs.   Additional   Commissioner,   Tribal
Development   and   Others,   (1994)   ’,   wherein   this
Court expressed grave concerns about the deprivation of benefits
to genuine candidates, especially when caste certificate has been
obtained   fraudulently   on   the   basis   of   forged   documents   and
social status.  This Court laid emphasis on the need of the hour
to  streamline   the   procedure   for   issuance   of   caste   certificates,
their scrutiny and validation thereafter. Resultantly, this Court
exercising the powers under Article 142 of Constitution of India,
laid down exhaustive procedural guidelines in para 13 which is
reproduced below as thus – 
13.  ……..It is, therefore, necessary that the certificates
issued   are   scrutinized   at   the   earliest   and   with   utmost
expedition   and   promptitude.   For   that   purpose,   it   is
necessary to streamline the procedure for the issuance of
social status certificates, their scrutiny and their approval,
which may be the following:

1.
The   application   for   grant   of   social   status
certificate   shall   be   made   to   the   Revenue   Sub­
Divisional Officer and Deputy Collector or Deputy
Commissioner and the certificate shall be issued
by such officer rather than at the Officer, Taluk or
Mandal level.
2.
The   parent,   guardian   or   the   candidate,   as   the
case may be, shall file an affidavit duly sworn
and attested by a competent gazetted officer or
non­gazetted officer with particulars of castes and
sub­castes,   tribe,   tribal   community,   parts   or
groups of tribes or tribal communities, the place
from   which   he   originally   hails   from   and   other
particulars   as   may   be   prescribed   by   the
Directorate concerned.
3.
Application for verification of the caste certificate
by the Scrutiny Committee shall be filed at least
six months in advance before seeking admission
into educational institution or an appointment to a
post.
4.
All   the   State   Governments   shall   constitute   a
Committee   of   three   officers,   namely,   (I)   an
Additional or Joint Secretary or any officer high­er
in   rank   of   the   Director   of   the   department
concerned, (II) the Director, Social Welfare/Tribal
Welfare/Backward   Class   Welfare,   as   the   case
may be, and (III) in the case of Scheduled Castes
another officer who has intimate knowledge in the
verification   and   issuance   of   the   social   status
certificates. In the case of the Scheduled Tribes,
the Research Officer who has intimate knowledge

in identifying the tribes, tribal communities, parts
of or groups of tribes or tribal communities.
5.
Each Directorate should constitute a vigilance cell
consisting   of   Senior   Deputy   Superintendent   of
Police   in   over­all   charge   and   such   number   of
Police   Inspectors   to   investigate   into   the   social
status claims. The Inspector would go to the local
place of residence and original place from which
the candidate hails and usually resides or in case
of migration to the town or city, the place from
which   he   originally   hailed   from.   The   vigilance
officer should personally verify and collect all the
facts of the social status claimed by the candidate
or the parent or guardian, as the case may be. He
should   also   examine   the   school   records,   birth
registration, if any. He should also examine the
parent, guardian or the candidate in relation to
their caste etc. or such other persons who have
knowledge of the social status of the candidate
and   then   submit   a   report   to   the   Directorate
together with all particulars as envisaged in the
pro forma, in particular, of the Scheduled Tribes
relating   to   their   peculiar   anthropological   and
ethnological traits, deity, rituals, customs, mode
of marriage, death ceremonies, method of burial
of dead bodies etc. by the castes or tribes or tribal
communities concerned etc.
6.
The Director concerned, on receipt of the report
from the vigilance officer if he found the claim for
social status to be “not genuine” or ‘doubtful’ or
spurious   or   falsely   or   wrongly   claimed,   the

Director   concerned   should   issue   show­cause
notice   supplying   a   copy   of   the   report   of   the
vigilance officer to the candidate by a registered
post with acknowledgement due or through the
head of the educational institution concerned in
which the candidate is studying or employed. The
notice should indicate that the representation or
reply, if any, would be made within two weeks
from the date of the receipt of the notice and in no
case on request not more than 30 days from the
date   of   the   receipt   of   the   notice.   In   case,   the
candidate seeks for an opportunity of hearing and
claims an inquiry to be made in that behalf, the
Director on receipt of such representation/reply
shall   convene   the   committee   and   the
Joint/Additional   Secretary   as   Chairperson   who
shall   give   reasonable   opportunity   to   the
candidate/parent/guardian   to   adduce   all
evidence in support of their claim. A public notice
by beat of drum or any other convenient mode
may be published in the village or locality and if
any person or association opposes such a claim,
an opportunity to adduce evidence may be given
to him/it. After giving such opportunity either in
person  or  through  counsel, the   Committee   may
make   such   inquiry   as   it   deems   expedient   and
consider the claims vis­à­vis the objections raised
by   the   candidate   or   opponent   and   pass   an
appropriate order with brief reasons in support
thereof.

7.
In case the report is in favour of the candidate
and   found   to   be   genuine   and   true,   no   further
action need be taken except where the report or
the particulars given are procured or found to be
false or fraudulently obtained and in the latter
event the same procedure as is envisaged in para
6 be followed.
8.
Notice contemplated in para 6 should be issued to
the parents/guardian also in case candidate is
minor   to   appear   before   the   Committee   with   all
evidence in his or their support of the claim for the
social status certificates.
9.
The inquiry should be completed as expeditiously
as possible preferably by day­to­day proceedings
within such period not exceeding two months. If
after inquiry, the Caste Scrutiny Committee finds
the   claim   to   be   false   or   spurious,   they   should
pass   an   order   cancelling   the   certificate   issued
and confiscate the same. It should communicate
within one month from the date of the conclusion
of  the   proceedings  the   result  of   enquiry  to   the
parent/guardian and the applicant.
10.
In case of any delay in finalizing the proceedings,
and in the meanwhile the last date for admission
into an educational institution or appointment to
an officer post, is getting expired, the candidate
be   admitted   by   the   Principal   or   such   other
authority competent in that behalf or appointed on
the basis of the social status certificate already
issued   or   an   affidavit   duly   sworn   by   the
parent/guardian/candidate before the competent

officer   or   non­official   and   such   admission   or
appointment should be only provisional, subject to
the   result   of   the   inquiry   by   the   Scrutiny
Committee.
11.
The order passed by the Committee shall be final
and   conclusive   only   subject   to   the   proceedings
under Article 226 of the Constitution.
12.
No   suit   or   other   proceedings   before   any   other
authority should lie.
13.
The High Court would dispose of these cases as
expeditiously as possible within a period of three
months. In case, as per its procedure, the writ
petition/miscellaneous
 
petition/matter
 
is
disposed of by a Single Judge, then no further
appeal would lie against that order to the Division
Bench but subject to special leave under Article
136.
14.
In case, the certificate obtained or social status
claimed   is   found   to   be   false,   the
parent/guardian/the   candidate   should   be
prosecuted   for   making   false   claim.   If   the
prosecution ends in a conviction and sentence of
the accused, it could be regarded as an offence
involving   moral   turpitude,   disqualification   for
elective posts  or offices  under the State  or the
Union or elections to any local body, legislature or
Parliament.
15.
As soon as the finding is recorded by the Scrutiny
Committee   holding   that   the   certificate   obtained
was   false,   on   its   cancellation   and   confiscation

simultaneously, it should be communicated to the
educational   institution   concerned   or   the
appointing   authority   by   registered   post   with
acknowledgement due with a request to cancel
the admission or the appointment. The Principal
etc. of the educational institution responsible for
making the admission or the appointing authority,
should   cancel   the   admission/appointment
without any further notice to the candidate and
debar   the   candidate   from   further   study   or
continue in office in a post.
In furtherance of the said guidelines, streamlined procedure
was formulated and State Acts were enacted to deal with caste
claim cases.
10.
As the present case arises from Maharashtra, it is necessary
to deal with the respective State Act, i.e., the 2000 Act enacted
with effect from 18.10.2001 containing elaborative procedure and
mechanism for regulation and verification of caste claims. Since
the moot point in this case is arising from the verification and
issuance   of   caste   validity   certificate   in   favour   of   Appellant,   it
becomes imperative to look into the relevant provisions of the Act,
in   particular   Section   6,   Section   7   and   Section   9,   which   are
reproduced below for ready reference – 

Section   6   –   Verification   of   Caste   Certificate   by
Scrutiny Committee. 

The Government shall constitute by notification in the
Official Gazette, one or more Scrutiny Committee(s) for
verification   of   Caste   Certificates   issued   by   the
Competent Authorities under sub­section (1) of section
4 specifying in the said notification the functions and
the   area   of   jurisdiction   of   each   of   such   Scrutiny
Committee or Committees. 

After   obtaining   the   Caste   Certificate   from   the
Competent Authority, any person desirous of availing
of   the   benefits   or   concessions   provided   to   the
Scheduled   Castes,   Scheduled   Tribes,   De­notified
Tribes   (Vimukta   Jatis),   Nomadic   Tribes,   Other
Backward Classes or Special Backward Category for
the purposes mentioned in section 3 may make an
application, well in time, in such form and in such
manner   as   may   be   prescribed,   to   the   concerned
Scrutiny Committee for the verification of such Caste
Certificate and issue of a validity certificate.

The   appointing   authority   of   the   Central   or   State
Government,   local   authority,   public   sector
undertakings,   educational   institutions,   Co­operative
Societies or any other Government aided institutions
shall, make an application in such form and in such
manner   as   may   be   prescribed   by   the   Scrutiny
Committees for the verification of the Caste Certificate
and issue of a validity certificate, in case a person
selected   for   an   appointment   with   the   Government,
local   authority,   public   sector   undertakings,

educational institutions, Co­operative societies or any
other   Government   aided   institutions   who   has   not
obtain such certificate. 

The Scrutiny Committee shall follow such procedure
for verification of the Caste Certificate and adhere to
the   time  limit   for verification  and  grant  of   validity
certificate, as prescribed.
Section 7 – Confiscation and Cancellation of false
Certificate.

Where, before or after the commencement of this Act,
a   person   not   belonging   to   any   of   the   Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes, De­notified Tribes (Vimukta
Jatis), Nomadic Tribes, Other Backward Classes or
Special   Backward   Category   has   obtained   a   false
Caste Certificate to the effect that either himself or his
children belong to such Castes, Tribes or Classes, the
Scrutiny Committee may, suo motu, or otherwise call
for the record and enquire into the correctness of such
certificate and if it is of the opinion that the certificate
was   obtained   fraudulently,   it   shall,   by   an   order
cancel and confiscate the certificate by following such
procedure   as   prescribed,   after   giving   the   person
concerned   an   opportunity   of   being   heard,   and
communicate the same to the concerned person and
the concerned authority, if any.

The order passed by the Scrutiny Committee under
this Act shall be final and shall not be challenged
before any authority or court except the High Court
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

Section   9   –   Civil   Court   powers   to   Competent
Authority,   Appellate   Authority   and   Scrutiny
Committee.

The Competent Authority, the Appellate Authority and
the   Scrutiny   Committee   shall,   while   holding   an
enquiry under this Act, have all the powers of a Civil
Court   while   trying   a   suit   under   the   Code   of   Civil
Procedure, 1908 and in particular in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
any person and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d)   requisitioning   any   public   record   or   copy
thereof from any Court or office; and 
(e) issuing Commissions for the examination of
witnesses or documents.
A bare perusal of the aforesaid provisions reveals that power
to verify the correctness/validation of the caste certificate issued
by Competent Authority under Section 4 is vested with Scrutiny
Committee   constituted   under   Section   6.   Section   7   further
empowers   the   Scrutiny   Committee   with  suo   motu  powers   or
otherwise to call for record and enquire into correctness of a
caste certificate if it is of the opinion that such certificate was

obtained   fraudulently   and   also   vests   the   Committee   with   the
power   to   cancel   and   confiscate   the   certificate   in   question   in
accordance with law. Such order of Scrutiny Committee as per
sub clause (2) is said to be final and protected from any challenge
before   any   authority   except   High   Court   under   Article   226   of
Constitution of India. Furthermore, Section 9 confers all powers
on   the   Scrutiny   Committee   as   exercised   by   Civil  Court  while
trying a suit as per Civil Procedure Code, 1908. 
11.
In   furtherance   of   the   aforesaid   2000   Act,   the   State   of
Maharashtra   further   brought   in   force   the
 ‘Maharashtra
Scheduled   Castes,   De­notified   Tribes   (Vimukta   Jatis),   Nomadic
Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Category
(Regulation of Issuance and Verification of) Caste Certificate Rules,
2012’   (hereinafter   referred   to   as  ‘2012   Rules’),   stipulating
detailed   provisions   regarding   procedure   for   constitution   of
Scrutiny Committee as well as the procedure to be followed by it
while   dealing   with   the   claims   seeking   validation   of   caste
certificate issued by Competent Authority. For the purpose of
case at hand, Rule 13, Rule 14 and Rule 17 are relevant and thus
are reproduced below for ready reference – 

Rule 13 – Report of Vigilance Cell and Issues to be
dealt with.

Vigilance   Cell   Officer(s)   shall   submit   report   upon
investigating   into   the   Scheduled   Caste,   Scheduled
Caste   converts   to   Buddhism,   De­notified   Tribes
(Vimukta   Jatis),   Nomadic   Tribes,   Other   Backward
Classes   or   Special   Backward   Category   claim,
referred to it, – 

by visiting permanent place of residence and
conducting domestic inquiry; or 

by   recording   statements   of   respected   and
responsible   persons   from   concerned   area,
including   representatives   of   Local   Self
Government, Police Patil, etc.; or 

by collecting information, as part of recording
statement,   as   regards   to   name,   age,
educational
 
qualification,
 
occupation,
existing place of residence and information
regarding properties (existing and disposed)
of family members of applicant or claimant;
or 

by   collecting   information   including   the
sociological, anthropological and ethnological
(anthropological   moorings   and   ethnological
kinship),   genetical   traits   of   the   Scheduled
Caste,   Scheduled   Caste   converts   to
Buddhism,   De­notified   Tribes   (Vimukta
Jatis),   Nomadic   Tribes,   Other   Backward
Classes   or   Special   Backward   Category,   if
any; or 

by personally visiting Office of the Competent
Authority   or   revenue   or   school   or   other
concerned offices.

Notwithstanding anything contained in any provision
of these rules, –

the Vigilance Cell shall not record concluding
remark or opinion, since vigilance inquiry is
meant for internal assistance to the Scrutiny
Committee   and   adjudication   of   Scheduled
Caste,   Scheduled   Caste   converts   to
Buddhism,   De­notified   Tribes   (Vimukta
Jatis),   Nomadic   Tribes,   Other   Backward
Classes   or   Special   Backward   Category
status  is  exclusive  domain  of   the  Scrutiny
Committee;

finding   recorded   and   opinion   expressed,  if
any,   by   the   Vigilance   Officer   shall   not   be
binding on Scrutiny Committee nor could be
used as evidence, in support of Scheduled
Caste,   Scheduled   Caste   converts   to
Buddhism,   De­notified   Tribes   (Vimukta
Jatis),   Nomadic   Tribes,   Other   Backward
Classes   or   Special   Backward   Category
claim.
Rule 14 – Verification of Caste Certificate. 
Any   person   desirous   of   availing   of   the   benefits   and
concessions provided to the Scheduled Caste, Scheduled
Caste converts to Buddhism, De­notified Tribes (Vimukta
Jatis), Nomadic Tribes, Other Backward Classes or Special
Backward   Categories   for   any   of   the   purposes   as

mentioned in Section 3 of the Act shall, invariably submit
an application in FORM–16 with an affidavit in FORM–3
and FORM–17 for students; FORM–18 with an affidavit in
FORM–3 and FORM–19 for employees or service purpose;
FORM–20 with an affidavit in FORM–3 and FORM–21 for
election purpose; or FORM–22 with an affidavit in FORM–3
and FORM–23 for other purpose, as per his requirement, to
the concerned Scrutiny Committee for verification of his
caste claim and issue of Caste Validity Certificate, well in
time: 
Provided that, the Caste Certificate issued to migrant
from   other   State   and   Caste   or   Community   Certificates
issued by Authorities of the States other than the State of
Maharashtra, shall not be verified by such Caste Scrutiny
Committee.
Rule 17 – Procedure of Scrutiny Committee.

On   receipt   of   application,   the   Scrutiny   Committee
shall ensure that the application and the information
supplied therewith is complete in all respects and to
carry out scrutiny of the application. 

Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules,
the   claimant   or   applicant   or   complainant   shall   be
personally   responsible   for   removal   of   objections
raised   by   Scrutiny   Committee,   if   any,   within   two
weeks or within such extended period, which shall
not be more than six weeks, failing which the claim or
application   or   complaint   shall   be   disposed   of,   by
appreciating available records and such decision may
be   communicated   to   the   applicant   by   the   Scrutiny
Committee. 

The   incomplete   application   may   be   rejected   by
recording reasons. 

Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, it
will   be   the   sole   responsibility   of   the   claimant   or
applicant   to   attend   the   dates   of   hearing,   either
personally or through duly authorized representative.

The roznama of the Scrutiny committee shall be self­
evident as to what transpired on a particular day and
it shall be signed by all the members of the Scrutiny
Committee.

If   the   Scrutiny   Committee,   upon   appreciating   the
statement of applicant or claimant submitted in the
form of Affidavit filed in consonance with Order 18
Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as well
as   other   evidence   and   documents   furnished   along
with any application or proposal is satisfied, about
the   genuineness   of   Scheduled   Caste   or   Scheduled
Caste   converts   to   Buddhism   or   De­notified   Tribes
(Vimukta Jatis) or Nomadic Tribes or Other Backward
Classes   or   Special   Backward   Category   claim   the
scrutiny   committee   shall   forthwith   issue   Validity
Certificate in FORM­20 without enquiry by vigilance
cell. 

If   the   Scrutiny   Committee,   upon   appreciating   the
statement of applicant or claimant submitted in the
form of Affidavit filed in consonance with Order 18
Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as well
as   other   evidence   and   documents   furnished   along
with any application or proposal, is of the opinion
that   the   documents   do   not   satisfy   or   conclusively
prove   the   Scheduled   Caste   or   Scheduled   Caste

converts to Buddhism or De­notified Tribes (Vimukta
Jatis) or Nomadic Tribes or Other Backward Classes
or   Special   Backward   Category   claim,   the   Scrutiny
Committee by mentioning the same in the roznama,
shall refer such case to the Vigilance Cell for carrying
out suitable inquiry, as is deemed fit, by the Scrutiny
Committee:
Provided that, findings recorded by the Vigilance
Cell shall not be binding on the Scrutiny Committee,
as   the   vigilance   inquiry   is   meant   for   internal
assistance to the Scrutiny Committee. The Scrutiny
Committee shall record its reasons for discarding the
report of Vigilance Cell. 

The Vigilance Cell shall complete the inquiry within
six weeks, thereby making suitable inquiry, on all the
issues   or   as   specifically   directed   by   the   Scrutiny
Committee. 

Vigilance   Inquiry   shall   be   made   for   respective
territorial area of jurisdiction of concerned Scrutiny
Committee. 
(10) In case of those cases which are referred to Vigilance
Cell,   upon   considering   the   report   submitted   by
Vigilance Cell, if the Scrutiny Committee is satisfied
about   the   genuineness   of   Scheduled   Caste   or
Scheduled Caste converts to Buddhism or De­notified
Tribes   (Vimukta   Jatis)   or   Nomadic   Tribes   or   Other
Backward   Classes   or   Special   Backward   Category
claim of claimant or applicant, it shall be lawful to
decide the matter finally by its written decision, and
forward the copy of decision and Validity Certificate

in FORM–24, to the concerned parties or authority, by
preserving its scanned copy (in electronic form). 
(11) (i)
In   case   of   those   cases   which   are   refereed   to
Vigilance   Cell,   upon   considering   the   report   of
Vigilance   Cell,   if   the   Scrutiny   Committee   is   not
satisfied about the claim of the applicant, it shall call
upon   the   applicant   to   prove   his   Caste   claim,   by
discharging   his   burden,   as   contemplated   under
Section 8 of the Act, by issuing a notice in FORM–25
coupled with copy of report of Vigilance Inquiry; 
(ii) After issuance of notice, if applicant requests, by
way   of   written   application,   for   copies   of   vigilance
inquiry  report   or any   other  document   or prays   for
adjournment, reasonable time for final hearing or for
submitting written submission, it may be granted; 
(iii) After affording an opportunity of hearing, Scrutiny
Committee shall, – 

being satisfied regarding the genuineness of
the Caste  claim, decide the  matter finally,
upon   appreciation   of   evidence,   by   its
reasoned decision, i.e., decision of committee
and issue Certificate of Validity, in FORM–
24;   and   forward   the   same   to   concerned
authorities within thirty days, by preserving
its scanned copy (in electronic form); 

being not satisfied about the genuineness of
the   claim   and   veracity   of   the   Caste
Certificate, it shall pass its decision, thereby
cancelling and confiscating the original Caste
Certificate   and   invalidating   the   Caste   or
Tribe claim of the applicant or claimant; 

upon invalidation of Caste or Tribe claim, the
Caste   Certificate   under   inquiry   shall   be
stamped as "cancelled and confiscated", and
forward   the   same   along   with   copy   of
decision,   to   the   Competent   Authority   and
concerned parties, by preserving its scanned
copy (in electronic form); 

after conclusion of the hearing of the case,
the work of writing of the decision shall be
assigned   to   one   of   its   members   by   the
Scrutiny Committee; 

in case of difference of opinion amongst the
members of Committee, on the main order of
majority, the dissenting member shall write
his separate order; 

The name of member of Committee to whom
work   of   writing   final   order   was   assigned,
shall   be   mentioned   in   the   roznama.
Moreover,   front   page   of   final   order   shall
disclose the date of the order. 
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, it
is incumbent on the applicant to disclose all the true
and   correct   information,   including   disclosure   of
adverse entries or material, failing which, it shall be
lawful for the Scrutiny Committee to draw adverse
inference. 
(13) If the Scrutiny Committee finds and concludes that
the report of Vigilance Cell is false or unrealistic, it
shall   record   the   reason   in   decision   and   direct
appropriate action as contemplated under Section 14,
read  with  Section  11  and  12  of  the  Act  and  also

recommend   Departmental   inquiry   against   such
Vigilance Officer:
Provided that, an opportunity of being heard be
granted to the concerned Vigilance Cell officer prior to
any   direction   for   appropriate   action.   This   hearing
shall be independent to adjudication of Caste or Tribe
claim.
12.
A combined reading of the Sections of 2000 Act and Rules of
2012 Rules, makes it clear that a detailed procedure has been
prescribed for the Scrutiny Committee to deal with the claim of
an applicant seeking validation of caste certificate issued by the
Competent Authority. The power to deal with such verification
has been specifically vested with Scrutiny Committee and it falls
within the exclusive domain of it in view of Rule 13(b) of 2012
Rules. For the purposes of verification, the Scrutiny Committee
has all the powers of Civil Court while trying a civil suit and it
can   further   take   internal   assistance   of   Vigilance   Cell   for
verification in those cases as and when needed by the Committee.
It is pertinent here to note that, as per Rule13(2)(b), the findings
recorded, and opinion expressed by the Vigilance Cell shall not be
binding   on   Scrutiny   Committee   and   nor   could   be   used   in
evidence for the purpose of claim. Further, Rule 17(6) provides
that if the Scrutiny Committee upon appreciation of statement of

applicant   in   prescribed   format  as   well  as   other   evidence   and
documents   furnished   along   with   it,   is   satisfied   about   the
genuineness of same, then it shall forthwith issue the validity
certificate in FORM–20 without enquiry by Vigilance Cell. In other
words, the said Rule provides for subjective satisfaction of the
Scrutiny Committee when a claim is made and does not mandate
verification in each case by the Vigilance Cell. At this juncture,
Section 7(2) of the 2000 Act also assumes significance. It fortifies
the exclusive domain of Scrutiny Committee and deals with the
finality of the orders passed by Scrutiny Committee under the
2000 Act stating that the orders passed by Scrutiny Committee
shall be final and it shall not be open to challenge before any
authority   or   Court   except   High   Court   under   Article   226   of
Constitution of India. The said language used in sub clause (2)
clearly   reflects   the   intention   of   legislature   to   ensure   minimal
interference with the orders of Scrutiny Committee. 
13.
Now reverting to the facts of the instant case, the Scrutiny
Committee   admitted   the   claim   of   Appellant   vide   order   dated
03.11.2017   based   on   its   subjective   satisfaction   regarding   two
documents   namely,   (i)   bona­fide   certificate   issued   by   Khalsa
College of Arts, Science and Commerce in favour of Appellant’s

grandfather mentioning his caste as ‘Sikh­Chamar’; and (ii) the
Indenture of Tenancy of year 1932 in favour of great grandfather
of Appellant as his residence proof, proving his migration from
Punjab to Maharashtra prior to issuance of Presidential Order in
1950.   The   Scrutiny   Committee   also   extensively   referred   to
pedigree   table   of   Appellant   tracing   the   genealogy   of   caste   of
Appellant’s forefathers as ‘Mochi’. The said fact was also affirmed
by Vigilance squad which made a personal site visit in Punjab
and confirmed the truthfulness/genuineness of the contents of
the pedigree documents from the locals as well as authorities
concerned. Although the said documents were not admitted by
the Scrutiny Committee for them not being in ‘complete form’,
however,   notably   these   documents   were   neither   objected   nor
debated by the complainant. Be that as it may, once the Scrutiny
Committee after hearing the contesting parties and evaluating the
documents   on   record   reached   on   conclusion   based   on   its
satisfaction and application of mind, the question that arises for
consideration of this Court in the particular facts of this case is
that   how   far   the   High   Court   was   justified   in   completely
overturning   the   findings   of   Scrutiny   Committee   in  exercise   of

jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India by re­
appraisal of the entire evidence on record? 
14.
The   entire   sum   and   substance   of   the   Respondents’
arguments before this Court and High Court is that the Appellant
has forged   and   fabricated   the   documents  to   obtain   her  caste
validity certificate. In our view, it is a disputed question of facts
and can only be sustained by leading evidence. Admittedly in the
present case, on remand by High Court, the parties appeared
before the Scrutiny Committee, filed objections and led evidence.
They were heard and after due consideration of all the material
brought   on   record,   the   Scrutiny   Committee,   delineated   the
objections   and   passed   the   detailed   order   validating   the   caste
certificate   of   the   Appellant   primarily   on   the   anvil   of   report
submitted by Vigilance Cell and report of home enquiry and also
held that other documents produced by the contesting parties are
inadmissible.   So   far   as   question   of   admissibility   of   bona­fide
certificate   dated   11.02.2014   issued   in   favour   of   Appellant’s
grandfather is concerned, the Scrutiny Committee recorded its
satisfaction   and   formed   opinion   that   the   said   certificate   is   a
competent evidence and held it as admissible after verification of
the   students’   original   register   which   recorded   the   date   of

admission   of   Appellant’s   grandfather   as   16.11.1946.   The
complainants   have   not   raised   any   oral   or   written   objection
regarding   this   document   before   the   Scrutiny   Committee.   The
primary   grievance   of   the   complainants   before   the   Scrutiny
Committee was that they were not allowed to cross­examine the
Vice­Principal of the said college who came to present the original
record. However, the present case herein is not that the said
grievance was not considered by the Committee or that it had a
biased or favourable approach towards the applicant. A perusal
of   the   order   passed   by   Scrutiny   Committee   reveals   that   the
request of complainants for cross­examination of Vice­Principal
was not accepted for the reason that the said person came as a
presenter of the original student register on behalf of Principal of
the college, and being representative, he does not automatically
become witness of the applicant. 
15.
Now,   when   the   Scrutiny   Committee   which   is   principally
tasked with the fact­finding exercise for validation of caste claim,
had applied its mind and reached a conclusion, then in such a
situation, whether a roving enquiry by High Court was required?
It is well settled that High Courts as well as Supreme Court
should refrain themselves from deeper probe into factual issues

like   an   appellate   body   unless   the   inferences   made   by   the
concerned authority suffers from perversity on the face of it or
are impermissible in the eyes of law. In the instant case, the
order passed by Scrutiny Committee reflects due appreciation of
evidence and application of mind and in absence of any allegation
of bias/malice or lack of jurisdiction, disturbing the findings of
Scrutiny Committee cannot be sustained. 
16.
In view of the above discussion, if we take a look at the
findings of the High Court in said perspective and deal with each
findings   individually,   it   would   rather   burden   the   judgment
unnecessarily and therefore, we deem it appropriate to confine
our analysis only to those findings by which the High Court has
upset the reasonings adopted by Scrutiny Committee to admit
those two documents, i.e., the bona­fide certificate of Appellant’s
grandfather and indenture of tenancy of year 1932 to allow the
claim of Appellant. With respect to bona­fide certificate, the High
Court opined that the Scrutiny Committee did not deal with the
observations  made  by  Vigilance  Cell  that  the   original  student
register was not produced by the Vice­Principal for inspection
and that the handwriting and ink of the last two entries made in
the said register did not match. The High Court itself perused the

coloured photocopy of the last page of the register and affirmed
the difference in handwriting and the ink by appreciating the said
evidence. On the other hand, insofar as the indenture of tenancy
of year 1932 is concerned, the High Court in contradiction with
the Scrutiny Committee was of the view that the alleged rent
agreement   was   relied   upon   by   Appellant   much   later   in   time,
coupled   with   the   fact   that   it   did   not   make   any   sense   for   a
landlord and tenant in a private rent agreement to mention the
caste   of   tenant.   The   High   Court   further   observed   that   to
substantiate the rent agreement, the Scrutiny Committee heavily
relied upon the affidavit of one Smt. Radha Adukiya, i.e., the
granddaughter of the erstwhile landlord who rented the property
in favour of Appellant’s grandfather. In the said affidavit, Smt.
Akudia   deposed   that   her   grandfather   rented   the   property   in
favour   of   Appellant’s   grandfather   and   further   identified   his
signatures too. Smt. Akudiya at the time of deposition herself was
about 82 years of age and she recognized the signatures of her
grandfather on an agreement allegedly executed 55 years back. In
view of the same, the High Court was of the opinion that Scrutiny
Committee failed in not carrying out an enquiry in finding out the
authenticity   of   the   said   rent   agreement.   With   these   primary

findings,   the   High   Court   quashed   and   set­aside   the   order   of
Scrutiny Committee. 
17.
Having perused the order passed by the Scrutiny Committee
and findings recorded by it to reach its subjective satisfaction
with respect to claim of Appellant, at this juncture, if we look at
the whole exercise carried out by High Court from the perspective
of settled principles of law for invocation of jurisdiction under
Article 226 of Constitution of India, particularly in relation of writ
of certiorari, it leaves us with no scope of doubt that the High
Court has clearly overstepped by re­appreciating the evidence in
absence   of   any   allegation   of   mala­fide   or   perversity.   As   fairly
settled by this Court in catena of judgments, the writ of certiorari
being a writ of high prerogative, should not be invoked on mere
asking. The purpose of a writ of certiorari for a superior Court is
not   to   review   or   reweigh   the   evidence   to   adjudicate   unless
warranted.   The   jurisdiction   is   supervisory   and   the   Court
exercising it, ought to refrain to act as an appellate court unless
the facts so warrant. It also ought not re­appreciate the evidence
and   substitute   its   own   conclusion   interfering   with   a   finding
unless perverse. The High Court in a writ for certiorari should not
interfere when such challenge is on the ground of insufficiency or

adequacy   of   material   to   sustain   the   impugned   finding.
Assessment of adequacy or sufficiency of evidence in the case at
hand,   fell   within   the   exclusive   jurisdiction   of   the   Scrutiny
Committee and re­agitation of challenge on such grounds ought
not have been entertained by High Court in a routine manner.
18.
As per the ratio of larger Bench judgment of this Court in
‘Dayaram   Vs.   Sudhir   Batham   and   Others.,   (2012)   ’, it reveals that the Court while answering the question as to
whether   the   Civil   Courts’   jurisdiction   was   rightly   barred   by
judgment   in  Kumari   Madhuri   Patil  (supra),   observed   that  a
Scrutiny Committee is not an adjudicating authority like a Court
or Tribunal, rather it is an administrative body which verifies the
fact,   investigates   into   a   specific   caste   claim   and   ascertains
whether the caste claim is correct or not. It was further observed
that permitting civil suits to challenge such proceedings with the
provisions   of   appeal   and   further   appeals   would   defeat   the
purpose   of   the   scheme.   However,   such   decisions   were   rightly
made available to challenge in proceedings under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India ‘which may be within the parameters for
invoking the writ jurisdiction by High Court’ in the judgment of

Kumari Madhuri Patil  (supra). Though at the same time, the
said observation does not explicitly give a wide power in a writ of
certiorari which is not within the purview of issuance of such writ
merely   because   of   decision   of   Scrutiny   Committee   is   under
challenge. 
19.
In sum and substance, the writ of certiorari is expended as
a remedy and  is  intended to cure jurisdictional  error, if any,
committed by the Courts/forums below. It should not be used by
superior Court to substitute its own views by getting into fact­
finding   exercise   unless   warranted.  [See  Central   Council   for
Research in Ayurvedic Sciences and Another Vs. Bikartan
Das and Others, 2023 SCC OnLine 996 –  Para 51 and 52;
Syed Yakoob Vs. K.S. Radhakrishnan, AIR 1964 SC 477 –
Para  7].  At   this   juncture,   it  would   also   be   profitable   to   refer
relevant extract from judgment delivered by this Court in ‘Indian
Overseas Bank’  (supra),  wherein para 17, it was observed as
thus – 
“17. ……..The findings of fact recorded by a fact­finding
authority   duly   constituted   for   the   purpose   and   which
ordinarily   should   be   considered   to   have   become   final,
cannot be disturbed for the mere reason of having been

based on materials or evidence not sufficient or credible in
the opinion of the writ Court to warrant those findings at
any rate, as long as they are based upon such materials
which are relevant for the purpose or even on the ground
that there is yet another view which can be reasonably
and possibly undertaken……”
Such   being   the   situation,   in   the   instant   case,   the   High
Court went into a probe regarding credibility of the opinion of the
Scrutiny   Committee   because   the   writ   Court   felt   the   need   to
substitute it’s own views. In case if the findings of the Scrutiny
Committee are based on the materials specified under Rule 16
followed   by   its   subjective   satisfaction,   then   exercise   of
jurisdiction   under   writ   of   certiorari   to   quash   the   order   of
validation of caste claim by Scrutiny Committee is unwarranted
and uncalled for. 
20.
In  a  recent  reference   in  ‘Mah.   Adiwasi  Thakur  Jamat
Swarakshan Samiti’ (supra), while answering the question as to
‘whether paramount importance should be given to the affinity test
while adjudicating upon a caste claim on the basis of a caste
certificate issued by a Competent Authority, or in other words,
whether the affinity test is a litmus test for deciding a caste claim’,
this Court observed that if the Scrutiny Committee is satisfied

with the documents, it need not mechanically forward the same
to the Vigilance Cell for verification in a routine manner. Even as
per Rule 17(7) of the 2012 Rules, the Scrutiny Committee is not
required to send every document to Vigilance Cell. It is only when
the Scrutiny Committee after holding an enquiry is not satisfied
with   the   material   produced   by   the   applicant,   it   may   refer   to
Vigilance Cell. Therefore, in our considered view, the observations
made   by   the   High   Court   in   the   case   at   hand   regarding   not
sending the documents to Vigilance Cell is not justified. 
21.
Lastly, the documents which are furnished by an applicant
before   the   Scrutiny   Committee   are   a   reference   point   for   the
Scrutiny Committee to verify the caste claim of an Applicant. In
such a case, where the Applicant is tracing the caste genealogy
based   on   documents   from   pre­independence   era,   the   task   of
Scrutiny Committee is to validate or reject a claim of validity
certificate based on assessment of documents that are filed by
the Applicant. More so, the Scrutiny Committee under Rule 4(3)
of   the   2012   Rules   can   even   allow   caste   claim   without   any
supporting documents. Hence, as already discussed above, such
adjudication   is   kept   within   the   exclusive   domain   of   Scrutiny
Committee under Rule 13(2)(a) of 2012 Rules.

22.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, we are of the considered
opinion that High Court inadvertently undertook an erroneous
exercise of appreciating evidence in exercise of its jurisdiction
under Article 226 of Constitution of India and swayed itself into a
roving   inquiry   which   was   not   expected   as   per   settled   legal
position. At the cost of repetition, we again observe that under
Rule 13(2)(a) of 2012 Rules, the adjudication on the basis of the
documents falls solely within the domain of Scrutiny Committee
based   on   the   inputs   received   from   the   Vigilance   Cell.   The
Scrutiny Committee is an expert forum armed with fact finding
authority. The High Court ought not to have interfered, especially
when Scrutiny Committee had followed the due procedure under
Rule 12, 17 and 18 of the 2012 Rules and that there was nothing
perverse about a finding of fact.
23.
In the instant case, the Scrutiny Committee duly considered
the documents placed before it and after due application of mind
on being satisfied, accorded reasons for accepting/validating the
caste   claim   of   the   Appellant   herein   while   accepting/rejecting
other certain documents. The Scrutiny Committee heard all the
parties in detail complying with the principles of natural justice.
Hence,   in   our   considered   opinion,   the   order   of   Scrutiny

Committee did not merit any interference by the High Court in a
‘writ of certiorari’ under Article 226 of Constitution of India.
24.
So   far   as   question   as   to   judicial   scope   to   tinker   with
Presidential   Order   is   concerned,   there   is   no   quarrel   that
Presidential   Order   cannot   be   amended   directly   or   indirectly.
However,   the   whole   argument   of   Respondents   to   the   effect
interference   by   this   Court  would  amount   to   fiddling   with   the
Presidential Order is not sustainable for the reason that, the case
of the Appellant neither calls for any inquiry into a sub­caste nor
does it amend the Presidential Order. The Appellant had claimed
‘Mochi’,   the   Scrutiny   Committee   validated   and   granted   the
‘Mochi’ caste certificate and ‘Mochi’ caste is clearly mentioned in
Entry   11   of   the   Presidential   Order.   The   argument   of   the
Respondents  that a reserved category in one  State  cannot be
granted benefit of reservation in another State has no bearing in
the present case since in the instant case, the Appellant did not
claim   ‘Mochi’   caste   based   on   her   caste   in   some   other   State.
Rather, the claim was for ‘Mochi’ based on genealogical caste
history of Appellant’s forefathers. The Scrutiny Committee has
verified the claim of Appellant holding that Appellant belongs to

‘Mochi’ caste in accordance with Entry 11 of Presidential Order
as application to Maharashtra.
25.
Accordingly,  in  the   light  of   discussion  made  hereinabove
and considering the peculiar facts and circumstances, the instant
appeals stand allowed and the impugned judgment passed by the
High   Court   stands   set­aside.   The   validation   order   dated
03.11.2017   passed   by   the   Scrutiny   Committee   is   restored.
Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of. There
shall be no order as to costs.
…………….…………J.
(J.K. MAHESHWARI)
………………………..J.
(SANJAY KAROL)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 04, 2024.